Shadows without Substance, OR, Pretended new LIGHTS: TOGETHER, With the
Impieties and Blasphemies that lurk under them, further discovered and drawn
forth into the Light: In way of Rejoinder unto Mr John Saltmarsh his Reply:
ENTITLED Shadows flying away.

Wherein nothing less is showed to have been performed, then what the Title
Page imports, or the Preface promises. AS ALSO, Diverse points of Faith and
Passages of Scripture are vindicated and explained.

BY THOMAS GATAKER, B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign
of the King's Head, 1646.

TO Mr John Saltmarsh.
SIR,
WHether according to your hope in the very entrance into your Epistle
professed, you have returned an Answer unto all things material in my Book,
tho I might well, without further trouble, refer the trial of it unto any
that will take the pains to compare this of yours and that together; yet I
shall, I hope, as occasion shall offer it self, in the further pursuit of this
Debate, make it appear to be far otherwise; and that you have wittingly and
willingly overslipped many things as material as any that you have been
pleased to take notice of. Mean while, to give you a taste of some few of them;
you may among others be put in mind of, your palpable See Answer page 34, 35.
glosing and dissembling, in a professed desire to have the names of Legalists
and the like, laid down; when in that very Discourse you so often use them your
self: your See Ans. p. 27 30, 31. 40.
insolent censures and uncharitable aspersions of those whom you are pleased so
to style; one while charging them with gross ignorance, as Treatise p. 40 85.
unable for want of that spiritual discerning, and Treat. p. 28.
more glorious light, revealed to your self and those of your way, to
distinguish those things that Antichrist has jumbled together; another while
with no less gross perfidiousnesse, and notorious wickedness, Trea. p. 37.
85.
in devising ways and courses, to keep open the wounds of their spiritual
patients, for the lengthning of their cure; besides other reproachful speeches
uttered of them, as that Treat. p 82.
they exalt men, to cry down Christ: your Treat p. 77. See Answ. p, 41
paralleling the way acknowledged to have been used by the Prophets, with the
Popes giving out his Pardons: your declining to render an account where you
find in Gods word that Treat. p. 85.
Scripture assurance (as you term it, pronouncing withal, Ibid. see Ans. p
32. 33.
all other assurances, tho such as are showed to be found in Scripture, to be
rotten conclusions from Gods Word) to wit, Treat p. 84.
that Christ Jesus has perfectly believed for us, and perfectly repented for
us: the Sea Ans. p. 27 28.
other base terms heaped upon those ways of Assurance, that by the Apostles
have been delivered: and lastly, (to let pass the rest for the present, that
you stoop not so low as to look after) your encouraging Christians Treat. p.
173 174. see Answ. p. 17. 18.
not to be troubled for any sin; nor to imagine that God is displeased with
them, or that any afflictions do befall them for their sins, or that they
shall ever be called to any account for them.

But these, it seems you account matters of no moment, nor do I much marvel
that such things as these should be so slighted by one who tho he reproach,
revile, calumniate, and wrong any in any kind whatsoever, traduce the truth,
broach errors, belch out blasphemies, yet professes not to expect or fear any
after-reckoning with God for it; and either jeers, or at least and best, pities
them Treat. p. 171.
as sely souls that so do. Howbeit, Sir, we cannot yet so persuade our selves;
nor do you deal so kindly with us, in letting these things slip, and not
endeavoring to rectify our judgments herein, out of Gods word (which we
desire to make, as we conceive it to be, both in these things and in all other,
Esaias 8.20. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17 (...). Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Orat. 13. (...). Basil.
asc^t defin. 72.
our Rule of direction, as well for opinion as for practice) that so we might
not with those sely creatures you speak of, hold and carry our selves so
strait-laced in these things, but being better informed of our liberty, as you,
it seems, are, may know our selves to be in this regard much more loos-girt
then as yet we are aware of. And thus much shall at present suffice concerning
your Hope of having done that which indeed you never meant to do.

After this your hope professed, you fall to snatch and snarl at my margin;
which tho you tell me you will not meddle with Epistle.
; (nor is it any great matter whether you do or no; tho you may peradventure
find some things there, that you list not to deal with) yet in the very next
words, breaking your word so lately given, as repenting you of what you had
said, you fall foul upon it, charging it both in this Answer and in other my
books, to be filled with such things and Autors as are of little value to
Christ crucified; and to be such as argue me to be Comicall and Poetical in
mine old age.

Concerning which there needs here no large Apology, nor long Answer. In brief,
many things are useful, which are yet of no great value to Christ crucified,
and such indeed are all humane Arts and Sciences; which notwithstanding are and
may be made many of them (...). Aristot. Met. l. 2. c. 2.

Ancillantur Theologiae humaniores disciplinae. Lips. manud^ct ad Stoic. Did.
3.


Handmayds unto Divinity; and are of special use for the finding out of truth,
and Vere hoc mihi dicturus videor; nisi accuratius homines incipiant
philosophari, futurum, ut nullus sectarum and errorum futurus sit finis;
quo^doquidem ignoratione ac cidat, ut neque accipere legitime, neqe reddero
rations disputatores imperiti valiant. Schaegh. adv. Antitrin. praef.
discovery of errors opposite thereunto; nor is it marvel therefore that the
Sectaries of our times do so much decry them. The Apostle, tho he profess 1
Cor. 2.2. (...)
that he determined to know (that is, Docere, Cameron in Myrothec. ad Marc.
13.32. Profiteri. Illyric. Beza. Praedicare, Calvin.
to teach, preach, regard, or take notice of) nothing in comparison at Corinth
but Christ Crucified; yet in the very same Epistle, wherein he so professes, 1
Cor. 15.33.
he cites a saying of Ex Menandri Thaide. Schol. Graec. and Hieronym. ad Magn.
qos pleriqesequntut. At Clemens (...) strom. l. 1.
Menander a Comic, as is most generally agreed: and tho concerning himself be
elsewhere professes, that Phil. 3 8.
he esteemed all things, besides, as (...), scoria, faex. Dioscorid. l. 5. c.
85. unde (...) Plut. in Themist.
dr^sse or (...), stercus. Glossar. (...). Hesych. (...). Etymol. At Suidae,
(...), mensae decidu^. Charisio, qisqiliae. Prisciano, frumenti purgamen a,
aceres, paleae. Synesio, capitis furfures, sordes.
dung, (for the word may bear either) in regard of Christ, the eminent
knowledge of him, and his interest in him; yet did, he not so abandon his
former reading in Poets, as wholly to refuse or reject all use of them; but is
observed to have Ex Arato, Act. 17.28. ex Epimenide Tit. 1. 12.
alleged some passages out of them; and that in likelihood also in his elder
age. For mine own part, Poetry I never professed, nor was ever heard or seen on
any Scene: whether your self have, or no, I know not; nor is it ought to me,
nor do I list to enquire. Howbeit in their writings I acknowledge, that, I have
been sometime somewhat versed: and some of those things that I then red in them,
are not yet utterly lost with me: nor am I ashamed, as occasion is offered, to
make use of them, no more then that blessed Apostel was: tho they be the least
part of that which you might have met with in my margin, either here or
elsewhere. Euripideum Socrat. hist. l. 3. c. 16. utriusqe esse potuit. Vide
Clem. strom. l. 6. and Gell. l. 23 c. 17.


But Sir, what is all this to any point in qestion between you and me at
present? what is the filling of my margin with things and Autors of less value
then Christ crucified (which yet for want of better and more pertinent matter,
helps to fill and make up the main body of your Epistle, and comes in again to
eech out the Conclus. p. 17.
close of your book) unto the business in debate; either the clearing of your
self from your arrogant censures, and groundless aspersions of Gods faithful
servants, and your blasphemous jeeres fastened through their sides, on Gods
Prophets? which wind and turn you, which way you will, you will never be able
to elude; and which, had you any dram of ingenuity left in you, you well might
and would in the eyes of men at least be ashamed of; (tho in Gods sight See
Gods eye on his Isr. Pref. p. 2.
the principles laid by you and those of your strain, do openly profess and
proclaim, that you neither are, not ought to be ashamed of ought) and which
being altogether unable to wipe off, you therefore slily slip by, and return no
Answer at all to? Or what is my being Comicall and Poetical in mine old age?
which you have once again a fling at, making it (...). Prora and puppis. ut
Graecorum proverbium est. Cicer. ad. Tiron. epist. 24.
prow and poop (as they use to say) Caput and cavda.
head and tail of your discourse; (tho I know no reason why any Divine may not
exercise his Poetry, if he have a vain that way, which my self never had; and
that in his old age too, as Gregor. Naz. Pavlin. Nolan. Theodor. Beza, alii
innumeri.
many worthy and religious persons have done) but what is this, I say, unto the
clearing or strengthing of ought excepted against in your book, or to the
removing or weakening of any objection made against it? It was long since
observed to be an (...). Aristot. rhetor. l. 3. c. 14.
ill sign, and such as might well give just suspicion of a bad cause, when men
fly out from the matter in present debate, and either In adversae partis
advocatos invehuntur, and ubi defecerint alia, conviciis implent vacua
cavsarum; si contingit, veris, si^ minus fictis.
fall foul upon the person of him, with whom they are to debate it, or make
(...) Aeschin. ad Ctesiph.
excursions into by-matters, snatching and catching at every thing that comes
in their way, as desirous to be dealing rather with any thing then that,
wherein they find themselves wringed. Which whither herein you do or no, I am
well content that others judge.

As for what you subjoyn, concerning your former raptures, which you profess
now to be shamed of; and of your present strains of a more glorious Spirit: for
the former, what they have been, I wot not, nor am I curious to make inqiry. If
they were such as you may justly be ashamed of, you have good cause to repent
of them; as Psalm. 25.7.
David did in his later days of his younger slips and excesses; if you think
David at least a fit precedent for you to follow; which the insolency of those
of your way does disdain: And for the latter, to wit, your strains of a more
glorious spirit, not unlike your vaunting els-where of Treatise, p. 28.
a more glorious light, it will peradventure with some no injudicious Readers
be deemed, not to want some smach of vainglory; especially laid together with
the glittering Title of your former Treatise, and that height of scorn and
contempt, which therein you express, of Treat. p. 40.
the divinity and the Divines (a term that ye here seem to jeer at tho
formerly used by you) both of these days and former times.

Your conclusion is, That you hope you shall be no more in passion with me,
then with my brother of the Assembly, M. LEY.

Truly, Sir, this latter hope seems wholly frustrate as well as the former; for
you have already here expressed passion enough, if not pride and Magisteriality
also mixed with it. Or what was it but passion, that carried you into this
digression? and what is it, but pride and Magisteriality, to censure for that,
which you convince not to be evil, and to reprove without proof? And surely,
Sir, if your Answer to me, be of the same stamp with that of yours to Mr Ley, I
shall look for little in it, but a few froathy sqibs, slightings of matters
objected, and vain boastings of your self. For of such is your Answer to him in
a manner wholly made up; fruits of passion rather, then of judgment and reason.

But, you write, you say, to edify, not to conqer, nor to teach others, but
that we may be all taught of God.

Sir, you write riddels; whom intend you by your writing to edify, if not
others? or how to edify them, if not by teaching? it is true indeed, that
unless men be Esai. 54.13. Ioh. 6.45.
taught of God, all humane 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.
teaching will do little good: but neither can man edify any without him; and
the case therefore being alike in either, where the difference in this regard
should ly between edifying and teaching, my shallow brain is not able to
conceive.

As for writing to conqer: he that writes barely to conqer, without respect had
to truth, is at best but Superbae stultitiae perseverantia. Senc. de ben l. 4.
c. 38.
a pertinacious, or vainglorious fool; it is (...). Philonid. A veritate
vincires p^^cherrima. Qi vincitur a veritate, triumphat. Moses Amyrald. defens.
doct. Calv. c. 3.
a conqest fair and honorable enough, to be overcome by truth. Yet to Iud. 3.
contend and that earnestly for the truth, that it may not be overborn by such
as oppose it; and to further its conquest, by beating down errors, that are
raised up against it, is a just and commendable endeavor: and so to strive to
conqer, is no evil, but (...). Henod. ^per.
a good and laudable strife. In which kind I profess freely, that I do in
this my writing Tu pertinaciam esse hanc praedicas: Ego pervicaciam a^o, and a
me uti volo. N^m per^icacem dici me esse and vincere, perfacile patior;
pertinacem nil moror. Haec fortes seqitur; illam indocti possident. Accius apud
Nonium.
endeavor to conqer, to wit, by holding out and maintaining the truth opposed;
and thereby to establish and edify others with my self in the same, through
Gods blessing upon my labors; whereunto whither your writings conduce or no,
in the ensuing discussion of this Reply, shall by Gods assistance be more fully
made to appear. Which, having thus dispatch your Epistle, I shall in the next
place address my self unto.

Your Reply begins with mine Epistle, out of which and the forepart of mine
Answer, you have these ships.

1. Whereas I say, that I was advertised of a Treatise of yours, wherein I was
among other late Writers, produced, (traduced, I might say) as giving testimony
to some tenants of the Antinomian party.

You fasten on the word traduced; which as of others there cited, so of my
self, I may well say. And whereas Reply p. 1.
you refer the Reader to our books, I do therein very willingly join issu
with you. Let my book speak for me, how I condescend to them, or approve of
their tenants.

But my words you gave, my meaning you could not come at, nor dive into; nor
were you to discover to the world, mine intents, nor to judge of my reserves
and secret senses; but of words and writings: that which Reply p. 1. 2.
more then once or twice you insist on, to salv your double and deceitful
dealing.

But Sir, first, we leave such reservs to those of your own way, whereby to
help out their hideous and blasphemous assertions of which more See Gods eye,
etc. Preface, p. 26.30.
els-where.

2. I deem you not so shallow brained, but that you might, had you listed, have
easily conceived my meaning, not lying deep in my heart or breast (as you
pretend) but See Ans p. 4.5
as expressed before in my book, so laid there before you, in that clause
inserted, [as was before said] pointing and directing you as with the finger,
to that place, where my meaning was fully explained: which clause in your
qotation of it was advisedly left out, because you listed not to make use of it.

But Sir, suppose you had not had that help, to disclose mine intent to you,
and that my words should be taken as they stand, without reference to ought
before intimated. Yet the charge of traducing me, as by those words taken in
the strictest sense that may be, acknowledging little difference between us and
the Antinomians, stands firm still against you: since that you cannot with all
your witty and wily Sophistry (wherein you are rise enough, I confess; tho
Logic you disclaim) conclude that, which you would father and fasten upon me,
from ought you cite out of me: which by diverse instances in mine Answ p. 5.
Apology I evidently show; whereunto you return here no Answer at all; and
remain therefore convict of abuse and wrong herein offered me. But what forehead
that man has, that has the face to allege me out of that book, as
acknowledging little difference between them and us, I shall leave to any person
whatsoever friend or so to determine, that has but cursorily read over the
Preface to that book, out of which my words are cited.

But Sir, you profess herein to have done me a great kindness, and to have
showed me much love: for herein Reply p. 2.
you accounted me better then I desire to be, and took me to be more a friend to
the truth, then you now see I am: and abusing 2 Cor. 12.13.
the Apostles words, desire to have that injury forgiven you.

Sir, These are your wonted scofs and jeers: wherein yet you might have been
pleased to spare the Apostle, and not dally with his words.

But what a friend I am to those (...). Basil. ubi sup.
Counterfaits of truth, that instead of Gods sacred truth are obtruded upon
people, and instilled into too many, to the preverting of their faith, and the
poisoning of their souls; my book it self, whence you snipped of that shred
might sufficiently have informed you: Whereby, as you needed not to have been
thus mistaken in me, so may you easily suppose, that I esteem it a very sorry
courtesy to be deemed warping toward those, whose Tenants out of their own
books, mouths, and writings, I there show to be so hideous and blasphemous.

As for your Reply p. 2.
exception taken to the stiling of some Antinomians, as if I had now newly done
it, and not before in my book; and the wrong you therein pretend done them, I
shall without further ado, refer the Reader to Answ. p. 3^.
mine Answer.

Secondly, Where I say, Preface to Answer.
you were a man utterly unknown to me before save by one or two short Pamphlets.

You pitch Reply p. 1.
upon the term Pamphlet; and interpret it as a slighting of your works, which
it seems, you have an higher conceit of, then that they should be so styled.

Yet Sir, you know, that it is a term commonly given to small things of a sheet
or two; such as those of yours were, that had then come to mine hand. Nor truly
Sir, to deal freely and ingenuously with you, did I meet with any such solid
matter in any of them (for many they were not) that should necessarily exempt
them from being so termed. Howbeit, to make you some part at least of amends,
if it stick so much in your stomach, I am very well content (as Quod Alpha
dixeram te penulatorum, si fort. bilem m^vit hic tibi ver^us, Di^as liceb. 1
Beta me togatorum. Mart. l. 5. ep. 27.
he sometime in somewhat the like case) that you call, if you please, mine
Answer and this Rejoinder, being neither of them overlong, two short Pamphlets,
so you may be even with me herein; and this qarrell I hope at an end.

Yea, but Reply ibid.
You could call my Treatises by a worse name then Treatises.

And so do Sir, if you please, they will be never the worse; for the worst
terms you can give them, no more then the faithful servants of God, whom you
and your brother Eaton have in your books so bespattred, are any whit the worse
for all those opprobrious reproaches that you have endeavored to overwhelm them
with.

Reply ibid.
Yea, but one of them you knew long since, that of Lots, wherein I defend cards
and dice playing; which it had been happy for others as well as your self, in
your times of vanity, had I therein following Augustines example, printed a
Retractation of it: for you believe I have strengthened the hands of many to
sin.

1. For writing of Retractations after Augustines example; it is that I
somewhere promise, if opportunity serve, and God be pleased to lend life and
strength, to review what I have abroad, and amend such mistakes in my writings,
as upon further consideration may be discovered in them. But for retracting of
that which you instance in, I must crave pardon of you, if I profess that I
may not; because I cannot so do without betraying of the truth against mine own
knowledge: Which I continue still the more firmly strongly assured of, because
it has upon due trial Videatur Antidiatriba, qa Amesio, and Voetio
respondetur.
held out opposition free, against other manner of Champions, then I yet take
Mr S. for. Howbeit if by dint of Argument to show your Goliah-like might, you
shall deygn to deal with it, I hope I shall not greatly need to fear your
encounter.

2. For your belief, That I have thereby strengthened the hands of many to
sin: I know, and am well assured, that there is nothing in that book, that
may encourage any thereunto. But if your self, in the days of your vanity,
(which it may justly be feared, are not yet over; to much of it still appears
in you both here and els-where) or any other, Aranei ex eisdem floribus, unde
apes mel conficiunt, ven^num colligunt. Constable. Emper. praefat. ad clav. Talm.
Spider-like, besides your self, have sucked poison out of the sayings of truth
(I am bold so to style them having not been hitherto convict of error; and
disprove you if you can, what I say) therein delivered; the fault is not in my
book, but in your own, and their own Homines male sumentes salubrem cibu^ in
venenum vertunt. Aug. de temp. 45.
corrupt affection, that converts that into venom that is wholesome and
harmless of it self. Nor is it probable, that the freeing of a Lot used,
either in those games or any other, from that superstitious conceit, that some
had labored to fasten on it, should spur any on to an excessive use, either of
those disports or any other. They that were so conscientious as to forbear them
only for that scrupel, there is no likelihood, but would be as strict and
precise in the moderate usage of them, if they thought good to make use of
them, when they were freed from that groundless scrupel. And well may it be
deemed therefore, that your own idle vain and loose disposition, was it that
carried you on to excess, if you were in game overmuch, rather then my book
(which not only gives no allowance for it, but Treat. of Lots, chap. 9.
expressly condemns it) or ought you found or read in it.

3. I know none who by their teachings and writings do more strengthen men's
hands in sin, then those that infuse such principles as these into them; That
God see: no sin in them, live they never so ill; nor likes them any whit the
less when they do sin; nor is an all displeased with them, or will ever call
them to account for ought they do, and the like.

4. As was before said, What is either my frequency of qotations, or my use of
Poets, or this now concerning my book of cards and dice, either unto mine
Answer of your Treatise, or your Reply to mine Answer? Of what force or
strength is it, either unto the impairing of the one, or the improving of the
other? And yet is this also as well as the former, both Aleph and Tau with you;
it begins your discourse; and it helps to conclude, as if it were one of the
principals of your Reply. Howbeit Sir, if to cry qittance with me for laying
open some of the unsound and rotten stuff contained in your Treatise of
Free Grace, you will take the pains to discover such dangerous matter, as you
pretend to be delivered in my Treatise of Lots; and that the rather that others
may thereby be warned to shun those rocks, that your self you say have
formerly struck on, howsoever you got off again; do with me as I have done with
you, I shall be very well content with it: Lay open as much as you please of
the unsound matter you find in it; but withal show it to be such, and when you
have so done, I will give you mine honest word, that I will either refute you
or else do as you here advise me, retract.

Secondly, for the unsound stuff in your book, that I have undertaken to lay
open: I yield to you, Rep^y p. 2. 2.
that it is neither your sayin it is sound; nor mine that it is unsound, (...).
Ar^stot. de ininterpet. c. 10.
that must decide the matter: Let the trial be by Gods book, the only sure
touchstone of all saving truth.

Yet Sir, let me mind you withal, that the foulness and unsoundnesse of some
stuff in your book is such, that being laid open to view, by your silence you
seem either ashamed, or unwilling at least to own it; and suffer it therefore
to be charged upon you without Answer, as was intimated and instanced in before.

The last thing you nibble at in my Preface, is of Reply p. 1. 3.
some that think they have found a shorter cut to heaven, then (say you) some
former Divines: where you tell me, that you know not what I mean by a shorter
cut; and that Papists find a way by works; some Protestants by Jesus Christ
and works others by Jesus Christ alone, and make works the praise of that
Free Grace in Jesus Christ.

Where Sir, 1. You relate not my words to the full; I say not, a shorter cut
then former Divines, but a shorter cut and more compendious passage then Gods
Ministers out of his word have formerly chalked out unto them.

2. Because you pretend ignorance (tho I doubt not but you understand well
enough, what the shorter cut and easier passage spoken of imports) I shall
plainly and directly point to it, not your self so much, being already well
acqainted with it, as the Reader, who, it may be, has not formerly heard of
it: It is the way that your self, and other of the Antinomian party propound,
to wit, that there is nothing reqired to be done by any, for the obtaining of a
sh^re, in the redemption and salvation procured and purchased by Christ, or for
the application of Christ's merits unto any; and they may therefore be saved by
Christ, without faith or repentance or new obedience; tho they continue in
infidelity, impenitency, and the worst sins that are.

To this purpose take these assertions from some of those Wri^ers, whose works,
I presume are no strangers with you. Christ's Counsel to the Angel of Laodicea,
p. 27.
The end, says one of them, for which Christ came, was to die for the ungodly,
to purchase redemption for their sins, and to reconcile them unto God; and all
this he did freely, upon no condition, fully and perfectly, leaving nothing
undone or to be done by way of application: for in the performing thereof he
fully and perfectly applied it; for he took upon him our nature; and by virtue
of this our humane nature in the person of Christ, we are made truly the Sons
of God, heirs and coheirs with him. And again, Ibid. p. 35.
Salvation is not tied to belief; nor is faith a condition without which a man
can not be saved: All men, women and children, that is, the whole Church of
God, are all saved only and totally by the merits of Christ; whose merits are
applied unto us sufficiently and effectually too, by hi^ own assumption of our
nature, by which we are incorporate into him. Ibid. p. 40.
And they are false teachers that make redemption conditional, and make it
depend upon duties: Ibid. p 41.
Nothing at all being required in any respect of him for whom Christ dyed,
(they are deceivers that teach otherwise) neither faith, nor repentance, nor
self-denial, nor hearing, nor use of ordinances, nor observation of Sabbath,
nor doing as we would be done to, and the rest: Ibid. 42.
they are falls teachers that make these duties, and teach that we must exercise
our selves in these things, or we shall have no part in Christ. And another of
them: Power of Love, p. 30.
This work of our redemption and reconciliation with God was perfected, when
Christ dyed; and nothing shall be able to separate you from his love then
purchased; neither infidelity, nor impenitency, nor unthankfulness, nor sin,
nor any thing whatsoever can make void this purchase; no, tho with the Jews you
should deny the Lord, that bought you. And for want of this knowledge many of
us have walked very uncomfortably, spending our time in fasting, and weeping
and mourning, in praying, reading and hearing; and in performance of other
duties, and all to get Christ; while we consider not what the Scripture sets
forth unto us, to wit, salvation purchased and perfected for ever, to sinners,
to the ungodly, to all the world; a work perfected, depending on no condition,
no performance at all.

Now I would gladly understand from Mr S. whither the course that these
propound, be not a shorter cut and an easier passage, then Gods Ministers out
of Gods Word, or Gods Prophets, and Christ's Apostels, yea, God and Christ
himself in the Word, have formerly chalked out unto us; and how these things
agree with those words of our Savior, Mark. 16 16
Whosover does not believe shall be damned: And, Luke 13.3, 5.
unless you repent you shall perish; And, Math. 11.20, 24.
It shall be worse in the day of jugdement with Chorazin, Bethsaida and
Capernaum, then with Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, because thy repented
not at his preaching: And, Math. 10.33.
He that denis me before men, I will deny him before my Father in heaven; and
those passages of the Apostle, Phil. 3.12.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling; And, Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the flesh ye shall die; And, 1 Cor. 9.27.
I keep under my body and bring it into subjection, lest having preached to
others, my self prove a (...) rejectaneus, ut 2 Cor. 13.5, 6.
castaway. And Heb. 12.14.
Follow holiness, without which no man shall ever see God: and that of Peter,
who tells us, that those that 2 Pet. 2.1.
bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, bring swift
damnation upon themselves.

Let any man lay these two ways together; and then tell, whither of the two is
the shorter cut and the easier passage; For they are not sure both the same.

Now Sir, if you shall disclaim and refuse to own these and the like, as
pretending, that you are not to make good what every one prints or preaches.
Yet 1. hereby may appear what new cuts are abroad: which there was just cause
and good ground therefore to give warning of. And 2. that your self are not far
from compliance with them herein; it is too palpable, too apparent. For 1. that
main part of your Treatise, contrived dialog-wise, wherein in a jeering and
scoffing way, you traduce, as they also do, the faithful Ministers of Christ,
and their manner of propounding and pressing such things as these men make
wholly needless and unnecessary unto the attaining of life eternal, runs
all along just in the same tone with them; as may appear by those parcels in
mine S^e A^s. p. 9. 10. 14. 17.
Answer thereunto, thence represented. 2. In that your Treatise you tell us in
express terms, that Treat. p. 126.
in the Gospel, God agrees to save man; And that all the conditions are on
Christ's part, no conditions on our parts; And that Ibid. p. 191.
Salvation is not made any puzzling way in the Gospel (a puzzling way, then
belike before time it was) it is plainly, easily, and simply reveiled: Jesus
Christ was crucified for sinners, this is salvation, we need go no further; all
that is to be done is to believe that there is such a work; and that Christ
died for thee amongst all other sinners he dyed for. Ibid. p. 193.
This is short work: (And it is short work indeed) and this is the only Gospel
work and way. You see Sir, what a short cut your self here make; for here is
Repentance, and new Obedience, and Mortification, and the study, pursuit and
practice of Holiness and the like, all cut off at one blow, as being neither
Gospel work, nor way. And it may justly be questioned, whether this be Matthew.
7.13.
the straight gate and narrow way, that Christ pointed his to.

Yea, but Faith may some say, is at least reqired by you, for the application
of Christ, and the attaining of interest in him.

How it is reqired by you, your self inform us; Treat. p. 189.
Christ you say, is ours without Faith; but we can not know him to be ours but
by believing: and you reject this under the Title of the Reformed opinion and
more general, Ibid. p. 198.
That none are justified or partakers of salvation, but by faith. And if no
conditions at all be reqired for obtaining salvation by Christ as was formerly
affirmed by you, then neither Faith also: Yea, to this you come fully home,
where you say, that Ibid. p. 15^. 153.
The Covenant now under the Gospel is such a kind of Covenant, as was
established with Noah, Genesis 9.11. clear against the strain of the old, wherein
man was to have his life upon condition. And in this your Reply, you deny Reply
p. 14. 8.
the receiving of Christ to be acknowledged by you as a condition. And indeed,
if the promise of salvation by Christ, be as absolute and free from all
condition as that Covenant made with Noah; then may a man be saved by Christ,
tho he never know or look after Christ; as he is sure never to perish by an
oecumenicall deluge, tho he neither know nor believe, nor do ever hear of such
a Covenant concerning it. Whereunto also, Answ. p. 8. 9. 24. 25.
where it came to be scanned (whence you might have informed your self, what
this shorter cut meant) as a thing material, you have returned nothing at all.

But thus the Reader may be pleased to take notice of that shorter cut and more
compendious way, and easier passage to heaven, that your self have cut out as
well as those other of your way, not without only, but contrary to all warrant
of Gods Word.

3. For what you add; of the Popish way by works, whereby men are said to merit
heaven, we abhor and detest it, as much as you do. Of some protestants by
Jesus Christ and works. Sir, when you set Jesus Christ and works, as cheek by
joull the one with the other; you wrong those whom you would by such an
expression aspers. They teach Christ Jesus to be the only purchaser and
procurer of our Justification and salvation; and his blood to be the only
price, that was laid down and paid for the purchase thereof. But they hold
withal, that faith and repentance, and self-denial, and new obedience are
necessarily required in the Gospel, as conditions to be performed by all those,
that will have part and interest in Christ or look for salvation by Christ; and
that none shall without these ever attain to that salvation so deerly purchased
by Christ. And for this; Sir, we have the Scriptures pregnant and plentiful;
as your self can not be ignorant; and as in the Answer to your book has
sufficiently Answ. p. 11. 15.
been showed: which how you seek either to shift off, or to slubber over, shall
appeer, when we come to that part of your Reply.

Lastly, for taxing me Reply p. 2. 3.
with frowardness and qarrelsomnesse; which yet you impute partly to mine age,
and partly to the remainders of my disease, rather then my judgment, and the
infirmity of my body, not the strengh of my Spirit: but withal demand of me,
why I chose not a better time to try truth in, when I were not so much in the
body.

1. Sir, froward or qarrelsome I have not showed my self in this business. The
beginner of the qarell here was your self, who as an insolent Golias first
entered the field, with a flag of defiance, Treat. p. 40.
to the Divinity both of this age and former times, reproaching in base and
scurrilous manner Gods faithful Ministers, men many of them much better then
your self; and endeavoring by your unchristian charges and vile calumnies to
bring shame and contempt upon them and their Ministry; and were pleased to
single me out and draw me forth among others, (whom, tho coming all within
verge of your magisteriall censure, you call in for seconds) as complying in
part with you and the party you fight for; acknowledging little difference at
least between us and them; nor does it argue any frowardness or qarelsomnesse
in one so engaged, to endeavor (...). Menander Olynth. and Chaeremon There Is.
Svid. Principium non est a m, qi me vindico. Et Achaus, apud Athen. l. 13.
(...), etc. N^n haec ego ultro di^o, sed me vindicans.
to vindicate himself and those with himself, whom he finds to be so abused.

2. For my years, Sir, scof not at old age: you may live if God pleas, to come
to it your self; and for the remainders of my sickness, which I am not yet
freed from, nor am like to be in have: Eccles 3. 1, 2, etc. Vide Iu^. and Coch.
sickness and health are passages of Gods providence, above man's power to
dispose of: nor was it therefore in mine hand to make choice of my time for
this trial of truth; but was necessitated to take it, as the wrong offered by
your self occasioned it, and as God had pleased to dispose. Besides, that the
trial of truth in this cause was not now to be first new taken up by me, but
had formerly been labored in (as by Gods Eye on his Israel.
my other work may in part appear) in time of better health: and you may see if
you please thereby to understand, that my judgment then was the same, that now
still it is. Nor is sickness I suppose, wont to make men much in the body, as
you seem here to imply but less rather. Howbeit, Sir, I seem to understand
your jeer and to conceive what spirit and body you intend; such spirit and body
as may be justly suspected, notwithstanding all your vauntings of such a
glorious spirit and light, that you have little yet of the one, but too much
still of the other; otherwise being 2 Cor. 4.16. and 12.10.
much in bodily weakness, is not wont to be deemed any means of impeaching the
work of grace in the soul.

And thus far shall suffice to all that you have replied, either to my
Preface, or to the former part of mine Answer; all in effect as good as naught.

Pass we now to consider of your Reply to the latter part, concerning diverse
Passages in your Treatise.

Here at the very entrance into this Part of your Reply, you manifest your self
to be of that qarelsome disposition, that you pleased even now to fasten on me.
For to pick out matter for a new qarell to begin with, you Reply p ^. 1.
relate my words thus, That our Antinomian free grace is not the same with the
Prophets in the Old Testament and the Apostles in the New.

And then you fall, as one in a chafing heat to chide, and demand, Why do you
tell us of Antinomian, of Prophets and Apostles free grace? It is not the free
grace of any of these. -- I could as easily say, Mr Gatakers free grace and the
Legalists free grace, as he the Antinomians free grace; but such words and
repoaches make neither you nor I speak better truth.

Good Sir, Ne saevi mag^e Sacerd^s.
have patience awhile, I pray you be, not so hot and eager in your first
encounter; do not begin with so much passion, especially having so lately
promised, that you would not be in passion; unless your meaning were, for you
are many times very ambiguous) when you said you hoped you should be no more in
passion with me then with Mr Ley, that you intended to be in passion as much
with me as you had been with him. But Sir, to come to a calm and serious
reckoning with you: what is the cause and the ground of all this windy bluster?
where does Mr G. say, Our Antinomians free grace, or the Prophets and the
Apostles free grace? I say only, as in the Frontispice of my Book, so in the
discourse it self, Answ p. 6.
That free grace which we find here described and is by our Antinomians usually
asserted, is such as differs much from that which either the Prophets held
forth in the Old Testament, or Christ and his Apostles preached in the New. And
yet had I said, The Prophets and Apostles free grace; I might well enough have
justified it; for why might not one as well say, Ephesians. 2.20. ^od est ab ^psis
positum and praedicatum. ^un. ad. Bellar. cont. 3. l. 3. c. 23.
the Prophets and Apostels free grace, as the Prophets and Apostels foundation,
and ^ Cor. 4.3.
the Apostles Gospel? not theirs as Authors and owners of it; and yet theirs as
taught and promulgated by them. But Sir, it seems you liked rather to be
picking somewhat out of my work to find your self work, which you found not in
it; or to be pidling with that which had it been there found, had been of no
moment, then to be dealing with those things that are indeed material, but you
either shun or slight. And let any indifferent Reader now pass sentence; or
let Mr S. himself, being by this time I hope, out of the fit he was in when he
writ this, and in a calmer and cooler temper whither all this wind and dust
were not raised to little purpose, and without any just occasion given, unless
the matter propounded, and undertaken to be proved and made good against him,
finding it somewhat too soundly set on, and perceiving he could not so easily
shift it of, might cast him into this frivolous and groundless distemper.

And indeed, Sir, this may well the rather be deemed so to be, because you
appear plainly so puzzled in that which ensues; that you shuffell much, and
mash your self like a fish in a net that (...) not get out, in answering to
what is objected in the one part, and again you slily slip away as an eele out
of the fishermans fingers, taking no notice at all of what you are charged with
in the other.

For first to prove, that according to these men's grounds free grace was not
preached by Gods Prophets in times past, Answ. 7.
I reason thus from his own words there related.

Where Gods love is to be had in way of purchase by duty and doing; and the
whole efficacy is put as it were on the duty and obedience performed, there is
no free grace, much less as these men describe it.

But so it was, says Mr S. in all the Ministry of the Prophets.

No free grace therefore was preached by them.

Now to this he Answers nothing but this, that Reply p. 4. 2.
those terms inserted, as if, and in the way, and as it were, do clear him
from such positive and exclusive assertions of free grace, as I would make him
speak.

Which had need of some Oedipus to unfold unto us, and to tell us what he would
have, or to which Proposition of mine argument, what he here says, is to be
applied. Sure the man was somewhat distracted or disturbed when he writ this:
One would have thought, that these qalifying terms should rather have imported
no such absolute denial, then no such absolute assertion of free grace.

But Sir, this plaster, make it up which way you will, and apply it where you
please, will not serve to cover, much less to cure the foul sore of your
assertions, or any whit to amend the matter. For look in what manner the
Prophets propounded and preached it; in the same manner, and no other, could
the people apprehend it; and if the Prophets then so propounded and preached
it, as if it were to be had in way of parchase by duty and doing, then was it
not either propounded or preached, as if it were free grace, nor were the
people then taught that it was to be had otherwise then by way of purchase; for
in that way, say you, did all the ministry, that then was run; and if
free grace were neither preached to them, nor believed by them, then neither
were they saved by free grace; ( 1 Cor. 15.1, 2.
for it is that, that is preached to people, whereby they are saved, and not
some other secret reserve) which yet Act. 15.11.
the Apostel says that they were.

But Sir, to draw up all this debate to an issue; If the Prophets in their
preachings propounded Gods love and favor so as if it were to be had by way of
purchase, when as yet they knew, that it was to be had by free grace, and not
by purchase, and so intended, whatsoever they said; then they deluded Gods
people, and taught them one thing, when they knew and intended an other. Or if
they taught in express terms, that it was Psa. 55.1.
not to be had by way of purchase; as your self know they did, and Treat. p.
24. 30.
press their words to that purpose; (tho abusing them grossly, as others of
your strain do, to make people believe, that we do not preach such freegrace as
they did) then Sir, you did wickedly and wretchedly, against your own knowledge,
wrong and calumniate Gods Prophets as well as other his Ministers, in affirming,
that they propounded Gods love so unto his people, as if it were to be had by
way of purchase. Now, Sir, out of these briars, wherein you have unadvisedly
ensnared your self, how with all your wit (for they give you out to be a very
witty man) you will be able to unwind your self, I see not.

Mean while by what has been said, may appear, how vain and idle Reply p. 4. ^
2.
your expostulations here are, and your complaints, of being unjustly dealt
with; as if your words had been strained beyond their extent; when as nothing
is drawn from them, but what they willingly yield, and by just and necessary
consequence afford: nor are they racked any one jot beyond your intent; which
is to prove that the Legalists (as you style them) of these times, do not
preach free-geace, Treat. p 163.
because they preach as the Prophets did; both which also, by what after
ensues, shall yet more fully be made to appear.

Nor do I marvel therefore that this unhappy Logic should so shrewdly stick in
your stomach. Reply ibid.
I may see you say, what this Logic has brought me to, Reply ibid.
to deceive my self, as well as my neighbor.

Sir I neither desire to be deceived; (that (...) Plato apud Epictet. l. 1. c.
28. and l. 2. c. 22. and Marc. comment. l. 7.. 63. (...); Epict. l. 4. c. 1.
Qis est, qi velit decipi? da religiosum, non vult fallere; da impium,
sacril^gum, fallere vult, falli non vult; nolunt fallere boni: falli autem nec
boni volunt, nec mali. Aug. de verb. Ap 30. Idem enchir. c. 17. falli nolunt
etiam qi fallere amant:
no man they say, would) Oculum simplicem duo faciunt, cognitio very, and
dilectio boni; sive prudentia and benevolentia, ut animi oculus and pius sit qi
fallere nolit; and cautus sit, qi falli neqeat. Bern. de praec. and disp.
nor to deceive any: What should I gain by so doing? My desire and endeavor
rather, is to undeceave those that have been deceived, deluded and led aside
into error by you and and such as your self, nor have you yet made it to
appear, how I have here deceived either my self, or any other; or dealt any way
unjustly with you. They rather may justly be suspected, to mind and intend
deceit, who reject and labor to have that removed, whereby deceit may be
discovered.

But Sir, have you, who are reputed and reported by those of your party for a
great Scholar, now qite cast of all Scholarship? or together with your
Poetical raptures, as you term them, (which for my part I was never acqainted
with) have you laid aside also your rules of Logic? If you have, it is to
little purpose to debate or discuss ought with you, that will not be tied to
rules of reason; for that privilege once obtained, you may without chek or
controull, affirm what you list, and prate what you please; Or would you
prescribe your adversary not to proceed Logically with you? you may as well bid
him enter the lists with you, but lay his weapons first aside: or invite him to
flourish, (...) 1 Cor. 9.27. (...). Loc^an de sect
and beat the air round about you; but upon condition that he strike you not.
Or do you imagine, as many now adays maintain, that in matter of divinity
there is no use of Logic? for that is it, you seen to intimate in your Epistle
Dedicatory, where you complain of a Miscelanie of Logic and Divinity: as if
these two were things inconsistent the one with the other: and to make use of
Logic in matter of Divinity were to (...). Synes. Epist. 57.
sow together things unsuitable. Concerning which absurd fancy, I might turn you
over to a Divine of great note, that has written a N c. Vedeli Rationale
Theol^gicum lib 3. comp^ehensu^.
large and learned Treatise, both to show and prove, the manifold and singular
use of it Divinity. But that it may be, you would then tell me as An end of one
controversy. Sumw. p. 8.
you do Mr Ley, that it is no good payment, to turn you over to an other, for
what I stand bound to pay my self: tho therein the After-reckon.
After-reckon it seems, has given you so full satisfaction, that you are well
content to let your action fall.

Howbeit Sir, a little to satisfy, if not your self, yet some others, that may
peradventure be in danger of taking in this ridiculous conceit from you.

1. I would demand of you, or of any of them that so hold, how any point of
Divinity, that is not in express terms laid down in Gods Word, can but by the
help of Logic be thence deduced; and yet how many points are there of
undoubted truth, that have no other necessary ground, such deduction excepted?

2. Did not our Savior himself make use of Logic, when from Moses by way of
Syllogism, M^ th. 22.31, 32. Luke 20.37, 38.
against the Saduces he confirmed the doctrine of the Resurrection? when Math.
1^.4, 6.
from the Story of the Creation, and Gods institution of Marriage, he
discovered the unwarrantablenesse of groundless Divorces? when from the words
of the Psalmist, Matthew. 22.43, 45.
he asserted his own Deity; and from a passage of the Prophet Hoshea, Math 12.7.
the Lawfulness of that which his Disciples did on the Sabbath? Yea, do not
the Apostles freqently by Logical Arguments prove points of Divinity, and
confirm matters of faith; as Paul Romans 3.2^, 28.
justification, not by works, but by faith, Romans 6.2, 12.
the necessity of sanctification and newness of life, in persons by faith
justified; 1 C^r. 6.15, 19.
the foulness of fornication; 1 Cor. 8.7, 1^. and 10.16, 21.
the haynousnesse of feasting with Idolaters in Idoll-Temples, 1 Cor. 15.12, 23.
the resurrection from the dead and the like: or how think we, disputed he at
Athens with Act. 1^.18.
the Stoics, the men Stoici ^ogicam sive Rationalem Philosophiu^ cum primis
excolebant: qam Epicurei, licet repudiarent, tamen cum ambigua discernendi,
salsa coargu^ndi, necessitas incumberet, alio nomine, Canonicae scil.
introducere cogebantur. Laert in Zenon. and Chrysip. Senec. Epist. 89.
of most repute for Logical skill in those times? does not his Sermon it self
show it? I might well, Sir, say to you, as Augustine to Cresconius, Si Paulus
dial^cticus erat, and ideo confer cum Stoicis, qi Dialectici maximi erant,
non timebat; cave ne Dialecticam cuiqam pro crimine objeceris, qa usos
Apostolos confiteris. Aug. ad Crescon l. 1. c. 12.13. Sed and Christum ipsum.
Ibid. c. 17.
If Paul at Athens disputed with those chief Logitians the Stoiks, beware how
you object the use of Logic as a fault to any; which that the Apostles, yea,
and Christ himself used, can not be denied. But I shall spare to spend more
word in pursuit of this point, until Mr. S. further herein explain himself,
and let us know what he will own in it, and how far forth he will give those
that deal with him leave to make use of their Logic. Sure, if reason be the
eye of the soul, and Logic (...).
the art or way, or method (...). Plato Alcib. 1.
of using reason aright; they that would debar men of the use of Logic, would
have them either put out or seal up their eyes, that being blind or blinded,
they may lead them as 2 King. 6.19.
the Prophet did the Syrian Troopers smitten with blindness upon his prayer,
or transfer and carry them as the Falkner does the Hank hood-winkt, whether
themselves please.

But Sir, I shall entreat you to give me leave, or shall be so bold as to take
leave, whither you list to give it or no, to be a little further troublesome
unto you with my Logic in something, wherein forbearing to relate mine
Argument, you slubber over the matter after your wonted manner of answering, as
if so you said somewhat, it were not material whither or no it were to the
purpose. I charge you with making Gods Prophets del^ders of Gods people; which
tho it be apparent enough, by what already has been Answ. p. 7 8.
said, yet I do by this Argument further make good.

Those that profess to Preach free grace, and yet propound it with such
conditions and qalifications, that tho free grace may be in the notion of it,
yet it is not in the truth of it; they delude the people to whom they so
preach.

But the Prophets of God, say you, tho they profess to preach free grace, yet
they propounded it with such conditions and qalifications, that tho free grace
might be in the notion of it yet it was not in the truth of it.

The Prophets therefore according to your assertions, deluded the people to
whom they preached.

Of the Proposition of this Argument, no man I suppose, will make doubt.

And for the Assumption you must be enforced to own it, wind and wriggell you
which way you will.

For first, concerning the former part of it, that Treat p. 24^ 30.
the Prophets professed to preach free grace, you grant and produce as others
also of yours do Esaias 55.1.
a passage of Esaias, to that purpose. And secondly, for the latter part, to wit,
that it was by them tempered with such conditions and qalifications, as did eat
out the very heart of free grace, that tho it were in the notion of it, yet it
was not in the truth, I thus prove to be yours.

If the conditions and qalifications used by the Legalists (as you style them)
of these times, in preaching of the Gospel, being no other then such as the
Prophets of God formerly used, are such as the free grace may be there in the
notion, yet it is not in the truth of it; then was it by the Prophets so
tempered, that tho free grace might be there in the notion of it, yet it was
not in the truth of it.

But the conditions and qalifications, say you, used by our legal teachers in
preaching the Gospel, being no other then such as the Prophets of God formerly
used, are such as tho free grace may be there in the notion, yet it is not in
the truth of it.

Therefore according to your assertions, the Prophets so tempered it that tho
fr^e grace might be there in the notion, yet not in the truth of it.

The Proposition cannot be by any color denied; for whatsoever destroys the
nature and truth of free grace, must needs be of the same force, wheresover it
is found.

And for the Assumption, neither do you, nor can you deny any part of it to be
your own: For all that herein you charge the Legalists with, both now again and
before, is Treat Oc^^s ^^rd p ^
preaching the Gospel with such conditions and qalifications as the Prophets
did; and of such preaching you say in express terms, Treat. p 16^.
that tho it may have a notion of free grace, yet it has not the truth of it.

Now Sir, let others judge, whither or no, I have justly charged you, with
making Gods Prophets deluders of his people; Yea, with casting an impious and
blasphemous aspersion upon God himself, in making him Occas. Word, p. 4.
like a Master, that to seem liberal bad his servants fill his wine out
freely, but had before ordered them to burn it so; that it should be too hot
for them to drink. But your eagerness against the Legalists, makes you, with
others of your strain, to often too forget your selves, and to aspers Prophets,
and Apostels, yea and God himself, together with them.

For all that you reply here in defense of your self, is no direct answer unto
any part of the Argument: but (as if indeed you had never been acqainted with
rules of Logic, or had wholly forgotten them, or were resolved utterly to
relinquish them) you address your self to the conclusion, which alone you
relate, and tell us with-all, that

Repl^ p. 4. 5. 3.
The Prophets were no deluders of Gods people, bcause Gods people were then in
their pupillage; and the way of teaching, which they then used, by pressing
repentance, reformation, humiliation with commination and the law, etc. was the
method and the strain, that the Spirit then taught them; but if they should
so have held out Christ now, when the Ministration of the Spirit exceeds in
glory, they should have sinned.

Which, howsoever part, of it be true, and part of it most false; for neither
did Christ, nor his Apostels sin in preaching and pressing these things; as
shall hereafter be showed they did; nor does the preaching and pressing them
any whit derogate from the glorious Ministration of the Gospel: Yet no part of
it is at all to the purpose; nor helps any whit to clear you of that aspersion
cast upon them, and upon the Spirit of God that then taught and directed them.
For how does this take off the crime you stand charged with, of aspersing Gods
Prophets, and God himself, as by them deluding his people, in pretending to
preach and propound free grace to them, whereas there was no truth, but a mere
notion or fiction rather of it, (for what other thing is a notion without
truth?) in that they taught? How does it in any wise take it off I say? or not
rather further confirm it, by telling us that they did no other but what the
Spirit of God taught and directed them to do; and so devolving that base and
unbeseeming carriage, wherewith, under the person of Legalists, you had
aspersed Gods Prophets, from them unto God himself and his Spirit? For what is
this but to say, that God directed his Prophets so to propound free grace to
his people, that tho it might carry some semblance thereof with it, yet it
should have no truth thereof in it: nor are they therefore to be taxed, as
deluders of Gods people; (tho the Legalists delude them, when they do the like)
because God taught them so to do. Thus you see, Sir, how in laboring to shift
of your shameful abuse of Gods Ministers and their manner of teaching, you do
but plung your self into further impiety, and set your mouth blasphemously
against heaven it self.

Yea, consider, how you add blasphemy to blasphemy; a new one concerning
Christ and his Apostles, to your former concerning God and his Prophets; For if
the Prophets, say you, have held out Christ in the New Testament as they did
before, pressing repentance, reformation, humiliation, and with commination and
the Law, they had sinned against the glory of that Ministration. Now Sir, to
make a little further use of my Logic; Mensura hypothetica est propositio
aliqa categorica, ad qam semper revoc. ri debet. Bert. Logic. l. 2. c. 7.
An hypotheticall Proposition, they say, may be turned into an universal
Categoricall; for example, this Conditional, If a man can see, he is alive; is
all one with this, Every thing that sees, lives; this Proposition, If a man
do evil, he sins; imports as much as this, Every one that does evil,
sins: When you say then, that the Prophets, if they had preached in the New
Testament as they did in the Old, pressing repentance, reformation,
humiliation, with commination and the Law, etc. they had sinned: It is just as
much as if you had said, Those that preach under the New Testament, as the
Prophets did under the Old, pressing repentance, etc. do sin ^n so doing. Now
Sir, take we your Proposition, and subsuming what of the Apostles preaching
will be made good, see what these premises will produce.

Those that preach under the New Testament, as the Prophets did under the Old,
pressing repentance, reformation, humiliation, and with commination and the
Law, etc. do sin in so doing.

But the Apostels did under the New Testament preach, as the Prophets did under
the Old, pressing repentance, reformation, humiliation, and with commination,
and the law, etc.

The Apostels therefore sinned in so doing.

Nay, rise we a little higher, Sir, and subsume what may with good warrant, yea,
with clear evidence of truth be avowed; that Christ himself so taught; and
consider seriously in what extreme impiety you here further involv your self.
Nor will it help you at all, what you add of such veils over Christ, and so
much Law over Christ. For these, Sir, not the Types, are the veils you speak
of: nor do degrees of more and less alter the truth and nature of the thing it
self; nor are you able to show, that Christ preached and pressed these things
any whit more sparingly then did the Prophets. But thus, Sir, the extremity of
your malevolent affection to the Legalists does so transport you, that Qod de
Cyro Xenoph. paed. l. 1. (...). Democrit. ^racundia in temeritatem prona est:
and pericula, dum infer vult, non cavet. Scen. de i^a. l. 1. c. 12.
while over-eagerly you desire and unadvisedly strive to wrong them, you either
forget or regard not how you wrong your self.

Meanwhile, Sir, I suppose I have by your own grounds and grants made it good,
that the free grace which the Legalists teach, is the same with the free grace
that the Prophets preached: and that the free grace which you and other
Antinomians now teach, is not by your own confession such free grace as the
Prophets preached; unless you will acknowledge that which you hold out for
free grace, to be nothing else (as of that, which with the Prophets we preach,
you say) but a mere counterfeit of it.

Proceed we now to examine, whither according to these your grounds Christ and
his Apostles preached Gospel and free grace or no: and whither our manner of
preaching free grace and the Gospel be not the very same with Christ and his
Apostles preaching.

And here, Sir, your assertions excepted against, whereof I made bold to mind
you before; of Treat p. 125. 126.
no Covenant at all made with man in the Gospel; Ibid. p. 193.
nor any condition at all reqired on man's part but all on Gods own part; as in
that with Noah, Genesis 9.11. as also, of your contradicting of your self
els-where, where you say that Ibid. p. 163.
the Gospel is made up among other things, of conditional promises; and of the
Ibid. p. 193.
short work, and only Gospel work and way, you tell us of here; and your Ibid.
p. 17. 19. 21. See Answ. p. 9.
girding at those that tell men of repentance, and sorrow for sin, and self
denial; or press these upon any as things reqired of all those that expect a
share in the salvation purchased by Christ, etc.

All these I say, with silence you let slip, as if they concerned you not to
make good. Only your girding at those that bid men repent and be humbled, as
legal teachers; you make some offer to justify in a Magisteriall manner thus
demanding.

Reply p. 5. 1.
If you press repentance and humiliation legally, why wonder you at such words
as legal Teachers? will ye do ill, and not be told of your faults? And so you
proceed in a supercilious way of checking and scholing us, satis pro imperio.

But Sir, 1. We might justly have expected other terms from one that had before
professed so great Occas. Word. p. 1.
a desire to have the name of L^galist laid down.

2. I might return you your own Arguments: when you, or those you maintain, See
Gods eye on his Israel p. 17.18. c. 2.
affirm, that the moral Law is of no use at all to a believer, no rule for him
to walk, nor to examine his life by; and that Christians are free from the
mandatory power of it: yea, when in Pulpits they cry out, Away with the Law; in
most horrid and hideous manner blaspheming it, and in it God himself the Author
of it, by giving out and affirming, that Ibid p. 18.
the Law cutteth off our legs and then bids us walk; (which impious assertions
I could never yet hear, that the Author of it ever recanted, tho they give out
that he professes himself altered in his judgment, which if it so be, he may
do well to make it more public for the undeceiving of those that were formerly
misled by him) when I say, those at least whom you abet, if not your self, do
in this manner oppose and oppugn all use of the Law among Christians, and speak
so opprobriously and despitefully of it, Why wonder you, if the name of
Antinomians be given them?

3. You are to hasty with us, you tell us we do ill; but you show us not
wherein; you charge us with ill doing, but you make it not to appear wherein it
is that we have so done. If we press faith, repentance and humiliation, we are
sure we do no other, then Christ and his Apostles before us did.

Yea, but Reply ibid.
you press them legally.

1. And so says your brother Eaton, Honey-^omb. c. 5 p 84. Ans. p. 10.
that Christ himself did.

2. But Sir, you might have done well to enform us, what it is to press these
things legally: Is it because we press them, as things necessary unto the
attaining of life eternal, and as reqired of all those that expect any share
in the salvation procured and purchased, by Christ? What else do all those
speeches of Christ and his Apostles before related, and the like amount unto?
Ioh. 8.24.
Unless you believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins; Luke 13.3, 5.
unless you repent, you shall perish? Math. 18.3.
unless you be converted, and become as little children, you cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven: Romans 8.13.
If ye live after the flesh you shall die: Ephesians. 5.5.
you know, that no Whore-mongers, nor unclean person, or covetous man, who is
an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of God and of Christ, with
many others of the like strain.

But Reply p. 5. 1.
you blame not you say, any that bid men repent; or be sorry for sins, and be
humbled, etc. if they preach them as Christ and the Apostles did, as graces
flowing from him, and out of his fullness, and not as springings of their own,
and waters from their fountain; as if these legal Teachers with Moses, would
make men believe that they could with such rods smite upon men's hearts as upon
rocks, and bring waters out of them, be they never so hard and stony.

But Sir, in all this your rhetorical flourish (for that it seems you have not
lost or left with your Logic) you do but Omissis super qibus pugna est, de
scammate and loco certaminis egred ens in peregrinis and alienis
disputationibus immoratis. Hier. ad Pammarh.
run out of the lists, and leaving your adversary (...) Non po est adversarium
vincere, qi in dimicando non hostem, sed umbram petit. Lactant. l. 3. c. 28.
skirmish with your own shadow.

For 1. That they preach these things, as Christ and his Apostles did, has
formerly been showed; and shall hereafter again be further made manifest, when
we have occasion to consider of, and compare together the particulars of either.

2. It cannot be proved, nor does it any way appear, that either Christ or his
Apostles in the pressing of these things (no more then the Prophets before
them) did always in their sermons and preachings, make mention withal of
Christ as the person from whose fullness the grace did flow, whereby they were
or might be enabled to do that which was then required.

3. That we preach these things to people as springings either of their own, or
our own, and waters from our own fountain, or theirs, to whom we preach them
(for you so speak as it is not easy to tell, whither you mean; but whither of
the two it be, that you entend) it is a calumny, and Turpe est hominem
ingeniosum (aut ingenuum etiam) id dicere, qod si neges, probare non possit.
Lact. Ibid.
such a charge, as you are no way able to make good: but would fain fasten
somewhat, whereon to ground matter of reproof, on those, whom you have engaged
your self to traduce, that you might have some color to bear out your
satyricall jeering and girding at them in that your dramaticall discourse.

4. You grant, Sir, that we press these things, as the Prophets did. But Sir,
should either you or any other, say, that the Prophets of God did so preach
them, as you here imply that we do, he should therein do them most notorious
wrong, as charging them with a denial, or not ackowledgment, at least, of that
grace of God, whereby those whom they preached these things unto, should be
enabled unto the doing of them; nor can there be any difference assigned
between the spring and fountain, from whence any such grace then issued, and
that from whence the like now flows. In plain terms, look from whence or from
whom any now receive power to believe, repent, be humbled and the like; from
thence, and from him so many as in those times believed, repented, were
humbled, received the like power then; and the Prophets teaching herein was
according to the truth of God, and of the thing it self in those times, as well
as Christ's and his Apostels in their times was.

5. You abuse us notoriously, when you bear men in hand that we would have them
to believe, that we can by such rods as these so smite upon their rocky hearts,
as to make water run out of them. No, Sir, you speak untruly; we profess no
such matter: yet we believe, that by such preaching God is able to break and
mollify the most flinty heart that is; and we find by good proof, that by such
preaching and pressing of repentance and reformation as you scof at, God has
to admiration wrought in this kind; and See Act. 2.23, 38, 41. and 3.19. with
4.4.
given thereby such success to his own ordinance, as may justly give you cause
to be ashamed and abased, as well as abashed, for your jeering of it, and
girding at it in that manner as you do.

6. How bold soever you think you may be with us, you might have done well to
forbear your unmannerly dealing with Gods Prophets, with whom too often you are
overbold: Could it not suffice you to spend your purulent matter on us, but you
must needs spit some of it in Moses his face? where find you that Exodus 17.6.
Moses believed that he could with his rod make the Rock give water? It was
neither Moses nor the rod, that made the Rock run with water; but God, who
stood by to the deed, upon his smiting of the Rock. Nor did Moses believe that
he could himself effect such a work by any power that himself had; nor did
either he, or any other of Gods Prophets presume that by any power of their
own, they or their preachings, were able to work on the hearts of those whom
they spak to: See Deuteronomy. 29.4. and 30.6. Esai. 1.^5. and 57.18. and 63.11, 17,
18. Ier. 5.23 and 31.18. Zech. 12.10.
unless God pleases to second them, and to accompany that his ordinance by
them with the powerful work of his holy Spirit.

But say you, Reply p. 6. 1.
we agree with you, that repentance and sorrow for sin, and humiliation, and
self-denial are all to be preached; and shall contend with you, who preaches
them most and clearest.

And Sir, for this I may very well refer my self unto those that have been
frequent auditors of your Antinomian teachers, how rise and serious, or how
sparing rather and superficial, they are in this subject, if ever at least
they light on it. It is to to well known, to be concealed or dissembled, what
their dealings are in this kind; by the concurrent reports of persons judicious
and well affected; who having either occasionally, or living in those places
where they have lectured, often heard diverse of them, too constanly and
consonantly affirm, that they could seldom or never hear them handling this
theme; unless it were by telling them, as you do in this Treatise, that it is
enough for them Treat. p. 84.
to believe, that Christ has repented for them, and confessed See Gods eye,
etc. p. 25.
their sins for them. No Sir, their teaching runs in an other strain, and
bends mainly an other way, to encite to joviality, and being fro-like, and
making merry. To which purpose they have not stuck some of them to tell their
hearers, that Jesus Christ when he was here upon earth, lived all his life long
as if he had been set upon the merry pin: and why should not believers live in
like manner? especially knowing that he now rules the roast in heaven: Yea,
Sir, how you have in your Treatise preached and pressed repentance, may appear
by the several passages formerly dealt with, and further yet to be discussed.

2. If you be so frequent in preaching of these things; why, do you check
others, for doing as you say your selves do? Yea, why do your hearers shun our
Teachers, and are offended with them, because they press these points which
their nice palats are nothing pleased with.

Reply ibid.
But then, say you, because John said, repent; and Christ said repent; and
Peter said, repent; are we to examine the mystery no further? know we not that
the whole Scripture in its fullness and integrity reveils the whole truth? and
must we not look out, and compare Scripture with Scripture, spiritual things
with spiritual; and so finding out truth from the degrees to the glory and
fullness of it, preach it in the same glory and fullness of it, as we find it?

Sir, if they preach repentance and press it as necessary unto salvation, I
hope we may be so bold as to preach the same after them in like manner; and in
girding at us for so doing, you gird not at us alone but them.

Nor are we ignorant, that the (...). Basil. de fide.
whole Doctrine of Faith, is to be received, that is contained in holy Writ;
and that Manifestorum lumine illustrantur obscura. Aug. Ep st. 48. Obscuriores
locutiones de manifestoridus illustrand. Idem doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 9.
Collation of Scripture with Scripture, may afford much light unto places more
obscure. But Sir, neither are these passages of any obscurity; being of the
clearest almost of any, either in the Old Testament or New: Nor can any parcel
of Scripture contradict or take away the truth of another; nor are any
therefore to be taxed for the delivery of any truth that in Scripture they find
recorded, or for urging and pressing any duty that they find there urged and
pressed, and so frequently by such as you here instance in your self. This is
all therefore nothing but a pile of mere impertinences; as would plainly
appear, would you but be entreated to rub up and resume your old Logic and
trusse up your loose stuff into some Syllogisticall frame, that it might
appear what you here oppose.

Of the like condition is all that to little purpose, that ensues, where you
tell us; that

Reply ibid.
We hear Christ preaching Ioh. 7.39.
before the Spirit was given, Repent; and we find when the Spirit was given,
Christ is said Act. 5.31.
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; and shall we not now
preach Jesus Christ, and repentance in Jesus, the fountain of repentance, the
author of repentance; and repentance thus and repentance in the glory of it
self more.

1. Christ then preached repentance; and repentance as of necessity unto
salvation; and where find we, that ever he revoked this precept, or the
doctrine concerning the necessity of it?

2. But this was before the Spirit was given; what Spirit Sir, is it you mean?
was not that Spirit, which was given to those that believed and repented upon
Math. 21.32.
John's preaching, and Ioh. 4.41, 42.59.
Christ's, before his passion, and before that Compare Ioh. 7 39. with Act. 1.5.
and 2 3, 4. (...). Schol. Graec.) and 19.
more ample effusion of it, and the extraordinary gifts of it, spoken of by the
Evangelist, in the place you seem to point at; the very same with that Spirit,
that was given afterward for the working of faith and repentace in those, who
in times ensuing Ioh. 17.20. Act. 2.38.41. and 4.1. and 8.12.
upon the Apostles preaching repented and believed? Or had they power to repent
and so did without that gift of the Spirit, which the other afterward had not?
So that these things in the one, should be (to give you your own words) as
springs of their own, and waters flowing from their own fountain, in the other
as graces flowing from Christ and his spirit.

3. But after the Spirit was given, Christ is said to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins. And by whom, Sir, I beseech you, were these things given
before? The Apostle tells us, that Hebr. 13.8. (...). Schol. Graec.
Jesus Christ is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. And whatsoever
saving grace is now given from Christ by the Spirit, was always and in all
times given unto all, that ever were saved by Christ; nor is there herein any
difference between those times and these. If you think otherwise, you may do
well to speak your mind plainly, for you talk very perplexedly; to make men
believe, that we preach not repentance, as a grace of God by his Spirit,
wrought in our hearts in and for Christ; which is most untrue; for we say and
teach, that it is not only so now, but was ever so in all ages: whereas you by
your ambiguous expressions seem to intimate the contrary.

4. But Sir, what is here to repeal the former precept of repentance? or to
give any just, much less necessary cause, to alter our preaching and pressing
of repentance, and the necessity of it, in the same manner I might well say, as
the Prophets, but much more as Christ himself, before the Spirit was in that
manner and measure given as after it was; when as the source and Original of
it was ever the same, and the necessity of it, as well now as then yea, in all
ages no less alike?

5. All therefore that hereafter follows, concerning Reply Ibid.
the preaching faith in the glory of it, and faith in the revelation of it, and
faith from Christ, and faith in Christ; because the Apostle says Act. 16.31.
, Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved; and Hebr. 12.2.
Jesus Christ is the Author and finisher of our faith, etc.

All these, I say, are but flanting flourishes brought in on the by, partly
(...), Plut. de vit. Epic.
to put by what you should speak to, and partly to make heedlesse people
believe that there is some new doctrine of faith by our new-light-men lately
discovered, other and more excellent, then ever was taught, either by the
Prophets of God in former times or by Christ himself in his preaching here upon
earth; or by any the ordinary Ministers and Teachers of the Gospel, either in
those times or in former ages.

6. For (not to stand upon the version of the word used by the Apostle, which
signifies rather (...), Heb. 2.10.
a Captain or Leader, then an (...), Heb. 5.9.
Author or worker) who of us denies faith to be Ephesians. 2 8. and 6.23. Phil. 1.29
the gift of God; or that God out of his love to us in Christ freely works it
in us, that thereby we may be enabled to Ioh. 1.12.
receive Christ, and Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ by it may dwell in us? yea, we say that it was so, and was taught so as
well before Christ's passion as since the same.

As little to the purpose is what you subjoyn, of Reply ibid.
one Scripture telling us, that 2 Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation; and an other says Zach. 12.10.
, They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him
etc. and then ask, Shall we not preach sorrow for sin from Christ piercing
and wounding and melting the heart?

1. Who forbids you, Sir so to preach? or who denies, that the sight of Christ
crucified for our sins by the eye of faith, is a singular mean of melting men's
hearts into godly sorrow; and that even after they are in the state of grace,
yea, and assured to of the pardon of their sins thereby purchased and procured?
contrary to what you teach, that Treat. p. 44.
no trouble for sin can arise in the soul, but from the obligement of the
Law, and the satisfaction it demands: against which to what is Answ. p. 18.
objected, you return nothing.

2 We teach therefore herein, as much as Gods Word warrants: But we teach also
with good warrant from the same Word, that Gods ordinary way of bringing men
over unto Christ, is by Act. 16.18. and 16.31, 32.
openi g their eyes unto a sight of their sins, and apprehension o^ their lost
and forlorn condition, unless they be saved by Christ; and by working their
hearts unto a willingness to come out of their sins and go out of
themselves, that they may by a true and lively faith, repair unto Christ, lay
hold on him and receive him, that they may be saved by him. Thus were those Act
2.23, ^7, 41.
that Peter preached to, brought in; thus was Paul Rom 7.10, 11
wrought on, as himself professes. And Sir, because Christ calls to come to
him with promise of refreshment, such only as are Math 11.28.
weary of, and burdened with the weight of their sins: nor do we find any
invited unto the waters of life, (which yet are E^ai. 55.1.
freely propounded) but such as spiritually Ioh. 7.37, 3^. Revel 2^.^7.
thirst after them: nor are any by the Prophet presumed so to thirst, but those
only that are Esai. 55.2, 3, 6, 7.
willing to hear and obey, and reform their lives, and return to God^ We
therefore dare not presume to tell men as you do and others of your way, that
they may come to Christ and receive him, tho no such work at all be wrought on
them but they continue still in their wonted sinful courses; and this indeed
is that that you scof us for, because we dare not be so presumptuous to say
herein as you say.

3. Yea Sir, we say further, from that very place of Zachary which you here
cite; that, as Zach. 12.10. ^ 13.1.
there is no fountain opened for sin and uncleanness unto any, until this
work be wrought on them; so that all those who now believing on Christ, do by
the eye of faith behold Christ pierced by their sins, cannot but be much
grieved and troubled for them; and that as well for those sins that after their
conversion they commit, as for those which before it they committed: since that
the one was a procuring cause of Christ's sufferings as well as the other; nor
is there less cause to be humbled and grieved for the one, then for the other.

4. Little to the purpose therefore is it, for you to tell us; that Reply p. 6
ibid.
Christ was s^nt Act. 5 31.
to give repentance, and pardon of sins; for not Luke 24.47.
this without that, nor pardon of sin without (I hope) but upon repentance;
which none of us ever denied; but tell us, Sir, plainly, if you dare speak it
out; that men tho they repent not yet may believe in Christ, and be saved by
Christ (that which is commonly asserted by those of your way; and is also
covertly hinted by you, as elsewhere is and will be showed) otherwise you here
(...) 1 Cor 9.27. ut qi a^tema jactat Brac^ia p^oterd^ns, and verberat ictibus
aeras, Vng. Aen. l. 5. (...). Eustath. ad II. ^.
beat but the ay^r about you, you smite not us, nor touch by way of reproof or
rejection ought that is held or taught by us.

The like doom belongs (to give it his due) to what follows next with you,
that

Math. 16.24.
One Scripture bids, Reply, Ibid.
He that will follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross: an other
says, Phil. 2.13.
It is he that works in us, both to will and to do; and Phil. 4.13.
I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

1. For what is all this also to the present purpose?

2. And yet Sir, you may do well to add the Apostles inference; Phil. 2.12, 13
It is God that works in you both to will and to do* of his good pleasure: and
therefore work you out your own salvation with fear and trembling: a lesson
that those of your way lust not to hear of, to learn and take out, much less;
yet a better, safer, and wholsomer inference then that of one of yours from the
forementioned place of Zachary: There is Zach. 13.1
a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem
for sin and for uncleanness. Therefore let believers sin as fast as they can,
there is a fountain open to wash them in: and what such wholesome exhortations
tend to who sees not? See Gods eye, etc. Pref. p. 18 C. 2.


But how these things make to the matter in hand, you will show us, I hope in
the close. For there you undertake to state Reply p. 7.
the difference between you and us.

1. That we preach Christ and the Gospel and the graces of the Spirit in the
parts as we find it: whereas you dare not speak the mystery so in pieces: you
see such preaching answers not the fullness of the mystery, the riches of the
Gospel, the glory of the New Testament, as belike yours does.

But Sir, 1. Do we preach these things, as we find them in parts? where do we
thus find them but in the word? and if we preach them so as we find them there;
we are sure, that we have warrant for such preaching good enough: and need not
therefore fear either yours or any man's censure, for our so doing.

2. Is there any piece we find in the word, that we leave unpreached? if we
wave none at all, tho we preach them in pieces, as we find them preached by
Christ and his Apostles before us yet preach we the whole, for (...), Arist.
metaphys. l. 4. c. 26.
all the parts and pieces make up the whole, and your censure of us is most
frivolous.

3. Consider Sir, what an insolent claim after your wonted manner you here
made; as if you were the only men forsooth, that preach the fullness of the
mystery, the riches of the Gospel, and the glory of the New Testament.

But Sir, I see we must bear with you; for you seem so highly conceited of, and
strongly yea strangly transported with the conceit of your own way of
preaching, that unless you be vaunting and bragging of it you burst.

4. Consider what aspersions you cast hereby upon the Apostles of Christ, yea,
upon Christ himself, to wit, that they preached not the fullness of the
mystery, nor the riches of the Gospel, nor the glory of the New Testament; (for
they delivered these things in pieces, as by their Sermons and Epistles whence
we take them, your self confessing it, as we find them, appears) but left that
it seems to be done by you, and those of your side. Whither will not the
insolency of man's hauty heart dare to ascend? and yet observe their hyprocrisy;
they dare not forsooth, do as we do, preach these things in pieces as the
Apostels did, humble minded men, that dare not be so presumptuous as we are,
and yet under color of this not daring to do as not we alone, but the Apostles
also before us did, dare advance and extol their own way of teaching above not
our teaching alone, but theirs also, and the Holy Ghost it self that taught by
them; (...), M rc. Imp. l. 12. 27
no pride worse, or more abominable then that, which comes shrouded under the
weed and wimple of humility, and by seeming to stoop, strives to lift up it
self.

2. Reply, Ibid.
You find, you say, that in the fullness of the New Testament, Christ is sit up
as a Prince, as a King, as a Lord, as a crown and glory to every grace and
gift: nay, he is made not only righteousness, but sanctification to, and so
you preach him: Whereas to preach his riches without him, his graces by
themselves, singel, and private; as repent and believe; and be humbled, and
deny your selves, we make the gifts loose much of their glory, Christ of his
praise, and the Gospel of its fullness.

To all which vain glosing I Answer.

1. Which of us deny Christ any part of this his honor? or how preach we faith
in Christ, repentance unto remission of sin by Christ; or self-denial, as a
duty reqired by Christ of all those, that look for salvation from Christ; how
can we preach any of these thus, and not withal preach Christ? But Sir, still
you proceed, without fear or shame as if you had cast both away, to asperse our
Savior himself and his blessed Apostles, in whom and with whom we find the
duties by you here mentioned, in the self same manner pressed, as you here
propound them; nor is there any ground or color of reason for any to imagine,
that whenever they preached any of these duties unto any, or pressed them
upon any, they did withal instruct them in the whole doctrine and mystery,
concerning the power and principality of Christ. Read over our Saviors Math.
5. and 6. and 7.
large Sermon in the Mount; his other long Math. 13.
Sermon by the Seaside; his discourse Math. 24.
on Mount Olivet with his Disciples; his Math. 16.23.27.
lessoning of them upon Peter's carnal advice; Act 8.20.23.
Peter's spiritual exhortation and advice to the Sorcerer; James whole Epistle,
and John's and Judes; and as you find their exhortations to be framed, so judge
whither they come not within the compass of this arrogant man's censure, who
little regards how he brands or upbraids Gods P^ophets, Christ's Apostles, yea
Christ himself, and their preaching and teaching, so long as together with them
he may ding some dirt on the faces of them and their doctrine, whom in the
height and pride of his censorious spirit he looks upon, either See Ans. p. 30
as mere imposters or as punies to himself in the mystery of Christ and the
Gospel.

But 2. Sir, we have learned to distinguish between Christ himself and the
Graces of his Spirit, and those duties or actions, the performance whereof is
reqired of all those, tho by grace from God received thereunto enabled, that
desire or expect to be saved by Christ, and to give each his due and proper
place; nor do we jumble these things together, as you and those of your strain
are wont to do: whereof to give the Reader a taste, tho of no very good relish,
I shall relate some passages that my self heard delivered by Heydon a ^usie
spread r of Mr Eatons books.
one of them in a Sermon, which as I was afterward informed, had been preached
in diverse places. The Scripture he undertook to handel, was 1 John 3.7. Little
children, let no man deceive you, He that does righteousness is righteous even
as he is righteous: In opening whereof he told his Auditory, that there was a
twofold righteousness, a righteousness inherent, and a righteousness
imputed; an active and a passive righteousness: the former was the
righteousness of the Law, the latter of the Gospel and that the latter, to
wit, the imputed or passive righteousness was the righteousness that the
Apostle here spoke of; and in prosecution of his matter, he expounded all the
places he qoted, wherein any duty was reqired, not as to be done by us but as
done by Christ for us, and so to be believed of us. For example, Math. 7.21.
Not every one that calls me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
but he that does the will of my Father in Heaven; that is, he that has done it
in Christ and believes that Christ did it for him, and Math. 12.50
He that shall do the will of my Father in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother, that shall do it in Christ, and believe that he has done
it for him; and Ephesians. 4.24.
put on the new man, which is after God created in righteousness and true
holiness, that is, Jesus Christ by believing his holiness and righteousness
imputed unto you: and 1 Cor. 15.58.
abounding in the work of the Lord; that is, in believing in Christ, (for that
is Ioh. 6.29.
the work of God) and what he has wrought for you. Beside many other
Scriptures in like-manner vexed and racked, and being afterward charged with
wronging his text, in expounding it directly contrary to the express words of
it; and to the coherence of it with the rest of the context; he boldly and
peremptorily affirmed that all that went before of 1 Ioh. 3.3.
purifying himself, and Ibid. v. 6.
not sinning, and that followed after, not of Ibid. v. 9.
committing sin, and Ibid. v. 10.
doing righteousness, was all to be understood of imputation and
justification, or of imputed and passive righteousness, as he was pleased
still to style it. But thus he, to which I might add what an other of them
writes; that H. Den Confer p. 30. in some, p. 18.
Faith is, as the learned know, (but what learned, I know not) a part of
repentance: and Repentance and faith differ, as whole and part, and Ibid. p.
32. or 20.
Faith is our new life. Nor Sir, do your self much swarve from this manner of
teaching, when you tell your readers, as was before showed, that Treat. p. 84.
85.
Christ has believed and repented for them; and they must believe that their
faith and repentance is perfect in Christ.

3. As for what you say, from the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.30.
that Christ is made not only righteousness, but sanctification also to us
(and do not we say and teach the same?) good Sir, keep you close to this; and
be pleased to press it upon your people; for if it be so, then undoubtedly
Romans 6 2, 16. 1 Cor. 6.10, 11.
no unsanctified person has any share yet in Christ; nor are any justified by
him, who are not with all sanctified, and the one consequently may be a good
evidence of the other, all which yet your positions impugn and oppose; as in
due place shall appear.

But proceed we to the residue of your reply.

In the next place therefore, Ans. p. 9.10.
skipping over (belike you found the ground to hot under your feet) all the
instances given of our Saviors assertions; which should you set your Amen to,
you must needs pass sentence against your self on our side for deliverin^ the
like: and Ibid. p. 10.
that blaspehmous inference which from your own grounds you stand justly
charged with, and will never be able to wipe off; as also Ibid. p. 11.
the Answer to your Objection, of Christ's mentioning faith only in some
places; which you endeavor not to take away; and being duly considered, might
in one line have blown away all the dust that you have raised in the last
forgoing passages, wherewith to dim your readers eyesight.

These things over-skipt, you proceed to answer that plea of ours, as unjustly
taxed by you, and termed Legalists, Ibid. p. 11.14.
for preaching faith and repentance and newness of life, in the very same
manner and method that John, Christ and his Apostles did; who by collation of
places are evidently showed from the first to the last, to have observed the
self-same method.

The Answer you return hereunto (not denying at all that they all therein
conspired) is this, that Reply p. 7. 1.
you tax us only, for that we preach it not as they aid according to the full
revelation of it in the New Testament; but we preach it only, as we find it in
their Summaries, and in the brief narration of their doctrine: which we ought
not to do.

But Sir, this is your old b Cuckows song; (...).
which ever anon to little purpose you repeat; and helps to fill up your pages,
and take off your Reader, when you are at a loss and find your self destitute
of any satisfactory Answer to matters objected.

For 1. Is there ought in their Summaries, that is not sound doctrine and good
Gospel?

2. Are not these things pressed by them, as duties to be necessarily done and
performed by all those that are saved by Christ?

3. Can you justly charge us with concealing any part of the Gospel, found in
any book of holy writ?

4. Was this the meaning of John, or Christ, or Peter, or Paul, when they
called upon people to repent, Repent: that is, Believe that Christ has
repented for you; and you have perfectly repented in him? or when they exhorted
men to believe, was this their meaning, Believe that Christ has believd for
you; and you believe perfectly by virtue of that his belief? For this with you,
Sir, is the full revelation of the New Testament, which yet you must pardon us,
if we believe it not on your word, because we find it not in Scripture.

Mean while Sir, you are to Magisteriall in telling us, that we should not do
so, as we see such as these are before us do, and we must reqest you, Patere
nos cum istis errare, ut Hieron. ad Aug. Siqidem, Tales honestus error est seqi
duces, ut Fab inst^t. l. 1.
not to blame us if we deem their practice better warrant to bear us out
herein, then your bare word to beat us out of it.

But, Reply p. 7. 8.
you will herein condemn me you say, out of mine own mouth. For I say of the
Apostels, that we have but Summaries of them, as in Act. 2.40. and 16.31. and
we knowing this, preach only by their first methods and Summaries, not looking
to the revelation of the mystery, which the Apostle says Romans 16.25, 26.
it now made manifest.

Sir, He that has but half an eye may easily discry, what monsters you are
secretly brooding, tho you dare not yet offer them to open view: But let us
discuss your words a little.

1. Where do I say of the Apostle, that we have but Summaries of them? no such
matter, Sir; I say only Answ. p. 13.
we have not their whole sermons; but some brief summaries, and principal
heads of them: wherein yet we find more preached, enjoined and pressed, then
you would have taught; to wit, repentance as well as faith: That which is
sufficient to stop your mouth, and to cut of your Treat. p. 123.
short cut, of making faith the only Gospel work and way, because the other in
some places is not mentioned: But I say not, that we have brief Summaries only
of the Apostles doctrine. For we have whole Epistles, and in them very large
and plentiful discourses and disputes; Yea, in those Summaries of their
Sermons, and their other writings, together with those pieces of holy Writ,
penned by other holy men, immediately directed, and infallibly guided by the
Spirit, we have all things necessary to be known, believed or practiced, for
the attainment of salvation by Christ, fully delivered.

2. If we do ill in preaching after their first methods; good Sir, be pleased
to show us where or when they altered their methods; or where having at first
preached, and pressed upon people, faith, retance, and newness of life, they
afterward revoked and repealed any part thereof, as tho formerly needful, yet
no more necessary then, or where they imposed ought on any, that came not
within compass of these; which if you be not able to do, you have little reason
to control us for preaching after that method which they retained, and
constantly held on to the last.

3. Whereas you say (and that it seems is the mischief, and the maine ground of
the qarell, that we admit not Treat. p. 204.
your more glorious new lights, as you term them) we look not to the revelation
of the mystery, which the Apostle said is now made manifest: Sir, you put me in
mind of Dr Alabasters dotage, of Apparatus mysticus in Revelationem Christi.
a new way of expounding Scripture, which Solomon had foretold, should in these
latter days come to light; and was accordingly now reveiled to him: For in
like manner, it seems you would make us believe, that the Apostle in his times
foretold of some mysteries, that should in these days be made known; and that
the same are now reveiled to your self, and your associates. But, good Sir,
when the Apostle says in the place you point us to, Romans 16.25.26.
The revelation of the mystery which was kept secret since the world began; but
now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets made known to all
Nations, for the obedience of faith: did he not speak of the times wherein he
lived; and of that mystery of the Gospel, which tho concealed formerly from the
Gentiles, yet had bin manifested by Gods Prophets from time to time to his
people, and was Act. 3.24. and 26.22. and 28, 23.
out of their writings, and according to the same, by himself, and other the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, in those days preached, reveiled, and made
known also to the Gentiles? Or, can you hope that any, unless fanaticall and
fantastical people (I will not say, like your self) can be persuaded (and yet,
what are not such prone to believe?) that the Apostle, when he spoke that,
should so much as dream of Mr S. or I know what other Enthusiasts, and of some
Mysteries, that in these times should be reveiled to him or any other; which
the Apostle himself was either ignorant of, or was loath to trust pen and paper
with? But this, Sir, may well render you justly suspected, to be one of the
Revelationists, reported to be rise abroad. Howbeit, you must excuse us if we
take you not, for any such extraordinary man, either Prophet or Apostel, until
you produce a better patent for it. And by your own grounds such an one you
must be, if you will profess your self a dispenser of the Gospel; what else
import those words of yours els-where, that Reasons for uni y, 7.
Both Presbyterians and Independents have need of Seekers, because none of them
have the Ordinances by the first pattern in the Word, as by Apostleship and
Baptism of Spirit: But concerning this more anon, where you are harping on this
string again.

As for John's manner of preaching, Reply p. 8.
his preaching, you say, ought to be no more an example to us then his baptism;
and that we know the least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater then he.

1. It is true, we know, Math. 11.11.
our Savior so says; and in that respect wherein he so spoke, we deny it not;
tho we stand not now to discuss it; because it would reqire a large discourse.

2. But Sir, for the exampell of John's preaching, and the duties he reqired of
those that should be saved by the Messiah, whom he preached, we may well make
him our pattern; for that the things reqired by him were such as were in all
ages the same; and the rather are we emboldned so to do, because we find the
Apostle Paul in his preaching by his own report (as I have Answ. p. 14.
showed in mine Answer) treading precisely in his steps, and Act. 26.19, 20.
paralleling him to an heir: howsoever such preaching (it seems) is now out of
date, since the day of other more glorious mysteries reveiled unto you and
yours.

3. Nor know I any reason, why his baptism for the substance of it, should not
be an example to us also in these times, being Mark. 1.4.
the baptism of repentance unto remission of sins; that is, if I mistake not,
baptism obsigning remission of sins upon condition of repentance.

But this expression you take exception to, and cannot endure to hear faith,
repentance, and new obedience, termed conditions of life and salvation; and ask
Reply p. 8. 2.
why I keep not the wholesome words of Scripture; and where the Scripture
calls these conditions of salvation.

Sir, I will not make stay to insist on the like demand from you, whether
Christ's believing for us, and repenting for us, be either Scripture phrases or
contain in them Scripture doctrine; either such as is found expressed in
Scripture, or such as may by necessary conseqence be thence deduced; It may
peradventure be one of those mysteries that have since the Apostles writings
been revealed unto your self and some others, who take upon them to mould us
out a new notionall Divinity, not in words and terms only, but in matter of
faith, other then from the Scriptures which with many are now grown into
contempt, we had formerly received.

Nor will I stand to examine whether by such demand you intend to help out Paul
Best, that blasphemous beast his impious assertions: (For Videantur Dionysius
Alex. apud Athanas. de ejus Sent. Gregor. Naz. de Theolog. Orat. 5. Ambros. de
fide c. 5. Aug. epist. 178.
that was the main objection the Arian and others of that way used, that the
Names and Terms were not found in Scripture:) the rather to be suspected,
because you are so eager a pleader Reasons for Un ty, 4.
for opinions of all sorts.

Nor will I take exception to your misrelating of my words, that faith,
repentance, and new obedience are conditions of life and salvation; for I no
where so speak, but that Answ. p. 11.12.
pardon of sin and salvation are propounded and preached upon condition of
faith, repentance and newness of life, which are the conditions of the Gospel;
and yet may they also be so termed, as conditions of peace, Luke 14.31.
upon agreement unto, and performance whereof, peace may be had, which
otherwherewise cannot be obtained.

Only Sir, I shall endeavor by help of Logic out of Scripture thus to (...).
Athan. de Syn. Nic. Idem fere Cyr l. de Tr nit. dial. 1.
justify the use of that term.

That which is so propounded as that being performed life and salvation may
undoubtedly be attained, and without which it cannot be had; may well be termed
a condition.

But such are the things before mentioned.

They may therefore justly be termed conditions.

Yea, but this say you, is Reply ibid.
to make a condition by consequence; and the interpreting of the Spirit thus in
the letter, and by consequence has much darkened the glory of the Gospel; and
when as John. 6.53.
some of Christ's Disciples took his words as I do, under a condition, Ibid. 63.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc? the words, says he, that I
speak are Spirit.

Sure the man is in a strange humor; he would have those that deal with him,
to make themselves no better then mere bruits; for they must divest themselves,
not of Logic only, but of Grammar too; both of common speech and common sense;
they must not interpret the Spirit by conseqence: as much as to say in plainer
terms, they must deduce nothing by conseqence from Scripture; especially when
it shall cross any Tenent of his, nor must they say, that such a speech
imports a condition; tho they find it usherd in with a conditional particle;
and therefore, tho nisi or except, be such an one in our Saviors assertion,
yet it must by no means there import a condition.

For as for what he subjoyns, that some of the Disciples should stumble at
those words of our Savior, because they took them as I do, under a condition:
and that our Savior therefore told them, that the words he spoke were Spirit:
And what then? that they were not to be taken rherefore under a condition? as
if in Spiritual things conditions could not be as well as in carnal; these
things are so palpably absurd, that it is a wonder how they could possibly find
entrance, I say not, into any Scholars skull, but into any illiterate fellows
head piece, unless his brain-pan were not lightly crafied only, but clean
crakt. For who is so void of common sense, as not easily to apprehend, that the
ground of their startling at that passage, was not the taking of the words as
conditionally conceived, which our Savior no where waives; but the Carnaliter
intellexerunt, qod spir tualiter int^lligendum erat. Aug. in Joan. 27 and de
doctr. Chist. l 3.
taking of that carnally, which was to be understood spiritually, was that
wherein they were mistaken, and which our Savior meets with in that
after-speech. But some things, they say, are so apparent of themselves, that
tho it may well be deemed a fond labor to spend many words about proof of
them, yet (...), Epict. l. 1. c. 5.
it is not so easy by argument to confirm them against an obstinate opponent;
not because they are not of unqestionable truth, but because they are of
themselves so clear, being in the nature of principles, that it is hard finding
out a medium to prove them by, that is not less clear then themselves; as that
two and two make four; and that contradictories ever divide truth and falsehood:
And just such are those assertions that Mr S. here opposes, that Collections
may by conseqence be framed from Scripture; that Conditions may be in
spiritual things, as well as in carnal; that Conditional particles imply a
condition: that a Condition is where the whole nature of a condition is found.

But that this man herein striveth against the clear light of truth shining
into his soul, or within him rather by that candle of natural reason that God
has set up in his soul; only to run counter to the Legalists, whom his soul so
much abhors, may hereby appear, in that when this fit of opposition is a
little over, and this heat of passion somewhat alayed with him, and the man is
come again now to himself, he freely of himself confesses, that Treat. p. 163.
the Gospel is formed up of exhortations, conditional promises, etc. (unto
which els-where objected, he returned not a word;) and what other promises but
these, and such as these, the Gospel should be made up of, I suppose Mr S.
himself is not able to show, nor do I believe that he meant any other. Howbeit,
it may be, that out of some nice subtilty, tho he grant conditional, he will
deny condition, as in an other subject he seems to have some such subtle
reserve, where, tho he use the word divinity, yet he scoft the title of a
Divine: as I am informed that some other also now do; but they perchance merely
for some want of Scholership; but Mr S. a professed Scholar, I am sure, cannot
be ignorant, that a Divine and Divinity, condition and conditional are
vocabula, yea and argumenta conjugata.

But however, Sir, lay aside, if it be so offensive to you, the term of
condition: for to maintain strif about words, is but a vain expense of time. Do
you but acknowledge, that upon believing in Christ, repenting of sin, and
leading a new life, life and salvation may undoubtedly be attained; and that
without these it cannot be had; and we shall herein be soon agreed: or if you
dare, deny it, and so give our Savior Christ himself and his Apostles the lie;
whom I have showed in express terms by testimonies unavoidable so to affirm.

But here you object;

1. That Reply p. 8. 2.
th^se that are Christ's, do not repent and believe and obey, that they may be
Christ's; for God has chosen us in him, and predestined us unto the adoption
of Children in Jesus Christ.

But, Sir, 1. All this proves not that these things are not conditions of the
Gospel, or that any can have part in Christ without them.

Gra^is hoc qoque pr^stitum est; gratis, qod ad t^ att^^et; n^m qu^ad ^ll^ n^n
gratis: salvus fact^s es pro nihilo; sed non de nihilo tamen, Bern. Ser. in
Psalm. 90.
2. The Apostle tells us in express terms, that Gal. 2.16.
he believed in Christ, that he might be justified by Christ, thereby implying
that he was not actually justified, or had part in the justification procured
and purchased by the death of Christ, until he believed. And albeit the
ransom, whereby we are freely (in regard of our selves) justified, be wholly
in Christ Jesus; yet is he said to be Rom 3.24.25.
set forth for an atonement unto us through faith in his blood; nor were those
Romans 11.23, 24.
branches of the w^ld Olive, which were taken to succeed in the room of those
who were broken off, actually in Christ, but Epes 2.12.
out of Christ, until upon their believing they were engraffed into Christ.

3. As Epes. 1.5.
God has predestined us unto the adoption of sons in Christ; (that is, to
be adopted through Christ; as he is said to have blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in him) so has he elected, them whom he was pleased so to single
out in his counsel and purpose from eternity, Ibid. v. 3.
Iam. 2.5.
to be rich in faith, says one Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4.
to be holy and unblameable before him in love, says an other Apostle, and the
same again; 2 These. 2.13.
he has from the beginning chosen you unto salvation, by the sanctification of
the Spirit and the beli^f of the truth; or by sanctification of the Spirit and
true Faith; nor can any man therefore have life and salvation without these.

2. Reply ibid.
Consider (say you) what straits you bring the Gospel into; first y^u make life
appearing to be had in the covenant of grace, as at first in the covenant of
works; do this and live, so believe, repent, obey and live; thus runs your
doctrine; nor can you with all your distinctions make faith in this
consideration less then a work, and so put salvation upon a condition of works
again. Is this free grace?

I pass by your first here without a second; we shall meet with the like again
hereafter: as also, that to say believe and be saved; repent and be saved, is
to put salvation upon a condition of works again. Q^d ille a^ud Co^^icum A^lul.
1. Pactum non pactum est; p^ctum non pactum, ubi vobis lub^t.
A condition is a condition, when it pleases you and may seem to make for you:
it is no condition, when you list to mislike it, because it will not serve your
turn.

But 1. Sir, you should do well, or ill rather (if you dare be so bold) to tell
our Savior, he has brought the Gospel into straits by saying, Mark. 16.16.
whosoever does not believe shall be damned, and Ioh. ^.24.
unless you believe in me, ye shall die in your sins, and, Luke 13.3.5.
unless you repent you shall perish: and, Ioh. 6.53.
unless ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you have no life in you: and
Math. 18.3.
unless ye be converted, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven: and,
Math. 7.21.
none shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of my Father in
heaven: according whereunto also the Apostle, Heb. 5.9.
He is Author of salvation to all that obey him. Now suppose, Sir, we were not
able to answer all your cavils, yet were we bound to stick close to these
truths so expressly delivered and taught us by Christ, and not suffer our selves
to be beaten off from them, by any exceptions, that any froward heart or wanton
wit, should to puzzel us, make against them. Be pleased therefore, Sir, to set
us a while aside, and if you lust to be contending with Christ, advise or
request, (whither you please) him to consider a little better of the business,
what streights he has brought the Gospel into, by these and other the like
assertions; for we have no cause to doubt, but that he will own his own words;
tho you may well have just cause to doubt, what thank you shall have from him,
for qarelling with, and cavilling in this manner against them.

2. You say, that thus runns our doctrine; but we demand of you, whither
Christ's doctrine run so or no; whereunto you dare not return any direct answer,
for you cannot deny it: only you tell us of a further mystery, that is of late
reveiled unto your self and I know not who: which is all nothing to the
purpose; nor does any thing, that out of Scripture you have alleged, at all
cross or contradict that which you here call our doctrine, but is indeed
Christ's; as unless you have so brazed your brow, that you have rubd all shame
off it, you cannot but acknowledge; but whither you do or no, others seeing it
thus laid in precise terms before you, will thereby easily know what to deem
of you, unless you so do.

3. But Reply ibid.
we cannot, say you, with all our distinctions make faith in this consideration
less then a work; and so put salvation upon a condition of works again.

1. The Apostle could distinguish, and does distinguish, between faith and
works: and we know therefore that in this business they may be distinguished,
and are distinct; and tho we were not able to show, how they are to be
distinguished, yet would not that prove, that distinguished they could not be.
But Sir, you are not able with all your Sophistry (for Logic you renounce) and
fond flourishes, to take off that aspersion which you have cast upon the
Apostle as if he therefore preached life to be had in the covenant of grace,
(...) otherwise then as before in the covenant of works, because he presses
faith as n cessary to the attaining of salvation by Christ: whereas he thereby
in express terms distinguishes the two covenants, the one from the other; not
by rejecting or excluding faith, but by taking it in, as opposed to works in
that manner as in the former they were exacted; for these are his words: Romans
10.5, 6, 9.
Moses discribeth the righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which
does these things, shall live by them. But the righteousness, which is of
faith, speaks on this wise; -- If thou confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shall believe with thine heart, that God has raised him from the
dead, thou shall be saved: and the words are so clear, to evince his
acknowledgment of that that you would fain fasten as an aspersion upon us, that
if the aspersion be just, it must of necessity light as well on him as on us;
and Cernis nempe, cum q^bu^ tua maledicta sustineamus; cernis cum qibus nobis
sit causa communis, qam nulla consideratione sobria pulsare calumniis and
expugnare conaris; cernis qam tibi pernici sum sit tam horribile crimen
objicere talibus, and qam nobis gloriosum sit qodlibet crimen audire cum
talibus, Aug ad Iul. l. 1. c. 2.
we are not unwilling with him to bear it.

2. Nor yet is this spoken, as if, according to your vain and peremptory
sentence past upon us, we were unable to distinguish between the act of faith
reqired in the latter covenant, and works exacted in the former. For we might
stop your mouth with your own words in your next paragraph, where you tell us,
that faith is the glorious Gospel work; and so point us to a distinction, that
we might make some use of in this argument; but that we find you so flagging
and fluttering too and fro, that we scarce know where to have you, or how to
lay hold on you. The difference between these has by our writers been long
since observed, whereof from their writings you might easily have been
informed, had you deigned to consult them: to wit, that in the Covenant of
works, works are considered, as in themselves performed by the parties to be
justified and to live, without reference unto ought done or to be done for them
by any other: whereas in the Covenan of grace, Faith is required and
considered, not as a work barely done by us, but as an instrument, or mean,
whereby Christ is apprehended, and received, in whom is found, and by whom that
is done whereby Gods justice is satisfied, and life eternal meritoriously
procured for us; that which carries the power and efficacy of all home to
Christ. Now Sir, what a vast difference there is between these two may appear,
if you will be but pleased to consider, how far these two propositions are
asunder, Pay your debt of a thousand pounds, and be free; and, Rely on such a
friends satisfaction made for it, and be as free as if you had made full
payment and satisfaction your self. He is either very dim-sighted, or wilfully
wincks, that sees not what distance there is between these two agreements, and
how they suit with the two Covenants, that we to are distinguish: which Mr S.
would here make to be a matter of so great difficulty that we must needs be
nonplussed in it.

As for repentance and new obedience; there is, as much difference between them
and faith, in regard of its peculiar office, in this latter Covenant; so much
more between them and works in the former.

1. Between them and faith, in the point of justification, or the discharge of
a sinner from the guilt of his sins; for that, howsoever they are both
reqired as conditions to be necessarily performed by all those that expect
life, or pardon of sin, and salvation by Christ; yet neither of them comes in,
as having any hand in the business of our justification, or discharge of us
from the guilt of our sin; because that neither do they cast ought in toward
the discharge of our debt, nor have they any peculiar act in the application
of, or special relation unto, that whereby our debt is discharged. Whereas our
faith, tho it afford not the least mite of it self toward the making up of that
price, wherewith our debt is to be discharged, yet it is that whereby we Ioh.
1.12.
receive Jesus Christ and in him and with him the price by him paid for us, and
whereby we trust to him, and rely upon him, for the discharge of our debt by
the merit of his sufferings: in regard whereof it is called, as Act. 20.21. and
26.18.
faith on Christ, so more specially, Romans 3.25.
on his blood.

2. Between repentance and new obedience in the latter Covenant, and works in
the former: for works in the former are required as fully and exactly answering
Gods justice, and the utmost rigor of the Law: whereas in the latter, they are
reqired, tho as necessary duties, and such as without which none can expect
salvation by Christ; yet not, as any way answering Gods jstice, but as finding
gracious acceptance with God, notwithstanding their manifold defects, through
his mercy in Jesus Christ.

Thus Sir, you see, that such sely novices as we are esteemed by you, yet are
able to distinguish those things, which you presume impossible to be
distinguished, by such shallow wits at least as you conceive or conceit ours to
be.

Now what has been said, being duly weighed, will meet with all, that is, by
you here further objected.

For 4. to your first demand, (...) ibid.
is this free grace? I shall crave leave, to return you a counter-demand:
Suppose a King be content at the suit either of the parties themselves, or some
friend of theirs, to grant his gracious pardon to a company of notorious rebels
that had risen against him, set up some base desperate rogue in his room, done
him all the despite and mischief they were able to do; and being apprehended,
arraigned and condemned to such death as by their wicked demerits they had most
justly deserved, upon condition that they aknowledge their offense, and their
sorrow for it, with purpose and promise of living loyally for time to come;
whether you would deem this to be free grace, or no? Or, because I may well
doubt, that you would little regard what you say, to put off ought for the
present; I shall not stick to refer it to any indifferent Reader whatsoever
to determine, whether he were not a most ungratious wretch, that having his
pardon on such terms granted and signed him, should in regard of those
conditions, deny it to be of free grace: and whether they do not blaspheme Gods
free grace, that deny it to be free grace, if it be propounded on terms of
belief, repentance and amendment of life; Sir, whatsoever you say of us, take
heed how you tell Christ, that he does not freely save you, if he will not
save you unless you believe.

And for your next Qere Reply ibid.
, concerning faith granted to be a gift of God, whether this be more free
grace respectively to what we do, then the Covenant of works had; since that
all the works wrought in us then were freely of God, and of free gift to, as
Arminius you say, well observes, and we wrought only from a free-gift given.

To pass by many differences, that might be observed between the one Covenant
and the other; not to stand to discuss what Arminius says, who I suppose,
would deliver his mind there clearly then you here relate him. It is not
denied, but that whatsoever Adam wrought, or was reqired to be wrought by him,
did proceed, and was to proceed from such power and ability, as God together
with his reasonable soul at first freely conferred on him; but yet this proves
not that there was no other difference between the one Covenant and the other;
or that life promised is no more of free grace in the one then in the other;
since that such exact working as might fully answer the justice of God was to
life reqired in the one; whereas that which comes far short of it, is in and
for Christ unto life accepted in the other.

And not frivolous only, but scandalous also is that which you further subjoyn.

Reply ibid.
Either place salvation upon a free botome, or else you make the New Covenant
but an old covenant in new terms; instead of Do this and live; Believe this and
live; repent and live; obey and live: and all this, is for want of reveiling
the mystery more fully.

This I say, is frivolous, because as has been showed, salvations free botome
is no way impeached by such conditions as these reqired; scandalous, because
therein the Apostles doctrine is not covertly, but directly challenged as
overthrowing and razing the very foundation of free grace. For what is, Act.
16.32.
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved; but Believe and live? or
what is, Act. 3.19.
Repent, that your sins may be done away, but Repent and live? or what is,
Heb. 5.9.
He is the Author of salvation to all that obey him; but obey and live? And I
demand then what this amounts unto, and whither it be any better then blasphemy
to say, that the Apostles by such their doctrine, did not place salvation upon
a free-botome; but brought in the old Covenant again in new terms. Sir dare
you say in your new reveiled mystery, Believe not, and yet live; Repent not,
and yet live; Obey not, and yet live? or believe, repent and obey; and yet be
damned? understanding such belief, repentance, and obedience, as the Apostels
speak of. If you dare, speak it out that we may understand from you, what your
mysteries are, and together with us give the holy Ghost the lie.

But in your wonted manner you proceed; and Reply p. 8. 3.
to that, say you, that where we find faith only preached, and so salvation
made short work, it is because we have but the Summa^ies; I agree with you that
we have but the doctrine of the Apostles as John's; of whom it is said, he spoke
many other things in his exhortation to the people; It is true, we have much of
what they said, and we want much.

You misrelate me, Sir, as once before in this very passage.

1. I say not, that in the Apostles preaching salvation is made such short
work; but that Answ. p. 9.11.
you so make it, in cutting of all those reqisites elsewhere mentioned, and
which are necessary and inseparable attendants of true faith, that which also I
express; but you deign not to take notice of.

2. I say not, that we have the doctrine of the Apostles, as John's, etc. I say
only, that we Answ. p. 15.
have but the Summaries, or principal heads of some of their Sermons. Nor do I
therefore herein agree with you, who if Vncia concessa, libram totam tollitis,
Optat. l. 2.
one give you but an inch, I see, will soon take an ell; much less, dare I to
say as you do (which amounts to little less then blasphemy against the
Scriptures sufficiency) concerning their doctrine, (for that yours words
manifestly imply) that much of it we have, and much we want. Of which manner of
speaking let others judge, and from what spirit it does proceed.

Reply p. 9. ^.
Yet we have so much, say you, as may show us, that according to the work of
salvation in us, Faith is the work which gives most glory to God; Abraham
believed and gave glory to God: they that believe give glory, and Faith of all
the works of the spirit, is the glorious Gospel work, Christ calls it the work
indeed; this is the work that ye believe. So as the only reason, why we hear
so much of faith in the Gospel, is not only and merely as you insinuate,
because we have but their Sermons in Summaries, nor because of another reason
of yours drawn from the qualifications of those they preached to, that had
other gifts and not Faith: but because faith is of all spiritual encreasings
in us, the most gloriously working toward Christ; faith goes out and faith
depends; and faith brings down Christ, and faith opens the riches, and faith
believes home, all strength, comfort, glory, peace, promises.

But Sir, what does all this glorious flourish here? or to what purpose is it
here inserted? does it either prove that life and salvation is not propounded
in the Gospel upon a condition of believing in Christ; or that repenting and
amending are not to life eternal as necessarily reqired as it? If not, (for
that is the subject we are about) this is all but a needless De qa vere u^u pa
^p test i^lud Scaligeri, exe^c. 107. 20. Decl^mati^nes (in disputando)
am^itiosorum opera, ^tiosorum ci^i sunt.
declamatory digression, whereby you endeavor cunningly to divert your reader,
from the matter that is in hand.

Yet let us see what it is you say.

1. That faith is a grace of great excellency, and most useful, is by no man
denied; or that thereby we give glory as did Romans 4.20.
Abraham to God: but that is not the reason, why Romans 3.28. and 5.1.
by faith we are said to be justified; for to omit that Josh. 7.19.
by confessing out sins we give glory to God and we bring glory to him both by
our Math. 5.16.
constant obedience in life, and Ioh. 21.19. Phil. 1.20.
Christian patience in death: this were to found life on the worth of the work;
the excellency of the gift: and so other graces might as well lay claim to the
same privilege with it, as shall afterward appear: but because it is that
whereby we Ioh. 1.12.
receive Christ, and (...) Chrysostom. in Gal. 220.
make him our Christ; (according to that that you at length come to in the
close of this paragraph, tho else where again you fall from it, and wherein we
consent with you) that which is the peculiar office of faith, as was before
said. So that here, Sir, you runn your self on that rock, whereon even now you
told us that we miscarried, in placing the foundation of our justification and
salvation on the eminency and excellency of something in us.

^. Albeit faith be a glorious grace, yet I dare not say, that it is the most
glorious of any of the graces of the Spirit; for should I so say, I should
contradict the Apostle, (which tho you make no bones of, yet dare not we do)
who expressly tells us, that 1 Cor. 13.13.
love, or charity is greater then either faith or hope; and although faith be the
most useful and beneficial grace to us, yet is it such a grace as carries us
out of our selves, implying us to be (...). Rom 5.6.
impotent, insolvent, very banckrupts, unable to contribute any one farthing
toward the payment of our debts. And albeit thereby we give glory to God; yet
by it are we bereaved and utterly Romans 3.27. and 4.1, 2. 1 Cor. 1.29.31.
stripped of all glorying in our selves. Nor is the term of glory therefore
(to speak exactly) the peculiar of this grace; which shall also cease, and
become useless, together with Romans 8.24.
hope, her most proper fruit when glory shall come; when as yet 1 Co. 13.8, 13.
love, tho the last of the three in the Apostles recital, yet pronounced the
greatest of the three, because the longest laster shall continue, and abide
with us and in us for ever.

3. Christ, it is true, says of Faith, Ioh 6.2^.
This is the work of God; that is, the work that God reqires of us, that we
believe on him whom he sent. But the same Christ tells us, that Io^. 15.12.
this is his commandment, that we love one an other: and I^h. 13.34.
the new commandment: and that which he makes ^oh 13.35.
his cognizance and the very (...). Chrysostom. in Joan. orat. 72. and i^ H b.
31. At Basil. apud Greg. Na^. (...).
Character of a Christian; love therefore is the work of God, as well as Faith:
and 1 Ioh 3.23.
John joyneth them both together.

4. I give other reasons, why faith alone is sometime mentioned, which you
pass by; but that which you say I give, is untrue; to wit, that those they
preached to, had others gifts, and not says. For Answ. p 13.
neither of Paul nor of Cornelius, do I say that they wanted faith either of
them, before that Ananias resorted to the one, and Peter repaired to the other;
nor do I omit that, which you close with concerning Answ p. 11.
the peculiar office of faith. Concerning which this may further be added, that
that howsoever the sweet and comfortable effects of faith here mentioned may
evince the beneficialnesse of that grace unto our selves, yet they argue not
any excellency or eminency above other graces simply considered, which in
regard of their proper nature, and peculiar employments make us more
beneficial and useful to others. Faith is as the houswife; Love as the
Almoner: Faith brings all in, Love lays all out: faith brings God and Christ
home to us; love carries us out, and Act. 20.24. and 21 13. Phil. 1.20, ^1. and
2.17. 2 Cor. 12.15.
expends us in all pious offices, unto the glory of God; and good of man.

Now this add I the rather, to take off your ensuing complaint of that, from
which your self here are not wholly free; to wit, that

Reply ibid.
Faith has so much put upon it, as becomes a stumbling stone, and a rock of
offense to many. Just fication, Imputation of Righteousness is put upon faith;
Salvation upon Faith; as Christ's blood is put upon the wine; 1 Cor. 10 16.
the Cup that we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and
Christ's body upon the bread: Ib^d.
the bread that we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and
yet neither the wine, nor the bread, is his blood or his body, no more then
faith is either justification or righteousness; but such a work as goes out
most into him, and caryes the soul into him, who is righteousness and
Justification to us. The word were no mystery, if it were not thus ordered, and
things so mingled, that t e Spirit only could discern and distinguish; the
Papists stumble at works, because they see not faith for works; and others
stumble at faith, because they s e not Christ for faith.

What all this ayms at, is hard to say: It concerns nothing, I am sure, that
Mrs S. and I had in debate. But let us rove a little, to bear him company, and
go along out with him into his impertinent excursions and his intricate
discourses.

1. Truly Sir, I dissent as much if not much more then your self, from any that
put too much upon faith; as some of the Ancients have done, making it Chrysostom st
in Romans 4.
a matter of more worth and excellency, then the keeping of all Gods
commandments, from whom I have also therein Animadv. in ^ud. ^ucii Scrip. de
Iustif. part 1. Sect 9 n. 7.
elsewhere testified my dissent. But Sir, it is your self, rather then any of
us, that trip at this stone, when you would have faith so much pressed in the
doctrine of salvation, in regard of the gloriousness and eminency of the grace
it self which to assert is not sound.

2. As for the putting of justification, and imputation, to righteousness, and
salvation upon faith, as Christ's blood is put upon the Cup, and Christ's body
upon the bread: I mislike not much the resemblance; tho it be nothing exact,
nor conceive well what it drives at. But Sir, who of us ever affirmed faith to
be either justification, or imputation to righteousness, or salvation? we
affirm with the Apostle, that Romans 5.1.
we are justified by Faith; and Ephesians 2.8.
we are saved by Faith; and that R^m. 4.9.
Faith is imputed to righteousness. And in all this we say no more then the
Apostle himself in express terms does. Yea, even those of us who maintain
Faith to be taken in a proper Sense, and not by a Metonymicall Trope, as well
in any one of those phrases as in another do not say any more then may well be
justified; nor do they differ at all in doctrine, so far as I am able to
conceive (and I love not to make differences, where I apprehend none) that say
the one or the other; but contend only about the Analysis of the Text, and the
Grammatical acception of one term in it: to make this clear, by some instances
of the like kind, when it is said, This Child is fed not by the breast but by
hand: if one shall hold that the hand is in such speech taken in a proper sense
without trope or scheme for the hand of the dry Nurse wherewith the child is
fed, it being the instrument whereby meat is conveyed into the mouth of it: and
another shall maintain, that the hand is there taken not properly, but by a
trope or a metonymie, for the meat wherewith the child is indeed fed; because
the hand of it self has no power to feed the child, but is said to feed it as
it has relation to the meat; would any understanding man from hence conclude
that they were of diverse minds concerning the thing it self, and not rather
that they dissented in a qestion of Schoole-learning concerning the Analyzing
of an Axiom, and the Grammatical interpretation of a word in it? Or, when it
is said, The mouth feeds the body: if one should contend that the mouth were
taken for the meat, that goes into the mouth, another for the mouth it self
whereat the meat goes in; what difference were there in matter of judgment
here between the one and the other concerning the thing it self? Or to make
use of an instance given by ^ubbert. collat. cum Bert. 57.
an eager stickler in this Argument, who Ibid. 58.
reckons up for his party a larger bead-roll of Writers, then I suppose, he is
able to produce: Suppose a Painter holding out a Pencill shall say, Si dicis
Pencillum dealbare parietem.
This Pencill drew that Picture; if one shall affirm, that the word Pencill in
such a sentence must not be taken properly for the Pencill it self, but for the
Picture-drawer himself that made use of that pencill in the drawing of that
picture, or for his hand that guided it in that work; or for the colors
wherewith the picture was drawn; another, that the word pencill is to be taken
properly, as well as the word picture, the one for that very instrument which
the artist held in his hand, the other for the work he pointed to, when he so
said. I suppose, it would not be deemed, that there were any difference at all
between them, concerning the thing intended, notwithstanding the controversy
between them about the phrase or form of speech. In like manner concerning the
word Faith in the fore mentioned forms ( Phrases sum aeqipollentes: Paraeus ad
Romans 4.3. Obs. 3.
which in effect come all to one) when some shall say, that the word is taken
properly, for that grace, or that act of grace whereby we apprehend Christ and
his sufferings, Vide Calvin. and Lubbert. insra.
the meritorious cause or subject matter (term it whether you please) of our
justification, or that whatsoever it be in Christ, for which we are justified:
others, that faith is by a Metonymie put for Christ, by whom, as our surety,
having paid the full price for the discharge of our debt, and satisfied the
justice of God for our sins, we are delivered from death, and have life
purchased for us. here is no difference of judgment in what on either side is
averred for matter of doctrine: a dissenting only about the resolution of a
term used in those axioms; and conseqently (for ought yet I see) thus far forth
a mere (...).
wrangling about terms and words. And for my part, to declare my judgment
herein, which I desire I may do freely without offense to either party; it
being, as I conceive, not any matter of faith, but a point only of
School-learning. As Videatur Barthol. Keckerman. System. Logic. l. 1. c. 2. p.
395.
by diverse learned men of no small note it is well-observed, that in those
Propositions, wherein Mr. S. does here instance, Matt. 26.26.
This bread is my body; Ibid. 28, 29.
This wine is my blood: neither bread nor body are taken tropically, but
properly, in the one; neither wine nor blood likewise in the other: by the
bread is meant the bread that Christ then brake; by body, that body that hung
the next day on the cross: by wine that liqor of the grape that was then in
the cup; by blood, that very blood of our Savior that was shed upon the
cross. All the impropriety of the speech is in the predication, or in the
copula, in the verb-substantive, that as a knot or a clasp coming between the
two terms of either Proposition, fasteneth them the one to the other,; which is
to be understood not properly, as if the one were really and essentially the
other; that which even the Bellar. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 16. and 19.
Papists themselves are enforced to confess, cannot so be; but figuratively or
tropically, as implying the one to be typically, symbolically, or
representatively the other. So here in the forementioned Propositions, the word
faith is taken for faith, as the word Romans 8.24.
hope for hope in the like: all the impropriety of speech, if any be, is in
regard of the manner, how we are said to be justified by it, to live by it, to
be saved by it, to have it imputed unto us for righteousness: all which indeed
is to be understood not principally, immediately, meritoriously, in regard of
any worth or dignity of it, or efficaciously, in regard of any power or
efficacy in it self; but mediately, subserviently, organically,
instrumentally, as it is a means to apprehend Christ, his satisfaction, and his
sufferings, by the price and merit whereof we are justified, and saved, and
consist as righteous in Gods sight, and as it has a special respect and
relation thereunto. Nor do the most of the testimonies in this controversy
usually produced hold out Lubb. ipse. Vtroqe penicillo and albedine paries
dealbatur; sed non eodem modo: illo enim instrumentaliter, hac materialiter.
Ita fide and justitia Christi homo justificatur: sed non eodem modo: illo enim
instrumentaliter, hac vero pene materialiter.
any more; nor do they therefore deny faith to be taken properly in the
Propositions before proposed. This the rather I here insist on, because I
observe our late Antinomians to make a bad use of the other exposition of some
of those Texts, to put by the necessity of faith unto justification: for so one
of them; H. Den Confer. page 18.
We are justified by faith; that is, by the object of our faith the blood of
Christ: (and so Romans 3.25.
through faith in his blood, should be through Christ's blood in his blood)
faith is taken for the object of faith, as hope for the object of hope, 1 Timothy
1.1.
Christ our hope: To which purpose it grieves me to find in one of ours to
confirm this tropicall exposition, that forced interpretation of somewhat the
like phrase; Romans 8.24. Spe servati sumus, i. e. Christo in quem speramus:
Pemble of Justif. Sect. 2. cap. 1. At rectius Chrysostom. (...). Schol. Graec.
(...). Spe futurorum, Calvin. Salutem illam (de qa v. 23.) nondum reipsa, sed
spe obtineri, Martyr, and alii fere universi.
We are saved by hope; that is, by Christ in whom we hope. Howsoever, as in
the former sacramental speeches, those of ours that take the words body and
blood properly, with an improper predication; and those that take them
improperly, with a proper enunciation, do not differ at all either from other
in the doctrine of the Sacrament; and are as free and far off the one as the
other, from those two monstrous opinions of Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation: as also in expounding those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
10.4.
The rock was Christ; albeit some understand (...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 10. and
reliqui Graeci. Ambr. de Sacr. l. 5. c. 1. Jun. parallel. l. 2. par. 36. and
alii.
the word Rock tropically, the word Christ properly, the Verb was essentially:
others take the word rock properly, the word Christus, i. e. figura Christi.
Rei nomen metaphorice transfertur ad signum: Calv. Sicut imago Herculis
Hercules nominatur.
Christ tropically, the Verb was essentially: a third sort Keckerm. ubi sup.
Petra erat Christus, in mysterio: Primas. Nec secus in omnibus illis
locutionibus, Mat. 13.19, 20, 22, 23, 37, 38, 39. praedicata omnia proprie
sumuntur; verbum substantivum symbolice.
take both the words rock and Christ properly, the Verb was only symbolically:
yet do none of them differ in ought, either concerning the truth of the Story,
or any doctrine of faith: in like manner those that here press a trope in the
word faith, and those that stand for the proper sense of it, (so far forth as
they proceed no further) do not at all differ in any point of faith concerning
justification, would they be pleased aright to understand one another. But Sir,
there is none of us, either the one or the other that do (as you closely here
would intimate) affirm faith to be either Justification or Imputation of
righteousness; we distinguish these things warily one from another: and tho
we sever not those things that are not to be severed; yet we distinguish
those things that are to be distinguished, and are in their proper and genuine
nature distinct: neither confounding justification with faith, nor faith (as
some fantastical spirits Tortuosas Sophistae hujus figuras non admitto, qum
dicit, Fidem esse Christum. Inscite fidem qae est instrumentum duntaxat
percipiendae justitiae, dico misceri cum Christo, qi materialis causa, tantiqe
beneficii author simul est and minister: Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. c. 11. Sect. 7.
in Calvines time, by him then opposed) with Christ: which yet some treading in
their steps, have endeavored to do in these days: But such fanaticall
fancies we abhor, and your ensuing censures therefore reach not us. We are
neither of those that cannot see faith for works, nor of those that cannot see
Christ for faith: a strange prodigy, how men should not see Christ for faith,
when they see Christ by faith: nor are these things in the Gospel so mingled,
(as you would make men believe) but that we can discern and distinguish them,
without the help of that new spirit that undertakes now adays to reveal such
matters of doctrine as the Apostles are pretended to have preached, but not to
have left upon record. But Sir, we may truly say, that you and yours are they
that either cannot, or will not see the wood for trees; the conditions on which
salvation by Christ is propounded, tho in the Gospel they do everywhere
occur, and offer themselves, will ye, nill ye, to your eyes.

In your next, you relate me as objecting against you, that Repl. page 9, 10.
Sect. 1.
Christ and his Apostels never preached free grace, without condition and
qualification on our parts, Romans 8.1. Matthew. 5.8. etc.

Where Sir, me thinks you grow weary of your work; for you draw up whole
pages into little more then a line. But Sir, you dissemble mine Argument
because you felt where it pinched you, and knew not which way to rid your hands
of it. The argument runs thus.

Ans. p. 15.
If the Gospel propound and promise pardon of sin and salvation without any
condition at all required on our part; and all such conditions and
qualifications of belief, repentance and new obedience destroy the freeness
of Grace, then neither Christ, nor John Baptist, nor the Apostles preached
either Gospel or free grace: for they thus preached, and propounded pardon of
sin and salvation upon such terms from the first to the last; as I there at
large show by their express professions and speeches: and according to your
grounds therefore they never preached free grace.

Now out of this whole argument, you only pick one piece, letting pass all the
rest, with the proofs thereof, that it may not appear to what purpose it was
propounded; nor attemping once to take of the crime laid upon you, the stain
whereof sticks as close to you and your tenants, as your flesh to your bones,
and your skin to your flesh. Only you annex two places, with an etc. the
Matthew. 5.8.
one whereof I produce not for the proof of ought I affirm: but Answ p. 14.
to show what your brother Eaton says of it, who makes it a parcel of Christ's
Legal preaching; the Romans 8.1.
other indeed I allege, but Answ. p. 15.
insisting principally, on the words of the twelfth and thirteenth verses of
that Chapter; which you saw so inconsistent with your presumptuous novelties,
that you listed not to take notice of them.

Yet let us hear, what you say unto that which you have pitched upon.

Repl. p. 10. Sect. 1.
They preached faith and repentance and obedience; 1. in degrees of revelation;
the Gospel came not all out at once in his glory. 2. not in parts, as we have
their doctrine, as you confess they preached them: but all along in the New
Testament there is more of their glory and fulness reveiled concerning them.
So as the degrees of reveiling, the parts and summaries of their sermons, the
fuller discovery in the whole New Testament, are those things you consider not:
we only consider; and so dare not preach the Gospel so in halfs, in parts and
qarters as you do; and yet will not believe you do; which is so much worse; you
say you see, and therefore your sin remains.

But Sir, what is all this, to take off the edge of mine Argument, which cuts
to the qick with you, convincing you, by necessary conseqence, of blaspheming
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostels as teaching such doctrine, as not only
does not hold out Gospel, or free grace, but does utterly overthrow and take
away the very truth and essence of either. For the conditions and qalifications
here mentioned, which you deny not to have been taught by them, are such, you
say, as tho the Gospel so propounded and preached may have some notion of free
grace in it, yet it has no truth thereof at all: the guilt whereof therefore
you stand justly still charged with, notwithstanding ought, that beside the
point in qestion, you prate here to no purpose.

2. The two branches of your Answer, (for it seems you were in some perplexity,
or disturbance at least, when you were putting pen to paper) do apparently
enterfere, cut and cross the one the other. For if the Gospel came not all at
once to them, but was reveiled to them by d^grees; which you affirm in the
first branch; then how could they choose but preach it in parts? which yet you
deny in the latter branch. Thus Sir, your forces, like Suoqe Mart cadant
subiti per mutua vulnera fratres. Nafo Met. lib. 3.
the men in the fable that sprung up of the snakes teeth of Cadmus his sowing,
fall foul one on another, and destroy either other, without the help of any
adverse party: for how could they preach it otherwise then it was reveiled?
and if by pieces reveiled to them, then sure in pieces preached by them.

3. Grant that some things were afterward reveiled to them, wherewith at first
they were not made acquainted. Yet

1. there was at the first so much reveiled to them, and preached by them, as
was sufficient to convert and save souls: for to what end else was their
preaching? Either therefore you must of necessity grant, that men may be
converted and saved without notice of free grace, and Gospel; (of free grace,
or Gospel, I say; for no Gospel without grace, nor grace that is not free) or,
that the Apostels, if by their ministry, they did at first convert any, then
the doctrine of free grace was reveiled to them and preached by them at first:
which how could they do, if at the same time they preached that that was
directly contrary to free grace, and did take away the truth of it? unless any
man will be so void of reason and common sense, as to say that the Apostles
preached contradictories in the very self same sermons.

2. There was nothing in matter of doctrine afterward reveiled unto them, or
taught by them, that crossed or repealed ought, that had formerly been made
known unto them, and by them made known to others. Divine revelations
concerning matter of faith cannot possibly contradict one another, tho such as
yours are may both cotradict some contained in Gods word, and some other also
of your own. what they taught at first was the truth of God, as well as what
they taught at last: nor did they ever revers ought of what was taught at first
by them, but continued teaching the same still to the last. you and those of
your faction may have your reserves, and your new-lights, controling and
contradicting your former, as new fancies and falsehoods (...). 2 Pet. 1.16.
cunningly contrived, are either suggested to you, or forged by you; but with
them it was not so. It was Gods truth they taught at first, and it was Gods
truth they taught^ at last; and if in process of time ought were further
reveiled unto them, then at first, it could not, being truth, but of necessity
be consonant to what at first was reveiled to them; for (...). Arist.
truth and truth cannot jar.

4. For what you say of their Summaries, has been fully answered before: nor
is it meet to trouble and tire the reader with needless repetitions. But Sir,
what you say, we consider not, we do consider and acknowledge as well as your
self; nor do we reject, or refuse, or forbear to preach ought that we find
reveiled in the word: and that therefore, which you here charg us with, is most
false and a base calumny, without ground or color of truth. And here I
challenge you to show what point concerning free grace, as it is revealed in
the writings of the Apostles we preach not, which unless you can do, you must
justly undergo the censure of one, that care not how you belly your brethren
against your own knowledge and conscience.

5. For your vain boasting of your only considering what you say we do not, and
of your preaching the Gospel in the full glory of it: if you preach it no
otherwise then it is discovered and reveiled all along in the New Testament;
there is none of us that blame you for it; it is our endeavor so to do; nor do
we restrain any from so doing, nor aspers them when they do it. But Sir, if
you shall presum to piece out the preaching of the Gospel, with some
additionals of your own under pretense of some mysteries in these times
reveiled, which in the Apostles times were not; or shall cross and contradict
ought, as repugnant to, and destructive of free grace, that was first or last
taught by them, we must of necessity crave leave here to leave you; and not
to abhor only and abominate, but to oppose and impugn such ungodly courses,
that others may not be perverted and poisoned therewith.

6. For our preaching of the Gospel in halfs, in parts and qarters: it is but a
parcel of your scurrilous Rhetorik; which you are grown very rife in, since
you laid down your Logic. And yet, Sir, still you consider not whom you strike
at, while you play thus upon us and our preaching; for you told us (if you have
not already forgot what you said) but even now, that the Apostles preached the
Gospel in degrees of revelation; and that it was not all reveiled unto them at
once: and if it were in halfs, and parts and qarters reveiled to them, then
could they no otherwise preach it to others, then you are pleased to say that
we do; so by your own words you stand enforced to acknowledge that charging
this (be it true, or false) as a fault upon us, you therein censure the
Apostles together with us.

Mean while your reply is here made up, not by halvs and qarters, or by
half-qarters, or qarter qarters, but by snips and shreds, letting pass the
main pieces of mine Answer: for out of the next whole page and an half, you
pick out only this pitance of one passage, Rep. p. 10. Sect. 2.
that Christ's blood is not to be filled out to rogues and dogs.

Wherein you deal, as in the former; neither relating my words as they lay
before you; nor showing on what occasion I speak what is there spoken.

Occasion. word p 9.
If you have faulted in ought, you say it is with filling that wine out Too
freely; which yet you suppose the Master of the feast has bidden you, Cant. 5.

This Answ. p. 16.
I wish you to be well advised in; and show you that the place produced by you,
speaks of wine reserved for friends; which if a servant should power out to
the dogs and hogs, or serve out to sturdy rogues and vagrants at the door, that
shall refuse to to com in, or to have any commerce or acquaintance with his
Master, tho invited thereunto, he should from his Master have small thanks for
his labor.

But neither do you relate my words as they there lie, nor mention the
occasion of them, nor take any notice of my pressing upon you the Too free
filling out of the wine as unjustifiable, and the abuse of the Text: nor your
wicked, malicious, and uncharitable charging of us, as those that Treat. p. 82.
to exalt men, cry down Christ, recharged upon you: but pass them all over;
being indeed not able either to justify the one, or to make good the other.

Howbeit, let us hear what beside the matter you say.

1. Repl. ubi sup.
Take heed you charge not Christ for being with Publicans and sinners: You may
upon this ground say he preached false doctrine, because he said, He came not
to call the righteous, but sinners.

But Sir, what is this to the Too free filling out of the wine spoken of in the
Canticles? unless this be a good Argument; Christ was with Publicans and
sinners: Ergo Master S. has good warrant from that place of the Canticles to
fill out the wine there spoken of too freely. Or, therefore the wine there
spoken of, to which Christ's friends alone are there invited, may by his
servants be powered out to dogs and swine: and is there any color of reason in
such kind of reasoning? But I do you wrong, you will say, in reqiring sound
reason from him who professes to have left his Logic. Howbeit Sir, give me
leave to tell you, that he is an over-bold servant, who, because he hears his
Master say, Come and drink my wine freely, my friends; shall presume as in his
Masters name, to say, Come and drink both friends and foes: and because he sees
his Master free of it to the one, shall lavish it out therefore to the other.

2. You deal with Scripture, as the Matt. 4.6.
Devil is commonly (how justly, I stand not to discuss) deemed to have done,
when he tempted our Savior. As you clipped out the middle words from that
passage of the Cant. 5.1.
Canticles; which might soon have stopped your mouth: so you pare away the latter
end of our Saviors speech here, which you knew would not stand for you; that
Matthew. 9.13.
he came to call sinners to repentance. And you may do well to remember, that
the same our Lord and Master, who was in company sometime Matthew. 9.11.
with Publicans and sinners, yet Matthew. 7.6.
forbad his servants to give holy things to dogs, or to cast pearls unto swine.
And I suppose therefore, that I have better warrant for what I say from this
injunction of our Savior, then you have, or can have, for your professed
profuseness, from that speech of his directed to his friends in the Canticles.

2. You ask, Repl. ibid.
What were all of us in our unregenerate condition? sinners, or righteous
persons? unholy, or holy? men of faith, or unbelief? or not rather dead in
trespasses and sins, till qickned with Christ?

And Sir, what tends this Qestion to? Who denies, or makes doubt, but that Ephesians.
2.1, 5.
we were all such, until God qickned us with Christ? and yet how were any of
us fitted to taste, or able to drink of that precious spiritual liqour, before
we were so qickned? But in stead hereof you might have been pleased to consider
what you found objected Ans. p. 17.
a little after, against your second Assertion, which you there waiv; it seems,
unable to answer. Nos actum non agimus.

Your next work is to justify some of the Assertions in your Treatise excepted
against, as warping too much toward the way of those that Jude 4.
turn Gods grace into wantonness; some whereof you take notice of, and seek to
salve; others you leave to shift as they may for themselves.

The first is, that Treat. p. 102.
The promises belong to sinners as sinners; not as repenting or humbled sinners.

The second, that Treat. p. 186.
None ever received Christ, but in a sinful condition.

In justification hereof, you give us a large reply, (tho not answering at all
the objections Answ. p. 17.
made against either, nor showing how what you say is appliable to either) in
these words.

Reply p. 11.
To whom do all promises belong first, but to Christ? and from whom to us, but
from Christ? and what are the elect and chosen in him, before they are called
and believe, but sinners as sinners? do you look that men should be first
whole for the Physician, or righteous for pardon of sin, or justified for
Christ, or rather sinners, unrighteous, ungodly? while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us: He died for the ungodly. Christ is the Physician, the
righteousness, the sanctification: and makes them beloved, that were not
beloved; and to obtain mercy, that had not obtained mercy; and saints that
were sinners; and spiritual who were carnal: So as we look at Christ and the
promises coming to men in their sins. But those men were beloved of God in
Christ, who suffered for sins before: so as they begin not now to be loved, but
to be made to love: God begins not to be reconciled to them, but they begin to
be reconciled to him, Romans 5.
the love of God being shed abroad in their hearts by the Spirit which is now
given unto them. So as we looking at persons as chosen in Christ; and at their
sins, as born by Christ in his body on the tree, we see nothing in persons to
hinder them from the Gospel and offers of grace there; be they never so sinful
to us, or themselves, they are not so to him who has chosen them, nor to him
in whom they are chosen. And this is the mystery, why Christ is offered to
sinners, or rogues, or whatsoever you call them; Romans 11.28.
They are, as touching the election, beloved for the Fathers sake: I speak of
such to whom Christ gives power to receive him, and believe on him, and become
the sons of God: and Christ finds them out in their sins, and visits them who
sit in the region and shadow of death; and them that are darkness, he makes
light in the Lord.

Sir, All this long discourse of yours concerning Gods election of men in
Chrst; the estate they were in when Christ died for them; Gods reconciling them
to him, and loving them before they loved him, etc. Do not all prove, that the
promises of the Gospel, to wit, of pardon of sin and salvation, do belong to
finners as sinners, and not as repentant and humbled sinners, Mat. 11.28.
such alone as Christ invites, and promises to refresh: nor do you frame hence
any formal argument, whereunto a direct answer might be duly shaped and
returned: but heap us up a pile of words, affording no premises, from which
what you should prove, can be necessarily concluded.

For, (to pass by that your uncouth phrase, of all the promises belonging
first to Christ: not unlike that which you have elsewhere, that Treat. p. 125.
God makes no covenant with man, but with Christ. tho we deny not, but that 2
Cor. 1.19.
Gods promises are all yea and Amen in Christ) Election and Predectination
either of Christ's, or of any other in or unto Christ, must be distinguished
from the actual exhibition of Christ, either by his incarnation, or by the
application of him unto any. As 1 Pet. 1.20.
Christ was pred^stinate to be made man, and to suffer, from eternity; but was
not actually exhibited, Gal. 4 4.
until that set time that God had before appointed: so God Ephesians. 1.4.
elects men from eternity, he Romans 8.29, 30.
calls and converts them in time; he Ephesians. 1.5.
predestinates them to be adopted, (it is the Apostles own language) but he
does not actually adopt, until he give them power to John 1.12.
receive Christ, in whom they are adopted: he determines to justify them
from all eternity; but he does not actually justify them, until he work
faith in them, Romans 5.1.
whereby they are justified, and whereby they Gal. 2.16.
believe that they may be justified, as the Apostle speaks of himself; thereby
implying, that he was not justified until he believed: He decrees to pardon
and remit sins from eternity; (for Acts 15.18.
from the beginning were all Gods works known to himself, and resolved upon
with himself) but does not actually remit or release sin, until he give grace
to repent; which in the Gospel phrase and method Luke 24.47. Acts 3.19. and
8.22.
goes constantly before pardon; and so does in nature, tho not in time: He
purposes from all eternity to sanctify all his, who are therefore said to be
Ephesians. 1.4.
elect thereunto; and yet were they not, nor could be actually sanctified
before they were, nor were for a long time after they were, many of them, it
may be the most. Nor will it avail to object, as some do, that sanctification
is a transient act, and causes a real change in the person of the party
sanctified, which justification does not; for justification does the like; tho
not in the person; yet in the state and condition of the party justified; and
may in that regard be termed a transient act also. Howsoever for School-terms
it be, sure it is, that justification and adoption are herein both alike: and
since that the Apostle, in saying that we were Ephesians. 1.5.
predestinate to be adopted, does thereby imply, that the very act of adoption
is no more from eternity, then the act of sanctification, or the act of
salvation, unto which 2 These. 2.13.
through sanctification, we are said to be elect: the like may we concerning
justification, from those words of his justly conclude. We grant then, that
from eternity God purposed to bestow Christ on his elect: but we say withal,
(and that with good warrant from Gods word) that Christ is not actually
exhibited unto any of them to be his, until he work faith in them whereby they
may receive him, that he may become theirs. The elect Ephesians were out of
Christ, and Ephesians. 2.12.
without Christ, until they believed; nor does he bestow faith on any,
without repentance and humiliation, which are two unseparable companions of it,
and spring all three from the same principle of spiritual life. Nor does all
therefore that here you say, either confirm your assertion, that the promises
of the Gospel belong to sinners as sinners, and not as penitent or humbled
sinners; or to justify your offers of grace, and gracious promises propounded
in the Gospel, unto sinners, tho never so sinful, either to your self, or in
themselves, as belonging unto them: because Romans 11.28.
as touching election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake; (another of your
uncouth phrases, and Scriptures grossly mis-applied) unless you make your
tender thereof to them, if they believe and repent; (nor does Christ offer them
otherwise) or dare presume to say, as of the Thessalonians the Apostle, that 1
These. 1.4.
you know them to be elect, tho they be not converted, but lie wallowing still
in their sins.

But for the point it self a little further: If the promises of the Gospel
belong to sinners as sinners, not as penitent and humbled sinners, then to all
sinners, whether penitent or impenitent; and as well to Luk 7.30.
those Pharisees and Lawyers that contemned the counsel of God against
themselves, and refused to repent and believe upon John's preaching; as to Mat.
21.32.
the Publicans and harlots, who did thereupon believe and repent: and as well
to the Mat. 12.31. Mar 3.29, 30
Pharisees that blasphemed against the holy Ghost, as to Luk 7.37, 38
that woman, whoever she was (for that it was Luke 8.2.
Mary Magdalen is a groundless, and tho commonly received, no probable
opinion) who having been formerly of loose and lewd life, testified her
repentance and inward humiliation by those offices performed about the feet of
our Savior. For if they b^long to sinners as sinners; then sinners as sinners
may lay claim to them, as having right to, and interest in them: and being so
absolute, especially as you have formerly avowed, free from all condition
whatsoever, they shall undoubtedly, whether they repent or no, be made good to
them: and so all sinners, even the whole world, according to your assertion
(not differing from what out of another of your strain was before recited)
shall be saved.

Again, If the promises of life and salvation be made to sinners simply and
absolutely as such, without any respect to faith, repentance, humiliation, and
the like (for we will waiv the word of condition at present, because it is so
unpleasing to you) what means the mention of these things in the propounding
of the promises? for I hope you will not return me that answer that a Doctor of
some note sometime did, pressing an exception made in a Matt. 19.9.
proposition of our Saviors, that they were etiosa verba; and being charged
with the guilt of no small crime for so saying, to salve the matter, said, his
meaning was, that they were but as some expletive particles in Greek^, used in
a kind of elegancy, only to make up the sentence. But Sir, I hope, whatsoever
you think, if you do think at least as you write, you will not be so bold, as
in express terms to avow, that the mention of faith, and repentance, and
humiliation, and the like in the promises, is but idle and superfluous matter,
inserted to make some show of a conditional promise, where nothing less then
any such mattter is intended: and much less, that those menaces annexed
usually to the promises, and denounced against all those that do not believe,
repent, and be humbled, are such. Which yet unless they so be, it will
necessarily follow, that promises do not belong to any sinners, but such as
are so qualified as was abovesaid: And indeed, to whom otherwise shall the
comminations appertain? Certainly, you cannot say, that both the promises and
the menaces belong to the same persons, and that the same persons have a like
right to, and an interest in either; for that implies a contradiction: And if
the menaces do belong to all that do not believe, repent, and be humbled;
then what manner of sinners the promises belong to, any man by just consequence
may easily apprehend.

Nor Sir, is it therefore any Reply Conclus. p 17.
sporting with a poor wounded conscience, (for there is no sporting matter in
it) to tell any, in way of discovery of the evil and unsound courses of those
who teach them, to reason thus; God will save sinners: But I am a sinner:
Therefore God will save me: which manner of reasoning you seem to approve, and
is agreeable to the principles and grounds that you here lay: To tell them, I
say, that they may with as good ground reason thus, God will damn sinners: But
I am a sinner: Therefore God will damn me. No Sir, It was one warping to your
way, that endeavored to make a wound where none was; as Mountebanks do
sometimes in their own flesh, thereby to make way for their own counterfeit
plasters, the efficacy whereof the party justly misdoubted; and seeing it
further by such a parallel showed to be vain and ridiculous, reposed her self
quietly on her former grounds again, wherein he endeavored to disturb her.
Which if it were a fallacy, as you affirm it to be, nor was it propounded for
any other; then that other, being of the very same form and stamp with it, must
admit the same censure: and how can it be other then (if not a false, yet) an
uncertain Conclusion at least, that is grounded upon a fallacy? yea, how other
then certainly false that has no other ground but a fallacy? or what is the
endeavoring to satisfy people with fallacies in matters concerning their
souls state and safety, other then to teach them to build their faith upon
falsehoods? This is not therefore as you say, Conclus. ibid.
by the use of Logic to cast a mist on the promises of the Gospel to sinners:
but by the help of Logic to dispell such mists as are by your party raised, to
dasell men's eyes, that they may not discern what sinners they are that have
part in those promises. And it is idle therefore to demand here again, clipping
and paring our Saviors speeches, Ibid.
Know ye not that Christ came to call sinners? (yea, but you know also what
follows, Matt. 9.13.
to call sinners to repentance) to save sinners? but not, unless they repent:
for Luke 13.3, 5.
unless they repent they shall perish, notwithstanding his coming to save;
himself says it.

But we shall not need stand longer to debate the matter with you; your self
in the close are pleased to close with us, and after all your long excursion,
and heaps of impertinent discourse, to conclude against your self. For when
you say, Reply, ibid.
You speak of such, to whom Christ gives power to receive him, and to believe
on him: It is just as much as if you had said, Not of sinners as sinners, but
such sinners as have power given them to receive Christ, and believe on him.
And do, or can any but repentant and humbled sinners so do? And yet your
second Assertion excepted against, implies that they may. But thus Sir, as the
common saying is, When you have given, as you suppose it, a great deal of good
milk, much matter to little purpose; at length with your heel you kick down the
pail, and spill all: Or rather, to show us your skill at fast and loose, (...).
Aes^hyl.
Gypsie-like, you knit us a number of knots; and then to ease us of the labor,
with whom you deem them indissoluble, you loose them all again your self in a
trice. And all therefore that has been here said, is rather to satisfy
others, then to answer ought that you oppose, your self having in fine so
concluded the matter, that no other answer needs then your own.

But pass we on to your third Assertion, wherein you either deride, or pity
them as Treat. p. 171, 173.
melancholic creatures, who suppose that God may be provoked to wrath by his
childrens sins, and may chastise them for the same. In defense whereof you
reply thus with a multitude of queries.

Rep. p. 11, 94.
Can God be as the son of man? Is there any variableness or shadow of change
with him? Can he love, and not love? Does he hate persons, or sins? Is he
said to chastise as fathers, otherwise then in expressions after the manner of
men; because of the infirmities of our flesh? must we conceive so of God, as of
one another? Can he be provoked for sins done and abolished? Has Christ taken
away all the sin of his? Has he born all upon his body, or no? Speak we of
anger otherwise then by way of allusion and allegory, as a Father, etc. and is
that, He is a Father, after the manner of men? Or, speaks he not in the old
Testament according to the revelation of himself there, and in the new
Testament of himself now, only because of our infirmity, and his own manner
of appearing? which is not yet so, but we may bear him in such expressions; and
yet not so in such expressions, but we may see more of him and his love, and
the glory of salvation in other expressions: and not make up such a love as you
commonly do, of Benevolence and Complacence.

(...), praecipit Arist. Top. l. 6. c. 1. (...).
The manner of those that would not have something discovered, is Genesis 31.34.
Josh. 2.6. Acum in acere. Scal. de subt. ex. 216.
to hide it in a heap of some heterogeneous matter. In like manner do you Sir,
your answer here to the point charged upon you, in a multitude of impertinent
demands; and hook in such things here, (without any removal of it) that belong
to another place. It would be but lost labor, tho it might render you
ridiculous, to take the subject matter of your several demands, and by making
mediums of them, show how your Assertions are proved by them. Letting that
pass therefore, especialy dealing with one that renounceth reasoning, I shall
return distinct answers to each of them in order.

1. God may be, and is in some things as the son of man: for proof whereof I
turn you over to Answer, p. 19.
mine Answer, and the Arguments there used: which if you meant to reply to, you
ought to refute. Nor is it a sound reasoning or good consequence, God in some
things, to wit, such as argue some imperfection or faultiness, is not like
unto man, nor can do as man does; he is not like man Tit. 1.2.
to lie, or Number. 23.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.
to repent, or 2 Timothy 2.13. (...), Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. 4. Hae^ posse, non
potentia sed impotentia est. Anselm. prosol. cap. 7.
to deny himself, he cannot lie, or repent, or deny himself, as man sometime
does: Therefore he is in nothing like to man, nor can he do in ought as man
does: Or, therefore he is not like man in being provoked to wrath by his
children, or in chastising them when they do amiss. Sir, your Logic, had you
not left it, or laid it aside, would have taught you, that Syllogizari non est
ex particulari.
a particular will not infer an universal; nor one particular an other.

2. Tho there be Jam. 1.17.
no variableness or shadow of change with God in regard of his essence, and
nature; or in regard of his affection to good or evil, as if at some time he
should dislike and disallow sin, and at other times like and allow it, yea,
Ibid. v. 13.
tempt and incline to it: that which the Apostle in those words principally
aimed at; which is not commonly observed: Yet in regard of his disposition and
dispensations toward the creature, he carries himself in diverse and various
ways; he loved, liked, approved of, and was well pleased with those Angels
before they fell, while they continued in their original estate, whom yet 2
Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
after their apostasy, he hated, abhorred, disapproved, and so far forth was
displeased with, as to adjudge unto eternal torments, and throw them headlong
into hell.

3. Tho God cannot both love, and not love; (taking love in both members alike)
or love and hate; for that implies a contradiction: yet may he Amat and
irascitur, dici potest: Amat and e^it, dici non potest, Aug. homil. 5. and 40.
love and be angry too; yea, therefore be be angry, because he loves. As a
father may be very angry with that child whom he loves most deerly; yea, be
the more angry with him, because he loves him so deerly.

4. God both Psalm. 45.7. Zech. 8.17.
hates sin, and Pro. 6.16, 19. Psalm. 5.5. and 11.5. Zech. 11.8.
hates persons for sin: and hates sin in those also whose persons he loves.

5. God is truly and really said to chastise his, as parents do children, by
inflicting on them real and penal things in way of correction for their sins,
therein intending their amendment, and to make them examples unto others. And
he that intends to do this, had need shut his eyes very close, that he may
not discern that bright Sunshine of light, that through the whole word of God
ever and anon breaks out, and in most conspicuous manner off^re^h it self to
his eyesight, able to pierce and strike through the very eyelids of those
that shall strive to wink strongest.

6. God may be provoked by those very sins, the guilt whereof is a^olished and
done away in Christ; for Exodus 4.14.
Moses his and 2 Samuel 11.27.
David's were; and yet was God provoked by them.

7. T^o Christ has taken away all the sins of his, and by his sufferings made
satifaction unto Gods justice for them, yet does it not thence follow, that God
therefore cannot either be angry with any of those, for whose sins Christ has
satisfied; or out of his paternall indignation and displeasure chastise them
for their wilful oversights and defaults. What he has done, we know he can
and may do; and that the one does no way cross the other, nor infer or
enforce a forbearance of the other. David's sins, in his adultery, murder, and
numbering the people, were satisfied for, and taken away by Christ, as well as
Matt. 26.70, 75.
Peter's in the denial of his Master, or the sins of any other Saint; and yet
how sharply 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 13, 14. and 24.10, 15.
God chastised him for the same, he felt, and by Psalm. 32.3 4. and 38 1, 2, 3.
and 51.8, 14.
his own acknowledgements we know. Nor can all your sly shifts serve to
shield you from the guilt of palpable o^stinacie, in opposing so express and
clear Scripture; or to cover and conceal either the nakedness and
sham^fulnesse of your cause, or the shamelessness of your faces in the
maintenance of it, and of those things that do of necessity thence ensue. It
was not the end of Christ's sufferings to free any of those for whom he
suffered, from God his and their Fathers useful and needful chastisements,
which are professed to proceed Prove. 3.12. Heb 12.6.
from his love, and to be Psalm 9.12. Heb. 12.10, 11.
for their good: much less was this the end of his satisfaction for their
sins, that they might have the rains let out loose to them, and so to lie on
their necks, that they might freely follow the swinge of their corrupt nature,
or the remainders of it still abiding within them, (which you confess to be so
powerful, Treat. p. 51, 59, 62.
as to carry them often into the same, and those great sins) without check or
control. But Sir, what this doctrine tends to, all men may soon see; and as
well those that abhor it, as those that are willing with open arms to
entertain it. Nor have any cause to wonder, that all sorts of loose people do
by whole shoals flock to, and run after those that teach it. In many of whom,
what dreadful and dismal effects it has had, tho I could give hideous
instances, yet I forbear to relate, and proceed to the rest of your demands.

8. I apprehend not any allegory yea or allusion in the words, As a father,
and^. Whether you understand thereby those words cited by me, in Answer, p. 19.
mine Animadversion on your eighth Assertion, which you seeem here to be
nibling at, Psa. 103.13.
As a father pities his children; so the Lord pitieth them that fear him: or
whether you have an eye to those of Solomon; Prove. 3.12.
Whom the Lord loves, he chastises; as the father does the son whom he
delights in. The same with that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.5.
As a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. And indeed,
what allegory or allusion is there in either? What Scholar is there so simple,
that is not able to distinguish between either an allusion or an allegory, and
a direct, plain, and express similitude? But Mr. S. it seems, together with
his Logic, that does him so many shrewd turns, has cast off all his
School-learning, that he may the better comply with those Sectaries, who with
open mouth cry it all down in these days.

9. That anger is in propriety of speech given unto God, tho both Stoics and
Epicures of old Nec been premeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira, Lucr. l. 1. and
2.
denied it, is by Ita eo sensu, quo Scripturae dant illam Deo, vere and proprie
ei attribuitur. Zanc. de attri. lib. 4. c. 6. q. 1. These. 1. Deus peccatoribus
tam electis qam reprobis irascitur. Ib. These. 2.
some good Divines avowed. But not to stand upon that, but leave it to dispute
in the Schools. Albeit that anger be not such in God, as it is in man, no more
then love or hatred; which yet are not denied to be spoken properly of God: and
indeed, if the one, (which I suppose no man ever doubted of) by necessary
consequence then the other: Yet the effects of anger, as well as of love and
hatred, may be, and are the same usually with God, that they are with men. As
men out of love do good to those whom they love; and out of anger and
displeasure chastise those whom they are displeased with; and Genesis 27.41. 2 Samuel 13.22, 28. Qem qisqe odit, periisse expetit, Cic. Offic. l. 2. 1 John 3.15.
seek to destroy those whom they hate: so does God likewise Psalm. 11.7.
do good to those whom he loves; and Psalm. 89.32.
chastises those whom he is displeased with; and Psalm. 5.5, 6. and 11.5, 6.
destroys those whom he hates. Which (tho you seem bold enough to say any
thing to support your own principles, yet I Will hope) you dare not deny.

10. What you tell us in an intricate discourse, like a man in a wood, that
has lost himself, and knows not how to get out, of expressions diverse in the
old Testament and in the New, is idle and frivolous, and not at all to the
purpose. For,

1. Those expressions and actions of this kind, recorded in the old Testament,
were not mere fictions and fancies, as you would make them; as if God were not
at all displeased with David for his adultery, nor was it indeed at all evil
in his eye, (as of Abraham's denial of his wife your brother Eaton Honeycomb,
c. 5. p. 79, 80.
affirms) but that he made some show or semblance only, as if he were
offended; when as yet he liked well enough what David had done, or was not, at
least in regard of it, the less pleased with him. But Sir, the Scripture
expressly tells us, that 2 Samuel 11.27.
the thing that David had done was evil in Gods eyes: and David himself found
and felt to his smart, that Gods displeasure toward him was no imaginary
matter, but the fruits and effects of it real arguments of true wrath.

2. The very same expressions are found in the new Testament: and it is extreme
impudence for any man to deny it; the proofs of it are so pregnant. Which
being Ans. p. 18, 19.
in mine Answer, some of them represented unto you, you dissemble: and after
your usual manner, both here and elsewhere, having jumpt clean over the
premises, give a snap at the Conclusion; or fasten your fang on the
Proposition in question, not regarding, or taking notice at all of the proof.

As for the distinction between Love of benevolence, and love of complacence,
it is sufficient for you to jeer it: you do not so much as attempt to refute or
remove it. But this is the usual manner of your reply both here and elsewhere.

But we pass on to your new demands, tending to the justification of your
fourth Assertion, and the removal of mine Animadversion on it.

Reply p. 12.
Did David or Peter, say you, make up their peace with God by repentance? Is
there any that makes peace but one Jesus Christ, who makes peace through the
blood of his cross? Can repentance make peace? Is there any sacrifice for sin
but that which was once offered, and is called by the Apostle Hebr. 9.28. and
10.12.
one sacrifice for sin for ever?

I answer, 1. David and Peter did both of them make up again that breach that
they had made between God and them by their sins, and did make their peace
again with God by their repentance. If you will not believ me herein, you may
believ Psalm. 32.5.
Davia himself, if you so please: and you must give us leave to believe him
whether you will or no.

2. Christ is the only peacemaker, who Col. 1.20.
by the blood of his cross has made our peace, by Ephesians. 2.14, 15.
abolishing the enmity that was between God and us. And yet in that peace so
purchased, without faith, repentance, and new obedience can no man have any
part.

3. By renewed repentance, such 2 Samuel 24.17, 25. 1 Chro. 21.16, 17, 27.
breaches may be made up, and peace repaired, in regard of Gods fatherly
displeasure, that believers have contracted by their sins.

4. There is Heb. 9.26, 28
no sacrifice for sin, whereby the condemning guilt of it is, or can be
removed, or satisfaction is, or can be made unto the justice of God for it, but
that of Christ only: and yet is Psalm. 51.17.
a broken heart, and a contrite spirit such a sacrifice as finds acceptance
with God, as well in these times as in David's days. And Sir, if you go on to
teach men, as you do, otherwise; you dissuade them from that which God himself
is said to 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14.
expect, and Psalm. 34.18. and 51.17.
accept of, and which he himself does profess to Isa. 57.15. and 66.2.
respect, and Psa. 147.11.
delight in.

But you add a little further, to gratify us herein, that Reply, ibid.
Repentance, obedience, etc. may make way for the peace made already for sin,
that is, in such working of spirit, the love of God in the face of Jesus Christ
may shine upon the soul more freely and fully; and the more the spirit abounds
in the fruits of it, the more joy and peace flows into the soul, and the more
the soul looks Christ in the face; so as peace with God is not made, but more
revealed by the Spirit in obedience and love, etc.

Sir, You heap up, after your wonted manner, many words, little or nothing at
all to what is objected to you, or against you; but much wild discourse beside
the mark or the matter, to lead your Reader aside from attending the present
dispute. The Question is, Whether God be not truly displeased with a believer
fallen into wilful gross sins, and whether he were not so with David upon
some of his sins, until he was humbled for them, and repented of them. And
what is all this that you tell us of here, roving to and fro, as one that were
treading a maze, unto the refuting of ought that is objected against you, or
the making good of ought asserted by you, whereunto exception is here taken.

In the next place you pass from your fourth Assertion excepted against, to
the seventh; skipping over, among other things, that of which it will not be
amiss to mind, if not your self, yet the Reader; to wit, that

Treat. p. 44.
Nothing can trouble the quiet and peace of any soul, but the taking in of the
law, and the accusings and condemnations of it. And that

Ibid.
All trouble for sin arises from the obligement of the Law demanding
satisfaction of the soul for the breach of it.

Which doctrine, how wholesome it is, let others judge. I repeat not again what
I have Ans. p. 18.
there said to it.

Out of mine Animadversion on his seventh Assertion, he culs out this a little
to dally with, that I say,

Ans. p. 19.
God loves us also for his own graces in us, and our exercises of the same.

And having picked out of it a principal particle, the word also, (which made
the Proposition adverse to his, wherein he denies, that Treat. p. 80.
God loves us for ought in our selves: which yet by express testimony of
Scripture I there show to be agreeable to truth) that so he may find somewhat
to cavil with; he thus replies,

Rep. p. 12, 95.
I thought he had loved us too in himself: and from that love given Christ for
us; and yet loved us in Christ too. Can any thing without God be a cause of
Gods love,? Does God love us as we love one another, from complexions and
features without? Or loves he not rather thus? God is love, and therefore we
are made, and redeemed, and sanctified: not because we are sanctified,
therefore he loves us. We love him because he first loved us: he loved us,
because he loved us; and not because we love him, not because of any spiritual
complexion or feature in us, because of his image upon us: that is but an
earnest of his love to us, that is only given us, because he loved us. He
loves us from his will, not from without; for tho we are like him, yet we are
not himself: and he loves us as in Christ and himself.

Sir, tho you have left your Logic, yet you have not lost your Rhetoric: How
plentiful can you be in the proving of that that no body denies you; and in
dilating of your own denied Assertions; not once offering to answer the
objections made against them?

For Sir, whatsoever you thought heretofore, or think still, I do not think it,
but am sure of it, that you do nothing here but trifle, in setting up an
imaginary opposition, (...), Plato leg. l. 8. (...). Lucian. de Sect.
a man of straw of your own making, and then exercising your self in shooting
some shafts at it, as if you wanted other work.

But You had thought that God had loved us too in himself. And good Sir, keep
you still in that thought. Who questioneth you for it? Who ever denied it? Or
what is it to my Proposition, if you restore me my stolen goods, if you
return it again what you filcht out of it? And yet as you propound it, it is no
whit inconsistent with that which to no purpose you give us your thoughts of.
For tho my Proposition, as I delivered it, contradicted your Assertion; yet as
your self have now framed it, it is not at all disproved by that which in these
words you oppose against it. God may love us for his graces, and yet love us in
himself. This shaft therefore, tho a sound one, does not so much as strike at,
much less fasten on, or pierce the mark that you set up to shoot at, the man
that your self made to encounter with.

Some other rotten reedy ones there are, that you make use of here, which
though they hit it, yet they hurt it not; they hurt no body but your self.

For it is not true that you say, that God does not love us because we are
sanctified: nor does he love us because we love him. And did you not profess
to have given over your Logic, I might tell you, that these are no good
consequences: God loves us before we love him: Therefore he does not Libenter
Dei amor nostrum, quem praevenit, subseqitur. Bern. Ep. 107.
love us when we love him, even for the loving of him. And, God sanctified us
because he loved us; he loves us not therefore when we are holy, because we
are holy, and because we are lovely, which before Amarus est non amandus. Idem
de Deo dilig.
we were not. For what hinders, but that the same effect of love may become
an object of that love, whereof it was at first an effect? 1 John 4.10.
God loves us before we love him, without respect to ought in us: and Ibid. v.
17.
we love him because he so loved us: and God loves us again for our loving of
him. And this our Savior himself assures us of, as you were told Ans p. 19.
before; and I am compelled again to mind you of, because like one of those,
who have no very graceful title given them in the Schools, you deny the close
of the Argument, and dispute against the Conclusion; letting the forepart, the
promises, wherein the proof of it consists, stand untoucht and unspoken to.
For our blessed Savior in express words tells us, not only that Pro. 8.17.
he loves those that love him; but that Joh 16.27.
the Father loves them, because they love him, and believ on him: as he says
elsewhere of himself, that John 10.17.
Therefore the Father loved him, because he laid down his life for his sheep.
Thus you see Sir, how either for want of Logic, or for some selfish humor,
you stick not again to give our Savior the lie, tho you were formerly told of
it; and your work here should have been, either the clearing your self if you
could, or (which had been the better and more Christian course) the crying
peccavi, and confessing your fault; rather then the troubling of your self and
your Readers with a tedious discourse and needless dispute about a fained
opposition of your own setting up, by mangling of my Proposition; and
attracting a further guilt by a renewed opposition in more direct terms to our
Saviors own express Assertion.

As silly a shift, and sorry a shaft is that that ensues: that tho we are
like him, yet we are not himself: And what then? Cannot God therefore love us
for his image in us? Yea, but the reason annexed will (I hope) make all
cock-sure: He loves us as in Christ, and himself. I may still ask, and what
then? for this is also as little to the purpose as the rest.

It is true indeed that you say, God loves us not as we love one another, from
complexion and feature without: for 1 Samuel 16.7.
God sees not as man sees, as he sometime told Samuel: Man looks on the
outward appearance; but God looks on the heart. And does he not love therefore
for complexions and features within? Psalm. 11.7.
The Lord is righteous, and loves righteousness; and the Psalm. 146.5.
righteous for their righteousness. And he Ps. 147.10, 11.
delights, tho not in an horses strength, or in any man's legs, yet in those
that fear him, and trust in his mercy. For what, think we, but for that their
fear of him, and confidence in him? and for what he delights in them, for that
sure he loves them: for how can he delight in that that he loves not? But I
fear, I may justly incur blame and censure, for spending time, and wasting
words, in laboring to prove that by argument, Siquidem videtur hoc esse, qod
Plut. (...). Quale enim est, die non esse contentum, nisi igniculus aliqis
alluxerit? Aut qod potest in hac ^laritate habere scintilla momentum, Sep. Ep.
92.
which our Savior himself has so expressly averred, as if his word were not
of it self all-sufficient proof for it, and able to bear down all contrary
cavils; and attract that guilt that I charge Mr. S. with, in endeavoring In
rebus apretis argumentari, tam est stultum, quam in clarissimum Solemn ^umen
infer, Fabius lib. 1. cap. 13. Et Fabio prior Aristoteles, (...), Stob. cap.
4.
by reason upon reason to confirm that, which, till these days, no man in his
right wits and sober mind, ever made doubt of, much less denied. But you see
what exigences men's prodigious conceits, and their obstinacy in them enforces
us unto.

Yet one thing, I confess we are here beholden to him for; but that I doubt,
he wishes it had not dr^pt out of his pen. He says, that Gods image upon
us, is an earnest of his love to us; only given us, because he loved us. For
if Gods image renewed in us, be an earnest of his love to us; then may it give
us good assurance of his love. For to what end is ^n earnest given, but to
assure the party to whom it is given of that whereof it is an earnest? and ^hen
sanctification by his own ground and grant here, is a sound and sure evidence
of just fi^ation; unless any man will undertake to give better assurance then
Gods earnest. And yet with what base, broad, and opprobrious terms this
assurance has been vilified and reproached by him, shall in his due place
appear. But thus the adversaries of Gods truth are sometime by a secret
providence induced, ere they are aware, to give testimony thereunto.

Concerning your eighth Ass^rtion, and the Animadversion on it, which you were
pidling with a little before, you return us here nothing more then you there
^ad, save a Magist^ri^ll and censorious reprehension of all others beside your
self and those of your side, in these words:

Rep. p. 12, 13.
Whereas you say, G d is as man, and as a Father: I hope you mean not as in
him^ lf, but as in his ways of speaking and appearing to us; and if so, we are
agreed. But your taking things more in the letter then in the spirit, makes
your divinity less divine, and your conceptions more like things of men, then
of God. This makes the glory ^f the G^sp^l so legal and carnal, when we rise
no higher then the ba^e l^tter of Scripture, not the inspiration by which it
came: All Scripture being given by inspiration.

Where Sir, 1. You mangle my sayings after your wonted guise. I say only, Ans.
p. 19.
In some things he is as man: and what I say, I render reasons for, more then
one; and instance in such things as you oppose: all which you take no notice
of. A worthy manner of replying: such as the meanest, I say not, Scholar, but
person whatsoever of common capacity, might well be ashamed of.

2. I show that he is so; not in ways of speaking and appearing only, as you
speak, (as if in deed and truth he were nothing less then what he seemed to
be, and in such speakings were pretended) but in reality and truth.

3. Clear your self if you can, from guilt of blasphemy, for averring, that
Exodus 34 6.
God in way of speaking and appearance only proclaimed himself to Moses, a God
merciful, and gracious, slow to wrath, and abundant in goodness and truth:
and that Moses in way of speaking and appearance only told the people, what so
seriously he advised them to D^ut. 8.5.
consider, that as a man chasteneth his son, so God chastened them: And that
the Psalmist spoke in the like strain, when he says, Psa. 103.13.
As a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth those that fear him; for
that is the instance I there bring, which you were nibling at here before.

4. Sir, we dare not allegorize the Scriptures, where the letter of it yields
us a clear and proper sense: much less expect such new inspirations as the
Enthusiasts of our times, whom you seem overmuch to comply with, pretend, that
they may obtrude on us their vain and profane fancies in stead of Gods sacred
Oracles.

5. What you conclude with, that Scripture was given by inspiration, who
denies? but what follows thence, I beseech you? that therefore we must rise
higher then the letter of the Scripture, and expect some new revelation for the
raising of some other spiritual sense of it then the letter will afford? This
is a way to draw Qod de Rabbinis Judaicis, Constant. Emperat. ad Dan. 10.1. De
nostris etiam qibusdam, Sixth. Amam. videndus Antibarb. Bibl. l. 1. err. 7. page
256. etc.
quidlibet ex quolibet, and to make the Scripture Nasum cereum, uti Pontificii.
a nose of wax, that men may wind and turn which way they list, as their quaint
fancies and wanton wits are pleased to play with it: for Sir, was not 2 Timothy
3.16.
every parcel of Scripture, whether Historical or Doctrinall, given by
inspiration, as well as any one of it? But this is not unlike that idle dotage
of the Jewish Doctors, who tell us, that Menach. in Genesis 29.
every Scripture has seventy several faces or senses: and the Popish conceit
of four several sorts of interpretation of Scripture; which our Writers do
justly oppose.

Nor could I therefore, I confess, without much grief of mind, yea and some
kind of godly (I hope) indignation, read what I lately lighted on, among some
Treatises of a Protestant Writer of no small note, lately published; a L. C.
Exercitatio ad locum Zoharis.
large discourse, wherein this mystical manner of expounding plain and
historical passages of Scripture by I know not what analogicall and
allegorical senses, is not justified only, but highly commended: and a great
deal of pains taken in relating, translating, and unfolding, for a pattern
thereof, a most absurd, ridiculous, and putid explication, or profanation
rather, of some Genesis 2.4, 5, 6
few verses in a passage of Moses concerning the creation, taken out of one of
those Jewish brainsick, and fantastical Writers. And truly, I could not but
wonder not a little, that one of that learning and piety, that I presume him to
be of, nor dare otherwise to deem, (and whom ever since I have been acquainted
with his Writings, I have ever in either regard reverendly esteemed, and still
shall) could induce his mind to undertake such a work, as to commend to
students in Divinity that course and practice, wherein he could not but know,
how foully diverse of the Ancients had failed and faulted, and whereby some of
them had taken occasion to broach and bring in many erroneous, both fond and
impious conceits: or could endure to waste so much precious time and serious
study, in beating out and laying open that intricate texture and prolix train
of most uncouth and unsavory fancies, wherewith that addle-headed Writer has
cloyed and clogged that Scripture; the very bare reading whereof were enough to
turn any judicious man's stomach, and alone sufficient to make a religious
spirit zealous and jealous of preserving Gods sacred oracles in their genuine
purity and simplicity, to abhor and abomitate such irreverent and irreligious
abuse of them, in writhing and wrigling them to and fro, as some Nihil
qaerendum in verbis, nisi loqentium voluntas, cui demonstrandae invigilare
debent omnes veridici enarratores, Aug. de cons. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 46.
Mysterium ex rebus qibusvis obviis and apertis effodere, eorum est qi via
hominum pervulgata sapere fastidiunt, qae res saepe excidit in febriculosam
putiditatem. Cun. de Rep. Hebr. lib. 3. cap. 5.
puppet-like artifice, to make them express variety of forms and shapes, as
such did, this one while, and that another, things as much discrepant one from
another, as all of them from the truth of the text: and (...), Marc. Imp. l. 7.
Sect. 3. qae nervorum, sive verticillorum opera pro tractantis arbitrio
attracta citaqe varias subinde figuras exprimebant. De his Arist. nom. de mund.
c. 6. Xenoph. in Sympos. Petron. in Satyr.
wringing that out of them, that they neither speak directly, nor by just
consequence flows from them, nor can be proved ever to have Litera sua^iter
excutienda and non more captivorum acerbe torquenda, donec restituat, qod non
accepit. Joan. Sarisb. Metalog. l. 3. c. 1.
been intended in them. This I thought good to give an item of by the way, the
rather, because I perceive too much liberty in these licentious times taken by
diverse, and the people much applauding them, who play and dally with Scripture,
to fish and fetch out of it some abstruse mysteries, and strange crotchets,
beyond ordinary apprehension; dealing nothing so religiously with Gods word, as
any sober-minded man would do with any humane Author of any profession,
Interpretis professio est, non qo ipse disertus appareat, sed qo eum qi
lecturus est, faciat intelligere, qomodo ipse intellexit, qi scripsit. Hieron.
ad Marcel. de Rhet. Commentatoris officium est, non qid ipse velit, sed qid
sentiat ille quem interpretatur, exponere. Idem de Jovin. Apolog. 1.
whom he were to open and expound. As for your abuse Sir, of this Scripture
testimony concerning Scripture, were but your words brought into a
Syllogisticall form, it would plainly appear how impertinently and ridiculously
it is by you here produced. And for your censure past on our way of handling
Scripture, I will say no more but this, that if we should take that course of
dealing with Scripture, that your self and some of yours do, our Divinity
would not only be less divine, but much more fantastical then (we bless
God for it) as yet it is.

From these Assertions you pass to others excepted against, which are
specially concerning Faith.

The first whereof is this, that

Treat. p. 94.
Faith is truly and simply this, A being persuaded more or less of Christ's
love.

This being excepted against as containing no more then any man, the wickedest
and most profane may have: and indeed, who almost has not? Your Reply is only
in a poor chiding way; that no whit salves the loosnesse and unsoundnesse of
such a libertinish and licentious Assertion; thus:

Repl. p. 13. Sect. 6.
I pray you mistake not. Can all believe from the Spirit? Can all be more or
less spiritually persuaded? Do I speak of any persuasion of Christ's love
which is not spiritual? Deceive not your self nor your Reader, nor wrong your
Author. Or do I speak of Faith abstracted from all Repentance, Obedience? etc.
Why deal you thus?

1. Sir, all your pitiful complaint of wrong done you is idle and frivolous. I
wrong you not, I misrelate you not: but give you your own words entirely as I
find them in you. If any other mistake you, and by mistaking of you be
encouraged to sooth up themselves with a vain conceit of being possessed of
true faith, when indeed there is no such matter; your self is to be blamed, who
by such speeches as these give ground to such a pernicious error, by not
speaking your mind more fully and plainly, (if you meant one thing and spoke
another;) and stand guilty of the blood of the souls of such as shall, or may
perish by such mistake.

2. If when you profess to deliver your mind truly and plainly, yet you mean
otherwise then you speak, and speak otherwise then you mean, (as it was said of
a couple, Pontificem nunqam qod diceret facere, Valentinum nunqam qod faceret
dicere, Guicciard. l. 1.
the father and the son, of no very good note either) how shall we know when
your speeches and your meanings concur?

3. Can all believ from the Spirit? No Sir, none can believ from the Spirit,
but those alone that believ from Gods word. But many, that have no ground of
belief from Gods word, but from such principles as without warrant from it, you
and yours infuse into them, nor ever had ought of Gods spirit in them, may yet
have such a persuasion as you here mention. And we therefore tax this for an
unsound Assertion, and a rotten principle, the same term that you Treat. p. 85.
brand some notes of Assurance with, which yet you cannot but confess to be
found in Gods word. And to mend the matter, you afterward tell us, that Treat.
p. 92.
none ought to qestion whether they believ or not: and so dissuade those that
have swallowed down this your poysonfull principle, from examining whether
their faith be true and sound or no. And it is an absurd thing for you to ask,
whether you speak of any persuasion of Christ's love that is not spiritual,
when not only you say, persuasion in general, making no mention of
spiritual, but forbid any to try it, whether it be spiritual or no.

4. But, Can all be more or less spiritually persuaded?

1. Where is that spiritually in your text? If it were in your breast, as a
secret reserv, (which is your Repl page 2. Sect. 1, 4.
vain plea concerning some words of mine abused by you, where you were as by
the finger pointed to my meaning, not concealed, but expressed) like a
backdoor, or a starting hole, for you to slip out at, when occasion should be,
and your self closely pursued, and hard pressed with it: You do but juggle
with us, and delude your Reader, that you may make our doctrine herein not
complying with yours, to be deemed too strict, as devised on purpose to pinch
men and Treat. p. 37.
keep them in pain, to make the cure after the more admired.

2. You talk still in ambiguous terms to us. For what intend you by being
spiritually persuaded? If from such grounds as Gods Spirit in the word
suggests, and such operations as the Spirit is wont ever to work in the soul
wheresoever it gives ability to believ; you cross your self, who are ever and
anon girding at us, (as Reply, p. 5. Sect. 1.
your self deny not) and traducing us, for teaching men, with the Apostle,
thence to draw ground for such persuasion, and thereby to examine the truth of
it. If you mean by an immediate voice of the Spirit speaking directly to the
soul, as some of your party seem to maintain; then I see not how there can be
more or less in it, notwithstanding whatsoever you talk elsewhere of Treat.
p. 99.
degrees: For what the Spirit speaks in such an immediate manner to the soul,
cannot but fully satisfy and persuade that soul to whom it so speaks. Nor will
you ever be able to prove, that to every believer the Spirit so speaks.

5. But, Do you speak of faith abstracted from all repentance, obedience, etc.?

1. If such persuasion as you mention may be without any of these, as there is
no qestion but it may be; then a faith abstracted from these comes within
compass of your definition or description of faith, term it whether you please.

2. You do speak of, approve, and justify such a faith; yea, more then that,
you affirm, all true faith to be such; when you maintain, that Treat. p. 186.
every one that receivs Christ (which is done Joh. 1.12.
by faith) receivs him in a sinful condition; and consequently, in an
impenitent condition. And that to be your meaning, you acknowledge, tho you
return no answer to mine Argument against it.

3. If you intend no other faith, why do you so often tax us, for pressing these
things as required of all those that have interest in Christ.

4. What other faith is it that you intend, when you say, that Treat. p. 98.
men ought not to stay the exercise of their faith, for repentance or
humiliation, or any other grace? Of which more hereafter in your Model.

6. Since you have dealt so ambiguously and covertly (by your own confession at
the best) in this and other your Assertions, (which you are not able to
justify) being delivered in your own words, and well sorting, as they are
delivered, with what you affirm elsewhere; you have no cause to ask me, why I
deal thus: but we may well ask you, why you deal so deceitfully, and delude
silly souls, in teaching them to rest on such rotten reeds as these, (which you
are loath to own, tho they be your own) to the ruin of their souls.

Your next Assertion is, that

Treat. p. 97
No man can believe too suddenly.

To which I answer, That Ans. p. 20.
men may believe too suddenly, as did Simon the Sorcerer: too soon and too
suddenly they may presume, and he persuaded of Christ's love; if that be faith,
as you define it.

Reply p. 13.
Now to this you reply,

1. Was Simon Magus blamed for believing too suddenly, or for mis-beleeving:
because he believed that the gifts of the holy Ghost might be bought with
money?

1. Grant it, that he was blamed for the latter; that misbelief of his, and
the evil act thence proceeding, discovering the unsoundnesse of his formerly
pretended, and externally professed faith: yet what I say stands still firm,
That a man may too suddenly believ as he did. And if his belief were unbelief,
and a mere groundless presumption, then that which I say is true: For sure it
is, men may too suddenly mis-believ and presume.

2. If to believ be no more then as you say, To be persuaded more or less of
Christ's love; not Simon Magus alone, but many millions, nay, any other in his
estate, may too soon and too suddenly believ: yea, if your former tenants be
true, Simon Magus, tho Act. 8.23.
abiding still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, had as
good right unto, and interest in the promises of the Gospel, running absolutely
and simply without any condition of faith and repentance, and belonging to
sinners as sinners, not as humbled or repentant sinners, and therefore to him,
unless you will deny him to be a sinner; as Philip or Peter, that preached
Christ to him: and might conseqently believ as well as they, and be on good
ground persuaded that Christ loved him; since the promises belong to none but
such as Christ loves.

But you proceed in your chiding and expostulating language.

2. Repl. ibid.
Can any believe too soon? If some mis-believe, or believe falsely, what is that
to them that truly believe? Romans 3.
Shall the unbelief of some make the faith of God without effect? God forbid.
Can Christ be too soon a Savior to us? Can the fountain be too soon opened for
sin? Can the riches of Christ be too soon brought home? Paul counts it an
honor to be Romans 16.5, ^
first in Christ: as to some that were in Christ before him, and to others that
were the first fruits of Achaia.

1. No man can truly believe too soon, no more then he can truly repent too
soon. But Sir, you compel us to sing over your own song again to you. Men may
too soon be persuaded more or less that Christ loves them; because sooner then
they have any good ground for any such persuasion, that which is the very
essence of faith with you; and they that so believe before they repent, believe
too soon; their impenitency showing such belief of theirs to be no
well-grounded faith, but a presumptuous fancy.

2. If there be mis-belief and false belief, as well as true belief; How dare
you dissuade men from trying their faith, whether it be sound and sincere?
Should one dissuade or forbid men to weigh or try the gold they receive, when
they know light and base coin to be rife abroad; yea, so rife, that there is
far more store of the faulty commonly tendered in payment, then of good and
weighty gold; what could it be deemed but a mere knavish device, of one either
desirous to cheat and cozen people himself, or willing to have them cheated and
cozened by others?

3. You mis-apply and abuse Scripture, as elsewhere, so here. Tho Romans 3.3.
the unbelief of some cannot make the faith of God of none effect, but that his
promises shall in their due time all undoubtedly be made good to all his: yet
what is that at all to our present debate? For may not therefore some persuade
themselves, (and that from your grounds encouraged so to do) that Gods promises
belong to them, when indeed they do not?

4. Tho Christ cannot too soon be a Savior, if he please, unto any; yet may
many, yea, too many do persuade themselves, that Christ is their Savior, whom
yet he never will save.

5. The fountain in some sort and manner may, in the ministerial dispensation
of it, be too soon set open; if it be otherwise set open then it was by Peter
in his preaching Acts 2.38. and 3.19.
to the Jews, and Act. 8.22.
to Simon Magus afterward: and if, as it is by many of your strain in these
times, who tell men that sinners of all sorts may be washed in it from the
guilt of their sins, although they continue still in the practice of them; and
your own principles prove and approve the same.

6. The riches of Christ cannot too soon be brought home to any soul. It is
God; not you, or I, or any other that can do that. But the riches of Christ,
and the waters of the forementioned fountain, are (I suppose) of those Mat. 7.6.
holy things, which we are by our Savior himself forbidden to throw to dogs,
or to expose to swine. And we may be over hasty therefore in our dispensation
of them.

7. For the Scriptures wherewith you seal up this impertinent discourse, I
should endeavor to show how miserably and palpably you abuse them in your vain
and ridiculous citing of them to no purpose, if I deemed any Reader to be so
sottish or dim-sighted, that he were not able to discern between an apple and
an oyster.

But in stead thereof, I shall only make bold to present him with a brief
Model of your Divinity concerning these points.

1. Treat. p. 94.
Faith (you told us) to speak truly and simply, (which indeed you, and those of
your strain seldom do) is (no more then) to be persuaded more or less of
Chricts love.

2. Ib. p 97, 98.
Men cannot too hastily or too suddenly (thus) believ. (for unto this your
definition your words must have reference, unless you will acknowledge, that
your writings hang together like ropes of Arena sine calce. Suet. Caio. cap. 53.
sand, without lime to bind it: and by faith you mean one thing, and by belief
another).

3. Ibid. p. 98.
Men ought not to stay the exercise of their faith for repentance, or
humiliation, or any other grace. (As much as to say, they ought not to forbear
persuading themselves that Christ loves them, tho they do not repent, nor be
humbled at all for their sins.)

4. Ibid. p. 92.
None ought to qestion whether they believ or no: (and so need not, yea, ought
not to examine their faith, whether it be sound and sincere, or no.)

5. Ibid. p. 57.
In the Gospel all are immediately called to believe: (that is, according to
the former tenants, to be persuaded that they are of the number of those that
Christ loves, and will save, whether they be yet humbled and repent, or no.)

6. Ibid. p. 93.
Christ commands to believ: (whom, but those whom he calls? and he calls all
immediately without more ado;) for this is his commandment; and commandments
of this nature must be obeyed, not disputed: (and men must not therefore stand
disputing whether they believe aright or no: for to that purpose is this
alleged.)

Now Sir, endeavor you to salve these Assertions with what qualifications and
modifications you please, and out of your subtle wit you can devise; let any
indifferent person judge, what encouragement you have hereby given unto sely
souls, to build hopes of attaining heaven and happiness, on such a sandy
foundation as man's corrupt and profane heart is of its self over prone to
entertain and r^ly on; to wit, being persuaded more or less that they are of
Christ's beloved ones, and true belevers, tho they have no dram of repentance,
or other grace in them.

But the most of all this (which indeed you might justly be ashamed of, had you
not made an utter riddance of all ingenuous disposition) together with what is
against the same in mine Ans. p. 20, 21.
Answer objected, you let pass, only out of mine exception to the last, you
snip off that one shred, wherein I say, that

Ibid. p. 20.
Christ commands us to repent as well us to believe; yea, first to repent, and
than to believe.

Whereunto, in your wonted fashion, to little purpose, you thus reply:

Repl. page 13. Sect. 7.
Yea, but will you take the doctrine of the Gospel from a part, or summary of
it, as you say, and not from the Gospel in its fullness, and glory, and
revelation? will you gather doctrines of truth, as Ruth for a while did
glea^ings, here one ear of corn, and there another; and not rather go to the
full sheaf, ^o truth in the harvest and Vintage? Will you pick up truth by
pieces and parcels, in Repentance, and Obedience, and self-deny all? and not
reveal these as Christ may be most glorified, and the Saints most sanctified,
and these gifts most spiritualized and improved? Will ye preach doctrine as it
lies in the letter; or in their Analogy and inference of truth? The Papists
preach Christ's very flesh and blood to be in the wine, and why? because they
look but half way to the demonstration of truth in the Spirit: they shut up
Christ in one nation, and not in anoth^^* and so lose the truth by revealing it
in that form of words which is too narrow for it, and too short of Ephesians.
the height, and depth and length of it.

But Sir, 1. You have here a great deal of your Rhetoric; which it seems, you
have not yet renounced: but very little of your Logic; which, it seems, you
have so shaken hands with, that you never intend to admit, or to be reconciled
unto again. For here is nothing but idle flourishes, like some Fencer in
disport, laying about him with his two-handed sword, to make passage for some
sight, when he has no body to fight with: nothing but a mere sound of words,
the same that we had often before, with one or two qeint similitudes, that may
serve for a new garnish: all as much to the matter, as an answer of chalk to a
question of cheese. Sir, put your discourse into some form of Argument, and you
may from you self soon have an answer; you will soon see the loosnesse of it
your self.

2. If you did but well weigh what you say, you might easily discern, that the
edge of this your rapsodie, (for it is not worth the name of an Argument)
leaving us, turns directly upon your self. For who be they that glean, picking
here an ear, and there an ear, and refusing to resort to the whole sheaf, but
your self? You tell us, Joh. 14.1.
Christ commands to believe: there you pick up one ear. We tell you, Mark 1.15.
he bids us repent and believe: we would have you take the rest of the sheaf
along with you; and that you refuse. You tell us, that Acts 16.31.
Paul bids the Jailer believe: there you pick up the same one ear again. And
we tell you, that the same Apostle says, that Act. 20.21.
he preached to all (that he preached to) Jew or Gentile, as well repentance,
as faith; yea, Act. 26.20.
faith, repentance, and new obedience: and would have you join them together,
binding them up in one sheaf, as he did. And you not only refuse so to do,
but jeer and deride us for so doing: and when we complain of your so dealing
with us, you demand of us, Repl. p. 5. Sect. 1.
Why we think much to be so dealt with, when we do therein amiss. Now Sir,
whether of the two pick up ear by ear, or whether go to the full sheaf, you or
we, in that particular at least, that is now before us, let any man, not wholly
void of common sense, judge. We require to have the sheaf kept entire, and not
broken asunder, Mat. 19.6.
nor those things dis-joyned, that God and Christ has conjoined: You
over-saucily and presumptuously sever them. And when we find fault with you
for your so doing, you charge on us the fault that you your selves offend in.

3. If there be any truth in our doctrine concerning repentance, self-deny all,
and obedience; and concerning the necessity of these unto salvation: confess
at length to your shame, unless you regard your own credit more then Gods
truth, your heinous impiety, in wilful opposing these truths, against your own
knowledge; and with Achan, Josh. 7.19.
Give God the glory, whose doctrine of truth in his Ministers preaching and
pressing of it, in no other manner then as Christ himself did, you have
wickedly and wretchedly derided.

4. If these be but pieces and parcels of truth, what is faith any more?

5. Before you taxed us for Reply, p. 8. Sect. 2.
interpreting Scripture in conseqence; and now for not preaching it in Analogy
and inference. Do you know what you would have? you are very wayward, it seems:
nothing that we do, or not do, can please you. How differ consequence and
inference? Be pleased good Sir, to show us, and arread us this riddle: for but
Rep. p. 14.
a little hereafter your self make them all one.

6. No sound inference or analogy does or can destroy any truth: nor does the
analogy of one truth with another, inhibit the preaching of one truth as well
as another.

7. For what you prate so much of spiritualizing the letter of the Text, we
justly suspect that lurking in it, that we deservedly detest and abhor: the
doctrine of repentance, and self-denial, and obedience, is no allegorical
matter, that we need fancy or fish for some mystical senses of, by some I
know not what new forged lights. But of this enough before.

8. For the Popish doctrine, either of Transubstantiation, or of Concomitancie;
what have we to do with it? were it any part of Gods truth, we had no cause
to r^ject it. We deem of it, as we do of your Antinomian dotages, that they
are both alike mere novelties, fruits of men's wicked and wanton wits, enamoured
too much on their own vain speculations, and therewith endeavoring to delude
and seduce others.

9. Popish errors and Scriptures you make much alike use of; alleging them to
as little purpose the one as the other.

To the refidue that ensues, Ans. p. 21, 30.
in five entire leaves, in way of exception to his eighth, ninth, and tenth
Assertions, the justification and establishment of our grounds of assurance
assigned out of Gods word by us, and by him opposed; and the discussion and
rejection of his newfound assurances, he returns indeed some few short
slubbring answers; but so as that the main matter, the most of it, is let go,
and left as wholly buried in oblivion.

1. Concerning his disswasive from any trial of faith, which with much
eagerness he had formerly insisted on; affirming, that Treat. p. 73.
for a man to qestion his faith, were to qestion Christ himself, and to make
our Savior a Sorcerer: He is now somewhat allayed of his former heat; and out
of his kindness he is content in some sort to close with us, and to stoop so
low from his Magisteriality, as (tho contrary to his own tenants) to condescend
in some things to us, that we may not utterly disagree. His words are these.

1. Repl. p. 14.
You say, We are to try our faith: I say so too; if you would not pick and
choose in my book, to make me some other thing then you find me.

1. Do you say, Sir, that we must try our faith? You do indeed now here so
say: but do you say so in your book? or do you not there flatly avow the clean
contrary, and that, in as express terms as may be? else what is the English of
those words there; Treat. p. 92.
None ought to qestion whether they believe or no? and Ibid. p. 95.
We ought no more to qestion our faith, then we ought to qestion Christ?
Unless I have forgotten mine English, as you have your Logic, these words are
directly repugnant to what you now say. Nor do I in charging this upon you,
make you any other thing then I find you: the rather, finding you, as Ans. p.
22, 23.
mine Answer shows, not barely propounding these things; but with much
vehemency pressing them, and deeply censuring what you seem how to
acknowledge, as derogatory from the credit of the Gospel, and the honor of
Christ: both which in truth you do hereby not oppose and contradict only, but
much dishonor and disgrace. Sure, you made full account, that no Rejoinder
would ever have appeared to this your Reply; you would never else have thus
written.

2. Repl. ibid.
But my meaning is, that we must try our faith for assurance; as my other words
imply: and you say so to.

Sir, I say, we must try our faith it self, whether it be sincere or no, as
well as take trial of our assurance; which a man may want, tho he have true
faith. Nor do my words imply any other thing, or exclude either. But Sir, this
puntilio we will not stand upon; (tho your words here be nothing clear) a small
matter shall not part us. The rather since that in both you freely profess to
say the same; and are of late become so liberal, where you seemed so extreme
tenacious and hidebound before. But where is the difference then between us?
what is it, that sets us at a distan^^ and such a distance, that for saying no
more then you now gran^, we must needs be held guilty of making our Savior a
Sorcerer? Speak on your mind Sir, plainly; you are much mistaken in us; we are
willing enough to hear you.

3. You say; Repl. Ibid.
We would have the best assurance from trial: and there you leave us; and do
not say (...) we say.

1. The q stion at present is not concerning the best assurance, or the worst;
but whether any trial is to be taken at all. And here your words are peremtory
and general: that none ought to qestion their faith: and consequently, that no
trial at all is to be taken. And here Sir, should I leave you, sticking fast
in the mire of your own former assertions, which it seems you are grown
ashamed of, and are loath therefore now to own; and so entangled in the briars
of your own cross contradict^ons, that you know not how to wind your self out
of them; and so rid mine hand of you, having forced from you a confession of
what you formerly denied; there could be nothing further exacted of me as
concerning the present debate. For all that here follows is nothing at all,
either to the clearing of your self from the point charged on you, or the
removal of mine exception made thereunto. Yet resolved we are to hear what you
say, tho you speak not to the point.

2. Where then do you find me say, that the best assurance is from trial? and
here I might return you again your own coin, expostulate with you in your own
words; Why do you make me some other thing then you find me? deceive not your
self, nor your reader; nor wrong not your Author. Set not up a stake, as the
young Ad palum tirones exercebantur, Vege. l. 1 c. 11. and l. 2. c. 23. Inde,
Pali vulnera, Juvenali Sat. 6.
novices of the Roman trained bands had wont to do, wherewith to exercise your
self. Howbeit, that you may see, we are not so quarrelsome as you deem us; if
you will be pleased to do, not us, but the Apostles of Christ the courtesy, as
to acknowledge the assurance that they have pointed us to, and given us
assurance of, to be true, sure, sound, certain; and not vilify, debase,
disgrace and traduce them, as Ans. p. 27, 32.
narrow, puzzling, perplexing, distracting courses, broken ware, weak work,
rotten stuff, and the like, we will let fall this controversy, and leave
contending and qestioning what assurance is the best, we will be content to
take these, and teach them, such as they be, and as the writers of holy writ
have ascertained them to be. And yet, give me leave to be so bold, as to tell
you so much of my mind by the way, that I shall ever conceive just cause to
qestion that faith, that shunneth this touchstone, that refuses to be tried by
such signs and marks as the Apostles have propounded for that purpose.

Repl. Ibid.
But is that (say you) the best spiritual assurance, that is from our spirit
in part, or from God alone? from our reasoning, or his speaking? can a spouse
argue better the love of her friend, from his tokens and bracelets, or from his
own word and letter and seal?

1. Sir, we contend not for prerogative, as was before said, that is a qestion
of your own; no assertion of ours.

2. The assurance gathered from the gracious work of gods spirit on our souls,
and the effects of the same, is not an assurance taken from our own spirit, but
from Gods spirit. 1 John 4.13.
Hereby we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his spirit.

3. Our assurance rightly and truly raised by our reasoning from Gods gracious
work in us, is a true and a divine testimony; as a Habent testimonium in verbo
Dei, suntqe non minus divina mandata, qae ex certa Scripturae sententia, bona
consequentia deducuntur, qam qae totidem literis and syllabis in Scripturis
exprimuntur. Chemnit. exam. trid. part. 1. p. 19.
conclusion necessarily deduced from Scripture, is a divine truth, as well as
that that is expressly found in Scripture: yea, the Apostle tells us, that Romans
8.16.
the Spirit of God bears witness together with our spirit. Nor does the one
therefore simply weaken the work of the other.

4. A bracelet, or a frontlet barely sent or given, may argue some good will,
but makes no engagement; there must be some letter, or Pignus est donum verbo
vestitum. Reg. Jur.
word of promise added, that must effect that: And that these spiritual
endowments want not. We have Gods word, (...). Maca. hom. 39.
his letter, his hand writing, his seal, both testifying to us, and giving us
assurance that these things are his earnests; as your self before confessed.

5. Yea, but Repl. Ibid.
the Spirit is 1 John 5.8.
one of the three that bears witness on earth: and, in whom after ye
believed, you were sealed with the Spirit of promise.

That Romans 8.16.
The Spirit bears witness, and that together with our spirit, is acknowledged;
and that the faithful are said to be Ephesians. 1.14. and 4.30.
sealed by the Spirit, the Apostle is express for it: but the qestion is, what
manner of sealing it is that is there meant: And it is such, I suppose, as
rather crosses, then furthers what you would have. Which to make manifest, I
shall in the first place crave leave, that I may without offense or prejudice a
little rectify the Translation, and render the text as the Original yields
it; the words run thus, Ephesians. 1.13.
In whom (...) Ita (...), credens, Marc. 16.16. (...) credentes, Luc. 8.12.
(...) credere, Marc. 9.23. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Sic (...) audiens, Mat. 2.3. and
4.12. and 8.10. (...) audientes, Mat. 15.12. (...) audire, Mat. 13.42. and
13.15, 17.
believing, or having believed, or when you believed, you were sealed.

Now the sealing here mentioned I take to consist in the inward endowments of
sanctifying grace, whereby the Spirit set Gods mark and seal on them at the
time of their conversion and receiving of Christ.

My reasons are briefly:

1. The sealing here mentioned is general, common to all believers; 2 Cor.
1.21, 22.
us with you, and you with us, says the Apostle of those at Corinth; and the
self-same he presumes here of all the faithful at Ephesus.

2. It is said of them, that they are thereby sealed, as elsewhere; not that
thereby redemption is sealed unto them; but that Ephesians. 1.13. and 4.30.
they are thereby sealed unto it: which implies some impression of a seal, or
signature stamped on them. And herein some difference seems to be between the
outward seals, to wit, the Romans 4.11.
Sacraments, and the inward seal of the Spirit; that they seal the covenant to
the soul, this seals the soul to the future benefits contained in the covenant,
which in due time they shall be possessed of: the Sacraments seal to all that
receive them indifferently, for the truth of the covenant (else were not wicked
ones Jer. 34.18.
covenant-breakers with God) effectually, for their good and benefit, unto
those alone that believe and repent. The Spirit seals in the manner above
mentioned, not the truth of the covenant alone, but the benefit of it, unto the
party thereby sealed, as having interest in and unto all the good things
therein contained; and being, by what he has already received, marked out
for, and sealed up unto whatsoever thereof is yet behind.

3. That which is here called the seal of the Spirit, is elsewhere called the
Romans 3.23.
first fruits of the Spirit, as a parcel of that, which in the full crop is
hereafter expected, and of the same nature with it.

4. That other place plainly parallel to this, wherein by diverse several
tropes, under several distinct notions, this one and the self same thing is
decyphered, to me seems to carry it along this way. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.
He it is, says the Apostle, that assures, or rather, (...).
ensureth us, in Christ, or (...).
into; or unto Christ; and has anointed us; who has also sealed us, and given
or put, the earnest of his spirit on our hearts, Whence I thus reason: Look how
God ensureth us, so he anointeth us; and how he anoints us, so he seals us; and
how he seals us, so he gives us his earnest, or puts his earnest into us: But
it is the gracious indowments of his sanctifying spirit, wherewith he anoints
us; as all Interpreters hold, that ever I read: And it is the same therefore,
whereby God seals and ensures us, as by his Ephesians. 1.14.
earnest to himself. And this being, as I take it, with other good ^llyric.
Cal^. Pisc. Ba^n, alii.
Autors, the genuine sense of that scripture, (the contrary whereunto, I
suppose, you will not be able easily to evince) it little helps you in ought*
that you would conclude from it; but it much strengthens that which you so
mightily oppose.

6. Repl. Ibid.
Can any inference or consequence drawn from faith, or love, or repentance, or
obedience in us, so assure us, as the breathing of Christ himself, sealing,
assuring, persuading, convincing, satisfying. Psalm.
I will hear, what God will say; for he will speak peace to his servants. A
Saint would rather hear that voice then all his own inferences and arguments;
which tho they bring somsthing to persuade, yet they persuade not so
answerably, till the voice speak 2 Pet. 1.
from that excellent glory.

Sir, 1. Comparisons we use to say, are odious. We make no comparison between
any assurances that God gives and affords unto his. Nor do we cry up one, as
you do, to cry down another: like those of the prelaticall faction, that cried
up prayer, to cry down preaching. And tho all you plead here therefore were
granted you, it neither hits us, much less hurts us, or our cause; nor yet
cleers you, from the heinous guilt contracted by you, and cleaving still fast
to you, in traducing and vilifying Gods own sacred assurances, the general and
ordinary pledges and pawns of his special favor and love in Christ.

2. I might demand of you: Are not these graces you mention the very breathing
of Christ himself into the soul? were the ministerial abilities conferred on
his Apostles Joh 20.22.
such? and are not the sanctifying graces of the spirit such also? or does not
Christ by these seal, assure, persuade, convince, and satisfy? and I might
here challeng you, or any other of your way, to deny this if they dare.

3. Where did the Psalmist profess his desire and endeavor to by inqiry to
hear Psalm. 85.80.
what God would speak, but In verbo suo: Moller. In promissionibus: Calvin.
in his word? or what speaking of peace are we to understand there, but a real
speaking; not a verbal or vocal speech, either inward or outward, but a Pacem
loqi, largiri, Moller.
real exhibition, such as Gods Deus, cum benedicit, facit qod dicit: Aquin.
benediction is wont to be, of peace, that is, of Pacem, prosperum successum:
Calv. Ita passim. Isa. 48.18. Psalm. 119.165.
prosperity, and prosperous success, to the people? so that this place is
little to your purpose.

4. It is not denied, but that Luke 7.48, 50.
Christ's immediate voice to the poor penitent woman, could not but be matter
of exceeding great comfort to her, and such as might well afford inexpressible
refreshment to her drouping spirit, inconceivable tranq^llitie to her troubled
mind, inconcussed settlement and assurance to her soul; but neither can such
now be expected: nor is the security drawn from the grounds of Gods word (as
Matthew. 5.18.
infallible and unfailable as the pillars and ground-works of heaven and earth;
yea Mark 13.31.
more unfailable then the foundations of either) less powerful and
efficacious in it self; and might be so also unto us, were it not for the
weakness of our faith, and want of our firm apprehension of them. Nor is it
denied but that Gods spirit in a more immediate way, may at sometime insinuate
it self into the soul, by sweet and sensible raptures and soul ravishing
comforts, in times especially of tribulation and extremity of distress;
thereby to encourage Gods servants to depend upon him, and with the more
alacrity of spirit to go through with such bitter brunts as God has pleased to
call them to: and that God may in such manner, and often does, in such sort
communicate himself to his servants, according to his good pleasure, and the
diverse manners of his dispensations to his: and that such irradiations and
insinuations are for the present matter of singular comfort and contentment to
the soul. But these are Heu, Domine Deus, rara hora, and brevis mora: Bern. in
Cant.
neither general, nor perpetual; many a soul (no doubt) has gotten into
heaven, that was never much acqainted with them. Nor does any such
extraordinary or more unusual courses any whit infringe (much less take away
and annull) the force and efficacy of assurances drawn from the word, wherein
Gods voice is as well as in these; and which are commended to us in the word,
and that for such as every one ought to try himself, and to be tried by. We
speak of such ways as every true believer is, or may be capable of; and such
as, if the Spirit of God speaking in his word do not delude and deceive us,
may give us abundant of Romans 15.4.
comfort and assurance 1 John 1.3.
with joy.

5. For the place you cite out of Peter to confirm your comparison, let but any
Reader consult 2 Pet. 1.18.
the place, wherein the testimony of the word written and enrolled in the
records of the Prophets is pronounced (...), 2 Pet. 1.19.
more firm and certain, then the immediate voice heard in the Mount; and he
may soon discern, how you mis-apply and abuse Scriptures (a practice too common
with you) to serve your own turn, as your self please.

6. For such grounds of assurance as we plead for, we have express
Scripture, as you cannot deny: of such an immediate voice or enthusiasm as you
seem to plead for, no Scripture produced by you is yet proved to speak:
Scriptures only are to that purpose by you mis-applyed. That which I say of it
at present shall be this only, that that voice that shall inwardly speak peace
to a soul, where those marks of faith, repentance, self-denial, and obedience
are not found, may undoubtedly be avowed to be no voice of Christ, nor
testimony of his spirit, (for the Spirit of God cannot cross it self) but
either some vain and groundless suggestion of a man's own corrupt heart, or a
mere delusion of the Prince of darkness, transforming himself into the Prince
of light, the Lord Jesus.

Mean while Sir, consider, I beseech you, seriously, and weigh well what you
do; you beat men off from those grounds and assurances which Gods word holds
out to them; and in room thereof, you propound either some devices of your own,
as that Christ has repented and believed for them, which they cannot admit,
because they find no footing for them in Gods word; or some extraordinary and
immediate voices, or what else you please to term them; which, tho being true
believers, and wel-grounded in the faith, yet it may be they never had, nor
dare to expect. Now whether this be not a puzzling way indeed, let others
decide.

From hence making a long jump, or an almond leap, and skipping over all that
you find objected against that your most unreasonable motion of not taking any
trial of faith at all, and the branding of it as above: you light at length on
a by-passage in the Animadversion on your tenth Assertion; forbearing to
trouble your self further, as your wisest course was, with the exceptions
taken to the main matter: which yet is the chief principle and groundwork of
almost your whole book.

The passage together with the occasion of it is this: Mr. S. blames us Treat.
p. 27, 29.
for propounding the promises of the Gospel to men with conditions of
repentance, sorrow for sin, etc. as so clogging them with conditions and
q^lfications, that because they are things they cannot do, in stead of drawing
a soul to Christ, we put it further off from him.

Now to return the reproof upon him, Ans. p. 24.
I tell him, that he may as well be said to do the same, when he propounds
them so clogged with conditions of receiving, taking, and believing on; unless
he dare say, that it is an easier matter to believe, then to repent.

Whereunto Mr. S. returns us this answer:

1. Repl. p. 14. Sect. 8.
I preach not receiving as a condition, as you do repenting.

But Sir, your precise words are these: Treat. p. 30.
The way of coming by a right, or purchasing an interest in this righteousness
or salvation wrought by Christ, it is held forth without price or work, only
for taking, and receiving, and believing in.

Where, to omit that you say more then we dare do, in ascribing a purchasing
power unto faith; whether these words imply not as much, if not more then a
bare condition amounts unto, let any man that has not utterly lost his wits,
judge. We attribute nothing near so much to repentance, as concerning faith
these words import.

2. Repl. ibid.
I preach Christ the Power, and Life, and Spirit, that both stands, and knocks,
and yet opens the door to himself.

Sir, we preach as much in this kind as you here mention, and as much as you
do, if you preach no more then Christ himself does in his word: Nor does this
or any other part of sound doctrine, concerning Gods work in the act of
conversion, either take away, or contradict those other parcels of Scripture,
wherein upon such conditions part in Christ is propounded. Nor is any man to be
blamed for the pressing of the one, any more then to be taxed for preaching of
the other. You might as well pick a quarrel to Peter for his Acts 2. and 3.
two first Sermons, and with Paul for his whole discourse of justification by
faith, in the third, fourth, and fifth chapters of his Epistle to the Romans,
as to any of us in this regard.

3. Repl. Ibid.
I preach not receiving as a gift, or condition given or begun for Christ: but
Christ working all in the soul, and the soul working up to Christ by a power
from himself.

Sir, you prate and vaunt very much of your preaching: But Sir, compare what
you say you preach, and what we present you with from your self in print; and
see how well they sort together. For as for Christ's working all in the soul,
you have been answered more then once.

4. Repl. Ibid.
If you would preach repentance and obedience as no^ either preceding or
previous dispositions, we should agree better in the pulpit, then we do in
the press.

If we preach otherwise then the word of God warrants us, reprove us out of
it: Otherwise Sir, blame us not, tho we agree not with you, either in pulpit,
or in press.

In the next place, taking a new leap, you pass over all that was Ans. p. 25.
excepted against your parallelling of the promises of salvation by Christ,
with the covenant made with Noah: and to the result of your Assertions, and
sum of your Divinity thence extracted; to wit, that Ans. Ibid.
The promises of the Gospel belong to all sinners without exception: and that
all are therefore bound to believe the said promises, being not conditional,
but absolute; even as absolute as the promise to Noah, of never drowning the
world again: Nor is any man to qestion his faith, or what ground he has for
such his belief. From whence it necessarily follows, that men may be saved,
whether they believe or no, repent or no; as from that concerning the promise
to Noah, and other your Assertions there related, is inevitably inferred. To
the last branch, I say, of this, to wit, That men may be saved whether they
repent or no, believe or not: silencing the whole residue, you thus reply;

1. Repl. p. 14. Sect. 9.
Should I say to you, The sum of your Divinity is this, That faith, and
repentance, and obedience are helps with Christ, and conditions with Christ to
man's salvation; and that salvation is not free, but conditional; the covenant
of grace is as it were a covenant of works: Should I do well in this to upbraid
you, and those of your way?

Sir, If you should upbraid us with ought that we teach not, or does not
necessarily flow from ought that we teach, you should wrong us, as in part
here you do: Concerning which, and your doctrine herein, enough already has
been said, for the clearing both of us and it.

But Sir, there is nothing here charged on you, but what either in express
terms you deliver, or of necessity follows from what you affirm.

2. Reply p. 15:
Say not then, that I think men may be saved that never repent nor believe.

Sir, what you think, I know not; and it may be you scarce know your self what
you think or would have, you seem to be of so many minds. But what you have
written and taught, both you and we know: and if you think otherwise, as you
here say, why take you so much pains to possess your Reader with such
principles, as (...). Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. S. (...). Plut. ad Golot.
being admitted, do necessarily infer as much as is here avowed? Yea, why do
you not clear your self hereof, by showing that such things do not follow from
the grounds by you laid, and by removal of the Arguments, whereby the same is
evidently evinced? Mean while, you must give us leave to say what we see, and
to relate what we read.

And to meet with that your unjust and groundless charge, wherein you do so
passionately expostulate with us, as if some apparent wrong had been offered
you and the rest of your crew;

Repl. Ibid.
Why do you set up and counterfeit opinions, and then engrave our names upon
them?

Sir, 1. Show what the opinions are that are by me fathered on any of you,
that have not been proved to have been taught by them whom I have therewith
charged. But you are like (...). Lucian. de Gymn.
slippery eels the most of you: (...). Athanas. de Arian. in Synod. Nicen.
defens.
one while you stoutly avow your erroneous conceits, where you misdoubt no
opposition or discussion of them. Another while you cry out that you are of an
other mind, and wrong is done you in them; not sticking to report that you have
made the same manifest, by repair to those, and giving satisfaction to them,
who were never once in that kind spoken with: And otherwhile pretending to be
altered in judgment, and otherwise now minded then formerly they were; when as
yet, where you find opportunity, you are in effect still venting again your
former opinions; sometime indeed more covertly, and sometime more openly, as
you suppose you may do with most safety: whereof diverse instances might be
given.

But Sir, 2. For your self, no opinion is here set up, with your name engraven
on it, but what comes out of your own forge, what was minted by your self, and
has received its impression fron the mould of your own maxims. For to omit,
what besides in mine Animadversions does inevitably evince it, If the promise
of life and salvation in the Gospel, be as absolute, and as free from any
condition on man's part, as the promise made to Noah for never destroying the
world by water again: then a man may as well attain life and salvation without
faith and repentance by virtue of the one, as safety from destruction through
such a general deluge by the other. But the former you say: and the later
necessarily thence follows, unless Logik be lost.

Do not you tell me therefore, that Repl. Ibid.
you could so piece up my book, if you would be unfaithful, as to make me
appear as great an heretic as any whom I thus fancy.

1. Talk not too much of your faithfulness, Sir; how unfaithful you have
been in relating my sayings has more then once been manifestly made to appear.

2. But here is no unfaithful dealing at all with you, here is nothing wrung
from your assertions, but what lay couched in them, and flows freely and
naturally, without force or torture from them. If otherwise, why make you it
not to appear?

3. If you can by like due course of Argument draw such rotten stuff from
ought of mine, I crave no favor from you; do your worst: and I shall tell you
beforehand, (...). M^th. apud Epiphan. Haer. 64. (...). Mar. Imp. l. 6. Sect.
21.
that if you charge me justly with ough in them, and convince me of it, I will
thank you for it, and recall it. For Sir, I am not herein so obstinate, as you
are Concl. p. 17.
hereafter pleased uncharitably to affirm of me. If otherwise, I shall take
leave, whether like you to give it or no, constantly to defend, while God shall
be pleased to affordabilitie, what I deem agreeable to truth.

4. But Sir, give me leave mean while to tell you, that it will be hard for you
to persuade an intelligent and advised reader, that shall peruse your ragged
Reply, that you would not have been forward enough, to have done in this kind
what you could, had you met with matter fit for your purpose in my book; when
he shall observe how you take liberty both in Epist.
the van and in Conclus.
the rear here, to run out impertinently, into other by-matters concerning me,
and some other of my works, that have no reference at all to the business in
hand, but you supposed (tho vainly) might some way asperse me. And there is
little reason to imagine, that you should make such excursions to seek and
fetch in matter of that nature abroad, when you had so much of it so near at
hand, close under your nose, but you were loath (forsooth) to take notice of it,
or to file your fingers with it. Howbeit, I doubt not, but that by such Logic
as you make use of, you may draw heresies enough out of Christ's Sermons, and
Paul's Epistles; whose express doctrine how you have traduced in our teaching,
has abundantly been showed

As for your stivolous flourishes, concerning Repl. Ibid.
your teaching faith and repentance, not as gifts to procure us God, or his
love, or Christ; but as gifts from Gods love, and fruits of the spirit, given
to such as Christ has suffered for, and are chosen in him: and in that full
revelation, in which they are leaf tin the New Testament; not in that scantling
of doctrine, as they are merely and barely revealed in the history of the
Gospel and Acts of the Apostles, and that because you preach thus, you are all
Antinomians, heretics, men not worthy to live.

1. All this varnish has been washed of again and again: and yet you will be
still glasing over your rotten stuff with it, to conceal the badnesse and
baseness of it from common view; which yet every qick-sighted soul, through
all your colors cast over it, will easily discern.

2. What the opinions are, for which you are justly termed Antinomians, and
which your companions, if they continu yet in what then they professed, were
sometime publicly charged with and stand still convict of, it is well known:
some of them I relate else where Gods eye on his Israel, Preface p. 17, 18.
: and too much of them is found in your book. Those Sir, either clear your
selves of, or make them appear to be consonant to Gods word; and do not abuse
men by telling them idle tales, that you are so termed for preaching this and
that, concealing your unsound wares; for which you are no otherwise deemed,
then as your hideous and uncouth dotages deserve.

As vain and frivolous is your next expostulation where you begin with a
fawning compellation: Repl. Ibid.
Brethren, must ye forbid us to preach, because we follow not with you?
because we preach not the Law as you do, nor faith as you do, nor repentance
as you do, therefore do we not preach them at all?

1. Sir, this your smooth compellation, may justly be suspected, to be but a
Luke 22.48.
Judas his kiss. You cannot sure have so soon forgotten, what mountebanks and
qacksalvers you erst while compared them to; what cheating and cosening
companions you made of them; (not therein unlike the Compassionate Samaritan, a
bird, it seems, of the same feather with you) of kin to, or kind with, such
unfaithful and ill minded Chirurgians Treat. p. 37.
as keep men's wounds open for sinister ends to lengthen their cures; and such
as Ibid. p. 77.
deal out Christ's blood, as the Pope does his pardons. Were they but even now
such abominable beasts? and are they now become your brethren? This was sure no
brotherly course, if you accounted them then your brethren. Or if you desire to
admit them into brotherhood with you, such vile wretches as then you made them;
either (...). Matt. 18.15.
convince them of what you then charged them with, that being convinced of it,
they may repent and reform, and so be made fit for the society of such upright
and faithful dealers as ye profess your selves to be, (for honest and
faithful Chirurgians will refuse to own those that are notoriously known to be
such cheaters as you charge them to be) or if you cannot convince them by
making your charge against them good; confess ingenuously your base calumny,
and ask forgiveness in print, as in print you have wronged them, before God
and the world, in the face of whom you have traduced them. In so doing you may
give some liklyhood of your willingness to embrace them as brethren; and there
will be some hope of acknowledgement and amendment of other oversights with
you, that have been laid open before you, as well in this, as in other of your
works. Till then we shall justly deem, that you little mind or regard, what
you acknowledge them here to be.

2. As to the matter of your expostulation, we forbid you not to preach,
because you follow not with as; or because you preach these things otherwise
then we do. But Sir, it is you that scoff and diride us; and by conseqence
so much as in you lies, inhibit us, for teaching these-things as Christ and his
Apostles taught them; and are justly therefore charged with impiety for
jeering in us, the doctrine expressly delivered by them.

And for what you add, that Repl. Ibid.
you preach them all, as you are persuaded the New Testament will warrant you;
and as you make Christ to be the power of all, and fullness of all, and may
exalt him whom God has exalted.

1. you are so far from preaching them as necessary duties required on our
part, as Christ in the New Testament, and the Spirit of Christ by the Apostles
did (nor could they contradict themselves by ought, that they preached further,
either before or after:) that you scoff at us for so pressing them: yea, as
has abundantly been showed, you preach and print, that without them men may
have part in Christ, and without them consequently be saved by Christ

2. And for all your vain boasting and vaunting so much of what, or in what
manner you preach, as if that would serve to wash off all your other filth; it
may discover your vanity, but it covers not, much less cures your impiety.
It is no more then any sect, tho maintaining things never so v^le and
abominable, is not wont to do. Sir, crake not to us thus of your preaching; but
return answer directly to the crimes and erroneous assertions wherewith you are
charged; refute the exceptions taken to them, and remove the arguments brought
against them, and then you have done somewhat. Till then you must justly look
to lie under the guilt and imputation of either, as a party, that being
charged with some treason, or felony, shall in steed of answering to his
indictment, run out into discourses, of what good service he has sometime done
to the State, or what good offices to others. But these things in your reply
you have warily shunned; and may well therefore be deemed to have replied as
good as just nothing, notwithstanding all the noise you have made to no
purpose; as those at the bar are said Non est hoc respondere, qod est non
tacere: Aug. ad Gaud. l. 3. c. 1.
to stand mute, when they decline a legal trial, tho they talk at large
never so much otherwise

Lastly for your closing wish, that Repl. Ibid.
we and all that here you, were almost, and altogether as you are, except in
reproaches.

If your meaning be, to have them all Antinomians, and so principled as the
Antinomian tenants import; howsoever you may much desire it out of a selfish
and sinister respect, to enlarge your faction by multitudes added to your
party; wherein the worst and wickedest that are, will easily concur with you:
it were to wish the poisoning of millions of souls with pestiferous and
pernicious opinions; tending directly to beat them off from all trouble or
sorrow for sin; or craving pardon of any sin at Gods hands; or fearing to commit
any the most horrible and hideous sin, in regard of Gods either fight of it in
them, or displeasure for it with them; or making any qestion of the truth of
their faith, if they be but more or less persuaded that Christ loves them; or
making the least doubt, but that God loves them and likes them as well, when
they cheat, and cozen, and eqivocate, and lie, and swear, and forswear, as when
they deal truly and justly. Nor Sir, are these forged calumnies, but
well-grounded charges; such as have in part been made good here, and are
further Preface to Gods ey^ on his Israel.
elsewhere, against those whom here you profess to take part with.

As for reproaches; your exception of it is idle: for either they must not be
like you and yours, for such principles as these, and much less for such
composure of mind, and practice of life as is suitable thereunto, if they will
not minister matter of just reproach: or if they would keep free from just
reproach, they must waiv your principles, and such practices much more, as they
either exact of them, or encourage them unto, and too many, to their worthily
deserved reproach, have exhibited the fruits and effects of already.

Hitherto Sir, your Reply reaches; such as we have seen: many words besides
the matter, little to the purpose: short enough, because it falls short of
reaching what it should have been returned unto: and yet (...), Philem. apud
Stobaen.
too long, because it detaineth and takes up your Reader with much impertinent
discourse: which I shall impute either to your known guilt, which you are
unwilling to acknowledge; or to your fixed resolution of abandoning all Logic,
which you are unwilling to revoke.

Your Conclusion follows, patched up of unsuitable, and much of it likewise
impertinent pieces, loosely put together.

1. You tell your Reader, that Conclus. p. 16.
from page 29. to the last, (some 14 or 15 pages) my replies all amount not to
any thing of substance, but of qarelsom^ and humourous exceptions.

An easy way indeed of reply, as you term this: but whether there be not there
some store of such matter as concerned you to answer, and to clear your self
of, those that read it impartially will as easily espy.

Had I said the like of your whole Reply, from the first to the last, and so
left it; those that shall seriously survey and weigh this Rejoinder, will
peradventure deem, that I had neither spoken nor done much amiss. Tho those of
your own party, it is not unlikely, would have been extolling your work, and
have given out, that it was unanswerable. But Sir, your Reply here I have not
so either put off, or posted over. I have traced and pursued you, not from page
to page only; but from line to line, even through all your idle and
extravagant excursions. But I find you here no other then I observe you to be
in your Replies upon, and Answers unto others, both annexed to this, and
elsewhere. To make up somewhat that may rise a little higher then the common
appellation of a Pamphlet, (a term that you much stomach) you entertain your
Reader with some impertinent discourses of by-matters; tending mostly, under
specious pretenses of Love, Peace, and Unity, to plead for a toleration of all
abominable opinions, and liberty for every one in matter of religion, to
profess, vent, and practice what he please, without check or control by
censure, either Ecclesiastical or Civil. What else means Reasons for etc.
Sect. 4.
several spirits, consciences, opinions, judgments, without limitation or
exception of any? But what you return Answer to, or reply upon, that you make
very short work of: here a snatch, and there a snatch, Qod canis in Nilo,
bibit, and fugit. Constat enim in regionibus illis canes raptu crocodilorum
exterritos currere and bibere. Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 2. De hoc Aelian. l. 1. c.
4. Plin. l. 8. c. 40.
as the Egyptian dog, lapping in Nilus, and as Antonie in his flight, after his
discomfiture by Augustus. Letter to Mr. Ley, p. 3. After-reckon. p. 7.
Seventeen sheets posted over in a sheet and an half: Repl p. 9. See Rejoinder.
whole pages in a line and an half: Answ. to Mr. Edwards, and After-reckoner.
two large books in little more then two pages: forty five pages here in
seventeen: and yet by-matters sometime in the way plentifully enough
prosecuted; and additionals prefixed, to detain and take up the Reader, that
your failings in the matter that concerns you may the less be looked after;
and your dealing haltingly and by halvs, or by snips and shreds rather, the
less regarded. Yet in the Front of your writings you pretend and promise to do
great matters; but in the works themselves there is so little perf^rmed of what
is looked for, that the old saying may not unfitly be applied unto them, being
verified in them, Plus habet rubium qam nigrum.
There is more in the Title then in the Text.

2. In stead of what you should have done, you tell me Conclus. Ibid.
what I might have done, Indeed, I suppose, you would rather have had me done
any thing, then have meddled with the ulcerous sores of your book. But Sir, you
are not to cut me out my work. And for the Argument you would here have put
me upon, such an one as those of your strain everywhere condemn and cry out
against, I have somewhat largely Meditation on Psalm. 97.11. in Signs of
sincerity.
done elsewhere already; and that (I bless God for it) with some good
success, as I understand from those, who having made use of it, profess to
have received much comfort thereby.

3. Yet to quit me of that labor, (in way of kindness no doubt) you tell
me, that Conclus. Ibid.
I say of my self, (how becoming such a one, you leave) that I am an old Steed
that neighs, and prances, but is past service; so as you must take this of mine
age and infirmity, as a fuller answer, or supplement of what I have failed in
against you.

True It is, Sir, in regard of mine age, being now upon seventy two complete,
and infirmity by a late sore sickness accrewing, having never been of much
strength, and finding my natural abilities, as well inward as outward, (
(...). Aristot. Physiogn. cap. 4. (...). Ibid. cap. 1. Animus, languente
corpore, nec membris, nec sensibus uti potest: Cicer. de Divin. Animo qi
aegrotat, videmus corpore hunc signum dare: Tum doloribus confectum corpus
animo obsistere: Lucil. lib. 26.
the one usually suffering with the other) memory especially, much impaired; I
am willing rather to set others of younger years, fresher parts, and better
endowments, on work, to prosecute the discovery and discomfiture of these
monsters, which the Sectaries of these our times daily produce, and to
undertake some further and larger survey of your Treatise, which, but upon
occasion of being called in by you to attest for you, I had not at all taken
notice of; it may be, had never seen: and do therefore in acknowledging mine
own inability to undertake such an over-burdensome employment, compare my self,
not as he in the Tragic Scene only, but as one of the Greek Fathers, to an
old Steed, who tho past years of such service as the field and fight reqires;
yet by bestirring himself as well as he may, incites others to do that which
himself is not able to do. And this is that which Mr. S. is so much pleased to
play upon, and to make sport with, that he began with it in his Introduction,
and returns now again to it in his Conclusion; as being bare and barren of
better matter, to make up his Reply with, and enforced therefore with renewed
patches to piece it out.

But Sir, neither do I suppose it any uncomely thing, for any Minister of the
Gospel, much broken with age and sickness, to acknowledge himself either well
near, or wholly past some kind of service: Number. 8.24, 25.
God himself was after some term of years content to discharge his Attendants
in the Tabernacle and Temple of some more laborious employments. Nor do I plead
either of these in way of excuse for, or (as you speak; which to me seems
little better then nonsense) as a supplement to what I have failed in against
you: which if in ought I have done, it is your part to show, not barely to say;
but to declare, why I took no further pains with you; but contented my self
with such parcels of your broken wares, as I thought good to deal with at
present. And truly Sir, unless you can better discharge and defend your self
and your Assertions in the things objected and excepted against either, then in
this your Reply hitherto you have done; there will be little need to wade
further into your work: there is folly and unsoundnesse enough discovered in it
already to make it worthily to be abhorred.

4. Howbeit, Concl. Ibid.
two or three things, you say there are (in that rif-raf of so many pages,
which you told us even now had not any matter of substance in them) more
observable then the rest.

But you repented you, it seems, again of what you had said; or you had no
great lust to deal much with any observable matter. For instead of two or
three, you present us (as I remember a great Bellarm. de sac. Euchar. l. 3.
cap. 19.
Cardinal sometime) with a first, without second or third: so that your first
must be such a first, as the Lawyers speak of in some cases; such a first as
Primus est qem nemo praecedit, etiamsi nullus seqatur, Reg. Jur.
none follows; and must therefore go for both first and last: for it is all
you produce.

Conclus. Ib.
First therefore, you say, that I tax you for saying, The marks in the Epistles
of John and James, (where Sir, you leave out Treat. p. 32.
your etc.) are delivered rather as marks for others, then our selves to know
us by. And this, say you, I affirm again; not excluding that other of our
selves, but rather for others. To which purpose you instance 1. in James 2.24,
18, 21. where works, you say, are made a sign rather to others, then our
selves. Which how I Answ. p. 29.
show to be not agreeable to the Apostles main scope, who directs his speech
there to the party, thereby to undeceive him in himself; you pass by, and
return no answer unto. 2. In 1 John 3.14. concerning which passage, how absurd
and senseless it is so to say, how directly contrary, both to the Apostles
scope in that Epistle, and to his express words in that very place, tho the
bare reading of the Text be sufficient to make evident, yet I shall refer my
Reader (to (...) Suid. in Pythag.
avoid needless prolixitie, and unnecessary repetitions) to what I have said
Ans. ubi. supr.
in mine Answer; whereunto there is no one word here replied: And much less to
that of Peter; which ought to come within compass of your and caetera; but you
have no mind at all to take notice of: and that the rather, because with it
this your rather, wherewith you would evade, could have no color, as here also
it has no truth.

And Sir, for what being enforced by evidence of truth, shining forth so
strongly and brightly in your face, that in spite of your teeth it strikes
through your eyelids, tho you close them as fast as you can possibly against
it, you do in a scanty and malignant manner elsewhere Treat. p. 81.
acknowledge; (which also I conceal not, but Ans. p. 27, 28.
give it expressly in your own words) after you have spent all your fleam and
spittle upon it, to bespatter it, and throw so much dirt and filth on the face
of it, to deface and disgrace it; it neither makes amends for your former abuse
of it, nor does it take off ought that is herein charged on you.

And for your pitiful complaint therefore of Concl. Ibid.
my pulling your Treatise in pieces, to make my self work; and then binding it
up again after mine own fashion;

It is so poor, as might (...) Suid. vel Priamo miseranda: Mar. l. 12.
move even a professed adversary to pity you; and shows indeed how inconsistent
your Work is, one part of it with another.

But Sir, I want not work at home; that I should, with (...) Suid. Zenob. Plut.
ad Colot.
the Lydian, go to seek some abroad. much less wanted I any then, when my work
rather wanted me, I being neither fit almost for any work at all, and wanting
workmen for that work, which God had at that time disabled me unto. Nor had I
any reason to undertake that task that then I did, had I not conceived a kind
of necessity in it.

Yet neither have I pulled your book in pieces; nor have I bound it up again
after my fashion. Your book lies by me still entire; bound up in the same
manner as it was brought me at first: only I have made bold to pick out of
it, and lay open some neither sound, nor savoury passages of it, and have
dressed them indeed as they deserved; but representing them no otherwise then
as I found them in the book: the precise words whereof you have not hitherto
showed, that I have any where swarved from; nor suppose I, that I did amiss in
so doing: for neither did I undertake to deal with the whole book, but to give
some taste of what it contained: nor if any thing be sound in it, will that
serve to excuse and justify ought, that is rotten and unsound.

As for Concl. p. 16, 17.
the story of the Lady, what you except against my speech to her, it is already
answered elsewhere, where the proper place of it was, and where all this might
have come in more seasonably, then it does here. But in steed of it, Sir, you
might have done well, not to say over the same things again; but to have
asserted and confirmed by Scripture, that way of assurance, that Treat. p. 84,
85.
you propound as the only Scripture way, and in regard whereof all other
assurances (those that Peter, James and John hold out, not excepted) are
affirmed to be but rotten stuff; to wit, That we are to believe, that Christ
has believed for us; and we have believed in him; that he has repented for
us; and we have repented in him. For this, Sir, being one of your main shores,
yea the only main shore in effect, (your immediate enthusiasm excepted)
erected and set up by you for the support of poor afflicted Spirits, when you
have beaten them off from all other, ought not to have been deserted by you,
where you found it opposed, much less dissembled, and shifted off, and
shuffled, or shoveled away, as a thing not worthy of any notice, among the
rubble and rubbish, wherein you say, there is nothing of any substance. And the
truth is, I am therein of the same mind with you, if you think as you speak, as
concerning this particular, that it is a mere shadow without substance; and
such therefore as is no more able to afford any true stay, or sound satisfaction
to a wavering soul, or a wearied spirit, then Aesopi fab.
the shadow of the sheeps shoulder that the dog catched at in the water, or
some delineation of the like on the wall, to relieve and refresh an hungry
body. Take heed, Sir, how whilst you dally and delight your self with such
sublimated notions, distilled through the limbeck of your own qaint invention;
you delude Gods people, and cause them, as Jonas spoke, while they Jon. 2.8.
follow lying vanities, to forsake their own mercy; and so attract a greater
guilt, then you are aware of, or at least consider well of at present. But to
what end spend I words, and wast wind unto one, who in plain terms professes,
that should he so sin, yea sin never to much, being a beleiver, (as I doubt not
but he beleives himself to be, especially glorying and vaunting so much as he
does of the glorious light and spirit that he is now possessed of,) he never
looks to be called to any acount for it, and scoffs at those as silly souls
drowned in melancholy, that do ever so imagine?

In the last place a little to ease your stomach, and empty your Jecur pro
fell; cujus vesicula jecori adhaeret: Job 16.13. Lam. 2.11.
liver, you take ocasion at parting to spend, out of your gall, some of your
bitter choler upon me; by demanding of me, Conclus. p. 17.
now I am an old man, (for you are often playing upon mine age) how if I were to
account to you I would gather up my assurance; whether it would be of such a
measure of faith, so much obedience, so much love to the brethern, so much
zeal, prayer, repentance, and all of unqestionable evidence: then you proceed
to qestion me concerning my faillings, when I writ in defense of cards and
dice, and of the common prayer book: then whether my luxuriancy in qotations,
be all out of pure zeal; no selfishnesse, no vain glory; my love to the
Antinomian brethern, without bitterness; my preaching and obedience all out of
love, and not seeking mine own, and making a gain of Godliness: all my
fastings and repentance, from true meltings of heart, and sound humiliation, or
because the state called for it, and constrained it: my praying and preaching
not much of self, of invention, of art, of learning, of seeking praise from men.

To all which rabble, Sir, 1. I might in a word return this; that, for ought I
yet know, neither have you any authority herein thus to shrive me, nor I
necessity to return answer unto these your interrogatories.

But yet, 2. That if I were to render account of mine assurance either unto
you, or, any other, I shall assure you, that it should be none of that, that
you propound and commend, as the only Scripture assurance, tho in Scripture no
where extant; to wit, my believing that Christ has believed and repented for
me; until you can give me better assurance for it out of Gods word, then you
hitherto have done.

3. For my grounds of assurance concerning my self, I shall need to profess no
other, then what is common to all true Christians, and for which we have good
warrant of assurance from Gods word; our faith in Christ, who has made
satisfaction to God for our sins, and purchased eternal happiness for us: the
sincerity whereof is approved to us in our conscience, by by such holy graces
as are in the word found to be inseparable attendants of it.

4 We use not to mete out our faith, as drapers do cloth by the eln and the
nail; or to weigh it our, as merchants some wares, by the pound and the stone;
or as wary men do their gold, which they refuse to receive, be it never so
good, if it come never so little short of its allowance; as if the sincerity
of faith, and its acceptance with God depended upon the scantling and the
quantity of it. we know, that (...), Mat. 6.38. and 8.26. and 14.31. and 16.8.
small faith may be sound; and Mark 9.24.
faith weak and mixed with much infidelity, as good gold with much dross, yet
may be sincere. Nor is the weakest faith less efficacious unto justification
then the strongest, no more then a plaster is more or less efficacious in
regard of the strength or feebleness of the hand, wherewith it is applied unto
the sore. The like may be said of other sanctifying graces, such as you here
mention; they are Gods 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.14.
earnests; and an earnest is available for security, not according to the value
or qantitie of the sum given in earnest, but according to the fidelity of the
party we deal with: your qestion therefore concerning so much faith, and so
much of this and that, might very well have been here spared.

5. For my defaults and failings, I may say, of my self, as you of your self,
End of one Controversy, p. 12.
I have indeed many, which you and the world sees not. And I bless God, as for
Cui deputat ille qod dimisit, huic iste deputet qod non commisit, Aug. homil.
23. (...) Demades.
keeping me from many sins, that my corrupt nature might otherwise have carried
me unto; so for keeping those that I may have failed in from the notice of such
as your self. For to what end, Sir, do you here call me to this account
concerning my failings, but to disgrace me, what you could in the eyes of the
world, and to cast shame and reproach thereby upon me? and what think you, Sir,
have you gained thereby with any modest, prudent and intelligent reader? as
much, surely, as by your frequent vaunting and vain boastings of your self in
your book; the note of an extrem insolent and arrogant spirit by the one, and
of a no less spiteful and malevolent disposition by the other. So that the
(...) Marc. Imp. l. 9. S^ct 4. (...) Chrysip. de justit. (...) Dio orat. 74.
(...) Clem. Paed. l 2. c. 10. (...) Simocat. Epist. 40.
wrong will in fine redound, I doubt not, to your self; and your Malitia ipsa
maximam partem veneni sui bibit: Attalus, Sen. Epist 81.
malignitie, as he sometime said, take in again, and drink up the greatest part
of its own poison.

For your self, I list not to make enquiry into your life. To what end were it?
or (...) Marc. ubi supr. (...) Idem l. 4. Sect. 26. (...) Idem lib. 12. Sect.
26. (...) Ibid. lib. 9. Sect. 38.
what is it to me what you either are, or have been? although there be, it seems,
some reports abroad concerning you of some things that sound not well; which
wether true or false, I take no notice of, as not at all concerning me: yet
such as true or false, coming to your ear, I should in likelihood have heard of
on both ears again from you.

6. But Sir, I am glad, that one so spitefully minded, as you have manifested
your self here to be, could take up no worse matter to cast in my dish, then
you were able (for good will, it appears, you wanted not) here to do. For the
truth is, you bark and snail indeed; and bite you would, but you cannot: you
will Genuinum fregit in illis: Pers. Sat. 1. Vbi tamen Duza legit, Julis.
break your fangs, Sir, ere you will be able to enter, where you have
endeavored to fasten them.

The failings you charge me with are two only, they are drawn into a short
and narrow sum.

The former, which I was told of once before, that I writ in the behalf of
Cards and Dice. Sir, no otherwise in the behalf of them, then in the behalf of
any other lawful game lawfully used: nor more in behalf of a Lot used in them,
then of the same used about any other light affair, either in sport, as for
mating men at bowls, or for moving first at Chess; or out of it, as drawing
cutts for the partition or assignement of some trifle: For that is all that my
writing aims at, that it is not the use of a lot in them, that makes them, or
any other wherein the same is used, unlawful. Wherein Sir, (...). Marc.
Imperat. lib. 5. Sect. 22. and 28. l. 9. Sect. 11. and l. 10. Sect. 4. and l.
11. Sect. 13.
if I have failed, do you show me my failing; or else Reprehensores non audio;
seqor magistros: Hieron. apolog. de Jovin.
forbear to reprove me for, or reproach me with that, which you cannot prove
to be a fault.

The later is my writing in the behalf of the book of Common Prayer. Sir, Where
saw you that writing? or who told you of it? What writing is it? or how far
forth in that writing have I written in behalf of it. Sir, when you produce
it, I shall know what to say to it. It is some Treatise or other, sure, that
slipped from me in my sleep: for, of any such Work of mine abroad, is more then
I am aware. But, it seems, you were driven to some streits, when for want of
other matter, you were fain to be faining somewhat to object to me as a
failing. So that here, Sir, you have engaged your self to a twofold task;
first, to prove that I have written in defense of the book of Common Prayer:
and secondly, that I have failed if I had so done, in so doing: neither of
which, I suppose, you will easily be a^le to make good.

7. But Sir, suppose I had failed in both these, or twice as many things more
as these, as in many more then so, I know I have: neither were that sufficient
to weaken my assurance, even gathered from those grounds that by the Apostles
are given us, and which you purposely here oppose; nor to argue the insincerity
and unsoundnesse of my faith. For the same Apostle who tells us, that Jam.
3.2. Impingimus ait, non impingitis; nec in uno, sed in multis: nec multos sed
omnes impingere dixit: Aug. Ep. 29. Non dixit, offenditis, sed, offendimus,
inqi^: and in maltis praemisit, omnes su^junxit, Beda.
in many things we sin, or slip all: does withal inform us, that a true
Christian, notwithstanding these many slips, may have the sincerity of his
faith and profession justified even by his works, in the eyes both of God and
man. And that I take to be the genuine sense of James in that place, and the
right way of reconciling Paul and James in that argument, the one with the
other. The case or cause in qestion that they deal with, is diverse. In Paul the
case is concerning sin in general, whether a man be a sinner or no: and if
that be the qestion, Romans 3.23, 24, 25.
he cannot be justified but by faith only, resting on the blood of Christ, and
pleading that in way of full satisfaction to God for his sin. In James the case
is concerning a particular sin, to wit, hypocrisy, or counterfeit faith, and
counterfeit profession, whether a man be (...), 1 Cor. 9 27. 2 Cor. 13.5. cui
opponitur (...), 1 Timothy 1.5. and 2 Timothy 1.5.
a counterfeit Christian or no: and where that is the qestion, he that is
unjustly so charged, may Jam. 2.24.
by his works be justified in the eyes both of God and man. To which purpose
makes that of a learned Author, Fides justificat hominem: opera justificant
fidem: Zanc.
Faith justifies the man; works justify his faith. Thus, to omit Romans 4.1, 3.
Heb. 11.17. Jam. 2.23. Genesis 22.12.
Abraham's example, which both of them instance in; David, tho conscious of
Psalm. 19.12. and 40.12. and 51.5. and 149.2.
many sins to himself; yet Psa. 7.3, 4, 8. and 26.1. and 18.22, 23.
for his sincerity dare appeal unto God, and offer himself to be tried for it
by his works and his ways. And the like might be said of Job 9.2, 3.15, 21. and
19.25. with cha^ 13.16. and 23.10, 12. and 27.5, 6. and 31.
Job, and of other of the faithful; were it seasonable here to expatiate into
discourses of this kind. It would little therefore avail you, tho I should
plead guilty in all wherewith you here charge me, to beat me off thereby from
mine assurance; unless you could prove these failings to be Deuteronomy. 32.5.
such blots or bloches as are inconsistent with sincerity.

8. From these failings wherewith you thought you had me on the hip, you pass
on to such corruptions as might adhere to me in my works and writings, in my
preachings and fastings, and other like employments. And truly, Sir, I shall
freely confess unto you, since you will needs be my ghostly father, as they
use to speak, that I find and feel to my hearts grief, many more corruptions
accompanying me in all my performances, then any one beside my self is able to
espy.

But Sir, if it should be demanded of you, for what cause or end you were
pleased to make up this long Catalogue, and to pitch upon most of those
particulars, I doubt your heart would tell you, that it was not to shrive me
alone; but to be girding at, and traducing of those, against whom with rancor
you swell almost till you burst, and upon all occasions therefore are still
venting your gall.

For to give a little touch at least upon each of them:

1. As concerning my luxuriancy in qotations: which you had once before a fling
at; and which The end of one controversy, p. 7.
you twit Mr. Ley with: your qestion is so frivolous, whether it be all out of
pure zeal, that it is unworthy any answer: It is a most ridiculous (...). Marc.
Imp. l. 9. cap. 31.
semblance of affected sagenesse and severity, to expect or reqire zeal (if you
understand what zeal means) and pure zeal, in every qotation of an Author, or
passage of a discourse, tho in Divinity; and a mere frothie frump therefore to
object as a fault, the absence of ought there, where it is neither needful,
nor suitable.

2. For my bitterness against the Antinomians, wherewith my love to the
brethren you imply to be tainted. Good Sir, give me leave to mind you, or thie
Reader at least, a little of your great and palpable partiality. It is not so
long since the Ministers by the call and command of authority met and siting at
Westminster were styled by Mr. S. Epist. Dedic. prefixed to Animadvers. on M.
Fullers Sermon.
An Assembly of most sacred and reverend Divines, for the reformation of the
Church, convened by the Parliamen^. But now since he is fallen of to the
Antinomian party, and is become an Architect of a new Sect, that wants as yet
a peculiar distinguishing name, (for the most of those that are of that note
and notice, as to have gained any special denomination, he disclaims and In a
discourse prefixed before his Smoke.
excepts against) and he perceives that the frame of government commended by
them to the Parliament, is adverse to his idol of immunitie and impunitie for
all sorts of sectaries; now that most sacred and reverend Assembly, are with
Mr. S. like Frontispiece of An end of one Controversy. See After-reckon. p. 4.
that confused Assembly at Ephesus, Act. 19.32.
raised by Demetrius and his fellow crafts men, for the support of their trade,
whereof some said one thing, and some another, and the more part knew not for
what they were come together. Thus is the Assembly turned and transformed, as
Master S. his weathercock turns to and fro. Now Sir, just in the same manner
you deal with Master G. For while, it seems, you conceived some hope of
gaining him to your side, at least so far forth to win and work on him, as to
render him somewhat favorable and inclinable thereunto, by faining him one,
that acknowledged no great difference between us and you; while this I say,
lasted, Master G. was one of those Treat. p. 210.
men of learning and judgment, that do not cry out Antinomianism on free grace
or free justification, as others do. But since he has begun to touch your free
hold, and to deal a little more freely with your work; and that hope, it seems,
is utterly qasht; now is Mr. G. become a Repl. page 2^
froward old man; and one that may justly come under censure for his
bitterness against the Antinomians his brethren. and yet all the bitterness I
stand charged with, must be out of that book, concerning my carriage, wherein
Mr. S. himself was pleased formerly to afford me this testimony, sufficient, I
hope, if his certificate may serve, to discharge me of this guilt. Nor is it an
argument of an embittered Spirit, to discover the vileness and perniciousnesse
of such Opinions, as persons either of corrupt judgment, or bad conscience, or
both, endeavor to taint and poison the souls of Gods people with.

3. What your next interrogatorie tends to, of seeking mine own things in
preaching and obeying, and making again of godliness, he that has but half an
eye, yet may easily discrie. This you would cast as an aspersion, not upon me
alone, but upon our whole Ministry, as Reas. for Unity, 13. Sec. 5.
elsewhere, that receive and are sustained by such maintenance as the Laws of
the land have allotted us. And it must be returned back unto you as a base
calumny, until you are able to see into men's hearts.

4. Concerning our fastings and repentance; they are such themes indeed, as
those of your way cannot endure to hear of: and it is not unlikely, but they
could very well be content, to have all exhortations to, or injunctions of
repentance, razed out of the New Testament; as well as See Gods eye, Pref. p.
18.
that petition for remission of sins, out of the Lords prayer. For as for
Fasts, it is well known what some of them have been convinced to have taught;
to wit, that In Star Chamber, before the Commit of the House of Commons; by
them reported to the House.
There ought to be no Fasting days under the Gospel. Nor ought believers to
afflict their souls; no, not in a day of humiliation. that, To fast in
obedience to civil commands of men, is to be servants of men. And your aim,
Sir, here is apparent enough, to aspers and traduce our monthly fasts by
authority enjoined. But the impresse of authority commanding us to convene, is
not of that nature, that it must needs either imprint such a stamp of impiety
and profaneness upon our hearts, or so damp all gracious affections and
dispositions in our souls, that we should thereby be disabled to the
performance of that duty with true meltings of heart and sound humiliation: no
more then it was presumed or deemed so to do, in those solemn fasts, recorded
in the word, that were 2 Chr. 20.3. Joel 2.15, 16.
called and commanded by religious Kings, yea and some also John 3.7.
scarce such. And I marveil why you let slip the observation of the Sabbath, by
authority enjoined: which those of your way begin also to disclaim, affirming,
that Qomodo Diogenes, (...) Plut. de Tranq. Vel potius ut Theocr. Idyl. 14.
(...).
every day, with them is a Sabbath.

5. For your last, of invention, and art, and learning, (under which head also,
I hope, that heathenish piece of Logik comes, which your soul so much abhorres)
used in preaching and praying: any one, that is but lightly acqainted with the
humors of the times, may easily discern the drift of it; to comply with those
that cry down all necessity and use of any learning; and to help to bear up and
bear out the rude rapsodies of those that from the loom-work, or the
cutting-bord, or the washing ball, and the like, stepping up into the pulpit,
and supposing it enough to make there a great noise, throw out boldly what
comes next to hand with them, making prayers and sermons without head or foot.

9. But to pass from your not professed aims, tho to any eye apparent and
transparent enough, through the choice of such matter, as you picked out, to
instance in and insist on: and to come to that, which you pretend, and would
seem, only to drive at, that upon due consideration, Concl. Ibid.
there would be found so much of self, and hypocrisy, and vanity, and flesh,
and corruption in all those our performances, that all would prove unprofitable.

1. It is not denied that even the best-performances of the very best of Gods
servants are more or less tainted with sin, some with a slighter stain, some
with a deeper dye. Paul himself, that Act. 9.15.
choice vessel of grace, found within himself, the flesh and the spirit so
intermingled, that Romans 7.21, -- 23.
nothing came with him from the one, but it still received some light tincture
at least from the other: yea, that which was sometime spoken by the Prophet
Esaias, tho I suppose De sensu genuino videantur Luther, Calvinus, and Muscul. in
loc. and conferatur cum Mic. 7.4.
the genuine meaning of the place to be other; to wit, that Isa. 64.6.
All our righteousnesses are as a menstruous cloth: yet may truly be affirmed
of all even the good actions of the godly: and Orig. in Romans 3. Hieron. in Isa.
August. nom. soliloq. cap. 28. Greg. in Job. l. 21. c. 15. Hugo in Job. 9.30.
Bern. de verb. Isa. 5. and alibi saepe. Perald. sum. tract. 6. Dionys. in Psalm.
132. Ferus in Matthew. 12. and alibi. Oecolamp. Buleng. Alii in loc. Luther.
assert. art. 31. Perkins Reform. Cath. Abbots Defen. Chamier. Panstr. tom. 3.
lib. 11. cap. 18. Cajet. in 2 Cor. 5. Pigh. de fide and justif. Morus Apol. pro
Erasm. Alii.
so not a few, as well Papists at Protestants, old as new Writers do either
expound it, or apply it. Nor is it denied, but that many, yea the best of Gods
Saints, have had their failings, and some of them grievous ones; of other
manner, then any of those by Mr. S. here mentioned.

2. It is apparent, that notwithstanding these, either defects, or defaults,
yet the Holy Ghost has pronounced them to be 1 King. 3.6. and 9.4. and 15.11,
14. 2 Chr. 15.17.
upright-hearted and Luke 1 16.
righteous in Gods sight: and that they have hereupon assured themselves of
Psalm. 18.20, 24.
being in favor with God; and been so far forth thereby emboldened, tho in
submisse and humble manner, to Job 23.10.12.
plead the sincerity and integrity of their heart and life unto God; and both
Isa. 38.3. Psalm. 86.2. and 119.94.
to ask, and Nehem. 13.14, 22, 31.
to expect favor, and mercy, and goodness from him in that regard.

3. Your main drift herein (and that not concealed, but professedly held forth)
is, in plain terms, impious. For it is (as has already in part also been
showed) directly to contradict the Apostle John, and to make him a liar: for
he tells us, that hereby we may know and have assurance, that we are in the
state of grace and life; 1 John 1.7.
if we walk in light, Chap. 3. 14.
if we love the brethren; Ibid. Ver. 19, 21, 22.
if we do those things that are wel-pleasing unto God. And on the other side,
you tell us, that we cannot hereby know, or have any assurance of it: and what
is this, but in express terms to contradict what he says, and to give the
holy Ghost speaking by him the lie? Or what other end can you pretend that you
propounded to your self in this your prolix and curious sifting and shriving of
Mr. G. but to make this assertion good? And yet, alas, Sir, what is he? a
feeble wretch, (...) Heb. 5.2.
beset one every side with manifold infirmities; a sorry creature, made up of a
multitude of imperfections; one of the meanest in his Lords house, of the most
unserviceable in his Masters family. Why should you pick him out as a pattern,
or an instance, whereby to disprove the Apostle? For what if Mr. G. a man of so
many failings, were not able to make out any good account of his assurances
from such grounds as John there gives; or were found so faulty, that he could
not pass the trial, and attain approbation, by such marks, as he there
propounds: and that Mr. S. here had laid such load of iniquity and hypocrisy
upon him, as must of necessity force him off from his hold. Yet what is that
to the truth of the Apostles doctrine, or the proving of it to be vain, and
fruitless, and useless, and frivolous, and such as no other, tho sincere and
upright, might gather ground of assurance from? To what purpose then is it,
Sir, that you (...), Mat. 1.19. Catamidiare: Spart. in Pio. An Catomidiare, ut
Salm.
bring him thus here on the stage? either it is only to traduce him: and that
is mere malignitie; or else it is to cross the doctrine it self delivered by
the Apostle; and that is gross impiety. Make your choice, Sir, your self, for
whether of the two, you reserved this to the last: and let it then go for an
assay of the rest, if you so please.

10. That all we do, or can do, is unprofitable, either unto the discharge of
the least and lightest of our sins, or to the meriting of ought more or less
at Gods hands, you need not tell us: we are not to learn it from you; nor need
we to light our candle at any of your new waxen tapers for the discovery of
this truth: we had it long since from Matthew. 23.8.
our common Master; that Luke 17.10.
when we have done all that ever we can do, we are unprofitable servants. But
withal we have also from him, that even such Isa. 42.3. Mat. 12.20.
smoking (...). ut Isa. 43.4. Ellychnium, Jun.
weeks, as you jeer at, Treat. p. 171.
that have more smoke then light, he will not qench: and that the very buds and
blossoms of sanctifying grace are Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit; and that the being of them in us, and the
diligent and constant exercise of them with us, are a good 1 John 4.13. and
3.14, 19.
evidence of the state of grace and life: and that true 2 Cor. 7.10.
repentance, and Godly sorrow for sin, are good assurances of the pardon of sin,
and 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. and 5.5.
sure earnests of eternal salvation: and that by these therefore, tho we Job
22.2. and 35.7. Psalm. 16.2.
cannot be profitable unto God; yet we may be profitable, as Tit. 3.8.
unto others, so herein also to our selves.

11. But, Conclus. p. 17.
for your part, you say, you cannot be so uncharitable, but to wish us a better
assurance, then what I and my brethren can find in our own works and
righteousness. For it is not what we approve, but what God approves, is
accepted. Luke 16.9. Gal 6.7, 8. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19.


1. Sir, I and my brethren are much beholden to you for your charity. Which
yet as appears by the fruits of it, is not very fervent toward us: and which
in the very next clause, wherewith you consign all, you bewray some want of it;
when you charge us, with maintaining the truth formerly taught by us, (which
your self cannot but confess to be found in Gods word, and in the Sermons and
Sammaries of Christ and his Apostels) and opposing you and these your newfound
and new forged lights, Concl. Ibid.
out of a lothnesse to loose our reputation, by going out of an old track of
divinity. Tho that indeed would be the readiest way rather, to get reputation
with the multitude in these humorous times; wherein men's appetites are not more
nice then their Jo^ 34 3.
ears, and nothing relisheth with them, but (...).
either new diet, or old diet newly dressed. But whether this be not against
the rules of charity, thus to sit upon the consciences of others, I shall
appeal, not so much to your own conscience, (whose doctrine professedly
teaches not to make conscience of ought in regard of Gods sight and
displeasure) as to the conscience and judgment of any other that understand
and acknowledge what charity and conscience import.

2. Nor unsuitable to this your qick and sharp, tho short censure, is the longer
tail or train it draws after it; the rather, it is not unlikely, drawn out
thus in length, because it goes great with secret insinuations, such as are not
unusual with you (which any intelligent Reader therefore will yet easily
discern) of the glorious excellencies of your illumination by virtue of your
new-lights attained: Wherein you tell us, that Concl. Ibid.
when our spirits shall once begin to be unclothed of forms of darkness,
(which we must conceive your self to be divested of; howsoever we silly souls
remain enwrapt up still in them) and self-righteousnesse; and do 2 Cor. 3 18.
with open face behold the glory of the Lord, (as your self do; we as yet do
not) we will cry out, Isa. 6.5.
Woe is me, I am undone, for I have seen the Lord; which none of us belike, you
and your brethren, to return you your own words, only yet do:) and, Luke 5.8.
Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful creature: and, Matthew. 11.7.
What went you out to see? mine own unrighteousness? or rather, a reed shaken
with the wind? (a not unfit emblem, if your frequent shifting and flittings to
and fro be well weighed, of your self): which long sage admonition, or
premonition rather, wherein like a cunning wizzard, you (...) Lucian.
foretell us what is already done by us, (for there is none of us but
acknowledge as much already as you tell us we will do, when we have attained
to your light; and we are like to be no great gainers therefore by your new
light, if that be all we should get by it.) Whether it discover not some
height of spirit above Christian modesty, and rash censure of others beyond
Christian charity, I leave it likewise unto the consideration of others.

3. For our assurance of our peace made with God, we rest wholly on the merits
and mediation of Jesus Christ, whom by faith we pitch our selves upon, as the
sole procurer and purchaser of it; and we renounce our own righteousness,
which yet we acknowledge to have received from God through Christ, or ought
else in us, as utterly unable to satisfy for the least of our sins, or to
Psalm. 130. and 143.2.
appear at the bar of Gods exact justice. Howbeit, from such graces wherewith
God in any measure has been pleased to endow us, and the workings thereof, as
well outward as inward, we take encouragement (Gods own word affording us good
warrant so to do) thereby further 1 John 1.7. and 4.14.
to assure our souls, that we are of the number of those that are reconciled
to God in Christ, and are thereby Ephesians. 4.30.
sealed up unto life eternal. And whosoever shall charge us with presumption
for so doing, shall withal be enforced to condemn, not only multitudes of
Gods faithful servants, whose practice we find u on record in Scripture as
guilty of the same crime with us; but even the penmen also of Scripture, as
teachers of doctrine tending to presumption, who have taught us so to do. And
yet dare we not be so presumptuous, as to offer to persuade either others or
our selves, that we or they have interest in Christ, tho not repenting of our
sins, but remaining wholly still in them; or that our faith or theirs may be
(...) 1 Timothy 1.5. and 2 Timothy 15.
sound and sincere, tho not accompanied in some measure with other such
spiritual qualifications.

4. It is true, that 2 Cor. 10.18.
not what we approve, but what God approves is accepted. But Sir, we know,
that Psa. 119.108. Isa. 567.
God does approve and accept the weak and unworthy services and sacrifices of
his sincere-hearted servants: and that they are Pro. 15.8, 26. Phil. 4.18. Col.
3.20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. Heb. 13.16.
well-pleasing to him, notwithstanding those manifold defects and taints either
attending them, or adhering to them; they being also, for the guilt of them,
washed away in the blood of our Savior, who has undertaken the discharge as
well of Exodus 28.38.
the iniquities of our spiritual performances, as of Isa. 53.6, 7.
our excesses otherwise: Which yet we d^em that we have just cause to be Romans
7.18, 23, 24.
humbled for; and that as well for the one, as for the other. So that neither
do we rest on the worth of ought that either is in us, or is done by us, which
we know and acknowledge to have much more matter of humiliation mixed with it,
then you can know by us, or can truly therefore tell us of: Nor yet do we in
regard thereof deem our assurance the weaker: since that it is not the qantitie
of it, but the sincerity, not the worth of it, weighed in its own intrinfecall
value, but considered as God^ earnest, and a seal of our portion in Christ,
from whence this our assurance arises. And we shall desire you, if this do not
satisfy you, either concerning us or other faithful, to propound your
captious cavils unto John the Evangelist, and demand of him, why he put us and
other Christians on such a puzeling course of assurance, as by the finenes and
subtility of your sublimated wits, you and those of your way have discovered
that to be, that he has delivered, and directed us and them unto

Lastly, Sir, for a farewell, I shall in friendly manner advise you, to be
hereafter more sparing, then here you have been, in insulting over, and
trampling on the the blindness and darkness of others, least by your new
pretended light you lay open your own folly, in the impotencie and insolency
of your spirit, unto the light and fight of others; men are not usually so
blind in this seeing age, but that they can discry daylight at a little
loop-hole.

Thus having ripped up and uncovered your Reply from the first stich to the fag
end, I may truly say of it, that I have, as I found it, so showed it, to be
such, as one of your Hyperaspistae, or Encomiastae rather pronounces of his
book, whom he opposes; to wit, I.P. his Answer to Mr. Vicars in his Epistle.
a work consisting, the most part of it, of inconclusive notions, having no
more to underprop them, but your own Ipse dixi. And tho I will not be so bold
with you, as he is with his Antagonist; whom he tells, that Ibid.
he cannot imagine him to be yet out of his hornbook in divinity, that
expresses so little Logic in his writings: which blow so unadvisedly given to
his Client, whom he had undertaken not to defend only, but to commend to,
being one that cannot endure to hear of Logic in matter of divinity, how he
will by his Sophistry teach him to ward, I know not, and must leave him
therefore to crave him mercy. Yet I believe your Treatiset to be in some kind
such as he says, Ans. to Mr. V. p. 9. Sect. 3.
to subtle to old men; (those of the Jer. 6.16.
old way, that God by the Prophet advised his people to look after,) whom he
therefore pronounces to have the old man still in them; (which we all, indeed
with Romans 7.17.
the Apostle howsoever it be with these new illuminates, deny not to have more
or less still in us) and to have been infected (which himself belike never
was) with the old leven of outward dispensations, (one of the fairest terms
that these men's black mouths, can afford Gods ordinances, and and the doctrines
and dealings of Gods Prophets and Apostles with his people) and self conceit:
(one of the truest and most conspicuous characters of those of his own way) as
also that Mr. S. spins too fine threads in Divinity; (that which Mr. S.
himself Treat. p. 37.
charge the Legalists with as a fault in them) and that he is too sublime and
spiritual (the term that all your Familisticall, fantastical Novellists, as
well as the old Qui se solos pneumaticos indigetabant, orthodos Psychicos. Nos
agnitio Paracleti, atqe defensio, disjunxit a Psychicis, Tert. ad Prax. c. 1.
Et de Monogam. cap. 1. Nos spirituales merito dici facit agnitio spiritualium
charismatum. Sed Psychicis non recipientibus spiritum, ea qae sum spiritus, non
placent.
Mountanists affect) for those that take all in gross (in those plain terms,
in which Christ and his Apostles preached them) and have not yet attained the
more excellent way; (the new way now revealed, but till now concealed, and in
the sacred writings of former times not to be found) wherein (if you will upon
his own experience, and that is proof, I hope, sufficient, believe him); and
yet, according to his way, we need not stick much at it with him.

Mr. S. Treatise (he says) does so lay down the doctrine of Free Grace in that
manner and with that demonstration of spirit. (that he and his professes) as
no other writing yet extant in print does the like. But I believe withal, that
the Doctrine of Free Grace in the way that it was taught both by Gods Prophets
and Christ's Apostels, is so far from being either cleared or advanced by this
Treatise of his, that it is much obscured aspersed and scandalized thereby: as
has evidently been showed both here and before.

Concerning which, Sir, to make an end at length with you, let the Reader, that
will be pleased to take the pains, to compare mine Answer with this your Reply,
and your Reply with this Rejoinder to it, when he shall perceive what a poor
pittance you have returned ought unto, in regard of what you have wholly let
slip, and how little you have spoken to the purpose, in that whereunto you have
returned ought; judge, whether this were not rather undertaken by you, that you
might seem to have done somewhat, then out of hope that any good fatisfaction
should thereby be given unto any that would advisedly consider of either,
unless those only of your own party. Unto whom I shall only wish more
wisdom then to suffer themselves, forsaking the light and conduct of Gods
saving truth reveiled in his word, to be seduced misled by such false, tho
flairing, lights as may bring them into, and leave them in, those miry qags,
wherein finding no firm footing, nor being able to get out of, they may stick
fast irrecoverably, to their eternal perdition.

FINIS.
Escapes of moment to be amended.
Page 6. lin. 9. read dispatched. p. 8. l. 37. and strongly. p. 13. l. 36. not
material. p. 19. l. 22. seem. l. 29. it in. l. 32. reckoner. p. 25. l.
penult.-tion. p. 28. l. 17. to do. p. 43. l. 24. condition and conditional. p.
61. l. 2. deny this. p. 70. l. 5. anagogicall. l. 29. abominate. p. 77. l. 21.
as well as. p. 78. l. 6. two-hand sword. p 81. l. 22. hands. p. 86. l. 7.
abundance. p. 91. l. 1. ought. l. 4. it like. l. 29. leaft in. p. 93. l. 7.
with us. p. 100. l. 3. you. p. 109. l. 33. put out it. p. 112. l. 23.
unravelled. page 113. lin. 13. and fanta. l. 14. Montanists. l. 21. with him;
Mr. S. etc. p. 114. l. 4. put out only. l. 6. and misled.

In the Margin.
Page 24. lit. m. Sen. page 26. lit. i moraris. p. 63. l. m. Ira. p. 67. lin.
ult. Sen. p. 68. lit. g. aper- ib. mortale lumen. p. 83. l. t. Romans 8. p. 94.
l. a. (...). ib. (...). page 113. l. q. -thodoxos.


