The Divine RIGHT and ORIGINAL OF THE Civil Magistrate From GOD, [As it is
drawn by the Apostle S. Paul in those words, Romans 13.1. There is no Power but
of God: the Powers that be are ordained of God] Illustrated and Vindicated In a
Treatise (chiefly) upon that Text.

WHEREIN The procedure of Political Dominion from God, by his Ordination; The
direct line by which the said Ordination descends from him upon the person of
the Magistrate, And the way of such a persons becoming and claiming thereby to
be the Power in the Text, which is of God, ordained of God, is endeavored truly
and plainly to be laid open.

Written for the service of that eminent Truth, Order, Justice, and Peace which
the said Text, in its genuine sense, holds forth, and supporteth: And for the
dissolving of sundry important Doubts, and mistakes about it.

By Edward Gee Minister of the Gospel at Eccleston in the County Palatine of
Lancaster

Zanchius de Not. Dei lib. 4. cap. 8. quaest. 3. These. 3. Ad verum enim,
legitimum, liberumque dominatum constituendum necessarium est liberum,
absolutumque jus, libera, absolutaque potestas, qua^ Graeci (...) vocant, qua
res quarum dominatu^ quaeris Tuae fiant London, Printed for George Eversden, at
the Maidenhead in Pauls-church-yard, 1658

THE Divine Right and ORIGINAL of the civil MAGISTRATE from God. Illustrated
and Vindicated

By Edward Gee

Sold by Geo: Euersden at ye Maidenhead in St. Paul's Church yard

(...)

2. Sam: 18

2. Sam: 20

engraved title page

THE PREFACE.
THis Treatise (it must be confessed)

To anticipate such unmerited surmises, let me at this threshold advertise the
Reader, that this Treatise handles its subject, held forth in the Title, and
not the persons of any, nor the interests of any. And its subject is a general
truth, or a Scripture-Maxime of perpetual, and commune authority, concernment,
and use.

It is true, every such general verity has its descent to particulars; and
has its consequences, both of obligation, and eviction. But, let every man
take heed how he builds thereupon; that is, what consequences he draws
thence, what particulars he reduces thereto. Such inferences, and such
references are made by the discourse of man; and are variable according to the
ability, or disposition men have to reason. And they all come to this
reckoning. They are either native, genuine, and virtually comprised in the
general axiom; or they are aliene, and but imposed. What is genuine to such an
abstract Truth, or Doctrine it self will own, as it will also the assertors of
it, neither needs the weakest, or lowest avower of it distrust its patronage.
But neither it, nor the hand that holds forth it, and no more stands chargeable
with either deductions from, or reductions to it, which are of others
collection, or effiction.

Such a Scripture canon as this, is like the Sun which scatters its light, and
beams every way, and upon all: and all its rays are ever most sound and pure:
not one stricture of its influx (whatever Astrologers tell us) h^th the least
corrupt, or malignant tincture. If any fetide vapor be either discovered, or
raised thereby, we must not blame the sun for shining; the rise thereof is from
the earth, and the ascent is by its repercussion of the sunbeam, and not from
the sun, by any direct emission. And if the sun-rayes conduce by reflection
either to the detection, or drawing up of any such matter, the earth may fault
it self for the breed of such an exhalation, but thank the sun both for the
said discovery, and extraction.

That the whole discussion of the following book is precisely bounded within
the premised compass, and takes in no more then general truth, either
comprised within the text, or relating to it, I leave the perusal of it to
manifest. And for the intention of the Author, he professes solemnly, as in
the divine presence, and with recognition of his giving an account hereof
before the same, that (exception of indeliberate, and unallowed motions of
self-seeking, partiality, and such other incident to humane nature (as now
depraved) being admitted) the sole special, and immediate aim by him
consented unto, proposed and fixed, to be the clearing up of the important
doctrine of that Text, and in it the satisfaction of conscience: and for more
remote, and general ends, those to be no other but such resultancies of this
labor as all sorts of lookers into this book will confess to wish and approve.

If it come forth after notable revolutions of State have newly been, or while
some Trepidations, or grudgings of distemper, growing upon such occasion, do
remain; the Author could not think the publication for that less seasonable,
or useful And further considers that the holy Apostle Paul lived in a time of
as great Commonwealth differences and changes, nevertheless he had the
confidence, and his prudence directed him to write, and publish the political
assertions, and precepts, among which the Text lies, and is one; and this his
writing not only passed (for any thing I presume appears from antiquity)
without ill construction of either Superiors or Subjects, but doubtless was
very suitable, acceptable, and advantageous to the Christians, for both their
resolution and vindication in the matter it concerns. The like (in its measure)
me thinks should a discourse now be, that medleth no further then with an
enquiry into the sense of his Text, and deals but with the terms of it, and
with the expositions, doubts, and arguments that have been upon it; without the
least application to, or bringing into question, the title unto the warrant of
this Scripture, of any in place of power, or any other person now extant in the
world. This manner of process the Author promises in this Treatise: and does
thereupon expect in some proportion (though with abatement, for the worsenesse
of this age in comparison of the Apostles, and for the far greater disparity of
the persons writing) the like success.

It is certain that when the Apostle composed this Epistle, there had been
lately, and about the same time were diverse contests about sovereignty, and
transversions of Government within the Roman Dominion; some about the whole,
others about some parts, or provinces of it: and concerning them there were
opposite sidings, and dissatisfactions among the people.

There were about, and presently upon the writing of this Scripture several
competitions for the Empire. Galba in Spain is raised up by Julius Vindex
against Nero; and he being confirmed by the Senate, and Nero suppressed,
presently Vitellius is set up against Galba. And after Galbas violent death
Otho is made Emperor at Rome, whilst Vitellius stands up in Germany. Otho
being quickly gone, Vespasian is promoted in Egypt, and Judea; and the
competition betwixt Vitellius and him is prosecuted by the sword in Italy, and
even in the City of Rome (whither this Epistle was sent) and that with
diversity of success vicissitudinarily to both parties. As to particular
Provinces; Vologeses the Parthian takes Armenia from the Romans; thence grew
wars betwixt the invader, and the invaded. In Judea the Jews generally rebel
against the Roman, and set up an Autonomie. In England the Britains seize on
the Roman Colony at Camalodunum (or Maldon in Essex) cut off the Roman
Soldiers, and possess themselves of it. It may be deemed there were
Christians in all these controverted places, and under each of the respective
contestants. It is certain by Scripture there were in Jewry. And to let pass
what Dorotheus his Synopsis tells us of the Apostle Thomas his preaching the
Gospel in Parthia, Media, and Persia; Josephus witnesses the conversion to
Christianity of many in Parthia Joseph. Ant. lib. 18 cap. 12.
; and it is noted out of Augustine that the first Epistle of St. John was
called anciently the Epistle to the Parthians Dr. Hammond in preface to that
Epistle.
.

The Christians that then were at Rome, and in those other places were
concerned either as Soldiers, or Subjects in these commotions, and
counterseisures: and as there is no question but they made this concernment a
matter of conscience, so there is little doubt but they, or some of them,
especially in the beginnings of those several contests, and mutations were
scrupled in conscience which way to take. Our query concerning them is not
which of the Collitigants respectively they were to own and obey as their
Sovereign Magistrate (for I shall not take in hand the interest of particular
persons, to debate the justness of any of their causes, or titles) but, what
standard, rule, or light of Gods word they had to go by, and by which to
determine what to do under the scruple and temptation of contrary demanders of
their subjection and assistance. If anything were delivered to them by this
Apostle, or any other of their instructions that is not in holy writ we have no
record or notice of that: but within the compass of those Scriptures which
were directed to any such Christians in those times there is none (I think it
will be acknowledged) so likely to be written for that use, or to afford
ground, and matter for their guidance therein as this; wherein the Magistrates
authority is not only asserted, but derived, and defined; and as to them, so it
may be to others in any the like case.

Having given this account of the subject,

The great subject of debate, difference, exagitation, and contrivement in the
late Commotions, that which the most stir has been about is the matter of
Authority. Diverse other things, indeed, have (scarce any thing but has) been
in dispute with some, or other. No principle so plain, no right so manifest,
but some have been to stand up in question or contradiction of it. But in all
the controversies that have risen, there is nothing (to my observation) that
has been so universally, really, and continuedly insisted on as this matter of
Power. This has been singled out as the Helena of contention, the bone of
strife, the hall of litigious agitation, and that which men may be noted to
have most generally, cordially, and constantly prosecuted. The Controvertists,
and unquiet spirits in the modern Perturbations, when they have had their short
velitations, their slight skirmishes in other points, they have ordinarily
settled, centred, and joined issue in this subject.

This may be observed by a transient view of the debates in their several
kinds. They have been various both for the manner of managing, and for the
matter concerned. For the manner of managing, some have been military, some
mental; some in the field, others in the closet; some acted by the hand,
others by the head; some by the sword, others by the pen. But in all these
ways, whatsoever has been first started, or begun with, the stairs of
Superiority, and Dignity have been the thronged and beaten rode, the garland of
honor, the common and standing mark which the aims, and altercations of men
have at length fixed upon.

And for the matter concerned, some of the differences have been of a
Religious, others of a Civil importance. Those in Religion have been either
betwixt the Romanists, and the Protestants, or of these latter among themselves.

For Popish controversies, the distinct discussion of the many points of Faith,
and Religion (each whereof had formerly its particular, and exact traverse) is
now reduced in a manner to this as the only or main head, the power of the
Pope, to wit, the prerogatives of his Crown, and Chair, or the universality,
and supremacy of Jurisdiction, and the infallibility of judgment he claims
over the whole world, or over all Christian States and consciences.

In the latter, those of the Protestants among themselves; many uncouth, and
Heterodox tenants, and bickerings about the same, there have been raised,
especially in these Islands: but the thing which (I think) has abidden most
contention (the most both for the multitude, and vehemence of contenders) and
which has been still held up, and disceptations have been continuedly (under
some, or other notion) renewed about it, is the matter of Church Order, and
Ecclesiastical Power. One while the question has referred to the Form of
Government; another while it has been about the Censures in the Church, their
warrant, kinds, or extent; another while about the Maintenance, another while
about the Office and calling of the Ministry.

And for matters Civil, though the oppositions therein were begun upon
several interests, as about Laws, about Property, about Liberty, and about
Magistratical Prerogative, and Power; yet at length this last has taken the
place of all the rest, and set it self up alone. And in the upshot, what have
the cross devisings, and debates of men's heads, and tongues fixed upon? and
about what have their conflicting, and counterworking hands all clasped, but
this rocky Pyramid of worldly power?



In the nature of the thing it self, we may take notice, not only that it is a
matter of humane temporal interest (about which through the earthlinesse of
men, and every ones partiality of judgment, and immoderation of affection to
himself, men are most subject to precipitancy of passion, and dazzling of
reason, and consequently to mutual discord) but that it is that humane
interest which of all others is most controvertible.

It is easy to see that the precepts, and relative duties comprehended in the
fifth Commandment are more then any other of that table subject to diversity
and opposition of judgment, practice and claim. When our Savior would give
an instance of the Pharisees wide, and palpable variation from, and elusion of
the sound sense of the Commandments of God, he made choice to do it in this of
Honor tby Father and thy Mother. Mat. 15.3.


To note the Seminary and spring of this matter a little more particularly.

1. Every humane interest is so much exposed to Controversy as it is of worth,
or concernment real or reputed. Now the duties, and rights of this commandment
have in this respect the preeminency. Thence we may take it to be that they
have the priority of place in the order of the precepts of the second Table;
and deservedly, for the other Commandments of that Table give order about the
adjuncts of man, but this disposes of his person to a certain state, relation,
and personal obligation. The other Commandments respect each some one
interest; this has a supereminent influence upon all, to wit, for their
securement to the proprietors, and the mutual communication of them to others
behoof, by the superintendency of a superior respectively. The other
Commandments provide for the interest of men as single, or several persons,
this projecteth for them by and in society.

2. Another occasion of controversy is the peculiarity, or appropriation of a
thing. What every man is in some proportion a partaker, or capable of (such are
the matters of the other Commandments) is not so exposed to emulation, and
simulty, as what is confined to one, or a few, as is the state of Superiority
in this Commandment. That which in this kind can be owing, and payable only
to one is usually desired, and many times claimed by many. It is observed that
there were thirty competitors once on foot for one, and the same throne, to
wit, that of the Roman Empire, who confounded one another See Matthew. Prideaux
Period 4. Sect. 33. page 205. It was anno Christi 260. in the time of Galienus
the Emperor.
. And I think our age has seen a greater number of aspirers for a narrower
Territory. Now this comes to create both interruption to him that should
receive, and distraction to him that ought to pay duty: when the latter is to
strive, not only with his own loathnesse to part with any honor, gain, or
labor from himself to another, but with the doubts and dangers arising from
contrariety of demandants. In such a case, to avoid wrong to another, and
peril, and scruple to himself, to discern whose the right is, and duly to
render it, how difficult a thing does even he find it whose mind is most
honestly, and impartially disposed: and if this cause such demurs, and
distractions in an upright breast, how much more will it in partial and
self-interested spirits, who are far the greater number?

3. It adds to the controversarinesse of the subject of this Commandment,
that the thing enjoined to be yielded always, or for most part is, that which
is out of the hands of the proprietor, and in the hand of him that is to render
it to him. Honor, we say, is in the honourer, and not in him that is to be
honored. Other Commandments do assert that to a man, that is, or may be
already in his occupation, but this attributes that which one man still has to
receive, another to part with. And besides, much of the return consists not in
the transferring, but in the immanent act of him that yields it; in which kind
of matter there is prone to be on the one part (his that is to receive
advantage, or respect) forwardness, freeness, largeness of expectation, and
claim: on the other (his that is to expend, or part with duty) slowness, delay,
and retentiveness. In the former there is apt to be cavilling, and jealousy:
in the latter a propensness to questioning, and grudging; on both sides an
inclination to arbitrariness in favor of it self: all which are the next
matter, and seed of division, and strife. So much of rise we find for this had
Symptom in the thing it self.

2. But a greater, and stronger reason, or viz a keen, and earnest appetite of
Rule, which of all other desires in man is most common, and predominant. The
incendiaries, and foment of all contentions among men (the Scripture teaches
us) are their lusts. Every man has an armed, and fighting multitude of these
in him ((...)) But the leader of all these lusts; James 4.1.
the commander, chief, and master of them is the desire of command,
chieftainship, and masterdom. Ambition with greatest probability is conceived
to have been the first sin, as well of degenerating man, as of the falling
Angels. This is the Captain, and so the most active and domineering of all
other lusts; not only by virtue of its first entry (as Joab obtained the
Generalship by being first in scaling the fort of the Jebusites;) but from
hence, that man being a rational creature, he would have himself, and others
governed by reason; and being in that faculty corrupt, and prejudicate, he
esteems his own judgment, whatever it be, to be the only right, and sound
reason; and therefore most worthy to take place, and give order to all others.
And moreover, this affection has no little nourishment in him from the sense
of the consequents, or attendants on Superiority, which are honor, and glory,
things which men are generally excessively in love with; and besides, not only
these, but all other things come within the beck, and verge of Government.
Dominion (as was said) according to its proportion, being comprehensive of all
the acquisitions, and possessibles of man; and standing seized of the command
thereof is furnished to be the purveyor, and accommodator of all other lusts:
the which it usually becomes when it is sought, and attained from an inordinate
principle, and has strength to its will.

3. An aitiologicall observation likewise

As first we are forewarned of the more then ordinary breaking forth of such
vicious qualities, as where they prevail do produce this effect, and make it
very rife. The Apostle fortelleth that, in the last days (and if any shall be
latter, these doubtless are of the last) men will be boasters, proud, 2 Timothy
3.2, 4.
disobedient to parents, highminded: and when, not one man only, but men are
so, that is the greater sort, or it is the common complexion and mood of men's
minds, how should it be but contentions (the natural, and immediate issue of
elation, and refractoriness of Spirit) should be very ingruent; and that,
whatever is the object of pride, boasting, immorigerousness to Parents, and
highmindednesse (as, if any thing State dominion is) should be the object of
contention?

Jo. Barclai Euphorm. par. 1.
-- Sedet axe superbo
Infoelix Bellum, motisque accenditur Armis.
Ambition is the sturdy beam, above
The which wars-chariot does sit, and move.
And moving once, the clash of Arms
Beats sparkles out to greater harms.
To this may be put, that the Apostles Peter and Jude, 2 Pet. 3.2, 10, 14. Jude
8, 11.
do both foretell Christians that among them shall be those who will be
despisers of Government, presumptuous, self-willed, that are not afraid to
speak evil of dignities: and that, many shall follow the pernicious ways of
these, and that, they shall beguile unstable souls; and Jude adds to their
character, the gainsaying of Core. Now these two, the ardent affection (even to
jealousy) unto Dominion ordinary in those that are possessed, or candidates of
it, and this rebellious, irreverent, contemptuous, stubborn, and reproachful
humor, and carriage in them who should yield honor and subjection to it,
meeting together, cannot choose but kindle the flames of discord, even to the
height of fury.

As the Holy Ghost predicteth this event in the causes, so does he it in the
effect it self. This, as I understand, he does in the Prophecy of the seven
vials, Rev. 16.10.
which contain the seven last plagues, in which is filled up the wrath of God,
and which is not improbably applied by many Expositors to our days. The fifth
of those Vials is powered out upon the Seat or Throne of the Beast. I cannot
receive their interpretation who understand by the seat of the beast, the City
of Rome: much less can I theirs who take it for a certain form of Church
Government. Among other reasons against the former, which is the more common
Exposition, this is one, that it places the Beast upon that City, as his seat,
whereas the best Expositor, the Text it self contrariwise seats the great
whore, Rev. 17.1, 3, 7, 9, 18.
the woman which it interprets to emblemize that great City which reigns
over the Kings of the earth (and which the consent of Expositors both ancient
and modern, and of these, both Protestant, and Popish interpret to be the City
of Rome) upon the Beast, and makes the Beast to carry her, and the Beasts seven
beads to be seven mountains on which the woman, that great City sits, and
his ten horns to be those Kings over which she reigns. And further, for our
rejection of both the aforesaid Expositions, the Text it self gives us very
plainly, and appositely another application of the seat of the beast. For what
is the Seat or Throne of the Beast, but that upon, or over which he is set, or
placed? But the Angel that first shows, and then explaineth the Vision, and
mystery of the woman, and of the Beast that carries her, and of his seven
heads, and ten horns, says expressly unto John, the waters which thou saw,
where the whore sits (and consequently upon which the beast that carries
her is placed, the ubi where she sits being properly the seat of him that
carries her.) are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, verse. 15.
Nay, which makes this yet clearer, in the visionary description of the great
whore, which precedeth this explanation of the Angel, she is said to sit upon
many waters, verse. 1. so that these many waters (so applied as has been showed
in verse. 15.) are not only the ubi where, but expressly the seat upon which this
woman (this City) sits.

It is further to be observed, that in this Vision three seats are attributed
to her; 1. She sits upon many waters, verse. 1. 2. She sits upon the Beast,
verse. 3. 3. She sits upon seven mountains, signified by the seven heads of that
Beast, verse 9.


It may without either show of contradiction, or much difficulty be conceived
how all this diversity may be accorded. If we take the Angels Exposition of the
woman to be the great City, and that City to be Rome, we may thus apply it to
those three seats. Those seven heads, as they import seven mountains, are the
Natural or Topicall seat, or site of that City, the seat on which it stands,
or is built The Beast, that is, the Dominion, Power, or Sovereignty which that
City possesses, and which bears it up (for by the Beast is commonly
interpreted the Roman Sovereignty, or Empire) is the immediate political seat
of that City. And the many waters, explicated to our hand, to intend peoples,
multitudes, nations, and tongues, are the mediate political seat of that City,
that is, they are the seat of the Beast, or they are the several Communities,
or Republiques which once were all one, and belonged to, and were under the
Dominion of the Roman Empire, possessed by that City. The issue then is, as to
our purpose, the Woman, that great City is immediately seated upon the Beast,
the Roman Empire, and mediately upon the waters, that is, upon those peoples,
and multitudes, etc. once (that is, in the Apostles time) under the power of
that Empire: and the Beast is immediately seated upon those waters, those
people, etc. These then in all likelihood (not to say certainly) are to be
taken to be the seat of the Beast.

Which the more confidently to affirm, the words next following these in the
Narration of this Vial induce me; which are, and his Kingdom was full of
darkness. It can be no otherwise construed but that the Beasts kingdom^, and
his Seat here, should be both one thing: the one being that on which the Vial
is poured out, the other that which is said to be affected by the said pouring
out. Now for the word. Kingdom, it both i^ Scripture, and in ordinary speech,
sometimes signifies authority, or government, and sometimes the people, or
subjects ruled, or the governed. The latter signification can only suit here,
for the former (as was aforeshewed) is meant by the Beast himself. The Kingdom
ruling is the Beast, the Kingdom ruled is the seat of the Beast; this latter
then is the Kingdom here meant, the seat of the Beast, the people governed: and
agreably to this sense sound the words following, these, and they gnawed their
tongues for pain; who can be understood by this relative they, but a plurality,
a multitude, these are the seat of the Beast upon which the Vial is poured out,
his Kingdom which upon that is full of darkness, and those, they, who upon
it, gnaw their tongues for pain.

Some clearness appearing in this point, what is understood by the seat of the
Beast, which is the subject of this Vial, the meaning of the effect which it
has upon this seat (for the observing of which, as pertinent to our purpose, I
make this reflection upon this place) will easily follow. The effect is, that
his Kingdom is (or, the people anciently of the Beasts Empire are) full of
darkness, and they gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of
heaven because of their pains, and their sores, and repent not of their deeds.
This Kingdom-filling darkness may import a delusive obfuscation,
erroneousnesse, giddiness, and dotage, which shall at the time, and in the
place of this Vials pouring forth (and may not its time, and place be the
present?) possess, and prevail over the minds and judgments of men about the
matter of Power and Authority, Civil, in the first place, and Ecclesiastical
consequently, and by way of participation. And this darkness must needs cause
a Chaos of confusion, commotion, and contention. The tongue-gnawing pain, and
that which follows, blaspheming, and impenitency, I interpret of worldly
griefs, and dolours, arising from all sorts of sufferings, and dangers upon
bodies, estates, and other temporal interests; and of conscience-tortures by
deceptions, scruples, and guilt; which the said obscurity will breed unto
people; and which being incumbent on them will (especially in the faeces, the
worse, the more hardened sort of them) boil up unto extreme vexation, and
anguish, yea unto rage, and fury, whence they will break forth into blasphemy
against God, by casting (in their spite, and madness) the blame, and scandal
of all their sufferings, and distempers upon the Gospel, Religion, and
Reformation, and upon the faithful, and zealous friends, and followers of the
same; accusing them of Rebellion, and bringing ruin upon Church, and State;
and charging them as the causes of the public Commotions, and Convulsions,
and of their own private adversities, and agonies flowing from them; which,
indeed, are the fruits of their own error, and the recompenses of their own
sins; and which should have wrought on them for their repentance, but prove
ineffectuall to that, and occasional to the contrary, the continuation, and
heightning of their sin, and an addition to their judgments.

Having upon the occasion of observing this effect gone so far in looking into
this Vial, I cannot well let pass the noting (but it shall be in one word)
the correspondency which is betwixt this, and the next foregoing Vial, and the
apt sequency of the one upon the other. That fourth Vial I suppose to bear
this sense. The Sun, upon which it is powered out, is the Sovereign or Royal
dignity residing in the several Princes, or Estates signified by those ten
horns, Rev. 17.12. Its effect, to wit, that upon it power is given to the Sun
to scorch men with fire, may signify the passions of those Princes, their
inordinate, and boundless appetite of rule, their emulations, and jealousies
transporting them above it, their immeasurable aspiring, ambitions and
avarices, from which they are in special stimulated, and enflamed to an
exorbitant stretching, and heightning of their power, and prerogative over
their people, for the advancing, enlarging, and maintaining whereof they
proceed to those precipitate counsels, and violent courses, which do
exceedingly wast, and crush, and in so doing discontent, exasperate, and enrage
their subjects. And these are the heats, and flames by which men under this
Vial (as by a Zenith Sun) are scorched.

Upon that effect of the fourth Vial this of the fifth very sutably, and even
naturally ensues. As the Summer-sun-beames by their glowing heat having a good
while together penetrated, and even tosted the earth, thereupon the earth comes
to send up many gross fumes, and vapors to the bemisting, and enveloping of
the air; by which means the Sun being overcast, the earth it self is deprived
both of its shine and light; so it is betwixt Potentates and people. The
abuses, and excesses of Princes by which they overtop, gall, and excruciate
their Subjects, raise, and retort clouds upon themselves, and their own power,
and dignity; their people thence conceiving, and venting many blind,
inconsiderate, and gross mistakes, many heady, and mutinous contestations
about their Sovereigns power, and prerogative; and this to the reciprocal,
mighty prejudice both of Prince and Subjects; the one coming thereby to be
eclipsed, if not disorbed: and the other, while they by such reflections seek to
allay, and cool the heat, darted upon them by the too great elevation, and
vertical influence of their Sun, having thereby changed their day into
darkness, are overwhelmed with confusions, night-wandrings, and horrors, and
do pine away in black, pensive, and hopeless obscurity.

To this that has been said of these Vials portending the more then ordinary
inclination of the times allotted to them unto disceptations, and clashings
about Government, I shall add a touch upon another Prophecy looking somewhat
the same way, the rather because much looked upon now by some men. It is part
of the matter of the third woe, and seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15.
in those words, There were great voices in heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of
the world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. 1 Cor. 15.24.
To which may be joined that of the Apostle, Then comes the end, when he shall
have put down all rule, and all authority, and power. There is much recourse
had to these, and the like prenunciations, now-a-dayes, and strange use made of
them. I am none of those that have the confidence to define, either the time
when, or the means, or manner how these passages shall be accomplished. Much
less do I sort with those who upon presumption that they shall receive their
completion before the worlds end, or while time is yet current, and in a
worldly, and temporal manner, and by humane means, and force, do thence
conclude it a necessary, and prime duty of Christians, to lend their assistance
to the bringing of them to effect, by laying their heads, and conserting their
hands together to plot, and act the pulling down of all Civil Powers humanely
constituted, and so to the making way, and entry to that Kingdom of God, and of
Christ.

But this may be said with sobriety, who knows what prelude, or preparative
may be in, what use the unsearchable wisdom of God may make of, the many
unsatisfiable, and unappeasable stirrings, and jarrings both of the men of
this, and of diverse other spirits, and principles about Government, to the
bringing about of his own counsels predeclared in those Prophetique passages?
One thing may be affirmed without pretense of supernatural light, either from
Scripture prediction, or from private Enthusiasme, as that which comes within
common experience, and reason; that debates, and competitions about authority
(especially when so multiplied, and obstinate) do bode, and tend to its
downfall. The more discussions, and stirs are raised about it; the more
climbings up to, and corrivalships for it, the more still the Majesty, and
luster of Authority is defaced, the foundations, and strength of it are shaken,
the more it tottereth, and inclines unto ruin.

Moreover, as this is the natural effect of that, so it may be taken some
notice of, that the prevision, and presage of a time of horrid violence, and
confusion, and of spoil, and expilation by the subversion of all Laws, and
humane Authority, restraint, and reverence, to come upon the latter ages of the
world, has sadly possessed the minds of many sage, and learned Christians,
both ancient, and latter. To give some instance, as that of Tertullian, Est and
alia major necessitas nobis orandi pro imperatoribus, etiam pro omni statu
imperii, rebusque Romany, quod vim maximam universo orbi imminentem, ipsamque
clausulam seculi acerbitates horrendas comminantem Romani imperii commeatu
scimus retardati. Itaque nolumus experiri, and dum precamur, differri Romanae
diuturnitati favemus. Tertull. Apolog. cap. 32.
who declares in behalf of the Christians of his time, that they took
themselves bound to pray for the Emperors, and Roman state, though then
Heathen, and persecuting, because that by means of the continuance thereof, the
great crash, or conquassation, threatening the worlds ruin, and the most
dreadful calamities, was retarded. And Lactantius Vide Lactantium in Institut.
lib. 7. cap. 15.
presageth that a little before the glorious restoring of the Church by him
divined of to come ere the worlds end, there shall antecede those desperate
confusions, and overturnings of order, right, and laws, as never were before
in the world. And in the Harmony of Confessions, Confession of Saxony in the
Harmony. Artic. 23. of Civil Mag. page 596.
that of Saxony gives warning, that in this last age of the world great
confusion is to be feared.

But enough of the causes of the Tumultuations

Amidst the many factions about political order (not a few whereof bespeak
themselves religious, but are indeed seditious) my persuasion is, it is not
only the worldly man's interest, but the Christians, and not only his interest,
but his bounden duty, both to submit to Civil Authority, and to support it:
and that (sutably to the conjunction of the second and third petitions of the
Lords-prayer) we have no other way of active promoting the coming of the
Kingdom of God, but by doing his will. The which will I understand to be, not
so much, if at all, his dispositive, or decreeing will, unto which his
Prophesies belong (for that, in many things, is to-us unrevealed, and that ever
shall, and cannot but be done, as well in earth, as in heaven) as his
preceptive will, delivered in his Law of nature, and the rules of his word.
Which will of his is (as much as for any thing) express for the perpetual, and
indeterminable, both authorization of Civil Magistracy ( viz. that which is by
ordinary, or humane creation, or constitution) and obligation of all men, all
Christians in homage to it Nos judicium dei suspicimus in imperatoribus, qui
Gentibus illos praefecit. Id in eis scimus esse quod Deus voluit. Ideoque
salvum volumus esse quod Deus voluit. Tertull. in Apolog. cap. 32.
.

For the better disposing, and drawing of men's minds to the doing of this will
of God in this particular, and for the abating of the pernicious contentions
abovesaid to be now so incident, and rife about it, and which are the great
obstacles of men's performing the Divine will in this matter, Two things (I
suppose) will be easily admitted to be chiefly desirable, and contributory. One
on the part of the Government it self, which is, that it be evidently laid upon
a ground of conscience, a just foundation, or which is the same, that it
apparently be by divine authority, or according to that rule, or will of God
which we are to do. The other (which also is conducible unto that) is on the
part of those that are concerned in, or upon its being settled, to wit, that it
be clear, and understood wherein consists that regularity, and how the divine
authorization held forth by it is passed, or conveyed unto men's investure in it.

For the requisiteness, and usefulness of these two a little may serve to be
said. The former is, that Government be laid upon a bottom of conscience. This
is the only genuine, true, and connaturall, and this is the surest, and firmest
groundwork for it. Without this there is little hope for it to prove either
beneficial, or permanent, little likelihood of either a real regular, or
durable subjection to it. The discernable standing of Government upon
conscientious grounds, is the only thing that can bring in conscience, and a
conscientious submission to it. Conscience (that is, a persuasion of the thing
to be done, that it is as it ought to be, or is right and just) is the highest,
and most kindly principle of any humane, or moral act. It is both the
strongest, and most lasting obligation to any relative duty. It is the
strongest, and most inducing tie, because it is the dictate of the supremest
faculty in man, the (...), his mind, or intellectual part, and that upon the
powerfullest persuasive, a Law received from nature, and from God. And it is
the most lasting tie.

1. In being upon a consideration which is in it self certain, and immutable,
viz. the everlasting rule of righteousness.

2. Inasmuch as it does most engage the will, and so procures the most
voluntary, and free accord unto that which it imposes.

There is scarce that thing which is more necessary to mankind (considered in
society) then Government; but nothing would be more free in its imposall, and
reception. It is true, a coercive power is (in the present depravation of man)
requisite to it, both for its conservation, and effectual administration, but
this is not proper, nor can it serve to be its procreative, or constitutive, no
nor sole conservative cause. It is easy to discern that the personal
strength of one man or a few Chieftains of a Community is not sufficient to
this coercion: and that Magistracy cannot have, or validly put forth without
the cordial concurrence of a multitude. For a Magistrate to hold, and put
forth this power by the strong hand of a consenting multitude distinct from,
and opposed to that he rules over, who sees not the unnaturalness, and
unstablenesse of such a command? This will never incorporate the governing, and
governed, or joint them in one political body, but shall always keep them
dispartite, and set them in a state of jealousy, discontent, and
counter-working each of other. If force be all that interveneth to the
relation, and correspondency of ruler, and ruled, how should that hold? an
aversation of wills, and affections will work out it self, and either dissever,
or dash them together. Vim vi reprimere is a practice which begets the like to
it in the other on whom it is practiced and that is Vim vi rependere, and
repellere. These two are principles, and studies that sit deep, and keep the
subject they possess respectively in continual motion. He that is up, and
stands by the former has but little ease, and less stayednesse; he that is
down, and meditates the latter is like a vapor under ground swelling, and
searching to rend out its passage into the open air, with the breach, or fall
of what ever is betwixt it, and its freedom.

The right, and durable basis then that is left unto Magistracy is that which
is cemented with a composure of the wills of them over whom it is. Now the will
is two ways conciliated, or won. One is by the sense of an external, or
temporal accommodation, or advantage. The other is the innotescency of a moral
obligation, or tie of conscience. The former is but an inferior, and low
attractive, and it is beneath a rational faculty to be taken with it by it
self alone, or as the commanding principle. That were as if the servant should
govern his master, the beast its rider, or the body overpower its soul. And for
the point of continuance; though the motion of it be impetuous, and it strongly
works upon the sensitive conceit, and appetite, yet it participates of the
nature of its object, in being variable, and uncertain. To incline the will to
obedience is but accidental, and contingent to the sense of a temporal good,
it is as prone to oppose, and withdraw from it, being indifferent, and equally
poysed to dispose the mind, either to subjection, or contumacy, as the one, or
the other may seem to favor its object.

But the latter, the evidence of a conscience obligation that is the most
weighty, and meriting persuasive, that is always the same, that takes an
immediate, and deeper hold on the rational faculty, yea, and is of as general
extent, and influence as the other; all men, and nations retaining some touch
of religion, and conscience, and of it as much, and as universally in this of
Civil authority, and obedience as in any particular.

And in truth, if we should make a reflection upon our selves in this Nation
(which is so naturally addicted to Laws, and liberties, that has received the
knowledge, and profession of the true Religion, that has been of late so much
busied in looking up Scripture mouldes, and dictates of this argument, that
has had almost all the questions that can likely be raised in this behalf laid
open, and agitated to, and fro, that has had so often in this business
tendered such conscience-pressing adjurations, and engagements, and has showed
(if recitations, urgings, and disputes about them be arguments thereof) to be
solicitous of them, and lastly, that has both by words, and actions both
declared, and had declared to it a conscientiousnesse in this matter) it cannot
(I s^y) be rationally expected that any other way of settling then upon clear
grounds of conscience should here take.

The requisitnesse of the first of the two before proposed expedients appearing,
the necessity of the second immediately follows upon it; and is evident by the
concession of the other. For if it be admitted needful that a ground, or
principle of conscience be the basis of Government, it will be confessed as
needful that a rule of Gods revealed or preceptive will (which is the only
cynosure, guide, and emperesse of conscience) touching the founding, and
erecting of Government be laid forth, and that, both verbo tenus, and re, both
the words, and the thing, that is, both which is the rule, where delivered, and
also what it says, or orders, or what is its genuine sense, and meaning.

In the want, or uncertainty of this all settlement upon this groundwork will
be to seek. Though the thing settled be right, yet the beneficial influence of
that rectitude upon the conscience, and will shall be superseded; and in stead
thereof it will be attended with a disrelish, muttering, and discompliance in
the same. Many illusions, and fallacies shall be obtruded upon the conscience
to bottom it wrong; and many pretensions of conscience will be held forth to
the eyes of the world where there is no conscience stood upon.

These two things being granted needful any so to be, or not to be, contains
in it matter of fact, and descends to a circumstantiated, and individual
case; I pass it over as too high and hard for me, and leave it to the
Statesman, as proper to his immediate inspection. The latter, which is the
inquiring out of the rule, with its interpretation, and meaning, is that I only
take in hand; and this will not be denied to lie within the precincts of my
calling. Might it be evident ere I have done to be as well within the compass
of my performance, it would be something of satisfaction both to my Reader
(possibly) and to my self.

This, I say, is the whole reach and limit of what follows; and it will be by
it self enough. For as the making plain of this will be acknowledged to be
singularly conducing to the allay, and pacification of much discomposure, and
to be preparative and productive of obedience to the will of God in this
behalf; so it cannot be denied, but that the rule it self, the investigation
whereof we are upon, falls under some controversy.

The plainest, and fullest passage of Scripture for the holding forth of this
rule, and the way how the Divine Authorization is conveyed to particular
persons, for their investing thereby with Civil authority, I take for granted
to be the prefixed text, [There is no power but of God: the Powers that be are
ordained of God.] And therefore having for that reason, laid down that for the
ground, and center of my discourse, I shall immediately proceed to it.

In the late times of dispute about state government much recourse has been
had to this Scripture. Each different way has sought to it for patronage, and
endeavored to make it of its party. This has raised a variety of senses, and
interpretations, and thereby some obscurity upon it. That which has been said
of some other Scriptures may be of this. This text had been plain, had there
not been so many Expositors upon it. I cannot ascribe the controvertiblenesse
of it, so much to any Grammatical, or Metaphysical difficulty of the terms, as
to the value, which the matter it consists of, bears.

1. The subject of it: nothing higher in place, or more in esteem with men then
it, viz. Civil power.

2. The predicate: nothing more sublime can be spoken of any thing (as to its
origination) then it, to wit, that it is of God, ordained of God. The
desireablenesse of the subject, and the divinenesse of the predicate seem in
their conjunction to occasion the disputeablenesse of these words.

In the beginning of our Commotions the sentence next before this [Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers] underwent the debate: and therein the
extent, or latitude of the power, and subjection it asserteth. Since that the
question has passed on to the next, which are these words, and upon them the
main queries are, who the persons are that are here termed the Powers, which
are of God, ordained of God? and (in order thereunto) what is meant by the
Powers? what by of God and ordained of God?

The exceeding (and in my opinion excessive) wide-stretching of this style, The
power of God, ordained of God, by some Authors anteceding these times, has to
me seemed strange, and to have given some rise to the late diversity of
applications of it. Besides the peculiar (and I am confident the only intended)
application of it to the Civil Magistrate there are that have imagined in it
much broader accommodations.

That great light of the Church in his times, and since, St. Augustine (the
authority of whose example has perhaps led others to do the like) extends
this proposition, There is no power but of God, to take in all power whatsoever
that can be named, and is in any creature. As the power to put forth any good
work, or act of grace Aug. de Spir. and lit. cap. 31. To. 3.
; the power to do any wrong, or act any sin Aug. Enarrat. in Psalmos, Psa. 32.
Conc. 2. To. 8.
the power of Satan to tempt, or sway men to evil Aug. ad Simpli^ian. lib. 2.
qu. 1. To. 4.
. After him comes the Pope with his Doctors, and they make bold to insert into
the sense of this text, not only the Papal, with all the rest of their
Hierarchies Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical power, but the Popes power in
Temporals over Sovereign Princes. Pope Boniface 8 (who is said to have come
into the Popedom like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a D^g) makes
this use of this Scripture In extravag de major. and obed. cap. unam Sanctam,
etc.
So does Pighius. Bellarmine, and others endevor to impose their Popes, and
Prelates powers, and to defend their Clergy-exemptions from the Temporal
Magistrate by putting that sense upon this Text Bellarm. To. 1. Cont. 3. lib.
2. cap. 29.
. After these arise the Munsterians, and having expelled their Prince, and
taken the power of the City into their hands, and set up of themselves a
pageant King (but too tragical) they declare, that he is not so much of their
as of Gods ordaining Regem non tam ab ipsis quam a Deo constitutum esse
scripserant. Jo. Sleiden lib. 10. page 256.
. And yet farther, and which is more to be regarded, Some of our Protestant
Divines (and of chiefest note) as Bucer, Calvin, and Pareus, have drawn forth
the authority of this text to any person that by any means gets in, or has
possession of rule, or the upper hand over a Civil State Bucer, Calvin, Pareus
in loc.
.

There is none of those uses of this text, or of the Divine warrant it hold
forth to the Civil Magistrate, but (with reverence to those authors of any of
them who are acknowledged with us to deserve it) I look at as going beyond the
just bounds thereof. This Treatise does not propose the distinct, or particular
examination of each of them. But its inquisition into the positive importance
of this Text will manifestly discover the disinterestednesse of every one of
them therein. And the last, being it is commended by such names; being it has
been taken hold of, and confidently insisted on by many of late, both upon the
account of the deserved esteem of those Authors, and by other arguments; being
it has some more shadow, or appearance then the rest of approaching near the
meaning of this Text, and so stands more in our light, or way to the clear
view of it; being it has been currently received, and patronized by diverse;
and being it is of the concernment which will easily be discerned to be in it;
this Treatise (with all due respect to those who may be entertainers of the
said sense, and wish submission to the further sifting of the Judicious) does
professedly deal with, and bring it under a hearing, and Trial.

I might here insert the allegation of many absurd consequences and pernicious
tendencies which wait upon the admittance of this sense, to make the profit,
and necessity of its discussion the better to appear; as also the recital of
sundry other questions of some abstrusenesse, and of special use, with other
contents, as instances of the usefulness of the untertaking in this Book. But
these I omit, for the Readers speedier passing on to take his own survey of the
things themselves, as they are delated in what follows. Humbly submitting
what I have written to his censure; and committing the same to the blessing of
the Almighty.

The Author having not opportunity to survey this Impression until past,
humbly requesteth the Readers excuse for, and pains to correct the following
errors in it.
1. In sentences.

PAge 87. line 15. after particular insert, Persons, and Families are in of
public association, protection, order, and administration of justice, calls
men into civil societies, and to the erecting of G^v^rnment: and more
particular, p. 136 l. 19, 20, 21. expurgo. The transactions about them enjoined
a rule of right, and equity to be kept, and forbidden.

2. In one, or a few syllables.

Page 2. line 22. f. quality r. quantity, p. 7. l. 10. f. 23. r. 22. p. 10. l.
23 r. offered unto, etc. p. 11. l 13. r. compass, p. 20. l. 17 r contemned, p.
24. l. 15. r. persuading, ibid. l. 16. r (...), p. 26. l. 19. r. lawfully, p
28. l. 26. r. in the person, p. 29. l. 12. f. awful r. lawful, p. 31. l. 12.
r. Marcionites, p. 36. l. 40. f. universal r. unjustifiable, p. 37. l. 37. r.
and for the matter, p. 43. l. 7. f. proceeding r. producing, p. 45. l. 26. f
casually r. casualty, p. 52. l. 2. r. receives, p. 54. l. 4. r. totally, p. 55.
l. 24. r. agency, l. 41. r. peculiarly, p. 65. l. 22. f. is r. it, p. 66. l.
15. r. Trade-adventurers, p. 70. l. 36. 37. r. positives, p. 72 l. 1. r. to us,
l. 21. r. drowsy, l. 33. r. knew p. 73. l. 2. r. very guilty, p. 76. l. 38. f.
2. r. 4. p. 82. l. 3. 4 expunge or a master, l. 8. f. to r. of, l. 36 after
solely insert which, p. 83 l. 40. r. this, or that, p. 84. l. 39. r. not to be
taken, p. 85. l. 7. f. whill r. which, l. 23. r. of the thing, p 87. l. 24. r.
those whom, p 91. l. 11. r. there being, l. 35. after employing insert force,
l. 38. r. founded, l. 39. f. profession r. poss ssion, p. 92. l. 27. r. to be a
rule, p. 93. l. 41. r. do come, p. 94. l. 4 f. clear r. clean, p. 95. l. 7. r.
uniform, p. 99. l. 33. r. take, p. 103. l. 37. f. or in r. in or, p. 110. l.
33. r. a working, p. 111. l. 15. f. mortality r. moral tie, p. 122. l. 21. f.
living r. lineage, p. 123. l. 10. after his insert fall, p. 126. l. 24. r.
names, p. 136. l. 14. f. and r. be, p. 139 l. 8. r. according to h laws, l.
14. f. where r. were, p. 140 l. 1. r. inquire, p. 157. l. 31. f. as r. us, p.
159. l. 31. r. of an usurp, p. 164. l. 5. r. Tractu, p. 165 l. 18 r. it
allows p. 171. l. 4. r. sociatis, p. 173. l. 4^. f. extensively r.
exclusively, p. 176. l. 32. r parties, p. 178. l. 8. f. eng ne r. enemy, p.
179. l. 28. expunge to be, p. 183. l. 14. r. distinguished, p 187. l. 36. f.
hold r. take, p. 189 l. 1, 2 r convention, p. 193. l. 14. r. and abstract, l.
33 ^. the act and the, p. 194. l. 4. r. wherein it is, p. 202. l. 37, 38. ^.
autho^ity r. power, p. 206. l. 25. r. determined, l. 34. r. take it.
Understand, p 207. l. 17 r. propositions, p. 210. l. 5 r. variety, p. 214. l.
7. r. it the, p 223. l. 14 r. hold, p. 229. l. 38. r. so far as they, p. 235.
l. 40. r. indifferen^, p. 238 l. 32. r. 2 Ki^gs, p. 239. l. 4. r. predominant,
p. 241. l. 16. r. unpublished, p 248. l 7. r. Gen 9 6. p. 255. l. 8. r. where,
p. 257. l. 13. r. Herdonius, p. 259. l. 21. f. sight r. Sit, p. 277. l. 19. r.
afford it, p 283. l. 6. r. strictures, p. 291. l. 1, 2. r. command, p. 297. l.
16. r. capacity includes in, p. 300. l. 15. expunge externally.

In Margins.

Page 28 line 9. r. superior est jure, p. 52. l. 2. r. that of same of the, p
71. l. 3. r. 9 31. p. 123. r. Pareum. p 13^. r. W^ddrington, p. 251. l 5 r.
contigit.

A Direction to such Scriptures as are somewhat explained in this Treatise,
after the figures noting the Chapters and Verses of the Books of Scripture, the
figures that follow signify the pages, and sometimes the places referred to
are noted by Chapters, Sections, and Subsections.
Genesis 9.6. p. 20. in marg. and. p. 248. 10.25. p. 175. 49.10. p. 229. Deuteronomy.
17.14, 15. Cap. 10. Sect. 4. Subsect. 1. 32.8. p. 33. 1 Samuel 20.26. p. 208. 2 Samuel 7.12. Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Subject. 1. prope finem. 1 King. 2.4. Cap. 10.
Sect. 2. Subs. 1. 19.10. p. 209. 2 King. 2.11. p. 238. 18.7. Cap. 10. Sect. 6.
1 Chronicles. 29.26, 27. p. 238. Psalm. 41.11. p. 72. 115.16. p. 32. Prove 8.15. p.
214. Eccles. 8.4. p. 20. 10. p. 261. Isai. 19.18, 19. p. 49. 42.24. p. 198.
Jer. 21.8, 9 27.1. to 18. 28.14, 16. 29.7. 38.17, 20. Cap. 10. Sect. 4.
Subsect. 1. 33.7. Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Subs. 1. prope finem. Ezekiel. 21.27. p. 244.
29.21. p. 230. Dan. 11.14. p. 49. Habak. 1.14. p. 287. Matthew. 3.15. Cap. 10.
Sect. 5. 4.23, 24. p. 208. 5.39, 40, 41. p. 284. 9.10. p. 209. 17.24, 25, 27,
Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Subsect. 2. 19.6. p. 131. 22.21. Cap. 10. Sect, 2. Subs. 3.
26.52. p. 20, 250. Mar. 1.5. p. 207. Luke 4.6. p. 11. John 8 51. p. 2^8. 10.35.
p. 25, 133. 12.32. p. 207. 19.10. p. 8. 11, Cap. 10. Sect. 2. Subs 4. Act.
2.17. p. 208. 11.26. p. 189. 17.26. p. 33. Romans 12.17, 19. p. 283: 13.1. first
part, p. 111, 112, 253, to 263. latter part per totum. 2. p. 114, 263, to 274.
3. p. 117, 274, etc. 4. p. 21, 117, 274, etc. 6. p. 279. etc. 1 Cor. 2.15. p.
209. 6.12. p. 209. 10.25. p. 208. 11.30. p. 73. 12.14. p. 131. 14.33. p. 105.
15.24. Prefac. Sect. 5. Ephesians. 6.12. p. 14. Philip. 2.21. p. 207. Col. 2.15. p.
14. 1 Timothy 2.1. p. 213, 208. 6, 8, p. 208. 4.4. p. 208. 2 Timothy 2.4. p. 209.
Heb. 5.4. p. 211. Jam. 1.13. p. 59. 1 Pet. 2.13. p. 132. Revl. 11.15. Prefac.
Sect. 5. 13.2. p. 11. 4. p. 11. 13. p. 12. 17. p. 12. 16.8. 9, 10, 11, Prefac.
Sect. 5. 17.1. 3, 9, Prefac. Sect. 5. 17. page 11. 18. Prefac. Sect. 5.
THE ORIGINAL OF THE Civil Magistrate From God, [As it is drawn by the Apostle
Paul in those words, ROMANS XIII. 1. There is no Power but of God: the Powers
that be are ordained of God] Endeavored to be Illustrated and Vindicated.
THere is no question but the Apostle does in these words own and attribute the
Civil Magistrate unto God, as his Author (...) unto an act of God, as his
Production. But it is made a question, How this deduction is from God? or, What
this derivation of the Magistrate from God, here called his Ordination or
Ordinance, does mean?

For the discovery of this ou^ disquisition must be, What the true sense and
just extent of these words, There is no power but of God, the powers that be
are ordained of God, may be.

The Method I have proposed to my self here^n is, first, and principally to
insist, by way of Exposition, on all the terms of this sentence, one by one,
which may seem to bear any part, either in the making up of the sense, or in
the extending, or confining of the latitude of it.

Those are, 1. The subject spoken of, Power, the powers. 2. The predicates
enunciated of the same. 1. Of God. 2. Ordained of God.
3. The quality of the enunciations, whether universal or indefinite; There is
no power but of God the powers that be, etc. 4. The adjunct of being put to the
subject of the latter position, the powers that he are ordained of God.


And to then annex some consideration^ from the context, and from other
principles coherent to the assertion of this text.

Each of these forenamed particles, as they have somewhat in them which may
deserve either opening or observation; so they, have something said of them by
those who have had recourse to this Text by way either of Comment, or of
Controversy, which may deserve examination. I proceed forthwith to the
enquiry, in the order proposed.

CHAP. I. Of the Subject here spoken of, Power, the Powers.
SECT. I. An Enquiry whether Power be put for the Person invested with Power,
or for the abstract, the Office seated in him?
IT may be of some use for the understanding of the meaning of this word Power,
to take notice whether it be put here for the Officer, or for the Office, for
the Magistrate, or for Magistracy. The Scripture uses the term both ways.
Sometimes in the abstract, or for the form, office, or state, which makes and
denominates one a Superior to others. [So Luke 20.20. Joh. 17.2. Rev. 17.13.]
Sometimes in the concrete, or for the person in whom that abstract form, or
office is subjected. [So it is Luke 12.11. Romans 8.38. Ephesians. 1.21. and 3.10. and
6.12. Col. 2.15. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 3.22.] That it is this latter way to betaken
in this place, not only Commentators agree, [for which see Augustine Tom. 4.
part. 2. Expos. propos. ex Epist. ad Romans Piscator, Rollock, Pareus, Dr.
Hammond, Essius, Vignerus in loc.] but the Text it self may lead us to resolve.
Power in the abstract cannot be the subject, or recipient either of the duties
required, and argued for in this text to be paid to the Power therein
mentioned, or of the offenses forbidden, and threatened (if done) against it:
neither can it be the agent, or administrant of those acts which are ascribed
to the Power here intended. It cannot be the object of that Fear, nor the
author of that Praise mentioned verse. 3. The accident, or abstract power is,
indeed, the Reason of men's Obligation to the performance of those duties, and
the refraining of those injuries to the person empowered; and it is the form,
or principle which those acts do flow from in him. But it cannot be that
suppositum which is the object of the one, and the agent of the other.
Moreover, that the concrete, the person in power is here meant, may be clear
from the following words in the context, in verse. 3. the Apostle puts the title
of Rulers, and this of Power identically, Rulers are not a terror, etc. will thou not then be afraid of the Power? and in verse. 4, 6, 7, 8. his arguments
for the subjection to the Power in this verse. enjoined run all upon the person,
for he is the Minister of God -- he bears not the sword in vain, etc.

SECT. II. The main enquiry, to wit, What kind of Power it is which the Apostle
intends in those words, Power, the Powers.
Subsection 1. Of the force of the word, (...).
POwer signifies here the person empowered. Yet in as much as the Text must
needs suppose, imply, and refer unto Power in the abstract, as the form which
does constitute, and denominate the person in whom it is seated a Power, and
only he can be said to be the Power, who is endued with that Power: the way to
explain this term, and to understand who are the Powers here intended, will be,
in taking the Apostle to speak of the concrete, or person, to cast our eye upon
the abstract, or the habit of Power placed in him, and to enquire what kind of
Power is that which the text presupposes, and refers unto, as that
endowment which makes the persons here spoken of to be termed the Powers.

The notation of the propriety, or use of the word (...), may be somewhat
conducing to this enquiry. The observation of a distinction betwixt (...) and
(...); betwixt potentia and potestas, and that the former is of a larger
acception, and ordinarily signifies a mere mightiness, or ability; the latter
is of a stricter use, and usually signifies such a Power as consists in right,
interest, or property, is an observation not only given us by some of late, but
avowed by Divines and Critics of chiefest note, and will upon due search (I
believe) be found to hold good.

It must be remembered, that the propriety of a word is not a thing of so
precise a nature, as that it is ever and invariably kept, or so as the word may
never be observed to be otherwise used. There is not (I think) any term that is
frequently made use of, but sometimes it is taken out of its proper and
peculiar sense; and so perhaps may be sometimes this word (...); but as far as
I can learn, either by mine own observation, or from the incomparably more
mature experience, and judgment of other Authors, the propriety of this word
is of this measure, that properly taken, it only signifies that power which
consists in right, and when it intends a power of Superiority of one person
over another, it signifies an Authorized power only, or that Superiority which
is lawful, or justly entitled to rule. And I believe (if possible) it will not
be easy, or obvious to meet with it in any other acceptance in the New
Testament.

For the former, mine own observation; I shall not trouble the Reader with
reciting the places of Scripture in which the word is found, whereby the
constant use of it may appear; but shall sum up under a few heads the variety
of use which I have noted in the word in respect of diverse objects it is
applied to, and refer to the several places for perusal.

I have noted that in the new Testament this word (...) is applied,

1. Sometimes to things privately possessible.

2. Sometimes to matter of action.

3. Sometimes more specially to matter of command, or authority over persons.

1. It is applied to matters privately possible: and so it signifies a right,
or just interest in a thing, so as the person in whom the Power is, may
lawfully dispose of, or enjoy it. [So Job. 1.12. Act. 1.7. and 5.4. and 8.19.
Romans 9.21. 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. Rev. 23.14.]

2. It is applied to matter of action, and so it signifies a Warrant,
Commission, License, or Rule, enabling a man to the doing, or executing of any
action, or work in the said Rule determined. [So Mat. 9.6. and 10.1. and 21.23.
Mark. 13.34. Luke 9.1. Joh. 10.18. Act. 26.12. 1 Cor. 8.9. and 9.4, 5, 6, 18. 2
Cor. 10.8. and 13.10]

3. It is applied more specially to matter of Command, or Authority over
persons, and so it signifies an Authority, or lawful calling to rule and bear
sway over others. [So Mat. 28.18. Mark. 1.27. Luke 4 36. and 12.5. and 19.17.
and 20.20. Joh. 17.2. and 19.10. 1 Cor. 11.20. and 15.24. Col. 2.10. Jud. v.
25. Rev. 17.13.]

These are the several kinds of objects or matters (in my observation) to which
the Power signified by this word (...) relates in Scripture. And by the many
instances under each of these heads may be gathered the propriety of the word
in Scripture-accep^ation. And the Reader that will please to search all these
tex^s, and examine the currantness of my citing of them, will (I doubt not)
upon impartial view, find also these two things true which I shall further
observe unto him of them.

First, That in all these places, the sense of this word (...) is confined
within the limit of a just and lawful Power, and cannot be extended to the bare
act of mere Occupation, or forcible possession, or command: hence it is rendered
by our Translators, not always by the word Power, but (in the forecited
places) sometimes by this term, Right, [as Joh. 1.12. in marg. Rev. 22.14.]
sometimes Authority, [ Mat. 21.23. Mark 13.34. Luke 4.36. and 9.1. and 20.20.
Act. 26.12. 1 Cor. 15.24. 2 Cor. 10.8.] and sometimes Liberty, [as 1 Cor. 8.9.]
And further in diverse of those Texts it is put to signify the Right, or
Warrantedness of a thing, when as the point of Right is either questioned, or
asserted in a contradistinction to an arbritrary, and unwarrantable assuming,
or usurping. [So in that of Mat. 21.23, 24.] the chief Priests and Elders ask
Christ, (...); By what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this
authority? The authority here demanded to be shown is a warrant; or lawful
commission for the doings of our Savior; the things done they had seen, his
(...), the act of Power, or force he had put forth, in his Doctrine, Miracles,
and imperious driving out of the Temple the traffiquing profaners of it; but
they call in question, and therefore demand of him, and accordingly he
conditionally promises to tell them by what authority he did those things, and
who gave him that authority. So again [in that of Mat. 9.6.] our Savior
asserteth to himself the having, (...), the power on earth to forgive sins;
they that were present had heard him executing the act toward the Palsie-sick
person, in his saying to him, thy sins be forgiven thee. But they doubted of,
or rather denied his authority or lawful power to do it, and that was the
thing therefore which he there avoweth. In like manner [in that of Joh. 19.10.]
Pilate thought Christ now standing before him, and not making any answer to his
examinations of him, employed that he took him to have no lawful power over him
in that cause; and therefore asks him, Know thou not that I have power to
crucify thee, and have power to release thee?

[Where by the way the allegarion which some make of this Text, as though the
word here signified an abusive, or unlawful power^ in as much as what ever
power Pilate might have to release Christ, he had none to crucify him, is
utterly impertinent. For it is not material to the use of the word here to
say, what power Pilate really had, or what he had not; but the matter is, what
power he thought and meant to assert that he had; for the word there must needs
bear that sense which the speaker meant it in: and for that there is no doubt
but Pilate looked on himself, as the lawful, Governor of that place, and at
Christ as a common person of that Nation, and so intended; that himself was the
competent Judge, of the person and cause of Christ then before him, and that he
had therefore power to crucify him, and power to release him, viz.
respectively, accordingly as he should find his cause to deserve.]

So [in that of Romans 9.21.] the Apostle disputing for the equity and justness
of Gods purposes, and proceedings in his acts of Free Election and Reprobation,
in order to the benefits of his Grace, and in his excutions thereof, he
alleadges by way of comparison the example of the Potters power over his clay,
to make a vessel of it to what use he pleases. Where if the word (...) were
ambiguous, and did not clearly signify right and just power, the argument were
of no force or evidence.

Secondly, The other thing I observe is, that this word is in those forequoted
places put for such a power, as does not necessarily import, or require to its
being, or depend upon possession, actual tenure, or exercise of the matter, or
object of the power, but is in some of those instances de facto separate, and
in all separable therefrom; yea in some of them the power is so affirmed, as
that the act or exercise of it is expressly secluded, and laid aside, as neither
done, nor to be done in the particular case. That universal Power which Christ
assumeth to himself [ Joh. 17.2. Mat. 28.18.] was then in him in regard of
grant and investure, and in respect of right and title to all the things to
which it refers, but a jus in re, a seizure or possession of them he had
not. For before his passion, being then in the state of humiliation, he was far
from an actual dominion, or command over all; nay after his rising again, and
his ascending up unto, and session at the right hand of God in heaven; the
Apostle says of him, We see not yet all things put under him, [ Heb. 2.8.]
That power of Believers to eat of things unto Idols, And that of Paul and
Barnabas to marry, and to take with them in their travail Wives, and to receive
maintenance for themselves, and them of the Churches of Corinth and
Thessalonica, [1 Cor. 8.9. and 9.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.9.] these were powers
inherent in those persons respectively, but they were not acted, no nor could
lawfully be put forth by them as the case then stood with those Christians.

It is against this Observation of the force of this word objected by some,
that (...) is put for a Power unlawful as to title, in two or three places, [
viz. Luke 4.6. Rev 13.2, 4. Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 2.14.] Unto which I say,

1. It should still be remembered (what was before said) that the propriety of a
word is not a thing of so precise a nature, as that it is ever punctually kept;
and that it is to be judged, not by its use once or twice, but by its common
and frequent use.

2. Let the Texts brought for this be severally looked into.

For that [of Luke 4.6.] I can see no reason to conclude the word is there used
for a rightless power. Who can think but that Satan there intends to assume
to himself a good title, and just interest over this worlds kingdoms, and not a
false or usurped claim? and according to his intention that speaks must the
sense of the word be construed to be. Indeed he lied in taking that large
composs of power to himself, and this he had done whether he had spoken of that
power in point of right, or in point of fact, for in neither sense had be all
that power either given to him, or to give to others; but his lie had not been
so specious or to his purpose, had he not meant of a real and good authority.

For that [of Rev. 13.2, 4.] where it is said The Dragon gave the beast his
power, and his seat, and great authority; and the Dragon gave power unto the
beast: presupposing that by the Dragon is meant Satan, and by the Beast the
Roman Empire, as distributed into ten Kingdoms, or States, upon the dissipation
of the Monarchy of the Caesar's, by the wars of the Barbarians; which ten are
therefore, it may be, called one Kingdom, Rev. 17.17. or that part of the said
Empire, which is called the Western Empire, as reduced partly in regard of
secular State and Title into the hands of the Exarch of Ravenna first, then of
the French, and after of the German Emperor, but acted, and over-swayed by the
Pope of Rome See Mr. Mede on Revel. com. part. 2. cap. 13. Napier. Simson. Ds.
Annot. in loc.
. Now where it is said, this Dragon gave this Beast his power, and seat, and
great authority, the possessive his, is I take it necessarily to be referred to
the Dragon, not to the Beast, for the pronoun (...) carries it to the agent, or
giver. Now the Dragon might be said to give his power and authority to the
Beast two ways.

1. By way of surcease, or surrendry. The Devil when he saw the authority of
the Heathen Emperors come to an end, upon the rising up of Constantine, he laid
down that sway he had held in the use of them, in whom he had played the
Dragon, by instigating them, and their people by them, to gross Paganish
Idolatry, and to open enmity against Christianity, and now gave way to the
Beast.

2. By way of allurement and assistance. Satan seeing he must perforce leave
that his way of working, and leading the world which he had long held by means
of the Heathenish Empire, he now applies himself to the present Secular powers,
the Christian Potentates, risen up in the room of the former, to draw them over
to his interest of Idol-worship, and Saint-persecution, though in another form
and method; unto which be makes it his design first to persuade, and then to
assist them, in the promoting and executing thereof. In reference, to the
latter his assistance, especially, may those words be understood of the Dragons
giving his power and authority to the Beast q. d. Satan joyneth his power unto
the Roman State or Magistracy, become Christian, and after a while degenerate
in Religion, by Heresy, and Superstition, to further them in their way (which
was also his own main work) of Blasphemous Idolatries, and cruel persecutions,
drawing in also the Nations of the world to follow them therein. A like manner
of speech to this we have, Rev. 17.13, 17. where the ten Kings are said to give
their power and strength unto the Beast; that is, by way, not of investing it
in him, but of assisting him with it. And thus it may be plain how the word
(...), is here used. For what is that Power, Seat, and Authority which Satan
has in humane affairs? Verily none properly so called; that is, he has no
temporal Government, no formal, professed, open, and acknowledged rule amongst
men, either by commanding in word, or compulsion in deed, as Princes have over
their Subjects, Masters over their Servants. The term therefore cannot here be
put to signify any Civil Empire, either lawful or unlawful, as to title. The
Devil has indeed a physical power, or potency in material or elementary
things, to produce effects in them above the ordinary course of nature; and
there is in him a properly political or governing Power, in relation to his
fellows, the evil spirits, and hence we read of his Angels; and him called,
the prince of Devils: But in moral, and humane proceedings, he has no more but
a suggesting or counselling, a tempting or persuasive power: the only way he
has to sway men after him (that we know) is by illusion and enticement. When
therefore we find these titles, the God, and the Ruler of the darkness of this
world, the prince of this world, and the prince of the power of the air,
ascribed to him, and here a power, seat, and great authority, which he lends in
assistance to the Beast; we must take these attributions figuratively, and
improperly spoken; and to import no more, but that, as it were, and in effect,
he is, and has these things, in as much as by his stratagems, or subtle arts,
he leads men both of high and low degree, in a manner at his pleasure; and by
crafty insinuations, he is as prevalent, and brings men as wholly to his
bent, as if he had a direct Empire over them, and they owned him as their Lord.
Satan's power being then spiritual, not temporal, persuasive or precarious, not
imperious, his giving his power to the Beast, whether by resignation at the
Beasts advancement, or by way of assistance to him when in authority, and in
relation to his use thereof, as it could no way concern the Beasts temporal
title, or interest in his civil authority, in point of lawfulness or
unlawfulness, so it affords no instance for the taking in of an unentitled
Civil power (whether in the Dragon or in the Beast) into the signification of
this word, (...).

Lastly, for those places [ Ephesians. 6.12. Col. 2.15.] Principalities, and Powers,
are the titles both of good and evil spirits, in reference to other spirits;
there being an order, and a distinction of superior and inferior, in respect of
dignity and rule, among them by creation; the which the fallen Angels do still
retain among them; and this they do (in all probability) both by virtue of
their first ordination, the present dispensation of God, and their own mutual
consent: now what power is in any Angel by creation, and primitive institution,
cannot be unlawful.

Secondly, for the observation and judgment of the Learned concerning the
notation of the word (...), I will not detain my Reader so long as to cite to
him all that I have found in such to this purpose, nor to rehearse the words of
any, but I shall only mention these following Authors thus interpreting this
word, and refer him to the places in them. Zanchius To. 2. de natura Dei, lib.
4. cap. 8. quaest. 3. These. 3. page 424. Beza in Marc. 1.27. Piscator, and
Elnathan par in Loc. Jansenius Concord. cap. 113. page 822. Daniel Heinsius
exercit. in Mat. 7.28. Gataker Dissertat. cap. 43. page 457. Ms. Leigh. Critic.
Sacra in voc.

Subsection 2. Power distinguished into Natural and Moral.
BUt it is not the mere notation of a word that will lead to the distinct and
adequate conception of the matter, or thing thereby signified. Wherefore let us
proceed to a more real consideration of this subject Power.

I will not run through the whole scheme of distinctions upon the word. There
are many sorts of Power which may easily appear to be of a remote and disparate
consideration to what this Text will bear. To omit therefore the Explication of
those divisions of Power, into increate and create; of create, into active and
passive; of active into immanently and transiently active. That Power which is
in a created and corporeal substance, and is transiently active, or imports
the influx of one body, or suppositum upon another, may be twofold: 1. Natural.
2. Moral Of this Distinction see Mr. Whites Way to the tree of life, page 45.
The Treatise of Monarchy part. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 2. page 19, 20.



1. Natural, or physical power, is the same which we call (more distinctly)
strength, might, and vigor. It consists in an ability to enforce or make
impression upon another thing, or to cause it to yield or give way.

2. Moral power, is that which we call property or dominion; it consists in a
right, title or interest, to order, dispose or govern. This Moral Power, as
seated in man, may be taken either more extensively, so the object of it may be
things inanimate, or brute beasts; for over them man has a dominion given him
of God Genesis 1.2^. Psalm. 8.5.
: or more strictly, as it respects man only; and this Power this related we
peculiarly call Authority: And this again is distinguishable according to the
diversity of humane societies, some whereof are private, and domestical; and
some are more public. But as it is found in, or related to a public civil
community, or body politic it is termed Magistracy, or political power.

That there is a real difference to be found betwixt those two powers, the
Natural, and the Moral; as in general, so as they may be seated in man as the
subject, and respect man as the object, and particularly as they are competible
to a body politic; and that the difference lies, as was said, herein, that
the one consists in a mere impetus, or prepotency, or a sufficiency of strength
to impose, or make impression on another; the other in a right, or imerest to
bear sway, may be easy to fe^.

1. The reality of the difference is evident, Natural power is found not only
in man, but in brute beasts, yea in inanimates: Moral is proper to reasonable
creatures. Again, although reasonable creatures be enduable with both, yet
among men the natural and the moral, might, and right to rule may be, and for
the most part are distinct or separate each from other in regard of the subject
of inherence Potestas in populo, Authoritat in Senatu. Cicero de leg. lib. 3.
. The Natural power is ordinarily in them that do not, ought nor to rule, but
to obey and be in subjection. There is a Moral power, or right to rule in Man
over the other Creatures, yet in natural power he is inferior to many of them.
And amongst men, in Natural power, that is strength, or might of body, the
family in greater then the Master, the Subjects excel^ their Sovereign, the
Souldiert overmatch their Leaders; whereas the Moral power in relation to each
of these is in the Master, the Sovereign, the Leader. It is very seldom seen,
if ever, in any humane Society, that Natural, and Moral power do meet in the
same persons, as the subjects of inhesion. Suppose a City or Nation ruled by
some strong hand, or a military force: even in that force there must needs be
some one head, or council of a few to guide, and command it, some Pretorian
Magistracy to govern the Army, and in that head or Pretorian office (far
inferior in Natutal power to the Army, as the Army possibly is to the City, or
Nation under its beck) would the supreme Power lie, and the military force
would but be subordinate, and ministerial to that command, in like manner as
the unarmed people are to that force. And although it be both right, and
necessary to the well-being of a political Society, that the Natural and Moral
power do concur, the former to serve and support the other, and the discord of
these is the high way to the ruin of both; yet it is not simply necessary to
the being either of the Moral power, or of the community. Every sudden mutiny,
or temporary Sedition, which is the Insurrection, and prevalency of the Natural
power against the Moral, does not dissolve the present Society or Magistracy,
Political, or Military. The uproar at Ephesus [ Act. 19.] was within a few
hours quelled, and the City remained in its former state. Although upon the
death of Ahaziah [2 Chronicles. 22.9.] his house had no power (viz. natural) to keep
still the Kingdom, but Athaliah usurped it, yet within a few years it removed
the usurpresse, and repossessed both Power and Kingdom as in its former right.

2. And that the difference twixt those two Powers lies (as was said) in the
mere forciblenesse or prevalidity of the one, and the right or legitimacy to
command of the other; that the one can, the other only may or ought to rule;
the one possibly has the appetite and act of governing, the other has only
the commission and warrant, should me thinks easily be conceived. Natural power
we oppose to impotency, weakness; Moral power we oppose to illicitness or
wrong. Thence that saying, Id tantum possumus quod jure possumus; whereby it
appears that Natural power consists in strength, Moral in rightfulness. And
indeed wherein else should the difference be placed? What difference is there
to be made betwixt the power of one Brute prevailing over another, or over a
Man, and that of the owners ruling over that Brute? or betwixt that of a
Manstealer that has gotten another child into his hand by stealth, and that
of the true father over his child? or betwixt that of a Rout, or Band of
Rogues, or drunken companions that may have assaulted and beaten the
Magistrates officers, and perhaps himself too, and that of the Civil
Magistrate? each of these may de facto be Master; each of them may be found
assuming, and exercising rule; they cannot therefore be distinguished by their
acts: The d stinction then betwixt them must be taken from the ground, rise, or
principle from which the acts of rule are put forth; which in the one and the
other are diverse. In the one those acts are from mere force and will; in the
other, they are from authority, or a will authorized to prescribe or command.
Each of these Powers (I say) may be found exercising rule; for we cannot call
any power moral, merely because it acts in, or manageth those we call Moral
or Civil affairs; for that a Natural power in a subject endued with reason may
do: there may be an intermedling with Civil matters, where there is no moral
power, as in case of Sedition, where they that are to obey will needs rule: as
on the other hand there may be a Moral power, that is, a right to command, or
dispose where the object is not moral, or civil; such is the power of man,
given him of God, over other creatures (animate and inanimate) of disposing
according to his reason and will, of their natural acts of feeding, generating,
laboring, etc. But that is a moral power in relation to any of these objects
or matters about which power is exercised, which has a moral rise or
deduction, viz. an authorization, and right, and what has not so is merely
natural.

The proper character then, or formal difference of each of these two Powers
is, that the Natural power is no other then a brutish predominancy or violence
Potentia est id quod per si est effican. -- Vit est majoris rei impetus, qui
repelli, vel saltem ex arbitrio, and commode non potest. Greg. Tholos. Synt.
Juris. lib. 11. cap. 2. Sect. 3. and cap. 1. Sect. 4.
: the reason of its superiority, is its own might and will; it knows nothing of
any civil liberty, order, or right; its proper act is ruere, impetere, or
impellere, to rush in upon, assault, or bear down before it what stands in its
way: if it use reason so far as to give out commands, to ordain, or proceed by
any laws, or to take cognizance of causes by any rule, it is but ad libitum,
without any obligation, certainty, or constancy, only as far as stands with its
own humor or interest; for as its rise is its own force and appetite, so its
end is its proper and private accommodation, and safety.

The Moral power (to speak of it only as seated in, and relating to man, and
more particularly that of the Civil Magistrate) is a special state, or
function, or administration amongst men. Its original is not its own inherent,
or adjacent robi^, or main strength, but positive constitution. It consists
in, not only an ability, but a right to command. It has indeed de jure, and
should have de facto, a Sword as well as a Scepter; a coactive, as well as a
directive power; the Natural power joined to its Moral: but its Moral power
lies in its word, Eccl. 8.4.
not in its sword; Where the word of a King is, there is power, Solomon says.
It is its reason, not its might which gives law, and its reason is legislative,
whereas another is not Ratio cujuslibet non est factiva legis, says Aquinas
Aquinas 1. 2a. quast. 96. artic. 3. and Cajetan in quaest. 96. artic. 5. Seldom
de Jure Not. lib. 1. cap. 4. page 46.
. Its proper, primary, and genuine act is to prescribe, guide, and direct: the
sword is requisite to it, but ex accidenti, upon occasion of others pravity;
compulsoriness is not of its essence, but an after addition to it, for its
preservation and efficacy It Is probably conceived that the sword is a
superaddition to the Civil power, annexed to it, Genesis 9.6. See Dr. Hammond of
Resisting, etc. page 27. It could not be from the beginning, for in the state
of integrity there was no use of it.
. It never uses the sword, but where equity and dignity are consemned; where,
by reason of the subjects either vitiousness, or defect of reason, bare
authority cannot take place. The special reason of its erection by men, is the
proneness of some to take the advantage of their natural power to invade, and
the inability of others to defend themselves against such; and a prime end of
it is to prevent or remedy the ^xorbitances of Natural power in ill disposed
persons; and thereby to secure the community, in order to the general, and each
ones particular good. Again, it does not take the Sword in the sense of our
Savior. [Matth. 26.25. Per accipere gladium intelligitur propria authoritate,
and voluntate uti gladio. Principes enim, and judices non accipiunt quasi a
seipsis, sed concesso sibi gladio a deo utuntur. Cajetan Jentac. 6. quaest. 3.
] but bears it [as Romans 13.4.] that is, it does not snatch it up, or wrest it
from another to it self, but has it delivered. It has the Sword not only in
its hand, but in its commission, and the Sword that it has is not the cause,
but the consequent of its superiority: It does not assume, or hold its
authority by virtue of the sword, but it assumes and holds the sword by virtue
of its authority. The Scepter goes before the Sword, and is that which
legitimates it Potentia vero debet sequi justitiam, non praire. Aug. To. 3. de
Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 13.

Observemus jus glad^i magistratibus esse a deo datum, tanquam necessarium
adminiculum and nervum suae potestatis. Pareus in Romans 13.4.


: when it draws the sword, the difference betwixt its Sword, and another,
(that is armed only by natural strength) is, that its edge is not merely backed
with metal, or in an arm of flesh, and sinews, but with warrant, and
commission, and that signed by God.

Let me add by way of Supplement, to what has been said, to demonstrate both
that there is a real difference betwixt Power Natural, and Moral, and what it
is, this further. That even in God we distinguish betwixt his Power by which we
mean his arm of strength and might, and his Power by which we signify his
throne of authority, or Sovereign rule: betwixt his power of command, and his
power of efficiency: betwixt his working power, and his legislative or willing
power: betwixt the power of his right hand, and the power of his scepter of
righteousness: in the Lords-Prayer, Kingdom, and (...), Power, ascribed to God
are distinguished: and though both be natural, that is essential to God; yet
the one we may call his Physical, the other his Moral power Vide Zanchium de
Not. Dei lib. 4. cap. 8. qu. 3. These. 3. Arminium Dis. priv. These. 22. Sect. 2.
and These. 27. Sect. 2.
.

Answerable to this twofold power in Man, there is a twofold subjection; one of
the body only, which respects the Natural power: the other of the body with
the mind also, relating unto the power which is Moral Duplex est servitus,
corporis, and animi. vis quippe in corpore, in externis, prohibitio autem Juris
animum po^issinum cogit. Greg. Tholos. Synt. Jer. lib. 11. cap. 1 Sect. 4.
. The Moral power lays an obl^gation upon the conscience: to it a man does
or ought to submit, as of right and duty: It may challenge our obedience
though, and where it cannot compel to it: and we are to subject though there be
nothing to overaw us to it: and this is the property of this Power in
distinction from the natural: that which is but natural reaches not the mind:
the acts it puts forth may lay a coaction on the body, but not a tie on the
conscience. What ever be the natural, or armed power of one person, or party
above another; no man is under any obligation to obey, nor has he any claim to
rule by virtue of it: if he had, there could be no such thing as Moral power in
the world, this being (as was before said) for most part, if not ever, seated
in those persons who in regard of Natural power, are inferior to them whom
they should reign over. If Natural power could oblige to obedience, the Monarch
were bound to resign his Crown to the multitude; and the Senate or Parliament
must receive laws from the community. Every heady commotion, or rout of a
multitude risen up, were to be submitted to, and were not to be repressed: the
Town Clerk did not well to check the tumult at Ephesius, or to refer the
plaintiffs from the present uproare to a court or lawful assembly, he should
have let them go on, and have both submitted to, and assisted them. But this is
absurd enough to appear so to any man; the commonly received maxim is, By
nature men are (in regard of Civil jurisdiction) all equal, no man a Ruler, or
servant to another Hooker Eccl. posit. lib. 1. cap. 10. page 26, etc. Ascham
Discourse, etc. part 1. cap. 1. Sect. 4. Hobs Elem. part. 1. c. ^. 1.
. So that the effect of a natural power, where it conquereth is but to involve
them that are under it in an actual subduedness, that they touch down, as a man
does to a Lion being under his paw, or as a traveller does to a highway-robber
that has set his pistol to his breast, that is, without either will or duty
owed to the prevailer, or obligation to go any further in subjection then
self-preservation, or the like considerations (irrespective to the invader) may
suggest. This then is the different effect or relative state produced by
Natural and by Moral power in the persons to whom these respectively are
extended; the Natural power involveth men in an actual subduedness: the Moral
reduces them to a rational and conscientious subordination.

Subsection 3. That Moral Power only is intended in this word Power in this
place.
HAving observed and explained this distinction of Power, it may perhaps remain
a question with some, Whether this term Power, in the text, be not of so
general an extent as to contain both the members of this division, or whether
it be to be restrained to Moral power only. The word indeed is put
indefinitely, or without express limitation; but it may nevertheless be doubted
whether it can here bear a sense as illimited as the words are. My apprehension
is (and I think I shall make it good) that only Moral power can be meant by
this Text; that is, not that which merely has might, force, or bodily
masterdom; but that which, besides that, has right, title, or warrant to
govern.

My Argument for it (besides what shall afterward be said) shall here be this;
Political, or Magistratical power, or the power of the Civil Ruler only is
intended in this Text, but this is only a Moral, warranted, or authorized
power; Therefore it is only a Moral, or warranted power which is here intended
in the Text.

For the first, or Major proposition, That the Political or Magistratical power
only is intended in this text; this, I suppose, will not be stuck at. The
subject of this Proposition, There is no power but of God, is the same, and of
equal extent with that of the rest of the context, viz. the discourse from the
beginning of the Chapt. to verse. 8. but therein, it is manifest, the Apostle
speaks only of the Civil Magistrate, as the adequate or the sole object of the
duty he is therein persuaded to. What power else can he call (...), Higher
Powers, and (...), Rulers? of what power else can it be said, that he bears
the sword, he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil, a receiver of tribute, custom, fear, honor? Our Divines both
Commentators and Controvertists, do strongly evince this against the Romanists,
who would upon this text found the Popes power; and against this text defend a
superiority for him over, and an exemption for his Clergy from the power of the
Civil Magistrate. Against both which our Protestant Authors do make good that
in this text Political, or State power only is intended, and unto it subjection
is inj^yned universally, or unto all persons, whatsoever other power they be
endowed with. Vide Whitakar To. 2. Controv. 4. cap. 3. page 647, 648 and quaest
7, 720. Pet. Martyr loc. com. ^las. 4 cap. 13. Sect. 22. page 906. Chamier To.
2 lib. 15. cap. 17. Sect. 8. etc. page 637, 638.

For the Minor, that Political or State power is only a Moral, warranted, or
authorize power; or, which is equipollent, all Political or Civil power is
Moral, warranted, or authorized Facultas moralis civitatem gubernandi
potestatis civilis vocabulo nuncupari solet. Grot. de Jure lib. 1. cap. 3.
Sect. 6.
: this also may be evident. They are called Gods, that is, Civil Magistrates,
unto whom the word of God came (says Christ) [Joh. 10.35.] that is, to whom
the commission came to put them in the place wherein they were [So Mr.
Burroughes paraphraseth it Mr. Burroughes on Hos. lect. 1. page 10.
] and they are Judges of Israel whom God commanded to feed his people, [1 Chronicles. 17.6.] Political or Civil power (as this text will tell us) is in genere
ordained of God, is his ordinance: By Ordination here (as I shall after
undertake to prove) is to be understood the Institution, warrant, approval, or
authorization of God, or his appointment by his revealed Will, Law, or Word:
and if Policy or Magistracy in its general concept or nature be ordained, that
is, authorized of God, then is all Political power in specie, and every
particular Civil Government, contained under or reducible to this Genus,
warranted and authorized by God: and what is by him unwarranted, unauthorized
or illegitimate, is in truth, no Political or Magistratical power. When a
person becomes a Magistrate, or a M^g^strate is made, what is the change or
effect that is thereby wrought in that man? or what new habit, or endowment
does the investing of a person into Magistracy, either by election, succession,
or otherwise, produce in him? He has no more Natural power in him, then he had
before; neither has he ordinarily more understanding, judgment, reason,
counsel to govern, then was before in him. Where is the change then? what does
this office add or put into him? why this is it, It gives him a moral capacity,
or a warrant, right, authority to rule: it legally empowers, or enables him to
command over, and obliges to be subject to his command all the natural power
that is in the multitude, or body politic, however vastly superior to his own
personal, innate, and natural power.

I am confident beyond all doubt, that no man shall be able to give a perfect
definition of Civil Magistracy, or Political power, which shall solely belong
to it, and distinguish it from all other power, but he must take into his
definition, warranted, authorized, lawful, or some other term that is
equivalent thereto. In this I am confirmed in that I find the concurrence of
learned Authors in their definitions of Magistracy expressly going this way. I
shall give some instances.

Augustinus To. 3. De Trinitate lib. 13. cap. 13. Potentia quippe adjuncta
justitiae, vel justitia accedens potentiae, judiciariam potestatem facit.
Augustine. For Power joined to Justice, or Justice added to Power, makes a
judiciary power.

Polanus Partit. Theolog. lib. 1. page 330. Est autem Magistratus politicus
persona publica, potestatem in subditos legitime gerens.
Polanus. The Political Magistrate is a public person lawful bearing sway
over the Subjects.

Bucanus Instit. Theolog. loc. 49. quaest. 13. page 853. Magistratus est
officium politicum a Deo institutum, quo ceria persona, vel plures cum
dignitate, and potestate legitime accepta, totam Rempub. vel ejus partem, quoad
(...) (i. e.) res quae ad hujus vitae usum pertinent, honestis legibus regunt.
Bucan. Magistracy is a political office, instituted of God, by which one
certain pertain person or more do rule, with dignity and power lawfully
attained, the Commonwealth whole or part with honest Laws, as to the things
that concern this life.

The professors of Leiden in their Synopsis. Synopsis purioris Theolo. per. 4.
profess. Leid. Disp. 50. Sect. 29. Forma Magistratus posita est in legitima
potestate ipsi a Deo concessa, haec enim inflar anima functioni ejus vitam
inspirat, atque efficacitem largitur.
The form of the Magistrate is placed in the lawful power granted to him of
God: for this like the soul breathes life into his function, and gives it
efficacy.

Zanchius. Zanchius de Not. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 8. quaest. 3. These. 3. Ad verum
enim, legitimum, liberumque dominatum constituendum necessarium est liberum,
absolutumque jus, libera, absolutaque potestas, quam Graeci (...) vocant, qua
res quarum dominatum quaeris tuae fiant.
For unto the making of a true, lawful, and free dominion, is necessary a free
and absolute right, a free and absolute power, which the Greeks call (...), by
which the things of which thou would have the dominion, are made thine.

Grotius. Grotius de jure belli, and pacis lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 4. Jus est
qualitas moralis personae competens ad aliquid just habendum, vel agendum;
qualitas autem moralis perfecta, facultas nobis dicitur, minus perfecta,
aptitudo. Sect. 5. Sub facultate continetur potestas, tum in se quae libertas
dicitur, tum in alios, ut patria, dominica, etc.
Right is a moral quality belonging to a person, whereby he may have or do a
thing justly; a perfect moral quality we call a faculty, an unperfect, an
aptitude. Under a faculty we comprehend Power, both that which is over a man's
self, which is called Liberty, and that which is over others, as the power of
the Father, of the Master, etc.

Sect. 6. Sed haec facultas rursum duplex est, vulgaris, sc. qui usus
particulalaris causa comparata est, and eminens, quae superior est in re
vulgari, utpote communitati competens in parts, and res partium, bon^ communis
causa. Sic regia potestas sub se habet, and patriam, and dominicam potestatem.
But this faculty is again twofold, viz. Vulgar, which is for particular use;
and Eminent, which is above the said Vulgar, as that which belongs to a
Community over its members, and their things for the common Good. So the Kingly
power has subject to it that of the Father, and of the Master.

Mr. John White his way to the Tree of Life, Chap. 3. page 46, 47.
In Scripture as well as in other Authors the name of Authority, and Power are
used indifferently, as if they were one, and the same thing: although in
strictness of signification we may find a real difference between them; for
Power implies that strength by which any thing not only subsists, but withal
bears out it self against whatsoever opposes it, and besides is enabled to
work any notable effect. Authority being most properly restrained to the
government of reasonable creatures, is that power by which a superior has
right to prescribe unto such as are under him. By Right in this description we
exclude Tyranny, which is, the usurping of authority without and against right.

To these I may add that of Tacitus, Agricolae vita cap. 10. he speaking of the
person of Galgacus our own Country man, Ausetre, trucidare, rapere falsis
nominibus imperium appellant; To despoil, to kill, to snatch away they miscal
by the name of Empire.

Subsection 4. What is required to the making of a Moral Power.
BEing come to this resolution that only Moral, viz. authorized or lawful
Power, and that species only of it, to wit, Political, or Magistratical power
is meant in the text; It may make for the further illustrating of this subject
we are upon, and the confirming of what has been said upon it, to consider
what it is that makes a Moral Power, or a Power to be warranted, authorized,
and awful: and for that end to take notice of the diverse ways wherein a power
may be said to be warranted or unwarranted, lawful or unlawful.

Unto a moral or authorized power, and so to the power intended in the Text, it
is necessary not only that the thing to be had and held, or to be acted and
done, be in it self lawful, but that it be lawful to the person in whom you
subject the power, that it be lawfully invested in him, or that there be a due
authorization, or call of the person to it.

For the yet clearer understanding of this, let it be observed that there are
four several ways wherein Power may be said to be lawful or unlawful,
warranted or unwarranted.

1. In regard of Matter. 2. In regard of Person. 3. In regard of Title. 4. In
regard of use.
Let us take notice wherein each of these consists, and differs from the
other, and how far they, or any of them conduce to the making up of a Moral
power.

First in regard of Matter. Power is in this respect lawful and warranted, when
the work or act to be done by it is in its own nature allowed, or approved of
God to be done by man. The Scripture declares to us a multitude of things which
are put into man's power, or are made lawful or warranted to him; as, for
instance, there is a power to eat, and to drink, to eat flesh, to eat without
discriminating betwixt clean and unclean; and to eat without respect to an idol
consecration. [1 Cor. 9.4. Genesis 9.3. Romans 14.14. 1 Cor. 8.^. and 10.23, 27.] On
the contrary many things are for their matter unlawful, and also the power of
them is unwarranted or forbidden to men. Such is the power claimed by the Pope
many ways, as the power of dispensing with divine laws, or of making of new in
matters of Faith and Religion; the power of judiciary binding the conscience,
or forgiving sins; the power of an Ecclesiastical supremacy over all
Christians; the power of disposing of souls in another world: these are
super-humane acts, or such as were never concredited to man. Such again is the
power of Witchcraft, Sorcery, false miracles, Divination, and the like
prestigiatory delusions, or pernicious seats, practiced by men from their own
presumption with the assistance or instigation of the Devil.

Secondly in regard of Person. There are in Scripture some Powers lawful for
the matter of them, but variable in point of warrant as to the person, the
tenure of them being allowed to one sort of persons, and inhibited to others;
some persons only are made competent, and others are disenabled to assume them;
and consequently in the persons capable to hold them they are lawful powers, in
others not so. The Priesthood of the Law was invested in the sons of Aaron,
with exclusion of all other: if any therefore besides them should have taken to
them that function (as did Korah and his company) there was a power unlawful in
regard of person. The Ministry of the word, or Office of teaching in the Church
is expressly forbidden to women. 1 Cor. 14.35. 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.
If then a woman should take up this work (as some, they say, of late have
done, and as the Pepasians, Quintillians, and Maxionites are said to allow and
practice Augustine de Haeres. cap. 22, and 27. Et Daneus in cundem.
) there were a power in this sense unlawful. Master Knox of Scotland held a
woman incapable (otherwise then by extraordinary call) of Civil Magistracy, or
Supreme rule History of the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, page 220.
and 311.
. So did the Jews, as Mr. Seldom tells us Jo. Seldom de Jure Not. lib. 7. cap.
6. page 812.
: and others conceive it simply prohibited by our Savior unto a Minister of
the Gospel, by those words of his [ Matthew. 20.26.] According to these opinions
if a Woman, or if a Minister should undertake the Civil power (however
humanely admitted to it) their power would be unlawful in regard of Person.

This is a second way of a powers lawfulness and unlawfulness. Where note, that
under this head the person is considered in specie, or in some common
condition, or rank, for as ^o persons individual warrant, or the want of it,
that is reducible to the next particular.

Thirdly, in regard of Title. A power may be in it self, or for matter
abstracted from persons lawful, and a person may be in common qualified for
investure with it, that is, as capable to receive it as another, but all this
makes not this or that man a Moral power. There must be put one thing more to
both these to constitute an authorized or lawful, and so a moral power; and
that is a right or title to rule.

This is of the nature and essence of Moral power; for what is Authority, but a
right to Rule? As private dominion or property consists in a right to employ,
and dispose of the thing owned; so public dominion or authority consists in a
title to rule.

That right or title is necessary to all tenure, or to Civil dominion in
general; or, that such right in most worldly things consists in a special
property, or sequestration of the things from common claim, and use to one, or
some peculiar persons, it may seem too much digressive and not needful to go
about here to prove. For however some things by reason either of their
vastness, and inexhaustibleness, or their joint-occupyableness by all without
interruption to any, are exposed to the common, arbitrary, and promiscuous use
of every man, as are the great Ocean, the light, the air; and however at the
beginning of the World, and for some time after, by reason of the fewness and
simplicity of mank^nde, dominion or right, in respect of the objects, was not
reduced to distinct property; yet now, upon the multiplication of occupants
(besides the emergent pravity, into which men are lapsed) in most things
dominion, or right is stated by sequestration, or peculiar appropriation; and
that doubtless agreeably to the law of Nature, and from the dictate of right
Reason, and the general agreement of all men that are but sound witted, and any
thing moralized. Yea it is delivered to us by Scripture to be the act of God,
The earth has he given to the children of men, [Psal. 115.16.] he has given
it, as the experience of this, and all precedent ages discoverable to us, tell
us, not to be catched up as fodder and harbor are by brute beasts in the
Wilderness, among whom the stronger and fiercer seize on what, and where they
please, the weaker take only what the other leave them; but under a rule of
equity and right apportionated or distributed by property: according to that of
St. Paul, He has determined the bounds of their habitation, [Act. 17.26.] and
that of Moses, When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance,
when he separated the sons of Ad m, he set the bounds of the people according
to the number of the children of Israel, [ Deuteronomy. 32.8.]

But to follow this Argument only with application to our particular subject.
Amongst the things that are subjected to property, or a seq^estred right, all
authority of one person over another must ne^ds be one, yea, and that more, or
rather then other things. For, though other things in the first age of the
world might have been common: as soon as ever matrimony, or other domestic or
civil societies were instituted, he rights of the correlatives of these
societies were distinguished, and appropriate; neither could it be other ways:
for whereas there was possible to be a community of right, or use at the
beginning in things of ordinary and external possession, whether moveable or
immovable, yet in matter of authority this could never be: It is repugnant to
the nature of the thing; it cannot exist without the subjection of some
determinate persons to it; and you must of necessity put, and tie up authority,
and subjection in distinct and several subjects, so as it may be said, this man
is to command, and these are to obey; whereupon it is inevitably to be yielded,
that authority consists in a right or title to rule appropriate to one, or some
certain persons, and reserved from others.

That to the producing, or constituting of a moral power (whether Civil
Magistracy, or any other) there must go the entitling or interesting of the
persons to it, or an investing him, or them with a right thereto, may be thus
further manifest.

All Moral power is derived from God as the fountain or Author. That which the
Apostle here says of the Civil Magistracy in specie; There is no power but of
God, the powers that he are ordained of God, is true of all power in general,
and he might have so expressly extended it, had his scope in this place been so
large. Gods derivation of authority to men must needs import two things.

1. His institution of authority in the general, with the several species of
it, as conjugal, parental, herile, magistraticall.

2. His communicating, conferring or conveying that power, which he has so
instituted to be, to particular persons.

There must be this latter as well as the former to the real and actual
constituting of an authority, or putting it into existence. Gods ordaining at
the first the conjugal, parental, herile, and political power, that is, his
appointing that the husband, parent, master, or prince shall have authority over
their respective correlatives (suppose by those words of the commandment,
Honor thy Father, etc.) does not of it self put any of those authorities in
being, or in one person more then another; or it makes no man a husband,
father, master, or Prince. Wherefore, if we will make this good, which cannot
be denied, that all Power, viz. Authority, is derived from God, we must say God
does by some act of his (besides his allowing or prescribing Government, with
such and such species of it to be) convey authority to individuals, or
particular persons. It must further be acknowledged that this act of God must
be such as that by it, not only the person authorized, but the rest that are
concerned in that estate, in point o^ use of it, or duty to it, may understand
that such an one is singled out by God to sustain this authority. How else
could any in conscience of Gods ordinance, either assume such authority over
others to themselves, rather then yield it to others, or others attribute it to
them rather then to others, or to themselves? Now can it be imagined how such
an act of God so humanely intelligible should be passed, but either it must be
by his immediate revelation from heaven, and thereby indigitating, or pointing
out (as it were) such a person, or persons to such an authority, in such a
place; or by chalking out a way to men, or giving rules in general to them, how
such and such authorities, shall accrue unto men; which ways or rules shall
serve in all cases (unless where himself shall immediately interpose) to
create superiority, or convey power to men, and to discover the empowered.

The former way, Gods designation of particular persons unto authority by
immediate revelation from heaven, is not now exercised or expected, neither was
it ever in ordinary, or constant use. The latter therefore is the way remaining
to us.

That there are such ways stated, or rules prescribed by God for men's entry
into relations of power over others, and those necessary to the being thereof,
so as without them all ordinary claims to such conditions are null, is very
evident, and confessed in the relations of parents, masters, husbands, pastors
of the Church, and many others; and there is no reason in the earth (to me
excogitable) to think it is not certainly so also in the Magistratical state;
What those rules or ways in particular are, in reference to Civil Magistracy,
here is not the fit place to enter upon the set enquiry, but I shall for this
have fuller opportunity (as also for the proving more largely that such rules
there are given of God) afterward in this discourse. But if thus much be
admitted (as I see not how it will be gainsayed) it suffices to prove the
thing we are about, viz. that the essence of Moral power consists in a title,
or right to rule. For if all power be from God, not only as appointing, the
office to be among men, but as appointing the person, or persons to the office:
and his ordinary, constant way of appointing the person to the office, be the
prescribing of a rule for men's ingresse into the authoritative relation, or
accession to power, by which way he communicates that power to them which is
not in others, and which otherwise is not in them, it must needs be that as
such admittance unto power most certainly gives right and title to it, so upon
men's having, or not having such entrance to it depends the reality, or nullity
of the power they to) themselves challenge. We have seen this third kind of
lawfulness or warrantableness of power ( viz. in regard of Title) and the
necessity of it to the being or constituting of a moral power.

Fourthly, there is yet behind another way wherein power may be said to be
lawful, or unlawful, viz. in regard of use. That power which in respect both of
matter, and of person, and of title is lawful, is yet to undergo a further
qualification to regulate it, which concerns the use, or employment of it: a
power lawful, and right for its composure must also be legal, and right for its
practice; its course, and process in government must be altogether just* it
may decree, and do only equal and right things, and in this respect that power
is unlawful, or culpable which does enact, or execute any injustice or wrong.
So were those ten Kings, [Rev. 17.13, 14.] who gave their power up to serve the
Beast, and to make war with the Lamb.

But among these four ways of the lawfulness and unlawfulness of a power,
which we have thus distinguished of and explained, there is this difference to
be noted. The three first ways do concern the being, composition, habit, and
constitution of an authority or Moral power; the fourth only concerns the act
and exercise thereof: and consequently the three first conditions of lawfulness
are simply necessary to the making of the power, the fourth is but accidental;
and exterior to its making; an unlawfulness in any of those three respects is
inconsistible with, destructive to the nature of a moral power, and
consequently secludeth the power that is in any of those things peccant from
any claim to this text; whereas that power which only offends in its use, or
acts of power, may well, as to its being, and constitution be moral, and
interested in the text, and its universal actings only be accounted foreign, or
disallowed ground therein. For this is (as far as I have observed) yielded by
all, and is very certain, that every unlawful power, so far as it is unlawful,
must be excluded out of the meaning of this text See the Authors quoted by Mr.
Prinne, his third part of the Power of Parliaments, p. 14.
. The power therefore that is unlawful as to its being, and constitution, is
wholly and absolutely secluded; the power that is unlawful only as to exercise
may be for its habit, or being included in it, and its irregular acts only
discarded from it.

To make this observation (if need be) yet more evident, as to that lawfulness
which concerns the being of a power. Unto the constitution of a power in its
individual essence and existence, you must necessary take in these three
things: 1. The matter of the power. 2. A subject or person to sustain it. 3. An
investure or conveying of that matter of power unto that subject or person.


If all these three must go to the making of a power, then a legitimacy in
every of these must go to the making of a Moral power; or a power lawful in its
constitution or being; and an illegitimacy in any of these is an illegitimacy
in the very being, and so a nullity to the power as moral, or a making of it no
authority.

1. An unlawfulness in the matter of a power destroys its moral being. The
Pope assumes to himself a power to dispense with the consciences of Christians
in divine Laws. This power, we say, is unlawful for the matter, or in the
whole kind of it disallowed to all, and every one of mankind: and therefore we
say it is null; we deny any such power to be in him.

2. An unlawfulness in regard of person evacuates the power. Korah and his
company arrogated to themselves the office of the priesthood; this power,
lawful in it self, as for the matte, was not lawful, but prohibited to be in
them; their Pr^esthood therefore was a nullity, they were indeed no priests.

3. Let there be a power lawful for matter, and a person capable, or induable
with it, yet if there be not a lawful investure, or conveyance of this power to
this person, there is yet in him no moral power; an unlawful, entry, or tenure
nullifies the power in that respect. John Becold (called John of Leyden) takes
upon him in Munster to be King, and as King acts and rules all at his
pleasure; this King being destitute of a just call, title, or tenure, was
therefore but scenical, and nothing as to a moral power, or real magistracy; he
was in truth no King, but a traitorous Villain; the unlawfulness here is in the
constitution of the power; that his having, and holding the pretended
Sovereignty, that his being in power was unlawful.

In any of these three ways of unlawful power, you cannot sever the
unlawfulness from the being of the power; take away that which is unlawful in
any of them, take away the matter, or take away the person, or take away the
tenure, and you destroy the very being of the power. For example, in the third
(which most concerns our purpose) where one takes and holds the place of Power
without right, or title, the thing which is here unlawful is the very tenure,
or holding of power; if then you will take away that which is unlawful, you
must take away the persons tenure, or holding of power, and so you take away
the being of this power. No otherwise is an unentitled tenure taken away, but
either by deposing the unlawful possessor, or by creating to him de novo, a
just title, and conferring on him a right: now either of these two ways the
power that was unlawfully occupied cease.

If then it be granted that from this Text is excluded every unlawful power so
far as it is unlawful, or whatever in the power is unlawful; Seeing the
unlawfulness of a rightless, or unentitled power, is in the being of it, not in
the exercise merely, and for that reason the unlawfulness is inseparable from
the power, it must needs be that an unentitled power is utterly and absolutely
excluded from the meaning of this Text: or, in short, seeing the being of the
power is unlawful, the being of the power must be shut out of our text. In this
respect the reason is the same betwixt an act of injustice of a power lawful as
to title or constitution, and an unjust occupants act of being in, or holding
the power; betwixt Ahabs seizing of Naboths vineyard, and Athaliahs intruding
into Joash his kingdom, the one is an act of Tyranny as to exercise, the other
is an act of Tyranny as to title. You cannot otherwise either give admittance
to the Text, and to the ordination of God, or deny it unto the one, then you
may do to the other: if you say the unlawfulness of oppression excludes Ahabs
act from this Text, I may with as good reason say the unlawfulness of wrongful
occupation excludes Athaliahs act, which is her being in power from the same.

CHAP. II. Of the term of GOD.
THese words, of God, ordained of God, are the two Predicates or things which
in this sentence are enunciated, or spoken of the subject, the power. And they
are the medius terminus, or the bottom or ground of the argument; the first
and principal argument which the Apostle in this his discourse of the subjects
duty to the Civil Magistrate, brings for subjection to the higher powers. And
they are a medium of a very great force and authority: being they offer to
consideration the highest descent, origination or derivation of the powers here
pleaded for, viz. that they are of God, ordained of God. These terms then are
of a very main, and material importance; and the defining and clearing of the
sense of them cannot but be chiefly necessary and useful.

It will easily be granted only those Powers are here intended unto which these
predicates (of God, ordained of God) are truly, and in the sense of the Apostle
in this place attributable. The business then will be to enquire, How these
words must be here taken, and what is their special meaning in this place.

Both of these terms refer the subject they are spoken of, the pow rs that be,
unto God as the author of them; but the former does it in a more general word,
Pareus Tolet.
the latter more expressly; the latter therefore may be, and is by Expositors
taken as the explication and limitation of the former. We will first examine
the former, the more general term, of God, and after descend to the following,
the more special notification of the powers derivation, ordained of God.

SECT. I. The diverse Scripture-acceptations of this term, of God, recited.
THere is no power but of God. This phrase, of God, is of a diverse acceptance
and use, both in Scripture and in Theology. That we may come the more clearly
to the meaning of it in this text, I shall endeavor, first to sum up the
different uses of it in Scripture, as I have collected them.

In the general all the ways of the being of things of God may be reduced
under two heads, that is, [1. Of his hand. 2. Of his mouth.] or, [1. Of his
work. 2. Of his word.] or, [1. Of his doing. 2. Of his declaring.] But then
each of these may be subdistinguished.

Of the former, the being of a thing of Gods hand, work, or doing (which we
ordinarily call his Providence) we must again distinguish. It may be taken
either,

1. In a more general and large sense, so as to import only that some
disposings or proceedings of God, are the antecedent or occasion upon which
certain things come to pass. And thus the sinful actions of the creature are
said to be of God. Judge. 14.4.
Samsons unlawful desire to have to wife a daughter of the Philistims: 1 King.
12.15.
Rehoboams either unjust or imprudent refusal to satisfy the ten tribes in
their desire of easement of their former burdens: 2 Chronicles. 25.20.
Amaziahs insolent, and foolish rejection of the peaceable overture and advice
returned him from Joash: these sinful courses of these persons are said to be
of or from God; that is, in the same sense wherein God is said to hearden the
heart; Exodus 7.11. Ezekiel. 14.9. 1 King. 22.23. Judge. 9.23. Isa. 29.10. Mat.
6.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. 2 Samuel 16.11. 1 Kin. 11.14, 23, Isai. 10.5. Psalm. 105.25.
Rev. 17.17. Zeph. 3.5. Jam. 1.13.
to deceive; to put a lying spirit in the mouth of some; to send an evil spirit
between men; to power out upon men the spirit of deep sleep, and to close their
eyes; to lead men into temptation; to send men strong delusions that they
should believe a lie; to bid a wicked man curse a righteous; to stir up and to
send men when they enterprise, and go on sinful achievements; to turn the
hearts of men, and to put in their hearts to do evil. Not as if he positively
acted these things, or efficaciously infused them into men, he will not do
iniquity, he tempts not any man, but in as much as he leaves men to
themselves and to Satan, he lays no impediments upon their power, or active
restraint upon their wills; yea, he so orders outward occurrences, as that
they meet with fit occasion and suiteable inducements to those evils, (which
his carriage to men he predetermineth before to use for holy ends, and most
righteously, and foreseeth infallibly what men will thereupon do) hence
therefore their running into those sins is (in a large and less proper sense)
said to be of God.

2. Secondly, things are said to be of God providentially, or of his hand,
work, and doing, more directly, or in a more proper and positive acception,
that is, so as he is the author, or efficient cause of them, or so as they are
not merely from his working providence, as the hint or occasion only, but from
him as the worker, or agent producing them, or putting them in rerum natura.
Thus all positive beings are of God. [ Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 8.6. Heb. 2.10.] that
is, the existence of all individuals or singulars, with all their motions,
effluxes or actions, Act. 17.28. whether the agents be irrational, Mat. 10.29
or moral, rational and free, [ Isa. 28.29. Prove. 16.1, 9. and 20.24. and 21.1.]
and all the conditions, and events; all the evil; and all the good that befalls
any creature, [ Psalm. 75.7, 8. 2 King. 6.33. Ia. 1.17.] and these whether they
be from second causes advisedly and intendedly, or they be merely casual and
contingent in respect of them [ Prove. 16.33. 1 King. 22 34. 2 Chronicles. 22.7. Genesis
50.20.]

And things are this way of God, viz. of his direct and positive proceeding two
ways:

1. By his ordinary providence, or as he works in, and by natural causes, and
in a natural course, as in the aforegiven instances.

2. In a way of supernatural efficiency, or working of Grace. So persons are of
him in their estate of Grace, [1 John 5.19. 3 John 11.] and so the gracious
effects that are in persons, are of him, [2 Cor. 5.18: and 2.17. 1 Chronicles.
29.14.] the former way the Schools call his general, the latter his special
concourse.

Secondly, of God, signifies of Gods mouth, word, or declaring: a thing is said
to be of God that proceeds out of his mouth, or is spoken, or uttered by him.
Now we must note, the things that proceed out of the mouth of God are more
principally of two sorts, in as much as the mouth or word of God is a
declaration of his will, and the will of God is distinguished by a twofold
acceptance.

1. The first is, his (...), or will of Decree, or that will which himself
purposes to execute, or have to be.

2. The second is his (...), or his Legislative or preceptive will, which
delivers the rule or law which man is to do, or walk by. Hence it is, that
the declarations of the mouth of God are sutably twofold, and of two sorts of
things. [1. Narrative or manifesting. 2. Imperative or regulating.] Under the
first sort are comprised all the discoveries of Gods own ways, and works, or
of what God himself has done, does, or will do; all the revelations or
prophesies of Gods proceedings, past, present, and to come; all Divine
histories, promises, threatenings, or other predictions. That (says the
Prophet) which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I
declared unto you, [Isa. 21.10.] Under the latter head, the declarations of his
Imperative, or regulating will, are contained all his Commandments, or
concessions unto men; whatsoever God injoynes or allows man to do, or not to
do; all divine warrants, commissions, precepts, or permissions touching humane
actions and affairs. According to this last acception that is of God that is
authorized by him unto men; that is not of God, which he disapproveth,
prohibiteth, or warranteth not unto men.

Let us, in reference to the latter, the being of a thing of Gods mouth by way
of declaring his approving or authorizing will, observe, for explications sake,
some instances of both sorts, viz. both Positive and Negative out of Scripture.

1. According to this sense both persons and things are affirmed to be of God.

1. Persons are owned thus to be of God; that is, to be authorized, and
approved of him to be in their respective states and places. Rabbi, we know
that thou art a teacher come from God, says Nicodemus unto Jesus, [ Joh. 3.2.]
and Christ says, He that is of God, he has seen the Father, [Joh. 6.46.] If
this man were not of God, he could do nothing, says the blind man of Christ, [
Joh. 9.33.] And the Apostle John often has this phrase, Try the spirits
whether they are of God, every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh is of God. Ye are of God little children, -- we are of God, [1 John 4.1, 2, 4, 6. and 5.19.]

2. As persons, so ways, doctrines, and practices are in this acceptance said
to be of God. If any man (says our Savior) will do his will, he shall know of
the Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, [Joh. 7.17.]
If this counsel or this work be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, quoth the
Doctor in the council at Jerusalem, [Act. 5.38, 39.] And David said of his
enterprise of bringing up the Ark of God to his C^ty; If it seem good unto you,
and that it be of the Lord our God, Let us send, etc. [1 Chronicles. 13.2.] A
parallel phrase to this of being of God is that of being from Heaven, in
distinction from that which is of men. As in that question of our Savior to
the chief Priests, [ Mat. 21.25.] The baptism of John, whence was it? from
heaven, or of men?

2. Negatively, in this sense many both persons, and things are denied to be of
God.

1. Persons are said not to be of God. Whosoever does not righteousness, is not
of God. Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God. He that is not of God hears not us, [1 John 3.10. and
4.3, 6.] This man is not of God because he keeps not the Sabbath, [Joh. 9.16.]

2. Ways are denied to be of God. All that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, etc. is not of the Father, but is of the world, [1 John 2.16.]

I have thus endeavored to gather together, and lay down distinctly the several
ways wherein persons and things may be said to be of God, and so the various
senses of this phrase, of God. The sum is, of God is first either of his hand,
and providence, and so a thing may be of God, 1. Either occasionally: 2. or,
casually. And this latter way things are of God, either, 1. By his general, or,
2. By his special concourse. Or secondly of his mouth, and word, and so a
thing, may be of God, 1. Either Narratively: 2. or, Legislatively, and by way
of authorization, approbation, or warrant to men. And this last way Scripture
declares, 1. Some both persons, and ways, to be of God. 2. And some both
persons, and ways, not to be of God.

SECT. II. For the clearing of the Question which of these acceptations are
proper to this Text, diverse things discussed.
BUt now the Question is, in which of those senses the term of God must be
taken in this Text? Some of these acceptions are so plainly, and remotely
distant from the purpose of the Apostle, that they need not at all come under
this enquity. Of this sort is the being of a thing of Gods hand, or providence
occasionally, as the sins of men are, which I shall therefore pass over, as
also the being of a thing of Gods mouth narratively, or prophetically.

Subsection 1. The difference betwixt the Narative, and the Legislative word of
God: and that Scripture predictions are not a warrant for us to act upon in the
things predicted.
ONly to give this note of difference betwixt the Narrative and Legislative
expressions of Gods mouth.

1. The former is the scheme or platform of Gods own ways, and of his will of
purpose or decree so far as he pleases to reveal it. And the same things which
are of his hand acting, are thus of his mouth declaring, either the history of
them, as things done, or the prediction of them as things to be done by him.
The latter, that which is Legislative is the model, or rule of man's duty and
ways. This is one difference.

2. The Narrative word is the object or matter of our faith: the legislative of
our practice.

These differences are well to be observed. When God reveals in his word that
such a thing is, or shall be done by himself; that such things have been or
shall come to pass: these revelations are the objects of our faith; we may,
yea must believe them to be as they are revealed, either past, or future. But
they are not therefore, or by virtue of such revelation, a rule or warrant for
us to walk by; that is, we are not authorized or obliged thereby to act, or put
our hand to the effecting, or promoting the execution of such things Vide
Amesium Medull. Theolog. lib. 2. cap. 1. Sect. 22, 23. Grotium de Jure Belli.
lib. 2. cap. 22. Sect. 15. cum Annotat.
. God foretold he would raise up evil against David out of his own house, 2 Samuel 12.11. Luke 24.46. Act. 3.18. and 13.27.
and he would take his wives before his eyes, and give them to his neighbor,
and he should lie with them. But this was no allowance for Absalom, Ahitophel,
or any of that party to counsel, or act to the accomplishing of these things.
The people and Rulers of the Jews did most wickedly, and undutifully in the
sufferings, and death of Christ: But they did nothing therein but what God
before had declared he would bring to pass by them.

There are some now a days who make it not only lawful, but a duty of the
Saints of this present age, yea their main work or masterpiece, to stickle
against Civil Powers, both with tongue, and hand, both to cry and to pull them
down; and their ground which they lay for this so strange a Position, is this
double supposal;

First, That the Prophesies and predictions of Scripture declare the ruin of
all eart^^ potentates to be a work which God will effec^ (...) this time.

Secondly, That whatsoever be not^^^^d to us ^y Scripture prophecy to be the
purpose, cour^^* or dispensation of God in our generation, that we are bound to
act for, and promote to our uttermost, and are to take the said dispensation of
God for our call, rule, and warrant for the same. Both these supposals and that
conclusion inferred from them, I find laid down and insisted o^ in the books
of one Mr. Tillinghast The former of the supposals is in his Generation work,
part. 1. page 42, 55. the latter, page 19, 43. 63, 72, 73. and part. 2. page 7.
The conclusion is in his knowledge of the times, the Appendix, conclus. 30.
page 344. and Gener. work part. 1. page 55, 66.
To debate these positions with him is not my enterprise here. This only will I
say to them, The former of his two supposals is a thing to me very inevident,
and will (I think) scarce be cleared so well as to be made a principle upon
which a practical conclusion may be built. The latter is a most unsound and
presumptuous position See this well discussed in Dr. Sclater his Sermon on 2
King. 9.31. page 25, etc.
. The Scripture abounds with multitudes of instances of divine predictions,
and humane executions; the former expressly owned, the latter as plainly
disowned and condemned by God. The examples above given of the sufferings of
David, and of Christ, may serve to be produced instead of all. And I shall add
only, that Baasha had a prophecy for all that he did against Jeroboams house,
yet is he not excused by that, but condemned nevertheless See 1 King. 14.14.
and 15.29. and 16.7.
. It is very strange that men of sober heads, and savoring of Godliness,
should in these days under the name of Saints, lick up the vomit of Hacket, of
Mountzer, and of John of Leyden See Camdeni Annal. To. 2. p. 37. Joh. Sleiden
Comment. lib. 10. page 253. Muntzers life in Rosse his (...).
. If divine providence and dispensation of it self make out a rule to us to
walk by, their horrid miscarriages, CHAP. II. SECT. II. Subsect. 2.
and fatal ends should have taught the men of these No ions quite otherwise. I
will but make up this (somewhat necessary) digression with a passage in Daniel,
and the explication of it given by Expositors. It is said [ Dan. 11.14.] Also
the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves, to establish the vision.

This sentence expositors apply to Onias the Priest, and certain Apostate
Jews, who in the days of Antiochus the great his reign over Judea fell from
him, and went into Egypt, and sided with the King thereof, his enemy, and by
petition obtained of him, that they might there in the Country of Heliopolis,
build a temple, and an altar unto God, like that at Jerusalem. And for this
their both civil and religious Apostasy they pretended the fulfilling of the
prophecy of Isaiah [Cap. 19. v. 18, 19.] In that day shall five Cities in the
land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts; one
of them shall be called the city of Destruction, (in the margent of the Sun,
that is, Heliopolis.) In that day there shall be an Altar to the Lord in the
midest of the Land of Egypt, etc] And because of the Apostasy of those men
upon that pretense the tex says, (as Commentators refer it) they shall exalt
themselves to establ sh the vision Divines Anno. and Diodate in loc. Vide Usser
Arnal. part. post. de M. 3854. Edw. Simsons Chron Cath. A. M. 3853.
.

Subsection 2. Certain Propositions to explain those several ways wherein
things are said to be of God.
BUt the question will be concerning the being of a thing of Gods hand by way
of efficiency, and the being of a thing of Gods mouth by way of warrant, rule
or precept; whether both of these, or but one of them, and if but one, then
which of them is it which is intended by this clause, of God?

Before I come to determine this question, as it lies betwixt these two in
particular, it may be somewhat conducible to compare them together, and to
explain them a little more, and the reduceableness of things to both, or each
of them. For the which observe*

1. Sometimes a thing is both these ways of God, viz. both of his mouth
authorizing, and of his hand working it. That which his mouth enjoynes, his
hand sometimes effects. [2 Chronicles. 30.12.] In Judah the hand of God was to give
them one heart to do the commandment of the King and the Princes by the word
of the Lord. The like see [1 Chronicles. 29.14. Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 5 5, 18.]

2. Sometimes a thing is of Gods mouth commanding, but not of his hand working,
God shows, injoynes to men their duty many times when as it is not performed in
them, [see Jer. 7.23, 24.]

3. A thing is sometimes of Gods hand, but not of his mouth. Many things come
to pass by divine providence, or working, which though himself effect, and
that by man's agency, yet he allows not of that agency of man in them. Take for
instances Gods sending of Joseph into Egypt, by his Brethrens selling of him [
Genesis 45.5, 7, 8. and 50.20.] the expulsion of David out of his Kingdom, and the
ravishment of his Wives by Absalom, [2 Samuel 12.11, 12.] The destruction and
captivity of Judah by Nebuchadn^zar, [Isa. 10.5, 6, 15. Jer. 51.7. and 25.9.
compared with Chap. 47.6. Jer. 50.17, 18. and 51.24, 34, 35, 36.] The
sufferings of Christ by the Jews, [Act. 2.13. and 4.28.] with many other things
[as 1 King. 11.14, 23. 1 Samuel 26.19. Judge. 2.14, 15. Hab. 1.6, 13.]

4. Some things are neither of Gods mouth, approving; nor of his hand, acting.
So are the sins of men in their formal, precise, or abstract consideration, [
Jam. 1.13. Gal. 5.8. 1 John 2.15.]

Subsection 3. CHAP. II. SECT. II. Subsect. 3.
Of Gods working in humane actions, whether good or evil; and the difference
betwixt the being of the one of God, and of the other.
FOr the better understanding of these four particula^s, especially the two
last of them, upon which there may lie some obscurity, let these Propositions
be thereto added.

1. All beings, or things; whatsoever has subsistence or existence; all
events, effects and productions, as to their matter, or positive entity, are of
Gods hand, and working, [ Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 1.11.]

2. Of those things that are of Gods hand, of working, 1. Some are of him as
the sole efficient of them. So are those things which receive their being by
creation, regeneration, or other such like supernatural, or miraculous
production. 2. Others are so of God, as to be also the work, and effect of
second agents. So are all those things which come to pass here below, and in
the order of nature, or the ordinary course of providence.

3. In the causing of the latter sort of effects, viz. those wh ch are both of
God, and the creature, these two are not coordinate agents, or set
collaterally, or in parity, or equality of order; for that would import that
both were first, and but partial, sociall causes, and as well the one as the
other to be independent, or to have their causality in, and from themselves
alone. But the one is subordinate to the other, that is, God is the supreme and
first, the creature is the inferior, and second cause, and is dependent on, and
receive its physical efficiency, or attingency of the effect from God, and that
not partially or by way of addition or supply, but wholly. [ Act. 17.25, 28.
Isa. 54.16. Ezekiel. 30.24. and 32.3.11, 12.] and this holds in all acts of the
creature, whether holy or sinful, good or evil, as to the natural being of the
action. That which the Apostle says of his gracious workings, Not I, but the
grace of God which was with me, [1 Cor. 15.10.] the same Joseph says of his
brethrens sinful deed, It was not you that sent me hither, but God, [Gen.
45.8.] The creature acts, yet not it, but the power of God with it.

The creature has truly, and really in it an active principle, and that
principle truly and really exerteth or puts forth acts, but it has both the
principle, and the activenesse put into it of God. His influence not only
touches the effect, but the second cause, and moves it Contrary to this some
of the Schoolmen. Molina de lib. Arbitrio. qu. 14. Disp. 26. pa. 111. and Disp.
32. page 133,
. He works not only with, but by it, and that though in some sense mediately,
in regard of his elevation, and use of the second cause, yet immediately also
in regard of his nearest attingency, and that both by immediety of person and
of virtue.

4. It behooves us to consider the subordinacy of the second to the first cause,
of the creature to God somewhat more distinctly. Observe therefore it is
twofold: 1. Physical. 2. Moral.


The former simply and absolutely concerns the being of every real effect,
and the virtue, or power by which it is produced by any second cause.

The latter respects the manner of the procedure of an effect from a rational
agent, and the relation, and correspondency it bears to the revealed, and
preceptive will of God given unto him.

All creatures in all their actions are physically subordinate to God; but
reasonable creatures moreover are, and particularly man is morally subordinate
to him; viz. as he receives all his activity from him, so he is to act by his
Commission, and in a conformity to his direction, or command given forth by
word: the ground and reason of the former subordination is his being a
creature; for as such he totally depends on God for his being and operation;
the latter is from his being a creature endued with reason and will, and
therefore working with deliberation and free volition; thence his person and
actions are qualifiable with a moral goodness, and evilness, and are capable of
being regulated by a law, and prosecuted with rewards and punishments. Man
therefore in respect of his moral actions, stands in this twofold subordination
unto God, physical, and moral.

5. There are diverse differences twixt these two subordinations of man unto
God, some of which it is to our present purpose to consider. They are different.

1. In the formal respect, or term to which they refer; the physical
subordination respects Gods will of purpose, and hand of providence; the
moral respects Gods revealed will, or word of precept.

2. In point of necessity, the physical subordination is certain and immutable,
so necessary as that it cannot be otherwise, it is impossible the creature
should not be in all things subject to, dependent on Gods decree and hand of
providence, both passively and actively: the moral is not so, but may be, and
is varied from, though this subordination be necessary de jure, and ought to be
kept inviolate, yet it is not de facto, but it is oftentimes infringed. And
here comes in sin; what is sin but the creatures breach, and transgression of
the moral subordination he stands in, and owes unto God his preceptive will or
word, either by a non acting, or by a contrary acting to the same?

6. By these differences it may appear (for I shall not strive to take notice
of all) that these two subordinations are in humane actions, not only
distinguishable, but separable and dissociable. Man may be subordinate to God
physically in those actions wherein he is inordinate morally. And Gods will of
purpose, and work of providence may go on, and be done, when his preceptive
will takes no place, but is directly crossed, as it is in all the sinful
motions of man. And hence it may appear of the sinful acts of men, as they are
something in rerum natura, how it may be said (as in the third Proposition
above) the thing is of Gods hand working, but not of his mouth warranting it to
man.

If it be here asked, Why God makes use of such agents to act by, as are
displeasing and cross to his preceptive will, when as he has such choice of
other ministerial agents, yea, and makes use of his creatures agency merely of
choice, not of necessity?

I answer, though man's sinful acts cannot but be displeasing and dishonorable
to him, yet the use he can, and does make of them, is not so. It is for his
honor to work by variety of instruments, and the commendation of his
workmanship to bring to pass a straight and perfect work, with crooked and
untoward tools. His providence of this nature are the probations of men, both
good and evil; and hereby he both works out more good then there is evil in
the act of the subordinate agent so peccant, and accomplisheth the just
punishment, both of others and of those he so imployes.

7. We must observe in the subordination of the creature to God in its
production, though it receive all its efficacy and working from God, yet the
causality of the first and second, of the superior and inferior cause, and
the efflux of the effect as from the one, and the other, are distinguishable.
As the creatures essence, and existence are wholly in and from God, yet far
enough different, and distinct from Gods: so the creatures power and operation,
unto the causing of an effect, is totolly received of God, yet Gods agency
therein is one, and the creatures is another. Hence our sense tells us the sun
shines, the fire warmes, chalk whitens, and it is so really. If we should say
(as many Schoolmen do) that in this subordinate agency of the creature under G
d, and their working together unto any effect, Molina. Suarez.
the action of God, and the creature is the same strictly and properly, as
action is taken for productio activa (for as taken for productio passiva, or
the effect, it may be clearly granted) yet, (although I see not why total
dependency, and derivation should more infer, or be a reason for the
confounding, or identifying Gods and the creatures actions, then it is for the
identifying of their beings) we must understand it of the materiale, and not of
the formale of their actions, and so must be forced to put some distinction,
betwixt the creatures causality, and the virtue by which he causes; betwixt
the divine influx to the creature agent, and the creatures (...), or efflux to
the effect; betwixt the creatures taking in the concourse of the first cause,
and his issuing or putting it forth. That God and the creature are different
agents in their producing of the same effect is granted, but how should they be
so, if their action or agents were altogether the same? Besides, if it were so,
then the same action must be said to be morally good ( viz. as from God) and
evil (as from man) to be subordinate to a law (^s from man) not subordinate
(as from God). Again, if in this concurrence of these two agents to the causing
of the same effect, the action of each were wholly the same, then the same
action would denominate them both, which we see it does not. When a stone falls
downward, a plant grows, a beast goes, eats, sleeps, we do not (nor can
properly) say that God falls, grows, goes, eats, sleeps. For although all these
acts are in and from his concourse, yet, as they only are in the creature, as
their subject, so they are also from the creatures natural principles, from
which there is a procedure of these acts different formally from that of the
divine cooperation, for which they peculiar denominate the creature and not
God. In man, whose actions have a moral (...) different from their physical,
and who acts with deliberation and choice, this difference (though it (...)
in all creature act^) is more apparent. Let it be granted that in all his
actions he is physically ^^^ed by God, (though some admit it only of his
imperate, transient and productive actions; unto the immanent and illicit acts
of his understanding, and will, they will only allow a moral motiveness Jo.
Cameron Resp. ad Epist. viri Docti. cap. 1. in operibus eius page 736. a, and
737. a.
, but whether way soever it be (let the physical influence be supposed of all)
in these humane actions the strength and virtue is from God, the actuosity or
agency is formally man's. Though the action be good, and so more peculiarly of
God (he not only sustaining the will in the use of its freedom, but determining
and carrying it (whether by a physical or moral influence, is not here to be
disputed) to the willing and working of that good) yet the formal agency is
only ascribed to man. Hence he is said to believe, hope, pray, and do the like
gracious acts, and not God.

Hence it may appear (which is the reason I have travailed so far in these
School intricacies) how in the sinful acts of man, the usual distinction
betwixt the action and the moral obliquity of it, and that the former is from
God, the latter is man's only, may hold. For,

1. Take it only in its natural or physical consideration, and so the action is
both from God, in as much as from him is the energie, or force that goes to it;
and from man also, in as much as he has an hand, or activity in it, distinct,
though inseparable from that of God.

2. And take it as a moral act, in which the creature owes subordination and
conformity to Gods law, and which flows from a moral faculty in man, and so
it is only from man, from his own will, according to that of our Savior, That
which comes out of a man that defiles a man, for from within, out of the
heart of men proceed evil thoughts, etc. All these things come from within,
and defiles man. And that of the Apostle, CHAP. II. SECT. II. Subsect. 4.
God gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to
dishonor their own bodies.) God not at all inclining or drawing, or
intrinsecally determining the will in the election of evil, as neither does he
in its act of aversation, or refusal of good, or in a sin of omission. And thus
it is manifest (according to our fourth proposition above) it may be said that
some things (taking the term Thing in a vulgar sense) are neither of Gods mouth
(approving) nor of his hand (working.) For man's sinful action, though the
matter, virtue, or activity be of Gods hand, yet in its formal and moral stamp,
it is neither of Gods hand nor mouth.

Subsection 4. How the hand of God is clear from the sin of man when it acts
in man's sinful action, and from injustice in punishing him for that action.
IF it be here asked, How this may be, that God may use, and be the author of
those actions, or motions of his creature in subordination to his working
providence, which in their formal and moral habitude are evil, and so
deordinate or repugnate to his word, and yet his hand and providence be as
clear from the sin, as his word is clear against it: and how the creature is in
this case justly punishable by God?

I answer briefly:

1. For the former, How God is clear from being the author of the sin?

1. It is not the sin formally taken which God makes use of to the production
of any natural effect, but the physical motion of the creature to which the sin
is adherent.

2. Let it be considered how man acts in this physical subserviency to God.
He is not impelled by God, but he moves of his own accord, and free choice; he
is not moved (as I think it may be affirmed) physically of God, till he first
move himself morally. Unto every moral act of man that is transient, and
productive of any thing, there are required two things to be in him, Will and
Power; the power, how great soever, does nothing of it self, it is the wills
injuction that educeth the act; though both concur to the action or effect, yet
the power does not lead or draw forth the will, but the will actuates the
p^we^. The power in it self is neither good nor evil, posse peccare was no
fault in Adam, he had it in his integrity; a defectibility was both in him, and
in the nature of Angels originally: neither does the power make the action to
which it is exerted, either good or evil; but the moral tincture is wholly
from the will, and so entirely does it result thence, that the will in some
sort (whether to good or evil) stands for, or is equivalent to the deed in
Gods account. The question then is, Whence is the will moved to this or that
sinful act? God indeed uses the creatures hand or power, but who or what is
the mover or swayer of the will? The Philosopher says, and it is true, God is
primus motor, the first mover, but this he understands of physical motion, and
therefore in the external execution of that deed which is sinful, let it be
granted that God begins, but in humane actions, there is a moral act which goes
before the natural, an elicite act precedes the imperate, an election of the
will before an elevation of the power. Now for the volition of the will in
reference to a sinful work, that is of it self, and its counselor or dictator,
the practical Intellect, as they may be each in their kind morally excited, or
induced by their objective attractives without, or the suggestions of Satan; It
must necessarily be acknowledged unto an evil course the will is not
intrinsecally determined by God: he neither morally persuades, nor physically
impels it to such resolution, purpose or choice. God tempts not any man, etc.
[ Jam. 1.13.] all, I think, that can be said of God, as to that act of the
will, is that he abandons, or leaves the man to himself, and to his objective
and injective temptations, which though it may be an antecedent, yet is not in
the least a positive cause of the wills default; and yet he never does that,
but very righteously, both in regard of his disobligation from any debt of
assistance to his creature, and in regard of just provocation from him, ever
since his first defection.

3. There are causes imaginable wherein even one man may honestly join in the
same act with another, when it is to his knowledge in that other a sinful
action: the diversity of the principle and end making the concurrence of the
one just, of the other wicked. Take for instance Reubens counselling and acting
with his brethren in the casting of his brother Joseph into the pit, which they
did for a mischief, he for a deliverance to him, [ Genesis 37 21.] and Hushaies
counsel to Absalom (which Absalom and his companions embraced) in show for
Absaloms service against David, but in intention and real tendency quite
contrary [2. Sam. 17.11, etc.] And this is seen in the guiltless concurrence of
one that is necessitated to enter into any contract that is unlawful in the
party voluntarily contracting, whether usury, or other Vide Grotium de Jure
Belli lib. 2. cap. 26. Sect. 5. and lib. 3. cap. 1. Sect. 22.
.

How much more may it be yielded to be so betwixt these two, in this respect,
as in other infinitely dispar agents, God and man; especially when we know
there is no less distance betwixt the end which the one has, and that of the
other: according as Joseph expresses it in the case between his brethren and
himself. But, as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto
good to save much people alive, [Gen. 50.20.] could it not be so betwixt man
and man; that one might lawfully join his hand in that act wherein another
joyneth sinfully, yet God, though most righteous, is unconfined to the bounds
of man's righteousness: it is his prerogative, as the supreme cause, not to be
tied within those rules, which subordinate agents are.

4. Let it be added, when God uses man's efficiency to inflict that upon one
which from the subordinate agent is sinfully inferred, as suppose slaughter,
robbery, defamation, or the like, there what is wickedly done by man, is
always justly from God upon the patient: he no less righteously (as to the
sufferer) takes away a man's life by the hand of an assassinate, then if he did
it by a disease, or any other means: and being so, if we think it no
impeachment to the justice of a supreme magistrate to take away the life of a
capital offender by such a judge, or executioner as may act corruptly in it, as
doing it with a mind merely acted by cruelty, or mercenary respects; much more
may we absolve the providence of the Almighty in the employment of a sinful
instrument to the accomplishment of his most just purpose and act.

2. For the other part of the question, The punishableness of a person by God
thus serving his providence by his sinful action: the same things will serve
for answer.

1. Man has a concurrence or agency of his own formally different from Gods in
the action.

2. That his concurrence is free, from his own will, without all
compulsivenesse.

3. He therein proposes to himself, not Gods end, or the serving of God in it,
but he has his own proper aim different from, and often contrary to that of
God Who so forlorn or impudent amongst miscreants as to say, that in his damned
ambition, or covetousness, or luxury he had respect to the will of God, which
no man lightly knows but by the event? Dr. Sclater Sermon on 2 King 9.31. page
27.
.

CHAP. III. CHAP. III.
A Digressive Enquiry concerning the voice, or declarative use of Divine
Providence.
I Have here done comparing and explaining those two ways of the being of
things of God, betwixt the which the question lies. But before I can come up to
the dissolving of it, there is another question shows it self in the way, which
I know not well how to avoid the speaking somewhat to. For whereas our enquiry
is, Whether of these two ways of the being of a thing of God ( viz. of his
mouth approving, and of his hand working) both, or but one, and if but one,
then which of them is meant in the Text? A question may here be started,
whether these two be not coincident? that is, whether the working hand of God
have not a mouth or voice, or be not vocal, and declarative of the will of God
to us, and if it be, then how far, and wherein?

CHAP. III. SECT. I.
SECT. I. The usefulness of the said Enquiry.
THe question intervenient, and first to be spoken to then is about the use of
Providence in the discovery of Gods preceptive, or approving and disapproving
will. This question I thought not good to omit, being of concernment to the
subject we are now upon, and having here a fit place to discuss it, and its
discussion being of more then ordinary necessity in these days; wherein there
is not only much variety and manifold revolutions of Divine Providence in the
greatest affairs, and those very unusual and amazing, but a very frequent,
studious, and solemn reference to it, as the voice of God, and as a Guide,
Judge, and Interpreter of Gods will of command, or warrant for the regulating
of our persuasions and actions in matters of chiefest difficulty and
difference. We see how much Providence is pointed at, produced, alleged to
justify and condemn ways and causes; and to entitle courses to Gods approval
or disapproval, and to induce men upon that account to own or disown persons
and proceedings. I have long desired heartily, that this question might be
religiously, judiciously, and impartially debated. And to occasion it I shall
here seriously deliver my weak thoughts upon it. I confess my self to have
entered upon, as a useful, so an high and intricate question, especially as the
tract of men's pens, and notions of their minds of late has run: Therein
therefore it behooves a man (especially such an one as I) to speak with great
caution and humble submission.

SECT. II. CHAP. III. SECT. II. III.
In what sense the word Providence is taken in this enquiry.
I Take up the word Providence because it is the ordinary term; and I take it
in the vulgar sense, for mere active, opera^ive, or productive providence.
Divines do use it in another sense Vide Molinam de lib. Arbitrio qu. 22. Disp.
1. pa. 287. Synopsis profess. Leid. Disp. 11. Sect. 2.
, (and the genuine signification of the word does so import) viz. for that
immanent or internal act in God, whereby he does within his own thoughts order
and contrive the affairs of the world, as they shall be accordingly acted and
issued in the creature. But the ordinary acceptance, and so our present use of
it, is to mean only effective or eventual Providence; and so I here use it.

SECT. III. The Question discussed, Whether Divine Providence be, and wherein
it is regulating, or declarative of the will of God to be done by us.
THe question then is, Whether Providence in producing visible effects in the
creature, be legislative, or declare the mind of God by way of rule to men,
CHAP. III. SECT. IIII. Subsect. 1.
or be a testimony of Gods commanding and prohibiting, approving and
disapproving will, which men are to follow, or square their actions by, in like
manner as his oracles, or dictates by vision, dream, or inward inspiration were
to them that received them so immediately of God, and still are to us that have
the record of them in the Scriptures; and if it be, in what things and how far?

Subsection 1. That Providence does declare something of God.
IT is not to be doubted or denied that Providence has a voice, and does
declare something of God to us. As God has a working word, [Psal. 33.6. and
147.18. Luke 7.7.] so he has a speaking hand. Hence it is that his works are
said to be declarative and instructive, [ Psalm. 19.1, etc.] to be signs, [Jer.
32.20.] and men are willed to hear the rod, and who has appointed it, [Mica.
6.9.] to come, and behold the works of the Lord, [Psal. 46.8.] which would not
be to any purpose if they did not show us something remarkable of God. But the
question is, of what and how these are declarative to us? As it is a sort of
Atheism to deny Providence a voice, so it is a great presumption, and high
impiety for man to take upon him to assign it its voice, or to make it speak to
his own mind and turn; and an error of very dangerous consequence it is to
misunderstand Providence, or construe it in any other language then its author
imposes and annexeth to it. For the discovery therefore of the truth in this
particular, I shall endevor by the light of Scriptures (as well as I can
apprehend them) to set down what Providence does, and what it does not discover.

Subsection 2. CHAP. III. SECT. III. Subsect. 2.
That Providence does declare somewhat of Gods counsels.
1. THe Providence of God is the image or express of his counsels; It does
therefore disclose unto us somewhat of Gods will of purpose, counsel or
decree. Two ways God makes known to us his will of Decrees, ^o wi^, by
Predictions, and by Providence. The fo^mer looks at, and reveals the things
of Gods Will as future, this latter discovers them to us as p^st, or present.
Providence are the effects, executions, or acomplishments, and so the copy,
print, or transcript of Gods purposes. Our God is in the heavens, he has done
whatsoever he pleased. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he, [Psal.
115.3.136.6.] First, that is, from all eternity, his Will of good pleasure
determines, and then in the foreset time his Providence effects things. Only
here we are to beware we stretch not this discovery beyond its own line, that
is, beyond the past and present time. We must not conceit, or pretend to
understand from is that of the purpose of God which it tells us not, or to see
by it that which it shows us not. Some there are that will proceed fu^ther
then this mark, and merely out of their own airy imagination presume by it to
divine of things to come. I mean of moral and contingent futurities: (for where
experience has discovered a natural connection of causes and effects, there a
probable conjecture and expectation of future events near at hand by the
intuition of their particular and immediate causes may be gathered; as that a
pregnant woman will bring forth a child; that the evening or morning face of
the sky will be followed with such or such weather the day next ensuing:) thus
the A^^rologer, and the self-interested Statist ^oully overlash and exceed
their bounds in interpreting the providence of God. The Astrologer pretends a
cunning to read in the great Ordinances of the heavens (whose huge volums in
regard of variety, distinction, and distribu^ion of influences (as to this use
doubtless) are to them, as the hand writing of the wall before Belshazzar was
to the Caldean Astrologers, altogether illegible, and unintelligible, yet) they
pretend (I say) to read, and to be able to draw out from them a map of the
disposition of the air of every day for whole months, and years to come, and
of the temper of living bodies, of the successes of Husbandry,
Trade-adventurers, and political-enterprises, yea, and of the very propensions,
contrivements, counsels of men's minds about Civil, Church, and spiritual
affairs, with the revolutions that will attend men's lives, estates, names, and
societies, temporal and ecclesiastical, yea, what will pass not only betwixt
man and man, but betwixt God and man; and (which is very strange) this map to
be every year new, and for every Country, Nation, City, yea for every distinct
sort or condition of men, whether they live far dispersed from one another, or
promiscuously intermixed with others, yea for each single person, different. The
self-interested statist from Gods present proceedings, either in punishing or
prospering a way, person, family, profession, or Nation will needs fancy, and
confidently conclude that he does foresee, and can presage what God has
determined, and will do with the same hereafter. Forgetting with what reason
Solomon has cautioned us against boasting of to morrow, to wit, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth; and not minding that men, and Nations,
even in regard of their visible worldly condition, are in the hands of God, as
the clay is in the Potters hand, soon made, and soon marred; now molded into
this frame, and quickly turned into another, and that as the grace of God may
suddenly, unexpectedly, and wonderfully change men's hearts, CHAP. III. SECT.
III. Subsect. 3.
or men deprived thereof may strangely alter themselves, so God has reserved
out of what he has clearly threatened in his word concerning men's temporal
punishments, much more out of what his Providence at present dispenses, a
power to alter his proceeding in an instant.

Subsection 3. That Providence does declare to us that God is, and what he is.
2. PRovidence is the Index or Character of the Divine Nature, and so it is
Doctrinal, or delivers to us matter of faith, or what we are to know, and
believe concerning the Divine Essence, to wit, as it is absolutely considered,
or abstracted from distinction of personal relations. God is made known by his
works, as the workman is by his artifice, the cause by its effect, [ Jer.
32.20. Romans 1.19, 20. Psalm. 19.1, etc. Act. 14.17.] Hence we find that so
frequently added in the prophets to the comminations and promises of God, as
the end of the execution of them, and so of his providence, And they shall
know that I am the Lord.

CHAP. III. SECT. III. Subsect. 4.
Subsection 4. Certain distinctions premised for the discovery how far
Providence is declarative of the will of God, which we are to do.
3 BUt to come nearer to the thing in question. Providence is in some sort
preceptive, and directive in matter of practice. Now for the opening of this
use of Providence, we must distinguish,

1. Of preceptiveness, or the delivery of Divine precepts to us. This may be,
1. Either by way of original institution. 2. Or by way of abrogation of what is
already in force. 3. Or, by way of declaration, remembrance, or monition of
that which is already ordained. And again this third may be, 1. Either
solitarily, 2. Or jointly and by way of concurrence with other means, or the
delivery of them otherwise.

2. Of divine precepts, 1. Some are of the law of nature. 2. Others are
positive, or subsequently instituted. And of both those, whether natural, or
positive, 1. Some contain our duty to God. 2. Some our duty to man.

3. Distinguish of the use of Providence. This is, 1. Either ordinary, which
the general rules of the word of God allow and dir^ct us in. 2. Or
extraordinary, the which special ^arrants in the word, given on special
occasions have allowed, or prescribed.

4. Distinguish betwixt the giving of a rule, or law, and the determining of it
to this or that particular matter, or case.

Subsection 5. CHAP. III. SECT. III. Subsect. 5.
Five Propositions explaining wherein Providence is, and wherein it is not
declarative of Gods will to be done by us.
I Shall apply these distinctions, and make use of them to our purpose in these
following propositions.

1. Providence (as I understand) c^nnot be said to deliver us the will or
precepts of God for our practice by way of original institution: neither can it
of it self abolish or make void any rule, or law of God before ordained: or
draw a warrant for us to proceed contrary to the same. Suspend it may, or
disenable from doing in point of affirma^ive precepts, but to the doing of the
contrary it cannot dispense, nor can it dissolve a law.

2. Providence may by it self without the help of any other Index or Law-book
deliver to us somewhat of the law of nature, that is, so much of our duty to
God as is contained therein. Divines distinguish betwixt cultum naturalem, and
voluntarium, Ames. Medul. Theol. lib 2. cap. 5. and 13.
seu institutum; the natural worship of God, and that which is voluntary, or
instituted. The natural is that which belongs to him as Gods or by virtue of
what he is, or the consideration of his nature; and this is taught by the law
of nature. The instituted is that which is given him by virtue of his own
voluntary appointment. The former is simply necessary and immutable, one and
the same in all ages and to all persons. The latter is arbitrary and variable
(as he pleases to order) and has been diversified: It was appointed to be one
w^y under the Law, another way u^d^r the Gospel. The former we say Providence
my lead to, or (as it were) dictate to us. For in as much as of it self it
reveals, that there is a God, and of what nature and perfections he is, it
hence infers, or by force of that principle of faith teaches us, that he is to
be worshipped, and in particular, that he is to be feared, loved, trusted in,
called upon, praised, and obeyed, and to receive from us whatsoever else may be
deemed an act of his natural worship. And this is all (I conceive) which
Providence can of it self, or taken alone, and apart, teach, or inculcate.
There being nothing else of duty which can be imagined necessary, and
immediately to follow upon that knowledge of God which Providence reveals. That
it goes thus far, will need little proof. The Apostle Paul told the Lystria^s
that the living God left not himself without witness, Acts 14.7.
in that he did good, etc. that is, by his good and merciful Providence he
testified against the Idolatry of the Heathen, and called for their service to
be yielded to himself alone. And he informs the Romans, Romans 1.20.
that the same persons are left without excuse (for their sins, and therefore
they must needs be taught somewhat of their duty) by the discovery of the
Godhead in the creation.

3. For other duties (besides the forementioned general rules which immediately
refer to God) whether of the law of nature, to wit, those which respect man, or
of positive institution, Providence does not by it self dictate, or declare
them to us. Observe here.

1. I say it does not declare Gods mind to us in these things. It was before
said the works of God, in as much as they discover the Divine nature, they of
themselves tell us thus much, that God is to be, obeyed in all his
commandments, but what his will- or commands are in particular, as touching the
posi^tives of his own worship, or concerning either the natural or positive
rights and relations which may be between man and man; and what our own
concernments are; the particulars of these it does not dictate or deliver to us.

2. I say this it does not solitarily or apart, or by it self, or by its own
single light or voice. For this must be acknowledged, though it does not
declare or promulgate, yet it does confirm; and though it does nor of it self
discover, yet it does second, and set on that which is before discovered of the
mind of God. In reference to the whole revealed will of God Providence has the
use of a Testimony, that is, by way of association, or concurrence: See Dr.
Sclater Sermon. on 2 Kin. 93.1. page 25.
though it be not Nomotherick, or Legislative, nor yet in the matters limited
in this proposition the original, or primary dictator of the will of God, yet
where a declaration thereof is made, and the same is actually known,
understood, end apprehended, there Providence comes in, and gives a secondary
sanctio^.

Let the light of nature, or book of God written in the heart, or his word in
the Scriptures first tell a man, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal;
then, if the hand of God remarkeably break out in some notable curse or
punishment upon a murderer, or thief, this Providence seen and noted does by
way of Item, or Second (in that it holds forth the displeasure of God against
theft or murder) prohibit, admonish and warn him and others from those sins.
But in matters of this nature Providence solitarily or by it self alone is not
significant, or declarative of Gods approving or disapproving will. Where both
the law of nature, and the Scriptures are either silent, or (which is all one
as to this) not understood, or apprehended, there providence (as to these
things) is dumb, or, if it must be said to speak, its language cannot be
unde^stood.

Providence in these matters may be resembled unto consonants; as these without
vowels make not any words, or speech, but compounded with them are vocal, and
significative; so Providence in concurrence, and concomitancy with the written
law speaks out to us, backing and confirming what the word declares, but of it
self, or apart from this it cannot do that office in these things of moral or
positive precept. Providence is in this respect like an echo, which reitera^es,
and resounds to what the word of God in Scripture, or Conscience says before,
it does rather consignificate, then signify Gods will to us, When God has
made known to us by his (...), or enunciative word what his mind, or
commandment is in this, or that particulars, then the providence of God, which
before, and of it self could only tell us that God is to be obeyed in all his
commandments, now bespeaks our obedience in these particulars, and adds its
stamp, or sanction to the commands of God so revealed.

In things which the conscience is already informed of to be either agreeable,
or repugnant to the law of God, providence coming in with any remarkable,
either crosses or blessings, bears witness to that law, and exciteth the
conscience by way of Memento to take special notice of it. And thus it is a
good second though not a solitary testimony. It has vocem tonantem, an
awakening, or startling efficacy, to rouse up the dowzie consolence to attend
to the rule already received See Deuteronomy. 4.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 30.7. Mal. 3.18.
. But this office holds only in concurrence with the word. We cannot simply
and singly conclude from any providence thus, God crosses men in this,
blesses them in that way, therefore he disallows that; approves this. But
having a precedent light in the conscience from the testimony of Gods law of
what he allows and disallowes, his so crossing or blessing may be an
accumulative witness^. Thus David argues, By this I know thou favorest me,
because mine enemy does not triumph over me, [Psal. 41.11.] He know before from
the written word, and from the particular messages that he had received by the
Prophets Samuel and Gad both what God had promised, and what he willed him to
do; and thereupon this mentioned Providence of God toward him was an additional
testimony. And thus Joseph's brethen metting with a shrewd and sudden cross
were prompted out of the light, and sentences of their own consciences cleared,
and called forth by that cross Providence (as they took it) in Egypt to say,
we are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is this distress
come upon us. And Reuben sureably was enabled to say, Spoke I not unto you
saying, Do not sin against the child, and ye would not hear? therefore, behold
also, his blood is required, [Gen. 42.21, 22.]

And the reason of the necessity of the antecedency of the knowledge of the
will of God unto the voice of Providence is very obvious. For before we can
gather, or draw inferences from Providence, we must be able to understand
their meaning, and to make an interpretation of them. We must first know for
what they come, ere we can say what they direct us unto; but now the word of
God, and the conscience in formed thereby, are the interpreters of Providence.
It was that sentence of the Apostles Epistle, which expounded the hand of God
upon the Corinthians unto them, For this cause many are weak and sickly among
you, and many sleep, [1 Cor. 11.30.] their own sense could tell them of the
event that many were weak and sickly, and many dyed among them. And their
Religion and conscience touched by it would tell them these evils were of God,
and perhaps it might suggest to them that they came for sin; but that they
might discern it was for that sin in particular; viz. their eating and drinking
unworthily at the Lords-table, and consequently infer, that for this sin they
must judge themselves, this they must reform, the word of God must be the
expositer of that providence; and therefore did the Apostle write that saying
to them.

Having insisted here on the extent of the use of Providence in dictating to
man his duty by way of secondary testimony to the word; and of the necessity of
a conjuction of the word, or law of God written, or otherwise made known with
Providence, that so the voice of Providence in moral, humane and positive
duties may be particularly applied and understood: It will not be impertinent
here to note the different ways wherein Providence is, or has been added to
the word as confirmative thereof.

1. This has been sometimes in a way extrordinary, and that,

1. Either when an ordinary act of Providence has been by an extraordinary and
immediate direction from God appointed to such use, viz. to back and second his
word: as Ezekiels removing his goods out of his house to another place in the
peoples sight, was a sign to them to confirm his predictions of their
captivity. And the Potters disposal of his clay to one mould first, then to
another, was an emblem set up by God of his power to order, and alter the
conditions of Israel, (and of all other Nations) as he should see good, and as
he had declared he would do concerning that people, [ Ezekiel. 12.11. Jer. 18.5,
6, etc.]

2. Or when a Providence extraordinary, or miraculous, for nature has been by
express assignation of God given unto the ratification of his word. So was
unto Moses the turning of his rod into a serpent, and of the Serpent into a rod
again, and his hand being made leprous, and whole again by putting it once and
again into his bosom. So was unto Gideon his wet and dry Fleece, and the Angels
consuming his meat by fire out of the rock. So was unto Hezekiah the return
back of the shadow of the Sun upon the Dial of Ahaz. And so were unto the world
in the primitive age of Christianity, the miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost
given unto the Apostles, [ Exodus 4.1, etc. Judge. 6.17, 36, etc. 2 King. 20.10,
etc. Heb. 2.4.]

2. This is more often in a way of ordinary dispensation, that is without any
either miraculousness of the act of Providence, or immediate, particular
pointing out of it, by an express word to such or such a use. And this is,

1. Either when Providence is given us for a patt^^n or ^op^y, and we are
required to imi^a^e it i^ the same kind. Thus Mercy, Love, Beneficience unto
the evil, and to our enemies are recommended to our practice by the example of
Gods own proceedings, [ Ephesians. 5.1. Luke 6.36. Mat. 5.44, etc.]

2. Or when Providence is employed to give a hint unto some duty suitable to it,
for us to practice, but not of the same nature as i^ the act of Providence
which speaks to us. For instance: In the day of prosperity be joyful; but in
the day of adversity consider. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray: i^ any
merry? let him sing Psalms. In that day, viz. in the day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity, did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and
to mourning, etc. [ Eccl. 7.14. Jam. 5.13. Isa. 22.12.] When Providence
disposes these conditions into act, it does call for the respective duties
appropriate to them at their hands whose conditions at any time they are.

But this distinction must be kept; for some acts of Providence are showed us
to imitate them in their very kind. Some again by reason of the Lords
transcendency and absolute power over us may not be paralleld by us. God may do
that to man, and make that use of him, which man may not do either to God
again, or to another man. Only such unimitable^ providence may yet be not
unuseful, but may dictate respective duties, correspondent and seasonable,
though not identical in kind to the act of God.

The difference also must not be confounded betwixt the two members of the
former distinction, viz. the extraordinary and the ordinary use of Providence
in point of backing or reinforcing the will of God already made known; which
is, that the latter way God daily and continually makes use of Providence as
memorials and testimonials to assure, and bring to mind his will in matters
vulgarly known, and of a moral and ordinary use and importance. The former he
has taken up to illustrate or enforce some commandment of an extraordinary
nature, or some doctrine or prophecy new, and strange to them to whom the sign
is given, and therefore standing more in need thereof to prove its divine
authority.

In reference also to the secondariness of the Testimony of Providence and the
necessity of the antecedency of the words light to it in the matters whereof
this proposition speaks, this let me add. Some that have long stood upon the
argument of Providence now begin to say, The Spirit makes out by Providence the
mind of God without the word* Unto this I shall only here interpose this;

1. I see not how this differs from Quakerism in the opinion of a sufficiency
of light from Christ, which every man has in him.

2. But I ask; Is not every spirit (that is, every dictate or doctrine
fathered on the Spirit, or apprehended by the conceiver thereof to come from
the Spirit of God) to be tried? and is not the word of God in Scripture the
rule of Trial? If any motion come then without express direction from
Scripture, it is not made out, that is, cleared as necessary, or safe for us to
follow, or to be of God, until it be examined or warranted by the word.

3. We usually distinguish of the Spirits speaking to man, viz.

1. Ordinarily. 2. Extraordinarly.
The former is by the word: the latter is without it, solitary or by
revelation. And we say the latter is not now afforded to any on earth; but he
that will say it is, and that he has it, as the lays claim to a very strange
and high thing, immediate, and extraordinary revelation; so he must evidence
i^t^ others very plainly ere they can credit him in, it Thus Luther answered
the Seditious Boars of Germany of Muncers and Phifers raising Si mandatum
aliquod habetis a Deo vestri facti necesse est hoc Ips^^^n a vobis aliquo
illustri miraculo demonstrari. Apud ^leid. Comment. lib. 5. page 120.
.

2. Besides the use or significancy of Providence which it has to confirm, and
second a rule, or duty before enacted and declared; it is found (even in
matters of a moral or positive nature) sometimes in a further use, viz. to
declare the will of God by it self alone, but then it must be withal said,
this is not the general, common, or natural, but a particular, extraordinary,
and institutive use of it; this is never but in case, and by virtue of a
previous, special warrant or appointment of God, This is not common to all, or
usual in many, but proper to some Providence, unto which it has pleased God
to annex such a use. Where God has given out his warrant concerning one sort,
or one single act of providence, and one singular and circumstantiated case,
that in this case such an event or act of Providence shall declare what the
mind of God is, there this use of providence obtains, and there alone, as far
as my observation can go. Some few such dispensations of God to some persons,
in some special cases I find in Scripture, and but some few, yet for
distinctions sake I thought it necessary to take notice of this use of
Providence.

When God would have the Land of Canaan divided among the Tribes, Number. 6.55.
and Families of the Israelitish nation, he appointed the distribution to be
made by Lot. When therefore Joshua and the heads of the Fathers cast lots upon
the several portions of that land, the coming forth of those several Lots to
this or that tribe, family, or person severally, was the signification of Gods
will concerning such or such a parcel of the Land, and the making over of the
property thereof by donation from him, unto such persons.

The same way was appointed, and of the same use was the Providence of God in
the disposal of the lots at the election of an Apostle in the place of Judas.
Act. 1.24, 2^.


By a Providence of this sort was the congregation of Israel guided in their
journies and stations in the wilderness. God appointed them for their motions
and pitchings to attend the settling or moving over them of the cloudy and fiery
pillar: hence it is said, Number. 9.18, 20, 23.
that they observing that course of the cloud, at the commandment of the Lord
they journeyed, and at the commandment of the Lord they pitched.

A like resolution did Abraham's servant obtain of God, when he went by his
Masters command, and with his assurance of extraordinary divine conduct to seek
a wife for Isaac. When he was come to the City of Nahor he prayed, and the Lord
granted him to know what damsel he should choose, and have for that marriage
by the token of her granting him water out of the well for himself, and for his
Camels, which sign therefore being accomplished in Rebecca, not only he, but
Laban and Bethnel her brother and father (when they heard the servants relation
of it and of the event) acknowledge the thing (or word) proceeded from the
Lord, and that in it the Lord had spoken Genesis ^4.27, 50, 51.
.

1 Samuel 14.10.
Such a sign had Jonathan to go by in his (otherwise desperate) attempt upon the
Garrison the Philistines. Luke 22.10.
And a token of this nature had Peter and John from Christ to guide them in
pitching upon the place where he would have them prepare for his, and their
eating of the Passover.

And as the mind of God for men's practice, so his meaning in matter of faith,
when there has been ambiguity or obscurity in the apprehending thereof, has
this way been discovered. The Shepherds at the birth of Christ, being told by
the Angel of the good tidings of great joy, Luke 2.10, 11, 12.
viz. the birth of a Savior Christ the Lord that day in Bethlehem; God gave
them by the Angel moreover a providential sign to know him by, to wit, the
special place and posture they should then find him in, In his swaddling
clothes, and lying in a manger. So did he point out to the wisemen which came
from the east to seek him that was born King of the Jews, Mat. 2.9, 10.
how and where they should find him, by a Star.

But this way of resolution concerning either the will or meaning of God: was
even then extraordinary, and out of course, and but rarely afforded, much more
is it so now, and besides the significancy which Providence had in these
extraordinary cases was not by virtue of it self, but from the institution, or
special word given forth for it. When God gives no such particular warrant, as
in those cases he did (and as now, for any thing I know, he does not at all) we
may not expect, or attempt to find out Gods will by such means. If we do, it
will not be an allowed enquiring, but a tempting of God Vide Ames. medul.
Theol. lib. 2. cap. 11. Sect. 18 and cap. 12. Sect. 17, 18, 19. and De
conscient. lib. 4. cap. 23. Sect. 1, ^.
.

5. And lastly, there is yet another use of Providence to be noted. We before
distinguished betwixt the delivery of a rule or law, and the determining of it
to this or that particular. We have said before, Providence is not originally
institutive, or preceptive, yet it may deliver us the law, or the will of God
already enacted by way of declaration, index, or remembrance; and this in some
things solitarily, and in some only jointly and concurrently with other means.
Besides all this, Providence has another use in promoting our knowledge and
obedience to the will of God; and that is by way of application or
determination of the obligation, or authority of the Law of God unto
particulars. And this use of Providence, together with the way and diverse
manners of its tending thereunto will here require a distinct discovery, that
it may neither lie under a confused notion, nor fall under mistake.

First, That Providence has this use, to determine general rules to
particulars, is very obvious and evident. It brings home the law, which in it
self runs in terms universal, or indefinite, to its singular matter, by
applying it to particular persons, things and times; and by that means that
commandment or direction which is delivered generally to all of the like case
and condition, it gives occasion or call to this or that man in particular to
put in practice. For instance; the law of God commands, suum cuique tribuere,
to do right to every man; now Providence comes with its disposing hand, and
distributeth to every man his right in particular, as this house, or field,
this honor, dignity or authority to this or that man. And by this hand of
Providence so disposing is determined that general rule to these particulars;
whereby it comes to pass that every other man is required to yield these
perquisites, or havings to this or that man, and is forbidden to take, or
detain them from him. Again; the word of God says, Is any among you afflicted?
Let him pray. Is any merry? Let him sing Psalms. As we have opportunity, let
us do good. Now Providence comes in, and at this time disposes this condition
of sadness, or that of joy to me, or it puts into my hand an opportunity of
almes-giving, and thereby it comes about that it is, now my part to perform
that duty of Prayer, Singing, or giving alms. The word of God has instituted
diversities of estates and relations amongst men, as marriage and single life;
Magistracy, and Subjection; Mastership, and servitude: not imposing every one,
or any one of these c^nditions upon every man, for that were not consistible;
but appointing one for some, another for other persons. Now besides this
institution, God by his Providence immediately (without his word, otherwise
then mediately) ordinarily calls men forth particularly, some unto this, others
to that estate: and those particular persons, whom his Providence so calls, the
general rules of his word concerning those respective conditions come thus to
be in force unto, requiring them to undertake those conditions, and to perform
the several duties annexed to them respectively. Here then by the intervention
of Providence it is that the general rules concerning this or that special
state or relation, either the entrance upon it, or the discharge of the duties
of it, become necessary to this, or that man. Providence, under this use I
shall call Ordinative, in distinction from that which is merely Eventual.

Secondly, as it is plain that Providence has this use, so it will be
requisite to enquire how Providence calls men into this or that state or
relation, and so effects this determination of general rules to their
particulars. For this I shall observe somewhat concerning, 1. The different
senses wherein God by his Providence is said to call. 2. The means. 3. The
manner.


1. For the different acceptions, or senses wherein God may be said to call men
into such a relation or state we say by his Providence God calls to the same,
either directive, or constitutive. Either by directing them to such an estate,
or by constituting them in it; that is, either by setting before them the
estate as requisite for them to enter into: or, by leading and putting them
actually into it. The former is when those occasions and inducements, or
exigencies are occurrent to a man which (when they are put, or in being) it is
his duty according to the rule of Gods word to enter into such a state, or
relation. The latter is when by the acting of Providence by those means whereby
such a state or relation is produced, or emergent, men are actually brought and
placed in that estate.

These two ways are manifestly different, and necessary to be distinguished.
For instance; In the former sense persons are called to the state of marriage
when they have not the gift of continency, that is, it is their duty then to
marry, according to that [1 Cor. 7.9, 36.] and he is called to a single life
thus that has that power over his own will that is mentioned [1 Cor. 7.37.
Mat. 19.11.] according to that of our Savior [ Mat. 19.12.] In the latter
sense, they are called to a married estate that are already bound, or entered
into wedlock. He is called into the single estate that is loosed, [1 Cor. 7.^4,
27.] And in like manner may it be said of domestical Mastership and servitude;
and of political dominion and subjection; and of domestical and political
freedom. It is one thing to say a man is by Providence called to be a Master,
or a Servant; a Prince, or a Subject the former way; that is, he has the
previous inducements to any such estate presented to him; and another thing to
say he is called the latter way, viz. that those acts are passed upon, or by
him which make him a Master, or a Master or a Servant, a Magistrate, or a
Subject. By the former he is but invited or directed to such a state, by the
latter he is invested or enstated de facto in it.

This distinction is observable in them that dispute to the validity of
absolute conquest, or captivity to make a man a domestic servant, or a
multitude, the patrimonial kingdom of the conqueror. They say the conquest or
captivity does not make the parties actual servants or subjects, and
consequently does not make their conquerers their Masters, or Sovereigns; but
it does lay a duty upon them to give their consent (if they be free from
others, and not pr^obliged and so can dispose of themselves) to their conqueror
or captiver, and so by their own act to contract that relation See a Book
called, A vindication of the Treatise of Monarchy. page 17, 18. Hobs Elements
page 92, 93.
. As in like manner it is in the case of a single person that has not the gift
of continency, he is called to marriage, but is unmarried, and has the power,
and right to dispose of himself, yet in regard he wants the said gift he is
obliged to marry as soon as a fit match is offered.

Secondly, concerning the means by which Providence may call one into any state
that is, invest, and enstate him in it; for this consideration will have
relation to the latter acception only of the providential call, of which even
now, viz. that which is constitutive or actually setting a man in a state.

Providence is working in all moral affairs, and civil stations, and
conducing to the bringing of men into the several relations they are in, but
(...) it is the word, or law of God, and not providence by it self which
ordains or authorizeth those states, so ordinarily it is not Providence solely
constit^tes men therein, but providence employing and acting by certain means,
and those concurring with it. Now the means may (as to our present
consideration) be two fold. 1. Some relative states are such as providence
calls, that is, brings persons into them, by means extrinsecal, as to the
persons called, or without the act of their own wills. So persons come into the
relation and obligation of children to their Parents by procreation, say some;
by preservation and education, say others Grot. de Jure lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect.
1. Hobs Elements part. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 3.
: but by which soever it be, they are passives in incurring that relation and
duty. So are others, through the defect of reason, as Orphans, Fools, and
Madmen brought into the condition of pupils and minors in relation to Guardians
and Tutors; and so are Delinquents or Malefactors through their vicious
miscarriages, against their wills, reduced into subjection or slavery Grot. de
Jure lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 32.
. 2. Other relative states Divine Providence leads men into with, and by the
will, choice, or consent of the parties in whom the relation is subjected. Thus
by their own contract persons become associates in private Traffic,
fellow-citizens are incorporate in one Commonwealth, and Nations become
confederates in one league: thus two by marriage become man and wife, and
persons by arrogation or adoption become the children of those who begat them
not. Thus freemen make themselves servants; and thus Commonwealths, or bodies
politic come under this or that form or constitu^ion of Government Vide Grot.
ut supra Sect. 8, 17.23, 26, 27, 30, 31.
.

Thirdly, For the manner how (we may say) Providence calls into any estate or
relation.

First, In general this is a principle to me most certain. A providential call
is included within the rules of Gods word. We have already said (and I take it
as a clear truth) that in matters of this nature Providence by it self or alone
is neither legislative nor declarative of the law of God. It remains therefore
that the utmost use and force it is of in the moral sway of these affairs is
either to second and set home the rule already given, and made known, or to
apply and determine the general obligation and authority of such a rule to
particulars. Hence we must needs yield that the determination of Providence to
this of that act, estate or relation, as it is not from it self, but by virtue
of the rule so it keeps within the bounds, and confines of the rule, and cannot
be construed to go any further. This then may be for a general Canon to us. We
cannot say Providence calls this, or that man to that, whether act or estate,
which the word of God forbids or warrants not unto him. Providence must not be
used as a countermand to the rule, or as a reserve or dormant warrant to carry
us out farther then the word goes before us, or to lead us there where the will
of God in Scripture revealed opens us not a way. This were by consequent to
destroy the authority of the word, and to make the most pure and perfect ways
of God the occasions and patronizers of every obliquity.

Secondly, for somewhat more particular resolution concerning a providential
call to any undertaking, let these (I suppose plain) Propositions and Cautions
be considered, the which I lay down with room reserved for, and submission to
the necessary addition, and just correction of the Reader.

1. The matters, or things about which this use of Providence (of applying, or
determining the general rule to its particulars) may be conversant, we may (I
suppose) reduce to these heads.

1. Either opportunities inviting. 2. Or necessi^ies urging.
1. The former, opportunities inviting, may be, 1. Either to our attaining. 2.
Or to our doing good. Or, either to a good of utility to be enjoyed; or to a
good of virtue to be done by us.


2. The latter, necessities urging, may be, 1. Either danger of sinning. 2. Or
danger of suffering.


2. Every opportunity inviting to, or offering us the attainment of somewhat we
esteem good, is not taken to be a determining Providence, or a Providence
calling to the prosecution, and laying hold on that offer. Providence does
ordinarily present us with opportunities to be shunned, as well as with
opportunities to be embraced. And by its ordering real evils, with the
appearance of good cast upon them by our own mistaken judgments, are set before
us, as well as the things that are truly good. There is a proving trying as
well as a guiding Providence, [see D^ut. 8.2, 3. and 13.3. 2 Chr. 32.31.] So
that it is a perilous thing for men to be taken and led by the first blush, or
fair face, or kind invitation of every outward occurrence. Many Providence
which our heady passions and lusts are apt to account invitatory, our reason
and religion should prompt us to be but exploratory, or the trials of our
obedience to Gods commandments. Such (for example) may we reckon that
opportunity to be which David had set before him (and whilh his men would so
fain have had him to have taken as eminently held out to him by God) of killing
Saul, once in the cave, 1 Samuel 23.3. and 26.7.
and again in the Camp asleep. The call therefore of Gods Providence must be
gathered, not by the facility, commodiousness, or rarity of the opportunity,
but by the lawfulness of it.

3. Opportunities of doing what is in it self good, whether permissively good,
that is, lawful, or preceptively good, that is, necessary, are not presently
of themselves the call of Providence to us, nor until it can be determined the
good to be done is good to us, or the good we are to do.

4. Thence, and in as much as the goodness of an action with application to
individuals arises much from the particular state and condition of the person.
Somethings belonging to the rich, somethings to the poor; some to the married,
some to the single; some to the superior, some to the inferior; to be done by
them respectively, it benooyeth each to know first, not only what is permitted,
or imposed on this or that estate, but what is the proper estate, place, or
rela^ive condition we are set in: God neither by word nor by Providence calling
any to the act or duty of such a state till he has called them into that
estate See Mr. Simonds Case and cure of a Desert Scul cap. 23. page 280.
.

5. Unto every estate there must needs be (the nature of the thing is self
requires it) something constitutive or essential to the putting of it, or the
enstating of a man in it. There cannot be order or a distinction of estates
without somewhat to make the difference. The same authority that ordains
different estates among men, appoints to each the peculiar way of entering into,
or founding those estates. The different acts which are proper to each estate
cannot be constituting or differencing characters of them: both because they
are subsequent to, and resulting from the estate, and therefore must needs
suppose it in being ere they can flow from it: and because others not called to
these estates do sometimes presume to put forth those acts: and because the
regularity of those acts must be proved by the persons being in the estate; and
therefore his being in the estate cannot be proved by his doing of those acts.
That there is such a peculiar foundation or ingresse to every relative state,
which gives it bring, and distinguishes it from other states, has been partly
showed before, and will be insisted on after. In all domestical, civil,
martial, and ecclesiastical relations and orders, the professors of the
disciplines of each conclude it so to be. Now this constitutive or formal
reason applied to particulars will serve to discover in what station, or place
each man stands, and unto what relation or state any man is called of God.

6. Where the divine rule or law of God has prescribed a special way of
entering into any estate, and constituting one in it, there providence cannot be
understood to call, or lead into it another way, or in a course cross or
subversive to that order.

7. Providence may call a man without the act or concurrence of his own will
into this or that estate, that is, make it his duty (by virtue of the divine
rule) to enter into it (as he is thereby called to be a servant, who has not
either wealth or skill whereby to subsist in, and manage a free estate. He is
called to marry whose temperament, or complexion leaves him not that power over
himself as to contain) when nevertheless it does not without his own will
constitute him in that estate. Where therefore to the being of a man in any
estate, or relation is prerequired the act or assent of the party, there
Providence (though it invite, order, or give occasion to enter into that
estate) does not anticipate the persons consent. Providence may of it self
without the said act of will be directive to, but is not constitutive of such
an estate. It is (I conceive) no otherwise in the subject matter of this
Treatise, in civil policy and Magistracy. Providence by virtue of that need
many ways that particular emergencies of Providence may invite, lead, or call
a Nation to make choice of this form of Magistracy before another, or of this,
or these persons to rule over them rather then others: but, nevertheless,
people are not incorporate into distinct societies, nor societies reduced into
a moral relation, or subjection unto any particular Magistracy, or Magistrates
without their own transaction or agreement, their own I mean transacted, either
by themselves or those whom they may be involved in.

8. Where Providence presents with any urging necessity, whether of sin or of
harm to be avoided, there we must not think Providence to call, either for the
shunning of a harm to commit a sin, or for the avoiding of one sin to run into
another. They that thus understand it, in stead of making a virtue of necessity
they make a vice of it: and they do not follow Providence, but falsify it.

9. There is a superseding as well as a leading, a suspending as well as a
moving, a recalling as well as a calling Providence, Where to a work or end in
it self good, necessary or desirable all prescribed or warranted means, all
honest and justifiable ways of advancing, or compassing the same are wanting,
Providence there must be underst^od to give a stop to our prosecutions; and to
determine (during the incumbency of that defect) a surcease of proceedings.
There Providence (if we will understand it aright) bids stand, go not forward.
There we may apprehend Providence meeting us in the way, as the Angel of the
Lord in Balaams way, with a drawn sword in his hand. Thus much shall serve to
be spoken of the use of Providence which is determining or applicative of the
rule to its particular cases, in the general the particular conce^nments of it
unto civil Government, the subject we are upon, will be spoken to in the nex^
Chapter.

I have thus endeavored to take a particular view of that guidance, light, or
instruction that is in Providence, and how far it goes, what of God, and of his
will it does discover to us, and what it does not. The sum of all that I have
gone over is, Providence is the image, or index of Gods decree, or counsel,
that is, as to things that are, or have been, not concerning future things. It
makes known that God is, and what he is, and that he is to be honored, served,
and in all he commands obeyed. The will of God extraordinarily revealed it does
sometime by special appointment confirm, and that which is known by the
ordinary means, it does constantly, and of ordinary course second, and set home
upon the conscience: yea, in some cas^s, by extraordinary designation; it has
revealed the will of God de novo, or not otherwise made known. And it does
continually determine, or apply the will of God in general rules laid down in
Scripture, to particular times, and persons; or, the obligation which the law
of God has in it, by it self considered, in actu signato, it brings to be
binding in actu exercito, or pro hic, and nunc. But on the other hand, it does
not of it self either enact or annul a divine law, or dispense with the breach
of, or contrary act to it: neither does it alone, or by it self declare or
reveal the will of God, or what Gods approving, or disapproving mind, or
pleasure is, either in the things of God that are instituted, and of positive
precept, or in the rights and relative duties that are moral, or of humane
concernment, CHAP. III. SECT. III. Subsect. 6.
whether they be of the law of nature, or of positive sanction.

So that the negative part of our resolution is this, Where the law of God,
either written in the heart of man, or in the book of God, is silent, or
prescribes not any thing, either in the matters of God that are institutive, or
in any humane rights whatsoever, there Providence regulates not, or is not,
either institutive, or declarative of Gods will to be done by us. And where the
said law of God does ordain, or deliver a rule to us, there providence gives no
relaxation, allowance, or countermand to the contrary.

Subsection 6. That Dominion is not founded in Eventual Providence.
IN opposition to the negative part of this resolution of the Question about
the use of Providence there are two positions, or opinions now on foot, both
which would make out a wider, or larger sense, or use of Providence then is
here allowed. They are, 1. That Providence of it self may (without
extraordinary appointment) in the matters above specified, and specially in
humane rights, dues, or transactions, deliver and declare what the will of God
is, or may justify or condemn a way: or, where Scripture evidence is wanting,
or a warrant out of the word of God cannot be produced, there we may collect or
infer Gods approval, or disapprovall of an humane action, course or proceeding
by Providence. 2. That dominion is, or may be founded merely in eventual
Providence; or, that a person or persons attainment, and occupiation (by
whatever means) of sway or command over a people makes him, or them the
Sovereign or higher power, which is, of God, the ordinance of God, the minister
of God.

For the latter, that Dominion is, or may be founded in eventual Providence,
or, (which is all one) in a persons being in place of rule or actual command,
the confutation of it, and the vindication of this Text from admitting it, is a
main drift and subject of this whole discourse: and therefore I refer the
Reader, for his satisfaction about it, to that which is before, and will be
after said; only this I shall put in, upon its mention here.

If this be so, It must needs be affirmed (I suppose) so to be,

1. Either because possession, or occupation in every case, or in any thing
possessible, or in every sort of Tenure gives a title; But this is so wild an
assertion, as I know not who will own it; or,

2. Because God has declared in his word, or made it a law, that it shall be
so in this particular matter of Civil authority, viz. that whosoever is master
shall be the Magistrate, or he whom his hand of Providence raises up to a
domineering prevalency in any place shall have the authority there, or be
interested in the style or office of this text, viz. shall be the higher power,
the ordinance, the Minister of God. But unto this;

1. If so it were, it would be not Providence disposing possession of rule
into this hand that of it self constituteth him a power, but that declaration
of God in his word. Providence would be only the determinator, or applyer of
that general rule to its particular matter.

2. But where is this found, that God has so expressed or declared himself, or
made such a law touching. Civil Magistracy? We must first see such a
declaration produced, or proved, ere we may grant it so to be: I know this text
is alleged as the only or main place to imply such a declaration, but, de hoc
quaritur: I hope by this treatise it will be manifest that there is not such a
thing to be extracted thence: and in short, I think it will be proved that,

1. By power, is not meant a mere force or strong hand.

2. That by being is not meant a mere act of possession of such a force.

3. That by of God, ordained of God, is not intended a mere being by eventual
Providence. And to give the Reader here a small earnest of Reason for the
improbability of their being either in this, or in any other Scripture any such
thing declared by God, I shall suggest these few things in this place.

1. The power of Magistracy may be in one, and actual rule by Providence in
another. Gods word has owned them for the power that have been out of
possession, whilst others have had the actual command. Take for instance what
is in [2 Chronicles. 22.9, 12. with Chap. 23.3.]

2. God has expressly disowned for being of him them that have been in present
possession of command, [ Hos. 8.4. Isa. 52.4, 5. Joel 3.2, 4. Hab. 2.5, 6.]

3. He has expressly authorized and owned the act of rising up in arms to
expulse them that have been in actual rule, in them that have been de facto,
subject to them, the which this text [ ver. 2.] expressly and severely forbids
in reference to the power here intended [ Judge. 2.16, 18. and 3.9, 15. and 4.6.
and in many other places of that book, and in other Scriptures.]

4. We have many examples (of unquestionable justifiablenesse) in the word of
God of persons taking up and employing for the recovery of persons, goods and
countries of the hands of them that have had the Mastery and possession of
them, which could not be done if dominion were found by God in providential
profession, [ Genesis 14.14, etc. 2 Samuel 18.1, etc. 1 Samuel 7.^, etc, and 13.3. and
14.1, etc. 2 King. 11.3, etc.]

CHAP. III. SECT. III. Subsect. 7.
5. To yield this would be to say that usurpatition is no sin; or that in the
tenure, or holding of power, or command over others (under the name of civil
authority) is, or can be no transgression.) But this shall serve for a touch on
this argument here.

Subsection 7. That Providence alone, or without the Rule of Gods word does not
signify to us the allowing, or disallowing will of God in matters either of
humane right, or positive institution.
FOr the eviction of the groundlesness of the former position [that Providence
alone, without Scripture evidence (or, extraordinary appointment and warrant)
may be, in the matters above specified, the interpreter of Gods will to us,
unto the justifying or condemning of a way, or unto the signification of Gods
approval, or disapproval] I would offer these reasons.

1. That which is in this position attributed to Providence is by Scripture
plainly denied to it [ Eccl. 9.1, 2.] No man knows either love, or hatred by
all that is before them ^ all things come alike to all; there is one event to
the righteous, and to the wicked, etc.

2. The putting of any thing to be rule beyond, or further then Scripture goes,
or so as to make out such an approving, or disapproving will, or law of God as
is not delivered in Scripture, is to derogate from, or deny that sufficiency
and perfection of the Scripture which the holy Ghost ascribes thereto, and
which we, upon his authority, maintain against the Papists. The written word of
God is affirmed to be perfect [2 Timothy 3.15. Psalm. 19.7.] we have very strict
prohibitions of adding to, or diminishing ought from it, [ Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove.
30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19.] we find men are sharply blamed by God for doing that
his word gave them no command or commission for, [ Jer. 7.31. and 19.5. and
32.35.] and persons are challenged for following the appearance or promising
face of Providence without recourse to him [ Isa. 30.1, 2. with 31.1. Josh.
9.14] We upon these and the like authorities, conceive that the good, the
acceptable and perfect will of God is contained in the Scriptures; that the
word of God has completely and unalterably delivered what is necessary, what
lawful; and therefore that it appears to be high presumption and strong
delusion to set up any thing to be a rule, either by way of crossing, or
uttering more then is read in Scripture. Either we must say the Scriptures are
imperfect, or the doctrine therein is repealable by Providence; or that there
is nothing left for Providence to declare anew. And which of these to admit, I
think is easy to choose.

3. Providence are both in themselves so indistinct and various, and in
relation to men's ways, and the rule by which they are to walk, so unanswerable
(for the most part in this life) and disproportionable, that it is not (I
think) to any man conceiveable how they should be employed for such a
signification.

1. They are in themselves so indistinct and various, in respect of rise, end,
and manner of proceeding, that they appear altogether unapt for such a use.

1. Providence is many times the same to persons and ways directly contrary;
that is, to them that are approved, and to them that are disapproved of God,
the course of Providence in present event is all one: the same judgments or
evils do befall the same outward benefits to come upon righteous and wicked
persons and ways, [ Ezekiel. 21 3. Mat. 5.45.]

2. The same same ways or proceedings of men may meet with clear contrary
Providence, either in the same person at diverse times, or in diverse persons at
the same time. He that follows a course of sin, may at one time prosper, at
another time fall in it. The path of the righteous may at sometime be (as Joh
speaks) washed with butter, attended with smooth and sweet successes, and at
other times be stuck with thorns, entangled with sharp and piercing crosses:
they that walk or join hand in hand together in the same ways or designs
whether good or evil may be accosted with quite contrary events at the hands
of Providence. Like as it fared with Pharaohs chief Butler, and chief Baker;
both it may be guilty in the same offense, and measure, yet the one raised to
honor, the other hanged on a tree.

3. The same kind of Providence may proceed from far different or quite
contrary dispositions, and intentions in God: the same gift, or outward, and,
in our esteem, happy success, and on the other hand, the same cross or blow
may come from him unto diverse persons, to one in favor, to another in
displeasure; to one for good, to another for harm.

4. Providence contrary in their face, and visible appearance, may agree, and
be coincident, or be the same in respect of the mind of God from which they
proceed. Notably good, and notably bad events, both these may spring from his
love, and be accompanied with his approval both of the person and of the way
upon which they come: and either of these may issue from his hatred, and be
attended with his dislike both of the person and way.

5. The thing which Providence in bringing good, or evil may respect, reflect
upon or aim at in special may be, not the present actions or ways of men,
but either those of times past, or those which be probable, and in likelihood
to come: to the former by way of recompense; to the (...), either by way of
prevention of a sin; or of encouragement or furtherance to what is good; or of
probation and experiment what men will do, how they will demean themselves.

2. Providence (eventual) as they are in themselves so u^i^orm, so they are
very often during this life, and in the things of it, found unanswerable and
disproportionable to men's ways, and the rule by which they are to walk.
Solomon's observation in this is commonly verifyed [ Eccl. 8.^4.] There be just
men unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked: again, there be
wicked men unto whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. The
present visible ways of God are not in point of retribution corresponde^^ to
the ways of men. It is not always or ordinary to be seen that good men, and
actions are presently, and constantly shined upon, speaded, and followed with
the promised felicity; neither that the contrary ways have the contrary fare.
All the proceedings of God toward all person^ and courses are ever most just,
but they are not ever juridical: ever most just in that justice which is
commensurable to the justice of the divine nature, or will; but not ever
juridical or compensatory to men according to their conformity or difformity to
the rule of righteousness he has enacted for them to live by.

3. And in both these considerations, and the several particulars reducible to
either of them, it may appear how unsuitable and insignificant eventual
Providence is to the discovery of the will of God in the matters abovesaid, by
it self alone, or without a prediscovery by the (...) law of God, what the
justifying, or condemning, the allowing or disallowing will of God is.

4. All signs, Testifications, or interpretations of a rational faculty,
whether it be the understanding or will of any person; whether the sign be in
words, gestures, or actions, have their signification by institution, or
voluntary appointment. There is this difference betwixt natural, or necessary
and voluntary agents; that of the former the inward principle, appetite, and
instinct is discovered by the act, or effect, because the said principles, and
operations are always uniform, and the same: but in rational agents, the
faculty being free, and indeterminate, and in different to diverse or contrary
conceptions and motions, the outward act cannot naturally, or necessarily with
any certainty, or any otherwise then ad placitum, or by arbitrary imposition
and appointment signify the meaning or dictate of such a faculty.

If then we will say that Providence are the interpreters of Gods will, we
must produce an institution for it, or manifest where and how it has been
appointed by God to such a use. Common reason will tell us that arbitrary
actions without some known designation intervening are of no aptitude to
express, or signify such a thing.

CHAP. IV. CHAP. IV.
The Question [how the Text says, The Power is of God] Stated and Resolved.
HAving taken so large a scope in discussing the Question about the voice and
use of Providence, it is now high time to return to, and to come to some
resolution in the enquiry above proposed, concerning the clause of the text
under present consideration, (viz. Of God) The several ways wherein things may
be said to be of God, have been above distinguished of, and explicated, and the
matter of civil dominion has been found among the things which eventuall
Providence by it self does not declare: the Question then is, concerning the
being of a thing of Gods hand by way of efficiency, and the being of his mouth
by way of warrant, or approvall, whethere both of these, or but one, and if but
one, which of them is meant by that clause in this place.

That the Apostle, when he says, there is no power but of God, may intend to
include within his meaning a providential being, or a being of the disposing
hand of God, I will not gainsay, but withal I think it must be affirmed, and
granted, that such a being of God is not the whole, or special meaning of his
words; but that he has some eye (if it be not his primary aim, which I rather
think; and let the Reader judge when he has perused what shall be said for it)
unto a being of the mouth of God, approving, warranting and authorizing the
power.

Moreover, that being of his hand or Providence which may be here intended, I
would understand, not after the common notion, viz. of mere eventual
Providence, or a persons bare possessing, or getting into the place of rule,
and command by any means whatsoever; but I understand it of that course of
Providence which is before specified to be ordinative; or such a disposing hand
of God as gives the person a call, or an allowing admission to the place; or
such a Providence as does apply and determine the general rule or Warrant of
Gods word concerning civil Magistracy to the particular case.

This ordinative course of Providence, in distinction from that which is merely
eventual, was in the general opened even now, and in reference to our present
subject in particular, to wit, the Civil power, will be illustrated in the next
Chapter; unto which also, and some other following Chapters I shall reserve the
proof of this sense that I here give of this clause, to wit, that it imports
the being of the power of Gods mouth or word (not excluding the disposur^ of
providence, but taking it in, being understood of such a procedure of
Providence as is conjoined, and concurrent with the authorizing word of God,
and is the execution, or effectuating thereof, and that a bare possessory act;
or a persons occupancy of the seat of power by a mere eventual Providence, is
not the true and proper importance of the words.

Only here, to give some light to the discerning of the difference betwixt
those two, and to show a little the necessity of understanding the words as I
have expressed, take a view of both in a Scripture example. It is the case as
is stood betwixt those two Brothers Solomon and Adonijah in relation to the
Kingdom of Israel. The case may well be stated in the words of Adonijah himself
unto Solomon's Mother, as they are set down [1 King. 2.15.] thou know that
the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should
reign: Howbeit the Kingdom is turned about, and become my Brothers, for it was
his from the Lord. Here are two persons represented as having been claimers and
competitors of the same kingdom, at one and the same time. Now let me ask, in
as much as both could not be, which of these two must we say was the power
which was of God, in the sense of our Text? The one Adonijah, he has to
allege for himself a being in it by eventual Providence: All Israel set their
faces on me that I should reign. This was as much as if he had said, he was
gotten into the throne, and had full admission and possession by the people.
And so by the story it appears he had [see 1 King. 1.5, 7, 9, 11, 18, 25.] and
upon this ground he built to himself a Title; The Kingdom was mine, says he.
On the other hand there was for Solomon the Lords designation of him by word of
mouth to David beforehand [1 Chronicles. 28.5, 6, 7. and 22.9, 10.] and an
ordinative Providence of God disposing David first to promise and to swear to
Bathsheba his Mother, and after to decree and give out command to Zadok,
Nathan, and Benaiah to anoint him King; though even then Adonijah stood seized
of the Kingdom, [1 King. 1.17, 32, etc.] and therefore Adonijah himself having
surceased and become a private person again, upon this ground acknowledges
that Solomon had the better of him in point of title, for it was his from the
Lord. Of these two different pleas, if we lake the eventuall Providence by
which Adonijah was possessed of the Kingdom to bear the sense of this Text, of
a being of God, by virtue whereof every soul is to be subject to the person so
being; then must we lay aside Solomon from being the power of God; and the
enterprise of David, Bathsheba, Nathan, and the rest of seating him in the
throne, must be disallowed as contrary to the rule of this Text, and settle
Adonijah when he was in: but this were to null and disallow the express
direction and donation of God, appointing the Kingdom to Solomon, and the
lawful proceeding upon it before cited out of the story. On the other hand if
we take that warrant of Gods word unto David, seconded by that his ordinative
Providence which moved the persons above mentioned, who in that case were
interested, to advance Solomon to the Crown, to answer this phrase in our text
of the powers being of God, then must we say that a mere eventual Providence is
not the right, and proper importance of the words.

But this shall be more at large discussed in the next Chapter, wherein I shall
proceed to the opening of the next phrase in the Text, viz. Ordained of God.

CHAP. V. CHAP. V.
Of the term, Ordained of God.
HAving in the last Chapter treated of and explicated the former attribute or
predicate which in this Text is spoken of the Powers, expressing their author
and original, viz. of God: I am now to proceed to the other, which says, The
Powers that be are ordained of God; answerably unto which in the second verse
the power is denominated, the ordinance of God.

This word, Ordained, I take to be a term somewhat more specifical, and
definite, and to bring the matter intended by the Text unto a clearer view. Yet
because they that seem to have a mind to widen the sense of it, and to make it
comprehensive of the power that I suppose to be alien to it, choose rather to
bring this clause to the formers indefiniteness (if simply, and by it self
taken) then to contract that by any limit which may appear in this, or in the
rest of the text and context; I must therefore proceed by steps.

1. Delivering the force of this word ordained, and distinguishing of the
several acceptions which it is capable any were to bear.

2. Laying down then positively and particularly the sense I understand the
phrase here to intend, and the reasons to confirm and conclude that to be the
sense.

3. And then explicating (to prevent further doubts) that special sense which
I ascribe to this clause in this place.

CHAP. V. SECT. I.
SECT. I. Of the several acceptions of the word Ordained, being put for an
action of God.
THe first thing to be done for the investigation of the meaning of this
clause, ordained of God, is to take notice of the force and use of the word
Ordained, and the different use of it.

The word (...) or (...) signifies to ordain, constitute or appoint. It is
commonly applied, 1. Either to matter of business. 2. Or to persons.


To matter of business or action, and then it is usually put to signify the
appointment or alotment of the circumstances of a thing to be done, as the
certain time, or place for it, [as Act. 28.23. Matthew. 28.16.]

2. To persons, and then it imports the ordering or setting apart of a person
to some special benefit, office, work or rank among others, [as Act. 13.48.
and 22.10. Luke 7.8. 1 Cor. 16.15.] Here it has respect to persons (for Powers
are put for the persons invested with power) the Powers (...), are ordained of
God, or ordered, set apart, appointed to their office, work and dignity by him.
In the next verse the Apostle says, the power is (...), the ordinance of God,
or, as the word bears, his edict, sanction or constitution. To them that are
conversant in Scripture, and other books of Divinity, it is at first sight
evident that there is a sense wherein all things that be, or fall out in the
world, even the sins of men, are said to be ordered or disposed by God: and
there is a sense whereby it is peculiar to some things to be disposed or
ordered by him. If we here take the word in the former sense, there is nothing
peculiar, no more spoken of, or for the powers here argued and pleaded for,
then is universally extensible to every other matter, and in special to all
humane occurrences, or affairs, be they in themselves never so inordinate and
irregular. The Magistrate that is here said to be (...) ordained or ordered of
God, and the Rebel that is said verse. 2. to be (...) a resister, or opposer of
himself to this order of God in the Power, both are in this large acception
ordained of God. Wherefore to me it seems necessary that we think of a more
restrained sense of this word, and discern what that is, and for this purpose
thus to distinguish of it.

There is a twofold order, ordination or disposition to be ascribed unto God,
as set down by him.

1. The order of his counsel, and working, or of his purpose, and proceeding in
Providence.

2. The order of his word or law, or the order which he instituteth for his
creature, particularly for man.

Of the former, the order of his own counsel, way, and working we read, [ Act.
13.48. Psalm. 119.91. and 8.2. Jer. 31.35, 36. Isa. 30.33.]

Of the latter, the order of his word, revealed will, or law given to man [1
Cor. 9.14. and 14.30. Col. 2.5. Heb. 7.11. Psalm. ^1.5.]

Of the former we may again distinguish. By the order of his purpose, and
providence God orders,

1. Things either effectively or operatively; when by his working will and
concourse he positively and immediately acts to or in upon them; thus he
orders all positive effects in their natural beings.

2. Or privatively, or by way of permission, or non impedition, and so he is
said to order, that is decree and dispose the being of sin, in that he leaves
his reasonable creature to himself, under an objective temptation.

And the former of these two, his effective, operative ordination is again
distinguishable. He effectually orders things,

1. Either productively, or to the causing of a thing to be.

2. Or directively, that is, by prescribing to the thing that already is, or
disposing of its state and course. And thus he is said even to order sin, to
wit, in its progress and consequents; for although as to the being of sin, his
ordination be only permissive, or non-impeditive, yet as to its progress, end,
and consequents his Providence is effective Aliud est facieus, aliud factum,
aliud utrumque ordinans. Qui facit malum facinus, is auctor est mali: qui
ordinem disponit in faciente and facto malo, is non auctor est mali, sed mali
ordinator bonus ad bonum. Malum non vult Deus, sed ordinem vult, and servat in
malo. A voluntate hominis accessit malum: a Deo ordinatio est universalis,
atque singularis providentiae ipsius, etiam quae sum mala sunt disponens, and
in ordinem cogens sapientissime. Junius in Collat. cum Arminio, in Arminii
oper. page 385, 386.
.

These two, the order of Gods counsel and hand of Providence, and the order of
his word, law, or institution given to man, are manifestly different, and in
reference to the present subject necessary to be distinguished. The difference
may be taken thus:

1. The former order is the rule, model, or platform of Gods own ways, the
latter is to be the rule and pattern of man's doings.

2. The former extends to all creatures and beings; the latter only to the
reasonable creature, and his moral acts, as being only capable of a law.

3. The former ordination is always accomplished, and takes place without
fail; the latter is not seldom put back and contradicted See Mr. Caryl on Job
c. 11. v. 10. page 67.
.

4. The former orders all actions and things; the latter always appoints that
which is good and acceptable in the sight of God, and only that.

In a word, to illustrate this matter by some instances suitable to the subject
we have in hand. By the latrer kind of ordinance, Israel should have continued
under Samuels government, when they rejected him, and desired a King. Absalom
should have been subject to his father and Sovereign David, when he rose up
against him to seize his kingdom. Jeroboam and the ten tribes should have kept
in allegiance to Rehoboam, when they cast him off. Athaliah should have yielded
obedience to the posterity of Ahaziah, when she took the Kingdom from them into
her own hands. The Kings rulers and people of the earth, of whom [ Psalm. 2.1.
Act. 4.25.] should have paid homage unto Christ when they conspired against
him: and by it the Angels that sinned should have kept their first estate (or
principality) when as they left their own habitation. Jude 6.
For so God had ordained to each of these respectively by the order of his law,
precept or institution. Unto this ordinance, or order of God is opposed all
that ataxie, confusion, and dislocation which any sin brings into the world.
And in reference unto this order it is that all indecorum or sedition in any
relation or society among men is disclaimed of God, and said not to be of him,
[1 Cor. 14.33.] For, God is not the author of confusion, but of peace.

Whereas by the former, the ordination of Gods counsel and providence, the
contrary to the order of his law, and will revealed to man for his rule often
comes to pass; even the things which (in respect of Gods ordinance given to
man to observe) are most disordered, confused and preposterous, are done See
Mr. Caryl on Job c. 9. v. 24. page 331.
. By this order of God, the Israelites rejection of Samuel, Absaloms rebellion
against David, Jeroboams, and the ten tribes defection from Rehoboam, Athaliahs
usurpation to the dethroning of Ahaziahs children, the confederacie^ of the
^^lers and people against Christ, yea the Apostasy of the evil Angels, and
all other irregularities are (as above was said) ordered and disposed by God.
Who knows not (says Job of such events) in all those, Job 12.9, 10. see also
verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
that the hand of the Lord has wrought this? in whose hand is the soul of
every living thing, and the breath of all mankind. For although these
considered in their own nature, being obliquities and depravements, are most
cross to the order of his word, and to the rectitude, and holiness of his
nature, and therefore as such we cannot (without blasphemy) attribute them to
his working will or hand; yet in as much as his wisdom, and power can extract
excellent things out of them when once they are occurrent, his justice, and
goodness may will their sufferance, and when they are emergent, his wise and
powerful hand may direct, bound, terminate, and with other ingredients, so can
temperate them, that much good may be educed from them, and therefore so he
orders, or ordains them.

Take for instance of the divine ordination about the evil acts of the
creature, and also of the difference betwixt the order of Gods commandment,
and the order of Gods Counsel and Providence above noted, that passage
concerning Joseph's selling into Egypt by his brethren, [ Genesis 45.5, 7, 8. and
50.20.] and peruse the words in the text it self. There was in that event the
order of justice, and of that mutual love, care, help which God has prescribed
to Brethren, broken on the part of those sons of Jacob, as also that order of
Gods counsel concerning Joseph's preheminency above his brethren, which God had
declared was intended to be broken by them; but the order of Gods counsel about
that and other things is by his most wise, potent, and holy Providence therein,
yea and thereby kept and performed; theirs is an act of selling, Gods is an act
of sending Joseph into Egypt; their act is sinful, God^ is righteous; their act
in the intent of it on their part in pernicious to Joseph, Gods act both in the
purpose and event of it is most eminently preservative and beneficial both to
Joseph, to his Father, CHAP. V. SECT. II.
to those his sellers, and to the Egyptian King, and people: with many others.
Thus the order of Gods commandment may direct one course, the order of his
counsel and Providence may steer quite another.

SECT. II. What the special and proper acception of the term Ordained of God,
is in this text.
HAving thus expressed the importance in general, and distinguished the several
acceptions of this clause, ordained of God; our next work is to discern
positively and particularly the purpose of it in this text. There being this
variety in the use of it in diverse places of Scripture, as it is brought in on
diverse occasions; the question is, how we are here to take it.

For this, my resolution is, that in this sentence of the Apostle, ordained of
God, imports not merely the proceeding of the things from God providentially,
as Providence is put to signify Gods counsel and acting, but such a being from
God as carries in it his instituting or appointing of it by the warrant, or
sanction of his word, law, precept, or commandment. Although it be true, and
may be said, that the rise, the standing, and the falling of every civil power
is, as all other occurrences in the world whatsoever, are ordered and disposed
by the counsel of Gods will, and the hand of his acting. Yet I conceive this
not to be the thing which the Apostle here only, or specially (if at all) takes
in, or intends; but the main thing within his porpose, and aim to be the
asserting of Gods preceptive ordination of the Civil Magistracy. My assertion
then is, that this Proposition, The Powers that be are ordained of God, is a
positive declaration of the divine right, property, or title which those powers
which are meant in, and are the subject of this text, have to their place of
dignity, and rule, and to the obedience of every soul within the Civil state by
virtue of the Law, revealed will, or warrant of God delivered in his word, or
otherwise promulgated. And this I assert in opposition to that claim or title
which some would build upon this text for such as obtain the upper hand, or a
prevalent possession, by virtue of a mere eventual Providence, understanding
this term ordained, of such a being of God.

They that would found the power upon mere eventual Providence, by virtue of
these words, do not well agree what it is that they would build upon them. Some
of them understanding the words to give a title, property or right to any
person or persons that hold possession of the place of rule, in as much as they
are in by Providence. Others admit the mere occupant to be an unwarranted,
unlawful, unjust Ruler, but they say, he being in place by the order, or
ordination of divine Providence, he is therefore a Power to be obeyed. But my
assertion stands against both these, affirming this ordination of God not
merely to import a providential possession, but withal, and especially a
preceptive institution or legislative sanction. Which if it hold and be made
good, will infer, that mere eventual Providence does not by the authority of
this text, either create a title, or command obedience to an unentitled power.
The Power which this text intends it does justify, or imply necessarily to be
a lawful, enrighted, or entitled power: but then it bottometh this right and
title, not upon eventual Providence, CHAP. V. SECT. III.
or a mere possessory act, but upon the warrant of the word, or law of God,
here called his Ordinance.

SECT. III. Reasons to prove that Gods Ordination of the Power is preceptive,
or warrantative, not merely providentiall.
ANd this now remains to be proved, viz. That the ordination of God in this
text is an authorizing, warrantative, or preceptive, not merely a providential
dispositive, factive or operative Ordination.

1. The first thing I shall say for this interpretation is, that it is, as far
as I can observe, the sense which our Divines commonly give of this word
ordained, in this place. I shall name and refer the Reader to some Commentators
upon it, so taking this word, viz. [Beza, Piscator, Melancthon, Aretius,
Willet, (and in him Haymo, Fajus, Hyperius) Tolet, Estius, Pareus, Eluathan
Par, and the late Annotations of our English Divines] adding to them these
other, that citing the words occasionally, so expound it. Calvin Instit. lib.
4. cap. 10. Sect. 5. fol. 420. B. [and in 1 Pet. 2.14.] Perkins discourse of
conc. vol. 1. page 527. A. Althamerus Conc. loc. 179. fol. 192. B. Martyr loc.
com. clas. 4. cap. 15. Sect. 3. page 932. cap. 13. Sect. 17. page 904. Synopsi.
Theol. Disput. 5. Sect. 17. page 752. Grotius De Jure belli. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Sect. 2. page 23. Jo. White his way to the tree of life, cap. 3. page 47.
Fuller Answer to Dr. Fern, page ^8. And let me also note that our Divines do
from these words fetch their main ground to prove against the Anabaptists the
warrant and lawfulness by the word of God, of the Office of the Magistrate in
a Christian, and over Christians, which argument were void did not ordained of
God, here intend an authorization by the warrant of his word. Some of them that
make this their main ground I shall name. The Harmony of Confessions, in that
of Auspurg. Artic. 16. and in that of Saxony Artic. 23. Pisc^^or in locum inter
observat. Bucan. loc. 45. quest. 18 page 856. Synops. pur. Theologiae. Disput.
50. Sect. 18, 17. page 751. But let us pass from humane testimony or opinion
unto matter of proof by Reason.

2. The nature of the Power here spoken of, argues this to be the sense of the
words, ordained of God. The Power here is not a mere natural or physical, but
(as was before showed) a Moral power. Now the text undertaking to describe to
us the procedure, or origination of this power, or to tell us whence it is,
viz. of God, and how of him, viz. by way of ordination; it must intend such an
ordination of God as is agreeable to the nature of the power, or suitable to
produce such a power. But natural power is one way from God, Moral power
another. Natural power is from the hand of his providence, his efficiency or
active concourse: Moral power is from the mouth of God, from his mouth
commanding or authorizing the thing. We ascribe unto God, as two distinct
faculties, or qualities, dominion, and strength; authority, and a potency;
right to rule, and ability or mightiness to act and enforce; a willing or
legislative, and working power See above Chap. 1. Sect. 3. And Zanch. de Not.
Dei lib. 4. cap. 8. qu. 3. page 424.
. And sutably to these two faculties we may attribute to him a twofold act,
viz. a Moral, and a Physical act; a moral act proceeding from his supreme
dominion, authority, or right to command; and a Physical act issuing from his
Almightiness, or infinite potency. The former is the act of his mouth; the
latter the act of his hand. And accordingly from these two distinct faculties,
and their respective acts in God there is communicated to the creature a double
power: a Moral power, that is a derivative right, or warrant, or authority to
have, or to do this or that; and this comes from the said Moral act of God: a
Natural, or Physical power, a force, ability, or prevalency to this or that
operation, derived from that Physical act of God. Now then, when it is said
here, the powers are from God, ordained of God, these powers being moral, the
meaning must be they are of Gods mouth, ordained by his precept or word,
calling, and authorizing them to their dignities, and functions. The truth is,
nothing has any obligation or morality, but by virtue of the law of a
Superior; a mere Physical act of it self cannot introduce a moral obligation;
as Mr Seldom, and others have well manifested, unto whom I refer my Reader
Seldom de Jure Nature. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 93, 94. and cap. 8. page 106, 107.
Vindication of the Treatise of Monarchy. cap. 3. Sect. 6. pa. 18.
.

3. I argue from the subjection which is in this verse commanded to be paid
unto the powers here spoken of, to persuade whereunto is the Apostles scope in
these words, and for the urging on of the same, this is his first and principal
reason, The powers to be subjected to, are ordained of God. Now let be
considered what the nature of this subjection is in the intent of the Apostle,
and it will help well to lead us to his meaning in these words, ordained of
God. The subjection enjoined is not a passive succumbency, or patient
submissiveness under the thing to be subjected unto, as under a burden or
cross; but it is a free, willing, voluntary and active submission, or
subordination; the former has an eye directly unto a thing as being by
Providence or the hand of God; and were that the sense of the subjection here
required of Christians, it would be suitable and convenient to understand this
ordination of God of a mere providential being of him. But evident it is, that
the precept, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, bears the latter
construction, to wit, of a voluntary and active subordination. The verb (...)
so signifies. Divines observe upon the word, it imports a subjection according
to order, and such a subjection as is that of persons, that stand in a relative
inferiority to their superiors, as wives, children, servants, and subjects to
their respective correlatives; who are not only to bear them that are over
them, but to be subordinate to them with good will, and in many duties and
offices to act under and serve them. They note also the word is of the middle
voice, and therefore signifies actively, as well as passively, and is therefore
in other places translated in the active, as, submit your selves, submitted
themselves, etc See Romans 10.3. 1 Cor. 16.16. Ephesians. 5.22. Jam. 47. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and 5.5.
. The quality of this subjection is further characterized in the subsequent
verses, as, that it must extend so far as to exclude resistance of the power,
we may not resist, or cast it off though we could ( verse. 2.) Yea, but on the
other hand, we are to support and maintain it, we are to minister unto it the
materials whereby it may be kept up, and continued to rule over us ( verse. 6,
7.) and the subjection to it must be of conscience, as the principle of
conscience is contradistinct from terror, and compulsory punishment ( verse. 5.)
and further the aforesaid support and maintenance must be yielded to it, as a
due, and debt, and that owing not only to God the imposer or ordainer, but of
justice to the power it self ordained. Now can a subjection of this nature,
containing all these things he built upon the being of a thing by mere eventual
Providence? the coming forth of a thing so of God can be no cogent, or solid
reason for such a subjection unto it. There are many things thus proceeding
from and ordained of God, which we are not bound to acquiesce in, or let be as
they are, much less to maintain and uphold in their posture; but our wills, our
desires, our prayers, our endevors may be, yea of duty must be against them.
Death, sickness, persecution, wrongs, famines, plagues, predatory wars, and
innumerable more things are providentially ordained of God at certain times
here, and there to fall, and never come but by such an ordination, yet may they
be endeavored to be repelled, or removed. And this is the reason which authors
commonly give for their understanding the words not of a sole providential, but
of an institutive ordination Tolet in loc. and Grotius de Jure Belli lib. 1.
cap. 2. Sect. 7. page 23.
. There is indeed due unto every providence of God, though never so inflicting
or heavy, some kind of subjection, that is patience, or a contented and
composed mind and behavior under it, but there is a great deal of difference
betwix this, and the subjection here due to the power. The work or office of
the former, viz. of patience, is not to form the mind to will, or desire the
being or coming to pass of the thing which is to be born, nor to command the
person to a concu^rence in procuring or continuing it upon himself, but
presupposing it must needs be so, it is to frame the heart to bear it in a
right manner, to wit, quie^ly, and without grudging; innocently, and without
evil doing, or speaking; confidently, and without despondency or casting away
hope in God. And this bearing it binds unto only for present, or during the
known incumbency of the evil, that is so far as it appears necessary and
inevitable, as being from the will of Gods purpose, and imposition of his hand;
which kind of subjection well admits and consists with the use of means for
the repelling, and of remedies for the ceasing, and ending of the evil
sustained, the use of those means, respecting not that which appears to be the
will of Gods counsel, but that which is to come, or that part and duration of
the evil which is behind, and therefore uncertain to the bearer, whether God
will have it to be or no. This is the subjection of patience, which therefore
properly has reference to a providential divine ordination, but the subjection
of a relation of inferiority in a civil state, whereof the text treats, is of
another stamp; it must sway the mind to consent to the power, to act for, and
contribute to its standing, and to refrain all counter workings of hand, or
spirit against the same: and the ground hereof is, because it has respect to a
divine ordination of institution, the which institution has prescribed the
power both to be, and to have such a posture of subjection yielded to it.

To say the power is ordained of God providentially, and therefore to be
subjected to with a subjection of this latter kind, to wit, which bars out all
resistance, or attempt to alter, or order any thing against its standing, or
proceeding, is to say, that whatever is ordained of God providentially is so to
be subjected to: and what were this but to forbid and put a Supersedeas upon
all humane actions, and to bind all the men in the world to be as still and
void of motion as if they were dead, so that none of them in any affair may
once stir, either hand, foot, tongue or thought? for there can be no motion of
any of these, but it must carry in it an alteration, change; or ordering of
something otherwise then Providence has already ordained it. For this we all
say; the present posture of all the things in the world, even to the placing of
a Sparrow upon the ground, or the hair of a man's head, is ordered by divine
Providence; now no creature can move without altering in some particular the
present posture of things; if then whatever is ordered by Divine Providence,
must be so acquiesced in, or under, that none may attempt to counter-order, or
alter any thing in it, every man is bound to a surcease of all action, even to
the very drawing of his breath.

4. I argue again from the prohibition of resistance of the power, and the due
and proper sense wherein it is to be understood. For I ask, Is resistance
absolutely, or in every sense imaginable, or all manner of resistance
whatsoever, here forbidden? There are none but they will, or must confess that
some resistance is to be excepted out of this prohibition, and is allowable See
Dr. Willers He^capla^on Romans 13. qu. 7. page 583.
. It is lawful for a Subject to defend himself in person, and estate by
Petition, and plea in the Court against his Sovereign. Likewise if his Prince
personally and wrongfully assault him to the manifest and immediate peril of
his life, it is permitted him to ward off, and defensively put back that
undeserved, and extrajudicial violence. Yea further, it is not only lawful,
but a duty to deny obedience to some of the Magistrates commands, backed with
penalties, and not only so, but to act to the contrary of them, as is manifest
by the example of the Apostles doing contrary to the prohibition and th^eats of
their Rulers, and the warrant they alleged for their so doing [ Act. 4.19. and
15.29.] What then is the resistance which is here forbidden, and how to be
circumscribed? The ordinary, (and I suppose rational and expedient) restriction
put upon the words is, the Power may not be resisted, that is, the lawful
being and proceeding of the power, that which is of God, is irresistible; or
all resistance is forbidden which can be said to be a resistance of the
ordinance of God (as to destroy the person in whom the power is placed by G^d,
or to deprive him of the authority committed to him, or to hinder the just
exercise of it.) Now if we take the words, of God, ordained of God (which are
the strongest reason and meetest circumscription of the irresistance here
insisted on) to signify a providential efflux from God, there is no limitation
in them, but an absolute illegitimation of all acts of resistance, even of
those abovesaid to be generally, and justly allowable, as well as any other,
and an imposal of subjection, without any manner of resistance, to all the
outrages of the immanest Tyrant. All the injuries and illegalities of every
Superior are providentially disposed of God, and therefore as wrapped up within
this term Ordinance, so understood, would be irresistible. It remains necessary
therefore that we here take Ordained, and ordinance, in an institutive, or
legislative, not in a mere providential way of ordination.

5. A reason also may be taken from the penalty annexed to that resistance of
the ordinance of God which is here disallowed, they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation. An ordination of Providence may be resisted, (that is,
endeavored to be prevented or altered) and no damnation incurred, yea
oftentimes such a resistance is the fulfilling of a man's duty. The evil which
God in his secret purpose intends, and his Providence is visibly working to
bring or to continue, it may be lawful, yea a duty for us to labor the not
falling, or our escape of; as on the other hand we may, and ought to seek the
attainment of those good things, which God wills never to bestow upon us.
Wherefore if an endevor to resist, and frustrate an ordination of Providence be
a matter of no guilt, or demerit of damnation, it must not be simply that; but
an ordination of precept which the Apostle here threatens with that sentence.

6. Once more I argue from the resistance, and the resister of the Power
condemned in the second verse. That cannot be the sense of the term ordained of
God, which may be said of him that resists the power, then when he resists,
and in respect of his so doing, and that cannot be the sense of that attribute
the ordinance of God, which may be spoken of the resisters act of resistance of
the power; but to be in the place of power by eventual Providence may be said
of the resister of the Power, then when he resists, and in respect of his so
doing; and the resisters act of resistance of the power, may be said to be by a
providential disposal: Therefore a being in the place of power by eventual
Providence cannot be the sense of those terms, ordained of God, the ordinance
of God. Both the premises I take to be so clear as not to need confirming. If
the minor should be stuck at, I would ask what branch of it can be denied, or
counted any thing obscure? I will only illustrate it by instance. Was not
Absalom, was not Athaliah in the place of power by eventual Providence? and was
not both the one and the other a resister of the power, the former of David,
the latter of Joash? and was not their very being in, or occupying the place of
power (as they did it, viz. by Treachery and violence) an act of resistance of
the power, in that thereby they kept out the power that was truly of God, CHAP.
V. SECT. III.
viz. David and Joash?

7. To be ordained of God must needs be taken in such a sense as that the term
may always be predicated of, or agree to every power that is intended in the
Text; but if we take ordained of God to mean an actual being in possession, or
place of rule by divine Providence, this cannot always be predicated of, or
agree to every power that is intended in the text. As it did appear in the last
foregoing argument, that such a being in the place of rule may agree to some
that are not the power, but are the resisters of the same; so here it may be
evident that it may not agree to them that indeed are the power. The Providence
of God does so order it sometimes, that the Power or Civil Magistrate is not
only disturbed and disquieted in, but outed and extruded from actual rule, or
possession of the seat of Magistracy, he still remaining the power. That he
that is the power may be providentially out of possession will be fully argued
a little after. Here I will only point at those two even now mentioned
instances. Who can deny but that David and Joash at what time they were
disseised by Absalom and Athaliah, were yet such powers as the Apostle here
means to command subjection to, and to persuade thereto by this argument,
because they be of God, ordained of him? and that which befell those two
Princes may, at the pleasure of God, be the providential lot of any other.
Those whom the precept of God (in this verse) requires to be obeyed, his
Providence may at the same time ordain their disseisure. Wherefore if it cannot
be said universally of all the powers included in this text, that they are
providentially ordered of God in an actual rule or domination, we must take the
text to intend some other kind of ordination, and that will be no other but an
injunctive imposal.

8. I argue from the end for which the power is ordained of God, expressed (
verse. 3. and 4.) which is to be a terror not to good works, but to the evil.
To be a Minister of God to thee for good, to be a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil. Commentators observing upon the words that the powers
in their proceedings do not always hold correspondency to these ends or uses,
Calvin. Pareus.
but not seldom do act directly counter to them, they therefore rightly tell
us, the Apostle herein speaks not what the Magistrate always is, or does, but
what he is ordained to be, and do; not what his action, but what his office or
institution is; not what is de facto, but what ever ought to he, and de jure,
is his level and scope. Here then is an evident ground to conclude it is not
providentiall, but preceptive ordination which the Apostle intends.
Providential ordination does ever take effect, or indeclinably accomplish its
end. The difference (as was before noted) betwixt these two ordinations
(preceptive, and providential) is, that the former is often disobeyed, and
departed from by men to whom it is given, but the latter holds on its course,
and attaineth his purpose without sail; it never comes short, or is defeated of
its end. If we will say the ordination here meant is by Providence, and the
Providence of God in the giving of all Magistrates proposes; and makes at
this, that they be a terror not to good works, but to the evil, etc. We must
thence say, it would then so come to pass, and be universally verified in
every power, and in every administration of every power. But the contrary to
the whole strain of those two verses ( viz. the 3. and 4.) experience finds to
be the practice of diverse Rulers. Whence I infer the ordination of God here
intended is institutive, or preceptive.

9. And lastly, Another argument there is to be raised from the consideration
of the end which the Apostle declares the Civil powers to be ordained for; and
it is this, The ordination that is here meant does set up Powers, to be a
terror not to good works, but to the evil; to be a Minister of God to thee for
good; to be a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: and this we
must understand to be their constant, and perpetual end: but Providence does
not seldom ordain powers (in judgment, and for correction to people) for quite
contrary ends to these 1 Samuel 8.11, to 18. Hos. 13, 11.
. So it is often that Rulers are not a terror to evil workers, but to the
good, Ministers of God for evil, executors of wrath not upon the evil, but
upon the well-doer. And if so it come to pass, we must needs say it is so
ordered by God in his Providence: and if the Providence of God does so
oftentimes intend and dispose that Magistrates are a scourge to virtue, and
indulgencers of wickedness, then we cannot say, unless we may speak
contradictories, that the ordination of the powers, by which they are set up
constantly, and only for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them
that do well, is an ordination merely by Providence.

Thus I have discharged (as I could) the Second thing I proposed to do for the
opening of this term ordained of God, which was to lay down positively the
sense which I conceive it to bear in this place, with my Reasons confirming and
concluding the same, I go on to the Third.

CHAP. V. SECT. IV.
SECT. IV. Gods preceptive ordination of the Power explained, particularly how
it is communicated to this or that particular Magistrate.
GOds ordination of the powers being supposed to be preceptive, or to involve
an act of warrant, authorization or commissionating of them by his word or law:
The third thing I promised is an explication of this special sense which I
give of the words, ordained of God.

That which I take to need some explication is, what this act of ordination
thus construed imports, and especially how particular powers may be said to be
thus ordained of God; or, how Gods preceptive, or legislative ordination
descends, or is derived to this, or that individual power, which has not his
express, extraordinary, or immediate nomination to the place of rule, as Saul,
David, and some others, found in Scripture, had.

Ordination here, I conceive, intends as much as creation, production, or
putting of the power in being. So that when the Apostle says, the powers that
be are ordained of God, his meaning is, they are by him made, created, or put
into the state of Powers. Whatsoever therefore goes to the enstating or
erecting of a Magistrate, or the investing of a person in that office, or
function, that I take to be imported in this word Ordination, and that I
understand by these words to be ascribed unto God. This is it then, the Power
is ordained of God, that is, CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 1.
whatsoever is effective or productive of a Magistrate is derived from God.

Subsection 1. Ordination contains Institution, and Constitution; and what each
of these signifies.
THis ordination or creation of the power must needs, I conceive, have in it
two things.

The first is institution, or the ordaining of Magistracy to be in the state,
or civil society. It is Gods preceptive ordinance that men in every politic
body should have, and live under a Government. In this act of institution may
be contained not only the simple appointment of Magistracy to be, but the
defining also of the office, or the prescribing what shall be the end, and what
the measure, compass, or bounds of its authority; how the Sovereign power shall
rule, and be obeyed, what shall be necessary or allowable for him to do, and
what to have.

The other is Constitution, which is the bringing of that Institution into act,
and execution in particular states. And this may have ascribed to it two parts.

1. Specification, or the determining of the special kind of Government,
comprehensible under that general institution, or the setting down, which shall
be the form^ of policy pro bic and nunc, or here and now, in this or that
state; whether Monarchy, Aristocracy, or another. And unto this Specification
may be reducible the designment of the proportion, or latitude which this or
that magistrate shall have. I shall not here enter into the dispute, whether
the supreme power be limitable otherwise then the general institution it self
confines him. But I will suppose (the which is to me the more probable opinion)
that there is a latitude in the allotment of power by that general institution,
and as some things are necessary, and of the essence of supreme power, so other
things are allowable or lawful; and being so, are left arbitrary, and referred
to the choice and agreement of the parties concerned in the constitution: and
these may be the subject of that designation, or apportionating; as may be also
the several shares or measures of power which each party shall have, where the
supreme power is either mixed, or compounded of several simple forms, or is
distributed into several hands.

2. Individuation; or the investure of the power, or the assignation of it to
the person, or persons that shall sustain it, or the concrediting, and
committing of it to this or that man, or number of men, or to one living, or
stock of persons in whom the designed fram of Government shall reside.

That these acts must necessarily go to the creating or putting of the
particular power in being, I think will not be questioned. It remains then to
show that they are, and how they are every one of them from God, and by his
ordination, understanding ordination in this sense in which we have before
construed it.

Subsection 2. CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 2.
That Institution of the Power is of God, and whether by the law of Nature in
man's Innocence.
FIrst, The institution of the Power; the ordaining in general, that Magistracy
shall be, and what shall be the office, power, and preeminencies of the
Magistrate, this is, with one consent acknowledged to be of God. Whether its
institution by God was in man's innocence, or it was since his; whether
Magistracy be of God, by the law of nature; or by a positive or postnate law,
is not agreed upon by all learned men: but most Divines, (as far as I observe)
both ancient and modern, Protestants, and of the Scools conclude it to have
been instituted of God in the state of man's innocence, and to be from the light
and law of nature Vide Aquin. part. 1. qu. 97 art. 4. Durand. in Sentent. lib.
2. Did. 44. qu. 2. fol. 157. A. P. Martyr loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 13. Sect. 5.
Bucan. loc. 49. qu. 16. Pareus in hunc loc. Scharp. Symph. Epo. 1. page 39.
Estium and Willet in loc. Aristot. pol. lib. 1. number. 8, and 17.
. And to their authority I may add that of the Prince of Philosophers, and also
that of the Jewish Doctors. These (as Mr. Seldom tells us Seldom de Jure Nature.
lib. 1. cap. 10. p. 118, 119, 127. and lib. 7. cap. 4. p. 804. Dr. Hammond of
Resol. centrov. Quaer. 1. Sect. 7. page 6.
.) deliver seven principal heads of the law of nature, which they call the
seven precepts of the Noachidae, and the sixth of them is concerning the being
of Civil Government, and of obedience to it, and this tenent of the original
of the law of Magistracy may be confirmed.

1. By this that we find the duty of all inferiors to their superiors enjoined
in the Fifth commandment of the moral law (as it is generally expounded: by
which it must needs be presupposed that the being of superiority, in every
state is enacted.

2. In that all nations, and people that are, or have been, and have owned
reason, and morality, as they have inclined to entertain civil society, and
communion, so they have been guided to esteem it necessary to have a Government
in every society, and accordingly have erected, and submitted to it.

3. God has (as is evident by Scripture) by his law of creation set other
reasonable creatures (as spirits) in a distinction of order and superiority of
some over others; and there can be no reason given why it should not be so in
mankind, by the same original law.

4. Though there appear not what use the state of integrity could have, of
punishment, or a coercive sword; yet it is not to me conceivable how there
could be either distinction or communion in humane societies, or actions
without the commanding and leading power of some over others.

Subsection 3. That constitution of the Power, or putting in of the particular
Magistrate is of God, and how, or by what means he does it.
SEcondly, The constitution of Magistracy, this, both as to the determination
of the form, and composure of the Government, and as to the individuation or
investure of the person is from God. Yet not always, and in every state after
the same manner.

1. We read God did sometime, CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 3.
unto the Commonwealth of Israel, ordain both the special form of Government,
and the particular persons in whom it should reside, by peculiar revelation. So
it was in the government of Israel by Moses, Josuah, Gideon, Deborah, Saul,
David and his posterity.

2. But besides that way of peculiar Revelation, proper to that people, and
those persons and such other as are in like manner mentioned in Scripture, God
has another, which is his ordinary, and constant way of determining the
special form of Government, and designing the persons for it, to wit, by giving
order and direction to men how to proceed in their vacancy of Magistracy, and
by leading and steering men according to that his order unto the constitution
of it among them. For our right understanding, and evidencing of this way of
Gods ordination of particular Magistrates in particular States, let these few
particulars be considered.

1. Gods ordination of Powers must needs import Constitution as well as
Institution; that is, wherever there is a power ordained of God, not only that
Magistracy shall be, but the special form, and particular person is ordained of
God; he orders what shall be the platform, and who shall be the Magistrate
Existimo Apostolum primum quidem testari in genere jus ipsum, and potestatem
Magistratus a Deo esse; deinde hujus potestatis distributionem eidem Deo
vindicare. Beza in loc. Men have no title to Authority, but by deputation from
God, as the Apostle expressly testifies, Romans 13.1. Jo. White his way, etc. cap.
3. page 47.
. This is the sense of that which is ordinarily said, that the Magistrate has
his power by deputation from God. And this must needs be acknowledged;
otherwise we could not say of the Powers that be, or (as some urge the words)
are existent, that they are of God. It is constitution that puts Magistracy in
being. By virtue of the general rule, or command given to all States, that
there be a government in the Commonwealth, no man is, or c^n claim to be the
power more then another, nor is this man bound to be a subject more then that;
CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 6.
nor are the people tied to own, and subject to this man as their Magistrate
more then to another, or then he is to any of them, or is any special form, or
kind of government expressly either justifiable, or reprovable more then
another; nor is the setting up of Magistracy the work or interest of any in
particular more then of others: So that if many persons should start up, and
claim the seat of Magistracy each to himself in peculiar over the same.
Commonwealth, or if in it diverse parties, either of that body politic, or
foreign to it, should enterprise the erection of Magistracy, each of them in
their own way, and oppositewise to one another, no one of them could be owned,
or binding, or entitled to the ordination of God, by virtue of that general
command more then another. It were to ascribe to God a bootless, void,
frustraneous act to say he has ordained Civil power to be, but taken no order
in whom it shall be, or how it shall be conveyed to any man, without an order
or rule for constitution, that law, that there he a Magistracy, may stand
written in the word of God, or in the heart of man by nature, and never take
effect or be acted. God does not ordain name or notions of things, but their
beings and realities, and in ordaining them, he must be supposed to ordain the
acts, method, and course of their production. We say of his will of decree, and
it must hold also of his will of command, God not only ordaines the end, or
that a thing be, but the means also, or how, and by whom it shall be. Civil
power being one of those things which the law of God both by nature, and in
Scriptu^e has subjected to property, or affixed to a peculiar having and
holding, by virtue whereof this man is enstated and entitled to this office,
and another is not, such a property, or peculiarity of tenure, or reservedness
cannot be without a law for the circumscription of men's wills and hands in the
acquisition and possession of it. Now if such a law be fixed by God, it must
needs be supposed that some rule, or direction is given by him for the founding
and transferring of this property, CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 7.
and for the discovery of it in whom it is. We must therefore come to this
conclusion; viz. To say God ordaines the Powers, is to say he regulates, and
prescribes by a law men's wills, and actions about it, and in reference to the
giving, taking and using of the Magistracy. The words of Pareus (and with him
of Willet) upon the place are to this effect, Ordained, (...), Ordinatae,
significat esse potestates a Deo ordinatas, h^e certis limitibus juris, and
honestatis circumscriptas, intra quas nisi se contineant, ab ordine divino
exorbitent. Pareus in loc.
signifies that the powers are of God ordained, that is, are circumscribed by
certain limits and rules of right and honesty, within which rules unless they
contain themselves they degenerate from the ordinance of God. And this
circumscription doubtless must necessarily be admitted as well in relation to
the assuming as to the using of the power.

Once more, If it were not so that Gods ordaining of the powers does import,
not only that he institutes magistracy to be, but that he constitutes every
particular Magistracy, we could not say that an insurrection against this, or
any particular Magistrate, or to depose him, and occupy his place were a sin or
a trangression, and resistance of Gods ordinance (as the Apostles words verse.
2. without question intend) for to take away or control a particular
Magistrate cannot otherwise be an entrenchment upon Gods ordinance then upon
the particular Magistrates being ordained of God. So much (that God institutes
Government to be) would stand unshaken by such an act, or would consist well
with it; for still, it notwithstanding, it would be undetermined who were the
power, and so it would be left as free and lawful for the resister to take the
place, as for the resisted to hold it; the institution would be satisfied if
any possessed it. Wherefore we must needs suppose God does in every
Commonwealth constitute the proper and particular Magistracy, where ever it can
be said to be ordained of God.

2. In regard God does not ordinarily by any special revelation determine the
constitution of the Civil state, that is, point out what shall be the special
form of Government, CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 3.
and who shall be the Governors in this or that place, we must therefore
conceive him to manage this matter ordinarily, mediante homine, or by men, and
that is, by his defining the way of erecting Magistracy, or giving order, and
prescribing rules to men how they shall proceed in the setting up of it, and by
men's proceeding accordingly. They that say the law, and light of nature
enacteth Government, to be in the Civil society, tell us also that by nature
no man is actually constitute a Magistrate more then another, and that nature
has left all men equal, and free, or unengaged ( in actu exercito, they mean)
to any one particul r form or person Aristot. pol. lib. 3. number. 102. Seldom de
Jure Not. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 92. Hobs Elements part. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 1. and
cap. 4. Sect. 1.
. Wherefore it must needs be concluded seeing God by the law of nature has
enjoined government to be, but has ordered no particular in it with
application to singulars, he has committed it to the positive transaction of
men, to be disposed according to certain general rules of justice, and prudence
given by him. It is not imaginable how God should impose or require any
distinct state, or special relation, and order to be amongst a multitude of
men, or other his creatures, but be must be said either immediately by himself
to create it, or to set down from what causes, or out of what principles it
shall arise.

3. For the distinct understanding of the manner, or how many ways God
interposeth and concurreth in the constitution of particular Magistrates, in
regard of which interposal the individual, or particular power may be ascribed
to Gods ordination, I shall note.

Some things God does herein immediately, and some things mediately.

1. Immediately, and by himself he does declare such, and such forms of
Government to be lawful and eligible, and he does order where and in whom the
interest shall be to make choice which of those forms in particular, and who
the person or persons shall be that shall be placed over this or that state
respectively.

2. Mediately, and by men he does enstate every special kind of Government, and
every particular Magistrate, that is, he does set them up according to those
rules which we say are immediately given by him.

And this his mediate concurrence is two ways.

1. The authority or warrant of his word, rule or law goes along with those
that act therein according to the same. And this is his moral concurrence.

2. His work or hand of Providence guides the wills and exterior actions of
them that proceed according to those rules; and this is his physical concourse.

We do not therefore exclude the Providence of God from the ordination of the
powers that be: but we attribute to it its proper place and use; which is to
pursue, and execute the authority and rule of his word, from which in the
production of Magistracy we cannot, neither ought by any means to separate or
disjoyn it, so as to make it constitutive of a Magistrate. And this act of
Providence is far different from that which some would confound with it, and so
put as the whole of sole basis of Civil government, as to constitution, to
wit, a persons mere possession, or occupation of the seat of Majesty, or a bare
physical predominancy: for this may be, and yet no Magistracy; and this, though
it be due to the Civil Magistrate, yet it is separable from it, as this
discourse I hope will manifest. The act of Providence which (as far as I can
apprehend) may be productive of Civil power is that which disposes of the
title or right, and not of the mere possession of the throne; that which
guides men's wills to consent, or give a call, or confer on the one part, and to
accept of it on the other; and not that which only swayeth men's hands, on the
one side lifting up an arm of force, as a punishment over a people, on the
other binding the hands, and leading away captive Princes, and people, that
however disagreeing, or relucting they can make no effectual resistance.

4. Though God do not by immediate revelation assign to every particular State
what shall be the special model of their government, and who the persons to
sustain it, yet where men do act in the assignation of these for substance
according to the prescript or rule given out by God unto all, there is a power
ordained of God, and (unless when a special revelation comes from God
determining these particulars) there only, or not otherwise.

This Proposition has two parts, a positive, and a negative.

1. The positive is, when men do act according to divine rule, in the moulding
of government, and advancing of persons to wield it, there the constitution may
be said (according to this text) to be of God, and the particular Government,
and Governors to be ordained of God. Immediety of designation from God either
of platform, or person is not necessary to the bestowing of this style, of God,
ordained of God, upon the particular Magistracy. It is in this case as it is in
the point of any ordinary right or property. God has ordained a perpetual law
of justice among men (thou shall not steal) by which every man's property in his
goods is required to be reserved to him; and he has given, either in his word,
or by the light, and law of nature a sufficient rule to determine, what shall
be right, what wrong, and how property in any possessibles shall be acquirable;
yet all this by it self invests no man in any right to any goods in particular:
it is a humane qualification or transaction which supervening, and being bona
fide passed, now enstates men in an actual right to any goods; and when this is
emergent, this or that man's title or property in these particular goods is
asserted by God, and then it may be said, it is Gods ordinance that this man
have and enjoy these goods, and a transgression against the same it is for
another man without like warrant from God to disseise him of them. The truth
is, the most, if not all, the moral precepts of God, and perpetual laws of
nature are so made, and delivered to man, as that to the putting of them in
practice, or the bringing of their obligation into act there must intervene
some positive constitution either from God or man, and most commonly it is from
the latter.

The Schools tell us that humane positive constitutions do determine the law of
nature as the form specificates the matter, or the particular matter determines
the general Vide Cajetan in Aquin. 1. 2ae. qu. 95. art. 2. Widdingtons
Rejoinder cap. 8. number. 20. Seldom de Jure Not. lib. 1. cap. 8. page 106. Hooker
Eccles. polit. lib. 6. page 151, 152. Grotius de Jure lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 10.
. That wives, children, servants, subjects own their respective superiors, and
pay them their duties is the law of God, but there are certain humane acts
which are the immediate foundation and rise of these relations, and so of
persons lying under the duties, which severally belong to them; which acts once
passed the bounds of relation, and duty do take hold of the persons
respectively by virtue of the divine ordination. Our Savior says of married
persons, What God has joined together let no man put asunder. Marriage then in
all married couples is a conjunction made by God; but how comes that seeing
most that marry have no recourse to, or particular direction from God, when,
whom, or how to marry, probably never think of any ordinance of God about it,
but only to follow their own or others counsels and wills in it? Why thus it is,
God in the beginning authorized marriage to be betwixt man and woman, and
appointed how it should be transacted, to wit, by the mutual consent, or
cleaving together of each party: and enacted other rules concerning it, as
touching proximity of blood, etc. And now by virtue of this his ordinance, what
ever couple do accordingly contract, are joined together by God. The same may
be exemplified in the office of the Ministry of the Gospel. Christ has given
commission to certain in the Church to ordain Elders, and when such are
accordingly ordained, they a^e then the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God, and are said to be made by the Holy Ghost Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5 22. Tit. 1.5. 2 Timothy 2.2. with Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 4.1.
.

In the natural body God is said to have given more abundant honor to that
part which lacked, [1 Cor. 12.24.] How it is said God has given this honor?
it is not by his making that part more comely then other parts, for contrarily
the words are spoken of those parts that by making are more uncomely, and less
honorable then the rest. But, in as much as we by an instinct of nature do
repute some parts naturally less honorable, and more uncomely then other, and
thereupon do b^stow more abundant artificial honor and comeliness upon them,
viz. do more cloth, and cover them with dressings; in this regard, what is
upon that consideration thought fit by man to be done in the distribution of
honor to his natural parts in such an inequality as may fill up the natural
disproportion, God is said to do, viz. by directing us by natures instinct to
do it.

The Judges of Israel for those 450. years mentioned by St. Paul, are said to
be given them of God, and to be raised up to them of God, and that he commanded
them to feed his people Act. 13.20. Jud. 2.16, etc. 1 Chronicles. 17.6.
: and yet we read not of any immediate particular, express call from God given
to them all, or to the most of them, none of them, I take it, can upon any
evident ground be supposed to have had any such, except. Deborah, Gideon, and
Sampson; but a mediate call from God, by men, that all of them doubtless had:
and of Jeptha his call of this nature the text at large informs us Jud. 10.5.
. from such an orderly call by men we may therefore take it to have been that
they were given, raised up, commissioned to that people of God

We all acknowledge Subordinate Magistrates to be ordained of God, and many of
our Commentators include them as well as the supreme in this text, and Mr.
Calvin, Calvin in loc. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 64. page 288. Estius
in To. 13.
Spanhemius, and Estius takes those words, [in 1 Pet. 2.13.] sent by him; to
refer, not unto the King, but to God as the sender; yet those inferior
Magistrates have their election, and deputation from the supreme humane power;
but they are notwithstanding, reckoned to be of God, in as much as they are
surrogated by them who are empowered by God to do it.

Our Savior speaking of all Magistrates, says that unto them the word of God
came, that is, Joh. 10.35.
as Expositors interpret these words, God has given out to them a warrant, and
commission for their offices. But how is that? the speech certainly can have no
reference to an immediate designation from God in relation to the most of them,
but the word of God comes to, or authorizeth them, who are advanced to the seat
of power by men according to his word.

We may take this then for clear, that the conveying of power from man so man,
may make a power ordained of God; only with this proviso be it said, this is
not merely because it is done by men, for neither every humane action, nor
every act of any whomsoever in this matter can entitle this effect to divine
ordination; but it is because, and so far forth as this is done of men by
virtue of a rule, and warrant from God, and therefore has the authorization,
and seal of God upon it.

Wherever therefore such a platform of Magistracy is erected, and such persons
are invested with it as God has declared eligible, and this by them to whom
God has committed this management, and such power placed in the persons, as he
has legitimated, there is a power enstamped with this of the Apostle, of God,
ordained of God. And this is the sentence of Commentators on the text, and
others that treat on this subject. As

Peter Martyr. P. Martyr loc. com clas. 4. cap. 13. Sect. 5.
Sometimes this (to wit, the creation of the power) comes to pass by the
consent of the Senate, sometime by the suffrages of the people, but these are
but instruments, the proper cause of Magistrates is God himself.

Pareus. P^reus in loc. sub. dub. 3.
Neither do second causes exclude the first. In old time God by an immedia e
call advanced some Magistrates, and Kings to the throne, as Moses, etc. But the
rest, as the 70. Elders, he by man's act, and counsel placed in power, and yet
cease not so to do, and that according to the laws and custom received of
every people; either by the election and consent of a Senate, as now the Roman
Empire; or by the voices of the people, as the Governers of the Cities that are
merely or mixtly democratical, etc.

Tolet in loc.
Toler. Of God, as of the first principle, and cause the powers proceed,
although by the intervenient wills of men, as heat, cold, and the like are of
God, but by intermediate second causes.

Estius in loc.
Estius. The secular power is mediately of God, by men, who by the instinct of
the law of Nature, set over those of whom they may be governed in a community.
For this instinct is of God, so that by reason thereof it may be truly and
positively said, that this power is not but of God.

Mr. John Seldom. Seldom ^ de Jure Not. lib. 1. cap. 8. page 108.
But whatsoever by that license is constituted variously betwixt men civilly,
and duly according to the several forms of Government, only by way of
determination, as the Schoolmen speak, so as not to be contrary neither to the
natural, nor the positive law of God; that also receives sanction and
obligation, according to the several qualifications of the constitution, from
the said law which is both natural, and divinely positive or written.

Willet upon the place. As the fruits of the earth are brought forth by man's
labor, yet are Gods gifts, so is Magistracy, etc.

2. The negative is, Whatever power (so named, or pretended) there may be, or
whatsoever persons there be that take upon them to be the Power, or Magistrate
over a State, and are not thereto appointed, or therein enstated, as is
abovesaid (that is, either by special express revelation from God, or by men
proceeding upon, and by virtue of a warrant, or authority from God) they are
not a Power ordained of God. This will follow upon what is said already. For if
it be so, that to the making of a particular Power, or Magistrate to be Gods
ordinance there goes not only a law of God universally enacting Civil
Government to be, but a further specificating act of God, whereby be
constituteth this special platform for this Commonwealth, and calls forth, or
authorizeth this person, or these persons here to bear it; and that this he
does, either by immediate revelation, or by the intervention of men qualified,
and instructed by his set rule to make the said assignation, then it must needs
be yielded that none can be entitled to the plea, and privilege of being Gods
ordinance, but they that come in by that door, or ascend by that scale.

It will (I think) be said by all, that Gods ordaining the power does not
necessarily import his d^signation immediately, by his own mouth, of the form
and persons, but that he commits the doing of this ordinarily to humane
arbitration. And hereupon it will be to be inferred, that either God has left
this determination to men absolutely, indefinitly, and promiscuously, giving
way to any that will, in any place whatsoever, to constitute what Magistracy,
and whom in it they please, (and who has so little understanding either of
God, or of the matter hereby attributed to him, as to say this?) or else that
he has set a stint, and fixed rule to men in this matter, appointing certain
to constitute the Government, and obliging people to the owning of the
Government so constituted, as from him, with exclusion, and disallowance of any
other to determine these things. And if this be the way (as to me it seems so
clear as that no other is imaginable) then, if in the erecting of government a
substantial deviation from it be, as when incompetent, or unallowed persons be
the advancers of themselves, or others unto the place of power, in as much as
in that case there lies the divine disapprobation, and men act besides the said
prescript, it may be said there is no ordinance of God, but a contradiction,
and contraordination to Gods order.

CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 4.
Subsection 4. That Gods ordination is conveyed to the particular Magistrate by
the consent of the community.
BUt then (perhaps) there will remain one Question, viz. where has God given
out his warrant or rule to any to act, or proceed in this business? and who are
they in every State respectively, whom God has authorized, or qualified to
determine the particulars of it?

Unto this my Answer is,

1. That the said rule, or the special way by which men should be called, or
attain to the place of Sovereign power, and expressly defined in Scripture is
not necessary, or to be, as such, exacted. We all grant that God has in
reference to all the proprietable things of this life, and to all transactions
about them enjoined a rule of right and equity to be kept, and forbidden the
transactions about them, enjoined a rule of right, and equity to be kept, and
forbidden the transgression of it, yet he has not in his written word
particularly stated the several ways by which the right, or title to a thing
shall be acquired, nor yet the special laws, or rules by which the property of
persons to such things may be determined, or adjudged. This the law and light
of nature in man's heart as to many, or most things, or cases, is left to
discover: and this it has done, in most things indifferent clearly, and
equally, in so much as the affairs of men about them are ordinarily, and both
by vulgar maxims, and customs, and by public laws, and judgments regularly
composed and determined.

2. And yet we are not without some Scripturelight in this particular. Even it
does not only prescribe an orderly call to the administration of Civil power,
and condemn the unorderly and violent assumption of it; [ Number. 27.26, 27. Luke
12.14. Hos. 8.4. Jer. 30.21. Ezekiel. 23.16. Amos 6.13.] but does also direct the
way how men should be advanced to it, and by whom, in case of vacancy of
Magistracy. This it does in the particular case of that nation to whom God at
first gave his written law, which may be a pattern to other Nations in this, as
in other matters confessedly it is. See the direction to them, [ Deuteronomy. 17.14,
15. and 16.18. and 1.13.] In which places the transacting of this affair is by
order from God put into the hands of the community, over whom the Magistracy is
set. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates which the Lord
thy God gives thee, throughout thy tribes, and they shall judge the people
with just judgment. And unto this order seems the speech of that good man, and
wise Statist to refer, [2 Samuel 16.18.] Nay but whom the Lord and this people,
and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide. And
according to this prescript runs the promise of God to the people of Israel
concerning their state after the return of their Babylonish captivity, Jer.
30.21. And their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall
proceed from the midst of them. And answerable to this rule we find instances
of the people constituting their Supreme Governor; as in the advancement of
Jeptha, Jud. 10.5, etc. of David, 1 Chronicles. 11.1, etc. and others. And I would
ask them who seem willing to deny that in the Bible any commission is given to
a prople to choose themselves Governors, to what purpose is it that the Lord
gives by Moses directions, and rules what manner of person the Israelites
should set up to be King over them, as it is [ Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15, etc.] if they
had no interest, or commission given them to set up, or choose any for
themselves?

3. Besides this light of the text, the law of Nature is judged to dictate the
same thing, to wit, that the right power, or interest, to transact this
business of the constitution of Magistrates is in the community, or people of
each Country, or State in relation to their own Magistracy. So that whether we
look into the Scriptures, or into the Book of Natures law, the way which God
has chalkt out, the ordinary means he uses for the deputation of persons
under himself, and over the people in the office of the Supreme Civil power, is
the vote, elective act, or consent of the body politic, or people to be
ruled. To testify the latter, viz. that the law of nature dictates this to men,

1. I shall in stead of many cite a few learned Authors of best respect that
affirm it.

2. I shall allege the original, and primitive practice of Nations to have
been conform thereto.

1. For the affirmation of it, to be so de Jure.

Mr. Richard Hooker. Hooker Eccles. pol. l. 1. cap. 10. page 26, 27, 29. lib.
8. page 150, 151.
To take away all such mutual grievance, injuries, and wrongs, there was no way
but only by growing upon composition, and agreement amongst themselves, by
ordaining some government public, and by yielding themselves subject
thereunto, that unto whom they granted authority to rule and govern, by them
the peace, tranquillity, and happy estate of the rest might be procured,
without which consent there was no reason why one man should take upon him to
be Lord, or Judge over another. -- Over a whole grand multitude, having no such
dependency (as is in the family upon the Father) upon any one, and consisting
of so many families, as every politic society in the world does, impossible
it is that any should have complete lawful power, but by consent of men, or
immediate appointment of God; because not having the natural superiority of
fathers, their power must needs be either usurped, and then unlawful, or if
lawful, then either granted, or consented unto by them over whom they exercise
the same, or else given extraordinarily from God. -- Of this point therefore we
are to note that since men naturally have no full, and perfect power to command
whole politic multitudes of men, therefore utterly without our consent we
could in such sort be at no man's commandment living.

Mr. Perkins. Perkins To. 1. page 762. A. Treat. of Callings.
Every lawful King is placed by God; and by men that are appointed under God to
set up Princes over them, according the laws and customs of several Kingdoms.

Mr. John Seldom. Seldom de Jure Not. lib. 1. cap. 8. page 106, 107.
Among these (viz. the acts of the permissive law of nature) every man sees
that the acts of making constitutions, entering into covenants, introducing of
Customs, and forms of Government, and of rescinding, revoking, or altering all
these, by the choice of those Societies of men whom it concerned, where
likewise permitted. -- In like manner it has still been granted that by the
said permission whatsoever it by men, joined in Society, limited, forbidden, or
constituted, that they are bound to keep who have so consented, according to
the conditions, and qualification with which it is prescribed, even as many as
have, and so far as they have given their consent. But whence is it that they
are so bound? from the authority of a deity, that is of man's superior, even in
these things, the rise of the obligation is to be derived, and therefore from
some heads of the obligative law of nature. For the acts whereof we speak were
allowed to men, so as either they might use them at their pleasure, or they
might by joint consent prohibit them, and confine their own liberty in them,
either by covenant, naturally plighted, or by Princes constituted to govern in
those matters; which thing seems not sufficiently conceivable how it should
be, whilst we always lock at right, and owing of duty, unless then join this
also to it, that the obligation to the said inhibition, or confinement of
liberty does accrue from his authority, and command who, as being man's
superior, gives warrant to it.

Mr. Jeremiah Burroughes. Burroughes on Hos. 1. Lect. 4. page 111. see also
Lect. 3. pa. 65. and on cap. 3. Lect. 2. page 704.
There is no authority that we are subject to now, but according to the laws
and constitutions of the Country where we live. We must require whether it be
a power: It is not because the man that is in authority commands it, except
he commands it by virtue of that authority which is according to the nature
and condition of the foundamental constitutions of the Country where he
lives. -- Otherwise we are not bound in conscience: bound we may be in regard
of prudence, and in regard of preventing other disturbances, but conscience
does not bind to wills of men, but binds to laws.

The Author of the treatise of Monarchy, Treatise of Monarchy chap. 1. Sect. 1.
and chap. 3. Sect. 2. and 5. Vindication of that Treatise chap. 3. Sect. 6.
(called by one in print, Mr. Hunton) God by no word binds any people to this
or that form, till they by their own act bind themselves. They (to wit
Sovereigns) attain this determination of authority to their persons by the
tacit and virtual, or else express, and formal consent of that society of men
they govern, either in their own persons, or the root of their succession. -- I
do conceive that in the first original all monarchy, yea any individual frame
of Government whatsoever is elective, that is, is constituted, and draws its
force, and right from the consent, and choice of that community over which it
swayeth. -- My reason is, because man being a voluntary agent, and subjection
being a moral act, it does essentially depend on cons^nt: so that a man may by
force, and extremity be brought under the force, and power of another, as
unreasonable creatures are to be disposed of, and trampled on whether they will
or no; but a bond of subjection cannot be put on him, nor a right to claim
obedience, and service acquired, unless a man become bound by some act of his
own will. I am persuaded it will appear an uncontrouleable truth in policy,
that the consent of the people, either by themselves or their ancestors, is the
only mean in ordinary Providence by which Sovereignty is conferred on any
persons or family: neither can Gods ordinance be conveyed, and people engaged
in conscience by any other means.

The author of the fuller answer to Dr. Ferns Fuller Answer to Dr. Fern ^ag.
17, 18.
Treatise, etc. The meaning of the place (Romans 13.) then must be this, The
powers that be (i. e.) so, or so established by consent of man, are ordained of
God to be obeyed; or it is Gods ordinance that men should live under some
government, and submit without resistance to that kind of government they have
by consent established: just (as St. Peter follows him) to the ordinance of man
for the Lords sake. -- There are two kinds, we use to say, of Tyranny,
regiminis, and usurpationis; that which is only of government, though never so
heavy must be endured. That other kind, of usurpation, it has no right, no
ordination at all, and so no subjection due to it. In all power of government,
Divinity tells us there are four things, the institution, the constitution, the
acquisition, and the use. The constitution always from man's consent, the
institution always from God.

Mr. Thomas Hobs. Hobs Elements part. 1. chap. 6. Sect. 6, 7. part. 2. chap.
10. Sect. 3.
That this may be done (viz. the erection of a common power) there is no way
imaginable, but only union, which is the involving, or including the wills of
many in the will of one man, or of one counsel. -- The making of union
consists in this, that every man by covenant oblige himself to some one, and
the same man, or to some one, and the same counsel by them all named and
determined.

Lastly, Polybius, as cited by Gregory Tholosanus. Greg. Tholos. Syntag. Juris
lib. 47. cap. 15. Sect. 22.
Neither yet ought every Government of one be presently called a kingdom, but
that only which is granted by the subjects consent.

2. Besides these testimonies to confirm that of right, and by the law and
light of nature so it is, viz. that the Supreme power be derived by consent of
the people. I promised to show the matter of fact, viz. that so it was in the
beginning of the erection of Government. For this I have the testimonies of
Aristotle, Cicero, Justin, Ludovicus Vives, Polydor Virgil, and Calvin,
speaking in general of all nations, and of Livy, Plutarch, and Juvenal, in
reference to the Roman.

Aristotle (polit. lib. 3. chap. 10. number. 89.) says, For when those first
heroes had obliged the people with great benefits, as by their invention of
arts, or warlike powers, or bringings of men into society, and commerce or
enlargement of their territo^ies, these were created Kings by the free consent
of the people.

Cicero (de legibus lib. 3. page 452.) tells us, all the ancient nations in
times past subjected themselves unto Kings, the which kind of Government was
first conveyed, and given unto the justest and wisest men. But those who were
not pleased with kingly Government, refuse they did not to submit themselves to
any at all, but they were not willing to subject always to one.

Justin. (lib. 1.) informs that, in the beginning the rule of nations was in
the hand of Kings, whom not popular ambition, but their moderate carriage
approved of the good advanced to that height of honor.

Upon which words of Justin, Ludovicus Vives (in Augustine. de Civit. Dei. lib.
4. cap. 5, 6.) has this note. In the beginning every family had its King,
either the wisest, or the justest of the house; a little after that Kings began
to rule over many families, and sometimes there were to one family diverse
Kings, whom the people elected to themselves as to be guides, governors, and
overseers of the public interest; and they were not compelled to take such a
one as happened any way to them: neither did nobility, or the seeking of the
party carry it: every man's own private good with the good of the public was
so dear and near to him, that it made him to make choice of none but the best.

Pol. Virgil. de Invent. Rer. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Polydore Virgil follows, and builde^h his relation upon Justin. And for the
Roman state in particular, it is very evident in Livy, Florus, Stadna upon him,
and Plutarch, that their five first Kings, Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus
Hostilius, Ancus Martius, and Tarquinius Priscus, were chosen by the Senate,
and People; and that their seventh King Tarquinius Superbus was by them removed
for his evident usurpation. Neque enim ad jus Regni quicquam praeter vim
habebat, ut qui neque populi jussu, neque patribus autoribus regnavit; says
Livy.

Unto whose testimonies I may add that of Juvenal, exprobrating the sloth and
degeneracy of the Roman people in falling off from their ancient manners, and
policy.

-- Nam qui dabat olim
Imperium, fasces, legiones, omnia, Juvenal Satyr 10. page 94.
nunc se
Continet, atque duas tantum res anxius optat,
Panem, and circenses. --
At first the peoples vote swaid all, the Crown,
The rule of Court, and camp; now they sit down,
For those not troubled, only grant, they say,
To us but stomachs filled, and leave to play.
Unto all these astipulateth that of Calvin (in Genes. 10.) Notandum in
nepotibu^ Noah tantum recenseri qui Gentium fuerunt principes. Nam ut quisque
inter fratres ingenio, virtute, industria vel aliis dotibus excelluit, sibi
peperit nomen, and potentiam, ut alii sub eorum umbra quiescentes primatum
illis libenter concederent. It is to be observed that of the Grand children of
Noah they only are recited who were Princes of the Nations. For as any excelled
among his brethren in wisdom, virtue, industry, or other qualities, he
purchased to himself name, and power; so that the rest voluntarily granted him
the Sovereignty, and rested under his protection.

CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 5.
Subsection 5. Three other ways of conveying unto persons a title to sovereign
Magistracy examined; viz. 1. That of Fatherhood, and Primogeniture. 2. That of
Conquest. 3. That of voluntary beneficialnesse by protection.
BUt besides this I meet with some other ways by some held lawful and approved
for the entry, and attainment of persons to Soverainty, and consequently such
as derive the divine ordination to it unto the persons qualified with them. Of
these it will happily be expected he that is handling this subject should take
some notice; together with what is said for them.

1. That which I shall take notice of, first is, the power or right of
Fatherhood, which is supported or pieced out (by the maintainers of it) with
that of primogeniture, or of the first born; both of these put together they
style (as I understand them) by the name of Genarchy. The drift of their
opinion that are for this is to make the rise, and right of Civil Government
natural and native, not voluntary, or conventional.

The Question here is not, Whether the Father, and the Firstborn have not some
preeminency over their respective correlatives, to wit, the Father over his
Children, the Firstborn over his younger brethren? But whether the preeminency
be the same with Civil Magistracy: Or whether the political power in a
Commonwealth be not one thing, and that superiority another, and those two be
not really and essentially different ^ Neither is the question, whether
Fatherhood and primogeniture may not be coincident in regard of the subject
with Civil Magistracy, that is, may not meet in the same person? Nor is the
question, whether Civil Power may not be he^editary, that is, settled and kept
in one family, and in it descend from the Father to his first Son, and after
that manner successively forward? But the question is, whether Fatherhood and
primogeniture, either of them apart, or both of them together be the proper
title, basis, or root of Civil Magistracy? or, whether a natural, and original
right, and title to political rule be in the Father, and firstborn, without
any positive voluntary, humane constitution, or consent of the state; so that a
person is in sovereign power not by virtue of any such law or paction, but
merely, and originally by his Fatherhood or primogeniture?

First, for the title of Fatherhood to Magistracy, there are these things that
impugn it.

1. Although it is granted there is in the Father a power over his child, yet
ever since the erection of the public State, or Comm^n-wealth, as a distinct
society from that of a household, and compounded of a multitude of families, and
where ever these two are in being together, the paternal power has been (and
that duly, and necessarily) taken to be another, or a distinct authority from
that of the Civil Magistrate, and inferior, or subordinate to it.

2. The power of the Father is in every Father over his children: and if from
it you will raise a Civil Political power, then, either it must be said to be
in, or to be the right of every Father; and if so, as soon as one begets a
child, or becomes a Father, he becomes a Supreme Civil Power, begins a new
Commonwealth, and he, and his children are exempt from his Fathers (if living)
and all other Civil superiority; and the Fathers power, and the Commonwealth
he is over shall be dissolved by his having Nephews, or by his childrens
fatherhood: and this will make every family, though but of two persons, to be a
Civil State, and that no Commonwealth can consist of more then the children of
one Father, and for ever prevent or deny the compounding a Commonwealth of
many families, and the distinction of the Commonwealth from the Family. And by
this multiplication of the number, and abridgement of the extent of civil
societies you disappoint mankind of that union, strength, security, and
comfortable commerce that nature has guided men to seek, and the experience of
all ages and nations have found in large and populous societies. Or

2. The political power must be said to be in, or to be the right of every
Father that is not Pater patratus, or that has no Father; and this does
dissolve and divide the Commonwealth at the death of such a Father into so
many parts as there are left persons fatherless, whether they be Wife, Sons,
or Daughters, and into so many new Commonwealths as there are left Fathers in
it that have not a Father.

3. The right or power of the Father can relate only to the children, and only
to his own. Out of the extent then of this dominion, and consequently out of
the Commonwealth it belongs unto, upon this score you must exclude,

1. The Wife, and Servants of this supposed Monarch, though he be their
superior, and they in a subordination to him, yet he is not their Father.

2. All other persons of any other stock; there can be no mixture of races, or
linages in this Commonwealth.

4. If Civil power be the right of the Father, then it must necessarily be in
him in reference to all his children, wherever placed, or dispersed. So that
how far soever Adams progeny must be disseminated, or spread upon the face of
the earth, during his life; or Noah's during his life; or any of the long lived
Patriarchs during their respective lives, all the posterity that sprang from
such a head, must belong to, and be shut up within one Commonwealth while that
common parent lasted. And how will this stand with that distribution of Noah's
race into several Countries and Nations in his life time, as also with that of
Shems, he being living? (of which in the 10 and 12 Chapters of Genesis) and
with Abraham's sending away the sons he had by his Concubines into another
Country while he yet lived? Genesis 25.6.

Unless it will be said, such a Father has a faculty, or warrant to strip
himself of this his paternal Civil Dominion, and to transfer it, or any part
of it to others during his life, But

1. Thus you unsettle and change the basis, and cause of civil dominion you had
laid in the Fathers natural right, and make it separable from it by humane
choice, and will: and if you put it once upon arbitrary constitution you make
it alienable for ever from that subject, and from that bottom.

2. This cannot be supposed at the confusion of languages ( Genesis 11.6, 7.) when
as they were one immediately before it; and the end of their building Babel was
to prevent their dispersion; and upon that confusion they were scattered from
thence upon the face of the whole earth; by which confusion, and dispersion the
consent, or act of their common head, for the divesting of himself, and for the
investing of those who should succeed him, in being the respective Sovereign
powers of those several divided Countries and nations, was prevented.

Secondly, But the inconveniences of fixing Civil power in the paternal
relation alone they endeavor to salve by eeking it out with that of
primogeniture. Unto this I say,

1. Primogeniture can never be supposed to derive any thing to the child, but
what was in the Father; if the Father be a Supreme power, a Monarchy may by it
be conveyable to his Son, and not otherwise. Thus primogeniture is not the rise
of civil power, but supposes it to be in being, and is only the mean of
continuation, and transmission of it from person to person.

2. The natural right of the first born in succession from the Father, as we
find it in Scripture, seems only to be a better, or double portion of what was
his Fathers, in copartnership with his Brethren. If then you go by that, you
must upon the death of every royal father, that has a plurality of Sons divide
the Commonwealth among them according to that proportion; whereby it would
come to pass that a Kingdom by many descents probably shall be divided into
numberless minute principalities, and every of them still new to be divided by
every new succession. The conveying of a Kingdom whole and entire to one of
many Sons is not from the law of the first born in Scripture, but is doubtless
from positive institution. And this is to me a st^ong argument (and
unanswerable to them that allow the transferring of Kingdoms undivided from
Father to Child) that Supreme power is in a person by arbitrary constitution,
not by natural right as in a Father or firstborn; for if it were, that right
by it self would infer a division of Commonwealths according to the
multiplication of the Regal stock, and so in time an easy dissolution of them.

3. If Primogeniture must carry it, then the right of Fatherhood a^ore insisted
on went on no farther then the first man Adam, and was never in any after him;
and upon his decease you put an end to, and destroy for ever your paternal
right to Political power. For upon his death either the power must descend upon
every one of his children distributively, as Fathers in reference to their
respective children as their subjects; and then where is that you call the
right of primogeniture, and what political power is accrewed by it? or, it
must descend upon his firstborn only, and then what becomes from thenceforth
of the right of fatherhood?

4. If you set the Civil power upon the first born in succession from Adam,
and so downward, then you must either set it upon every fi^st-born of every
Father, and this will bring the absurdities, argued to follow upon setting it
upon every father, or, you must fix it but on one firstborn only at once,
that is, the eldest Son of the eldest house; and then you make it necessary
that all men be kept within one Commonwealth, and that there be but one
Monarch; for that primogeniture can but be in one race, and in one person
still, and how opposite is this, not only to the practice of all ages, even
from Noah's time, when the race of mankind was divided, as into diverse regions,
so into several. Nations or politic bodies; but to the state of mankind so
far di^persed over the whole earth as it is incapable of being one earthly
Monarchy.

2. Or you must say the first-b^rn, as he had in him a right to hold the power,
so he had a power to alienate it to his younger brethren, or kin, and did put
into act this power to the distribution of the world into many entire States
and Principalities; but against this it will be said, a right in Adams first
begotten, and in every first begotten of the first begotten successively to the
power, and a right to alienate the power either in whole, or in part, from
descending to the first in succession, are inc^nsistent; he that alienates and
gives away power to any of the younger, unto so much as he gives, he cu^s ^ff
^he right of the eldest, and puts an end to this title of primogeniture.

5. Let it be considered what is in Scripture the right of the firstborn, viz.
some domestical preeminency, or superiority of the eldest over his Brethren
within the family, as Genesis 4.7. Vide Cartwright on Genesis 25.31.
The firstborn were next in honor to their Parents (says Ainsworth on Genesis
25.31.) what ever it was, it appears to be that which Cain might have over Abel
during the life of their Father Adam; and was not therefore the Supreme Civil
Power. It appears the first Son had precedence of place, Genesis 43.33. and a
double portion of his Fathers inheritance, Deuteronomy. 21.17. but all this, and if
there be any thing more, amounts not to a political Power; but in the contrary
we find it plainly distinguished, and separated from it. The right of Jacobs
firstborn descended upon one Son, the right of the Supreme Civil Power upon
another, 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2. Reuben was Isreal's firstborn; for his incest he lost
the birthright, and Jacob gave it to Joseph, but though the birthright was
Joseph's, yet Judah prevailed above his Brethren, and of him came the chief
ruler. The blessing of Lordship over his Brethren which Isaac unawares
b^queathed to Jacob, and the birthright were two distinct things in Esaus
repute, Genesis 27.36, 37. Probably in the beginning of mankind, or of a family
ere it was enlarged so far as to cause a full division into distinct Nations,
and Civil dominions, and while by reason of paucity of persons, and proximity
of habitation there was little difference observed betwixt a Family and
Commonwealth, public power did reside in the Father over all that sprung of
him; and after it had so gone on for a time, that communities by union might
enjoy more strength, and security, it might by the joint consent of many
families, and the Fathers and Grandsires of them be divolved to one which was
the firstborn of the eldest house. But that this was by natural right, or that
it was set down as a perpetual law, or rule for every Commonwealth, as the
only warrantable rise or title to Supreme Government; and that it was not as
free for them, or such as they, who first reduced themselves under the dominion
of the firstborn, by agreement, to have with the same agreement constituted
the power in another, or a younger stem, will (I suppose) never be proved,
neither can hold, for the reasons above given.

6. We find that in the disposal of Government among Brethren this birth-order
was not seldom inverted. As when Jacob was preferred before Esau; Judah before
all the elder sons of Jacob; Ephraim before Manasseh; Solomon before Adonijah;
2 King. 23.30, 36. See Divines Annotat. Dio^ate, and Jackson in loc.
Jehoabaz the younger, before Jehojakim the elder son of Josiah; and Judas
Maccabeus 1 Maccab. 2.66. with verse. 2, 3, 4.
the third son of Mattathias before his other elder brethren. And of Simri the
son of Hosah, it it said, though he was not the firstb^rn, yet his Father made
him the chief 1 Chronicles. 26 10.
. Yea it was anteverted by a standing law in the c^se of the elder brother
dying childeless Whereby the hei^ship did not descend upon the next Brother who
then was his Fathers firstborn, but was entailed upon a child to be begotten
by him on the widow of the deceased, which child was to inherit his Uncles
estate, and so put by his own Father. Deuteronomy. 25 5. Mat. 22.24.
If primogeniture had been the constant law, and channel of Government, why was
it pronounced as a peculiar curse upon Canaan the son of Ham the younger son of
Noah, that he should be a servant to his brethren.

7. Lastly, The preeminence of the firstborn is supposed at the first to have
been as well in matters Religious, as Secular, and to have comprised the office
of Priesthood See the Chaldee paraphrase on Gen 49.3 Musculus and Ainsworth on
the same, and the latter on cap. 15.31.
. Yet that was (after a time) taken away from it perpetually, and was under the
law put into one tribe, and family in Israel; and ever since the Ecclesiastical
function has been merely institutive, and not hereditary. Whereby it may
appear that the preeminences yielded to primogeniture in the beginning were not
all of them of the unchangeable law of nature, or any moral, or perpetual
institution, but some of them (at least) arbitrary, mutable, and temporary.

Having argued first the claim of Fatherhood, then that of Primogeniture, I
shall add this further of them laid both together. Whatsoever respect, or
reverence either the relation of a Father, or of a firstborn has at any time
carried any where; and whatsoever power was deferred to them at the beginning,
they cannot be imagined to have been intended by God, or ordained by the law of
nature as a fixed and constant basis, no nor to be of any permanent use so much
as to give us light, either for the beginning; founding, or raising up of a
Magistracy where it is wanting, or for the legitimating, or deducing, and
deriving of an original right, or title to any that is already in being.

1. If we consider the multiplication, division, confusion, and extinction of
families that has been.

1. The multiplication: Now that mankind has for so long a time been sprung
forth into a world of families and kindreds, which are every day sprouting out
into more.

2. Division: the stock or family of Adam is, and long since has been not only
multiplied, and disseminated into innumerable families, but those have been
parted into a multitude of (yea almost innumerable) Nations, and distinct
politic bodies.

3. Confusion: every one of those nations is not only constituted of numberless
families, but those are so consounded, and shuffled together, that no
distinction of any one stock in a continued descent from Adam, or Noah is left;
and so the priority of geni^ure as reckoned from either of them, to be in one
family, and person in relation to the rest of mankind, or of the same
Commonwealth is utterly unknown, and unconjecturable. Length of time, want of
records, removal, and shifting of habitations, the identity, variety and change
of the names of persons, and places, and many other things have overwhelmed
with dark oblivion all knowledge of such distinction, and priority.

4. Extinction of families: as the persons, so the stocks and linages of men
have a mortality upon them, and in time diverse of them are worn out, and come
to a period.

Now then, when mankind is looked upon as at present, and for some thousands of
years it has been drawn out into so many lines, and races, and those some
broken off, others transversed, interwoven, and mingled both in blood, and
dwelling without any pale or difference of stock, or precedence of birth
deduced from primitive antiquity, though the Father, and first-begotten, though
both in the house, and in the Commonwealth as far as they are known, retain
still a right, and respect at their hands, who stand in the relation of
children, and younger brethren to them, and in the latter the title of dominion
being once fixed in a stock or family, the paternal, and protogenial relations
are of use to keep it on in succession, and to convey it from person to person,
yet they are of no force to bottom, or raise a title to Civil Sovereignty upon,
over, or in reference to those who stand not in any known relation of children,
or younger brethren, or any juniority of descent to them. This may confidently
enough be affirmed, It cannot be said of any person, or family in the world,
nor could have been for these many ages, that he, or it claims, or holds
the throne in such a nation by a right of Fatherhood, or Primogeniture derived
from the first father, or first eldest son.

2. But if none of these obscurities were, but distinction of families, and
their order of precedence, and subsequency of descent from the first head of
mankind were clear; so that in every nation, or State, one family or race could
be pointed out as the eldest, and first of the Nation in descent from Adam, or
Noah, yet there shall lie difficulties incident to the pretense of succession
by birth-priviledge, even within any one family, not to be extricated by the
evidence of a natural pedigree, or any otherwise then by positive constitution.
How many questions do Civilians agitate about the right of succession where the
lineage is known? and what different rules and methods of succession do they
observe in several Nations and Kingdoms? He that shall but read one Chapter in
Grotius (viz. de Jure belli lib. 2. cap. 7.) may discover that variety of
opinion, and practice in this point of succession that may satisfy him of the
entangledness and intricacy of it.

There is one way of succession which they call hereditary, and another lineal,
and of the lineal there is one which they term agnatical, wherein males only
are admitted, another cognatical in which females are included. There are some
questions concerning what children shall succeed their Father, as, whether
begotten only, or also adopted; and whether Legitimate only, or the natural, or
bastard child also. There is a question about the matter into which the
succession is to be; to wit, whether if a man have a plurality of issue, the
dominion shall pass undivided to one, or be distributed into many portions,
that is, to every child a share. There is some question of succession to him
that has issue; as, whether a man's firstborn dying before him, and leaving
issue, the issue of that son, or his own second-born shall inherit. But there
are many questions of succ^ssion to him that has not issue of his body; as
whether his dominion shall go to his own brethren, and their issue in order, or
to the brethren of his Father, or to any other of his ancestors upwards;
whether his Brothers child, or his Uncle: whether his Brothers daughter, or
his sisters son; whether his younger Brother, or the son of his elder Brother;
whether the Daughter of his elder Brother, or his own younger Brother be to be
preferred.

These questions, and such like, the positive laws, constitutions, or customs
of Nations do determine several ways, each in reference to their own
territories; so that by virtue of them successions may be carried clearly and
quietly. But the paternal, or protogenial right by it self, abstracted from
those arbitrary constitutions, and as only laid upon the law of nature, or
looked into by the light thereof, is as to these particulars indeterminate.

The result of all this is, that the authors of this title of Government must
be driven to confess it now out of use, and to be an impossible thing, to build
any sovereign power that now is, or can be expected to be, or for most of the
ages of mankind past, has been in the world, upon it. Hence is it that after
all their discourses upon it they tell us, in relation to all Governments that
have been since the confusion of families, of an elective primogeniture (a
contradiction in adjecto:) and that those Supreme Magistrates the world has
now, or can have, succeed in the place of the Father and firstborn.

But if they come into their place, and not by their title, I ask then quo
jure? by this it is yielded that Fatherhood and Primogeniture make out no title
to them. And why then are these so much urged as the only original, rise, and
claim of all ordinary dominion; and that exclusively, and in opposition to any
other title, and specially against that which is by the vote, consent, and
constitution of the people? They that hold these to be the sole rest and basis
of Civil Government, and confess that no Governors now extant can be said, or
demonstrated to grow, or be built upon these, bring themselves to this
resolution, that there neither is nor can be by any ordinary means, any known,
lawful Government in the earth. And accordingly one of them is thus express
Observations of the original of Government, in the Anarchy of a limited, and
mixed Monarchy page 12.
; All Kings that now are, or ever were, are or were either fathers of their
people, or the heirs of such fathers, or the usurpers of the right of such
fathers. But before he involve all the Princes of the earth that either are, or
have been since the earth was divided (about a hundred years as I take it after
Noah's flood) under this brand of usurpation, or a suspicion of it so strong as
it lays every one of them under the odds of ten thousand to one to be
deserving of it, I would desire his title of Fatherhood and Primogeniture,
both, or either of them might be cleared of the incongruities and incapacities
not only of being an evident, and knowable, but of being a practicab^e, and
possibly ex^stent way of carrying on a course, and succession of Government in
the several states of the world from age to age, the which have been above in
this paper imputed, and argued to attend them. I will only take a little notice
of the main and cornerstone, which the friends of this opinion lay to found it
upon, and so pass from it. This is the universal Monarchy which they
presuppose Adam had from God; and which, or any part whereof none of his
posterity could have, but by grant, or succession from him.

But let this be supposed, what will be gained by it to their purpose?

1. Touching the universal Monarchy of Adam, it will be questioned how he had,
or received it? Whether by natural right, as the Father of all, or by an
immediate express and positive grant from God.

2. Besides the way of immediate and express grant from God, which it may be
supposed* Adam, and after him some other special persons (as Moses, Saul, David
had) there must be acknowledged a mediate, and ordinary way of Gods advancing
of persons to authority, and power, which is standing, general and common to
all times, and places. And of this our controversy is. I enquire therefore how
this universal Monarchy of Adam passed from him unto others.

1. Whether distributively, and piecemeal to many, that is to his sons, cach a
share, or whole, and solid to one?

2. Whether it passed from him to them, or any of them by his arbitrary and
positive assignement, or by order, or law of nature, as to the heir, or heirs
general.

3. If by his voluntary assignement it passed to whom, and in what proportion
he pleased, then the natural right of Fatherhood or Primogeniture took no place
at his death, carried not the Civil power from him, and so cannot challenge to
convey it downwards.

4. If by order or law of nature it passed from him, then the question will be,

1. Whether they that succeeded to him had it by right of Progenitorship, that
is, by reason of the Fatherhood which was in them in relation to their
posterity, who were therefore their subjects, so that upon that title, every
son of Adam was sovereign to the issue that came of him. But then it will be
said, this course of deriving Supreme Magistracy could be but temporary, and
must needs have a stop, for otherwise it would multiply Commonwealths in
infinitum, according to the multiplication of Fathers, and confine
Commonwealths to extend no further, then to comprise a Father and his
children, which (as was argued before) is neither agreeable to the practice of
men, even from the time of Noah, nor to the end of a Commonwealth, which is
union of a multitude of households for strength, and security. When therefore
this course of Genarchy ceased, what was the way of continuing Government?

2. Or it passed from Adam by right of inherence, to Adams sons, as his sons,
and so as heirs of their Father. And this is a way different from that of
Progenitorship, and upon this point the right of Fatherhood and that of
Primogeniture are at odds, and prove (as to the purpose of conveying power from
Adam) inconsistible. For if the Civil power went by Fatherhood, then were all
Adams sons joint successors in it (as was before said) every one in relation to
his posterity: if it went by primogeniture, but one of them could by that claim
the power, and this will run as upon the necessi y of having but one Monarchy
over all mankind, throughout all ages, which was above disproved. Unless we
must say the first-begotten could but claim a double portion of power, and then
the rest of the sons had each a single part in proportion to his double. But
this,

1. Falls again upon the absurdity even now alleged of multiplying
Commonwealths by the endless number of Fathers.

2. Out of what, or whom would you make the eldest son a double portion?
without depriving some other of the sons of his single part, and so destroying
the right of inheritance, to it you could make no addition to the single share
of the first born, or give him dominion over more then he was superior to by
virtue of his own Fatherhood.

To make an end therefore with this point, if the insisting on the mere natural
right either of Fatherhood, or Primogeniture will not beat us out a clear path
for the derivation of Government from Adam, or carrying it on with some
justifiableness of title among men, then we must return to that of voluntary
agreement, and grant; unto which the true natural right of Fatherhood is not
repugnant, but may very well be reconciled, yea, and assistant unto the
founding, and continuing Civil Government. Some of them that insist on the
Fathers power as the only Civil Power in the world, do yet place in him a right
to transfer it from himself, unto whom he pleases. If this be granted then I
will say the way of settling Civil authority by the agreement, or consent of the
governed, might thus come in. Suppose we Adam to have ruled as sole Monarch
during his life; afterward some one of his sons in succession to him, or all
his sons each over their own progeny as distinct societies; after by the
confusion of languages they being forced to sever; or when those distinct races
of Adam became so numerous, and dispersive over many countries that they were
too vast to be continued in one society, they may be supposed each of them
voluntarily to withdraw, or part themselves into several Commonwealths, and
the Fathers of the families in every of these new erected Commonwealths having
in them the interest of power each in relation to his children, and family, and
agreeing together for themselves, and theirs to some one as their public
civil-head, or King; and thus comes in Magistracy to be voluntarily
constituted in that way wherein the right of Fatherhood is preserved, and
continued in subordination to the Civil public power; and this put in such a
way, as both it, and politic societies of convenient amplitude might be kept
up, and new ones (as need should require) might be erected; whereas by the mere
right of Fatherhood, holding, and exercising the power it had in relation to
those only who were natural children to it, it could not be, no not with the
supplement of Primogeniture, as was before showed. And with this the Assertors
of the sole right of Fatherhood are driven in a sort to comply See the Anarchy,
etc. p. 11.
.

2. I come to the second way of attaining a title to Government above proposed
to consideration, which is, that of Conquest. The jus gladii as it is
understood, and qualified by many Grave, Learned, and approved Authors, I shall
not here call into question; But that the Sword, and success of it unto
victory, simply, and by it self, whatsoever the cause, or quarrel pursued by it
be, or taken, as it may be, separate from, or contradictory to the choice, or
consent of the people, can be a sufficient and justificatory title to Civil
Government, I cannot yield. We know how Augustine August. de Civ. Dei. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
has branded this claim with the style of Magnum Latrocinium. In supply of the
halts, and defects which at every turn are detected to occur in the title of
Fatherhood, and Primogeniture, an Author of that way (I even now quoted)
finds this shift, The obedience which all Subjects yield to Kings is but the
paying of that duty, which is due to the supreme Fatherhood. Many times by the
act either of usurper himself, or of those that set him up, the true heir of a
Crown is dispossessed. In such cases the subjects obedience to the Fatherly
power must go along and wait upon Gods providence, who only has right to give,
and to take away Kingdoms, and thereby to adopt subjects into the obedience of
another Fatherly power The Anarchy, etc. page 12.
. Hereby the Fatherly right, and power are made a mere Equivocum, or to
signify power entitled, or coming in any way whatsoever, though it do not only
not derive from the right of Fatherhood, but be privatively opposed to, or
destructive of it: and thus he confounds, and makes to meet together in one
name, and title, the thing that he had argued against, with the thing that he
had asserted. And the saying that Providence in dispossessing of a Crown, him
that is the true heir (and so has the right) and disposing it to the hands of
an unjust invader, does put a fatherly power in that invader, and adopt the
subjects to an obligation to it; is to deny the right both of paternity and
birthright, and of the consent of the people, and of every other special way
of conveying a title to Government, and to make the right thereof only to
follow, come by, and consist in possession, and to die forthwith in the Father,
and heir upon dispossession. And to what purpose then is all his plea for
Fatherhood, and primogeniture, or any other man's for any other title? what a
void distinction is that of his when he distinguishes of a natural, and an a
usurped right? According to him now there is no Power, but Fatherhood, no
Fatherhood, but possession.

But let us pass by this laxe, and wide claim to dominion by the sword, which
swalloweth up all other titles, and look into that which I noted to be
qualified, and cautioned (and so admitted by learned authors ancient and
modern) as it is distinguishable from this, and reconcilable with that of the
consent of the ruled.

Two ways I observe the Sword is admitted to conduce, or have influence into
the disposal, or placing of Government, but by neither is it made the sole, or
the immediate ground, or cause of a right or title to it, or any otherwise
then as concordant with that political constitution I have asserted.

1. Conquest (or the Conqueror rather) is admitted to be interested in
Government where it is the effect of a real and just war. And so it makes no
exception against my assertion. That Victory which is acknowledged justly to
lay claim to a Crown is the issue of such a war as supposes the equity and
necessity of the war to be on the victors part, and the default and provocation
to be on the part of the conquered; and moreover that the default of the
conquered is so high as either to detain from the Conqueror his right, or to
forfeit into his hands by wrong offered their power, or liberty in the
enjoyment, or disposal of the throne, and that there is a necessity on the part
of the Conqueror in reference to his attaining and enjoying of his own right,
and just security therein, that he take and use that forfeiture Vide Gro^a Jure
^elli. lib. 3. ca. 15. Sect. 1.
.

In this case conquest is only a means to the conquerers seizing and holding of
that power, or rule, which was his own before he prevailed, and which the
cause, and state of the war (before the success obtained) entitled him unto.
By which it is evident that his right is not founded on his victory, but was in
being before it, and had its rise from an antecedent investure or trespass.

Upon this ground it is, that the title of the sword is alleged not by it self
alone, but in subjunction to another title. A late Historian tells us that our
King Henry the seven^h at his coronation was proclaimed with these titles,
Hen^icus Rex Angliae, Buckes History of Richard the Third, lib. 2. page 54, 55.
Jure Divino, Jure Humano, and Jure belli. And that the Pope ( Innocent the 8.)
in his bull to the said King, Anno 1486. has the^^ words, Hic Rex Angliae de
domo Lancastriae originem trahens, ac qui notorio Jure, and indubitato proximo
successionis Titulo, and praelatorum, and procerum Angliae electione, and
successione, etc. etiam de Jure belli est Rex Angliae.

And this way of ingresse into the seat of Authority as it is not grounded on
conquest as its title, so it is not privative of, or altogether another from
that which was before affirmed to be the only ordinary way, viz. the consent of
the people. Forfeiture as it is a singular exception that lies in many cases,
so it presupposes a law, or constitution that ordains it, and so in a sort
involveth their consent of whom it is taken. Though there be no explicit, and
present act of will in the conquered that the Conqueror shall reign over them,
but an utter averseness, and all possible reluctance against, and that brings
the war: yet it is so allowed to be (when that case is put which is presupposed
as the cause of the war) by the law of Nations, yea, of Nature: and being so,
their wills have antecedently, originally, and implicitly subscribed to it, as
such, and are therefore in this manner concluded in it. In like manner as we
account that to be by a man's will, or consent, which his Predecessors (in whom
he is virtually included) have willed, or himself has formerly granted, though
now he be quite of another mind. He that gives his vote, personally, or by
proxy, to any penal law, or act to be binding to the community of which he is,
though he do not formally, and absolutely will his own punishment, yet he does
it interpretatively, consequentially, and conditionally, if he himself shall
fall under the provision of that Act: and his will so passed is, upon his
offending after it, sufficient to make his punishment not only just in it self,
but just ex ore proprio, and to have his own consent.

2. As Conquest may interest a person in Government by being an attainment of
possession in pursuance of an antecedent right, so the other sort of conquest,
to wit, that which is a seasing of another right, or the setting of a man in
meet possession, may have some tendency thereto, though not so directly, and
that is thus; It may be an inducement to the conquered (if they be indeed free,
and unengaged to any other) to a submission, and delivery up of themselves to
be the subjects of the victor, and to take him for their Sovereign. The former
way conquest is postnate and subsequent to the right of the Conqueror, and so
does not give him his title, but only introduce his possession; this latter way
it is antecedaneous, previous, and preparatory to his title, but is not
productive or constitutive of it. Of this latter way of conquests leading to a
title to dominion, I have spoken before, and refer my Reader thither Chap. 3.
Sect. 3. Subsect. 5. Proposition 5.
.

Only, whereas some object, that the title of the Sword, or Conquest has been
the usual beginning of the Kingdoms, and principalities which now are, or have
been in the world.

I answer,

1. A facto ad jus non valet argumentum. We do not ask, neither is it to the
pu^pose, what has been done in the getting of rule, but what ought to be, and
what is the rise of that power which can truly derive from God, as his
ordinance.

2. I take this assertion to be too broad, that this has been the usual
beginning of Dominions. Though many unjust inv^sions have been, yet that has
not been the constant birth of Soverainty. I have before alleged humane
testimony of the best authority to the contrary.

3. And where unlicentiate intrusion into the throne has been, it has
commonly not continued, but the dominion has been shortly, either
dispossessed, or settled upon a better groundwork, by the consent of the
interested, sufficiently valid (in point of conscience) to such an act.

3. But if the sword by it self cannot create a title, Let us see what the
third forenamed way will help, Non enim si quid alicui est utile, id statim
mihi licet ei per vim imponere. Nam his qui Rationis habent usum, libera debet
esse utilium, and inutilium electio, nisi al^^ri jus quoddam in eos quaesitum
sit. G^otius de Jure lib. 2. cap. 22. Sect. 12.
either added to it, or alone, viz. that of voluntary beneficialness by
protection. There are some who would build a kind of claim to rule upon the
consideration of the good, or benefit which the Governing may be said to bring
to the governed; which they will suppose it equal for him to obtrude upon them,
though against their wills, and in recompense of it to exact their obedience to
him. But such pretenses of benefit, besides that they are often without
reality, and are made the visour of proceedings of a q^ite contrary tenor; were
they never so real, cannot reach to such an effect. The intention, promise, or
actual collation of a good ^urn does not create a right in the promiser over
him, or any thing of his to whom the same is done, witho^t his consent, or
acceptance of it with such a condition.

To bring some color for this claim of Dominion, there are by an Author
alleged some cases out of the Civil law; they are contained under that head
of obligations which they call, ex quasi contracta, and particularly they are
of those, ex negotiis gestis. There is, says that law, an obligation, debt, or
duty upon a man, when ones business is done, without his consent to his
benefit. In this case the obligation is upon the owner of the business done,
unto the Gestor or doer of it. The said Author,

1. Urges the case de neg^tiorum gestione, in general.

2. Insists on that particular one of the minor to his guardian, which, says
he, is the case of the Commonwealth, according to that maxim, Res publica
semper est in cura, and tutela A R ply to Dr. Sandersons Letter, page 5.
.

1. To the case in general, ex negotiis gestis, I say, there is a wide
disparity betwixt it, as stated by the Civilian, and this, for which it is
alleged.

1. In that case the ground of the obligation, and compensation awarded is
because the thing done is behooveful, for the party obliged, to be done, and
yet no consent can be possibly given, the person whose business it is being
supposed by reason of absence, death, nonage, madness, or such like impediment
incapable of giving consent. There is no such ground here where the parties he
would have ob^iged are extant, present, and of age to declare their mind, and
do either declare their dissent, or not declare their assent.

2. What is the extent, or matter of the obligation in that, ex negotiis
gestis? not the passing of the beneficiary into the dominion of the benefactor,
but only an obligation of debt to the repayment of such necessary charges, as
the gestor has been at; it being all reason that in doing another business
commodiously to that other, the doer should be indemnified. But no obligation
here to a new personal state of subjection. By the law a Tutor, or Curator may
oblige them under his charge without their consent in their goods to defray his
layings out for them, but he cannot without their consent oblige them in a
personal relation, as in marriage, or servitude, which are obligations of state.

3. The law acknowledges such an obligation as is specified but under those
cautions as do exclude, and contradict the conclusion for which they are here
brought. As

1. It denies that obligation if a man handle another man's business as his own.

2. If a man act another occasions after that other has forbidden, or
disclaimed his acting.

3. If they be acted, no necessity requiring it Vide Greg. Thol^ sa^i Syntag.
^u^i^, lib. ^9. cap. ^ Sect. (...) 2. Sect. 8, 9, 11.
.

2. To that of the Minor, or Pupil in particular.

1. Though the Law allows the Guardian his charges out of the Minor, yet it
allwes not any one to be a Curator that will undertake it. That Is against the
very nature and end of Curatorship, which is to defend the minor from invasors.
He that is a Tutor (that is a Guardian of one under the age of 14. years) must
be either jure civili datus, or permissus; he must either be T^stamentary, that
is, assigned by the decaseds will; or Dative, that is appointed by the law, or
magistrate. And he that is a Curator, (that is, over one above 14 but under 25
years old) must be chosen by the Minor, and constituted by the Law. The Civil
Law expressly provides that they shall not be Tutors of Pupils who put
themselves upon, or offer to buy or make suit for the employment, and lest this
office should seem arbitrarily taken up, or by force put upon the Pupil or
Minor, it ordains that military men be excepted from it. It gives both the
Pupil, and the right Guardian an action against him that takes upon him that
charge, being not lawfully ordained to it; yea, and against those that assist
him in possessing, or exercising that place, and condemns the false Guardian
in as much as the value of that wherein he deals amounts unto Idem cap. 7.
Sect. 2. lib. 13. cap. 1. Sect. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 1. cap. 10. Sect. 6, 16, 37,
38, 39. lib. 12. cap. 4. Sect 6.
. Let these rules of the saw about Tutorship to a Pupil take place in the case
of the Commonwealth, and its Guardian, and this title by arbitrary
beneficialness will gain little by this parallel.

2. Whereas he says, the Commonwealth is always in pupillage. It is but an
allusive, or comparative speech; and is therefore unapt to be argumentative. A
similitude must not be made run of all four. It can only import somethings
appertaining to a Pupil may be in way of resemblance attributed to the
Commonwealth. But it were easy to show diverse things wherein there is also a
dissimilitude, Idem lib. 12. cap. 2. Sect. 2. lib. 13. cap. 10. Sect. 1.
A Pupil cannot choose his Tutor, cannot call him to an account during his
pupillage. But its generally confessed, the Commonwealth may elect its
Governors. And it is a publicly declared principle (I assert it not) the
Supreme Power is accountable to the people. And himself breaks the
correspondency most of all, in saying, the Commonwealth pupillage is
everlasting, whereas the Pupil comes to puberty, and out of his pupillage at
14 years old.

Subsection 6. CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 6.
A Solution of some Objections made against the passing of Gods Ordination unto
the person of the Supreme Magistrate by the consent of the people.
HAving examined those other ways of conveying over unto persons the title
unto Magistracy, and refuted them: It now remains, that we take notice of some
allegations against the peoples consent, being the ordinary medium of Gods
ordination of a person unto the sovereign power; which some, seeing they think
them fit to be urged, will judge worthy either to be assented to, or answered.

1. Object. The Anarchy, etc. above cited, page 8.
If no man have power to take away his own life, without the guilt of being a
murderer of himself, how can the people confer such a power as they have not
themselves, upon any one man without being accessories to their own deaths?

Answ. This Reason seems to ground it self upon that common Axiom, Nihil dat
quod non habet; whence it argues, the people cannot give the power of capital
punishment over them unto any person, because they have it not, cannot inflict
it, each upon himself. But it is misgrounded.

1. Here is ignoratio clenchi. For, as we yield it true that the people have
not a civil authority every one over his own life, so we do not say, but here
deny, that they can confer it upon another. The concession of a power in the
people to nominate, or elect their Sovereign does not infer so much, viz. that
they in so doing give, or confer upon him the Magistratical power. They may be
subordinate agents, and their vote, or consent may be the medium, or instrument
used by God to convey that power to the person, but they cannot therefore be
said to be the Creators, efficients, authors, or donors of that power, for that
is the properwork or prerogative of God. When the young Prophet came to Jehu,
and poured the oil upon his head, and said unto him, Thus says the Lord God
of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the people; can we say, that Prophet
made Jehu King? That young man was not the author, but the messenger only of
that business. It is very clear in the conveyance of this, and of other powers,
one may be the vehiculum, the hander over of that power to another, which he is
not the possessor of himself. A single woman has not in her the marital power
over her self, yet by her consent in marriage she conveyes it to her husband.
The people of a Christian congregation, or Church have not each the power of a
Pastor, or Minister to Preach, administer a Sacrament, or the Keys of
Discipline to himself, yet by their election they may be isntrumental to
convey the same to another. When the King in whom the power of life, and death
is, gives commission to a Judge to have, and execute it subordinately from, and
for him, and sends his order to the Keeper of his seal (required by the Law to
make such a Commission authentic) to pass and seal the said Commission; we
cannot say, the Keeper gives the Judge the said Commission, but it is the King
that conferres it by this Officers hand. That which the peoples consent does
when they agree that this person shall be their Supreme Governor, is to
determine the general rule (that every Commonwealth shall have a Magistracy
with power of capital punishment) to the particular person in relation to that
people; but it makes them not to be conferrers efficients, or primary causes of
that Magistracy.

When a power or privilege is by divine institution annexed to the act of the
creature, it is not the creatures act properly, or efficiently, but God by his
institution that communicates that power, or privilege.

2. This Objection, in its proper tendency, does not more argue against he
peoples capaci^y to c^nfer the power over life upon any person (which is a
thing we affirm not) then it does against the peoples giving their consent,
that such a one shall have the said power over them. For upon the same medium
it may be argued, if no man have power to take away his own life without the
guilt of being a self-murderer, how can any people consent to such a power in
another without being accessories to their own deaths? But that the people may
very lawfully give their consent to such a power in another, I hope the
Objector will not deny; If he should, I would say the people of Israel did
lawfully give their consent to such a power in Saul, David, Solomon, and
others; yea it is the part of every people to consent to the Rulers to have it,
unless we must say that all Subjects are to be under their Governors against
their wills.

3. But how then must we avoid the Reason, If I may not take away or destroy
mine own life, I may not agree that another shall have the power to do it?

I answer, This is a very false assertion, that power which one has not, and
may not himself exercise, he may not consent to in another; If by power be
meant (as it must needs be in the Objection) a power that is in its own nature
lawful. Indeed that which is simply, or in it self unlawful, (as for instance,
Murder) because it is so unlawful, as I may not do it my self, so I may not
consent to another doing of it: But that which is lawful in it self, but
unlawful to me (as many things are) because though good in it self, yet I am
not thereto called, or authorized, of that I cannot say, because I cannot do it
my self, I may not consent to it in another. The Apostle Paul did give his
consent to the taking away of his own life (conditionally if he deserved death,
and the objection imports no other consent) when he was in question about it
before his Judge Act. 25.11.
. If I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse
not to die.

4. From this antecedent, no man has power to take away his own life without
the guilt of self-murder, the conclusion would as well be, not only (ergo) the
people cannot, but (ergo) no man can confer such a power on another, and thus
the argument would run, as against the peoples, so against any others
conferring, (or consenting to, as to their sense who make the terms equivalent)
such a power in another; so that by this it should be unlawful,

1. For a Prince, or any other Supreme power to transmit, resign, or put off
their Government in their life time to another, which yet the Author of this
objection allows.

2. For one that is a subject to no State, to desire or offer himself to, or
accept of naturalization, or incorporatien in any Commonwealth, under any
civil power.

3. For one that is a member of a Legislative assembly, and out of it but a
subject, to give his vote to an act for the punishing of a crime with death, by
which his own life is concerned, as subjected to death by the said act upon his
breach of the same. Yet I suppose no man can defend any of these to be
unlawful. And for the last it is very ordinary, and generally allowed, and the
reason is; Because such a persons vote, and the ordaining of such a law does
not create a power of life, and death, nor confer it de novo on the Magistrate
to whom the execution of it is committed. It only does determine, or apply that
power which is already instituted by God, and inherent in the Magistrate, to
its particular matter, such a fact: or, make that power which was in him in
actu signato, to be in him in actu exercito, in reference to such a crime. As
therefore a Parliament man's vote conduces to determine, or apply that power
which was in some sort in being before to its particular matter, this fact; so
does the peoples vote determine that power which was in some sort ordained
before, that is, instituted by God, to its particular subject, this person. I
have thus dispatched their Herculean argument; let us see what more is said.

2 Object. The Anarchy. etc. page 11.
This supposed right in the people to choose, or constitute their Government is
a thing which it is not possible for them any way lawfully to exercise.

To make this objection good, and to show the difficulty, or imp^ssibility of
the said exercise they raise these scruples.

1. Since nature must be supposed to have left mankind loose, or unreduced into
civil, public societies, how come they distributed into distinct
Commonwealths, so as this person, family, or people belong to this State, that
to another severally?

Answ. 1. It must be supposed that nature has ordained (upon supposal of the
multiplication, and spreading of men over the several regions of the earth) a
partition of men into diverse civil Societies, to be under distinct, and
peculiar civil Governments. So that in actu signato, or in specie mankind is
naturally bound, and is not in that respect originally free: but in actu
exercito they are naturally free (as to political we mean, not as to paternal
subjection) that is, originally the reduction of men into this or that
Commonwealth distinct from others is yet to do, the union of them into one, or
division into many civil States is yet unmade; and it is yet in facto
undetermined of what society this, or that person, family, or people shall be,
and so unto what civil Superior they belong. This is very apparent. A
Commonwealths Society is made by some act, constitution, or law, which
ordinarily is humane, or transacted by men according to that of Augustine,
August. de libero Arbitr. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Ex hominibus una lege societatis populus constat: there must be men before
there can be a family; the being of families is before that of a Commonwealth,
the Commonwealth is before the Magistrate; and a distinction of Commonwealths
before a plurality of Supreme Magistrates. There must be the matter before the
form, the constituting parts before the constitution, the esse absolutum
before the esse relativum of these respective societies, and correlatives; and
therefore a natural freedom, or original unengagedness of men in actu exercito.
Which yet we must not so understand, as if now every single person still were
born free, and so remains until he by his personal act contract an
engagement; for in the erection of communities, and Governments in them, the
Master of the family, having the rule thereof, represents all the persons of
his house; and the persons then actually incorporate involve their posterity;
so that only they in this respect are free who are not by the act either of
themselves, or of their progenitors, or other representers compacted in society
with others. They that think it irrational that the Father should represent and
involve the family, must resolve us how the Religious and civil covenants of
Israel, and Judah made in Moses, Josuahs, David's, Asas, Joashes, Hezekiahs,
Josiahs, and Nehemiahs days did comprehend, and bind as well the absent as the
present, and their posterity born, and yet unborn; as also how the laws, and
contracts continually passed by some do take in others not personally
consenting.

2. Since the partition of Commonwealths is acknowledged by the Objectors as
well as by us, and both must say it is not determined, or brought to the actus
exercitus by nature, it behooves not us, nor touches our assertion that this
query be cleared, more then it does them, and theirs: and possibly if they will
resolve this their own Question, we shall accord with them in the Answer. And
to make it somewhat more explicate, if they would please t^ resolve us, how any
one Commonwealth hat^ been (without immediately divine direction, as was that
of Israel) constitute, or raised out of a multitude of collateral families
destitute of one natural Father, common to them all (as doubtless most, or all
that are, or ever were have been) we might (I think) easily agree, how the
distribution of mankind into many civil States has come) and if I must here
spend mine opinion it is brought to pass, or effected,

1. Not by Consanguinity, or tie of blood, for this is in some degree extensive
to all mankind: and for a confinement of it within any certain degrees whereby
to make a division of Commonwealths,

1. There is no direction from Nature or Scripture, either that any such
confinement shall make out the bounds of a Commonwealth, or what such degrees
are.

2. There is no ordinary means left, or possibility of knowing what persons (of
any number near to that of a Commonwealth) are within such degrees, and what
without.

3. It is contingent to a Commonwealth (and rarely if ever known) to consist
of one distinct kindred, or stock: and it is contingent to such a kindred to be
comprised within one Commonwealth: collateral linages being ordinarily, either
dissociated into several republiques, or but intermixed with, and parcels of
one.

2. Not by Cohabitation; for though that be convenient to be amongst them that
are one Commonwealth: yet,

1. It is not always so, one part of a Commonwealth sometimes lying from
another beyond the Seas, or beyond another, or diverse other Nations, yea some
imes one part in Europe, another in East India or America.

2. How far that cohabitation must go, or to what compass to be the boundaries
of a Commonwealth inclusively, and extensively, is not by any general rule,
much less by any dictate of nature defined, or otherwise determined then by
humane choice; and so it is not uniformely, or by one constant proportion, but
variously, and unequally; every Commonwealth being of a different latitude of
place from others; and one, and the same Republique often varying from it self
by vicissitudinary contraction, and extension.

3. Naturalization, or Denisonship is not tied to habitation, but ordinarily,
some that live among are not of, and some that are of live not among this, or
that Nation, or State.

3. Not by men's appertaining, or subjection to one Sovereign, or Civil head. For

1. A Commonwealth being ens aggregatum, and the term unto which a Magistrate
is immediately referred being not a multitude of persons in their individual,
or single beings, but as aggregate, and formed into one body politic, the
Magistrate cannot be, either in nature, or time, before the aggregation, or the
republique union, and relation of the people one to another as one State, and
therefore cannot be the procreant, or efficient cause thereof.

2. The same person we know may be the Civil head or Sovereign Lord of diverse
politic bodies, they under him still remaining diverse.

4. It remains therefore to be done (as far as my imagination reaches) only by
consent; and this consent to be the consent of all that are interessed in the
association, viz. of the parties themselves to be incorporate, and of those
whether superiors, or people they are dissociated, or severed from.

It is most congruous to say the distinction of politic societies, or
distributing one into many comes by the same means, or has the same
efficient, which the first contract, or entering into politic society has:
but that is the voluntary accord of the associated: as not only the learned
agree Boterus de Origin. urbium lib. 1. cap. 1. Bodin de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Althusius polit. cap. 4. page 24. Grot. de Jure lib. 2. cap. 6. Sect. 4.
Dithmars Polit. lib. 1. page 20.
, but plain reason dictates. It is a common principle, which not only
Scripture, and humane Authors tell, but our own experience suggests to us, That
man is a sociable creature, fitted for, and affected to mutual converse, and is
by his natural instinct, and bent led to seek acquaintance, cohabitation, and
communion with his kind. To this we may add his necessity in man's vitiated
state, of distributive Justice, and defense against occurrent injuries Dum enim
haec amittere timent, tenent in his utendis quendum modam aptum, vinculo
civitatis, qualis ex hujusmodi hominibus constitui potest. August. de liber.
Arbitr. lib. 1. cap. 15.
. By these two inducements men were betimes, and still are moved to close
together in large, and populous societies; and then to erect Government for the
upholding of them in union, order, equity and safety; And beginning first with
the aggregation of one politic body, when that, by multiplication of mankind,
was grown over numerous, and unwieldy to its self and its superiors, if no
distemper could have arisen to have made a violent breach; no such immediate,
and miraculous hand of God should have interposed as was that of the confusion
of tongues; yet mere populousness, and distance of habitation thence ensuing
would have persuaded to a partition into more Commonwealths.

It is very probable that the division of the earth made in the days of Peleg
Genesis 10.25.
was a distribution, and alotment thereof unto several Nations, and Kingdoms,
into which mankind were then severed; and that the first partition of
Commonwealths (at least after the flood) was then made: and that it was
occasioned by the confusion of Languages at Babel: for immediately before that
it is said, the people were one. Occasioned (I say) for that occasion did but
prepare men for that reduction into diverse communities, in that it did dissolve
their union, and parcel, and disperse them abroad upon the face of the earth,
by making them incapable of conversing together (and some of the Hebrew Doctors
say, it did set them at odds and embroyled them in fight, and bloodshed: Vide
Cartwright. in Genesis 11.7.
) but it did not mould, of incorporate the several parties so divided asunded
into several communities; no, that was the effect of some other cause, and what
should that be but the joint will and conspiration of the severally languaged,
and severed parties each among and for themselves immediately acted? and
therefore we read both of the sons of Japhet, and of all the sons of Noah, that
they were divided by families, tongues, and lands into distinct nations Genesis
10.5, 31, 32.
.

But though that were the occasion of the division then made, yet many after
divisions in every age (almost) there have been of nations into new
Commonwealths; as also unitings of more Republiques into one: of which
divisions though confusion, and discord, not of tongues, but of minds (even as
a modern Author would have that at Babel to have been no more Tho Anglus.
Instit. peripat. Append. cap. 19. Sect. 5, 6.
) has been as often as any other thing the occasion, yet such discord could be
but the introduction unto, not the former, or founder of new Commonwealths;
the associating of them could only be accomplished by the will, and consent of
the incorporated.

As for the distinction of property in Lands and other possibles which must
needs accompany this partition of Commonwealths when the first divisions after
the flood, or any since were made, whereby the prrties distributed, left unto
those they parted from the Country wherein they were, and entered into void
regions, there could be no entrenchment upon the common right of mankind by
such entry; there being a sufficient consent given to it by all others, in that
the places were left, and exposed empty in regard both of occupation, and
claim. The first property whether National, or personal unto Land or goods
accruing, if not by an Express declared consent, and agreement of the first
multitude in whom a common-right promiscuously, or indiscriminately resided,
yet doubless by their real accord, signified by their act of cession,
permission, or giving way unto the seizure and enjoyment of the first occupant.
Vide Grotium de Jure Belli. lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 3.


2. This doubt being passed, the next is, Commonwealths being distinguished,
how come these, each to set up their Supreme Rulers? In this matter, 1. It is
Objected, That either it must be done by a universal consent, even to a man
nemine contradicente, The same Author and Book, page 9.
and this is impossible to be; or the major part must conclude the rest: and
against this they say, The major part binds not the whole, unless either men
first agree to be so bound, or a higher power so commands.

Unto this I answer, It may be supposed that each community at their first
coalition, either judge themselves bound by the law of nature (which is a
superiors command) to stand to the vote of the major part, or are so wise as
either to constitute that, or some other way of bringing their matters of
public interest unto a result obligatory to the whole. Common reason will
guide them to the one at least of these, or rather to both, for if it dictate
the former, it must be presumed to bring on the latter, viz. either by tacit,
or express consent. The dictate of right reason, in materia morali, I suppose
must be yielded to be the appointment of nature. But that the major part does
conclude the whole in those affairs the determination of which does necessarily
concern the whole, until su^^ time as they have settled the determination of
such affairs to be by other persons, or means, seems to be the plain dictate
of right reason. For in this case, the very end of a multitudes associating,
and becoming one Commonwealth, and the being, and interest of them as such is
concerned that so it be.

1. From a peoples becoming one society, there does result in them a faculty,
and interest to act some things politically: all being is in order to action,
and every actus primus is for an actus secundus; and a Political being is for
Political operation; and although such a body may put off its affairs to be
acted not perse totum, immediately, but vicariously by particular organs, or
members, yet some acts it must needs put forth immediately, viz. such as
conduce to the organizing of it self, and such also as are necessary to its own
preservation, and cannot be, or are not transected by others; as suppose a
common engine, or other calamity be seizing on a people destitute of, or
neglected by particular subsidiaries.

2. In those matters that are to be acted immediately by the whole community,
there must be some way for them to come to a resolution and conclusion about
them. If the concurrence of the whole multitude (very numerous and vast) to a
single person be not at all, or not ordinarily possible, or likely, then cannot
that he the way of determination: and if not that, then some other there must
be: and what more obvious, natural, and congruous to reason then this, that the
lesser part be swayed, and obliged by the greater?

3. Yea what other expedient can common sense suggest but this? When a thing is
proposed to the determination of a multitude which requires a conclusion by
them either positive or negative, and there is foreseen likely, or found to be
a diversity of sense, and vote among them,

1. In case the major part consent, and the minor deny the thing, either the
major part must carry it for the whole, or the negative of the minor by their
dissent carries it against the major; which is against all Reason.

2. And if the major be for the negative, and the minor for the affirmative,
either the minor must be overruled by the negative of the major, or standing to
their affirmative they must secede, and be severed into another Common wealth:
for to the nature of a community it is required that there be communio juris:
and this secession, as it is unreasonable to be made by a lesser party without
the others consent, so it, and the occasion of it admitted tends to the making
void, and ruining of societies.

This course then, of the minor parts obliging the whole, appearing so
necessary to the acting, and to the subsistence of a community, why may we not
conclude it in the cases, and matter above specified to be the dictate of
nature Vide Grotium lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 17.
?

2. If the major part be allowed to conclude the whole; it is next asked, Idem
page 10.
How shall the whole people be assembled? Here are two difficulties;

1. Where all are equally interested, and authorized what one or more, less
then the whole has power to appoint time, or place, or give summons to the
rest; without which appointment it is unjust to bind the absent?

R. It is to be presumed this scruple is practically precluded, by the peoples
proceeding when they agree to become one people; for, who can imagine but that
then they have the end, and immediate necessary acts, for which they join to
be a community, before them, and in order to them, either they forthwith make
choice of the Government they shall be under, and provide for a succession in
it, and the means by which it shall be continued; or if that be not at the
first instant dispatched, they appoint how they shall come together, or p^sse
their resolutions on that, or the like public occasion. We see there is a
course to be taken for such assemblies in the polarchies that now are, as in
the united Provinces of the Netherlands, in Venice, Genoa, and the rest. Yea
the many distinct Republiques of Germany confederate in one general interest,
and band as one great community have their order how to assemble, and hold
their public diets; as likewise have the thirteen united Commonwealths of
the Switzers; who upon any occasion of universal concernment have referred it
to the Burgomasters of Zurich to give notice to all the Cantons to meet at
Baden. And in the ancient State of Rome, the Consuls summoned the Senate, the
Senate the Assembly of the Centuries; and the Tribunes the Assembly of the
Tribes. 2. But suppose this uncertainty settled, and a diet orderly called, with
time, and place appointed; another difficulty there is, which may be subdivided
into two;

Idem ibid.
1. All cannot be present, one is sick, another is lame, a third is aged, a
fourth under age: besides many are women, some are Virgins, all these are of
the people, and how shall the consent of them be passed, or included?

R. 1. These natural or personal defects are common to all mankind, and apt to
incapacitate persons as much, or more for other humane affairs as for this,
which yet are not therefore argued into a fr^stration. This occasion of a
peoples agreement about politic Government but rarely occurreth, but when a
Government is settled, whether by our, or by the Objectors means, the daily
management of it is much more obnoxious to these impediments in the person, or
persons in whom it is seated; and when one of them seiseth on such a subject,
it is prone to make a greater interruption in public concernments then all of
them are wont to do in this, yet are Salvos in those cases ordinarily found out.

2. We have already seen that some acts at some time must needs be admitted to
flow from a politic body immediately; now this objection does not more lie
against this of their agreement of Government then against any other. I say
therefore a civil society having in it persons lying under all those occasions
of absence, or non acting, and add to them one more, viz. that some list not to
come, it is not thereby rendered actionlesse to this, or other purposes. But how
are the exceptions removed?

3. Thus.

1. They that are absent are either incapable of giving a consent to any thing
that concerns them, as are infants, and such as want the use of reason, or
they are capable.

2. Of these latter, some are not personally interested in passing, or giving a
vote in matters political, but are involved (as to these) in their Husbands,
Parents, Masters, or Guardians; others have an interest personally to concur
in them.

3. Of these some may be necessarily absent, as the sick, lame, decrepit,
others are away volun arily.

1. For the necessarily absent. This is the case ordinarily, but of a few
single persons in a great body, upon whom nature it self laying a present
impediment, must needs be taken to lay a present suspense upon their interest
of personal presence, and consent in the public business, and rather to will
the divolving of it upon the other that can meet, then that they, and the whole
community should be suspended from attaining, or effecting the dispatch of
their public necessary affairs. As they to whom nature denies the use of
reason, so they from she withholds the opportunity of bringing it to political
exercise for want of bodily integrity may be comprehended by her in the actings
of others in those things that appertain to the whole community they are of.

2. For the voluntarily absent, if some, yea many that may and should concur
will not come, this must not prevent the whole, or the privilege of others;
but rather by their default they put off their right as to the present act, and
invest it in the rest Vide Grot. de Jure lib. 2. cap. 5. Sect. 20.
. We account (and justly) that a countrey-meeting a^ which we choose our
Parliament men, to which the people therein are called, though the twentieth
part of them that are called do not appear.

2. Suppose all present, or the absence of those that are not, dispensed with,
how can mary thous nds, or some millions of people, so m^et in one place as to
communicate their minds to one another, and jointly deliberate, and come to a
resolution in any thing?

R. 1. Commonwealths are usually very small at their beginning, which is the
time of settling their Government for succession.

2. When they are come to growth they have another way of acting besides
personal presence, and cognizance, viz. that of meeting, and transacting their
concernments in, and by their Deputies, or representees.

3. As it is not very convenient, so it is not altogether impossible for the
collective body (I mean those who make a collective assembly, to wit, grown
men, and Masters of families, and especially so many of them as are disposed to
come) to meet, and treat in an assembly. We have diverse instances for it in the
nation of Israel, and among the rest, one that was upon occasion of the Levites
Concubine, mentioned in the history of the book of Judges Cap. 20, and 21. for
the numerousness of, and universal accurrence to which assembly, let the Text
be observed, Cap. 20. v. 1, 2, 12. Cap. 21. v. 5, 8. And the people of Rome,
when come to a very large, and populous Commonwealth, had their meetings of
this nature often in campo Martio.

4. And besides the Roman state found out ways of accommodating the
difficulties of so vest an assemblies treating in one, by distributing
themselves one way into distinct classes, and centuries; another way into
several tribes, and giving their votes in those distinct partitions Vide
Tullium de legibus lib. 3. prope finem.
.

3. Object. It Is said, In case of a Commonwealths want of a supreme
Magistracy, Idem qui supra, page 11, 12.
as when a King dies without heir, the power shall not escheat to the whole
people, but to the supreme heads, and fathers of families, not as they are the
people, but quatenus they are Fathers of people, over whom they have a Supreme
power divolved unto them after the death of their Sovereign Ancestor; and if
any have a right to choose a King it must be these Fathers by conferring their
distinct Fatherly powers upon one man alone. Resp. It is well he acknowledges
thus much, and we are so far agreed, that in case of a Kingdoms destituteness
of a head there is an escheature of the power to some, and that it is to the
heads, and Fathers of families, so as the right is in them to choose a King:
only then upon this he thinks good to cast a thin shadow, or mist to make it
seem, as if this were not the same with our tenent, and as it were to suborne
another different way of introducing of Magistracy, which in truth has no
reality in it, but what is borrowed from, and built upon that our position. But

1. What means he by that Epithet Supreme, added to the heads, and fathers of
families, as if he meant that all heads, and families are not interested in
that Escheature, and election, but some only, distinguish by that title: And if
this be his sense, I leave him to clear first how he differenceth those he calls
Supreme from other heads, and Fathers.

2. Why he makes such a distinction, and limits the said power to some only of
the Fathers under that notion of Supreme.

2. When he says, The power escheates to the heads, and fathers of families. I
ask, what power? the power which was before in the King, viz. a political,
Supreme, Regal power? and how escheates, or descends it upon them, unitedly,
or conjunctly, as copartners, and joint heirs of that whole, solid power in
relation to the Community, or body politic? This indeed is the power of which
the Question is, and which wants a lineal heir, or subject to bear it, upon the
supposed death of the King: And if that descend upon them, it must either be in
that manner specified, or else so as each person of them is the adequate
possessor of the whole, and solid power, which I suppose will not be said: If
that then be his meaning, lo here a Democracy yielded, and set up by him who
elsewhere holds there is no ground for any such or any other polarchical form
of Government, and that Monarchy is the only warranted form. Or, In his
observations on Aristotle's Polit.
does be mean a private, Domestical, paternall power of each of those heads,
and Fathers, not over the Commonwealth, but over their families severally, and
respectively? But for this,

1. This is not the power which was in the King, and now by his decease without
Lineal heir can be said to Escheat, or pass from him to any.

2. This cannot be said to come anew to them then, but must be acknowledged to
have been in them whilst they had their King, to remain in them after they
have chosen another in his place.

3 Where Is he seems as if he would explain how there comes in this sense a
supremeness into those persons, viz. They have a Supreme Power divolved unto
them after the death of their Sovereign. Still it remains that he tell us what
was above asked, viz. what that power is, whether Political, or Oeconomical,
and how the power of either of those sorts can accrue De novo to them by such
death. Indeed that domestical power which was in each of them before in
relation to his particular, and private family they being left destitute of a
Superior, or Political head, has another habitude then it had before, being
become negatively Supreme, that is, it has none actually above it, but it is
the same power still; or, if we shall say the power of the Pater familias in
this vacancy may be put forth unto some acts in relation to the persons in his
house, which he might not exercise while the Commonwealth had a Magistrate, I
shall not dispute that, but only say, though the Oeconomicall power be somewhat
larger, in actu exercito, when unsubordinate to a Political Sovereign then it
is being subordinate, yet it is within the compass of Oeconomical still, and
the same it was in actu signato. And that which he calls a Power divolved upon
the head of the family by the Sovereigns death, is but the drawing forth into
act of that which was in him before, but was suspended by the political
relation, and subjection. That which then can be said to Escheat to the heads
of families by such death of their King is a power to dispose of themselves in
subjection to another, and of their votes for the election of him to be their
Sovereign together (if you will, with a larger compass for the exercise of
their paternal power in their families) during their want of Magistracy.

3. Whereas he says, This power accrues to the heads and fathers of families
not as they are the people, but quatenus, they are Fathers of people.

1. They are not Fathers, neither is any one of them a Father of a people, that
is a Commonwealth, or body politic, but they are Fathers only of their
respective families, and of the persons therein respectively; what power
therefore is in them as in that relation can be but Domestical, and that which
is in every Father.

2. What if those persons where no Fathers, but were single, and unsociate as
to such a relation, that is, what if they were not over any other, or if they
had no families, or children sprung from, or belonging to them, would not then
the said power in the said case Eschear, or belong to them? If he say no, I
demand his reason: if he say it would, then he must say it does not Escheate to
them as they are Fathers of people, but as persons and people of that
Commonwealth.

3. Men that are Fathers of families cannot as such be in a capacity of
choosing a King over them, they must besides that relation be moreover united,
and confederate in one Commonwealth, or else they cannot put forth that act of
election. Persons that are either non cives, or extraneae civitatis, have
nothing to do in it. Whereby it is very manifest the reason why men have that
power of Election of a Magistracy to this, or that Commonwealth is not because
they are Fathers, but because they are Denisons, or freemen of that
Commonwealth, and not comprehended or represented by any Domestical Superior,
but immediately concerned to act for themselves in the common interests of the
people of that Commonwealth.

4. Where he says, The Power shall not escheat to the whole people, but to the
Supreme heads, and Fathers of families.

I say, in that it escheats, to them (who are every one a part in his own
family the Supreme head, or Father, that is, having none in this case above him
in the Civil State) and to such as, being without Domestical head, are capable
of heading a family, whom I think he will not exclude, it escheates to the
whole people; for who are the whole people to this effect, but they that are
Masters of families with them who are Masters of themselves? As was before
showed in answer to the second Objection, and the latter branch of it: and they
choosing, the whole people choose their Sovereign, they being all the people,
either personally, or representatively.

5. In that he says, These Fathers choose a King by conferring their distinct,
fatherly power upon one;

This is quite mistaken, for

1. They do not put off, or part with their Fatherly powers, but retain each
their own still, when they have chosen their King.

2. The power which upon their election passes into the hands of the Elected
King, is more then all their Fatherly powers laid together, that is, a Supreme,
Political, Civil, or Commonwealth power; which is a power of a higher Sphere,
and differs not only in measure, but toto genere, or in kind from that of the
Fathers, and unto which the paternall still continuing in the Masters of
families is subordinate.

6. Lastly, As this Author cannot exempt these his words (if they must bear any
sound sense) from a confession of that which he contends against, both in this
Treatise against Mr. Hunton, (and in his other of Observations upon Aristotle's
Politics) viz. the rise of Government from the peoples consent; so can he not
excuse himself think) from down right self-contradiction in some other
particulars. As

1. How will his arguing against the peoples capacity to choose their Sovereign
by this Argument, That no man has power to take away his own life, and
therefore the people cannot confer this power upon another, consist with the
right of the Fathers of families to choose their King, whereas the power to
take away their lives is a part of the power to which they choose him?

2. How will this Escheature of the power to the heads of families, and their
right thereby to choose their King, stand with what he says presently after?
viz. That all Kings are either Fathers of the people, or heirs of such Fathers
or usurpers of the right of such Fathers: And that, when the true heir of a
crown is dispossessed by a usurper, the subjects obedience of the Fatherly
power must go along, and wait upon Gods Providence who only has right to give,
and take away Kingdoms, and thereby to adopt subjects to the obedience of
another fatherly power. For if the power (in defect of a right heir) escheat to
the Fathers of families, then it passes not to an usurper; and if those have a
right to choose their King, he that is chosen by them has the right to be
their King, and not the Usurper; neither can the subjects be adopted to the
obedience of another fatherly power supposed to be in him; neither is he that
is chosen upon the fail of an ancient Royal line, or stock truly reducible to
any of these three sorts, viz. Either a Father of the people, or an heir of
such a Father, or an Usurper of the right of such a Father.

4. Object. The last objection I shall hold up, being the remainder of what I
meet with is, But this way of settling Government by the peoples consent cannot
be proved ever to have been held, or practiced. All powers that have reigned,
have entered by the sword, or rule by virtue of such entrance.

Resp. This is a very broad allegation, and the prejudice therein c^st upon all
powers seems to proceed from partiality to some. But

1. The way of subjects election of their Government to have been practiced and
that anciently, or from the first, I have above brought testimonies unto from
Authors of the best note, to wit, Aristotle, Cicero, Justin, Juvenal, Ludovicus
Vives, Polydore Virgil, and Mr. Calvin Viz in this Sect. Subsect. 4.
. To these I shall only here add the witness of one of our English Historians,
giving a threefold instance of the subjects choice of their Sovereign, to wit,
of three Kings. One of the ancient British, another of the Saxon, another of
the Norman race.

Mr. Speed Speed Hystory, Book 5. Chap. 6. Sect. 2. Book 6. Chap. 2. Sect. 6.
Book 8. Chap. 6. Sect. 1. Book 9. Chap. 2. Sect. 54. Chap. 3. Sect. 1, 2.
tells us that when Julius Caesar first enterprised the conqu^st of this land,
among the many Reguli, or petty Kings that then ruled in the several parts
thereof Cassibilan was by a universal vote chosen the Chieftain and supreme.
That upon the death of Hardicanute the third Danish King, Edward the Confessor,
was by a general consent elected King. And that William the Conqueror
appointing no heir at his death, his son William Rufus was by the consent and
voices of the States made King.

2. When learned Authors tell us of fundamental laws, and constitutions of
nations; and when the late Parliament so often mentioned and insisted on the
fundamental laws, and the ancient fundamental constitution, frame, aad
government of this Kingdom, in opposition to an arbitrary, and Tyrannical
government, in their public votes, declarations and remonstrances,
particularly in their preamble to the Protestation taken by them, and the whole
Kingdom, of May the 3. 1641. and in the Declaration of the House of Commons of
April 17. 1616. ordered to be published, set up and fix^d in every Parish
Church, what other thing do they mean thereby but this, to wit, the o^igi^al
establishment of policy and government by the mutual contention, CHAP. V. SECT.
V. Subsect. 6.
capitulation, and agreement of Governors and people. Aristotle Aristotelis
Polit. lib. 3. number. 87. lib. 5. number. 112.
often in his Politics delivers it as the difference betwixt a King, and a
Tyrant, a Kingdom, and a Tyranny; that the one is founded upon the will of the
Subjects, the other is against their wills, and held over them by force. Mr.
Gregory of C. C. observes upon those words, Act. 11.26. And the Disciples were
called Christians first at Antioch; that the word (...), were called, is
borrowed from a Roman custom, viz. when the Provinces submitted themselves to
the imperial Government, the use was to cause a (...), or public edict to be
drawn up, and proclaimed upon the place. And particularly there was such an one
at Antioch, when the City yielded up it self into the subjection of the Roman
Empire, in the time of Julius Caesar: In memory whereof that City fixed their
era or reckoning of time upon the date of that action; which they therefore
called (...), because the Emperor did then (...), publicly entitle them to
all the privileges, immunities, etc. Here is a famous instance which the said
Author brings out of Johannes Antiochenus, of the mutual agreement, and close
betwixt Prince and People, at the first entrance into that relation.

And I would ask further how it could be otherwise, then by mutual consent,
that Government was erected in the several Nations at the confusion of
languages; when the several parties were in an instant rent asunder from that
one community they were of, and from under that one head which perhaps had been
until then over them, and left to themselves to associate each party into a
distinct community, and under a new Government as they were severally
languaged: there being no reason, or ground to conclude that to each of them
there was still appropriate one natural Grandsire, and that he was by natural
right to be the Sovereign, or that in defect thereof there was one eldest
house, CHAP. V. SECT. IV. Subsect. 6.
and one Parent thereof that was entitled to the regiment of all the other
collateral, and younger branches of the same stock. The which supposals have
been above refuted? And again, how can it be otherwise at the plantation of a
new Colonie, at the extinction of a Royal race, or at the Cession of Kings or
States, that is, when a people are deserted of their former Supreme Governors?
as the Britains of this Island sometime were by the Roman State, to wit, then
when their prefect Aetius withdrew himself, and his legions from this Country,
upon the decay of the Roman greatness, and exposed the rule of it unto who so
might get it See Speeds History Book 7. Chap. 1. Sect. 1, 2, 3.
. And thus it was (some authors tell us) at the translation of the Roman Empire
to Germany Widdringtons Theolog. Disput. in Admon. to his Reader Sect. 4.
.

3. The Governments that either now are, or heretofore have been,

1. Many of them are known to have been established by the peoples consent, as
was even now showed.

2. Of many of them the original, first rise, or bottom, like the head of
Nilus, is not known. Of these because nothing to the contrary appears, we have
no just reason to think but they stand upon this basis: In all matters of
tenure immemorial possesion inculpably held, leads men to take the beginning to
have been right.

3. Many are known to have a violent, and unjust beginning: Of these,

1. Some, though the entrance of them was such, yet they have after, come to be
settled upon a better foundation. Thus it was (says Fr. Junius Junius Animadv,
in Bellarminum Controv. 3. lib. 5. cap. 8. Sect. 18. and ca 9. Sect. 20. Mr.
Perkins To. 1. Tract. of Callings, pa. 762. A.
) in the Empire of Charles the first, as also in that of Julius Caesar, Ex post
facto jus invaluit, cujus non ita fuerunt principia justa. Accordingly says
Mr. Perkins, A Prince enters into a Kingdom by war and bloodshed. Now by the
bad entrance be is no lawful King -- Yet if the people do willingly submit
themselves to this usurper, and be content to yield subjection, and the King
likewise to rule them by good and wholesome laws, CHAP. V. SECT. V.
he is now become a Lawful Prince, though his entrance was but Tyrannical. And
to the same sense, Chamier, Chamier To. 2. lib. 15. cap. 16. Sect. 9.
Grotius, Grotius de Jure B. lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 14. Arnisaeus de Authoritate
principis cap. 4. Sect. 14.
and Arniseus speak.

2. Some as they come into power by mere force, and intrusion, so by it they
still continue. But the number of these is not great, much less so great, as
to give violent occupation of Dominion the plea of a universal practice and
custom.

SECT. V. That distinction which some give betwixt the Power and the
Acquisition, or Assumption of the Power; and its aptness to resolve the
Question [Whether a violent intruder into Dominion be among the Powers in this
Text that are of God, ordained of God] considered.
THe sequel of the last Section, as of some others before it, is that in this
Text there can be no room or footing for Usurped Powers. Howbeit, I meet with
some Commentators, and others that deal with the text, when the Question comes
in their way (whether the Apostle in asserring the powers that be to of God,
ordained of God, takes in Usurpers;) that which they afford to assoil the
difficulty is, a distinction betwixt the Power which they say is of God, is the
ordinance of God, and the assumption or acquisition of the Power, which they
say is not of God, CHAP. V. SECT. IV.
but is of the Devil, as being by dishonest ways, fraud, violence, and the
like. And upon this distinction thus ^^ven, some of them seem to affirm the
Question [Seem, I say, for they do not all speak very clearly either way.]

That these two, the Power which is ordained of God, and a violent another
usurpati^e entry, and holding of the power, are two different things, not to be
confounded, I shall easily grant; but that the distinguishing betwixt the
power, and the acquisition, or assumption of power makes any thing to the
answering of the Question, or if it do, that it tends to confi^^, or clear
that the t^xt is inclusive of a Usurper, I can by no means understand, and
therefore crave leave to show my reason for my refusal of that distinction so
used.

1. Whereas they distinguish betwixt the Power, and the assumption of the
Power, and tell us the former is of God, is his Ordinance; the latter in the
Usurper is not of God, nor ordained of God, but being by unlawful means, is of
the Devil; I suppose they must either mean that the power in the general
notion, nature, or conception of the thing is of God, his ordinance, but this
Power in particular that is pretended, this Usurper is not of God: and thus
saying they resolve the Question negatively, and quite exclude the Usurper from
ground in this text: and with this sense I have no dispute; only I think they
might as well omit their distinguishing, and flatly deny the Question.

Or, 2. They must mean that this individual power, this Usurper, or this
Magistracy in particular which he pretends to, is of God, and his ordinance,
but his usurpations or this his way of coming into, and holding of the Power,
to wit, Usurpatively, is not of God, is not Gods ordinance. But if this be the
sense of their distinction, it, as so applied, can by no means with me be
admitted.

If it be asked, Whether unjust Judgment, Theft, Drunkeness, Whoredom, or any
such lewd practice be of God, or the ordinance of God, CHAP. V. SECT. V.
I should simply deny it; and it were an absurd thing for one in defense of any
of these to say, I can distinguish betwixt the Judiciary sentence, which is of
God, the ordinance of God, and wrong judgment, which is not of God, and in
like manner I can distinguish betwixt possession, and theevish possession,
betwixt drinking, and drunkenness, betwixt carnal, and whorish copulation;
the former in each of these distinctions is of God, is ordained of God, but not
the latter. For in thus distinguishing I should only acknowledge those acts of
judgment, possession, drinking, copulation in specie, or in their universal
an abstract conceit to be of God, not by any means that this act in particular
wherein the judgment is unjust, the possession is theevish, the drinking is
excessive, the copulation is adulterous, is of God (in this sense wherein we
now speak) or ordained of God. So in that distinction betwixt the power, and
the assumption of the power all that can be meant, with any favor of truth, is,
that power in general is of God, is the ordinance of God, but of this the
question is not; not that it may be said the Usurper, or the power which he
assumeth, and usurpeth is of God, is ordained by him, but not the usurpation,
or his way of assuming power: no more then it may be said, this wrong
judgment, this theevish possession, this excessive drinking is of God, as his
ordinance, but not the injustice, the robbery, the drunkenness, the whoredom,
or not the way wherein the agents act those things.

No man (I think) ever yet said that the act, and vitiosity of the act may be
so abstracted, or distinguished from each other, as to say, the one in
individuo may be morally good, and so of God, as his ordinance, and the other
morally evil. It is easy to see that in an act whose matter is in specie
good, or lawful, but other Ingredients which constitute its moral individual
state, are evil, I cannot excuse the act in individuo, or entitle it to the
Divine warrant or ordinance from the goodness, or allowablenesse of the matter
in specie. And it is as plain that the abstract, and the concrete, the act, or
habit, and the subject wherein it must needs have the same, and cannot have a
contrary moral predicate, or denomination, if lying, or murder be a sin, and of
the Devil, the liar, the murderer is sinful, and of the Devil too Jo. 8.44.
, and you cannot say the one is of the Devil, the other of God. In like manner
of the Usurper, and of usurpation; if you condemn the one, you must condemn the
other also, and you cannot entitle the one to the ordination of God, the other
to the will, and work of Satan.

2. When they say (if so they intend to say) this power, the Usurp^r, or the
authority which he arrogates to himself is of God, but not his acquisition of
the power. I would desire to understand of them, how is he, or it of God? Can
he be a power, or a power be in him of God any other ways, then by his
acquiring or receiving his power from God? yet this is that which they deny in
the latter branch of their distinction, where they say, His acquisition, or his
way of having his power is not of God, but is of the Devil. Let the owners of
this distinction bethink themselves how they can distinguish betwixt the being
of the power from God, and the acquisition of the power from God, so as to
affirm the one, and deny the other. In my dull conceit, the acquisition of a
thing is no more, nor no other thing but the way whereby that thing is had, or
received; and if the question be, how such a thing is acquired, and it be said
it is of such a person, or such an author; this is to describe the acquisition
of it. To me then, in those two propositions (whereby the distinction is
applied) the power is of God, the acquisition of the power is not of God, but
of the Devil, the subject of them is one and the same in sense, and ^e, and the
predicates are contradictory, and so they praedicate contradictories de eodem,
of the same thing.

If they again make a refuge from this absurdity of the general institution;
and say in the former proposition they mean the Usurper is of God, his power is
of God, in as much as God has ordained Magistracy, and Magistrates to be; I
answer; What is the Usurper the nearer for this, that God has ordained
Magistrates to be? if he receive not his power from God, can it be said
nevertheless his power is of God by virtue of that general institution? We
have forestalled this plea in our last Section, and say again, there is no
consequence, or dependency of the one of these upon the other. Gods ordaining
Magistrates to be, inferres not this, or that man that is in the place of
command (whether justly or unjustly) to be a Magistrate, of God. Nothing can be
more weakly or groundlesly said, then to argue this or that man is a power of
Gods ordaining, because God has ordained that there shall be a power, and that
some body or other shall be it. We have (I take it) proved before that to the
making of a Magistrate to be of God, and to be his ordinance, in actu exercito,
there goes, not only the law of God appointing Government to be in each
community, but that a person, or persons for his or their particular, be put
into that office of God, that is in Gods way, or by his warrant; and this is to
say, the persons acquisition of the power must be of God; It must be said of
them as Adonijah said of Solomon's Kingdom, it was his from the Lord.

The former puts not any Government, or Governors in being, makes no man
actually either a Prince, or a Subject; notwithstanding it all the
Commonwealths in the world may be headless, or without Ruler. If a man should
start up in the midst of a Kingdom, or a City, or of a Senate, or Parliament,
and proclaim himself to be the Supreme power over that community, and being
asked upon what he grounds his claim, he should allege but this, God has
ordained a Supreme power to be in every State, and that some be Rulers, and now
I actually challenge it; how ridiculous would this man and his claim be?

In the time when prophecy and prophets were sent out of God into the world,
and into his Church, there were true Prophets, and there were false: the
difference betwixt them was, that the one were Prophets indeed, were of God,
ordained of God; the other indeed were no Prophets, were not of God. [ Zech.
23.5. Jer. 23.16, 21, 26.] It would have been a senseless plea for the latter
to have said for themselves, We are Prophets of God, because God has ordained
prophecy, and has set in his Church some to be Prophets; And as reasonlesse an
allegation it is to say, the Usurper, or the Usurpers power is of God, because
God has instituted powers to be in the Commonwealth. Suppose a couple be
suspected to live together in whoredom, and being brought before the
Magistrate under that accusation, they shall pretend, for their defense, that
they are in a married estate, and being required to prove their marriage, they
should allege that marriage is Gods ordinance, God has ordained men and
women to marry, and they cohabite together as man and wife. Would this pass
for truth, that these two are in the state and relation they pretend to?

Much less would it serve if the one of the parties only should make this
pretense, and plea, and the other quite disclaim it; and what is the reason this
allegation would not pass, but because there is required, besides the general
rule ordaining marriage to be, and the exercise of conjugall acts, that there
be an entrance into this estate, and admittance unto these matrimonial acts,
by such a covenant, or consent of the parties, as God has appointed to be the
way, and means of contracting this Relation?

But some of the Authors of this distinction thus argue. Riches gotten by
usury, extortion, etc. cease not to be good in themselves, yea and the gifts of
God: and as the owner of these unjustly procured riches may be said to be a
rich man, and he that has Learning, though procured by unlawful means, may be
said to be a Learned man; so the possessor of a most justly obtained authority
may be said to be a Magistrate, and in authority.

Unto this Reasoning I have this to say. 1. Riches gotten by usury, and
extortion, cease not to be good in themselves; Say they, It Is true, but what is
this to the usurer, or extortioner, or to his possession of them, or to his
denomination of being rich by them? Let it be distinctly observed, what the
goodness of those riches is which cease not by their ill getting. That
goodness which is in them as considered absolutely, and in themselves, without
respect to this, or that owner, or getter, and which was therefore attributable
to them before they came into the usurers or extortioners hands, they still
retain, that is a goodness in genere entis, or as Creatures, and a goodness
in genere utilis, which is an aptness to serve unto a naturally, or civilly
profitable use; but those Goods which taken apart from such, or any other
particular owners possession have that goodness inherent in them, are moreover
susceptible, by way of relative denomination, of another goodness, which is
not inherent in them, or in their nature, or necessary, and fixed to them, but
is to them adventitious, or extrinsecall, and therefore is mutable, so that
they are as well capable of an evilnesse opposite to it, as of that goodness.

This goodness and evilnesse is moral, and it comes, or is imputable to them
by means of their adjacency, or relation to their possessor. In this respect
riches are said to be sometimes just, sometimes unjust, or to be honest, or
dishonest according as they are gotten well, or ill, in this moral, or
relative consideration of riches (wherein alone the similitude betwixt them and
the matter in hand is pertinent) it is not true that riches gotten by usury and
ex ortion are good. Ez^k. 22.13. Prove. 10.2.
The H. Ghost calls them dishonest gain, and treasures of wickedness.

2. Neither are unjustly gotten goods the gifts of God, if you mean by the
phrase such a gift as conveyes a title, or right to the Donee, or receiver,
which alone, can be strictly and properly called a gift, and can be parallel to
the having of a thing of God, as by his ordinance. For, as for that larger
acception, wherein things may be said by God to be given into the hands of men,
when they are exposed by his providence to them, as their spoil, or the matter
of other their acts of cruelty, or fraud, it is not of any collateral affinity
with that kind of being of God, which the Text (as has been proved) speaks
of; neither does it import a deed of gift, such as makes over a property in the
thing given to the Donee. Isai. 42.24. Job 12.6.
God gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers: and Job (whose goods
were so given up to the Sabeans and Chaldeans, says of the tabernacle of
Robbers, that God brings into their hands abundantly. Shall we compare these
men's havings (in respect of the being of them of God) with the being of the
power of God, as his ordinance, intended in this Text?

3. It is evident the Authors of the distinction take the being of the power of
God in these words in a stricter sense then is that wherein wealth dishonestly
gotten can be called the gift of God, whilst in the application of their
distinction they tell us, the usurpers acquisition of the power is not of God,
they would not (doubtless) deny it to be the gift of God (and consequently its
acquisition to be of God) In the same acception wherein they affirm the gain of
usury, and extortion to be the gift of God. Certainly it is not their meaning
to make the usurers, and extortioners way, and title to their riches (by so
much as the gift of God comes to) better then the usurpers way, and his Title
to his power, whilst they say their goods are the gifts of God, but his power
is not acquired of God.

4. But then they argue, As the owner of these unjustly procured riches may be
said to be a rich man, and he that has Learning, though procured by unlawful
means, may be said to be a learned man, so the possessor of a most unjustly
obtained authority may be said to be a Magistrate, and in authority.

I answer each of these sentences severally.

1. The owner of these unjustly procured riches may be said to be a rich man,
say they, but contrarily I say,

1. An unjust procurer and possessor is no owner.

2. Neither do riches denominate their unjust possessor rich.

1. An unjust possessor properly is no owner. There is in truth no propriety in
an unjust tenure: for propriety is nothing but a separate right, and right and
unjust possession are incompetible. There a^e many cases wherein one may have
such a possession as the law of man in a sort protects him in, that is, it
takes no cognizance of the injuriousnesse of his holding, Vide Augustinum de
lib. Arbitr. lib. 1. cap. 5. Greg. Tholos. Syntag. Juris. lib. 21. cap. 3.
Grotium de Jure, lib. 3. cap. 4. Sect, 2. et cap. 10. Sect. 1. and lib. 2. cap.
23. Sect. 13. and lib. 3. cap. 7. Sect. 6. and lib. 3. cap. 20. Sect. 48.
but this notwithstanding, the possessi^n being wrongful, neither it, nor its
humane impunity, or indulgence, can create a right, or property in the p
ssessor. There is a difference betwixt a presumed, or supposititious, and a
true owner. Civilians confess, humane, positive laws do not take notice of
all that is just by the law of nature, scripture, and conscience, either to
establish it, or to correct the contrary. Hence those distinctions betwixt that
licet, quod caret vitio, and that quod impune fit; betwixt licentiam interi^rem
and exteriorem. That is, a lawfulness which is free from fault, and the
lawfulness which is free from punishment: a lawfulness which is internal
appertaining to the conscience, that is; and that which is external, or in
respect of the Court of man. And in those things wherein the law of man
interposeth, there are also many cases, wherein one holding a thing against all
right, his possession is therefore irritable, or ejectable, and yet because the
title must be first tried, and evicted, the law allows effectum quendam juris,
where there is nullum jus; a kind of privilege of right without right: and for
the present looks at him as (titular) proprieter, that is, no moral real, or
warrantable proprieter, but only fictitious, and therefore upon eviction, it
ejects him.

2. Neither do riches denominate their unjust possessor rich. This follows upon
the former. For seeing the haver of unjustly gotten goods is a bare possessor,
or a mere holder, and user of goods, and not the true owner or proprietor of
them, he cannot from such riches, be truly termed a rich man. A possessor in
fact, (or, in respect of that possession, which the Civilian calls a natural)
deserves not to be called rich, neither is he in many cases vulgarly so
esteemed. A thief may by robbery have gotten into his hands a great treasure;
yea, a man may be a just occupant of a wealthy estate, he may be a depositary,
a mutuary, or an usufructuary thereof, that is, he may have it in his custody,
and use by way of trust, hire, or tenantry, yet such a one if he be wise,
counts not himself a rich man in any such respect, neither does the world
(understanding how he has it) so repute him. A mere occupancy that is eftsoon
voidable by law, or that is determinable by a little time, or that is
accountable, for to another proprietor, is not wont to denominate the occupant
rich. But to make both these points a little clearer, we are to distinguish of
injustice, or evil dealing in the getting of wealth. There is some wrong in
getting, which is so deep, and intrinsecall to the substance of the title, as
that it does vitiate and destroy its being, and the contract, or other way of
procuring the goods by means thereof is null as to the producing of a property
to the procurer. And there is some injustice that reaches not so far as to
evacuate the title. Every slip, or deviation from the path of uprightness does
not make void a bargain, or title about which it is used. Casuists distinguish
therefore betwixt that dolus malus, that evil dealing, which gives cause to the
contract, and that which is only incident or circumstantiall to it, and say,
the former does nullify a contract, but not the latter Vide Bonacinam, To. 2.
Tractat. de Restitut. and Contract. Disput. 3. qu 1. punct. 2. Sect. 2. Emanuel
Sa Tit. Dolus. Alsted Cas. Consc. Cap. 20. Reg. 9. Bp. Halls Resolut. Decas. 1.
Cas. 6.
; and hence we must say riches gotten with some failing of the latter sort may
truly denominate a man an owner, and a rich man; because notwithstanding such
an error, or tincture he, and the person of whom he receives them may have made
a lawful contract, or agreement about the property of them, and that bona
fide, or really; and which is therefore for substance valid. But wealth
attained in the former way of injustice cannot entitle a man rich, because the
transaction so qualified, does not truly cause, or make a property: he that
has them but so has no title to them, conveyed unto him.

2. They say, He that has learning, though procured by unlawful means, may be
said to be a learned man. Here I say,

1. Learning is no moral habit, and therefore the denomination by it is not
concerned by the manner, or means of its acquisition: but a moral habit, as is
the having of riches, and the having of civil power, must have a moral
constitution. The difference betwixt these two in this matter will easily
appear by comparing the natural relation of father and son, with the moral
relation of husband and wife. He is truly said to be a father that begets a
child, though it be in whoredom, and a bastard is truly called a son. But two
cannot be called husband and wife from natural copulation, but there must be
betwixt them, besides that, a consent, or contract for substance valid, and
lawful to set them in that relation. The reason of this difference is, because
the former, that of father and son, is a natural relation, in regard of its
rise, or the act by which it is founded: the other is a moral relation as to
the way of its production, and therefore must result from a moral act.

2. Our Philosophy will tell us, it is not every having that does really
denominate, but that only which is properly intended by the denominative, or
concrete. We say, a man that is full of wine is drunk; but a Vessel, or Celler
being filled is not said to be drunk with wine. A Purse full of gold is not
called golden, but we call it golden, if it be wrought with gold Ad regulam
istam, cui inest abstractum de eo praedicatur concretum, requiritur ut
abstractum eo modo infit quem importat concretum. Marsupium non dicitur aureum,
quavis in Marsupio sit aurum. Sthalii Axiomata, Tit. 6. Reg. 4. Sect. 11. page
163.
. He that has the arts, and sciences in his study, or in a book in his hand,
or merely in his memory, so as he is able to rehearse the systemes of them by
roar, is not said to be a learned man; but he that has them in his
understanding: and he that has moral virtues not only in his study, book, or
memory, but in his understanding, yet is not said to be virtuous, unless he
have the habits (not the docentes, but the utentes) of them also subjected in
his will. In like manner the having of command, or rule over a civil State
merely in ones hand, does not truly denominate one a Magistrate, or in
authority.

Having thus discovered the unsutablenesse of the premises to infer that
conclusion, that the possessor of a most unjustly obtained authority may be
said to be a Magistrate, and in authority; that conclusion as to support by
them, falls of it self: But I may add, as to the terms of it, as I said, and
showed before that the unjust possessor of riches cannot be called the owner of
them; so may I here reply, those words, [the possessor of a most unjustly
obtained authority] are a contradiction in adjecto. A most unjustly obtained
authority there can properly be none: a man cannot be a possessor of authority,
that is authority indeed, but by lawful means. He that holds, and exercises
command, rule, or sway most unjustly, (as to title) may pretend to authority,
but the command he assumes cannot (but abusively and equivocally) be called
authority. Authority (as has been before made good) consists in a right, or
call to rule, and is formally, and essentially contradistinct to unjustly
obtained authority. I speak of that which is held, or stands merely by unjust
means: for, (as was before noted of injustice in the acquisition of Goods)
there may be a miscarriage incident to, which is not of the substance of the
Magistrates ingresse into, or tenure of authority. There is a faultiness in
the very nature, or essence, and constitution; and a faultiness in some
circumstances of the acquisition of authority. A man may come into, or hold the
throne by a just title of personal election, or hereditary succession, and yet
some indirect, or undue passage may be interwoven in the election, or the
actuating of that succession; which notwithstanding, the election, or
succession, being for substance lawful, there is a true Magistracy, or real
authority descending on that person. But where the place of power is merely
usurped, (or as are the words of that conclusion we are refelling, most
unjustly obtained) there is a Magistrate but verbo te^us; a style without
truth; a barely pretended, nominal, equivocall authority; and therefore no
real denomination.

CHAP. VI.
CHAP. VI. Of the universal negative note, in the words, there is no power but
of God.
THey that contrary to the sense I have endeavored to give, and make good, of
those terms in this Text I have hitherto handled, would take the subject of
this proposition the word power in the largest sense, so as to comprise any
strong hand that by its force lifts up it self over a community; and by the
predicates, of God, ordained of God, would understand any being of God, in what
general, and large acception soever can be imaginable, so as to include
whatsoever comes to pass, or occurreth in the world, or has existence by
eventual providence; they also endeavor to improve this universal negative
annexed to that subject, no power; and the verb substantive, or rather its
participle, in the other proposition, the powers that he, to the same purpose,
of making way for their broad sense of the term power: arguing, that if there
be no power but of God, then is an Usurper of God; and if the powers that be,
or are in being be ordained of God, then whosoever gets a Kingdom into his
hands, by whatsoever unjust means, yet he, seeing he is a power in being, is
ordained of God to be the Sovereign there. Wherefore somewhat I shall also say
to these minute particles, no power, the powers that be. Would they be content
to let those words (of which already) the power, of God, ordained of God, CHAP.
VI. SECT. I.
pass in their genuine and proper acceptions, which I suppose I have
manifested to belong to them in this place; I should let pass the stretch
which they also put upon these particles, and not dispute at all their sense:
seeing that, take them as generally, and widely as they ^an, yet applying them
to those main terms, the subjects and the predicates already opened, in the
construction before stated, they could not thereby alter or wrong the sense of
the whole sentence, or gain any advantage by it to that large extension of the
words. But supposing there were not evidence enough for that stricter, and
closer acception of the Apostles saying, which I have offered, I will examine,
whether those other terms, which yet remain to be spoken to, must necessarily
be taken as widely as they urge them, or as to be any thing complyant to their
larger interpretation, and use of this place.

The next thing then to be considered is that universal negative, no power.

Here we are to enquire what weight there is in this universal particle, no,
in the proposition, there is no power but of God.

SECT. I. The Original is not in those words, [no power but of God] expressly
universal.
THe Original is somewhat less favoring their wider sense then is the
translation: for it does not in terminis sound so fully to an universal
negative. It is, (...). Which word for word signifies thus, The power is not
but of God. It says not absolutely, and simply, there is no power, but
relatively, the power is not; looking back to the powers immediately before
mentioned in the precept, the higher powers, willed to be subjected unto.
Whatsoever power in the civil State can be involved in ^^at style, the higher
powers, of it the Apostle says; it is not but of God. And if every power
imaginable is to be so styled, then may the words better pass in an
equivalency to an universal, and might be all one as if the Apostle had said,
there is no power but of God. But if there be any peculiarity in that phrase,
the higher powers (of which something below Chap. 8. Sect. 2.
) then must we stick to the relative reading of them, (which in truth is more
literally consonant to the Greek, and is followed by those Latin Translations I
have to peruse, to wit, those of Beza, Montanus, Tremel^us, and the vulgar) and
lay aside that universal note. However needs it must be granted the safest,
and clearest rendering is that which is word for word to the original, which
expressly amounts not to an universal, but is, for its extent, formally
indefinite; and being so, our Logic rule will tell us, that its quantity must
be determinate (that is, whether it shall be taken equivalent to an universal,
or to a particular proposition) by the matter, to wit, by the necessity, or
contingency thereof; and the matter, to wit, the subject, and predicate, being
in controversy, in what sense (whether in a larger, or a stricter) they shall
be taken, it cannot be (until the sense of those terms, be concluded to be
necessarily thus, or thus) determined thereby. Only thus I take it to
understand by the power a moral power, and by the terms, of God, ordained of
God, a proceeding of God by way of authorization, commission, call or warrant,
and then this indefinite may be answerable to an universal: but cast off those
restrictions, (which yet I apprehend natural, and proper to the Text) and then
it cannot be spoken universally, but will amount only to a particular
proposition.

SECT. II. CHAP. VI. SECT. II.
The several qualifications which sentences in terms universal do admit.
BUt admit the proposition to be formally universal, and that the Apostle had
in terminis said, there is no power, but of God, or, every power is of God.

Yet we know that each sentence that has a note of universality put to it must
not be understood in the utmost bounds that such a note may sound, or reach
unto, at any time, or in any other sentence; words universally spoken must be
construed with caution. It is a rule, dicta quantumvis universalis aequitatem
recipient intepretem. It will behoove us for this purpose to consider a little
how universal proposition (whether affirmative, or negative) as in ordinary
discourse, so in Scripture very frequently, and familiarly must from the sense
intended be qualified, and restrained within a shorter compass then the
universal note would of it self bear Vide Bezam in 1 Timothy 2.1. Mr. Needler his
notes, p. 262.
.

1. Sometimes the universal affirmative, or negative means not simply all,
and every one under the subject contained, but only the more part, or many, as
[ Mark 1.5.] there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and were all
baptized of him. All, that is, many, not all to a man; [ Phil. 2.21.] all seek
their own, etc. that is, many, or the most do so. [ John 12.32.] I will draw
all men unto me: that is, a great number.

2. Sometimes it signifies indiscriminately, in reference to a multiplicity of
persons, or things, all, that is, every sort, or of one sort as well as
another; and not distributively every single person, or thing without
exception, or not collectively all singulars, so as to leave out none under
those sorts comprehensible. [1 Samuel 20.26.] Saul spoke not any thing that day;
not as if he were quite mute all the day from all discourse, but he spoke
nothing concerning that matter of David's absence; [ Acts 2.17.] I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all flesh; that is, not upon all and every person in the
world, but upon all without distinction of nation, Jew as well as Gentile; [1 Timothy 2.1.] That supplications, etc. be made for all men; that is, for men of
all ranks, and states, [ ver. 6.^.] Who gave himself a ransom for all. That
men pray every where. Christ gave himself for all, that is, for all sorts and
conditions of men, and of singulars under all those sorts for some of each, but
not for all Individuals, or particular persons unto all those sorts reducible.
And men must pray every where, that is, in one place as well as another,
importing the ceasing of that peculiarity of place, which was under the Law;
yet they might not play simply every particular where without exception, they
might not go and pray before an Idol, or amidst an assembly of Idolaters in
the Idols Temple; [1 Cor. 10.25.] Whatsoever is sold, etc. that eat, etc. [1 Timothy 4.4.] Every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused. That is,
any kind of those Creatures that are good for food might then be eaten; yet if
any individual of those was strangled, or the blood of any they might not eat
Act. 15.29.
; [ Mat. 4.23.] Jesus went about, etc. healing every sickness, and every
disease. [and ver. 24.] They brought unto him all sick people; Every, and all,
that is, some of each sort, for every disease of every person he healed not
Mark 6.5.
.

3. The universal Note sometimes signifies every particular, or singular, but
not of the Genus, or subject spoken of generally taken, but of one species, or
special kind only contained under that genus; and so the universality must not
be ex^ended absolutely, but secundum quid, or to one Classis, or sort only of
the things, or persons named. [1 Cor. 6.12.] All things are lawful unto me; --
all things are lawful for me, all things here means not simply all, not
Idolatry, Adultery, Theft, Drunkenness, which he had been naming but a little
before, [ verses 9, 10.] and condemned, but all things of natural use for
nourishment, to which point he [in this, and in verse 13.] is speaking. [1 Cor.
2.15] He that is spiritual judges all things. Not all things in general, but
all revealed spiritual things, of which things his discourse in that Chapter
proceeds. And again in the same verse, he himself is judged of no man, not
simply denying the spiritual man to be subject to any humane judgment or
cognizance whatsoever; but meaning that negation solely in reference to his
spiritual inward estate, [1 King. 19 10.] There is no Nation, or Kingdom
under heaven whither my Lord has not sent to seek thee. Not as if Ahab had
sent to seek that Prophet in every Country on the earth, but the meaning of it
must be, there was no neighboring nation, or place whither it could be
probably thought Elijah to have betaken himself, but he had sent to make
enquiry for him. [ Mat. 9.10.] No man puts a piece of new cloth, etc. not
intending absolutely to say, that was never done by any, but no man uses to do
it, or no man does it, that goes wisely, or with common advisednesse to work.
[2 Timothy 2.4.] No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life. Doubtless of every one that is a Soldier this cannot be denied, this
age has seen enough of the contrary, but it is denied only of the just, and
faithful Soldier; no man that warreth regularly, or as he ought behaves
himself after the manner that is here denied.

CHAP. VI. SECT. III.
SECT. III. The suteablenesse of some of those qualifications of universalls to
this (supposed) universal in the Text.
IN this vari^ty of limitations to which propositions universal (whether
affirmative or negative) are subject, we may reflect upon this sentence under
debate, and consider (supposing it to be indeed an universal negative, and
that the subject to which it is appendant, the term power, as here it is used
neither does carry in it self its own limitation, neither were by any other
thing in the Text restrained to one certain and peculiar acception) whether
some of these restrictions may not fitly be put upon it.

I doubt nor, but, looking upon the words under that supposall, the universal
note added to them may well, yea must needs admit of the second or third
qualification. When therefore it is urged in behalf of a power that merely
stands by forcible possession, and is destitute of all just title, and call
to authority, that this power is by virtue of this Text to be subjected unto,
inasmuch as here it says, there is no power but of God. It may be answered,
Scripture universalls oftentimes will not brook to be taken in the larg^st
extent, to which the word, or thing spoken of does sometimes reach; but must be
understood with some qualification. Particularly, as the universal is to be
taken in many Texts, so in this here, it does not contain simply all power, nor
does it intend to assert that any sort of power whatsoever that can be named,
or put forth in any creature, or in any man, is of God, in the sense wherein
the Apostle here means, but all that can be thought necessarily to be
imported in it is, either,

1. That every lawful, or (which is all one) every moral power in the civil
State is of God, is ordained of God. And for the congruity of taking this
universal not simply, but secundum quid, or, for this one sort, or species of
power only, I shall besides the Scripture instances al^eady given, here bring
two more, which are for form and matter of special affinity with this. The
first is a universal negative of a parallel subject, or matter, an office of
superiority, or rule, wherein though the words run as these are supposed to do,
in the general without any limitation expressed, yet they must be taken in
this manner. It is that of [ Heb. 5 4] No man takes this honor unto himself
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. This universal must not be
construed to be an absolute, or illimited negation of the fact, as if no man at
all does, or ever did take unto himself the honor of the Priesthood uncalled
of God. For Korah with his company, and Jeroboams Priests, and King Vzziah, and
Amaziah the Priest of Bethel did it. But we must take it as intended to be said
with this restriction, no man man that legally, rightly, or warrantably
proceeds, takes this honor unto himself, but he that is, as Aaron was,
called of God. So here, there is no power but of God; not as if there was never
any Dathan, or an Abiram to invade the Magistrates office, as well as there was
a Korah to usurp the Priests; or, as if though there were, yet the usurping
Dathan and Abiram, were powers of God in the Apostles sense here, though Korah,
and such like presumers were not Priests of God: but, taking these two places
to run very parallel, for likeness both of matter, and of universal
negativeness, we may say, as that of the Priesthood, so this of the Magistrate
must be construed to intend there is no power legally, warrantably, or
regularly set up, but it is of God. The Divines Annotations upon that of Heb.
5.4. give us a good rule to understand many such universalls by, to wit, Verbs
active in the phrase of the Scripture sometimes import; not the act it self,
but duty, or office; no man takes, that is, ought to take this honor upon
himself, but he that is called of God. So here, though every particular power
de facto be not of God, yet de jure there is none but that is. The power that
is as it ought to be (as the high Priest that is in his office of right) is of
God, ordained of God. The other Scripture instance is in the words that lie
next to our Text, in the same Verse with it, to wit, the antecedent precept,
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. This universal imperative must
not be taken absolutely, or to stretch to all men without restriction, for if
every soul without exception were to be subject there could be none left to be
the higher powers, and, besides, there are, or may be some that are not of, or
within any Commonwealth, and perhaps some Commonwealths may be for some time
destitute of rulers over them, [as Hab. 1.11.] but every soul must be limited
within this circumscription, every person that is a member of a body politic,
and is in the relation and state of a subject, every such soul must be subject.
So in these words, there is no power but of God, that is, there is none in the
relation, or state of a Magistrate, no moral, authorized or lawful power, but
it is of God, set up, and ordained to it by him.

2. Or indiscriminately, in reference to the diverse species, sorts and degrees
also of lawful power; of them there is none but is of God; that is, whereas
there are diverse species of civil power, as Kings, and Potentates,
Aristocraticall, and Democraticall; and whereas there are diverse degrees of
powers, that is, supreme, and subordinate, in several graduall distinctions,
and whereas there are diverse sorts of power in regard of the qualifications of
their persons, and governments; as for their Religion, some Christian, some
Jewish, some Pagan; and for administration, some being just and propitious,
others being unrighteous and persecuting. There are none of these kinds,
degrees, or sorts (taking the universal to intend gen^ra singulorum, not
singula generum) but they are of God; and this is the very construction which
both Beza, and Pareus give of these words. And this construction, moreover,
best suits with that which the whole stream of Interpreters (as far I can
observe) judge to be the proper occasion, and scope of the Apostles discourse
of this subject, of civil policy, in this place, to wit, that whereas the
Christians then, or some of them did, or might make question of subjection to
the higher powers, in reference to the Rulers, being unchristian, unjust, and
tyrannical as to exercise of Government, his drift is to charge the duty of
obedience upon them with relation even to such Magistrates: and to argue them
unto a submission to it as applied to such, he reasons chiefly from the Divine
ordination, and warrant of the powers unto their office, and plainly averres,
whatsoever they be for personal qualification, or manner of Government, yet,
if they be higher powers, indeed, they have their place, and calling from God,
and therefore are to be obeyed.

The Apostle elsewhere bespeaking Christians for one particular duty to these
higher powers, to wit, to pray, and give thanks for them, he extends this duty
universally to all them that are in authority, [1 Timothy 2.1.] yet, as Beza
observes, this universal must be taken thus indiscriminately, that is, in
reference to all sorts, and not distributively to all single persons in
authority, to wit, that heathen as well as Christian, misgoverning as well as
good Magistrates are to be prayed for. Otherwise (says he) there may be found
some one particular Ruler that may be excepted out of the verge of the
Christians prayers (such an one as Julian the Apostate was) who may have sinned
the sin un^o death.

Me thinks there cannot be a place more parallel to these words, there is no
power but of God, ordain^d of God, both for subject matter, and for
illimitednesse in terms, or words then that of Solomon, Prove. 8.15. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the earth. Whether we understand these words of God, (as
usually they are taken) or of Wisdom, unto him, or if the use, exercise and
administration of the power is ascribed as generallly, and indefinitely, as is
the being, and ordination of the power attributed unto God in this sentence of
the Apostle. But from that indefinite speech of Solomon, no man may gather it
was in his intention, and drift to own, or father every act of every King,
Prince, Noble, and Judge, upon either God or Wisdom; the words must needs be
understood only of such acts of those persons as are just, righteous, and
prudentiall. Certainly there are acts of rule (such as are rehearsed, Psalm.
2.2. the Kings, and Rulers of the earth set themselves, and consult against
God, and Christ, and a thousand more unlawful courses of such) which must of
necessity be excluded from that general saying. Now as from those indefinite
words we must not infer that all acts of Magistrates are from God, so neither
may we conclude from the like indefinitenesse of these words of the Apostle,
that simply, and universally every power that is in being (any way whatsoever)
is of God, by his ordination.

Whatever any one may judge of the congruity of any of these limitations unto
the universal note supposed in this Text, yet I think no considerate Reader
but will easily grant that some such restriction must be admitted to the words.
We have before distinguished of a fourfold lawfulness, and unlawfulness in
powers. Now it must needs be yielded that powers in some of those four ways
unlawful must be debarred the Text, and consequently that the propositions in
it must receive some limitation unto powers that are lawful.

Among other false pretenders to power by virtue of the Text, the Pope comes
in; and he offers injury to this place more ways then one. Among the rest,
he, and his Doctors for him, challenge power to make laws to bind the
Consciences of all Christians; Bellarmin, To. r. Controv. Genesis 3. i. e. de Romans
Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 16. loc. 6. Whitaker, To. 2. Controv. 4. qu. 7. p. 710 b.
Chamier To. 2. lib. 15. cap. 17. Sect. 3.
and one warrant pretended to for it by them, is this Text; and in it they urge
the indefinitenesse, or unlimitednesse of the words. Non est potestas nisi a
Deo, (which they say) is equivalent to this universal, Omnis potestas est a
Deo. All power is of God: and thence they argue, if every power be of God, then
the said power of the Pope to rule, and bind the conscience of all Christians
is of God. To his claim upon this ground we have no answer if we grant him the
words to hold in an absolute universal form. But, to cut off this his forged
pretense, we reply, the Text asserts not simply of every power, that it is of
God, but of that power which is by other rules of Scripture justifiable, and
lawful. If then to rid our hands of this corrupt gloss we must be driven to
confess the indefinite, (or say it be universal) form of these words must
needs admit of a confinement, to lawful, warranted powers; it is enough to
bar out the argument, from the illimitednesse of the proposition. And
further, then it will be said this lawful, must either exclude powers in any
sense unlawful, or in some sense only, if the latter, then some good reason
must be given why one sort of unlawful power should not be shut out of the
Text by it as well as another; which I expect will never be assigned: If the
former, then is power unlawful as to title, or usurped power chashiered the
Text.

But this may suffice for the discussion of the universal negative, there is no
power but of God.

CHAP. VII.
CHAP. VII. Of the being of the Powers, in that proposition, the powers that be
are ordained of God.
THE only term in the Text remaining to be cleared, and vindicated is the
being of the powers, in that indefinite affirmative, the powers that be are
ordained of God.

I will not insist on that reading of some which so places the words, and
puts the comma, as that it cuts off all pretense to that use of them which
some make from this, or any other of the terms of this Text, in behalf of the
unentitled, or usurping powers: Which is this, the powers that be of God, are
ordained; but take them in their ordinary, and to them most favorable reading:
and so the defenders of an obligation to unlawful powers do much lay hold, and
insist on this term. For this purpose they observe the word to be in the
participle (...), which they translate in being; the powers that are in being,
putting an high emphasis upon that word, and urging that the being, or
existence in rerum natura of any power brings it into this Text, and under this
pred c^te of being ordained of God. Whereas (...) is but put for (...), as it
is wont often to be, and therefore translated by our Interpreters be. But
however let them enjoy this (...), let it be the powers that are in being,
there would be in this no color of an argument at all, did they (as was before
said) take the subject spoken of, the powers in its proper sense; CHAP. VII.
SECT. I.
but let that be set aside also, and try we what they can make of this word.

SECT. I. The question moved, wherein consists the being of the power, or, what
it is that makes the power to be.
THe question here will be (in the midst of all the strong urging of it) what
must be meant by the being of the power? or, what it is for the power to be?
or, wherein the being of the power, the Ratio formalis of it, consists? or,
what it is that puts a power in being? There are that tell us the being of a
higher power, or that which makes the power to be, or one to be a power, is his
actual prepotency, or his present ruling, or his holding the sword de facto,
or his plenary possession of superiority. In this Text (say they) the powers
that be are the persons that occupy the place of rule, that have the Militia in
their hand, or prevail with their sword, or that hold (however they come by
them) the reins of G^vernment in their hand. The taking up of this (at first
sight or blush without further examining) to be the meaning of the words, is
that which has carried away some to a strong imagination, either of a Usurpers
right, or of a duty of obedience to him, as the ordinance of God; and has
staggered others to an unresolvednesse about it. Notwithstanding to me this
seems to be an overhasty, raw, and indigested interpretation of the Text.

CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 1.
SECT. II. Reasons to prove that prevalency, or actual possession of the seat
of Government does not make or infer one to be the power.
TO pass by what was above noted (Cap. 1. Sect 2.) that in Scripture we find
(...) put for such a power, as does not necessarily import, or depend upon
possession, but is separable from it, and that sometimes, not only de facto,
but de jure: my Reasons for what I say of this definition of the being of the
powers are these.

Subsection 1. Argument 1. Taken from the nature of existence.
THe being, or existence of a thing is eductio rei extra causas, the putting,
or extraction of a thing out of its causes. Its causes, that is, those proper
causes, that have a power or faculty to produce that thing. If then actual
possession, or prepotency do necessarily carry with it the productive act, or
acts of those causes which are qualified to produce the power in the Text, and
that it can be said where ever there is a holding of actual Rule, or a
mastering sword over a people, there must needs be the concurrence of those
causes which constitute, or create a civil Magistrate, then is it true, that
actual prevalency makes, or argues the said power to be in being. But I ask
what cause, or efficient of the civil power does actual regency necessarily,
and individually import, or put into act? a man might be in that condition of
actual prepotency if God had never ordained Magistracy to be, or though, having
ordained Magistracy to be, yet, he should not have given this man any
commission to be the Magistrate, yea though he should expressly have given out
a prohibition that he should not be a Magistrate, and though the people over
whom he bears sway, and all the world besides, (only himself, and his strong
hand by which he carries it excepted) were utterly, and professedly dissenting,
and opposite to it.

That its evident that actual rule may be where there is no concurrence of the
causes interested, and capable to produce a civil power, I shall need further
to allege no other medium, but the nature, or definition of Usurpation (as the
word has reference to civil policy.) What is usurpation, but the assumption,
and use of the preheminencies, and acts peculiar to the office of the
Magistrate without a lawful call, title, or admission to that office; which
lawful calling, entitling, or admission to that office is the proper act, or
acts of those agents who are competent to confer this office? If then this be
the nature of usurpation, and there be, or can be such a thing as usurpation in
the world, there may be actual rule without the concourse of the causes whose
place, and faculty it is to convey the civil power; and consequently it is not
actual rule which does put the civil power in being, or infer its existence.

CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 2.
Subsection 2. Argument 2. From the absurdity of admitting Satan's, and the
Popes usurped powers upon the ground of actual rule.
2. THe command, and rule of some over the Kingdoms of the world actually
challenged, and possessed by them will (I doubt not) be disclaimed by the very
authors, and urgers of this large exposition of the being of the power, and not
admittab^e into this Text; and if so, then they must confess mere prevalency,
or actual sway does not give being to, or hold forth that power of which the
Text speaks. The antecedent is proved by a double instance, one of Satan, the
other of the Pope.

1. Satan we find claiming to himself the possession, and disposal of the
power, and glory of all the Kingdoms of the world, [ Luke 4.6.] and for the
reality of his possession, or actual predominancy, when he made this
challenge, yea, and ever since, certainly it was, and is true, if not of all,
yet of many of this worlds Kingdoms: for which reason he is styled, the God of
this world, and principalities, powers, the rulers of the darkness of this
world, the Prince of the power of the air. Now if he, or any from him should
by virtue of this possession, and the authority of this Text so extended,
demand the civil subjection of any Kingdom, or person, what should be said to
this demand? If you say, though he have possession, yet he has no right, that
is to abandon mere possession from being that which makes or proves one to be
the power, and to yield me the question. If you say, being not a humane person,
he is not meant in this T^xt, this puts a limitation on the words beyond the
bare being of one in possession of rule; and I shall require to have proved how
a restriction in regard of person is more imposeable on the words, then a
restriction in regard of title or right.

2. The Pope of Rome, and his Doctors, (both Divines, and Canonists) in his
behalf lay claim to a temporal power, direct, or indirect, over all the
Nations, and Potentates in the world, (as some of them) over all Christian
Kings, and people, (as others say:) and as he claims, so it must not be denied
but he has generally, over Christendom, possessed and exercised this power,
and does still in many of the European Territories, and elsewhere: and one
reason alleged for this his claim is this of possession, continued possession:
He prescribes, and challenges to be the power, because he has obtained, and
held it. The Jesuit Parsons urges for the Popes temporal power against King
James (as appears in his Apology) K. James his Epistle to all Christian
Monarchs, etc. page 32.
this reason. And it is observable, that at this time, now the argument from
actual predominancy is so much in request, the Papists get hold of, and press
it against us, in this very point of the Popes Supremacy, as appears by Dr.
Hammonds reply to the Catholic Gentleman's Answer Dr. Hammond his Reply, etc.
cap. 4. page 45.
. Now if mere actual prevalidity make, or infer one to be a civil power,
authorized by this Text, my demand is, how shall we avoid the argument, and
reject this pretension of the Pope? Either we must suffer these words, the
powers that be, to be more confineable then to signify only a bare act of
rule, and sway, or else I am fully confident we shall be to seek for our
defense against this allegation.

1. If any think to escape it by saying the Pope claims a power unlawful in it
self, or for matter; or what is unlawful for any man to have. The reply will
be ready: whatever be the exorbitant ex ensions, or presumptions of his
Ecclesiastical power, that temporal power which he stands for is another
distinct thing from it (as appears by those Popish Doctors who assert the one,
and deny the other As Barclay, Widdrington, and others.
) and is not in it self unlawful, it being the same for substance which the
Roman Emperor held before him, and the German now holds within his present
precincts in reference to the free Princes and States of that Territory: in
which respect the Pope is supposed to be the second Beast, which succeeds,
reviveth, and exercises the room, and power of the first Mr. Medes Diatrib.
To. 4. page 450, 451.
, [ Revel. 13.] and if in any thing he assumeth an excessive power in
temporalls, or which is not for matter allowable, this exception would seclude
him from so much of his claim only as were in respect of humane competency
unwarrantable, and leave him the rest. For that a Paramont dominion, or an
Imperial power over a multitude of distinct Common wealths and Sovereign
Princes is lawful in it self, I take to be an uncontrollable truth.

2. If it be further said, the Pope is a person incapable of civil power; or of
being a temporal Lord, as being an Ecclesiastical person or Clergyman. To let
pass the question of an Ecclesiastical persons capacity of civil Magistracy;
and the urging that many now (and perhaps most of those that are against me in
this controversy) deny the distinction of Clergy, and Laity in that very sense
wherein this objection intends it. It will suffice to reply against this
evasion,

1. That it is not simply necessary to a persons investiture with the Popedom
that he be (as they speak) a Priest. One may be chosen and made Pope that is
not with them entered into the order of Priesthood. John the 20. (or, according
to some the 21.) was of a L^y-man chosen Pope Chamier, To. 2. l. 16. cap. 16.
Sect. 13. Platina in vit. Johan. 21. p. 165. Spondanus ad An Dom. 1024.
. Benedict the 9. is said to have been chosen Pope at ten years of age, and it
is confessed by their own Authors he was no Priest Spondanus ad An. 1033.
Onulphrius, An. 1032. Dr. Featly, Roma ruene, p. 18.
. I read also of Amadeus Duke of Savoy, that he was elected Pope by the
Council of Basil when he was but a Layman, and that after his election (some
distance of time) he received their ordination For his election Platina in vita
Eugenii 4. p. 310. Onuph. An. 1439. For his unordainednesse see Fox, Acts etc.
To. 1. page 903. Rosses Hist. l. 4. c. 4. page 350, 351.
: And though it be true that it is said before his Coronation he took the order,
yet that alters not the case as to the reply, their Doctors teaching that a
Pope is made, and has all the rites of his Popedom by his election, and
before his inauguration Tolet. de instruct. Sacerdotis, lib. 1. c. 40. Sect. 3.
p. 185.
. Those Popes therefore that were chosen Laics had for that time before their
Priesthood none of this objection, lying against their competency for a
temporal dominion.

2. But suppose he could not be Pope with them that had not their Priesthood,
yet they that held it a just exception against a persons capacity of bearing
civil Magistracy, that he is a Minister of the Gospel, upon that of our Savior
[ Luke 22 26.] will not (I suppose) acknowledge the Pope by virtue of his
Priesthood, or any other means to be a Minister of the Gospel.

3. It is commonly acknowledged by our Protestant writers (as far as I
understand) that the Pope in the proper Territories belonging to his Signiory,
as Romania, and the rest in Italy, called the land of the Church (the means of
his Instalement therein, whether the consent of the Roman people upon the decay
of the Exarchate of Ravenna, or the gifts of King Pepin, and of Charles the
great his Son, or of the Countess of Mathilda, or whatever else is alleged
Vide Ch^mier, To. 2. lib. 16. cap. 19. Sect. 7. etc.
, here is no place to search into) is to be owned, and obeyed as other lawful
Princes are in their dominions, upon the supposall that he is the lawful
Potentate thereof See Par. on Romans 13.1. page 246.
. Accordingly then they that hold, that person is to be obeyed, and owned as
the power in being, and so of God, in any Country that has possession of the
Supreme power there, they must acknowledge the Pope to be the power in being,
(in the Supreme temporal Lordship) in all the Dominions where he actually
prevails to have it.

Suppose any of us now living had been in the time when the Popes temporal
power paramon^ that of the King, was questioned, and upon questioning abolished
by an act of State, and our consent had been required to the said act, or our
oath of abrenunciation of him, what should we in conscience have done? On the
one hand the right was confessed to be in the King, on the other possession (by
a long accustomed usurpation) was in the Pope. If this were the sense of the
Text, mere actual possession makes one to be the power, to wi^, that power
that is of God, ordained of God, we should have been bound in conscience by
this Text to have opposed the King, and State in the same act, and sided with
the Pope.

To conclude this argument then, either we must refuse this position, actual
domination makes a civil power, or we must allow to the Pope his Temporal
supremacy, both unto the reproof, and condemnation of those Protestants who
have cast it off; and to the establishing of him in it wherever he yet
possesses it, by the disallowing of those that are de facto still under it to
put it off; and these are the fruits of this (truly Popish) Doctrine. Shall we
suppose him still to be the Antichrist, the man of sin, the Beast, and his City
to be the whore of Babylon; and profess so much to be for the ruin of him
under these names, and yet make him so large a Grant in the matter, and point
which is most for his promoting, and securing?

Subsection 3. CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 3.
Argument 3. From the custom of hereditary Kingdoms accounting the succeeding
to be King in the moment of the decease of his predecessor, without actual
investure.
3. I Thus argue. If a government by hereditary succession be lawful, and in it
the predecessor dying, or otherwise ceasing, the succeeding heir is
immediately the power, or the supreme Magistrate, without, or before actual
possession, acknowledgment, or investure by the Estates, or people over whom he
is the power; then it is not actual possession which puts the power in being.
But a government by hereditary succession is lawful, and in it the Predecessor
ceasing, the heir is the power in being without further act done by him, or
passed by the people, or any other. The first of these premises is evident,
and the latter will need little proof. The first part of it, that an hereditary
govergment is lawful, is attested by Scripture, by the general consent of
Nations, expressed both by laws, and practice, by the laws of this Land,
which have not only settled this government, but made it Treason to affirm the
contrary, and by the votes, and pens (as of other Authors, so) of our best
Protestant Writers, Divines, and others unanimously asserting it. And for the
later, that in hereditary government the successor is the power in being
immediately, and without more ado, upon the ceasing of his Predecessor, is a
point also generally subscribed unto. See Hooker his Ecclesiast. pol. li. 8. p.
154. Chamier To 2. li. 15. cap. 10 sect. 19. Treat. of Monarchy, part 1. cap.
3. sect. 7. Stat. of 1 Jac. 1. King James his Remonstrance against Card.
Perron, p. 154.


CHAP. VII. SECT. III. Subsect. 4.
Subsection 4. Argument 4. From the lawfulness and usefulness of fundamental
Laws, and provisions for the future continuance of Government by succession,
and against encroachers upon the same.
4. IF it be lawful, and necessary (as well as it is the universal practice of
Commonwealths) to make and ordain fundamental laws, constitutions, and
provisions about government, for the upholding and continuing of it, and for
the transmitting and transferring of it from hand to hand, whether by
succession, election, or otherways upon the death, or other change of the
present Magistrate, and for the preventing, resisting, punishing, and
suppressing of the violators thereof, then is it not the mere in being, or
actual seizing of rule, and command which makes the power. But the aforesaid
course is lawful and necessary.

This minor (I suppose) will be uncontested in all the parts of it Vide Grot.
de jure Bell. lib. 1. cap. 4, sect. 17.
. If the latter part, the lawfulness of ordaining Laws for the risistance, and
prosecution of intruders, and incroachers against fundamental constitutions, be
questioned, the generality of this Nation, even every one that has
participated actively in the late Wars, (what party soever they have led, or
followed) have manifested their consent to it. For the true state of the
difference was the intrusions upon the fundamental Laws concerning the interest
of government, which each accused other mutually of; which supposed intrusions,
and encroachments were in things lawful in themselves, as the power of imposing
taxes, disposing of the Militia, and interpreting laws, and the like; only the
interest therein which on both sides the one assumed, the other denied to
belong unto him, or them, CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 4.
was that which each of the two opposites gave out to be the cause of their
debate, and war.

For the consequence of the major that may also easily appear good. For if the
actual possessor be the power of God, then it must needs be both unlawful, and
a frivolous thing to make such constitutions, and being made to in force, or
vindica^e them, either by the civil, or martial sword from violation: and, vice
versa, if such Laws be lawful, and necessary, then mere actual possession does
not constitute any one to be the power.

It must (I say) needs be unlawful to make such lawe^ if the Word of God
determine the actual possessor to be the power; for the direct, and proper use,
and formal reason of such constitutions is to inhibite all invasion upon the
government, or entrance upon it otherwise then according to such constitution,
and to disapprove, illegitimate, and condemn it, if it be done; the use then,
and nature of such constitutions, is to cross and thwart that which the Word
of God enacteth, and therefore they are in their making unlawful, and unjust.
And it must needs be as frivolous, and vain to make them. For let us suppose
the fundamental Laws of a Commonwealth to appoint a Prince, or Senate to the
Supreme power, but for a limited term, as for a stinted number of days,
months, or years, as the Roman Consuls, the Carthaginian Kings, and the Theban
Boeotarchae were Greg. Tholos. Syntag. Iuris li. 18. cap. 1. sect. 16, 17.
: and at the end of the said term that Prince, or Senate should declare their
will, and resolution to continue still in the power, and should accordingly
hold it, notwithstanding such fundamental Law to the contrary; by this opinion
such persons being actually possessed are the power ordained of God; and to
what purpose then should such laws be made to confine, or dissolve their power
by a prefixed time; and when they are made, of what force, or authority can
they be? And if any execution be of such Laws, as if a Senate will, and do sit
beyond the time prescribed in the fundamental order, and he, or they that are
by it empowered upon the expiration of the time to dissolve the sitting, CHAP.
VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 5.
do undertake to do it, what justifiablenesse can there be in such an act,
seeing they are in possession of Rule, and therefore (according to this
opinion) the ordination of God, and therefore to be owned, let to stand, and by
no no means in or from their power resisted, deposed, or dissolved.

Subsection 5. Argument 5. From the practice of Nations owning them for their
Sovereign powers who have not actually ruled.
5. BY the common sentence, and judgment (both of States and Nations, and of
Books, and Authors of policy) authority, or supreme power is separable from
actual regency, or command. In the general account they are taken, and
acknowledged for the higher powers, who do not at all exercise any authority,
either by themselves, or others, personally, or by proxy. In the case of a
P^inces deficiency of the use of Reason, as through infancy, madness, or
dotage, and in case of his want of liberty to exercise government in his
Dominion, being dis-inabled by captivity, or expulsion; In such cases, either
the standing Laws of the Kingdom, or the act of the State pro re nata,
appoints both the Tutelage of the impotent Prince, if he be with them, and the
administration of his Kingdom, during that his deficiency, or restraint unto
some others, as Curators, Regents, or Protectors in his behalf. Hence they
d^stinguish in this case Jus ab usu juris, the right of Magistracy from the use
of it; and Actum primum ab actu secundo, the first act of power, which is the
being of the power, the esse magistratus, from the second, which is the act of
Rule. Vide Grot. de jure Bell. lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 15. and 24.
And the case is the same in a disturbed estate, whether it be by intestine
commotion of Subjects against their Sovereign, or by foreign, hostile invasion,
or by competition of diverse titulars to the Throne. In every of these cases the
power suspended from exercise, either by an inherent, or an adjacent
impediment, is yet in being; and though regnancy, or the second act of
Magistracy be interrupted, yet the first act, the relation of Sovereign, and
Subjects may ex st, and remain.

For instances of this nature, I shall refer to these few more largely to be
found in their respective histories; The people of Israel, who had risen up
with, and for Absalom against King David; at the same time when they said,
David was fled out of the land, do yet own him for their King, and consult
about his reduction from beyond Jordan into the repossession of his Kingdom,
as upon that account, or ground: and they that did thus, the Text styles them,
all the people throughout all the t^ibes of Israel: and all the men of Israel
(it again says) challenged a part, and right in him, as their King in that
condition, yea, ten parts, and more right, in d^stinction from the men of
Judah; and thereupon they contest with them of Judah that their advice was not
first had in b^inging back their King.

During the seventy years captivity of Judah under the Babylonian, we find
several persons successively named, and noted as the Princes of Judah: and,
which is remarkable, they are put in the pedigree of Christ, that is drawn down
from David: and it is further to be noted, that the line of Christ's pedigree
takes in both them and others, who are generally accounted to follow the
immediate predecessors to whom they are sub-joyned, not by natural generation,
but by way of legal succession; to show (as it is conceived) that Christ was
descended of those who were not only of David's blood, and stock, but of the
Royal dignity, though not always in respect of possession, and enjoyment of
the throne, yet in title, and right; and in the acknowledgment of the Jews, so
far they could own them: and that the prophecy of Jacob (the scepter shall not
depart, etc. Genesis 49.10.) was fulfilled: For, though they had not always
Monarchical Government actually swaying in the line of Solomon, nor in any of
David's seed, nor in any of Judah's tribe, yet they had still some kind of
polity, and royalty in being in the Jewish Nation, and kept up, or sustained
either by the Eth^^rohs of David's stock, as their chief national Magistrates
under, and after the captivity, or by some of the Jewish nation, though of
another tribe, as it was by the Maccabean race, and after them by some
Chieftains of that people, still continuing a dictinct Commonwealth, though in
subjection to Herod, or the Romans, until Christ was born, and some time after
until the gathering of the Gentiles unto Christ, as his Church, and the
desolation of the Jewish Church and State by Vesp^sian.

Accordingly we find Jehojakim in Babylon, when he had been in prison there 37
years, yet then, and in that condition styled the King of Judah, and withal,
some state and dignity of a King yielded him by the Babylonian Emperor. [2
Kings 25.27. Jer. 52.31.] of which exaltation of Jehojakim the King must (I
take it) be understood that of the Prophet [ Ezekiel. 29.21.] In that day will I
cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth. Which phrase (of the horns
budding forth) being interpreted by that of [ Psalm. 132.17.] There will I make
the borne of David to bud] must needs intend the reviving of the royal dignity
in David's family. See Divines Annotat. on Ezekiel. 29 21.


After him Salathiel still at Babylon is called the captain, or prince of the
people. Princeps populi. Junius. Dux populi. Usher. Vide Usheri Annal. part 1.
p. 138.
[2 Esdras 5.16.] and the reason is taken to be, for that he was appointed, and
declared by Jeconiah his heir, and next successor. Mr. Lightfoot his Harmony of
the O. Test. part 2. page 180. and Harmony of N. Test. page 56.
This Salathiel (or Shealtiel) is named Jeconiah's son [1 Chronicles. 3 17. Matthew.
1.13.] yet he was not his natural son, for Jeconiah was childlesse [ Jer.
22.30.] and Salath^el was the natural son of Neri, [Luke 3.27.] but he is
reckoned as his son in regard that Solomon's line ended in Jeconiah, and then
came in Nathans posterity in right of legal succession to the throne of David,
of which the next heir then was this Salathiel. See D^v. Annot. and Diodat. on
1 Chr. 3.17. Ezr. 10 8. Mat. 1.12. and Luke 3.27.


In like manner Zorobabel succeeds Salathiel, as the prince of that people,
and he was their leader out of Babylon into Judea, and the governor, CHAP. VI.
SECT. II. Subsect. 5.
and chief actor in the restoration there. He is called Shezbazzar the
Prince, (for Shezbazzar was his Chaldee name) [ Ezra 1.8.2.2.3.2.] and he is
styled the son of Salathiel, [Ezra 3.2. Matthew. 1.12. Luke 3.27.] whereas it
appears he was the son of Pedaiah, who was Shealtiels brother, [1 Chronicles. 3.17,
18, 19.] So that naturally he was Shealtiels nephew, yet he is reckoned his
son, as being his heir, and legal successor, in the head-ship of the Nation.
Thus we see these three, Jehoiakim, Salathiel, and Zorobabel, successively
sustaining the Princedome of that people during the 70 years captivity, and
until the reduction. Unto all which we may add that David (that is, the house
and successors of David) is sundry times called the King of Israel, and Judah,
even then during the captivity, and actual dispossession of the Nation, and
Princes of Judah, Jer. 30 9. Hos. 3.5. M. Lightfoot Harmony of N. Test. part 1.
p. 56.


Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon during his seven years frenzy, or
brutishness, though then dispossessed of the use, not only of his Kingdom,
but of his humanity and reason, yet he continued King still, and Historians
account those seven years as part of his 43. or 44. years reign: And they
suppose that his Wife, or his Son, or his Nobles, or whoever governed the
Kingdom during that space, were but as his Vicegerents, and the Protectors of
the Realm for him; they expecting the recovery of his reason, and his return
thereupon unto his Throne at the end of those years, upon the authority of
Daniels interpretation of his dream Vide Chronicon Catha. Edw. Simsoni. part 3.
p. 112. An. M. 3437. Sir W. Rawl. Hist. li 3. 3. cap. 1. sect. 13.
. And the Text tells us no less, then that the title to the Kingdom remained
still to him, and the use of it was to be reserved for him. His dream saying,
Yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth (to wit, of the tree
deciphering him in his Kingdom) even with a band of iron and brass. The which
Daniel interprets thus, Thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee after thou shall
have known that the heavens do rule.

Alexander the great, at his death, leaving his Queen Roxane great with child,
his Princes at their consultation about his successor determined to expect
Roxane her bringing forth her child, and presently they elect for it four
Protectors, to whom they swear obedience. Justin. Histor. lib 13. page 145.


Other examples of this kind the Reader may see in Grotius. Grot. de jure Bell.
li. 1. cap. 3. sect. 15. and 24.
I will only add these few instances coming near to us in place, and time.

In the Kingdom of France, anciently one of the three grand occasions for
which the assembly of the three Estates was wont to convene (as their Historian
tells us) was when it was necessary to provide for the governing of the Realm,
during the captivity, or minority of the Kings, or when they wanted the right
use of their senses. Historical collection, etc in the life of H. 3. page 137.


In England the sovereign power has often resided in them who could not in any
one act exercise it, by reason of their far d^stance from home, when the Crown
has descended upon them, or of their captivity, or of their childhood; which
defect has been supplied by the advice, and care of the Chieftaines of the
Realm: as it was in the case of King Richard the first, being prisoner to the
Emperor of Germany: and in the cases of King Edward the third, Henry the
six^h, Edward the fifth, and Edward the sixth, being but children at their
first coming to the Crown: and in the case of King Edward the first, being in
War against the Sarazens in Asia, at what time the Kingdom fell to him. Speeds
Histor. Book 9. cap. 7. sect. 44. cap. 9. sect. 3. cap. 10. sect. 6. cap. 16.
s^^t. 1. cap. 22. sect. 24.


Quum Roma a Gottis capta est, ^ccupatio fuit violenta, cui s^se interea
imperatores opponebant, quantum patiebatur rerum status, and pe^secerunt
denique ut ad se rediret. Itaque quemadmodum au^ olim Carolus 7. occupata ab
Anglis, aut nuper Henricus 4. ab Hispanis, Luteria, non d^sierunt esse very
Reges Francorum, nec desiit eorum juris esse Luteria, sic nec illi quidem
d^sierunt ess^ Romani imperatores. Chamier panstrat tom. 2. l. 17. c. 4. sect.
17.
Chamier observes, when Rome was taken by the Goths, there was a violent
possession, the which in the mean time the Emperors opposed as far as the
state of things would permit, and at last prevailed to a recovery of it to them
wherefore as in time past, Paris being seized by the English, or of late by the
Spaniards, Charles the seventh, and Henry the fourth* ceased not to be the true
Kings of France, neither did Paris cease to be of their Dominion; so neither
ceased those to be Emperou^s of Rome.

In the late differences betwixt the King, CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 6.
and Parliament, it was often affirmed to be Law, That the King in his civil,
or political capacity cannot be severed from his Kingdom, or Parliament, how
far soever he is distant in person, or in dispesition of mind to act with
them. See fuller answer to Dr. Fern, p. 9. Mr. H. Potts his Cordial, p. 15.


And to add no more, the late Parliament more then once found themselves
fallen under force, yet after recovering their liberty did account themselves,
and were accounted by the King, and Kingdom the Parliament still, and their
constitution and session to have continued both under, and after the said force.

Subsection 6. Argument 6. From another practice of Kingdoms, viz. their
admitting some to the place of supreme command whom they acknowledge not to be
the supreme power.
6 AS there are who are generally acknowledged to be the supreme power that
rule not at all, that do not actually possess command, or exercise any act of
civil authority; so there are that do lawfully exercise, and execute the same
authority, and yet are not acknowledged, or taken to be the sovereign power, or
Magistrate: Such are they who are placed as Protectors, or Vicegerents in the
forementioned deficiencies of the Sovereign Prince. One may be the King,
another, in regard of that Kings Nonage, absence, durance, or dotage, may be
the Regent; the latter executing the supreme authority in his behalf, or stead.
And where the case is thus; suppose the King dye in the said Condition, though
the Protector, or Regent, be found in actual use, or ex^cution of the
sovereign power, (whether there be another legal Inheritor, and Successor of
the dead King, CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 7.
or the line fail, and there be none invested with right of succession) yet is
not the said Protector the supreme power, nor is so taken, or acknowledged to
be by the Realm; the right, or title to the Crown having never been conveyed,
or made over to him: but rather, he having been but Regent in the name and
behalf of the deceased Prince; that office which he had legally cease upon
the death of him in whose name he ruled, and he is now divested of it.

Subsection 7. Argument 7. From the approved custom of determining
Controverted titles unto Sovereignty by Arbitration.
7 IT has been the custom of Princes, and other supreme States, or
Potentates, both ancient and modern, when a Controversy has been raised
betwixt two, or more of them, about the title to the Sovereignty of a Kingdom,
or Territory, and each part has been confident of his right, and bent to
vindicate his claim by the sword to the uttermost issue, and commonly one of
them has been in possession, and the other kept out by him, for the preventing
of the miseries, and uncertain events of War, and for the clearer, and safer
ending of the difference, to refer the matter to the arbitration of one, or
more, as judge, or judges betwixt them. Which way of decision is approved, and
commended as the most equal, wise, and moderate, and most becoming Christians.
For instance, Atherbal, and Jugurtha, brought their contest about the Kingdom
of Numidia unto the Roman Senate to be adjudged Salust. Bell. Iugurth. number. 69.
page 38.
. Tygranes the Father, and Son, referred their strife about the Kingdom of
Armenia unto Pompey the Great, for his decision Usser. Annal part. poster. p.
238.
. Hircanus and Aristobulus, the two Asm^nian brethren bring their difference
about the dominion of Judea before the same Pompey, as the Arbitrator betwixt
them Idem page 248, 249. Rosse Hist. Book 1. Chap. 5. page 20.
.

Archelaus, and Antipas, the two Sons of Herod the Great, after his decease,
repair to Rome, unto Augustus Caesar, to determine their several claims to
their Fathers dominions Usser. Annal part. poster. p. 537.
.

Upon the death of Alexander King of Scotland, the Crown of that Kingdom being
subject to the claims of many Nobles, the chiefest, and probablest of which
were those of John Baliol, and Robert Bruce, the determination of this
controversy was by all the parties referred to Edward the first, King of
England Speeds History. Book 9. chap. 10, Sect. 18. Rosse History, Book 5.
Chap. 3. page 244.
.

And more examples of this na-may be seeen in Bishop Usher, Usser. Annal. part
postr. p. 247.
and Hugo Grotius. Grotius de jure B. lib. 2. Cap. 23* Sect. 8. Et lib. 3. cap.
20. sect. 46.
When the case is thus, the thing referred, and adjudged is not who is in
possession, but in whom is the right: If this were a certain, and clear
principle, that he is the power that is in possession, the difference were at
an end, and would need no Arbitrator, where either of the litigants is in the
place. And when it is thus referred, it were a frivolous proceeding for the
Arbitrator to hear the arguments, and pleas of the parties, or to enquire into
the grounds of each of their claims, by law, descent, election, contract,
testament, or the like; all that he has to do, is to ask which of them is in
possession, and to judge for him, or at his own free choice to put the one of
them in possession (if neither be already) and so to end the difference. Unto
which business the parties need not travail or study to find out, and repair
to the wisest, justest, and mos^ ^^different Arbitrator: or he to call in the
ablest Civilians, or Causuists to assist him As the Historian says, the said
K. Edward did in the Scottish controve^sie last mentioned.
; The first person they may light on, CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 8.
be he the simplest man on earth, would serve to umpire the cause by that
principle.

Subsection 8. Argument 8. From the expressions of the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
owning men for Kings, in relation to the Kingdoms of which they have been
unpossessed.
8 THat persons may be out of the seat of rule both personally, and virtually,
both in regard of residence, and in regard of actual command, and yet be
higher powers, that is, Kings, and Sovereigns, may appear to be the dictate,
not only of wise Statists, and Kingdoms, but of the Holy Ghost in Scripture,
and this in that he mentions, enstyleth, or owneth persons as Kings, and as
reigning, at the time, and in the condition wherein they had no actual rule
over the places, or people, in relation to which they are said to be Kings, or
to reign. There may be found in Scripture diverse instances for this, viz many
persons mentioned as Kings in such a place, or said to reign in such a
Kingdom; at which time they were either carried away, and held captive, or
expulsed out of their Kingdoms, or shut up, and besieged in some one City of
their Dominions, and despoyled of the possession, and command of all besides by
their invaders, and besiegers, or lying secretly hid, and unknown of their
Subjects where they were, or whether they were alive, or no, or otherwise
excluded, whilst others in opposition to their title, and regency possessed
the Throne, and rule of their Dominions. I shall produce sundry examples for
this.

The sacred story relating to us David's disseisure of his Kingdom by his Son,
and Subjects, does nevertheless during that his outing mention, and own him
as King. How full, or in how great a measure that dispossession was, both in
regard of place, of power, and of the consent of the people, let the words of
the Text speak [2 Samuel 10.12, 13, 14.16. Chap. 15, 16, 17, 18. Chap. 17, 1, 2,
3* 4.16.21, 22, 24 27. Chap. 19 9, 10, 11.15.6.

By all which passages, it appears that David was wholly ejected, both out of
the hearts, and out of the territories of Israel; and that both the land, and
the wills of the people were totally given up to Absalom; and yet in this very
state of things David is King still, being so reckoned, and styled all along
the story; and that, not only in those words of the narration which are set
down as the Language of them that adhered unto him, as his friends, and
followers; not only in that acknowledgment of the other party, that rose up
against him, which they made after the battle was lost, and Absalom slain;
when they, both in their consultation among themselves, and in their address,
as Subjects to David, own him a^ their King; of which [ Chap. 19, 9, 10.41.43]
But in the proper words, and sentences of the penman of the story (and so of
the Holy Ghost) when he himself makes mention of him in his own person, and
not in another: In the perusal of the history, I have computed David is in
this manner 43 times in the narration, betwixt the time of hi^ fl^ght from
Jerusalem, and the peoples consent given for his reduction, Viz. Chap: 15.15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 25, 27. Chap. 16.2, 3, 4.5, 6.10, 14. Chap. 17.17.21.
Chap. 18.2, 4, 5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33. Chap. 19 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 11, ^4.
styled King. To this we may add the story of the other revolt by the
instigation, and under the conduct of Sheba, which followed at the heels of
that of Absalom. This was in like manner very general (as to the ten Tribes)
the Text says, So every man of Israel went up from after David, and followed
Sheba, [Chap. 20.2.] yet David, during the rejection, is reckoned as King still
by the sacred Historian, [ Verses 3, 4.]

And there is yet another instance for this in David, he is said to reign over
Israel, yea over all Israel forty years; seven of which he reigned in Hebron,
and the other 33 in Jerusalem, [2 Kings 2.11. 1 Chr. 29.26, 27.] within which
years there intervened, not only the space of time in which were the before
recounted interruptions by Absalom's, and Shebah's rebellions, but a fixed
confinement of David's actual reign to the Tribe of Judah only, for the first
seven years of the 40. in which he reigned in Hebron, for so the Text plainly
says. David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
forty years in Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years, and six months; and
in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah, [2 Samuel
4.5.] Of the means of this confinement of his actual reign for those seven
years to that one Tribe, the second and third Chapters of the second Book of
Samuel will inform us, to wit, the wars betwixt the houses of David and Saul.
The same story will tell us, that within those seven years, which were the
first part of David's 40 years reign over Israel, Ishbosheth was made King over
all Israel, and reigned two years, [see 2 Samuel 2.8, 9, 10, 11.] That Ishbosheth
might well be said to be King, and reign over all Israel de facto, though he
wanted the actual obedience of Judah, is easy to conceive, and yield; both
because he had 11 Tribes of the twelve, and for that the name of Israel is
often put to signify the ten Tribes, in distinction from Judah and Benjamin,
much more may it be put for 11 Tribes, including Benjamin, as it plainly does,
[2 Samuel 30.10. and 5.5.] but that Israel, and all Israel in the forecited
places [1 Kings 2.11. 1 Chronicles. 29.26, 27.] should be put for the Tribe of Judah
only, and divided from all the other Tribes, even then when the other 11
Tribes were in fact a dis-joyned and opposite Kingdom to it, and that under
the title of Israel, I see not how it can st^nd.

The question then is, how those Texts that reckon to David forty years reign
over Israel, can be reconci^'d to the other that allot to him seven of those 40
to reign over Judah only in Hebron, and give Ishbosheth within that time a
reign over all Israel, as a distinct Kingdom from Judah? I think it can be no
otherwise done then thus. Ishbosheth was King, and reigned de facto over, and
by actual, and predominate possession held from David the 11 Tribes, whilst
David enjoyed only the Dominion of the Tribe of Judah, but was de jure, or in
title and right King over all the rest, which Ishbosheth detained: and
therefore David at that time, not only expected, but justly waged war upon
Ishbosheth, and his partakers, for the recovery thereof, and therein
accordingly daily grew upon him, and won upon them: and upon this ground might
well be that message of Abner to David, saying, whose is the Land?
acknowledging David the Proprietor where he was not the possessor, [2 Samuel
3.12.] Here then we have two competitory Kings, mentioned as invested in the
same territory at the same time (not as joint partners, but each as claymer in
toto, and in solid^m:) with this difference, (for we must not make a
contradiction of it) the one is invested with possession, the other with the
right; the one is the occupant, the other is the proprietor.

Now if we should bring both these Kings to this Text of the Apostle, and ask
which of them during those two years of Ishbosheth might be said in reference
to the 11 Tribes to be the power in being of God, ordained of God? would not
any considerate Reader answer, not Ishbosheth, but David? not the possessor,
but the Proprietor? And whereas both are said to have reigned; not he that is
only said to reign, but he that is said to reign, and is likewise said to be
chosen by God to it, and entered possession by his special direction, as it is
said of David 2 Samuel 5.2.2.2.
.

Thus we have seen this one King, and that, he who in a style peculiar, and
above others is said to be the anointed of the God of Jacob, yields us a treble
instance of a power in being, yet out of possession.

Next to David was Solomon; yet when he, as David's immediate successor, should
be installed, being thereunto assigned both by divine appointment, and by his
Father, [1 Chronicles. 28.5. 1 Kings 1.17.] Adonijah, his elder brother, got the
start of him, in respect of possession; and the said Adonijah not only exalted
himself, saying, I will be King; but raised a very strong party, yea obtained
(it seems) a general consent of the State, and thereby got into actual seizure
of the Kingdom. There stood up for him, and gave him admission to the Kingdom
Joab the General of the Army, Abiathar the Priest, and all his brethren, the
Kings sons, and all the m^^ of Judah, the Kings servants: Whereupon Nathan the
Prophet, and Ba^hsheba tell David, Adonijah does reign: and himself said
afterward, The kingdom was mine, and all Israel set their faces on me, that I
should reign. [1 King. 1.5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 18.25.2.15.] Yet for for all this the
Kingdom in right of succession, upon the forementioned title, was Solomon's*
which Adonijah after confessed, It was thine from the Lord, [1 Kings 2.15.] and
therefore Adonijah's possession notwithstanding, Nathan the Prophet moves
Bathsheba, and they both together move David for Solomon's investure; and by his
order Zadok, Bendiah, and Nathan, with the Kings guard, proclaim, anoint, and
inaugurate him in the Throne. [1 King. 1.32, 33, 38] The which, if Adonijah had
been the power, because he was in possession, and Solomon had not been the
power, because fore-stalled, and kept from possession, they could not lawfully
have done; but both they, and Solomon, yea, and David also must have acquiesced
in the duty of subjection to Adonijah, according to the Rule of the Apostle in
this place, if to be understood as abovesaid. Let us go on to other examples.

^ Chr. 22.9.
Ahaziah King of Judah being slain by Jehu, the Text says, his house had no
power to keep still the kingdom; yet Joash, his son, and heir, being left
alive, though he were powerless (both in regard of his own childhood, and
Athaliah's strong hand of usurpation over the Kingdom, ceased not therefore to
be King. For, whilst he lay hid with his Aunt in the house of the Lord, and was
not known abroad so much as to be, being in common repute slaughtered amongst
the rest of Ahaziah's sons, and Athaliah reigned over the Land; and when
Jehoiadah the Priest, and those of the Levites, and people that were gathered
to him in the Temple, were but privately confederating, consulting, and
preparing to invest him in the possession of the Kingdom, the Penman of the
sacred Story styleth him the King. I mean, not only when the said persons had
set the Crown on his head, and observed the other Ceremonies of his
Inauguration (though all that being done, he neither by virtue thereof, nor
other ways, had the visible possession of the Kingdom, or the actual
prevalency over, and reception of the people, all the transactions hitherto
being contained within the Verge of the Temple, and published through the Land,
or City; yea, so secret as that to Athaliah her self, vigilant enough
doubtless, and who was so near to the Temple, and so much concerned to take
notice, it was utterly unespied, and unheard of until the closing Plaudite of
the people brought the confused sound of it to her ears, and so occasioned her
looking forth, and knowledge of it) but even while they were yet intending,
contriving, and ordering the way how to attempt, and execute their said
design. [See 2 Chronicles. 23.3.5 7.10.] Here then is a King in being before in
actual possession or regnancy.

The suspensions of Rehoboam, Vzziah, Hezekiah, Manass^h, Zedechiah, and
Hoshea, from the actual possession, use, and command of their respect^ve
Kingdoms, through the invasions made upon their Kingdoms by their several
enemies, or by their own incapacities and the consistence thereof with their
being Kings, and with the continuance of their Reigns still, as to right, and
title, in the computation of Scripture, we shall need to do no more but mention
cursorily, having already seen so many examples to this purpose.

In the Reign of Rehoboam, Shishak King of Egypt enters Judah with a huge
host, and overpowers it, taking the fenced Cities thereof, and so coming to
Jerusalem. Into it Rehoboam and his Princes were retreated for their defense,
and were so enclosed there by him, as that the Lord tells them by his Prophet,
for their forsaking him, he left them in the hand of Shishak. Yet in this
condition the Text still takes notice of Rehoboam as the King, and his Princes
as the Princes of Judah, [2 Chronicles. 12.6.]

Vzziah is reckoned to reign in Jerusalem 52 years; yet for some part of his
time, being smitten with a Leprosy by an immediate hand of God, he was
deprived of all exercise of regal power, and shut out even from civil
communion; and his son Jotham administreth the Realm. [2 Kings 15.2, 5. 2 Chronicles. 26 3, 21.] For how long time was this deprivation of Vzziah the
Scripture does not expressly relate; but, in regard in one place Jotham is said
to reign 16 years, and in another we read of his twentieth year, [See 2 Kings
15.13, 33.] It may be supposed that four of those twenty years, Jotham ruled in
the life time, and within those 52 years of the reign of his Father, because of
his said incapacity.

When Hezekiah was King, Senacherib King of Assyria came up against all the
fenced Cities of Judah, and took them, and sent his Commanders with a great
Army against Jerusalem (wherein was Hezekiah) to summon it; so that he was
Master of the whole Territory of Judah, Jerusalem excepted. [2 Kings 18.13.17.
Isa. 36.1.33 8, 9.] yet Hezikiah thus overpowered, and shut up is King of Judah
still. [2 King. 19 1.5. 2 Chronicles. 32.9.]

Manasseh is computed to reign 55. years, [2 King. 21.1. 2 Chronicles. 33.1.] yet,
The Lord brought upon him, and his people the Captains of the host of the King
of Assyria, who took him, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to
Babylon. [2 Chronicles. 33.11.] In what time of his reign this fell out, and for how
long this his dispossession, and captivity lasted, I find no certainty: but
from his first seizing to his recovery (considering his journey to Babylon, his
affliction there, the work it had upon him, his great humiliation before God,
and the c^nsequents of it, his prayer, and the Lord working for his release out
of the hands of the Babylonian, and his reduction from thence unto Jerusalem)
it must needs be taken to have been some considerable space of time. How much
soever it was, See Divines Annot. on 2 Kin. 21.1.
contained it was (as Expositors agree) within the current of those 55 years of
his reign.

Zedekiah is accounted to reign as King of Judah 11 years; yet for about two
years Archbishop Usher reckons it 2 years complete. Annal. part. 1. An. M.
3405.
of those 11 years he was mured up by the King of Babylons Army in Jerusalem;
and the rest of Judea was either possessed, or in like manner besieged by the
said enemy. [2 Kings 25.4, 5.34.7.]

Hoshea reigned in Samaria over Israel nine years: yet, for at least three of
those years, he was shut up, and bound in prison, and the whole Land was
overrun, and Samaria was besieged until it was taken by Shalmanezer King of
Assyria. [2 Kings 17.4, 5, 6.]

But the number of Scripture precedents already recited is sufficient for the
purpose before assigned. By all these it is (I hope) fully manifest, that a
Sovereign Prince may be shut up in some strong hold within his Kingdom, or be
carried away prisoner, or expelled out of it, or be forced to lie hid as one
out of the world, or through some incapacity be excluded from actual regency,
and yet be King still, and his reign (in the being, habit, or first act of it)
continued. And whereas, during the interruptions of the rule of the several
Princes above mentioned, there were others that, either by the will, and
consent of them, or their respective Kingdoms, or against it, bare the actual
sway, and command, unto whom the people were subject, yet it was either in
behalf of those dis-inabled Kings, where it was with consent; or by way of
compulsory, and passive subjectednesse, without any moral tie of allegiance, or
of the duty of Subjects incumbent on them in reference to such compulsatory
rulers. For, where the dis-inabled Princes power, and reign was yet in being,
there must needs be a reservation of the Rel^tive bond of Allegiance on the
peoples part to them: The tie of the Relation, and Liege right being ever
mutual, and recip^ocal, so that it remaining in the one, it must needs remain
in the other; and when ever the obstruction was removed, there being a
postliminium or reduction into act of the one, there would be the same also of
the other.

I will shut up this argument, and enumeration of Scripture-instances with that
which is found in Ezekiel. 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it
shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him. Who
is that whose right the Crown of Judah then was? It is usually applied to
Christ, and I shall not gainsay that Exposition: only I would say that, as the
branch of the Cedartree which the Lord says he will set and plant in the
mountain of the height of Israel, Chap. 17.22, 23. is interpreted first of
Zerubbabel, in whom the sovereign dignity was restored at the return from the
captivity, and then of Christ So Calvin, Diodate, and the Divines Annotat.
: So may this parallel prophecy be understood. But whether we apply it to
Zerubbabel, or to Christ, this must needs be granted, that after Zedekiah's
removal, and the Lands captivity was consummate by Nebuchadnezzar, a right
there was extant, and remaining somewhere, or in some person to the Crown, and
Kingdom of Judah, though for the present suspended from actual exercise, both
by the hand of Gods providence in the full conquest of Nebuchadnezzar, and by
his extraordinary direction, and dispensation by word of mouth, sent by his
Prophet Jeremiah, as we find, Jer. 27.12, 16.21.8, 9. and that right did not
descend upon Christ till he was born; nor then per saltum, or immediately from
Zedekiah, or Jehoiakim to him, but by the interposal of those persons in whom
the race, and line of blood, or inheritance was continued down to Christ.

Subsection 9. CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 9.
Argument 9. Taken from the nature of Magistracy.
9 REason is to be drawn from the nature of Magistracy. It cannot agree
thereunto, to say that actual possession, or rule, gives being to the power,
or is an inseparable adjunct, or convertible attribute thereof. Magistracy is a
r^lation of office. Every relation is founded upon something that is absolute.
What should be the foundation of the relat^on of Magistrate, and Subject but
the act of constitution of such a person, or persons in authority, or to be,
and stand in the office of Magistracy to such a people? from this transaction
as from its foundation results this estate, or relation: and then from this
estate or relation result the mutual duties, and acts of Magistrate, and
Subject, his actual superiority, and their subjection, his rule, and their
obedience.

Well then, actual superiority, and rule, being acts proper to, and resulting
out of Magistracy, they must needs presuppose it to be first in being, ere they
can be educed. First, (I say) not only in order of nature, but of time; for
the civil transactions whereby Magistracy is produced, and the politcall acts
which proceed from it are not immanent, or instan^aneous, (such as are those
whereby the forms of natural beings do produce their facultie^, or properties)
but transient, and succedaneous, and such as require some ^l^x^ of time to be
put forth in. It must needs be then an incongruous assertion to affi me, that
the acts which fl^w from Magistracy in tim^ d^ g^ve being to, or are
convertible adjuncts of it. A man is first a man, and then he reasons. A man is
first an Artificer, and then he works in his Art. So a man is first a power,
and then he rules; possession of the Throne, or Territory, and Regency, or
coercion of the people by the sword are after, and latter in time then the
Creation, or Investure of the power. Magistracy is the antecedent, the cause,
the principle, the first act; and actual dominion, or coercion is the
consequent, the effect, the effluxe, or the second act thereof. Men first are
Kings, and then they reign; they rule, because they are the higher powers, and
they are not the higher powers, because they rule. As, on the other hand, the
state of inferiority in a political body is the cause, and principle of the
Subjects acts of obedience.

Men are first in the relation of Subjects, and then they act, or yield
obedience. This precept of the Apostle [Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers] though delivered in ^^arms illimitedly universal, is only
intended, and given to them that are in the state of Subjects, and because they
are in that estate, therefore it takes hold on them; they that are either
supreme Magistrates, or within no Commonwealth, are not obliged by it. And as
every person is not involved, so every act of submission which may be done to
any kind of power in the civil State, is not that which is comprised in this
precept, or contained within the matter of it: It is possible a man may submit
out of a principle of humility, or policy, or be forcibly prostrated where he
owes no obedience, but it is a submission ex debito, and that stricti juris,
or proper to the conscience of him that is in the state of a Subject that is
hereby required.

Let Solomon be our instance to illustrate this. Having been before designed,
and chosen to be his Father Successor in the Kingdom of Israel, he is
thereupon first anointed, and proclaimed King by Zadok, Nathan, and Benaiah;
and then after this it is said, He sat on the throne of the King, in stead of
David his father, and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him, and all the
Princes, and the mighty men, CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 5.
and all the sons likewise of K. David submitted themselves unto lomon the
King. Here Solomon's constitution precedes his actual possession and rule, and
the Subjects submission, and obedience, both in order of nature, and of time,
as the ground and reason thereof.

And the same is exemplified in Joshua. When Moses was to dye, he spoke unto
the Lord, saying, Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man
^ver the congregation, which may go out before them, and which may lead them
out, and which may bring them in. Here, in this petition there is first desired
the setting of one over the Congregation, which is the calling and admitting of
him to the Sovereign power, and then follows his leading them out, and bringing
them in, his exercise of rule. And according to the order of this Petition, is
the method of the Lords concession, and direction upon it. The Lord in the next
words commands Moses to take Joshua, and lay his hand upon him, and set him
before Eleazar the Priest, and before all the congr^gation, and give him a
charge in their sight, and puts some of his honor upon him, and then it
follows, That all the Congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.

There may be a violent, brutish subduedness^, but there can be no rational,
moral submission, and obedience as of Liege-people to their Liege-Lord in any
other course. And as to this the case is altogether the same, and there is no
d^fference, whether the Magistrate come in by extraordinary assignation from
God, as Joshua, and Solomon did, or by the ordin^ry means.

Those commands, and rules that are given in Scripture for the doing of
public, distrib^tive j^stice, as that, Defend the poor, and fatherless: do
j^stice to the affl^cted, and needy: and deliver the poor and needy: rid them
out of the hand of the wicked, Psal^ 82.3, 4. and many others See Levit. 19.15.
Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17.16.19. 1 Samuel 23.3. 2 Chr. 19.6, etc.
. I would ask, ^o whom they are given? who do they concern? are they spoken to
all without exception, or only to them that are Magistrates, and Governors? I
suppose the latter. CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect. 9.
By them it does appear then, that the Scripture supposes men Magistrates,
before they may exercise any civil power: they must first be Governors, and
then they are called, and enabled to put forth the acts of rule.

Look upon that law given by God unto Noah, [Gen. 6.9.] Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. In those words there is both a
condemnation of bloodshedding, and a commandment for it: here is bloodshed
strictly forbidden, and capitally judged, to wit, the blood of the innocent;
and here is bloodshed commanded, to wit, the blood of the murderer. Here is a
prohibition of blood-spilling to some, and a commission for it to others. The
power of the Sword, or of capital punishment is neither forbidden to all, nor
prostitute to all; but commanded to some, and reserved from some.

The question then is, who are forbidden to shed blood, and who are authorized
to shed that blood that may, and must be spilt? The Law, though it run in
terms indefinite, yet must needs be limited; and as in the former words, whosoever
sheddeth, we must take in this restriction, whosoever murderously sheddeth, so in
the latter, by man shall his blood be sh^d, we must admit this limitation, not
by every man that will, and can; not by any private person, but by the
Magistrate. They that are not in his office may only prosecute by complaint,
and testimony, but must let judgment giving alone So Willet, and Pareus in Romans
13. P. Martyr loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 13 page 898 Syropsis pu: Theol. Disp. 50.
Sect. 38.
. Should we say they that get the sword, can arm themselves with it, may use
it, and are the authorized here, this were to set the stronger over the weaker,
and to occasion (especially where there were any neernesse to an equality, or
question which part were the st^onger) all combustion, and confusion among men,
to determine where that authority shall be; and in stead of preventing, or
punishing bloodshed, it were to open a gap to an universal, and endless
ove^flow of it, and to make this Law an act of indemnity, and impunity for
murder. We must therefore necessarily distinguish betwixt them that can, and
them that may, and ought to shed the offenders blood: CHAP. VII. SECT. II.
Subject. 10.
and say, this warrant of the sword, or putting to death (the first we find
given) is only made to him that then was, and from thence-forward to him that
is the Magistrate. A man then must first be a civil power before he can come
by this Scripture-way to the sword; he cannot by the sword come to be the
civil Power.

Subsection 0. Argument 10. From Gods express disallowance of some in actual
command.
10 THis shall be my last Argument. If some are, or may be in place of actual
command, and exercise of rule who are not (in the sense of our Text) of God,
ordained of God, therein then it is not that, to wit, actual rule which makes,
or proves one to be the power that the Text says is of God, ordained of God.
But this may be, viz. some may be in actual command, and exercise of rule, who
are not in the sense of the Text of God ordained of God. This is thus proved.

It is before made evident, and therefore must be here taken for granted, that,
of God, ordained of God, signifies appointed, approved, authorized, allowed, or
warranted of God. But there may be some in actual rule and command, who are
not thereto appointed, approved, etc. of God. This is very manifest by sundry
Scriptures, wherein G d does expp^sly disallow, condemn, and threaten with
punishment persons that are in actual rule, and command for their so doing, or
being. [See Amos 6 13.] Ye which say, have we not taken to us horns by our
own strength? [Ezek. 33.26.] Ye^ stand upon your sword -- and shall ye
possess the land? CHAP. VII. SECT. II. Subsect 9.
Hab. 2.5, 6. He is a proud man, neither keeps at home; who enlarges his
desire as Hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied; but gathers to him
all nations, and heapeth unto him all people. Shall not all these take up a
parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him
that increases that which is not his? etc. Nahum 2.4. Because of the multitude
of the whoredoms of the wet-favoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that
sells nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.

By those whoredoms, and witchcrafts of Nineveh, Expositors understand the
arts, and policies, by which she subjected the Nations of the earth. But
especially would I have observed that of our Savior unto Peter, [Mat. 26.52.]
For all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.

It is not questionless his drift by these words simply to disallow all use of
the sword; but the qualification, or restriction of the words lies in that
word, Take (as Augustine, Cajetan, and Luther (the last of whom applies this
Text against the Boo^s of Swevia then in arms against their Magistrates, in his
answer to their Articles) do observe Augustinus Tom. 6. contra Manichaeum. li.
22. cap. 70. Cajetani Jentac. 6. qu. 3. Lutherus apud Jo: Sleid. Com. lib. 5.
page 120. 122.
) by that term the Usurper of the Sword is differenced from the true ownes.
The one takes the Sword, the other has it committed to him.

The one snatcheth it to himself, the other has it coming orderly into his
hand. The former it is, and him only whom our Savior here condemns, and
declares the destructive judgment of God against. Whence it must needs be
confessed that one may have the sword in his hand, and be for it disallowed,
and threatened of God, and consequently cannot possess it, as thereunto
ordained, appointed, authoriz^d by him.

I will conclude this dispute, and section with that of Saint Augustine,
wherein he determines this question to the sense which I have here argued for.

When the Roman Empire under the Emperors Arcadius, and Honorius, was so
harassed by the Goths under the conduct of Alaricus, and Radagasus, and
specially the Western part by Alaricus, and the City of Rome was taken by him,
St. Augustine says of it in that condition,

Quanquam Romanum imperium afflictum est potius quam mutatum, quod et aliis
ante Christi nomen temporibus ei con tgit; and ab illa afflictione recreatum;
quod nec istis temporibus desperandum est: Quis enim de hac re novit voluntatem
Dei? Augustine de Civ. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 7. Although indeed the Roman Empire be
rather afflicted, then changed: the which also befell it at other times before
Christ, and it was again recovered from that affliction; which neither is in
these times to be despaired of; For who knows the purpose of God in this
matter? CHAP. VIII. SECT. II.
CHAP. VIII. Some Arguments to prove [that by the power in the Text is to be
understood a power lawful as to Title, and not a mere possessory power] taken
from the context.
HAving now gone over all the Terms of the Text, and of the description
therein of the original of the civil Magistrate, for the finding out of the
true sense, and just extent thereof: and by the discussion of them, having come
to this resolu^ion, That by the power is meant a power lawful, j^st, or
warrantable, in respect of Title; and that by the ordination of God is to be
understood a legislative, or preceptive ordination; and that the other words,
and clauses in the Text do very well comport, and accord with the said sense of
these: It now remains that, according to the method first proposed, I add
hereunto what considerations I have further conceived for the further clearing,
and confirmation of the same. The which I shall place under two heads.

1. Observations from the other parts of this Tex^, concerning the civil
Magistrate, contained within the seven leading verses of this Chapter.

2. The grounds or principles from other-where colligible, tending to conclude
the p^esent resolution.

The observations from the Context giving light and strength to our conclusion
are these. CHAP. VIII.


SECT. I. A consideration of the duty to be yielded to the power in those
words, verse. 1. Be subject.
1. THe first may be from the duty to be yielded to the power, the pressing
whereof upon Christians is the plain drift of the Apostle in this discourse.
And upon this my observation shall be twofold.

1. Of the original term in which the duty is laid down. 2. Of the thing it
self thereby evidently intended.
1. The term is Verse. 1. (...), Be subject. Used again, verse. 5. as the powers
are (...), ordained of God, and the power is (...), the ordinance of God, and
he that resists the power is (...), so he that is here instructed in his duty
to the power must (...), be subject. They are all words coming from one root.
The word (...) signifies to be placed in order under another, to be subject
according to order, to be under another orderly. Now an orderly subjection
relates to an orderly superiority, and looks at them that are above, or over
according to order.

But, what is order? The definition of it common in the Schools, and received
from Saint Augustine is, Ordo est parium, dispariumque rerum sua cuique loca
tribuens dispositio, it is the disposal of things, whether collateral, or
subordinate, whether of equal, and even, or of unequal and different rank,
and quality, each to his due, CHAP. VIII. SECT. I.
and proper place. To be subject then orderly or according to order, is to
submit to him, who is orderly placed over us; or, to be regularly under him
that is regularly above; or, to yield just, and lawful precedence, or command
unto him, or them that are of right our superiors. The direct opposite to
order among men is Atopy, desulto inesse, insolency, or undue elation. And, in
the civil State, disorder is when men run into tumult, rise up in sedition, or
aspire above their place by usurpation. To occupy the sea^e of Dignity
uncalled, unauthorized, is an ataxie, a breaking, and violating of order, a
bringing of the Commonwealth qui^e out of order, a casting down them whom
order sets up, and a lifting up them, whom order places beneath. Whereby it
may appear, that in relation to an arbitrary Government, there is properly no
(...), no orderly subjection. There may be for public order sake, or in
relation to the other parts, and proportionate positions in the Commonwealth, a
submission and obedience performed to an unjustly possessing power, and this
may be a duty, but this is not in behalf of, or with an eye, and respect to
such a power, who being up against, and out of order cannot be the mark, or
object of an orderly subjection.

2. The thing it self which is required in those words, Let every soul be
subject unto the higher powers, Divines have observed, that under this term
here, Be subject, there is much enjoined, a multitude of duties are contained,
and commanded to be performed toward the Magistrate, to wit, not only a
passive stooping endurance, or irresistance under his imposals, but an active
inserviency, execution, and observation of his lawful commands: and further,
to contribute our abilities to his support, and maintenance; and that both to
the acts of his rule, officiating, and administration, and to his standing,
continuance, and keeping of his seat, and station: and unto these assistances
of him are required all our abilities both humane and christian; as those of
pu^se, counsel, arms, and prayers: Moreover, CHAP. VIII. SECT. II.
not only the external act of all these are to be yielded him; but the
elicite, and inward motions of the heart, to wit, consent, love, reverence, and
honor: and unto all these is to be added a special kind of fidelity or
allegiance both in continuance under his jurisdiction, in concealing his
secrets, and his disadvantages wherd the opening of them may be to his
prejudice, and in discovering to him our knowledge of what may import his
danger, or securement.

Add hereunto the strict manner in which this precept of subjection is urged,
verse. 2. to wit, under pain of damnation, and the ground, or consideration on
which it is to be yielded unto the power, verse. 5, 6, 7. to wit, of necessity,
not only for wrath, or terror, that is so ^ar, and so long as one is
constrained by fear, and to avoid a greater evil, or damage, then is the
rendering of what is required by him; but for conscience sake, that is out of
conscience of duty, to wit, both that of piety to God, the ordainer of him to
that special Ministry, and Vicegerency under him, and that of equity, and
justice to him, whose due, and right in consideration of his office and work it
may be.

But now, can it be imagined that the Text does in this form, and manner set
up any violent, or predatory power, any Robber, or Pyrate, any Tory, or
Moss-trooper, Turk, or Tartar, Mamaluke, or Cyclops, that can raise, or steal
himself into the Mastery over a people? and that it ordains every country,
city, or person to yield, and pay a subjection of this extent to every such one
that shall seize, and captivate them?

The Roman Histories relate unto us diverse stories of mighty, and strange
successes, power, and command, which men of the vilest quality, and basest rank
have suddenly attained, and for a time held within the body, and in defiance of
the authority of that great Empire. The several stories of the high feats, and
achievements of the Roman slaves under those three Ringleaders, Herdonius,
Eunus, and Athenio are briefly remembered by Florus: CHAP. VIII. SECT. I.
as is also that of the sword-players Quis aequo animo ferat in principe
gentium populo bella servorum? quis crederet Siciliam multo cruentius servili
quam Punito bello esse vastatam? Quum servi militaverint, Oladiatores
imperaverint: illi i^fimae sortis homines: hi pessimam auxere ludib^io
calamitatem. Florus lib 3. cap. 19 and 20. Vide Stadium in loca ista Flori.
August deciv. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 5.
; this last is also mentioned by St. Augustine, and it was thus: A few slaves,
employed in sword-playing, persuaded by one Spartacus a Thracian, rather to
fight for their own liberty then the spectators pleasure, and their own
mutual destruction, break out from that bloody sport, raise great Forces, and
not only free themselves from their sl^very, but under three Captains (
Spartacus, Chrysus, and Oenomaus) overrun all Italy, acquire great victories,
and rule all at their pleasure, as Kings, and could not be overcome by some
Roman Generals; these mock-kings did for a time absolutely command a great
part, and much afflicted, and endangered the whole Roman Empire, when it was
grown to its greatness, and had subdued many Natitions to it self. But could
these succesful irruptions of those gladiatory slaves entitle them to the
style; and dignity of powers ordained of God in the Countries which they had
got the mastery of? And will any man say, that the Roman people within those
bounds were obliged to subject to them with a subjection of that siz^, and
qualification, namely, that they were in their hearts to consent to, to love,
and honor them as their civil Lords; that they were not only to acquiesce,
and stoop quietly under their prevalency, but be at their beck to fulfill their
commands (not in their own nature vicious) that they were to continue under, to
assist, uphold, and maintain them in that seat of rule with all their
abilities; and that they were to give over, and refrain all correspondency, and
intell gence with the Roman State, and disclose to those their new, and strange
Conquerours, whatsoever might preserve them from, and impeach the designs of
the Roman Consul, Senate, and Armies against them; and all this, not only for
the terror of their potency; and cruel violence, but out of conscience of
their duty to God, and them as placed by heaven in the obliging office of
Magistratical administration over them?

That the subjection of every soul to the higher powers comprehends as much
as is abovesaid, I need not make labor to prove in this p^ace, the terms of
expressing it used by the Apostle in the subsequent verse, and the explication
which not only Commentators, and other Divines, but other Scriptures give of
this duty, deliver us all those particulars as parcels of the nature of it. And
if any man doubt whether all those may not be due to a Spartacus, (or, to an
Hordonius, Eunus, or Athenio) that is to an upstart slave by a tumult gotten to
overtop a Nation; Let him consider, that, if such an ones tenure of head-ship
be injurious, to assist him therein cannot but be so also; and that not only
Absalom is by Scripture manifestly disapproved in his rising up against King
David, but also those Israelites that joined to maintain him. [ Psalm. 3.1, 7.]
Mr. Burroughes (in his fourth Lecture on Hosea, Chap. 1. ver. 10. page 111.)
teaches us in reference to the diversity of powers that may be, to distinguish
betwixt obedience out of conscience, and obedience out of prudence. Take his
own words that are very plain to the present purpose.

Not to the commands, and mere wills of men till it be brought to a law are we
bound in conscience to submit, no way, neither actively, nor passively: though
it be a good thing that is commanded, conscience does not bind to it, ea
ratione to yield to it because it is commanded, till it be brought to a law:
Now when things are brought into a law, and be according to the agreements and
covenants of the place and country wherein we live: and then suppose this
authority be abused, and there be an ill law made, then (I confess) if the Law
be of force, we must either quit our selves of the Country, or else submit or
suffer. When then it comes to be a power, to be a law, it is authority though
abused, and we must yield obedience to it either actively, or passively. But we
must enquire whether it be a power, etc. otherwise we are not bound in
conscience; bound we may be in regard of prudence, and in regard of preventing
other distuabrnces, but conscience does not bind us to wills of men, but binds
to laws.

Melancthon Melancthon in loc.
upon this Text distinguishes also betwixt the extent of subjection to a
predatory power, and that which is to a Magistrate. If thou can escape from
the hands of a robber, thou offendest not; but and if thou can escape the
punishment of the Magistrate, yet thou ought not withdraw from his Government,
that is that which he says, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

He that is a Magistrate indeed, and in authority, the Subjects are to pray,
and to give thanks for him, not as a man merely, but as a Magistrate, that is,
for his preservation, and prospering in his Government: accordingly Tertull. in
his Apologeticks gives account of the constant, public practice of
Christians. We constantly pray for all the Emperors, that they may have a long
life, Precantes sumus semper pro omnibus imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam,
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum
probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis, and Caesaris vota sunt. Tertul.
Apologet.
a secure dominion, a safe family, valiant armies, a faithful Senate, a good
people, a quiet world about them, and whatsoever may be desired by (or for)
them, either as men, or as Caesar's. But a possessor of power by mere force,
the people of God may complain, and cry out of in prayer, not for his
misgovernment only, but for that he governs, and may pray to be delivered from
him. This (if it be doubted of) may be evident by many Scripture examples of
the practice thereof, being of undoubted warranty for imitation; For instance
let these be taken [2 Chronicles. 6.38, 39. Psalm. 79.1.89.42, 44.106.47.126.3. Lam.
5.2, 8.] unto which I shall add that passage of the Prophet Habakkuk, cap. 2.
verse. 6. He is a proud man, neither keeps at home, etc. Woe to him that
increases that which is not his. How long, etc. together with Mr. Calvin's
words upon them. Quousque, quousque? omnes clamant quousque? and clamor iste,
quia nascitur ex naturae sensu, and regula aquitatu, ideo exauditur tandem a
deo. Vnde fit ut taedio affecti omnes, clamant, quousque? CHAP. VIII. SECT. II.
nisi quia agnoscunt non esse tolerabilem hanc perturbationem ordinis and
justitiae? sensus autem ille, nonne inditus est nobis a deo? perinde est igitur
ac si Deus seipsum audiret, cum ita exaudit clamores, and gemitus eorum qui
far nequeunt in justitiam.

SECT. II. Of the term higher annexed to the powers, verse. 1.
2 THe second observation shall be upon the Epithet higher, given to the
powers, (...), Beza renders super-eminent; the vulgar, more sublime. Expositors
generally note that this word here signifies a superiority of calling, office,
or function. One may be said to be higher over, or above another two ways.

1. He is higher, or above that has the upper hand, or prevails, and is in
strength above another.

2. He is higher that is superior to another in regard of place, calling, or
office. There is a superiori^y or celsitude in respect of mere sight, and
might; and a superiority in regard of dignity and authority; the former any one
may get over a person, or people: the latter is proper to the Magistrate. This
word (...) here used occurreth also 1 Pet. 2.13. Phil. 2.3.4.7. And from it
come the substantives (...). Phil. 3.8. and (...), 1 Cor. 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.2. And
the use of the words in every of those places is to signify, not an
over-powering act, of posture, but a moral excellency of one person, or thing
above another, or such a precellency as draws toward it a Recognition of
honor, or an h^gh repute, veneration, or valuation of the mind. And this
precellency is,

1. Either that of virtue, or absolute worth. As where Christians are required
in lowliness of mind to esteem each others (...) better then themselves,
Phil. 2.3. And where the peace of God is called (...) passing all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. So also the Ap^stle when he came to the Corinthians,
came (...), not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.1. And he
counted all things but loss (...) for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, Phil. 3.8.

2. Or that of office, or relative State, as when Christians are willed to
submit themselves to the King (...) supreme, or superior in reference to the
Governors, Presidents, or subordinate Rulers that are commissioned from, or
placed under him.

Though they be more, and stronger in natural force then he, yet he is (...)
superior to them in regard of order, authority, rank, and dignity, 1 Pet.
2.13. And Magistrates are said to be (...) in authority, 1 Timothy 2.2.

By comparing of those other places with this as to the use of this word it may
appear, that (...) is added to (...), for description, and discrimination sake,
and to add some weight to the exhortation, (...) signifying the Magistrate,
and (...) signifying the honor, and eminent dignity which is annexed to him,
and which is a proper and inseparable adjunct to the true magistracy, by which
it is distinguished from mere prepotency, or a predatory power. And in this I
have the observation of Expositors going before me.

Aretius upon the place says (...), is to excel in dignity, and right Dr.
Willet cites it as Cajetans observation, That this word is added to exclude
tyrants who are not excelling Lords, taking the Apostle to speak de legitimis
potestatibus. Mr. Prin, in his third part of the power of Parliaments, page
114. tells us, Dominicus Soto, Cajetan, Pererius, and other Popish Commentators
of this place observe that Paul adds this Epithet of higher, or excelling
powers of purpose to exclude Tyrants, CHAP. VIII. SECT. IV.
who are not excelling Lords, nor lawful powers.

Dr. Whitaker (Controver. de Romans Pontif. Quaest. 4. and 7. page 648. a. and
720. b.) insisteth on this term to prove against Bellarmine (who would find a
ground in this Text for the exorbitant power which the Pope pretends to, and
usurpeth) that the words of the Apostle can only be understood of a political,
or civil power, and not simply of any power whatsoever, which he could have no
advantage for from this word if it did leave the term power to signify
superiority at large, so as to take in any predominancy, and did not contain
its importance within the bounds of such a superiority as really deserves to be
adorned with, and has of due, and right belonging to it civil honor, and
veneration; unto which sense agrees St. Austins explanatory paraphrase upon
this term sublimioribus potestatibus in this place. viz. hominibus res humanas
cum aliquo honor administrantibus August. Tom. 4. part 2. p. 727.
. Higher powers, that is, men that administer humane affairs with some degrees
of honor. The actual administration of humane affairs, and the degree of
honor are two distinct things: the former may b^ without the latter, but both
put together make, and define a higher power. Honor is the attendant, or
shadow of real virtue, and of relative authority, but not of mere predominant
force.

Unto this Epithet of super-eminent, or more sublime, seems to be answerable
that phrase of Solomon styling the seat of Magistracy, the place of the Holy
[Eccles. 8.10.] the throne of Majesty is sacred, in that it is peculiar to the
Magistrate, and sacred in that it is authorized by God; agreeable whereunto the
seat of the lawful Magistrate is called, The Throne of God. [1 Chronicles. 29.23. 2 Chronicles. 9.8.] And, his kingdom the kingdom of the Lord [2 Chronicles. 13.^. 1 Chr.
28.5.17.14.] and the Magistrate is said to be King, for the Lord his God, and
to b^ anointed unto the Lord [2 Chr. 9.8. 1 Chr. 29.22.] And this judgment is
said to be, the judgment of God, and he judges not for man, but for the Lord.
[Deut. 1.17. 2 Chronicles. 19.6.] And God is said to be with them in the judgment,
and to stand in their congregation, CHAP. VIII. SECT. III.
and to judge among them. [2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm. 82.1.]

All these are the high, and holy, and distinguishing prerogatives of the
Magistrates state. Whereas there is a throne of iniquity (contradistinct to
this place of the holy, this throne of God) which has no fellowship with God.
[ Psalm. 94.20.]

SECT. III. Of the whole style Higher Powers, Verse. 1.
3 FRom the Epithet, higher, I will pass to a consideration of the whole
title, higher powers. By higher powers Expositors understand Magistrates of
every degree, or rank, and not only the supreme. So that they understand
higher, not to refer by way of contra-distinction to lower powers, but to the
people, to them that are to be subject to them. So Calvin, Beza, Marlorat,
Pareus, P. Martyr, Methusius, Dr. Mayer, and Par upon the place. And Chamier
(Panstrat. Tom. 3. li. 15. cap. 11. sect. 8.) And indeed the description of the
Magistrate with all the Reasons given in the following words (unto verse. 8.)
for subjection to him do as truly, and necessarily appertain to the inferior
and subordinate Magistrate, as to the highest. And the parallel precepts of
duty to the power: in other like Scriptures do involve all Magistrates, and
some of them nominate the subordinate, [as 1 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13,
14.] Now in the subordinate Magistrate we require a commission as a
qualification to our receiving, owning, yielding him any duty of subjection.
Otherwise we reject him, CHAP. VIII. SECT. IV.
if we understand he has no authority from a superior power. If one come to us
of his own accord merely, and do but take upon him the style, place, and
office of a Constable, Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Judge, and command our
persons, demand our purses, or exact our oaths, we think (and that rightly) we
may deny him. And if he have strength to extort his demands, yet either we obey
him not, or we comply only out of fear, and prudential self-consultation, not
taking our selves to owe him any subjection, not owning any bond of conscience
to him, as to a higher power ordained of God. And why is this? by reason he
has no lawful calling, warrant, or commission. Now if we require this
qualification in the subordinate, why not in the Supreme Magist a^e also? If
the Text admit of this caution, and restriction in reference to one sort of
higher powers, will it not also admit it in relation to every one?

SECT. IV. Of the Resistance of the power concluded under the penalty of
Damnation, verse. 2.
4 THe fourth thing in the Context, offering it self to consideration is in
Verse. 2. to wit, the unlawfulness of resisting that power, which our Text
holds forth. This unlawfulness is asserted in as much as the resister of that
power is charged with the sin of resisting the ordinance of God, and concluded
under the penalty of Damnation. Mine observation upon it shall be this.

That resistance which undoubtedly is by this place intended, to be disallowed
toward the power spoken of in our Text, is generally acknowledged to be
warrantable, and lawful to be used toward an invasive, or mere possessory
power, and consequently it must be as generally acknowledged that a mere
possessory power cannot be intended in the text. A resistance unto, or for the
deposition, repulsing, or removal out of place and rule, and a rescue of
persons, and places out of the possession and command of him that occupies
them, will (I doubt not) be concluded to be here forbidden toward, or in
relation to that power which the text means. But such resistance is generally
admitted to be just and lawful toward an invesor, or a forcible occupant of
command and rule. This may be made evident

1. By sufficient testimony, which I shall produce.

I will begin with King James, K. James his Remonst. p. 216.
his words in his Remonstrance for the Right of Kings against the Oration of
Cardinal Perron. The public Laws make it lawful, and free for any private
person to enterprise against an usurper of the Kingdom. Every man, says
Tertullian, is a Soldier enrolled to bear Arms against all Traitors, and
public enemies. St. Augustine Aug. de Civ. Dei. li. 5. cap. 26.
highly commends the piety, and fidelity of Theodosius, in that he took into
his protection young Valentinian, the brother, Sozomen. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 14.
and 24.
heir, and successor of Gratian, slain by Maximus the usurper (the Governor
of Britain.) against whom Theodosius, though the said usurper was grown
terrible by success, yet, he undertook the cause of Valentinian, Socrates
Hist. li 5. cap. 11, 12.24.
and destroying Maximus, restored Valentinian to his Empire (in the West:) and
in his enterprise he had encouragement, and certain promise of victory from one
John an Anachoret endued with a prophetic spirit in Egypt. And that
Valentinian being shortly after, either by treachery, or some other accident
taken away, another usurper Eugenius, starting up in his place, Theodosius
Ruffin. Hist. li. 2. cap. 17. and 31. Theod. Hist. li. 5. cap. 14 and 24.
(with the encouragement of the said Prophet) surprised him, against whose
^xceeding strong Army he fou^ht rather by prayers, then strokes. A mighty wind
snatching the weapons of his enemies out of their hands, and driving their own
darts together with the darts of their Assailants upon them: on which occasion
was that written by the Poet Claudian. O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat
ether, Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.

Chamier At Cives omnes jus habent insurgendi contra Tyrannos qui vi aperta
regna occupant. Chamier Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 12. sect. 19.
says, All Citizens, or free Subjects have a right, or warrant to rise up
against Tyrants, who by open force possess the Kingdom.

Dr. Willet Dr. Willet his Hexap. on Romans page 592.
upon the place, in answer to this question, How far the Civil State may
p^oceed in resisting a Tyrant? affirms, that where the Kingdom is usurped
without any right, as by Athaliah; or where the land is oppressed by foreign
invaders, as in the time of the Maccabees, in these cases there is less
question to be made of resistance by the general consent of the States.

Mr. Richard Hooker. Hooker Eccles. polit. Book. 8. page 155.
In kingdoms hereditary birth gives right unto Sovereign Dominion, etc.
therefore in case it does happen that without right of blood a man in such wise
be possessed, all these new elections, and investings are utterly void: they
make him no indefeasible estate: the Inheritor by blood may dispossess him as
an usurper.

Alstedius. Alsted. Caf. Consc. cap. 16. Reg 8. page 341.
A Tyrant without title, who is an invader, every private person may, and ought
to remove; for he is not a King, but a private man, who does invade the
country as an Enemy.

Gro^ius. Grot. de jure Bell. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 16.18.
Si bello injusto, and cui juris gentium requisita non adsint, imperium
artipuerit (sc. Raptor imperit) neque pactio ulla sequuta sit, aut fides illi
data, sed sola vi retineatur possessio, vide^ur manner belli jus, ac proinde in
eum licere quod in hostem licet, qui a qualibet etiam privato jure potest
interfici, etc. Nec minus licebit invaso em imperii interficere si deserta
authoritas accedat ejus qui jus verum imperandi habet.

Arnisaeus. Arnisaeus de authorit principis. cap. 4. sect. 12,
Of the former (to wit, he who is called a Tyrant in title) the matter is
plain, and determined by all without any difficulty, that he may be lawfully
repulsed, or if by force he be gotten into the throne, he may be wa^rantably
thence removed, because he has not any ^o^ of power which is legitimate, and
unto which resistance is forbidden, for the fear of God, and for conscience
sake: and therefore he is no further to be looked at then as an enemy.

The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy. Treatis of Mon. part 1. cap. 3. sect.
5.
Be they (to wit, a conquered people) captived, or possessed at pleasure, they
owe no duty, neither do they sin in not obeying, nor do they resist Gods
Ordinance, if at any time of advantage they use force to free themselves from
such a violent possession.

Mr. Bridge Mr. Bridge against Dr. Fern sect. 4. page 42.
his Answer to Doctor Fern. Which opinion of the Doctors (of the right of
conquest) for my own part I must abhor from; what danger will it not expose
our Dread Sovereign unto? Did not Athaliah remain as a Conqueresse six years?
and who knows not that she was lawfully thrust from the Throne again by a
stronger hand then her own? mere conquest being nothing else but an unjust
usurpation; and if the Conqueror rule the whole Kingdom, and keep them under
by conquest only, why may not the Subject rise, and take up arms to deliver
themselves from that slavery? Thus does the Doctor open the door to greater
resistance then those that he disputes against.

Roger Widdrington, Widdrington Theol. Disput. in Admon. to his Reader, sect. 6.
in his defense of the supremacy of Princes against the Popes claim of a
superiority in temporalls over them, thus argues (against Schulkenius, who
will needs maintain Athaliah to have been a lawful Queen, notwithstanding Joas
his survivall, and claim to the Crown) Tell me O Schulkenius, may not every
faithful Subject lawfully, and ought he not in the like case, that is, not by
his own private authority, but by the public authority of the true King, and
who is certainly known to be true King, the Commonwealth also consenting
thereunto, kill an Usurper, who is not only reputed, but also certainly known
to be such a one, and who plotteth Treason against the true King?

Lastly, I observe to this purpose, that the Author, or Authors of Ladensium
(...), in the Catalogue of Canterburian maxims of tyranny, do charge this
position unto that Party as one tyrannical maxim. That all this, (to wit,
absolute) subjection must be used not only to our Native King, but to any
foreign usurper who can get footing among us, and it were the Kings of Spain. As
also, that the title unto this Kingdom by conquest, attributed by Doctor Fern
unto our late Kings, See vindic. of a Treat. of Mon. chap. 3. sect. 6.
is disavowed by the Authors defending the Parliaments cause against him, as
unreasonable, and null, and that which exposes Princes to the offensive Arms
of the Subject.

2 They that state, and determine the question, what is a just ground, or cause
of War, lay down the quarrel, de rebus repetendis, or for the recovery of
what is injuriously invaded, or occupied, as one good, justifiable, and
necessary occasion of the taking up of arms by a Prince, or people [for this
see Augustine Quaest. super Josue lib. 6. cap. 10. in Tom. 4. part. 2. operum.
P. Martyr. loc. com. clas. 4. cap. 16. sect. 2. page 935. Bucani Theolog. loc.
49. quaest. 46. page 873. Grotium de jure Bell. lib. 2. cap. 1. sect. 2] But if
title followed possession, and all they were the true Proprietors, or Lords, or
the powers ordained of God that have the occupation, or actual command of
persons, and places, it could not be so: there could be no war just for
recovery: to dispossess men of what they hold, or to out them of what they are
(without present, or actual superiority of any over them in it) seized on,
could be no lawful enterprise, or warrantable cause of War.

3 Neither is it only the common Tenent of sound, and learned Writers that the
injurious invader and possessor may be resisted unto deposition, and that
recuperative arms are just, and lawful, but we have many instances of the
practice hereof in Scripture, not only of undoubted warrantablenesse to the
persons so acting in the story; but of a clear exemplarinesse, and
imitablenesse to others; as having no other ground, or rise laid for them in
the Text, but that which is of a common moral extention. The mention of these
may serve.

Upon the warlike conquest, captivity, and spoil of Sodom, Geneses 14.
and Gomorrah, by the King of Elam, and his partakers, and their departure, and
carrying away of what they had there gotten, Abraham together with his
confederates, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre make out with their Forces in pursuit of
their Conquerors, and coming upon, they smite, and chase them, and rescue the
people, and goods of Sodom, and Gomorrah, which they had so taken, conveyed
away, and held in custody.

The people of Israel during the government of the Judges, did many times under
their conduct rise up in arms to cast off, and deliver themselves, and their
Country from the power of several neighboring Princes, and Nations, who had
one after another invaded, and for some time held them under their Dominion Of
whom in general see Jud. 2.16, 17. and in particular through the rest of that
book.
. Neither (as far as my observation goes) can any immediate, or extraordinary
command or word for what they so did be pretended to, or pleaded from the Text
for many of them, or for any, save Barak, and Gideon. The same did they in the
times, and under the commands of Eli, Samuel, Saul, David, and many of their
following Kings, from to time until the Babylonish captivity. And in
particular did Hezekiah against the King of Assyria. The Text says, he
rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not See 2 Kings 18.7.
. As also did some of the Kings of Judah in resistance of the Kings of Israel,
as Abijah and Asa 2 Kings chapter 11.2 Chr. chapter 23
: the latter of which was reproved by God for the means he used (the Syrian
Auxiliaries) but not for his standing up against Baasha. Yea, the same did
David and Jehoiadah the Priest, with some of Judah combining with them, the one
against Absalom, the other against Athaliah, the wrongful possessors of the
Crown, and Kingdom of Israel, CHAP. VIII. SECT. V.
and of Judah. And thus also did the Jews under the Asm^nean government,
against many of the Seleucian Kings See the Books of the Maccabees.
.

SECT. V. The opposition, and distance which the Text puts betwixt him that is
the power, and him that is the resister of the power.
5 ANother thing to be observed in the words neighboring, and coherent to the
Text, is the difference, and contra-distinction which this Scripture makes
betwixt him that is the power that is, (...), ordained of God, and the (...),
the resister of the power, which is such as he that is the one cannot, at the
same time, and in respect of the same place be the other. The Apostle puts them
at so wide a distance, and direct opposition one to another, that it is not
possible that they should meet in one person. In relation to one and the same
seat, or station of Magistracy, he that is the power ordained of God, cannot
be he that resists the power, and resists the ordinance of God, and he that
is this Resister, cannot be that power. If then it will be found, and made good
that the mere possessor, that comes into the Throne by dispossessing the lawful
power, (that still lays title to the Throne) is this resister of the power,
it will thence follow, and be evident he cannot be that power.

That the person in possession resists the other that is outed, and still
claims possession (in respect of his enjoyment of the throne) is undeniable.
How then can he be denied to be the resister of the power? the defenders of a
mere possessory title will tell us, he that is in place by invasion, or
insurrection against a precedent lawful power, was (...), the resister of the
power when he first attempted, and perhaps while he was carrying on his design
by some of the first, or lower steps of it; but when he has brought it to a
head, or having come up to the last, or highest step that is, the finishing of
it, by outing the person he assaulted, and seating himself in the place, he is
now no longer the resister of the power, but is become that which in his way to
that achievement he resisted, to wit, the power himself.

But this must needs seem strange, that when the Apostle says plainly, the
resisting of the power brings damnation to the Author, such an Exposition
should be put upon the place as tells us, that resistance purchases to the
Author the dominion of that power whom he resists: and that he that resists
the power in a lower, or lesser degree, does in so doing fall under the sin,
and guilt in those words described; but he that does it in a higher, and fuller
measure is in that act clear from that charge, and stands wholly excused: that
the fieri of that act of deposing a lawful power should be so bad, and
punishable, and the finiri, or factum esse, should be so excellent, honorable,
and rewardable: that the success, and completion of an evil deed should have
such a virtue in it as both to release it, and its author of its delinquency
(though the deed be not only continued, but heightened) and to turn the scene,
or case of the agent, and patient upside down, so as that the resister, and the
resisted shall change their places, and moral denominations in the Text: He
that was under that brand of resisting the power, and the ordinance of God, and
under the doom of damnation for it, shall thereby become the power, the
ordinance of God; and he that was the resisted power, and ordinance of God,
shall now (if he sit not still in his dethronement, but endeavor to repossesse
his dignity) incur the impeachment of resisting the power, and demeriting
damnation. And this were a hard censure to be passed upon all ejected Princes,
or Potentates that have sought or may seek to recover their Dominions, among
whom David, Joash, and Ezekiah have been. But the exposition which makes the
strange transversion would be a little looked into before it be received.

1. Two things must be made very clear ere it can be current.

1. That the supposed resisted power does by the prevalency of that resistance,
and his dispossession thereby cease to be the power.

2. That he that was the resister, by his prospering therein unto the
occupation of the place of rule, does thereby cease to be the resister. The
former I have above d^^proved Cap. 7. sect. 2. subsect. 5. and 8. and in the
close of the 10.
, and shall therefore here omit the repetition of its refutation; the rather,
because were it not, or could it not be refuted, yet the latter would not hold,
and consequently my argument would be good nevertheless.

For, suppose actual disseisin to put an end to the power that was; or, that a
person, or Senate overpowered, and dispossessed, cease to be the power which
the Text speaks for, yet the over-powering and disseising party would not
therefore cease to be the resister by the Text condemned.

If a man by violence, fraud, or other dishonest means get into his hands
another man's goods, or estate, though the suffering party dye, yet the
injustice, and oppression of that injurious person (he keeping still those
wrongful acquisitions) cease not. He is still an oppressor in reference to
that person, and the act committed against him though he be now dead. The
reason is, though the wronged person, and so the property that was in him to
those possessions, (as all accidents inherent in him as a man) be extinct, yet
the Law, or rule which forbad, and condemned that act is still alive, or in
force: besides, though the party injured, and so his right to the things
unjustly taken from him, be dead, yet it is to be supposed the property, or
disposal of them is passed to some other, either by virtue of relation to him,
or escheature, and so the oppressors holding of them is a continued, or still
renewed act of injustice. Thus it is with him that resists the power unto the
ejection of him, and enthroning of himself; say the power outed by him were
thereby extinguished, yet the act by which he did it still cleaves to him; and
while he stands in that posture, his resistance of the power ordained of God
is continuated, and remains upon him: and the reason is, both because the
ordinance of God which established that power, and commanded subjection, and
prohibited resistance to it is still in being; and because that ordinance of
God must be supposed to have ordained a way how a succession of M^^^stracy
shall be continued (and by virtue of the same there is ordinarily either a
lawful Successor assigned, or a course taken for the electing, and
substituting one) in opposition unto which (suppose the divesture of the
dispossessed power) the intrusive possessor cannot but be confessed to enter,
and sit, and so still is in one, or both those respects a resister of the
ordinance of God.

2. Take an act that is in specie, or kind, one and the same, but may be varyed
in regard of degrees; that moral evil, or goodness which is attributible to
the action in specie may be said of every degree of that act; and especially it
cannot be that the less, or inferior degree of such an action should be
denominated good, or evil, and not the greater, or the full, and complete act
be so denominated. As in this matter, If a lower, or more imperfect degree of
withstanding, or opposing the power, or just Magigistrate be evil, and be the
resistance that is disallowed, and condemned in this Text, then the higher, the
perfecting act of that nature must be so also. If for a man to refuse
obedience, or to make head against the present lawful Magistrate, and to draw
in others therein to take part with him, and if to check, impeach, interrupt,
and somewhat to diminish the authority of that M^gistrate, and if to threaten,
or attempt to rem^ve quite out of, and to take his place be a transgression,
and a resistance of the ordinance of God here spoken of (as do all agree) then
to go on further, and higher in the same kind, for the said resister to
checkmate that Magistrate, or to add that consummating act, or ex cution of
that attempt, by wresting, and holding the whole command from him into his own
hand, must needs be as well, or much more the breach and contradiction of the
ordinance of God. Can any man say that this rule in the Text, or any
commandment of God in any other matter disallows, and condemns the consulting,
beginning, and carrying on of an undertaking, course, or action, and not the
accomplishment, and finishing, or not the continua^ion, and upholding of the
work when finished, or the persistency in it, when achieved. The truth is, the
resister of the power is never more, nor so much the (...) as when he is
possessed of the place; then is he completely counter-ordered, or
contra-ordained to the ordinance of God, when he is got into the Throne, and
disorderly placed in the Supreme command, guarding himself with his Military
bands against the Title, and entry of him he has dispossessed.

What is the ratio formalis of this resistance, or the (...), for which the
withstander of the power is styled (...), is it not his taking and holding the
reigns, and rule of a civil S^a^e, against, and in contradiction to the Law of
God? and this is plainly it which the excluder of the lawful Magistrate does.
In that there is a double contravention to the Law of God; one against that*
law which forbids every one to rise up against the power ordained of God:
Another against that law which commands retractation, and restitution of
whatsoever wrong has been committed. The violent occupant, as he should not
have seized on the Throne, CHAP. VIII. SECT. VI.
so, being in merely by intrusion, he is bound to surrendry, and redintegration
of his injury.

3 It is the observation of Cajetan, and from him of Mr. Elnathan Par upon the
words, That in this verse. the word resists is three times used; but in the
Greek, only the first is in the present, the two last in the time past. As if
you should render it: He that resists the power has resisted the ordinance
of God; and he that has resisted shall receive damnation.

By which it may be evident that any transient, and bypast act of resistance
may term the person in praesenti, the resister: and much more is he the
resister, who not only in times past acted a resistance, but stands up still
in the same posture.

SECT. VI. Of the work of the power, described Verse. 3. and 4.
THe next thing I take notice of in this discourse of the Apostle, is the
character, or description of that power which he intends in the Text, by which
he defines what he is in himself, and distinguishes him from all others.
This description is taken from his proper work, or the peculiar duty of his
place, and office. This we have delivered, Verse. 3.4. Rulers are not a terror
to good works, but unto the evil. Do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same. He is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do
evil, be afraid, for he holds not the sword in vain: For he is the Minister
of God, and revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

My Collection from these words is; He that is i^ place of rule, and command in
the Commonwealth without a just Title, call, and investure, and solely from
his own power, and will, he cannot be the power meant by the Text. And I infer
it thus.

He that is the power intended by the Apostle must be susceptible, or capable
of all this whole charact^r. He must be capable (I say) for I know Expositors
do well note upon it, these words intend to describe, not what the Magist^ate
is always de facto, but what he is de jure: The Magistrate does not always in
every proceeding hold correspondence with this Character, but not seldom
acts contrarily; yet notwithstanding the Character holds true, it
delivering, not what the Magistrate still does, but what he should, and ought
to do, what he is called, ordained, and appointed to, what his work, and
office is, and consequently what he is capable of being, and doing. But (I
assume) he that rules without a just title, call, and investure, a
self-created power is not capable of this; he, (while he remains such) cannot
possibly answer this Character; that his tenure of power, and this description
are incompetible: it can never be that one should observe, perform, and execute
all that is therein said, and yet be an unlawfully possessing power.

The third verse denies him to be a terror to good works, Vide Paraeum in loc.
requires him to be an author of praise to these, and a terror to evil
works. These terms good works, and evil, take in all civil, or political
good, and evil actions; whether they extend to all moral actions, as well
religious, as secular (according to the usual application of those words of the
same Apostle (1 Timothy 2.2.) I will not here debate. But this is certain, they
take in all civil, or political actions, good or evil.

Now usurpation must needs be acknowledged to be an action both politically,
and morally evil, and that in a more then ordinary degree, and in relation to
many persons. An act it is of manifold oppression, and injustice, to the wrong
of the deposed, and of the Commonwealth in its public order, right, and
freedom. It is commonly enterprised, accomplished, and upheld by a
multiplicity of acts of treachery, and violence upon them that are expulsed, or
brought under by it, yea, with the slaughter, and blood of many innocent
persons, and the ruin of their posterity, and dependants, and with the
overturning of public laws, and liberties. And as certain it is that one
single person cannot bear up or give subsistence, and strength to this
management, or, either perpetrate or maintain all or any of those facts,
whosoever occupies such a power must use a multitude of inst^uments, and
partakers. Now who can imagine that he that is such an occupant of power, that
comes in, and stands by such means, and instruments can be a terror to those
many evil works, and flagrant off^nces which introduce, or establish his
usurpation? or that he can be a terror, a Minister of God, and a revenger to
execute wrath upon the actors of them? But, as he is the chief au^hor of those
evils himself, so he must necessarily (while he stands upon that bottom) be of
all other a special abettor, yea, the savior, patron, and Protector of such
deeds, and doers. He that does evil, in this kind shall not need to be afraid
of him, but may expect praise, promotion, and reward from him.

And on the other hand, whereas it cannot be denied to be a good work orderly
to endeavor the prevention, redress^, or giving a stop to those evils, he that
should attempt any thing of that nature cannot look to have praise (that is,
impunity, defense, and reward) of the same, but must expect him to be to such
enterprises the highest terror. The greatest interest, and therefore the
constant course of such a power is in those good, and evil works which touch
the continuance, or disposal of the sea^e whereon he is, to be directly, and
wholly cross, and contradictory to this Character, and rule of the Apostle.
And it is not possible he should in every point conform to it, and yet
continue still his rule upon the basis of usurpation.

Furthermore, the fourth verse asserteth, and requires the Magistrate to be
the Minister of God to thee for good. To thee, that is, to every person, or
member in the Commonwealth; For good, that is, for his natural, moral, civil,
and spiritual good (says Paraeus) however, for his civil, or temporal good
without controversy let it be. But it is imp ssible he that bears the Sword
in an usurping hand, should in every thing procure the civil good of all, that
is, either of the whole joint community, or of all single persons in their
private state. This good has within it involved the vindication, and restoring
of the public, and of every persons rights, and the satisfying and rectifying
of all wrongs.

Now this, and usurpation are together inconsistible. Moses his rule for the
Magistrate is, Deuteronomy. 16.20.
That which is altogether just shall thou follow; but this an unjustly
possessed power cannot do, and stand. Its own State will not afford i. Yea,
the truth is, the violation of Justice, in which the foundation of this power
is laid, and the root of it is planted, will, and is ordinarily seen to beget a
cacexia, or ill disposition to justice, and propension to unrighte^us
administration in all causes, and proceedings whatsoever; If a common gift has
such an influence as to blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of
the righteous, Verse. 19.
(as Moses in that place) what respect of persons, and wresting of judg^ment
will the dishon^st interest of a Kingdom breed in all judicial
administrations? Scarce a man shall bring a cause before the Tribunal, but he
will appear under the character, either of a friend, or foe to that interest of
jealousy, and accordingly be looked at with the eye of partiality or
prejudice. What a general depravement of Just^ce is the ordinary sequel of
violent acquisition, and possession of Dominion, the words of the Prophet Amos
will tell us. To have turned judgment into gall, Amos 6.12, 13.
and the f^uit of righteousn^sse into hemlocke.

But who has done thus? Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, have
we not taken to us horns by our own strength? The Magistrat^s office is to
procure that the Subjects may lead a life in all godliness and honesly. The
Subjects cannot possibly be upon terms mutually honest, either with him, or
with the instruments of his supportance, whose very being in power is
injurious, and so they are barred out from living in all honesty: And for
living in all godliness, both Scripture, and common experience gives that
defection of Religion, is the individual consequent of defection in civil
Government: Usurpation in State, and corruption in Religion are like a couple
of Twins, you can seldom, or never take the former without the latter. Let the
kingdom of Israel, or of the ten Tribes rent from the house, and Throne of
David for all the while of its standing, and the reign of every King thereof be
the instance for this. Of whom (in this behalf) not only do perusers of the
story observe that, as they were wholly, and all along out in their civil
policy; they were q^ite, and constantly wrong, and depraved in their Religion,
but the Lord himself makes the same observation, giving us this short, but
universal account. Hosea 8.4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I knew it
not. Of their silver, and their gold have they made them Idols, that they may
be cut off. Here we have an Epitome of the whole history of that Kingdom.

S^ate-usurpation breeds, and brings in Idolatry in Religion: and as this is
the genuine product, and issue of that, so are they both con-causes of that
peoples ruin The same observation makes the sacred historian, 2 Kin 17 21. And
they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat King. And Jeroboam d^ove Israel from foll
wing the Lord, etc.
.

Let me but add one word more of the incongruability of this Character to an
un-authorized power. The power in this Text is appointed to be the Minister of
God to thee for good. Now see how the contrary is to be said of the Usurper. He
is appointed of God to thee for evil. The Scripture holding ^orth usurpation,
or violent, enforced dominion as a judgment, [2 Kings 17.20, 11.] and
threa^ning it as the punishment of a Nation for their transgressions against
God, CHAP. VIII. SECT. VII.
and ranking it with the penalties of plague, famine, sword, wild beasts, etc.

As on the other side, the removing of usurpation is promised as a mercy, Isa.
10 27.14.25. And the taking away of Magistracy is threatened as a judgment,
Isa. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Zech. 11.6. Deuteronomy. 28.43, 44, 48. Psalm. 106.41, 42. Now
the giving, sending of a thing to be for the good, advantage, benefit of a
people, and to be for their harm, punishment, and suffering: and the removal
of a thing to be promised as a mercy, and to be threatened as a judgment (and
these, per se, naturally, primarily, and directly so meant, and not per
accidens) both these are such opposites as cannot be praedicates of the same
thing. Thus much I have observed from the Texts description of the Magistrates
work, and duty.

SECT. VII. Of the Magistrates style, the Minister of God, verse. 4.6.
7 THere is besides another thing to the present purpose observable in this
description of the Magistrate, and of his office: to wit, the special Title
given him, denoting his peculiar relation to, and derivation from God. He is
called the Minister of God, and that thrice over ( viz. verse. 4, 6.) this style
imports, not only the office, and work of the Magistrate to be a special
service, and employment performed unto God, nor only it to be instituted,
ordered, and imposed to be done in his behalf. But that the authority of
managing it is by him invested in the certain person that may intermeddle with
it; none can truly assume, or be taken to be in this office, but he that has
received a commission, call, or warrant from God for it. The title (...), not
only signifies action, and labor, but directly, strictly, refers to God as
the Author of the persons mission, and deputation to it. We all confess him
only to be the Minister of a Prince or State unto whom the Prince or State
gives a Commission, and not him that of his own accord interposeth in the
administration of the public, civil affairs: Now the same dependence that a
subordinate Minister of State has upon his Sovereign for his b^coming his
Minister, the same has a sovereign Magistrate upon God for his being his
Minister; It is one thing to call a man Gods instrument, his rod, axe, sword,
or hammer, another thing to call him Gods Minister. Men may be the former when
they get power, and prevalency over others by unlawful means, but the latter
they are never called that are not lawfully admitted, or authorized to the
place, or work.

There is a wide difference (says Dr. Sclater Dr. Sclater his Sermon. on 2 Kin.
9.31. page 26.
) betwixt the instruments of Gods providence, and the Ministers of his
ordinance; those fulfill his purposes, these also do his commands. Herod, and
Pilate, in the death of our blessed Savior were unwilling instruments of his
providence, no Ministers of his ordinance.

SECT. VIII. CHAP. VII. SECT. VIII.
Of the Magistrates bearing the sword, verse. 4.
8 THe last clause, or passage of the context I shall animadvert upon, is that
in the same verse. He bears not the sword in vain.

1. Who is this He that bears the sword? The antecedent to which this
relative is referred, is, the power, the Ruler. Observe, the Apostle does not
say, he that bears the Sword, is the power, or Ruler, but he that is the
power, or Ruler bears the Sword. The Sword here, to wit, the power of
coercive, or punitive justice, ascribed to the Magistrate, is not put as the
cause, or constituent of his Magistracy, but as a consequent addition, or
additament to it. A person has not this Sword first, and then, or therefore
is, or becomes a Magistrate; but he is first a Magistrate, and then, or
therefore he has, or bears the Sword.

2. This word Sword cannot be put here properly for that material offensive
weapon that is made of metal, but (by a Metalepsis) for a faculty of power,
whereof that, and other forcible weapons are but instruments: and not for every
faculty of compulsory power neither, for there is the sword of an enemy, the
sword of a cutthroat, the sword of a common traveller, but for a faculty of
political rule, and authoritative judgment; such a sword as imports him that
has it a Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. VII.
3. And of this Sword the civil Magistrate is here asserted to be the hearer.
Bearing here cannot intend any whatsoever holding in the hand, or bearing by
the side, for a private person; a Sergeant ushering the Magistrate, an
Executioner, a Thief may hold a sword in his hand: but it must have a more
special and strict sense, and must intend not a corporal, or natural, but a
political act, not a mere manutenancy, or handling of a sword, but a civil
tenure of it.

4. And again, the Magistrate is said to be the bearer, not the founder of the
Sword. Gerit gladium, non cudit. He that is a Magistrate indeed, neither makes,
nor takes the Sword by the force of his own arm, but receives, has it
delivered him into his hand, and so weildeth, and uses it.

5. Lastly, he bears the Sword, not in vain, (...) by some rendered, without
cause, or, in vain, is by others rendered, rashly. The former interpretation
has reference to the end: in vain, that is, to no end. The latter relates to
the principle, and manner of bearing the sword; in vain, that is, without
author, and reason. Neither way does the Magistrate bear the sword, (...). For
the latter, he bears it not rashly, that is, not without Author, and certain
Reason, for he has not snatched it to him of himself, neither has it
happened to him by chance, but it has been given him into his hands by Gods
ordination. So Paraeus upon the place, page 103. and Dr. Willet, quest. 11.

CHAP. IX. CHAP. IX. SECT. I.
Some other Arguments for the conclusion insisted on in the former Chapter,
taken from other Scriptures, and Mediums.
I Have thus gone over the Context, and taken notice therein of the general
clauses, or structures in it which add their light, or strength to clear, or
confirm the sense of our Text above concluded on. There is yet another thing
promised to be dispatched, to wit, a super-addition of some other grounds, or
Mediums that may further prove the determination aforesaid.

SECT. I. Argues from the sense of Scriptures, forbidding the Retaliating of
wrong.
1 THe first of these may be that which lies not far from this Text. Let us
take notice of the meaning of those prohibitions, Romans 12.17, 19. Recompense to
no man evil for evil. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves. The
interpretation of these inhibitions (together with those given by Christ,
Matthew. 5.39, 40, 41.) by the genera^l consent of all Orthodox Expositors that I
meet with, is, that they do not simply, or absolutely disallow, or forbid all
humane punishment, or vindicative justice to be done by any man; for this is
authorized, and commanded by God to be done by certain persons, (as Romans 13.4.)
no, nor every punitive act that may be done by e^^e in his own case, or behalf,
(for that the Magistrate may do:) But that those Scriptures take vindicative
justice out of the hands of private persons; who, though they receive, or
suffer evil, yet they may not assume the penal sword, or the inflictive
vindication of themselves, into their own hands. And to these prohibitions,
lest it should seem an over-strait, and harsh confinement of the Christian (as
importing a most free exposal of him to all bodily injuries, from all
unreasonable men, without any remedy, yea an open invitation of them) the
Apostle subjoyneth.

1. An advertisement, what help a Christian has, what his proper, and allowed
remedy is in case of such sufferings. It is to give place unto wrath, viz. to
refer the taking punishment unto God, to his judicial process, either by his
special Minister ordained, and set up by him for that work ( Cap. 13 4, 6.) or
by other means he shall please to take (according to that supersedeas of David
unto Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.10.)

2. A reason of both the foregoing prohibition of self-revenge, and of the
prescrip^ion of the awayting the said remedy. For it is written, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay it, says the Lord. This Reason,

1. Asserts the right, and propriety of punitive justice unto God: so that none
may meddle with it but himself, either by himself, or by them that are
expressly war^anted, and deputed by him. Vengeance is mine.

2. Engages his word, or undertaking to perform it. I will repay, says the
Lord.

If we compare the words of this T^xt in this plain sense with what follows
after (to wit, Cap 13.4.) For he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute
wrath, etc.) We shall find cause to distinguish of humane revenge, or that
which is done by man, as being one way prohibited, and another way authorized:
and to say there is,

1. A sinful, and inhibited. 2. A lawful, and commanded avengement. The
sinful avenging is private, or that which is a man's revenging of himself; that
is, when a man takes vengeance, both in his own case, or behalf, and of his
own accord, motion, or mind. The lawful, and commanded is that which is taken
by him that is the Minister of God to execute it, by virtue of authority
derived from God: and the distinction (Let this be observed as that wherein
lies the sinew of the Argument) betwixt these two, is not in the act, or matter
done, both may inflict the same kind, and measure of evil; nor in the having
of power, that is, ability, or predominant strength in the hand to do it, for
that may be supposed of them both, of the self-avenger, as well as of the
other; but in the having of a call, commission, or warrant from God; In regard
whereof, in the act of the one, God may be peculiarly said to be the avenger,
and repayer, in the other the person may be laid to revenge himself.

If we should understand Gods repaying merely of his doing it by any
providential instrument, this distinction betwixt these two were destroyed; for
when a private person recompen^eth his wrong, it may be said of that way, that
God so, that is, providentially repayeth. But if we construe it of, or apply it
unto Gods repayment by such an instrument as is by him authorized,
commissioned, or warranted to that work, a revenge, or punishment, by such an
one we can clearly call Gods incontradistinction to that which is man's of
himself. Gods this is, not only by way of infliction, CHAP. IX. SECT. V.
but by his warranty and approbation; not man's, or a self-rev^nge: for in it,
man only has the execution, God the appointing; man the acting, God the
enacting.

In some cases, indeed, of the public Magistrates avenging, these two ( viz.
Gods, and selfs-revenge) may seem to be coincident, to wit, when the Magistrate
punishes, or judges in vindication of his own right; yet even here, in as
much as he has authority deputed to him by God, and he is to administer the
justice of God to all, and besides him there is none to do it, and the
asserting of his right and safety ordinarily no less concerns the public,
and common then his own personal interest, and is of much more importance then
that of any other man's, what he does therein falls not under that
self-avengement which there is forbidden, but reduces it self to that which
is a giving place to the wrath of God, and to his repayment, as contradistinct
to his own. For, though he here avenge in his own cause, yet, neither does he
it of his own accord, or motion, neither does he merely, or formally vindicate
himself, neither, if he rightly go about it, does he therein so much consider,
or consult himself as others.

Now let the clear sense of this prohibition of self-revenge, and the
commandment, of giving place to wrath, with the institution of the Magistrate
to be a revenger to execute wrath, and the distinction betwixt these two
revengings be considered, and the conclusion against the intrusive,
unwarranted, mere possessory power will be thence very evident.

SECT. II. CHAP. IX. SECT. II.
Argues from the Prophets comparison of the Jewish State under the predatory
power of the Chaldean unto that of such Animals as have no Ruler over them.
2 IN the Prophet Habakkuk (Cap. 1.14.) the state of the people of Judah, and
of other Na^ions under the Chaldean Monarchy is resembled to that of fishes,
and creeping things that have no Ruler over them. How were they said to be so,
to be without Ruler over them, when the Chaldean actually commanded, absolutely
ruled, and so grievously enslaved, and oppressed them? yea, the fishes, and
reptiles, cannot be said simply to have none ruling over them; for the weaker
are overpowered and mastered by the st^onger, and fiercer, and by them made,
either to give way, or to become their prey, or food: And in regard of this
prevailing of the greater over the smaller by mere force, and impetuosity the
condition of the Jews is compared to that of those Brutes. The meaning then
is, these creatures have no Ruler over, them by order of nature; and the Jews
had no Ruler (...) the root of that Noune translated, Ruler, signifies, jus,
authoritatem habuit. Pagninus. Piscator est Nebuchadonozorus, mare orbis
universus, pisces sunt homines, rete, sagena, hamus vocantur copia, vires,
arts Chaldaeorum. Nam ut minuti pisces majoribus pro cibo sunt, ita homines
infirmi a potentioribus opprimuntu^. Drusius in loc.
over them, by any right, or any that was properly their Magistrate, or
Sovereign, that is, by Divine authority, or ordination set over them; CHAP. IX.
SECT. III.
but, as it is among the fishes, and creeping things, if any command over
other, it is owned by no direction, instinct, or intimation of nature, but
wholly impetuous, savage, and by a preternatural encroachment: (understand we
this either of those kinds of Animals whom the Text specifies, or indefinitely
of any in respect of Individuals of one species over-powering those of another;
for of some certain kinds, as of Bees, Cranes, and others, it is observed
there is some image of order, and government among them, to wi^ ^ithin, or in
relation to those of their own special kind, and particularly society, or
herd:) and so it was with this people, there was none whom they could take as
designed, or pointed out by warrant from God to be their Ruler, but mere
confused violence took place; whosoever could, and listed, took the
superiority, and bare sway over them. We see then it is one thing for a people
to have an arbitrary masterdome, an enthralling tyranny, another to have a true
M^gistracy, or Principality over them: and that without some ruler of order,
and justice, in point of constitution of government observed; Cities or
Countries are but as mountains of prey, chases of wild beast, or pools of
silly fish.

SECT. III. Argues from the nullity of a self-created power, declared
negatively in Christ's, positively in Babylons case.
3 OUr Savi^ur Christ delivers this as a commonly received, and a true Max^me [
John 8.51.] If I honor my self, my honor is nothing. By which the nullity of
a self-created Dignity is against all contradiction asserted. The Jews (unto
whom he spoke these words) had objected to him, that the things which he had
before declared of himself were but his own presumptions, or arrogations, Whom
make thou thy self? unto which he answers; First, by way of concession, if
so it were indeed his claims were void, and of no force Monemur his verbis,
quicquid gloriae sibi homines a seipsis conciliant frivolum esse, ac nihili.
Calv. in loc.
. If I honor my self, my honor is nothing.

Secondly, by way of vindication to himself of another, a contradistinct, and
an indubitable valid title to his dignity, It is my Father that honors me.
Here then is a twofold rise of honor distinguished of; the one real, and
current, the other supposititious, and null; the one renounced, the other owned
by Christ, viz. selfe-honour, and honor which is from God. As the honor which
is from ones self, is thus in whomsoever disallowed by Christ as frustrate,
and nothing, so it is the brand of Babylon, and charged upon her as one of her
master-vices, that she glorified her self, [Rev. 18 7.] If by Babylon we
understand the City of Rome (as not only our Protestant Expositors generally,
but Ribera, and other Popish Commentators, yea, and some of the Fathers, as
Tertullian, and Augustine apply it) that brand does fitly and notably express
the usurped power, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, which that City, as the
sea^e, and metropolis of the Pope, and the Pope in it does claim, and in great
measure exercise over all the Dominions of Christendom, as it is
contradistinguisht from, and privative of the power of the respective civil
Lords of those Dominions whose right they are: who are therefore said, in
discrimination from her, to receive their kingdom, and power, Rev. 17.12.

CHAP. IX. SECT. IV.
SECT. IV. Argues from sundry absurdities following upon the attributing of a
mere possessory power unto God as his ordinance.
4 IT is a generally received, and most certain principle, All dominion, rule,
and power of command over any creature, or any of mankind is absolutely, and
originally in God alone; in the creature only derivatively, and by
communication from him. Whosoever then may claim to himself, or be said, and
taken by others to be in place of rule, or government over other men (in what
society soever) must have and be able to show a delegation, or substitution
from God for it.

Now for this it being clearly repugnant, both to the nature of authority, and
to divine proceeding about it, to say that God has ordained it (whether it be
that of a Father, or of a Husband, or of a Magistrate, or civil Lord) to be in
every man; but contrariwise all must confess he has to some appropriated, to
others prohibited it, having commanded these the contradistinct duty of
subjection; such a delegation must needs be required as does fix such a sort
of authority in such a particular man, in relation to such a society, or such
persons, who are thereupon to yield their obedience, by virtue of a divine
obligation to him.

But to say God has appointed any kind of authority, and particularly that of
civil Magistracy, to be the certain, and inseparable result of possession, or
to be his that can prevail, and does possess himself (by what means soever)
of a supe^iour commaad over people is,

1. To bring a people to a loss, and to put an indeterminateness and
disobligation upon them unto any M^g^stracy whomsoever, when the Throne comes
to be de facto unpossessed, whether it be by the death, or absence of the
Prince or otherwise, and to impose on them in those cases a continual
uncertainty, and dissettlement of Government, and that as by divine ordination.

2. To give an equal warrant (in case of such vacancy) to all men to step up
to, or stickle for the Throne, and to leave it to be attempted, aspired to, and
scuffled for by whosoever pleases.

3. To cassate, disannul, and make vain all those preobligatious, cautions,
restrictions, and rules which God himself has at any time delivered
beforehand for the determining, or directing of peoples proceedings about the
erecting of Magistracy, as he has given sundry to Israel, sometimes
prescribing them the particular stock they shall fix upon Deuteronomy. 17.15.
; and sometimes sending them to the use of Lots 1 Samuel 10.18.
, and sometimes to a certain race, or lineage 1 Chronicles. 28.4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 23.3.
, to find ou^, and receive thence the determination of their Magistracy.

4. To cancel, make impertinent, and trust aneous all other titles, or means
of any men's coming into authority, and all consultations, provisions,
constitutions or oaths of Senators, or people that look any other way, or
digress from this path of actual possession, or prevalidity.

Why should Moses have been so solicitous about his successor in the Government
of Israel, Numb. 27.15, etc.
and so earnest with God for the nomination of him before his death, if G^d h^d
ordained (and then no doubt Moses would have known and should have acquiesced
in it) that occupation, or possession must determine it. His own experience of
the aspirings of Korah, and the rest during his life, would tell him there was
likely to be no want of a successor after his death, if it might be carried by
usu^pation. In like manner, to what purpose did Israel after the death of
Joshua ask of God who should be their Leader? Or, did David enquire of God
what he should do in relation to his obtaining the K ngdome of Israel before
promised him when Saul was dead? Judge. 1.1. 2 Samuel 2.1.
he might have known if this had been a received principle, that he had no more
to do but gird on his armor, lead on his men, and take possession.

If God has ordained that possession shall be the basis or bottom of civil
power, to what purpose is any State-constitution, law, or decree for the
continuation or succession of government? according to this position upon any
vacancy, or voidance of the Throne, no person can by such constitution have any
right to succeed, neither can any violent intruder be by it illegitimated.

Though a person upon such vacancy come in, and the people receive him as their
Magistrate by virtue of an antecedaneous civil constitution, or an oath of
allegiance, yet upon that supposal the entry upon this ground, or title is but
a Chimaera, a mere conceit, or airy phantasme, for it is not in t^u^h that
title, but his possession which derives, and confers Magistracy upon him. And
on the other hand, though a person be destitute of, or come in directly in
opposition to, and violation, and eversion of such preobligations, yet if he
any way get possession, he is a Magistrate true, and good enough; and if a
person have all the laws, conventions, and pactions by man devisable for him,
yet if he lack, or loose possessi^n, he is no body, all is null. Yea,

5. This is to conclude all such constitutions, and obligations unlawful, and
sinful in the making; for to what intent are they made? the very end of their
enacting is to circumscribe and sense in the Throne, and to limit the way to
it, to pre-dispose the property of it; and to exclude, and prevent, to
illegitim^te, and condemn the entry of any whomsoever to it in any o her way,
or upon other account then that which is prescribed, and limited in the
constitution; and therefore to disallow, and bar out one if not the only way,
and title to it which God (if this position say true) has authorized, to wit,
mere prevalency, or intrusive acquisition, and possession.

6 To expose the Commonwealth as a common booty, and prize to all aspiring
spirits, and to give an invitation (making God the author of it) to every
ambitious, discontented, or disloyal party continually to be hatching, and
attempting by power, or policy to undermine, or bear down the present
Government, and to advance a new: by which means the civil power shall be
always tottering, as in an Earthquake; the peoples minds incessantly possessed
with expectations of change; and the public State (together with every man's
private) stand in perpetual jeopardy of falling under all violence, spoil, and
confusion. The invitation is, he needs no more to make him the Sovereign Lord,
and to lay a tie of subjection upon the consciences of the community unto him,
as unto the power ordained of God, but to get into possession, or actual
command of the territory: Unto which the next, and easiest way being the
concurrence of the common people, or a stronger, or more successful party of
them, any man that is of a wo^king, crafty head, and of a high resolution may
at any time be within the possibility, and by casting for it, not seldom have
the opportunity of putting to a shrewd hazard the effecting thereof: as the
example of Absalom, and Sheba in the reign of David, and of Jeroboam upon the
death of Solomon do witness.

7. To say that there can be no unjust possessor, no unlawful, or disorderly
occupant of rule in the Commonwealth, no such thing as we call usurpation,
meaning by it a culpable, or injurious tenure of the place of civil dominion.
For he that has a warrant, ordination, or deputation from God for the place,
must needs be rightly in, and authoriz^d for it; and if this deputation
infallibly come with, and by, and be the result of possession, then he that is
in, must needs be rightly in.

CHAP. IX. SECT. V.
Upon this account no man can be wrong, or out of his calling (in respect to
government) that can get into command, quocunque modo: neither is there any
possibility of (...) in this business: neither in this matter can any man
justly be blamed in the words of Moses to Korah, and his company, Ye take too
much upon you. Seeing, let a man take all he can upon him that he can graspe
into his hands, he is commissioned by this that he does take it upon him:
neither did Moses do well to charge the said company as those that were
gathered together against the Lord, or to defer the determination of the
question of usurpation, which they charged upon Aaron, and him, and these again
retorted upon them, unto Gods former choice, and consecration of him, or them,
or to Gods manifestation of his mind, then to be made at the door of the
Tabernacle of the congregation; for he should have pleaded, or decided it by
possession, at least, so far as the question concerned Political rule.

SECT. V. Argues from that State-maxime, Political power is originally in the
people, and in the Magistrate, only derivatively from them.
5 THat principle, that civil power is originally in the people, or community,
and from them passes to the supreme Magistrate (if it may stand) quite
overthrows the possessory title. I shall not undertake to make it good, I had
rather say, power is originally in God, CHAP. IX. SECT. VI.
and from him passes by means of the peoples consent to the Magistrate. But
this I shall say for it, it has gone of late for a chief Maxim in Politics,
and has been laid down as the principle to bear up, and justify the high
proceedings that have been, and to induce the owning of them; it has received
the stamp of public avouchment, and not only has it obtained the said late
authority, but it has had before these times the approval of some of our
learned men (as Mr. Richard Hooker, Mr. Hooker polit. Book 8. p. 150.
and Mr. Banes. Mr. Banes, his Diocesans Trial. page 83.
) That this principle quasheth the title of the mere possessor is very evident.
A meet possessor is one that is in the place of power without any call,
consen^, or constitution of the people, or that is one that is in it only by
his own act. If then the power be originally in the people, and in the
Magistrate only derivatively from them, the mere possessor (whose very being,
definition, or ratio formalis is, that he rules without the peoples consent) is
utterly destitute of it.

SECT. VI. Argues from the Rise, or nature of civil government.
6 THere is nothing more directly opposite, or abhorrent to the nature of
government then this pretension. For, what is government, but the subjecting,
or resigning up of the community, and of every part therein, whatsoever their
ability, or natural power is, to the arbitration, or rule of one, or a few
c^rtain persons, for peace, and orders sake, and for prevention of those
dangers, vexations, and violences, which single persons, private societies, and
small parties are continually exposed to, and have no strength to repel, nor
authority to overawe, or reform the authors of them? And for what end is
government ordained by God, and set up and upheld by men, but that the stronger
may not domineer at pleasure over the weaker? and what is Anarchy, or sedition
(the direct contrary to government) but the rising up, and the playing the Rex
of a headstrong party of their own mind, and accord, without, or against
authority.

It is generally supposed that the mischief of rapine and sedition, or the
dominion of the strong hand, was the inducement, and occasion that first led,
and as mankind has multiplied, and spread further over the earth, still has
prompted the people of the world to come out of that community, and equality
which in the simplicity, and inoffensivenesse of infant-times, and while
societies have been but few, and small, they for a time lived in, and to agree
upon a distinction of property, and a course of order, and of the political
superiority, and dominion of some over the rest. And now to lay this principle,
that the prevailer ought to be, or is the civil power, is to prostrate that
order so erected, to reduce the world to that supposed original parity, and
masterlesnesse, and to introduce, or give opportunity to alll those confusions,
and harms which Government was set up to fence out, to curb, and to suppress.

SECT. VII. CHAP. IX. SECT. VII.
Argues from the received Distinction betwixt a Sovereigns public, or
legal, and his personal, or private capacity.
7 BOth Lawyers, and Divines have found it necessary, in regard of many cases
of law, and conscience occurrent to them respectively, to distinguish of a
double capacity of him that is a Magistrate, viz. 1. His legal, civil,
politic.

2. His private, personal, and humane capacity. And this distinction is
grounded upon that of power before given (in Chap. 1.) to wit, that there is,

1. A natural, or physical. 2. A moral power. The difference betwixt those two
capacities they have assigned to be, that his personal private capacity in it,
all that he is, and does, or may, and can do either naturally, or ethically,
that is, by virtue of any natural, or moral power distinct from the Civil,
or Magistratical. His politic capacity is conferred on him, and exercised by
the Law; it is still inclusive of the Law, both as it is original, and
instrument of working; and it signifies only that which he is, does, and may
do legally, or by the Laws of the Land. The necessity, and use of this
distinction is to state the rise, and extent of the Magistrates authority, and
both the ground, or reason, and the measure, or latitude of the Subj cts
obligation unto the power.

This distinction has been much used by them that have defended the late
Parliaments cause. See it in the fuller answer to Dr. Fern, page 9. 16. And
the answer to Dr. Fern's Reply, page 36. The vindication of the Treatise of
Monarchy, page 27. The Answer to Doubts, and Queries upon the Oath, and
Covenant, page 6. Mr. Buroughs upon Hos. cap. 1. Lect. 4. page 111. Yet had it
not its effiction from them, but was unto the very same sense delivered by our
Divines before; as Bishop Bilson, in his true difference of Christian
subjection, etc page 520. Dr. Willer Hexap. (...) Romans cap. 3. quest. 17. page
593.

Yea, the substance of this distinction has been owned by both the
Parliaments, and the Royal party. Yea, both by Prince, and People; hence these
generally received maxims. The King has no power in him, but what is invested
in him by Law. The Law is the measure, and bottom of the Kings power. He can
claim nothing but what the Law gives him. He is our Li^ge, (that is, legal)
Lord, we his liege, (or, legal) Subjects. Whatsoever power is exercised, and
is not settled by Law, it is not authoritative. See the Kings Declaration from
New Market, March 9. 1641. Judge Jenkins Judge Jenkins says, The Kings
prerogative, and the Subjects liberty are determined, and bounded, and measured
by the written Law what they are. We do not hold the King to have any more
power, neither does his Majesty claim any other but what the Law gives him.
his vindication, page 19. Treatise of Monarchy, pars 3. cap. 1. and sect. 2.
page 31, 32. and the vindication of that Treatise page 58, 61.

This distinction, and the import of it (if it may pass for good, as it is no
less clear both in ^eason, and Religion then generally acknowledged) does
quit, and clean di^claim, and shut out this potation, and title of the
possessory power, and that so plainly, as it is supe^fluous fu^ther to form,
or draw out the argument. For how can you distinguish of these two capacities
in a mere possessor? where is his legal, civil, politic capacity (to wit,
that which is conferred on, or exe^cised by him by the Laws) distinct from his
natural, private, CHAP. IX. SECT. VIII.
and personal capacity? and consequently, where is any ground, or rise of the
peoples obligation unto obedience to him, as their civil power?

SECT. VIII. Argues from the being of civil power, by the law of nature.
8 UPon supposal of the truth of that Position, that civil Magistracy is by
the Law of nature, (for the proof of which I have said something before Chap.
5. Sect. 4. Subsect. 2.
) I would thus argue, If the law of nature does, and from the beginning has
dictated that civil Government be in politic societies; it must also be
presumed to direct, and authorize a way, how in particular communities it may
be erected; and that way which it has determined is to be practiced; and no
other can (unless it derive an express positive rule from God) be admitted;
especially none that is contradictory, or subversive to that: now no man can
reasonably imagine that meeer possession, which must be ever supposed to be
against the wills of the community, and for the most part is in prejudice, and
wrong of another title, yea which always is by unnatural, violent, and
dishonest means introduced, and maintained, can be by order, or law of nature,
or otherwise then by encroachment upon, and violation of it.

CHAP. IX. SECT. IX.
SECT. IX. Argues from the general solemn disclaim of Arbitrary Government.
9 ARbitrary rule, and government is a thing that we (to wit, this kingdom
generally) did condemn, and decry, as a public evil; and in opposition to it
we entered into a public, and solemn promise, vow, and protestation (See the
Preface to the Protestation of May 3. 1641.) I do not in the least reprehend
that action, but upon it I argue. If that were well, and justly done, then is
not Arbitrary government an ordinance of God, necessarily to be submitted to,
and maintained, and that which may not be resisted: On the other hand, if
Arbitrary government be an ordinance of God, etc. then were we externally
extremely out in the said action: but then the question is, what is Arbitrary
government? and wherein does it, and that government which we owned, and took
upon us to assert and stand for, differ? Doubtless, arbitrary, is opposed to
lawful, or legal, or that which is settled by National convention, pact, and
constitution. The government then we have in that Protestation obliged our
selves to, is that established by Law, and that which is otherwise (and without
controversy mere possessory dominion is otherwise) we bound our selves from,
and against.

SECT. X. CHAP. IX. SECT. X.
Argues from the impossibility of determining what measure of possession shall
make a power.
10 LAstly, If possession will serve to make a power, and to breed an
obligation in the people to it, I ask, what sort, size, or degree of
possession is it that will do it? If you say, partial possession will suffice;
I reply, possession of a part cannot give title to the whole. For that may at
one, and the same time be in diverse opposite competitors, as it has been in
England in our late Wars, and is in every Territory, where there are wars for
Dominion. One contrary party may be seized on one City, or Province, another of
another within the same Commonwealth.

If then the title follow partial possession, it may appertain to many at
once. But this cannot be; The entire title, or interest over a Kingdom cannot
be wholly in diverse contra-distinct, and opposite parties, neither can the
peoples allegiance be owing, or yielded to many contrary claimers.

1. It has often come to pass that the forcible occupancy of one part of a
Kingdom by one, and another by another power, has been the occasion of
dividing the same into several, and distinct Kingdoms or Principalities. So
was the Greek Empire parcelled after the death of Alexander the Great: and so
has the Roman Empire since been shared into a multitude of distinct
soveraignties. Now this could not be, if possession of a part gave a title to
the whole; for then, notwithstanding such distinguished possessions, and
denominations, the body politic would (as when it was united under one
Sovereign) be one still, and would remain entitled to one Sovereign, though
but partial possessor; and how inconsistent would this be? and therefore we in
Europe account that claim of the Turkish Emperor frivolous, and absurd,
challenging a right to all the Dominions of the Western Roman Empire, as
successor of Constantine, because he succeeded him in that of Constantinople,
which was in Constantines time one Empire with this of the West Keckermani
logic. lib. 1. cap. 23. page 203. and the Turkish history in Solyma^ page 615.
.

2 If it be said, that it must be plenary possession that can give a title, and
oblige the people to the possessor, I return: This is so tickle, and
momentaneous a ground, as no civil authority can any while st^nd by it. For,
how often, how easily is plenary possession interrupted? If a sorein enemy, or
an intestine insurrection, or a small seditious Rout, or a band of Pirates, or
Robbers seize but on one Town or Village in a whole Kingdom in opposition to
the supreme Lord thereof, this breaks off his plenary possession, and so (by
this opinion) annuls his Title, and disobeyeth his Subjects. There are few
Dominions of any great extent, but are often infested in some part, or other
with so much of commotion or invasion as may abate of plenary possession in the
Sovereign. Witness the long continuing, or frequently renewed troubles of all,
or most of the larger-Principalities of Europe in this age.

Have the Emperors, Kings, and Princes of Germany, F^ance, Spain, Italy, etc.
been so long divested, and deprived of their said Dominions, as their plenary
possession has been impeached in them respectively? But this conceit is
utterly rejected by the general vo^e, and use of Nations, who do universally
and constantly reckon their government to stand, and their Allegiance to hold
notwithstanding partial counter-seisures, yea, or the dismemb^ing of some
particles. You can scarce find in Scripture story a King whose reign is
historified but at some time, or other, if not often, CHAP. X.
and for much of his time he was by some or other occupant imped of plenary
possession; yet did not that cut off his reign, or diminish his computed time.

CHAP. X. Answers to some Objections, and Doubts concerning that sense of the
Text which the aforegoing Chapters have stated, and confirmed.
THis last Chapter is to return answer unto such Objections, and Questions, the
solution whereof may seem necessary to the further clearing of that
interpretation of this Text which this Trea^ise has hitherto held forth, and
ass^rted.

CHAP. X. SECT. I.
SECT. I. The objection [that this Text commands the Roman Christians
obedience to the then Roman Emperor, as the supreme power of God ordained in
that Empire, and that he was a usurper] answered.
Object. 1. WHen the Apostle wrote this to the Christians in Rome, the Roman
Emperor that then was in the Throne, was an usurper: yet the Apostle, in
willing them to subject to the higher powers in this Te^t, looks upon him as
the higher, supreme, or Sove^aign power of the Roman State; and means him to
be the power of God, ordained of God.

Answ. There are two things, which make up the substance of this Argument, the
which, could they be evidenced, would make this objection unanswerable, and
carry the sense of this Text quite contrary to the whole Discourse I have
hitherto made of it: But, if either of them be left inevident, or doubtful,
the objection fails, and the sense given stands notwithstanding it.

The two things that must be certain to make the argument good are,

1 That the Apostle in this exhortation unto subjection to the higher powers,
and this affirmation of the power to be of God, ordained of God, intends, or
has his eye upon the Roman Emperor, as the supreme power of the Roman State.

2 That the said Emperor was then an usurper.

As for the former: who so looks into the Roman Histories of those times will
understand, that there was then (to wit, in the time of the Emperors Cajus,
Claudius, and Nero) a Roman Senate in being, and exercising authority; and that
not merely subordinate, but Sovereign; sometimes without, sometimes against,
and sometimes in conjunction with the Emperor. Sometimes (I say) without,
s^metimes against him. Without him, as upon the death of Cajus, and Claudius,
and ere their respect ve successors were invested: against him, as about the
depesall, and death of Nero.

Yea, Mr. Prin has undertaken to make good, and has collected a plentiful
store of testimonies out of antiquity, sufficient to render it more then p
obable to any Reader, that in the Roman State, from the first, continually, and
par icularly after the Emperors came in, the supreme power resided in the
Senate, and people, and not in the Kings, C^nsuls, or Emperors. Unto whom I
refer the Reader in his f^urth part of the Sovereign power, etc. the Appendix,
page 2, etc. and his third part, page 109, 110, 111. See also Grotius, de ja^e
belli lib. 2. cap. 9 sect 11. and his Annotat. on that Section.

If H storians observe there was any debate at any time st^rted betwixt the
Senate, and the Emp^rou s about the title, or exercise of the sovereignty in a
y point; or if the Emperou s overtopping the S na e in some things be set
against the Sena^es acting without, or against the Emperor in others, t^ ^ at
the most will cause but the more uncertainty in this poin^, and leave both the
precise matter of fact, or the then constitution of the Roman power, and the
question whom the Apostles reflection, or intention was upon as the supreme
power there, the mo^e to us dubitable, and in medio: or rather will induce us
to conclude this as certain, that, what ever dispute, or alternatenesse of
prevailing there might then be, or may now seem to us (by what the Authors now
extant hold forth of th se times) then to have been, betwixt the Emperor, and
Senate about the supremacy; the Ap^stle relates not to that matter; meddles not
with the stating, or determining of it; that being a question of civil right,
which either might have little matter of doubt in it, as to the Christians
practice, or might not be so doubtful to them that lived in those times, as it
is now to us at this distance, or might have other ways of clearing it, in so
far as the Christians conscience was concerned, then by the Apostles express
writ in this Epistle. But taking the government that then was (in complexo) as
just, and therefore necessary to be subjected to, he exhorts to that duty
toward it, and that with this reason, because, of God, ordained of God.

Indeed the questions which were now on foot among the Christians, in reference
to civil obedience, and which lay more upon the Apostle to deal in, and
resolve, (by the consent of Expositors, ancient, and modern) were not so much
in whom the supremacy was, as, whether Christians were at all bound in
obedience to any civil superiors? and, if at all to any, whether to Pagan,
and persecuting Magistrates?

For the other, (the presumed usurpation of the Emperor) It is true, sundry
Authors, both Protestant, and Popish do occasionally instance in the Roman
Emperors of this age, as usurpers: but, upon what evidence? as far as I can
trace their censure in antiquity, all their ground for it is, the changes and
simulties about Government that had then for a long space troubled that State,
and the oppositeness of diverse worthy Romans (such as Cato, Brutus, Cicero,) to
the prevailing parties.

But let the alterations which the first Chieftaines made to the prejudice of
the Senatorian, or Consular interest be admitted violent, and illegal, and the
power which the first Emperor, or Emperors ascended to by them to have been
in that its first rise, or emergency of the same character; I shall affi^me
there is yet alleged no good reason to pronounce, that the power of those
forenamed Emperors, taken to have been Contemporaries with St. Paul's
Apostleship, was of that nature: This I deliver, not upon any exactness of
mine own search of History, but upon this twofold consideration.

1. The attestation of some Authors of this present age, very eminent.

As Junius (of whom Scaliger is said have given this highest Elogy, That no age
since the Apostles can show such a Divine Ab Apostolorum temporibus hactenus
parem Theologum nullum vidit seculum. Apud Gatakeri Cinnum, lib 2 cap. 9. page
267.
) In his controversy with Bellarmine about the Translation of the Roman
Empire from the Greeks to Germany, and in them to Charles the great (
Bellarmine endeavoring to defend it to have been the act of Pope Leo the
third, and to have been done lawfully by him) he first asserts his opinion of
that Translation. That a difference is to be put betwixt the translation in
doing, and the translation after it was done. In the former there was a fault,
which ceased in the latter. Though the beginning was injurious, there was a
post-fact which made it right. And then he brings in as a parallel, to
illustrate this the case we are upon, the Monarchy of Julius Caesar; Alia est
ratio translationis in fieri quam in factum esse. Translatio in fieri fuit
vitiosa, in qua, nec Leo tertius, nec populus Romanus, nec ipse Carolus
officium fecit. Sed translatio in factum esse desiit vitiosa esse, praesertim
cum Irene imperatrix, and Constantinus filius, etc. quorum intererat, cedemes
jure suo pacem cum eo statuerunt, etc. Nempe ex post-facto jus invaluit, cujus
non ita fuerunt initia justa. Exemplo esto, si placet, Julii Caesaris
Monarchia. Haec enim ortu iniqua sic fuit, ut constituta semel Rep. coeperit
esse justa. Nec solvi, nisi per in^ustum ordinis publici conturbationum
poterit. Junii Animad. in Bellarmin. Controv. 3. lib. 5 cap. 8. sect. 18. page
872.
of which he says, this was so unjust in its beginning, as that being once
constituted, to the Commonwealth it became just, neither could be dissolved
without an unjust distu^bance of the public order.

Chamier may second this of Junius. Whereas Pighius denies Pilate to have had
any ordinary, or lawful authority over Judea, or over Christ, because Caesar
had not: and Caesar (says he) had not, because he got his power both over the
Roman Empire, and over Judea unjustly Chamier thus answers him. What then? If
that Authority were from bad, and unjust beginning, did therefore Christ
untruly say it was from ab^ve? Quid tum? si a malis, and injujustis principiis
ea authoritas fuit, an propterea falso Christus dixit eam esse (...)? an
propterea perperam docuit Caesari censum solvendum? an vero nulla potestas ab
initio injusta, potest posted justa esse? Hoc vero si esset, tum sane aut
nulla, aut paucissima regna erunt justa. Chamier panstrat. Tom. 2. lib. 15.
cap. 16. Sect. 8. and 9. page 635.
did he therefore ill to teach that tribute was to be paid to Caesar? Can no
power at first unjust afterward become just? If that were so, then either none,
or very few Kingdoms would be just.

Another (to add no more) may be Arnisaeus, he, moving the question, Whether
the act of a Tyrant (as to title) may be so rectified by the peoples
after-consent, that what was null before may become valid; even as Sylla got
himself created Dictator for 80 years, and Caesar procured the same to
himself for ever? Absque m^tu vero si populus, ad exemplum Romans, deponat
omnem potestatem in principem, aut consensum tacitum confirmaris praescriptio
immemorialis, quae vim habet privilegii, acquiescendum esse consilio illorum,
qui censent inveteratas causas non esse renovandas. Arnisaeus de Authoritate
princi^^m. Cap 4 Sect. 14. page 127, 128.
resolves it thus. If the people, according to that example of the Romans,
dispose of the power to the Prince: or if prescription of time out of mind
convey a tacit consent, that is to be acquiesced in without scruple.

2. The evidences I meet with in Historians of the vote or consent of the
Senate, and people, which those Emperors had, giving them a just title, and
assoyling their government from the brand of usurpation.

Chronicon Carionis says of Julius Caesar, that he was confirmed by a public
decree in the supreme power. And the same says Cluverus of him. Revera Julius
Magistratus esset decret^ publico confirmatus, quo ei tributa erat summa
potestas, and quo sanxerat senatus eum esse inviolabilem. Chron. Car. part 1.
lib. 2. cap. penult. page 187. Tum vero absens (Caesar) Romae Dictator creatus,
pacisque and belli Dominus. Cluver. hist. lib. 7. p. 237.


Of Augustus his entrance Tacitus witnesses, both the Nobles and Provinces
assent to it. And for further testimony (very luculent) of the Senates and
peoples hearty subsequent submission to him from time to time, and their
conserting on him the honor, and power that he assumed, yea, and m^re then he
fought, or accepted, I sh ll refer the Reader to the collections (out of their
Historians) of Archbishop Usher, Vsseri Annal. part 2 page 379. 497, 498, 549,
554. Cluver. hist lib. 7. page 240. Em. Thesauri Caesares in Tiber. Vide etiam
Sueton. Aug. vita cap. 58. and 70. Greg. Tholos. Synt. juris, lib 47. cap. 15.
sect. 21. and cap. 20. sect. 4.
in his Annals, and to Cluverus. Unto which let that be noted of the Elogist,
Thesaurus. Doluit pat^ia cum principem fecit: gavisa cum habait.

Of Tiberius his admission by the Senate, and people, let be consulted.
Tacitus, Suetonius, Arch bishop Usher, and Emanuel Thesaurus Tacit. Annal. lib.
1. cap. 2. Sueton. in Tiberio. cap. 24. Usseri Annal. page 549, 554.
. Of whom the last says, Sponte se Roma tyranno tradidit, tempori serviens,
non Regi.

Of the most cheerful coming in of Cajus Caligula, let Suetonius testify
Sueton. in Caio cap. 13, and 14.
. And of Claudius, see Josephus, Cluverus, and Mr. Lightfoot Josephus de Bell.
Jud. lib. 2. cap. 10. and Antiqu. lib. 19 cap. 3. Cluver. hist. lib. 8. page
267. Lightfoot on Acts, Ann. Christi 42. Sect. 4, and 5.
. Of Nero, Tacitus Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. cap. 14.
.

If against the validity of the consent given to any of these it be alleged
that it was enforced by arms, and therefore void, It may be said,

1. Unto some of them, as Augustus, Caligula, and Nero, the consent of the
Roman S a e, is related to have been such as leaves no color for this
obj^ction.

2. It will be a very hard, yea, I think, an impossible thing for any at this
distance of time, and in such an imperfection of historical narration of
circumstances to bring sufficient ground upon which to conclude any such awe to
have been upon the Senate, and people at the time of their consent given to
any, or to such of them as might be in the Throne at the mission of this
Epistle, as may serve to make the said consent invalid. Let the definition
which Civilians and Casuists give of that terror which may annull a civil act
(to wit, that it must be 1. From a cause extrinsical. 2. Probable. 3. Grievous.
4. Unjust. 5. Impressed on purpose to overawe to such an act Metus 1.
Extrinsecus. 2. Probabilis. 3. Atrox. 4. Injustus. 5. Incussus ad hoc. Vide
Bonacinam Tom. 2. Tract. 2. de Restit. Disp. 3. qu. 1. punct. 2. sect. 3. Et
Tom. 1. Tract. 2. qu. 3. punct. 8. Et Greg. Thol. Synt. Jur. lib. 21. cap. 2.
sect. 3. Et lib. 36. cap. 25. sect. 5.
) he made out to have been then the case.

There is no great ground of presumption for it that I met with in story, in
any of them save in that of Julius Caesar, which will no way concern the title
of them that followed, particularly of that Nero, in whose reign the writing of
this Epistle is computed to fall.

3. There are that conceive, though in foro civili, promises made under some
kind of fear, or force are voyded, that is, are made politically null, yet by
the law of nature, and so in the Court of Conscience, a contract,
notwithstanding any force impelling the contractor, is obliging Grotius de Jure
Bell. lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 7.
.

SECT. II. CHAP. X SECT. II. Subsect. 1.
Object. Of Christ's paying, and commanding Tribute-paying to Caesar: of his
owning Pilates power: Of Soldiers serving the Romans without the disallowance
of the Baptist, Christ, etc.
Object. 2. CHrist himself paid, and commanded the Jews to pay Tribute to
Caesar; acknowledged Pilates power, which was the Romans, to be of God: and we
read of diverse soldiers, and officers under the Romans, with whom John the
Baptist, Christ, and his Apostles had to do, and none of them that we read of
ever reprehended any of them for, or dissuaded them from that service. But the
Romans were usurpers over Judea.

Subsection 1. The question, whether the Romans were usurpers over Judea?
discussed, and concluded negatively.
Answer. 1. IF the Romans were usurpers over Judea, there is something of an
argument, otherwise there is none in all this. But how will this be proved?
Most of the Authors of this objection do no more for this then cite the names
of some learned and good Authors affirming it, and so they take it f^r granted.
But for their full answer, and the clearing of this I shall

1. Scan a little this their common proof by such humane assertion.

2. Then consider what reason may suggest to us in this matter.

3. And then remove some other reasons pretending the conviction of the Romans
of usurpation.

For the former, the assertion of sundry learned Authors, that so it was:
though such do in transitis, and aliud agentes, affirm the Romans, in the
days of our Savior upon earth, to have been usurpers over Judea^, yet is not
their bare affirmative to be taken for an evidence in such a business, viz.
sufficient to state the sense of a Scripture in controversy, or to extend, or
limit a Scripture rule of practice, such as this is. Their ground for so saying
would be seen to such an end, and until then I shall with as good authority (I
think) deny it. Not that I oppose mine own negation, as to be as firm, and
credible as the assertion of any such learned men: but because I have the
authority of (I deem) as learned, and good Authors denying the same, and
asserting the lawfulness of the Roman government over the Jewish Nation, by
consent ere this given to it, whereby it stood cleared of usurpation.

There is a little Treatise (printed about 7 years since) called An
exercitation concerning usurped powers; which ( page 87, 88.) has cited some
passages out of Josephus to prove the Jews giving up themselves to the Roman
Dominion antecedently to this time which the objection concerns. I shall refer
the Reader to these, adding here one or two more out of the same Author (whose
testimony in this matter is absolutely the greatest of humane) and then produce
the attestation of others of best note; and after that subjoyn a sh^rt vindica
i^n of what that exercta ion had before given.

A further testimony out of Josephus is in these words of Agrippa, in his
oration to the Jews at Jerusalem, a little before their siege, and destruction
by the Romans for their rebellion.

For servitude is grievous, when new, Joseph. de Bell. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 16.
and it seems just to strive to avoid it; but he that is once brought under it,
and then makes defection, appears to be rather a rebellious servant then a
lover of liberty. Therefore it behoved, when Pompey entered into this Province,
to have used all means against the Romans entry: but ye that have received an
hereditary obedience, and are far inferior in means to those who first
submitted, how can ye now think of making resistance to the whole Roman Empire?

This passage is clear enough for the Jews reception of the Roman Rule, under
Pompey.

Another may be that which the same Author has in the relating of an
occurrence which happened about seven years after this first close of this
Nation with the Roman in subjection; which was this.

Alexander the son of Aristobulus (who was the head of that party that fell
under the force of the Roman sword, and still repined at their government)
beginning to make insurrection against the Romans, was suppressed by Gabinius the
Governor of Syria, and upon that suppression Gabinius settled the government of
the Jewish Commonwealth in another form, distributing the Province of Judea
into five equal parts, and appointing so many several Cities in each of them
for the people respectively to belong, and repair unto for justice; the which
course of government took so well with the Jews, that the remaining grudges at
the Roman Dominion were removed. The words of Josephus upon it are, Joseph. de
Bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 6.
The Jews being delivered from the government of one alone, were willingly
governed by several Chieftaines, or A^istocratically. I am to adjoyne now some
other W^iters testimonies, one of the most learned Antiq^aries, especially in
the Jewish affairs we have, is Mr. John Seldom. And he has purposely enquired
into, and professedly debated this question: and he resolves it for us thus.

It is not obscure to be seen that in the times of the Empires of the
Babylonians, the Persians, the Grecians, and the Romans, the Jews, upon their
respective victories over them, were (soedere, seu deditione subditi) subjects
to them by covenant, or surrendering up of themselves: that by virtue of the
said covenants, or deditions, they paid tribute, and they served as Soldiers
under Alexander the Great. And particularly in reference to the Romans, he
says, concerning the public acknowledgement of the Right of the Romans by
War, and arms over this Nation (the Jews) there is clear evidence from the
leagues, and charters of Princes, which both Josephus, and Philo ( in the Book
de legatione) do hold forth. And that that Nation was received of the Romans by
dedition, or by that league which is betwixt unequals. And that the tribute,
which Judas the Galilean stood up to free that people from, was imposed by
Augustus, by the law of victory and dedition. And that the sedition of those
Jews (mentioned, Acts 5 37.) who mutinied upon occasion of that tribute taxed
upon them by Augustus, by the law of victory, and dedition, was according to
Ga^aliels speech disallowed of by that Sanhedrim or Council of the Jews, as
St. Luke relates in that story (Acts 5.40.) as being by the delusion of a
seditious incendiary, and not of God. And that the Jews had yielded themselves
unto, and owned the Roman Dominion in Pompey, Caesar, Augustus, and Tiberius,
ere this question about tribute-paying was proposed to our Savior. And that
be, from the inspection of that Denarius, the coin which upon the moving of
this question, and his demand to have it sh^wen, was produced, raised an
irrefragable argument of that dedition, and from thence of their d bt of
tribute-paying. And that they who ex animo, and really stuck at the payment of
it, were a seditious party, dissenting from the Body of that Nation. All this
may be seen more at large delivered by Mr Seldom Io. Seldom de jure Naturae,
etc. lib. 6. cap. 17. page 751, etc.
. What an act dedition is, let Gro^ius inform Deditio sponte permittit quod
alioqui vis esset ereptura. Grot. de jure Bell. lib. 3. cap. 8. sect. 4.
Dedition is a yielding voluntarily to that which otherwise force would extort.

That there was on the part of the Jewish Nation a rendering of themselves up to
the Roman government, yea, and a covenant of fealty, or subjection entered into
by them upon Pompeys coming to Jerusalem in assistance to Hircanus, and his
besieging and taking the Temple from Aristobulus his party (the opposites of
Hircanus, and of the greater part of that nation) another of our most learned,
and judicious searchers of Antiquity, Archbishop Usher, has furnished us with
diverse testimonies out of History. One is of Eutropius, viz. Pompey passing
into Jury, took Jerusalem, the Metropolis of that Nation, in the third month,
killing 12 thousand of the Jews, and receiving the rest into fealty Ad Judaeos
transgressus (Pompeius) Hierosolymam caput gentis tertio mense cepit; duodecim
milibus Judaeorum occisis, caeteris in fidem acceptis. Eutropius.
. Another of Orosius, who speaking of Pompey, says, He sends to the City of
Jerusalem Gabinius with his Army, himself presently following, and being
received of the Fathers into the City, but repulsed by the common sort from the
walls of the Temple, he begins to besiege it; and hardly took it in three
months. Thirteen thousand of the Jews are reported there to be slain. The
rest of the people entered into a league of subjection Ad Hierosolymam urbem
eorum Gabinium cum exercitu mittit: ipse continuo subsecutus, and a patribus
u^be receptus, sed a plebe muro Templi repulsus, oppugnationem ejus intendit,
etc. vix tertio mense expugnavit. Tredecim millia Judaeorum ibi caesa
narrantur. Caetera multitudo in fidem venit. Orosius. Usseri Annal. part 2.
page 262, 263.
. Another testimony of the Jews consent to the Roman authority, the same
Archbishop gives us out of Josephus, which is that I cited even now, of their
willing embracement of an Aristocraticall government settled over them by
Gabinius Usseri Annal. pert 2. page 281.
.

Another witness shall be Calvin, who upon the Text mainly referred to in the
Objection, says, The authority of the Roman Empi^e was by common use
approved, and received among the Jews; whence it was manifest that the Jews
had now of their own accord imposed on themselves a law of paying the tribute,
because they had passed over to the Romans the power of the sword Romani
Imperii authoritas communi usu probata, receptaque erat, unde constabat Judaeos
ipsos jam sibi sponte legem imposuisse solvendi Tributi, quia Romany gladii
potestatem concesserant. Calv. in Matthew. 22.19.
.

For this voluntarinesse of the Jewish subjection to the Romans, and
consequently the freedom of these from usurpation in relation to them, at what
time our Savior conversed on Earth among them, I have more testimony, of
primest worth, but will spare the citing of their words, and shall refer my
Reader to Weems, Weems Exposition of the Judic. Law, page 52, 53.
Grotius, Gro^. de Jure Bell. lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 14.
and Dr. Hammond, Dr. Hammond Annot. on Matthew. Chap. 22. note B.
the last of whom I shall have occasion to bring in by and by; and unto these
may be put Chamier, before cited in answer to the first Objection.

Let us n^xt see what is said in this matter against the exercitation above
cited, and the Romans Title to Judea therein asserted, by the Book called, The
Exercitation answered.

He ( page 51.) objects against the Maccabean title by the consent of one of
which (Hircanus) the Romans came into the Dominion of Jew^y. But what if none
of them of that race that ruled, what if the last of them Hircanus had not any
good title? yet, if the Romans had the peoples consent (as the exercitation
asserteth they had) their claim might be good. But let us see how he avoids the
Maccabean title.

First, he obj^cts, That the Maccabees came in by force into the Kingdom, when
there was another King, a successor of Alexander. He says, but proves it not;
I answer him.

1 It is no concluding argument of the unlawfulness of any power that they
come in by force. The question is, whether that force be just, or unjust?
whether it be a mere force, or a force b^cked with a just title at its
entrance? or, if it had no^, a question will be further, whether it had none
subsequently conferred, by which means, though the force were unjust in its
entry, yet it might be absolved in its continuance from usurpative tenure? But
the justifiablenesse of the Maccabean arms against the Syrian Kings is
commonly yielded, and ass^rted, although there may be some diversity in the way
of making it out, of which the Reader may see in Grotius Grot. de jure B^l lib
1. cap. 4. sect. 7.
. For them there are rendered these reasons.

1 The allowednesse of the Subjects defensive arms against their lawful
Sovereign in case of ex^ream necessity, as was that of the Jews under
Antiochus. This is a ground undeniable by that answer.

2 But it is further to be said, that at what time Mattathias the Father of the
Maccabean brethren, and after him his son Judas, and the other in succession
raised arms against, and repelled the Seleucian oppressions, be that was then
reigning of that race (Antiochus Epiphanes) was an usurper, the right of
succession being in Demetrius the son of Seleucus, the son of Antiochus the G
eat, and elder brother to this Antiochus. And that Demetrius being now an
hostage at Rome, and by the Senate there detained from succeeding in the
Kingdom, the Jews had some occasion given them to assume the administration of
the aff^irs of their own nation, especially they being now under Tyran^ not
only as to title, but as to his imm^ne, (or Epimane, as his style is in
Athenaeus Usseri Annal. part 2. page 1. Ro^^e his hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. page 2.
) government. And it may be noted also, that this Antiochus at his end vowed to
God to grant the Jews an Autonomie, that they might thence forward use their
own Laws, and constitutions, and moreover wrote supplicatory Letters in behalf
of himself, and his son Antiochus, whom he left to succeed him, to pray, and
beseech their fidelity to them both Vide Usseri Annal. part 2. page 47. and 2
Macc. 9 13, etc.
.

2 As for the freedom of the Maccobeans Dominion in reference to their own
Nation, Josephus gives very clear testimony of the J was election, and
admission of them, and in particular of the fore-leaders of them, Mattathias,
and his sons Ios^ph. de Bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 1. Et Antiqu. lib. 13. cap 1,
and 11.
.

2. He questions, whether the High Priest were capable both of a Crown, and
Mitre, wherein some say he was a pattern of Antichrist.

To this blur of typifying Antichrist, it may be replied, Antichristianisme is
now grown a very common, and stale imputation, many having applied it to any
thing which they please to asperse.

2 It Is strange that under the Law not only Christ, but Antichrist should have
his types.

3 How will he make it apppeare, that to wear both a Crown, and a Mitre is a
property of Antichr^st, that is, that it does competere to him, and to him
(with his types) alone.

4 It is certain Christ is both King, and Priest, and so, in their model are
all Christians. The Maccabees then, if in this they must be typical, being
they were such faithful, and pious, as well as magnanimous persons, might
rather be construed presidentiall in this good, then in so soul an application.

2 But to his question, let the examples of Melchisedech, Eli, Samuel, and
Jehoiada (who sure were no patterns of Antichrist) be considered, as to the
lawfulness of the conjunction of civil regiment with the Priesthood. Yea, I
presume upon better enquiry it will be found that temporal power, to wit, the
judgment of civil causes was the ordinary investure of the Priesthood of
Aaron by institution See Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11. and 19.17. 2 Chr. 19.8, 9, 10.
. And certainly the Priests that were either presidents, or members of the
Jewish supreme Council, or Sanhedrim were interested in such a power.

3 As for the pomp, or honor of a Crown, or Kingdom, the former Maccabees
never assumed it. The first that did it was Aristobulus, say some, Alexander
his brother, and next successor, say others; the latter was father to Hircanus,
from whose hand the power passed upon Pompeys victory to the Romans; and the
said Hircanus sat High Priest nine years ere the Kingdom came to him, which
he had not enjoyed three months (say some Monta^us. Apparatus 6. Sect. 24, 25,
26. page 229. Lightfoot of Temple cap. 4. sect. 3. page 29.
) when the difference brake out betwixt him, and his brother Aristobulus, which
was the occasion of calling in the Romans by Hircanus, and his party, and so of
their sovereignty there.

2. He alleges, The covenant made betwixt Hircanus, and Aristobulus importing
that the latter should command the Kingdom; the which disinabled Hircanus
forgiving away the Kingdom after to Pompey.

Answ. 1. Hircanus indeed forced by Aristobulus, yielded him up the Kingdom by
such a covenant; but the Chieftaines of Judea not consen^ing, after set up
Hircanus again upon d slike of Aristobulus, and by the assistance of Aretas the
Arabian King first, and then of Pompey recovered it from him Vide I^seph.
Antiqu. lib. ^4. cap. 1, 2 7, 8.
. And Pompey, before his coming in, was sought unto by both those parties to
determine the controversy betwixt them Vide Usse^i Annal. part 2. page 249,
250. 163.
. Upon which he adjudging for Hircanus, and taking up his cause joined with
him, and his party in the oppugning and suppressing of Aristobulus.

3. He excepteth against the Roman Title by surrend^y of Hircanus to Pompey,
upon that maxim, a King cannot pass away his Kingdom without their consent.
This position is a truth acknowledged by Sta^esmen See K. James his Remonstr.
etc. p. 207, 208. The ^rraignment of the powd^r-Tr^tytors in the Earl of
Nor^hampt. speech, page 273, 309, 314. Widd^ing. Theolog. Disput. adm. to
Reader. sect. 10.
, and others (save that some distinguish of a constitutive, and a patrimonial
Kingdom, and deny it of the latte^) and from thence is voided his n^xt
preceding objection of Hircanus his covenant; which for this reason could be no
obligation to the people, or bar to the Romans title, coming in against
Aristobulus. Neither does the exe^citation at all inf inge that maxim, by
founding the Roman claim upon Hircanus his sole act; for it expressly takes in,
and brings proof of the consent of the Nation. Which proof now comes in to be
defended against this Answerer.

4. He alleges the words of Jos^phus, That all the whole Nation were against
both Hirc^nus, and Aristobulus for b^inging them under the servitude of a
Kingdom, for they said their custom was to be governed by Gods High Priest,
but I hope (says the Answerer) Pompey was no Priest, and there fore they did
not choose him for their Governor.

To this the answer is easy. The exception of the people in this narration of
Josephus was not against the government of both those brothers; For the same
Author relates the peoples acception of Hircanus to the Dominion immediately
upon the death of Alexandra. And when he being of an over-sl^w, and modest
temper, had given way to the turbulent spirit of Aristobulus his younger
brother to reign, they rose up (in assistance of Aretas the Arabian King) for
his restoring to the government Jo^eph. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 3. Usseri Annal.
page 141.
. But they were ill content with their government under the title, pomp,
majesty, and expensivenesse of a Kingdom, or they blamed the annexing of a
Crown to the moderate Dominion of the ancienter Asmoneans. This was indeed an
innovation (and so displeasing) first introduced by the Father, or Uncle or
Hircanus.

2 This complaint of the people against those brethren is no argument to
prec^ude the peoples consent to Pompey afterward, had he taken upon him to be a
King over them.

That which a people now disliketh, they do not ever continue to disaffect or
refuse. Who knows not the mutability of a multitudes minds? Sed quid turba
Remi? siquitur fortunam, etc.

3 But as Pompey was no High Priest, so he was no King. Neither does the
Exercitator say they chose him for their King. Neither does the matter of this
complaint make any thing against the complainers Dedition to the Romans. But in
truth it did further it; For they affecting rather Hircanus his indulgent rule
then Aristobulus an imperious, and warlike man; and not being able to keep down
the latter, or enjoy the quiet of their Country under him, they submitted to
the Romans, whereby they recovered Hircanus, freed themselves of the other
brother, and had their desire of the Romans of being rid of a Crowned
High Priest; Pompey gratifying them in leaving Hircanus to govern them, but (
secluso Diademate, say Hist^r^ans exp^esly) and in association with Antipater,
as Procurator Usser. Annal. page 261. Montacut. Apparatus, 6. Sect. 26. page
229.
. And when about six years after Alexander the Son of Aristobulus infested
Judea with new broyls, in his Fathers quarrel, Gabinius, the Roman President
of Syria, having subdued him, restored Hircanus to the H^gh Priesthood only,
and set over the Country certain prefects in distinct circuits, wherewith the
people rested very well satisfied Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 10. and de Bell.
lib. 1. cap. 6. Uss^r. Annal. p. 281.
.

5. Whereas to prove the Jewish dedition the Exercitator had brought out of
Josephus, the words of Antipater to Caesar concerning Antigonus (the son of the
aforesaid Aristobulus) his craving aid of Caesar against Hircanus, he falls
foul upon the Exercitator, and charge h him with a false construction of the
Latin sentence (for the Greek he had not) of Josephus.

In defense of that Exercitator I shall but

1 Present the Reader with the words which the Exercitator had truly cited out
of the printed Latin version of Josephus, which are [Non propter inopiam
desiderare facultates; sed ut in eos qui dedissent Judaeorum seditiones
accenderet.] and with the Exercitators Englishing of them; That he sought not
relief (of Caesar) because he was poor; but that he might kindle Jewish
seditions against those which had made a dedition of themselves. I leave the
Reader to judge if there be any such fault in the construction: And whether the
Answerer has dealt fairly, either with the Exercitator, in challenging him of
very untruly alleging those words of Antipater; or with Josephus, in his
undertaking to correct the Exercitators version by translating him thus, He,
that is, Antigonus, craved not maintenance for that he wanted, but that he
might raise a rebellion among the Jews, and against them who would bestow any
thing upon him. Which of these two have more faithfully translated the Latin
above set, I need not take the umpirage of.

2 Propose betwixt them, that the concernment of the quotation in the point of
validity lies in the congruity of the matter for which it is brought ( viz. to
prove a dedition of the Jews to the Romans) to the Greek of Josephus, which
is, [(...).] It may be the Latin (about the englishing of which the answerer
quarrels with the Exercitator) follows not the original overstrictly, but the
main question is, whether Josephus his own words do not bear a dedition as
clearly as the Exercitators English. That this is their importance I will not
seem to obtrude my assertion upon the Reader, now he has the words before him.
Only I shall let him know I am very much confirmed to take it so to be, having
found an Antiquary, and Greek Critic of so great sufficiency quoting this very
passage for the same purpose to which the Exercitator had done, I mean the
singularly learned Dr. Hammond; Dr. Hammond Annot on Math. 22. Note B.
who in his Annotations asserts of the Jews, that they had made a dedition of
themselves to the Romans, and for it cites the same place in Josephus (viz. de
Bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 8.) in which place there is nothing to be found that
sounds to that purpose, if these words do not. The same Doctors testimony to
the thing I am arguing for, which should have been given above, I have referred
to this place upon this occasion, as being very pertinent.

He affirms in the same Annotation, That the Jews, those of them that were of
Hircanus party, came under the Roman power by consent, and not by force; by a
choice which the factious among themselves put them upon, and by way of
dedition: while they of Aristobulus party looked upon the R^mans as usurpers,
and forcible possessors, and that this difference conntinued till our Saviors
time: When of the Jews some part acknowledged, and adhered to the Caesarean,
or Roman authority: some part looked upon it as an usurpation, and of this
generally were the Pharisees. And that Christ's answer is punctually in favor
of the Roman Emperor, especially to those who took the tribute to be his
right.

Having thus weighed, and I think sufficiently counterpoised the opinion of
those who are for the Romans, to have been usurpers over Judea, in the time of
our Savior, by humane testimony, I have only to add,

2. Somewhat of reason against their said opinion.

1 Had not so many learned men stood up for the justific^tion of the Roman
dition over the Jews by their dedition, and agreement, yet it is not with
probability supposeable, that their Dominion in Judea having now been continued
above 90. years, could have been exercised so long, without some consent
sufficient to legitimate it to the present rulers; that is, either an express,
or a tacit consent; eit er a real consent, or such as was to be presumed,
having been continued by immemorial usage.

2 To this title of the Romans, the confession of the Jews themselves made at
this time, seems to astipulate.

They said, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. We have no King
but Caesar. In the former sentence they disavow to be in them the power of
capital punishment, and consequently the supreme authority civil; not only
the natural, or compulsory, but the legal, and Justifi^ble power. In the
latter, they own Caesar as their King, with an exclusive negation, or
abrenunciation of all other.

3 To this also, that appeal of the Apostle Paul unto Caesar, adds some
strength. When the Chieftains of the Jews had challenged his trial to belong
to them, and F^stus also had moved him to agree to have had the cognizance of
his Cause taken at Jerusalem; in return to them both, he asserteth that both
his person, and his cause appertained to Ca^sars Tribunal; and that not only
in fact, but o^ right, (...), where I ought to be judged.

But there is one (the Answerer to the exercitation above dealt with) that
pretends to some more matter of reason to evict the Roman usurpation. He
opposes to the lawfulness of their title, two other titles, which by reason
of the venerablenesse of their names to whom they are affixed, will seem to
deserve an examination ere that of the Romans can pass for indubitable.

1 He alleges the title of the house of David, and that promise, that there
shall not want a man to sit on his Throne. Unto this I say, There was indeed
such a promise given to David, 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Kings 2 4. which was the basis of
the title of that house. But it is to be observed that the same promise was
made, Jer. 33.17. with relation to the times after the seventy years captivity.
Now let the obj^ctor of this promise show when, and in what sort this in the
Prophet did, or was to receive accomplishment after the captivity: and it will
easily appear, that the civil dominion, either of the Roman now, or of the
Maccabees before, or of any other person was, or would have been no impeachment
to that promise taking place, or to that title built upon it: but the one, and
the other might we^l consist together. The event shows, that the said promise
was applicable to a twofold fulfilling.

1 Temporal, or literal, in the natural posterity of David, and with relation
to Israel that dwelt in Canaan.

2 Spiritual, or mystical in the supernatural seed of David, that is, Christ;
and with relation to Israel in all Nations, viz. the Church of Christ. And that
the time was now come that the latter impletion was to take place; the which
superseded not, but rather made way for the civil title of any who might have
a fair call to the Throne over that Nation.

2 So far as the promi^e, and title was made to David, and his carnal seed,
with relation to the Israelitish Nation, it was made with an express proviso,
condition, and limitation, [of which see 1 King. 2.3, 4 Jer. 22 2, 3, 4, 5.]
the which having been long ere this entry of the Romans often, and wholly
broken, the promise, and title as to that sense of it, was void, and so could
not stand as a bar to any other families capacity of that Crown Vide Montacut.
Apparat. sect. 26 page 88.
.

3 It is evident (what ever had become of that condition) that promise was made
concerni^g the worldly K ngdome of that Nation to continue no longer in force
then to the coming of Christ, in, and by whom the Kingdom of David, and his
seed was to be changed from an earthly, to an heavenly Kingdom: which was meant
by John Baptists, Christ's, and his Apostles preaching the kingdom of h^aven.
Matthew. 3.2.4.17.10.7.
By the prophecy of Jacob, the Scepter (to wit, the temporal power) was
assured unto Judah, but until Shiloh's coming.

2 The other title he brings to nullify that of the Roman is, of the great son
of David, Christ himself, who, as Mr. Perkins acknowledges, Gen 49.10.
was right heir to the Crown, and kingdom of the Jews. Let that pass f^r
cu^rant, which is the comm^n opinion, that Christ was in a direct line David's
next na^ural heir: yet, what ever right might descend upon him, a civil, or
temporal title to the Crown, and Kingdom of the Jews, cannot be concluded to
pass unto him thereby. His succession to David (though he took upon him his
nature) was not of a civil, or earthly interest: as was before noted from the
tenor of his preaching: and is further evident by his own denying the title,
and exercise of a worldly Kingdom to belong unto himself John 18.36. Luke
12.14.
. And this, our Divines insist on, denying there was any civil dominion
residing in him; in answer to the Popes advocates; who for the maintaining of a
temporal power in their Pope, allege there was a civil title to the K^ngdome
of Judea in Christ: but this ours impugn Vide Mont. Apparat 2. sect. 47. page
9. Chamier Tom. 2. lib. 15. cap. 4. Sect. 7, etc. and cap. 16. sect. 3, 4.10.


2 Suppose any right had accrued to him to the temporal Kingdom, yet this
could not remain as a b^t unto the Roman, in as much as he waved, and receded
from it: voluntarily taking upon him a sta^e of poverty, and servitude, and
shunning the offers of the Kingdom Ioh 6.15, 12 36. compared with verse. 18, 19.
. Which he doing, either we must say, that he assigned his title to some other
certain person, or persons whereby all other were excluded from it: CHAP. X.
SECT. II. Subsect. 2.
or that he so declined the use of it himself, as that none other might assume
it though by the Jews agreement, but that they were necessarily, and of duty
to be thenceforth headless, or without civil government; either of which
there is no ground to affirm.

Subsection 2 Of Christ's paying tribute, Matthew. 17.
HAving thus disproved the imputation of usurpation to the Roman Government
over Judea, upon which the strength of this second Objection lies; I have yet
something to say to the other part of the argument, the particulars brought to
confirm the Romans power to have been of God, and the ordinance of God,
although in truth, the matter thus confirmed, is not by me denied.

1. Christ himself paid tribute, Matthew. 17.14.

1 It is a question much agitated for whom that tribute was gathered; whether
by Caesar's Tribute-gatherers for his use; or by the officers of the Temple for
its service. There are very learned men for each of these ways. That it was
for Caesar say those two great Antiquaries, Montacut. Orig. Eccles. part post
page 196. Seldom de jure Not lib. 6. c. 18. Baronius ad An. 33. Number. 31.
Casaub^n Exe^cit. 15. Sect. 19. Cameron Myroth in Matthew. 27.24. Weems Expos. of
judic. Law. page 51. Dr. Hammond Annot. on Mat. 17 24. Seldom ut supra.
Bishop Montague, and Mr. Seldom. That it was not at all for him, but for the
Temple, is the resolution of Baronius, Cameron, Casaubon, Mr. Weems, and Dr.
Hammond: besides those whom Mr. Seldom cites in his dispute upon it, to wit,
Hillary, Beza, Hottaman, Villalpandus, and Lipsius.

2 That payment was made by our Savior with such cau^ion (expla^ning the
consideration upon which it was done, to have been, CHAP. X SECT. I. Subsect. 3.
not any strict right acknowledged to be in the thing, as from him, but to
avoid offense in an act in it self unobliging) as leaves the title of them
that claimed it (supposing it was for Caesar) unstated as to civil dominion
over the place, or as it would have been if such a thing never had been moved
to, or performed by Christ.

Subsection 3. Of Christ's commanding tribute-paying to Caesar.
2 Christ's answer to the Question concerning the Jews payment of tribute to
Caesar, was, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Matthew. 22.21.

1. Some are of opinion that the words of Christ do not bear a command in them
of that payment to that Emperor of Rome, but a general precept only, that,
whereas the matter in question was a payment by the Law of God due to the
serv^ce of the Temple, but were now alienated from it by the Roman State Vide
Calvin in Matthew. 22.15. Dioda^e in verse. 17. Dietericus in Evang. Tom. 2. page
601.
; and the Pharisees, and Herodians came in seditiously, and captiously upon our
Savior with this question, on purpose to render him by his positive answer to
it, obnoxious, either to the Roman State, if he should deny See Luke 20.20, 26.
with cap. 23, 2
; or to the Jews, as an enemy to their Religion, and freedom, if he should
grant it: Our Savior Christ, being well aware of their conspiracy, and that he
might both solve their question, and evade their snare, frames his answer by
way of a general rule, of giving to God, and to Caesar, each their own,
without defining, what this in any particular in relation to either of them
was, or which of them had the right to the payment in question For this
interpretation see Marlor. in loc. Tostat. in loc. q. 104. Seldom de jure Not.
lib. 6. c. 17. page 756.
. And if it be granted that the tribute was usurped indeed from the service of
the Temple to Caesar's secular use, this (me thinks) appears the most probable
Exposition: and the Text seems to incline to it, making the issue of this
answer in them that moved the query to be [ Luke 20.26.] And they could not
take hold of his words before the people: and they marvailed at his answer, and
held their peace.

If they had understood in his words an express, and positive declaration (to
the hypothesis, or particular case) of an obligation to make that payment to
Caesar; why? whence did they wonder? in stead of admiration, and silence, they
would have broke out into exultation, as having obtained their end; and they
had not been prevented of a hold upon his words before the people, but had that
very handle they wished for, in reference to the stirring up an odium in the
multitude against him.

2. They that think otherwise, and suppose that our Saviors speech in these
words, accompanied with a demand of a sight of the tribute-money, and an exact
taking notice of the image, and superscription upon it to be Caesar's, and with
his finger (as it were) pointing at the portraicture, and style of Caesar upon
the coin, does hold forth a precise determination for the payment of the
tribute in question unto Caesar; withal do, and must understand this his
decision to be given in terms, not expressing the affirmative of the question,
but wrapped up in a general reason for it, the giving to Caesar whatever is due
to Caesar, which laid down, and an assumption made out, from the inspection of
the coin, the engraved name, and figure of the person upon it, with the
consideration of the adjunct of it, the Nations act of reception of that coin,
and that which by that act was signified, their entertainment of, and
submission to the Roman Sovereignty, would m ke a complete, and concluding
argument for the tribute to be paid to Caesar. Now the prosyllogisme, or proof
of the assumption of this a^gument (which is that which makes it bear a
pa^ticular determination of the case) does no less expressly assoyl the Roman
Emperor from usurpation, CHAP. X. SECT. II. Subsect. 4, 5.
and assert this title to the Jewish dominion by that Nations consent given,
then it does infer their duty of yielding that tribute, and is so a clear
dissolving of the objection we are upon And so it is adjudged to be by Calv. in
loc. verse. 18. and 21. by Mr. Seldom de jure Not. lib. 6. cap. 17. page 761.
763. 765. and by Doctor Hammond in loc.
.

Subsection 4. Of Christ's acknowledging Pilates power to be of God.
3 WHereas the Objectors say, Christ acknowledged Pilates power to be of God,
John 19.11. This were someting indeed for them, if it could be proved, that the
Romans power over the Jews was usurped. But the evincing of this I think is
forestalled above: And I shall only add, as a further testimony of the
contrary, the paraphrase of Dr. Hammond upon the words of Christ to Pilate,
here cited, which is, All power of the lawful Magistrate is from God: and such
I acknowledge thine to be.

Subsection 5. Of the Soldiers serving the Roman without the disallowance of
John the Baptist, of Christ, or of his Apostles.
4 LAstly, for our Saviors, his Apost^es and John B^ptists, not reprehending
their followers that were officers or soldiers of the Romans, for their being
so. It may make an argument (though but such a one as is from testimony in
matter of fact negative) for the lawfulness of Christians to war, CHAP. X.
SECT. III.
and to serve, and acknowledge, yea, and to bear civil Magistracy; but this
does not come up to any advantage of the objection: for it neither carryieth in
it, or has added to it any evidence against the Romans title to Judea: neither
does it justify any act but what might have been done if the Romans had been
indeed usurp^rs.

SECT. III. The prejudice which the requiring a good title to the making one a
power ordained of God may cast upon all Governments (in as much as their
beginning is ordinarily either unknown, or known to have been vioolent)
objected, and answered.
Object. 1. BUt if to the making of one a power of God, ordained of God, there
must go, not only possession, or actual rule, but a Divine authorization by a
just title, or orderly calling to the place; consequently to the acknowledging,
or owning of one, or more to be such a power, there will be necessary a
knowledge, or evidence of his, or their just title, or orderly call. But this
may suspend, or bring in question the owning of any civil power that is
ordinarily to be found, to be of God, as his ordinance, and will make it a very
hard matter to avow, or take any to be such. For,

1. It cannot be expected that the common people should be able, nor requisite
that they should busy their be^ds, to look into the justness, or legality of
their Sovereigns title, entry, or tenure of his power, or should be perfectly
acquainted with the ancient Laws, or Histories, yea, or the present
transactions which concern the disposal of Crowns, and Scepters.

2. Diverse governments are of a succession, or descent so ancient, that their
first root, or rise cannot at all, or can but dubiously be discovered, or
determined by the learned Antiquaries. Besides the certainty of the doings of
former ages will be still (in regard of the imperfection, and partiality of
Authors of story) dubitable. Yea, the truth, equity, and reason of what is but
emergent, and acted in our own time is often in State Affairs of a dark, and
intricate appearance.

3. Most, or many governments that now are in being, are by Histories tainted
with violence, or other indirect means of getting up at their first erection,
and yet they are accounted, and pass for powers truly authorized, and to be of
God as his Ordinance.

Answ. This objection raises difficulties of some show, but little strength.
It is in this respect in the holding of Thrones, and public authority, as it
is in private possessions, and patrimonies. There are few, or none holders of
lands; or hereditaments that can make out an original title to them. The
usual titles by which the present owners of them do stand upon (descent,
purchase, or gift) are but derivative; they do not as such properly bottom a
title, but convey, or transfer it. They cannot create a right, or constitute
a thing just; only they transfer or convey the same title, which the Ancestor,
seller, or donor had; the which, what it was in it self in point of justice
is, notwithstanding the conveyance, or change of the person possessing, still
q^estionable; and is to be determined by some other way. And the ways of
stating the justness of p^ivate p ss ssions, whether moveable, or immovable,
especially if of any durable, and ancient tenur^ seem to be altogether under as
great obscurities, intricacies, and dispu^ablenesse, as are those by the
objection attr^buted to public places; yea, to some more obscurity, in as
much as the original seisures of these have not the memorials, and
recognitions taken of them which the public have. But though this be
generally the state, and account which can be given of men's titles to their
possessions now adays, and so has been of others before, time out of mind;
yet no man scruples his ancient patrimony, or his late purchase, or grant upon
this score: and, on the other side, neither may therefore any say, there is no
such thing as honesty, or justice in the concernment of a man's tenure; actual
possession, or occupancy is enough; nothing is to be regarded as requisite to
ones becoming, or discovering the true owner of an estate, or goods, but
present possession. No, this would make mad work both in the consciences, and
in the dealings of men. But notwithstanding all the darkness that is upon the
original of titles, and all the inevidence, or disputeableness of subsequent
contracts, or conveyances, every man is bound to see to his just, and righteous
holding of his estate, and goods; Micah 2.1.
and, woe to them that practice iniquity, because it is in the power of their
hand. Tell me then how you will ex^ricate an honest-meaning conscience from the
pinch of the obligation to equity on the one hand, and the obscurity of the
matter of fact on the other, in the case of a private possession: and this will
facilitate the clearing of most that is in the objection.

Thus the case (as I take it) is commonly to be resolved. It was a true M^xime,
Quod non disprobatur, praesumitur. Where no wrong appears, we may ordinarily
take it to be right. And again, In re dubia potior est conditio possidentis.
Continued possession is a title, when it cannot be evicted, or where the
beginning is unc^rtain. There is security enough in holding that which comes to
my hand, and continues in it without detection of injury. If a possession have
run in a right current as far as the notice of him whose conscience is
concerned in it can reach, there is usually a satisfactory, or acquiescive
title: and he that has a thing so is called bona fidei possessor, an honest
owner.

The truth is, that which the Civilians call Vsucapio, or praescriptio, to wit,
an immemor^ l usage, or an occupancy good as far as humane knowledge in
looking back can go, stands up in stead ^f an original title, where that is
out of ken. Not because such a possession may ever be positively concluded to
have been originally right, but because nothing to the contrary does appear,
and therefore reason dictates, if any thing, this must pass for right. It
being to be supposed that the thing possessed either has come down from the
first Proprietor to this hand by a clear transmission, or if any diversion has
been (unwitting to this occupant) the right owner letting it pass so long
unclaimed, has laid aside his title, and given his consent to that alienation
of it.

And thus I conceive the aforesaid uncertainties which are usually attendant
upon the discovery of the positive ground, or rise of civil right, whether
public, or private, are ordinarily avoydable; so as, on the one hand they
shall not impose any real cause of perplexity to the conscience; on the other,
they may not be drawn to patronize the neglect, or overthrow of justice, or
order in present transactions, or to shelter what is manifestly, and evincibly
wrong. The error of an act, or possession which lies hid, and buried in
ignorance, or oblivion, Casuists, with one consent, absolve, as being
involuntary, and therefore inculpable. Concerning this I shall only relate the
resolution of a Casuist of our own, and well approved; and the rather because
his words touch the special matter we are upon, as to the objection. It is
Amesius Si quis rem aliquam suam esse bona fide judicet, cum sit aliena,
conscienti a dictante, potest, ac debet eadem uti ut sua. Si quis bona fide eum
judicet esse suum Magistratum qui est Tyrannus, vel eum esse legitimum
magistratum qui titulum illum falso sibi vendicat, obedientiam deb^tam tenetur
ipsi praestare. Ames. de consc. lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 7. Vide etiam Grot. de
jure Bell. lib 2. cap. 4. sect. 5, etc.
.

CHAP. X. SECT. IV.
If a man without collusion, or in simplicity of heart, judge a thing to be his
own, when it is not, upon the dictate of his conscience he may, and ought to
enjoy it as his own. If a man, in the same manner, judge one to be his
Sovereign who is a Tyrant, or him to be the lawful Magistrate, who falsely
claims that title to himself, he is bound to yield him due obedience.

To the last branch of the objection, the tainture of most ancient Governments
by history, with violence at their first erection, and yet that they may well
now be accounted the ordinance of God, I have returned answer sufficient above
Chap. 5. sect. 4. subsect. 6. in Answer to objection the last.
, and shall therefore, to spare my Reader, forbear repetition here.

SECT. IV. The examples of the Jews submitting to the Babylonian, Persian, and
Grecian Kings, and of the Christians to others, and the command the Jews had
of submitting to the Babylonian, objected, and answered.
Objection 4. BUt have we not going before us the examples of the people of
God, the Jews submitting themselves to the Babylonian first, then to the
Persian, then to the Grecian powers? this appears in the Prophecies of
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and in the histories of Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther,
and the Maccabees. And were not these usurpers over them? As also the ancient
Christians, when there were at sund^y times those that by no better ways then
murder, force, and bribery ascended to the Roman Empire, ^hey yielded
obedience to such. Yea, CHAP. X. SECT. IV. Subsect. 1.
we find s^verall commands, and exhortations which the Jews and with them also
other neighboring Nations had from God for submission to the Babylonian
Monarch. And do not these Instances imply the present possessor to be the
power?

Subsection 1. Of the examples of the Jews, and Christians submission to these
(supposed) usurpers over them.
Answer. THis objection must be answered by pa^ts.

1. For the examples of the Jews submitting to those Kings of Babylon, Persia,
and G^eece, which the Histories mention, and of the Christians so doing to
certain violent intruders into the Roman imperial dignity.

1 Some submission may be yielded and necessary to the present possessor, when
he is not the power of God, ordained of God, yea, and when another is that
power: of which diverse precedents have been before given out of Scripture Chap.
7. Sect. 2. Subsect. 5. and 8.
. As there may be actual rule without authority, so there may be actual
subjection, and no allegiance. But this submission is of another nature,
different from that which is proper, and peculiar to divinely constituted
powers. Of which difference somewhat ere I conclude.

2 That the Jews were Subjects by League, and dedition to the Babylonian,
Pe^sian, Grecian, and Roman Empires successively, was above testified by Mr.
Seldom, and others in answer to the second objection. And if so, then they were
subject to them of right, as to their Magistrates, authorized by God. And
whe^eas some have objected that rule of Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. enjoining the
Israelites to set to be King over them one of their brethren, and not a
stranger. To hinder the justness of their title, or to illegitimate the said
submission of the Jews to those Rulers.

1 If it did so, then is not that their submission to be urged as presidential
to others, or as a proof, that those they submitted to were powers over them of
Gods ordaining.

2 But I take that of Moses to be no disallowance of the Jews owning the
Babylonian, etc.

1 That rule in Moses seems to point at no other time but their first
establishment, or erection of their Kingdom.

2 It respects them only in the condition of the free possession of their
own Land.

3 For their submission to the Babylonian, the Scriptures referred to in the
objection, expressly deliver a command from God, the which (if that of Moses
were still, and in that condition binding) was a Supersedeas to what was before
given.

3 No particular instances are brought when, or who were the Christians that
subjected, or, to whom, or who the Emperors that usurped; if any be to be
given, either the like answer as is now made to those of the Jews may suffice,
or a further may be to be rendered. But somewhat of the Christians carriage to
some of the Roman usurpers will be said anon.

Subsection 2. CHAP. X. SECT. IV. Subsect. 2.
Of the commands the Jews had of submitting to the Babylonian.
2 FOr the commands, and exhortations which the Jews had to yield to
Nebuchadnezzar. 1. Those commands, Jer. 27.1. to the 18.28. 14, 16.38.17, etc.
21.8, 9. seem not to have been delivered until after the King, and people of
Judah had first of their own accord, yielded up themselves to Nebuchadnezzar.
Compare the said passages which reduce themselves within Zedekiah's reign, with
2 King. 24.1. Jer. 37.2. Ezekiel. 17.13, etc. 2. If those commands be extended to
others besides to whom they were then personally given, they do directly
contradict that which they are brought to prove, viz. That a present possessor
is to be submitted to, as Gods power, and ordinance. For when these commands
were directed out, who was the present p^ssessor of rule over the Jews? not
Nebuchadnezzar, for Zedekiah, and his people had rebelled against him after
they had sworn allegiance to him King. 24.20. 2 Chronicles. 36.13. Jer. 52.3. Ezekiel.
17.13, 14, 15.
: and Zed^kiah was now in fact the supreme Governor: yet are these commands
given, and urged again and again by the Prophet from the Lord, both to Zedekiah
to subject himself, and to the Priests, and people (in case Zedekiah would not)
to surrender themselves to Nebuchadnezzar: For which he is therefore complained
of to Zedekiah as an author of defection Jer. 38.4.
.

These commands have been much of late alleged, but they make little for the
alledgers purpose: they holding forth one as p^oprietor of Dominion, to wit,
Nebuchadnezzar, another as possessor, Zedekiah, and enjoining the Jews to
desert the possessor, and yield themselves to the proprietor, then out of
possession.

2. For that command, Jer. 29.7. 1. The matter commanded is no more, but that
the Jews, captives in the City of Babylon, should seek the public peace of
that City, and pray unto the Lord for it. Which may be a duty ordinarily
incumbent on the people of God in relation to any City, or Territory, whether
themselves reside within, and be actually under the government of it, or not;
and upon whatsoever terms the government thereof might stand; according to the
Apostles rule 2 Timothy 2.1.
. But observe, the interest of the present government is not put into into that
command, nominately; nor otherwise employed then as it might conduce to the
Cities peace; neither is the said interest employed to be necessary to the said
public peace.

2 Such as that precept is, it is apparent to have been but of a temporary
nature, and given upon a special occasion of their being captives in that
City, and of their being declared to be sure so to be, and there to serve the
Kings of Babylon until the end of seventy years, and it being declared they
were sent from Judea thither by God for the better place, and their own peace
to be bound up in that of Babylon See this Text it self, and Jer. 24.5, etc.
25.11.21.8, 9.38.2, 17, etc.
. For after the term of that captivity exp^^ed, they are called out thence
again, and are taught the contrary carriage toward toward that City, to wit,
not only to depart out of, but to pray against it, use imprecations upon it,
and exultations in its ruin Jer. 50.8, 28.51.35. Psalm. 137.8, 9.
.

3. It is in like manner to be said of all those forementioned commands of God
to the Jews, and to the other Nations, for their submission to Nebuchadnezzar,
that they were of an extraordinary, and peculiar nature, and not binding to
others in like condition. They were such special Declarations of Gods will,
and disposal as do not impose upon any but hose unto whom they were
particularly made. I may leave it to the determination of any considerate man,
whether if now the Turk, Tartar, Chinaois, or any other Mohammedan, o^ Pagan
Prince, yea, or any one of the Princes of Europe, of a warlike spirit, and
growing more potent in Arms then the rest, should discover his designs, make
preparations, and give out threatenings for the conquest of the Nations about
(as then did Nebuchadn^zzar in reference to the Kingdoms of Palestina, and
others) were the said Princes and States of Europe bound to surrender
themselves as servants, or tributaries to him, and his posterity (either for
the definite space of 70 years, or for the always of his, or their standing
up) under pain of destruction from God, if they should not, by virtue of that
which God declares to the Kings, and people of Judah, and other Nations
concerning Nebuchadnezzar by the Prophet Jeremiah Jer. 27. per totum.
. Or, if a Kingdom be invaded by a foreign Potentate, and the chief City, and
strength of it be by him besieged, is the supreme Commander, or the people
without him, necessarily bound to yield to their Invader, and besieger, because
of what is declared, and denounced to Zedekiah, and them of Jerusalem Jer.
21.8, 9.38.17, etc.
? Or let the urgers of these instances themselves be judges, whether, because
Zedekiah with his people having been (formerly) the subjects of Nebuchadnezzar,
and sworn to him, and lately revolted from him, and now summoned by him to
re-deliver themselves up to him; and they being reproved by the Prophets,
Jeremiah, and Ez^kiel, for their revolt, and called upon for the said
rendition, were thereupon obliged to submit to Nebuchadnezzar: therefore in
like manner others that have been under the like obligations to a Prince, and
have cast him off, are in conscience bound upon summons to render themselves to
him by force of those Texts.

CHAP. X. SECT. V.
SECT. V. The Objection, from the supposed goodness which may be in the
administration of a mere possessory power, answered.
Object. 5. But though the ingresse, the possession of a power be evil, yet
the acts, and effects of that power, viz. The laws, judicial proceedings,
administrations, counsels, and designs thereof may be good.

Answ. 1. What good of profit may be expected from such a power, has been
discoursed of above.

2 A government that is unlawful as to possession, cannot but be unlawful, and
injurious as to exercise and action: The act cannot be good, if the principle
be bad. A government for constitution good may for the acts it puts forth be
bad; but a government for constitution bad, cannot for the acts it puts forth
be good. The act which such a power puts forth may be good for matter, or in
specie, or in the universal nature of it abstract from it is circumstances, but
it is bad in individuo, or as done by him. The act may be good i. e. profitable
to the person to whom it is done, but it is not good morally, or politically,
it is still evil to the agent. It may be good to him too comparatively, that
is, it is better, if he will govern, to exercise his power, to act what is
materially and to others good, then what is per se, vicious, and to others
pernicious Vide Cajetan Summul. Tit. Remp. Tyran. Et Navarri Compendium Tit.
Tyran.
, but it is not good to him absolutely, and in it self, for it were simply his
duty, if a just title will not be made out to him, to desist.

To make a political action good, to wit, just, and legal, there must go, 1.
The warrantablenesse of the matter done. 2. A warrantable calling of the person
to do it. The former may be, and often is in the actions of men without the
latter; by which means it comes to pass those actions are sinful: yea, and
often, or for the most part, are more banefull then beneficial to others. The
note of Sculietus, upon that saying of our Savor, Thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness, Decet nos implere omnem justitiam, h. e. decet me
implere meam justitiam, and te implere tuam justitiam. Intelligit autem
justitiam particularem, i. e. operas ministerii uniuscujusque: quemadmodum
Plato justitiam hanc definivit, (...). Justitia est facere quae sui sunt
muneris, and non curiosum esse in all enis negotiis. Scul^et. Delic. Evang. cap.
28. page 107. See also this point well discoursed in Mr. Symonds his Case, and
Cu^e, etc. cap. 23. page 279. Vide etiam Aquinat. 22 ae. qu. 60. artic. 2.
may be here pertinently remembered. We must understand this distributively,
that is, it becomes me to fulfill mine, thee to fulfill thy righteousness. He
means of praticular justice, that is, the deed of every ones place
respectively: even as Plato has defined this justice to be, every man's doing
his own, and not meddling with another office.

3. This allegation may be an inducement to the Subject to bear, and improve
to the best what he cannot remedy: but it breeds no obligation on him to take
such a Ruler to be a power ordained of God: neither gives him a warrant of
engaging to the said Ruler as such, in all ties, and duties refe^ring to a
Magistrate.

CHAP. X. SECT. VI.
SECT. VI. Of the sayings of some Protestant Authors, interpreting this Text
not only to require obedience to present Rulers, what ever their title be, but
to justify their being ordained of God.
Object. 6. But some of our Protestant Divines of chief note commenting upon
this Text, have given their s^nse to be: That obedience in lawful things is to
be yielded to the present Rulers without respecting by what right, or wrong
they have gotten into power: and that who ever is in actual rule is the power
of God, ordained of God, and that it appears he is so by his seizure, or
possession.

Answer. Here are two positions delivered as the judgment of such Authors.

1. For the former, viz. That obedience is (as lawful, and in many cases
necessary) to be yielded, in lawful things to a poss^ssory power: (for which
are cited Peter Martyr, and Gualter in loc.) I have no dispuse against it. It
may be a position allowable in it self, though not built upon this Text, unto
which I conceive it foreign. There are other grounds, besides Gods ordination of
the powers that are, and the supposall of a real Magistracy in him that
governs, upon which to found, and warrant such an obedience.

2. For the latter (that, whoever s in actual rule is the power of God,
ordained of God, and is manif^sted so to be by such his command) though i^ may
seem to have the judgment, and a thority of Bu^er, Calvin, and Pareus, as they
are alleged for it, and perhaps of some others, yet it is not the ^^ore to
pass. But I shall for reverence sake to those Divines recite their words: and
offer that which is (I think) sufficient to take off the strength which this
argument would borrow from their authority.

Buc^rs word^ are. When therefore it is questioned whom thou must obey, thou
must not look what a one he is that exercises power, nor by what right or
wrong any has entered into the power, nor how h^ does use it, but only whether
he have power: F^r if any be possessed of power, it is without doubt he has
received that power from God Quum igitur quaeritur cui parendum, non est
spectandum qualis sit qui potestatem exercet, nec quo jure, vel injuria quis
potestatem invaserit, quave ratione ea^ administret; sed tantum si potestatem
habeat. Si enim quis potestate pollet, jam indubitatum est illum a deo eam
potestatem accepisse. Bucer in loc.
.

Calvin says, Whereas men often enquire, by what right they have obtained
their power, who have the rule; It should be enough to us that are in Rule. For
they have nor ascended to this height by their own power, but are imposed by
the hand of ^he Lord Saepe solent inquirere quo jure adeptifuerint potestatem
qui rerum potiuntur: Satis autem nobis esse debet quod praesunt, non enim
conscenderunt sua ipsi virtute in hoc fastigium, sed manu Domini sunt impositi.
Calv. in loc.
.

Pareus has it thus He that has shed man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed; but not by any man, for the prohibition is, thou shall not kill: but by a
Magistrate ordained of God. Neither matters it by what means or arts, Nim^od,
Jerob^am, or others have gotten them Kingdoms. For the power which is of God
is one thing, the acquisition, and use of the power is another Qui sanguinem
hominis fuderit ejus sanguis etiam fundetur ab homines: non utique a quovis,
prohibuit etenim, non occides; sed a Magistratu divinitus ordinato. Nec refert
quibus modis, vel artibus Nimrod, Jeroboam, vel alii regna sibi paraverint: nam
aliud est potestas quae a Deo est, aliud acquisitio, and usus potestatis.
Paraeus in loc.
.

I shall not controvert the sense of these sentences, or enquire whether they
will bear aequivalence with the position. Neither will I take upon me to
comment upon these Commentators, but having bestowed so much labor upon the
Text it self, which is both their, and my subject, I shall leave the Reader to
judge of what is said by either, as he shall find reason. Only somewhat to
the weight of their authority.

1. The opinion, or averment of man (of the best for learning and piety) in a
case of conscience, or in an enquiry what is the sense of such a Scripture, or
such a divine precept, is not an oracle, neither will it pass for such in any
controversy. The truth is, we are very prone to attribute some authority to
it, and urge it upon others, so far as we find it concurrent with our own
persuasion. But who is he that will be pre-judged, or concluded by it contrary
to the opinion he has received, or in what he is otherwlse doubtful? when we
look upon it with an impartial eye, that is, in the case wherein we are not
p^e-possessed, it bears no other value with us then what is allayed with the
imperfections of fallibility in it self, and variableness from it self, and
moreover is ordinarily contradicted by other humane testimony or sentence, as
considerable.

2. This p^sition, asserting the power that occupyeth his place by unjust
acquisition, and tenure to be ordained of God, understanding by Gods ordination
his institutive, or preceptive will, Bucer stands charged for it by Pererius,
and other Expositors of the best note of that party, as making God the author
of Sin See Dr. Willet in loc quest. 5. and Mr. Prin his third part of the
Supreme Power, etc. page 114.
. The assoyling the position of that change I leave to them that may concur
with him in it.

3. This argument from humane authority (though of such persons) in this case
can signify little, being far from universal, or having the general, yea, or
(as far as I have observed) the common, or the major vote of such Authors. For
the satisfaction of those that may lay great weight on the jud^ement of those
above cited, or may suspect my sense of singularity; I shall here set down the
sentences of other Authors (in greater store, and of special esteem) who
gainsay that which is said by Calvin, Bucer, and Pareus. In bringing in my
Authors I shall reduce them to two heads.

1 Those that speak particularly to this Text.

2 Those that speak to the thing without reference to it.

1 Those that speak to the Text, denying it to include every possessory power,
and limiting it to the lawfully entitled.

I begin with Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in loc.
who commenting upon the Text, has these words. What say thou? is therefore
every Prince made of God? this, says he, I say not; for I do not speak of
this, or that Prince, but of the thing it self. -- Wherefore he says not, The
Prince is not but of God, but discourses of the thing it self, saying, the
power is not but of God.

My next is, Theophylact Theophylact. in loc.
upon the Text, who repeating the words of Ch^ysostome, says further, He
speaks of the Princes office, not of the Prince: as when a wise man shall say,
a wise is joined to her husband of God, he does not say, that what man soever
lies with a wife, has her for his wife of God, but God has joined her to him
that is married.

Next I shall bring out of the harmony of the confessions of the Christian, and
reformed Churches, Harmony of Confess. in English, Sect. 19. page 588. 592, 593.
the confessions of the Protestant Princes, and States of Germany, viz. Those
of Auspurge, and Saxony That of Saxony says: Although there be many horrible
confusions, which grow from the Devil, and the madness of men, yet the lawful
government, and society of men is ordained of God. As it is said, Romans 13.

That of Auspurge has it thus. Such civil ordinances as be lawful are the
good works and ordinances of God, as Paul witnesses, The powers that be are
ordained of God. Gods wisdom is declared by order, which is in the discerning
of virtues, and vices, and in the society of mankind under lawful government.

To these I shall adjoyne these Protestant Writers

Musculus upon the Text. It is to be noted, he does not say, the^e is not a
Prince, or King who is not of God, but their power is not but of God. For he
speaks not of the abuse of power, and the tyranny which many Princes exercise,
nor y t of those who by force break into powers, but of the power it self
divinely ordained. Although every power be of God, Notandum quod non dicit, non
est princeps, vel Rex qui non sit a Deo, sed non est potestas nisi a deo; non
enim loquitur de abusu potestatis, ac tyrannide quam plerique exercent, neque
de iis qui vi i^rumpunt in potestates, sed de ipsa potestate divinitus
ordinata. -- Licet omnis potestas a Deo sit, non tamen mox omnis princeps est a
Deo. Scriptum est de quibusdam, ipsi regna verunt, and non est a me. Musculus
in loc. Officium subditorum erga Magistratus est obedientia, ut illi, si
legitimus est, omnes pareant. Romans 13.1. Nulla potestas, etc. Becanus loc. 49.
qu. 13. page 853.
yet every Prince is not presently of God. It is written of some, They ^ave
reigned, and it is not of me.

Becanus. The duty of Subjects toward the Magistrate is obedience, that, if he
be a lawful Magistrate, they all obey him. Romans 13.1. There is no power but of
God.

Dr. Mayer upon the place. He moves the question, whether the subjection of
the Text be due to any power once up, either by right, or wrong? His answer is,
The conscience is not bound to usurpers, but they may be removed again; as
Jehoiada removed Athaliah, and set up the right King. A King by birth, by
election, or by law of Arms through conquest is to be served, though he be
wicked, and tyrannical, as being given in Gods anger, for punishment; but a
Usurper may be resisted, and deposed again.

Dr. Hammond upon the place, in his paraphrase, interprets it of obedience to
the supreme powers rightly established, and constituted. And that every person
under government of what rank soever he be, is to yield subjection to the
supreme Governor legally placed in that Kingdom. And elsewhere he says,
obedience to Superiors is extended indefinitely (...), to the most heathen,
provoking, oppressi^g (as long as they be lawful) powers.

And again. By the words, he bears not the Sword in vain, etc. is intimated,
that the sword for vengeance, etc. is put into the hands of the lawful
Magistrate, with commission to use it as the constitution of the Kingdom shall
best direct.

The Author of the fuller Answer to Dr. Fern. Fuller Answer etc. page 17, 18.
Mr. Prin his 3d part of the Sovereign power, etc. page 104.
The powers that be (i. e.) so, or so established by consent of man, are
ordained of God to be obeyed, or it is Gods ordinance that men should live under
some government, and submit, without resistance to that kind of Government
they have by consent established. -- That other kind of tyranny (viz. of
usurpation) it has no right, no ordination at all, and so no subjection due to
it. -- There is in every ordained power, as well Gods institution of it, and
injunction of obedience to it, as man's constitution of it.

Mr. Prinne says, The whole scope of this Text in sum is only this, that
Christians ought in conscience to be subject to all lawful higher powers, etc.
and not resist them in the execution of their just authority.

Mr. Buroughs. Mr. Buroughs on Hos. Chap. 1. Lect. 6. page 157. and Lect. 4.
page 111. and Lect. 3. page 65.
You must observe, that every one is subject to the higher powers. Mark, it is
not to man first, but it is to the power. Let every soul be subject to the
higher power, wherever this power lies. It is not to the will of man that
has power, but it is to the power of that man. Now the power, the authority is
that that a man has in a legal way.

He elsewhere tells us, There is no authority we are subject to now, but
according to the Laws and Constitutions of the Country where we live. When
things are brought into a Law, and be according to the agreements, and
covenants of the place, and Countr^y wherein we live, etc. then the power of
God is in it, though it be abused (viz. by an ill law made) and we are to be
subject to all powers. When it once comes to be a power, to be a Law, it is
authority, though abused, and we must ye^ld obedience to it, either actively,
or passively. But we must enquire whether it be a power.

To these Authors may be added those others whom I cited before, who hold the
resistance forbidden to be made against the power of God, Verse. 2. to be
lawful against an un-entitled, or usurping power: to whom as they are before
quoted Chap 8 sect. 4.
, I refer my Reader.

And unto all these I may super-add the judgment of diverse Commentators of
the Popish party, yet of best note of that sort among us. Estius I shall
recite. An usurped power, Potestas usurpata, cujusmodi est latronum and
tirannorum, non est absolute potestas nec superioritas, sicut leges inutiles
and mala, non sunt leges, Estius in loc.
such as is that of Tyrants, and Robbers, is not a power absolutely, neither a
superiority. As unprofitable, and evil Laws are no Laws. Dominicus, Soto,
Cajetan, and Pererius I omit to cite in their words. They may be found in Mr.
Prinn, and Dr. Willet.

2. And for those that speak to the thing (though not referring to this Text
expressly) to wit, the nullity of a mere possessory power, or his no authority,
I will for brevities sake but name my Authors, who fully enough speak it, whom
my Reader may peruse, or pretermit as he pleases. Mr. Prin his third part of
the Sovereign Power, etc. p. 114. Dr. Willet in loc. qu. 2.


1 That a Usurper has no authority in him, is a mere private person, see
Alsted. Theolog. Cas. cap. 17. Reg. 8. page 34. Grot. de Jure B. lib. 1. cap.
4. Sect 11. Arnisaeus de Author. principis. cap. 4. sect. 12. page 124.

2 That no obedience is due to an un-entitled, or illegal power. Aquinas 22a.
qu. 104. artic. 6. ad 3. Burroughes on Hosea, Cap. 1. Lect. 4. p. 111. and
Lect. 3. page 65. Vindication of Treatise of Monarchy. Cap. 3. Sect. 6.

3 That the Sword is peculiar to a Magistrate lawfully called. Becanus Instit.
Theol. loc. 49. qu. 16. page 854.

4 That to the being of a Magistrate is required a lawful call. See those
quoted before in this Treatise. Cap. 1. Sect. 2. Subsect. 3.

5 That to the making of a supreme Magistrate is to go to the vote, or consent
of the people. Take those cited, Cap. 5. Sect. 4 Subsect. 4. To which I will
here put in Mr. John Goodwin (as swaying much with some) In his Obstruct. of
Justice. Sect. 25. page 27.

SECT. VII. CHAP. X. SECT. VII.
Many examples given of persons of good account, who have disowned, or opposed
mere possessory powers in such Recognitions, or rights as are due to the powers
that are ordained of God.
7 IN the next place, is asked, But can any instances be given of any of the
people of God, or of such persons whose examples are of any commendable, or
imitable note, who at any time have professedly detrected, or denied to those
in actual dominion any duty, or acknowledgement due unto Magistrates; or that
have practiced the contrary to what this, or any other Text confessedly
delivers to be observed in relation to those who are here entitled to be the
powers ordained of God?

Answ. A multitude (doubtless) of such examples there have been, as may be
evident by the no small number of remarkable instances of this kind, which my
short observation, and memory has here recollected.

1. Of such as have practiced the contrary to what is a plain, and confessed
duty, or rule to be observed toward those who are the powers ordained of God.

1 And first examples of such as being under the present predominancy of mere
possessory powers, and being private persons have either deserted such, and
gone over to their opposites, or remaining under them have acted, or assisted
against them.

We find a large list of C^ptains, and their men of several Tribes of Israel,
who being actually seated under the Dominion of the house of Saul, fell from
it, and turned to David, both during the Reign of Ishbosheth, and upon his
death, although there were then many heirs left of Saul's line. See for this 1 Chronicles. 12.22. unto v. 39. We read of Hushai the Archite, of Zadok, and Abiathar
the Priests, and of their two sons, Ahimaaz, and Jonathan, who after David's
flight out of Jerusalem, and the maine of the Kingdom both in respect of
places, and people, seized by Absalom, and themselves being fully under the
territory and command of Absalom, yet acted for David in his state of ej^ction,
and against Absalom. 2 Samuel 15.32. to the end, 16.16, 17, 18, 19.17.6. to the
23. verse.

When the men of Israel in distinction from Judah generally had cast off David,
and followed Sheba the son of Bichri (upon that variance which fell out betwixt
the Judabites, and the Israelites about David's return to his Kingdom, and in
his way betwixt Jordan, and Jerusalem) the wise woman of Abel, and after the
people in that City by her persuasion (though they were of those that had
deserted David) and set up Sheba, and though he then had the supreme command
there) consulted, and executed a rendition of themselves, and City to David,
and the destruction of Sheba upon Joabs pacificatory offer to them. 2 Samuel
20.1, 2.14, 16, etc.

Upon Jeroboams usurpation, and the ten Tribes revolt from the Kingdom of the
house of David the Priests, and Levites that were in all Israel, and other
people out of all the Tribes of Israel which adhered to the true God, and his
worship upheld in the Kingdom of Judah, forsook Jeroboam, and his Dominions,
and joined themselves to Rehoboam, and so strengthened the Kingdom of Judah,
and R^hoboam in it, 2 Chr. 11.13, 16, 17. In like m^nner did multitudes out of
Israel fall from Baasha King of Israel unto Asa King of Judah. Although Baasha
was an enemy to the Kingdom of Judah, and to that their revolt, and
endeavored by force to prevent it, 2 Chronicles. 15.9. 1 King. 15.17.

To this I shall add, that the Prophet Jeremiah exhorts the people of Judah
from God to relinquish Zedekiah, the present supreme G^vernor over them, and to
yield up themselves to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, Jer. 27.16, etc. 21.8,
9. And the ground of that appears to be,

1. Zedekiah, and his Kingdom had lately been subject, and tributary to the
Babylonian, Ezekiel. 27.^. to 16. and Zedekiah's, and their present standing up
against him, by their own force of Arms, and the assistance of the Egyptian
was but rebellion. Ez^k 17.6. 2 Kings 24.28.

2 The Lord had given unto the Babylonian the command of that Territory and
people for 70 years by his express order and declaration, Jer. 27.12.28.14, 16.
And the said seventy years were ere this (that is in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim) begun, according to the computation of our best Chronologers To wit,
Archbishop Usher, Dr. John Reynolds, Hugh Broughton, Mr. Mede, The Divines
Annot. and Mr. Light. who all of them begin the 70. years the 4. of Jehoiakim.
. And unto these exhortations it is probable some hearkened, and those might be
they who fell to the Chaldeans, mentioned Jer. 38.19.

To these Scripture-instances I shall adjoyne one, or two observable ones out
of other Histories. Ambrose being Bishop of Millain in Italy, at what time
Maximus the Tyrant (of whom before Chap. 8. sect 4
) had deprived Valentinian of possession of his Empire of the West, he
contested with Maximus about his said act, and that very sharply; and twice
went Ambassador to him unto Triers, and pleaded the right of young Valentinian
in that Empire against him, the present possessor. And when he could not so
prevail, he discommunioned Maximus, to his own mighty peril, for Maximus
threatened him with death. Upon which he was forced to to fly to Aquileia:
whence he returned not until the said Maximus was repressed, and slain by
Theodosius Proximum ei (sc. Ambrosio) certamen cum Maximo fuit Tyranno; apud
quem legarum pro Valentiniano juniore quem ex Galliis Maximus expulerat, bis
egit in Urbe Trovirorum. Apud quem cum acerrime primum contendisser, ne
adolescentem, cui successionis, and haereditatis jure deberetur regnu^, imp^rii
justa possessione pelleret: deinde communione etiam ei interdixit, non sine
ingenti sui periculo: caedem enim ei Maximus minatus est: ob quam Aquileiam
Ambros. secedere coactus est: ex quo loco rediit Mediolanum post, cum a
Theodosio interfectus Maximus esset. Magdebur. C^nt. 4. cap. 10 page 1163.
.

It is also observed of the same Ambrose, that when that Maximus, to ingratiate
himself by an office so just and good, offered to interpose his power in the
defense of Ambrose, against Justina the Arrian Empress (the mother of
Valentinian whom Maximus dispossessed) she being about to banish him from
Millain; Ambrose would not accept of the help of Maximus, whose power he
disallowed, and gainsayed Grot. de jure Belli, lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 5.
.

Another is of no long distance from our own time. It is that of the Suffolk
men, who were zealous confessors of the Gospel, and Protestant faith, and were
the first that joined themselves to the Lady Mary, after the death of King
Edward the sixth, and the advancement to the Crown of the Lady Jane. The sum of
the Story I shall give out of Mr. Fox, and Mr. Speed in their own expressions.

King Edward did by his Testament (or Letters Patent, signed with his own hand,
and sealed with the great Seal, says the Letter of the Lords to the Lady
Mary) in the presence of the most part of the Nobles, Counselors, Judges, with
diverse other grave, and sage Personages, assenting, and subscribing to the
same, appoint the Lady Jane to be Inheritrix unto the Crown of England. To this
order subscribed all the Kings Council, and the chief of the Nobility, the
Mayor, and City of London, and almost all the Judges, and chief Lawyers of
this Realm.

When King Edward was dead, the Lady Jane was established in the Kingdom by
the Nobles consent, and was forthwith published Queen by Proclamation at
London, and in other Cities where was any great resort, and was there so taken,
and named. The Lord Mayor of London, six of the Aldermen, and twelve Commoners
Merchants being sent for by the Nobility, take their Oaths for the Lady Jane,
and unto her obedience they promise to secure the City. The Lords of the
Council write to the Lady Mary (in answer to her Letter, wherein she had
required their owning, and proclaiming her as Queen) telling her that the Lady
Jane is, after the death of Edward the six^h, invested, and possessed with the
just, and right Title in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, etc.

The Lady Mary upon this Letter of refusal, speedeth her secretly away far off
from the City. The Council, hearing of her sudden departure, gather speedily a
power of men, appoint an Army, and ^end forth the Duke of Northumberland with
it. Mary in the mean time tossed with much travail up and down, etc, w th-drew
her self into the quarters of Norfolk, and Suffolk^, and there gathering to
her such aid of the Commons as she might, keeps her self close for a space
in Fremingham Castle. To her first of all resorted the Suffolk-men, who being
always forward in promoting the proceedings of the Gospel, promised her their
aid, so that she would not attempt the alteration of the Religion which her
brother King Edward had before established, etc. Thus Mary, being guarded by
the power of the Gospe lers, did vanquish the Duke, and all those that came
against her. The Lords after this proclaimed for Queen the Lady Mary, eldest
daughter to King Henry the 8th. and appointed by Parliament to succeed King
Edward dying without issue.

The brief of this story, as to our present scope, is this. Here we have the
Lady Jane in possession of the Crown, by her immediate Predecessors testament
by proclamation, and by the consent and actual reception of the Chieftains of
the Land, and having the first Military power on foot to uphold her therein.
And the Lady Ma^y claiming the Crown by virtue of lineall succ^ssion, the Act
of Parliament, and the T^st^ment of King Henry the 8 h, which laid the ground
of her title antecedent to (as well as more speciously (to say no more here)
then) any thing the other could challenge, or be invested by. And,
notwithstanding the said possession of the other, the Suffolk Gospellers are
the first comers in to Mary, and undertakers of her assistance, for the
vindication of her Title, and the g^ining her possession of the Throne: and
this before she had any acknowledgment, or reception of the Nobles, or Commons,
or other aid appearing for her.

2. Another sort of examples may be of such as being Princes, or communities
have cast off, or by Arms repulsed the domination of them who have had present
command over them. Scripture examples in this kind I have given before Chap.
8. Sect. 4.
: and shall therefore here but name them. Such are those of Othniel, Ehud,
Deborah, and the rest of the Judges, with the Israelites rising up against
Chusanrishathaim, Eglon, Jabin, and the other invaders, and captivers of them
respectively, of which in the book of Judges. In like manner were the wars of
the same people for their liberty against the Philistines, and the Syrian
Kings, in the times, and under the conducts of Eli, Samuel, Saul, and David in
the stories of both the Books of Samuel, and of the Kings; of the same sort
were the recuperative Arms of David, and Jehoiada, against Absalom, Sheba, and
Athaliah, in the said Books. As also were the stirrings of the Kings, and
people of Judah from Solomon, unto the time of their Babylonish captivity,
against the Kings of Israel, Syria, Assyria, and other encroachers, related in
the second Book of Chronicles. And such, lastly, were the conflicts of the
Jews under the Asmonean government, against diverse of the Selencian Kings Of
all these I will make particular narrative but of one, that is, that good King
Hezekiah, and of him but shortly thus.

2 King. 18.7.
It is said, That he rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not.
Expositors observe the reason of these words to be, The kingdom was left to
Hezekiah by his father Ahaz, in a subjection to Shalmantzar King of Assyria;
but he being no way bound to serve at his father did, because he used his
liberty, and cast that yoke from him, he is said to rebel. Mr. Lightfoot
Divines Annotat. in loc. and Mr. Lightfoot his Harmon. of the old Test. page 117.
observes further, that, not only had Ahaz his father but himself reigned as
an Homager to the Assyrian; who subdued, and deposed Ahaz, and set up Hezekiah
on the Th^one in his stead: and, that Hezekiah being thus under the Assyrian
for a time, he would bear it no longer, etc.

A multitude of instances of this sort out of other stories are produceable.
Among others, those of the Christian Princes, and Nations, on the Eastern
confines of Christendom, who bordering upon the Turkish Sultan, have been by
him subdued, and held under; and being in that condition, have at several times
attempted, and sometimes prosperously effected a recovery from that subjection.
As, for instance, have done sundry Princes of Hungary, of Macedon, and of
Greece, and the State of Venice. Amongst them the achievements of George
Castriot (surnamed Scanderbeg) in his regaining of the Countries of Epirus, and
Albania, from which his Father had been oured, and himself was excluded by
Amurath the sixth: and of John Huniades, the Vayvod of Transylvania (under the
shi^ld of whose valor, and success, the Countries of Moldavia, and Valachia
rose up for, and recovered their freedom from the same Turkish Signior) are
very notable, and easy to be remembered.

3. There may be under this head another sort of examples given, to wit, of
such as have not been under the command, and actual subjectednesse of the mere
possessory power, but have assailed, and come in upon him from abroad, upon the
quarrel of the disseisure of a just title, and for the reinvesting of it, the
cause being either their own, or others, whom they have thought it just, and
requisite to assist therein.

The instance of Abraham's arming, pursuing, and fighting in the rescue of his
brother Lot, and the people of Sodom, and Gomorrah, and their goods taken, and
carried away by, and remaining wholly in the possession of Chederlaomer, etc.
went before: only I shall observe here upon it, that Mr. Calvin (in his
Sermons on Genesis 14.13, etc. trans^^^ed out of French into English, page 5, 6,
7, 8.) moving this question, Whether these a^mes of Abraham were lawful, or
no, being he was neither King, nor Prince, but dwelt in the Land of Canaan as a
stranger? An^wers thus. Howbeit here is one thing first to be noted of us: that
he had been already constituted, and ordained to be Lord, and Master of this
Country: and, although the p^ss^ssion thereof was not yet given him, yet for
all tha^, the right and title thereof belonged to him. By which wo^ds, Mr. Calt
in pl inly teaches, that the possession of a Country may be in one, the right
thereof in another, and that the person in whom the right is, may lawfully war
upon the poss^ssor for the recovery of his said right.

We had also before the instance of Theodosius the Emperor of the East, his
coming in the quarrel of Valentinian, first upon Maximus, who had took the
Western Empire, and held it from Valentinian; and, after the suppression of
him, upon Eugenius, who had a while after inju^iously se^sed the same Empire
See before Chap. 8. Sect. 4.
.

I will here add one more out of Scripture, and a few more out of other
H^stories. The Scripture instance is this. 2 King. 3.4.
M^sha King of Moab rebelling against Jehoram King of Israel, not only does
Jehoram make an invasive War upon him for the recovery of his Dominion over
Mo^b, but Jehoshaphat, that good King of Judah, assists him therein in his own
person: yea, and Elisha the Prophet was with them in that Expedition; and in
their great distress for lack of water enquired of the Lord for them, and from
the Lord gave them a promise, and direction for their obtaining, both of water,
and of victory in their present War.

The examples out of other H^stori s shall be set down but by way of b iefe
remembrance. As first, the enterp ize of the Eastern Emper^ur Co^stantius, his
invading, and dest^oying Magnentius, who had usurped the West by the murder of
Constance the Emperor there S^e Rosse his History, Book 3. chap 1. p. 82.
. To this may be annexed the examples of many of the Western, or Italian
Christian Emperors, as Honorius, Theodosius Junior, Martian, Leo, and other
their Successo^s, who b ing disseised of whole Countries, and Na^ions, by the
breaking in of the Go^bes, etc. into Italy, Spain, and Africa, and sometimes of
Rome it self, yet they c aimed, after such their dispossession, their right to
those Te^ritories, and prosecuted the same by force of Arms, wherein they
some-while prevailed to a recovery Idem page 92, etc.
.

I shall refer also to the proceedings of Elubean the Christian King of the
Ethiopians against Dunaan the Jew, the usurper of Nargan a City in Arabia, whom
in behalf of the Christian people of that Region Elisb^an invaded, and ^j cted
Vide B^ron. Annal. ad An. Christi 522, and 523.
. As also to the several wars undertaken by the Christian Princes of Europe
for the recovery of Palistine from the Saracens.

Here may be also remembered that when the Anabaptists of Munst r, had
dispossessed the Bishop, who was the civil Lord thereof, and taking into their
own hands the rule of all, did after some time of their p pular disorder, put
themselves under the absolute sovereignty of John Becold; the Protestant
P^inces of Germany (as the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave of Hessen, etc.)
joined in assistance to the said Bishop (a Papist) against the said pretended
King in Munster, and his partakers, for the suppr^ssion of them (then the
possessory power there) by the Sword, and for the re-investing of the Bishop,
as the rightful Lord. And that both they, and the Protestant Divines (as
Luther, etc.) condemned, and declared against them, as violaters of the civil
order of that place Jo. Sleiden Comment. lib. 10. page 255.
.

As also that upon the death of Henry the third of France, when the Kingdom
was generally possessed by the Leaguers (the Guisians, the Spanish, and the
Popes party) under the command of the Duke of Maine, (who with the pretense of
the title of the Cardinal of Bou^bon, by him proclaimed King, by the style of
Charles the tenth, ruled all, and throwded his own usurpation) Henry King of
Navar, and with him all the Protestant Nobility, and people ^f France stood up
for the recovery of that Kingdom out of the hands of those confederates, the
possessors, in as much as the Crown of France lineally descended upon the said
King of Navar, and Henry the Third had immediately before his last breath
nomina ed him his lawful Heir, and Successor. And unto his aid in that cause
did out Queen Elizabeth send assistance of men, arms, and money Speeds Hist. in
Q. Eliz. Sect. 259.
.

The taking up of the cause of the Prince Elector, the Count Pa^atine, both the
Father, and the Son, by many Protestant Princes, as of England, Swethland,
Germany, when they were outed of the Palatinate, and it possessed by the
Emperor, and the Bavarian, for their re-investing therein, is well known, and
shall be the last example I will mention of this sort.

For, besides examples, we have it generally acknowledged, that the recovery of
a disseised title to Dominion is a just cause of wa^ Vide August. T^. 4. part
1. quest. 10. super Josua. Grot. de Jur. B. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 2.


If it be objected against the alleging of these examples, that being their
acts are the acts of persons who are not in actual subjection to the mere
possessory power, but such as assail him ab entra, they come not up to the
purpose for which they are brought. I answer,

1. Resistance of that power which is the ordinance of God is in this place (
ve^s. 2.) disallowed in all, without restriction ( whosoever resists the
power, etc,) and may therefore be ex^ended to any, as well Foreiners in regard
of State-relation, or of residence, as those who are Members of, or residing in
the Common wealth so possessed.

2. Though these be residers other-where, yet in their attempt, or in the act
of their assault of the p ssessing power they enter within the bounds of the
Commonwealth he is over; and so, were there indeed a real Magistracy in the
actual possessor, they would come within the obligation of subjection to him.
For this is certain, whosoever are, upon any account, within a Territory,
whether as fixed Inhabitants, or as strangers, whether as friendly guests, or
hostile invaders, yea, though they be Sovereign Princes in another Country,
yet, being there, they owe submission to the lawful power of that Country
they enter into; they are subditi there, though not cives.

3 They that are actually under the command of another perforce, and they that
assist them are involved in the same act. So that, if the former be bound to
the duty of Subjects, then it is unlawful for any, (though Foreiners, yea,
though Foreign Princes) to aid them in the violation, or casting off of any such
subjection, or the rescue, or restoring of another right to it.

2. But enough of exemplification in the point of opposition. In the second
place I am to produce some examples of such as have professedly disowned, or
denied to those that have had no more but their actual domination to claim by,
any of the duties of Subjects belonging to their civil Magistrates.

It is a known duty of Subjects to their Sovereigns to stand by them (to their
power) in defense of them and their possession of the Dominions, and
Territories which they hold, against whosoever would deprive them thereof. Jo.
18.36.
Our Saviors acknowledgment to Pilate was; My kingdom is not of this world.
If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the Jews. But the contrary to this I find practiced in
reference to mere possessors.

When the Jewish Nation had before the destruction of Jerusalem made a general
defection from the Romans, and had under the conduct of their own Leade^s
possessed themselves of the Forts and strength of all Judea, and held them
against the Romans, and by that means had the ruling power then in that
Region, the Christians that were in Jerusalem, deserted the defense of the
Jews, and of their City, and cause, and removed out both of Jerusalem, and of
Judea: so that Historians observe there was at the time of the last siege by
Titus not one good Christian left in the City Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap.
4. Epiphanius de mensuris, cap. 15. Joseph. de B^l. Jud lib. 2. cap. 22. etc.
Dr. Simson Chron. Cathol. lib. 7. An. Christi 67. page 46. Dr. Hammond Annot.
on Matthew 24 Note G. and on Revel 7. Note G.
. Indeed the grand Sectaries among the Christian professors, the Gnostics (as
one notes) Dr. Hammond on 2 These. 2. Note K.
sided with, and adhered to the Jews aginst the Romans in that war, and by
that means perished with them. But the Orthodox wholly relinquished them. Yea
it is observed, that many of the more advised, and honest sort of the Jewish,
both Nation, and Religion among them deserted their Nations defense against the
Romans, yea, and went over to their enemies, and with them took part against
the Desendants Usser. Annal. part. post. page 691. 693. and Dr. Simson ut supra.
.

The Jews that remained after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, made a
City called Bitter in Arabia, the chief seat of their Kingdom, and made a
Jew one Barcochebas* (or Barcochab, or Barcochah, as he is generally styled)
their King. Under him they rise up in sedition against Hadrian the Roman
Emperor: and over all Judea, and every where else they cast off the Roman
government, and slaughter, and destroy whosoever stands against them. To them
also join very many other Nations; and for that cause almost all the world are
in an uproar. Hadrian sending out his Forces against them, a great, and
continued War thereof arises. They say this Barchochebas reigned thir^y
years, and a half, and that at the last he endured in the siege of Bitter
three years and a half against the Romans to their great loss, ere he and his
Jews were vanquished That which we chiefly observe in the story is, that this
Barcochebas, being now the possessing and ruling power over Judea, and many
other parts, the Christians that were in his precincts refused
(notwithstanding) to own, or join with him against the Romans: yea, though for
this refusal he slew them with all kind of tortures. Insomuch that Hugo
Grotius, and Dr. Hammond t^ke him to be the beast that ascends out of the
bo^tomlesse pit, and makes war against the two witnesses, and overcomes, and
kills them ( Rev. 11.) and answerably the two witnesses to be the Bishops,
and Chr^stians of the Jewish, and Gentile Churches which were at this time at
Jerusalem. Some say indeed that he moreover gave himself out to be the
Messi^h; others, that he pretended to be that Star in Balaams vision ( Number.
24.24.) and true it is that Justin Martyr relates (who himself was an
eyewitness of those Wars, and on that occasion fled the Country) he
persecuted the Christians because they would not deny Christ. But his
imposture, and enmity to Christianity was not the sole matter in which the
Christians deserted him, or upon which he persecuted them. For both Mr. Mede,
Dr. Hammond, and Spondanus observe out of Eusebius, that the Christians denied
to aid him in his defense against the Romans, whose q^arrell against him was
about civil dominion; and la^ down that their refusal as a distinct cause by
it self of his persecuting them Mr. Mede in Apocalyp. Com. part 1. pa. 43. Dr
Hammond in Revel. 11.3, 7. and Note B. etc. M^. Calvert his Jew of Morocco,
page 220. Mr. Bogan of Threats. p. 372. Spondanus Epitome Baron. Ann. 130.
sect. 4
. He being the present actual Ruler over them, whatever his Religion, or his
enmity to their Religion was, they were bound to assist him in up^olding his
civil^ possession and authority, if indeed the actual possessor always be (and
conseq^ently, he by virtue of present possession then was) the power of God,
ordained of God. The then Roman Emperor, and State were no less distant in
Religion, no nor enemies to the Christian then were Barcochebas, and his Jews.
For under this Hadrian some reckon the continuation of the third, others begin
the fourth of the ten persecutions See Mr. Fox Acts. Vol. 1. Prideaux of Hist.
page 199. Mr. Clarks Martyrol. p. 36.
. The reason then of the Christi^ns refusal of the Jews assistance against
the Romans c^n be deemed no other then the civil right of the Roman, though
disseised, and the nullity, and illegitimacy of the Jew, though the present
All-commander.

Our next example shall be out of Tertullian, who gives us a very remarkable
testimony to our purpose, in a threefold instance of the Christians pract^se in
relation to three possessors of the style, and power of the Roman Emperors,
all of them in, or near about his time: The which he compriseth b^iefly (as his
manner is) in one short sentence; and he remembers the same twice in his works,
viz. in his B^ok ad Scapulam, cap. 2. Nanquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, vel
Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani. The Christians could never be found to
be Albinians, or Nigrians, or Cassians. And again in his Apologeticus cap. 35.
unde Cassii, and Nigri, and Albini, etc. de Romany ni full^r, i e. de non
Christianis. Whence arose the Cassu, the Nigri, the Albini, etc of the Romans I
take it, that is, of they who were not Christians.

The Scholiasts upon Tertullian, viz. Zephyrus, Rhenanus, and Junius, do agree
that these sayings of his do refer to Avidi^^ Cassius, Pescenius Niger, and
Clodius Albinus, their respective standings up, at several times, as
Emperors, and each obtaining to be so named, and to have under their command a
vast Territory of the Roman Dominions; but their assumption of the same being
violent, as in opposition to other Emperors, who were chosen, invested, and
received by the Senate, and people of Rome, (which was then the legal entry to
the Empire For this Title see Grot. de Jure Bell. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 11.
:) as Cassius against Marcus Antoninus, Niger and Albinus against Septimius
Severus; Tertullians drift in those sentences is to vindicate the Christians
from disloyalty, by assoyling them of joining, having any h^nd with, or aiding
any of those possessors, and titular Emperors in the Countries where they were
generally followed, and maintained by the Roman Legions, and Subjects, against
the right and lawful Emperors of Rome Albinianos, Nigrianos, and Cassianos
vocat Tertullianus defectionum istorum conscios. Rhenanus in loc. ad Scap.
.

He that shall consult those above named Annotators, with the Historians of
those times shall find;

That Avidius Cassius a Nobleman of Rome (of the F^mily of that Cassius who was
a Conspirator against Julius Caesar) whilst Marcus Antoninus was in his wars
in Germany, and the bordering Countries, (those wars where the famous victory
and relief of water was obtained for him by the prayers of his Christian
Soldiers, called upon that the Thundering Legion) gives out that Antoninus was
dead; by which means the forces and people of the East, within the Mountain
Taurus, generally, supposing the Empire vacant, set up Cassius to be Emperor.
After this, Antonine to show himself alive, and to recover his Empire in the
East, marches thither against Cassius, whose soldiers perceiving the error
they had been caught in by his lie, kill him with his son, and presenting their
heads to Antonine, the sedition is appeased Vide Zephyru^ and Rhenanum in loc.
Tertulliani. and Rosse. Histor. Book 2. Chap. 2.
.

Also that Pescenius Niger Proconsul of Sy^ia, and Governor of the whole
Eastern part, upon the people of Romes general discontent at the corrupt
entrance and maladministration of the Empire by Didius Julianus, is wished
for by them to come, and take the Empire; and is thereto made choice of, and
even sued to accept of it by the Roman Legions, and Subjects of the East, and
is by them (as far as in them lay) made Emperor at Antioch. But in competition
for it, Septimius Severus arises in Pannonia, being the prefect there, and by
the soldiery and people at Illyricum, is set up as their Emperor; and being
so, (whiles Niger taken up with sport and jollity, loses his time in the
East) he marches to Rome, and obtains the election of the Senate there; and
having so sped, he goes up into the East against Niger, overthrowes his power
at Cyzicum, and so suppresseth, and slays him Vide praeter Zephyr. and
Rhenan. in Tertull. Herodianum Hist lib. 2. sect. 21, 22, 23, 25, etc. et lib.
3. sect. 3.12, 13, 14. Item Sum. Herod. ex Photii Biblioth. Epist. Herod.
praefix. et Brev. lib. 2. Herod. praefix. and Speeds Hist. Book 6. Chap. 22.
Sect. 3.
.

And that Severus the Emperor being upon his enterprise against Niger (as
aforesaid) and conceiving jealousy of Clodius Albinus the Proconsul of
Britain, his stirring against him in the West, during his absence; to make him
the surer to him, he creates him Caesar, and after that his co-partner in
Government; but having overc me Niger, his jealousy against Albinus is made
good, or retorted by Albinus his rising up in Arms against him. This brings the
difference to an open war, which is ended by Severus his vanquishment and
dest uction of Albinus Vide Herod. Hist. lib. 2. Sect. 48. lib. 3. Sect. 16,
etc. Speeds Hist. Book 6. Chap. 23. Sect. 2. etc.
.

Of the possession of the East by Cassius first against Antonine, and then by
Niger against Severus, and of the West by Albinus against the same Severus, and
by their respective accomplices in such manner as has been related, Tertullian
says, None of the Christians were ever found to be Albinianes, Nigrianes, or
Cassianes. That is, they none o^ them interested themselves in the causes of
Albinus, Niger, or Cassius, or were partakers with, upholders of, or sticklers
for them: which yet it had been their duty to have bin, had their respective
Titles been as good as their possession was full in those Territories; or had
their possession made them the powers of God, ordained of God. But
contrariwise, these three having none of them any legal investure, and there
being lawful Emperors claiming those Dominions against them, the Christians
declined the poss^ss^rs in a duty belonging to those who are powers of Gods
ordaining, in recognition of the rightful c^aimers against them.

It is likewise to be remembered, that at what time John of Leyden ruled as King
in Munster, and stood out in defense of his pretended Kingdom against the
Bishop, the Temporal Prince thereof, and his assistants, the Princes of
Germany, (as was above related) there were some good men in that City, who
would have no hand with him in the maintaining thereof in that manner, and
cause See Rosse of Religions in John of Leydens life, page 18, 19. Jo. Sleiden
Comment. l. 10. page 258. 259.


These examples produced may be both for number, and pregnancy sufficient to
satisfy the query unto which they are returned. For a conclusion of my answer
to it, I shall observe, that with these examples of them of the true faith, and
religion aforegiven, some even of the prudenter Heathen have comported. To this
purpose, I shall remember two, one of M ssala Corvinus, and his Heroical reply
to Augustus. He being Colleague with Caesar Octavian in the Roman Con^ulship,
Plutarchus in vita Bruti sub finem.
and Caesar (after his famous victory at Actium over Antony, the which raised
him up to his Imperial Throne) taking occasion to give him a public encomium,
hat although in the cause of B utus in the Philippick war he had been a stout
enemy against him, yet now in the battle at Actium he had been his special
fautor, and aider; he (to wit, this Messala Corvinus) returns this Answer to
Caesar's Encomiastick. Tu me Caesar s^mper sectae, partiumque invenies meliorum,
and justiorum. q. d. Whoever is the upper, thou shall ever find me the friend,
and follower of the better, and juster party. The other is that of the honest,
and excellent Poet Juvenal, who thus whips the sordid servility, and compliance
of the Roman common people in reference to prevalent success: -- Sed quid
Turba Remi? sequitur fortunam, ut semper, Juvenal Satyr 10.
et odit
Damnatos. Idem populus si Nurscia Thusco
Favisset: si opp^essa foret s^cura senectus
Principis; hac ipsa Seianum diceret hora
Augustum. --
But what way goes the Roman rout? they own,
Or 'bandon Princes still, as up, or down
The wheel of Fortune bears them; for if she
The Thuscan S^ian favored had (even he
That first Tibe^ius minion was, and then
His Rival) and his jealous master fallen
The crafty Fox Tiberius; at this hour,
Their cry had been, Sejanus Emperor.


CHAP. X. SECT. VIII.
SECT. VIII. Three other Enquiries spoken to, viZ. Whether the power of a mere
possessor may not be made use of? whether subjection to it be not lawful, or
necessary? and if it be, whether the subjects conscience, or practice be at all
concerned in the justness, or the unjustnesse of the power that is over him.
IN the eighth place there comes in this threefold question.

1. But may not some use be made of, and recourse had to a mere possessory
power for the obtaining of political r^dresse, and safety?

2. Is not subjection to him lawful, or necessary?

3. And if so, then is it not all one, as to the subjects conscience, or as to
his performance of obedience, whether the power be just, or unjust; be the
ordinance of God, or be the presumption and in^rusion of man?

I answer,

1. For the first quaetie. Such is the necessity of order, justice, and place,
and such is every man's title, and interest in them, that there is no scruple (I
know) to be made of accepting, or seeking them at the hand of any, who may
reach them out to us, though he that conveyes them to us be not interested in
the umpirage of them, yet are we, and every man is interested in the benefit,
and use of them. And though one may not persuade, assist, or consent to any to
take, or appropriate to themselves the public place, or office of
administration of them to the community, that is not thereto lawfully called,
and authorized, yet of them that have unduly possessed themselves of that
place, and do exercise the same, they that are under them may request both in
reference to public concernments, and to private, that the administrations
which they have assumed into their hands, and are resolved to hold, may (for
their matter and use to others) be just, and profitable. This I find resolved
without dispute Cajetan. Summul. Tit. Rempub. Tyran. Navarri Compend. Tit.
Tirannus.

The Exercitation concer. Vsurp. Powers, cap. 3. page 23.


.

2. And for the next, It is also easily admitted, viz. That submission, and
compliance with a mere occupant may, and in diverse cases ought to be. Such may
be the warrantablenesse, or the goodness, either in point of profit, or of
moral duty, of the things, that obedience, or compliance with the commands of
a superior in them will hear a commission, either of lawfulness, or of
necessi y.

3. But then it must be said, It is not therefore all one as to the Subjects,
either conscience, or act of obedience, whether the power be just, and of Gods
ordination, or it be unjust, and of man's prevarication. For there is a
difference to be put betwixt the submission yieldable to the mere possessor,
and that which is payable to a right authority. And the difference may be
observed in more respects then one.

1. There is a difference in regard of ground, or in the reason; or
consideration upon which it is yielded. We are to render obedience to a real
authority, or to a lawful power, or potentate, as owing, or due to him. It is
his right, and it belongs to him up n the account of strict justice, the
people are under that obligation to him which we call Allegiance, and by reason
of it we call them his Liege people, and him their Liege Lord. Liege is as much
as legal, and Allegiance imports a bond of obedience by virtue of the law; and
it may refer either to the ordinative law of G^d, or to the constitutive law
of man. But to the mere occupant there is no such ^ye: in acts of submission to
him it is the matter prescribed, and not the precipient that obliges: or, it
is not the commander, or his commanding, but the condition of the commanded
which is the rise, or reason of this subjection. Or, yet more distinctly,
people may be led ^o obey such by force of other considerations besides
Allegiance to them: and those may be either the more general moral ones,
common to this with other cases, such as are, the lawfulness of the thing to
be done in its own nature, or the coincidency of another just, and obliging
authority, and command with that of the occupants; or,

2. And therewithal, such as are peculiarly arising from that state of
subduednesse; as, the necessity that is incumbent to do, or part with the thing
required for the avoidance of a greater loss, or suffe^ing to come if the
subject detrect that; or, the greater convenience, safety, or emolument which
there is to ones self, to his neighbor, or to the public, in doing, then in
denying, as the circumstances of the imposall, lie, though we^e it not so
imposed, it would not be eligible. Though we a^e obliged to nothing jussu ejus,
or upon the intuition of his command, yet we may do many things, ea jubente,
he commanding, and should do eo prememe, he enforcing them; and we have many
things to do, ipso seu volente, seu nolente, whether he will, or forbid the
doing of them.

This difference in the ground the Reader may find set down by H. Grotius de
Jure B. lib. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 15. And by the paper of Dr. Sanderson printed by
a Replyer to it, in defense of Mr. Ascams Discourse. And by Mr. Buroughs upon
Hosea, Chap. 1. Lect. 3. page 65. and Lect. 4 page 111. And by the Author of
the Observations upon Aristotle's Politiques, page 46, ad sin. And by the
Exercitation conc. usurp. powers, cap. 3. page 22.

2. There is also a difference in regard of the extent of the subj^ction; and
that,

1. In relation to the acts, or attributions which the subjection reaches to.
Whatsoever duty we owe immediately to G^d; whatsoever is due from us to the
public safety, or weal; whatever act of justice, or of charity is owed to
another; whatsoever is an office of our station, or place, or which we have any
other way a call unto; whatsoever is within the rule of the virtuous culture of
our selves, or may make for our own honest interest, without the wrong of any
other, that we may, or must do in concurrence with such a possessors command,
yea, and if a necessity of precept lie upon it, though it be to his advantage
in his unjust occupancy: a good and necessary action being not to be declined
for such an ill effect as is accidental to it, and arises from the use which
another makes of it.

But there are sundry, not only personal, but political acts that may come to
be the matter of a civil superiors command, which build not themselves upon any
of these considerations; and there are actions which not only are destitute of
such a ground to make them good, and necessary, but if done to a mere
possessor, they have in them an access rinesse to his unlawful occupancy: and
there may be some things then only to be done when there is for them the
warrant, and injunction of a real authority: and some acts are lawful, or
necessary to be put forth toward, or for a justly entitled Magistrate, which
are warrantlesse, or sinful toward another, as being derogatory to the said
Magistrates, or to the Communities right, or an entrenchment upon the divine
institution of Magistracy, or a bringing of the agent into a participation of
another man's sin. He that shall take a view of the just prerogatives of the
civil M^gistrate, and of the particulars of the subjects duty to him, may find
that such there are See before Chap. 8. Sect. 1.
. In things of this sort there will lie a restriction upon the yieldance of
that subjection to a mere possessor which is redditable to a lawful Sovereign.

Without particularizing what things are of this nature, that it is so may
easily appear, if we but make a comparison by inverting the case, and putting
the action on the Magistrates part. Let two persons come before a lawful
Magistrate, each with his cause, or suit, the one being a denison of the
Country, the other being a foreiner; or, suppose them both alike for that, but
the one having a just cause, or suit, the others being bad. The Magistrate in
hearing, and handling these diverse causes, or the cause of these diversely
qualified persons, may, and is to do in some kind the same things for them
all, and to treat them all alike: but in some kinds again he is to observe a
difference, and his process may not be altogether the same toward the
severalls of them respectively, his duty will require him in sundry things to
put a difference betwixt the denison and the foreiner; betwixt him that has a
just cause, and him that has a bad. And thus is it on the subjects part, and
in his actings: there is in many things a diversity to be found in the rule of
his proceedings in relation to those two sorts of superiors, the just, and the
unjust; or the authorized power, and the intruder.

2. In relation to the case wherein subjection is performable, the extent of it
may be to be diversified in reference to those two. A lawful, authorized
Magistrate, one is required to subject himself unto voluntarily, frankly, and
out of the case of terror, or external compulsorinesse, and though he had
ability to contest, stand our, and make good a refusal; but not so to the mere
possessor. It is then only necessary to comply, and sometimes does a thing then
only come to be lawful in reference to him, when matter of awe or menace is
cast into one of the scales of the subjects consultation See Dr. Sanderion, and
Grotius as above cited.
.

SECT. IX. CHAP. X. SECT. IX.
The conclusion is with a short view of the question, what kind of consent of
the community it is which is requisite to the conveying of Gods ordination to
the power.
HAving thus dispatched answer to these objections, and queries, I intend to
proceed no further: but think it time now to close up this Chapter, and with it
this Treatise.

There is but one query more that occurred to my observation as for answer
here, viz. Seeing we have found the only ordinary mean of conveyance of Gods
ordination to the person who is by that ordination the power of God, to be the
consent of the Community As it is laid down Chap. 5. Sect. 4. Subsect. 4.
before.
, what kind of consent is that to be?

This question arises from the diversity of ways whereof the giving of
consent seems to be capable of: as,

1. Touching the persons giving, consent may be either of the whole; or of a
part; and that whole may, either contain all, and singular the persons united
in one mind, or be the major part, admitted in virtue to be the whole.

2. Touching the manner wherein consent is signified; Civilians do deliver
several ways of consent giving, as by word, by action, and by non-acting; and
under these are reduced sundry particulars.

3. As to the time, the consent may either fore-run, or follow actual
investure.

4. As to truth, and reality, the consent may be either re^ll, or presumed, and
pretended.

5. As to the freedom, and consequently as to the valid ty, it is susceptible
of differences more then one:

1. There is a natural, or physical freedom; and opposite to it a natural
restraint, or confinement. The natural freedom is a remotion or clearness of
outward coaction; and this respects,

1. Either the body by actual stop, or impediment,

2. Or the mind, and this relates to fear, from the menace, or danger of
harm, or loss.

2. There is a moral freedom, or a freedom of conscience (^ruly so called).
And opposite to it there is a moral restraint, to wit, by a preobligation,
tie, or duty of conscience.

The requisitenesse of freedom, as the very formal reason, or constitutive
essence of consent, and the requisitenesse of both those freedoms, that i^,
both the natural, and the moral; a freedom both f om outward force, and
terror, and from preobligation of conscience, are much insisted on.

There is not much material difficulty in the positive determination of any of
these differences except it be the last, the point of freedom: and for it I
had rather suppose my intelligent Reader apprehensive of what is right therein,
then entangle him or my self here in the dispute of it.

The truth is, we commonly say Leave is light, and this proverb may be
understood to hold, not only of the easiness either of the obtaining or of
the carriage of it ordinarily; but of the discernableness, clearness, and
apparency, which for the most part is in that leave, or consent which is
unfeigned, and real. But if there be any whose interest, or will inclines them
to pretend to a consent which is not, or to a freeness of consent where it is
not, I shall not for their use enter into a debate of it; doubting them to be
of the number of those who are condemned of themselves; and for that I cannot
assume either that freedom to deal, or that hope to prevail with them, which I
should promise my self in the undertaking.

Deo laus omnis.
FINIS.
The Contents.
THE entry and partition of the work, page 1. CHAP. I. Of the subject here
spoken of, power, the powers, p. 3. Sect. 1. An enquiry w^ ^ther power be put
for the person invested who power, or for the abstract, the office seated in
him? p. 3. Sect. 2. The main enquiry, to wit, what kind of power it is which
the Apostle intends in those words, power, powers, p. 5. Subsection 1. Of the
force of the wo^d (...). p. 5. Subsection 2. Power distinguished into Natural,
and Moral, p. 15. Subsection 3. That Mo^all power only is intended in this
wo^d power, in this place. p. 23. Subsection 4. What is required to the making
of a Moral power, p. 29.


CAHP. II. Of the Term, of God, p. 40. Sect. 1. The diverse
Scripture-acceptations of this term of God, p. 41. Sect. 2. For the clearing
of the Question, which of these acceptations are proper for this Text, diverse
things discussed, p. 46. Subsection 1. The difference betwixt the Narrative,
and the Legislative word of God, and that Scripture predictions are not a
warrant for us to act upon, in the things predicted, p 46. Subsection 2.
Certain propositions to explain those several ways wherein things are said to
be of God, p. 49. Subsection 3. Of Gods working in humane actions, whether
good, or evil; and the difference betwixt the being of the one of God, and of
the other; p 51. Subsection 4. How the hand of God is clear from the sin of
man, when it act^th in man's sinful action, and from injustice in punish him
for that action, p. 57.

CHAP. III. A Digressive enquiry concerning the voice, or declarative use of
Divine providence, p. 61. Sect. 1. The usefulness of the said enquiry, p. 62.
Sect. 2. In what sense the word providence is taken in this enquiry, p. 63.
Sect. 3. The question discussed, whether Divine providence be, and wherein it
is regulating, or declarative of the will of God to be done by us, p. 63.
Subsection 1. That providence does declare something of God, p. 64. Subsection
2. That providence does declare somewhat of Gods counsels, p. 65. Subsection 3.
That providence does declare to us that God is, and what he is, p 67.
Subsection 4. Certain distinctions premised for the discovery how far
providence is declarative of the will of God which we are to do, p. 68.
Subsection 5. Five propositions explaining, wherein providence is, and wherein
it is not declarative of Gods will to be done by us, and how providence where
it de^ivers not the rule, may yet determine its obligation to the particular
matter, p. 69. Subsection 6. That Dominion is not founded in eventual
providence, p. 89. Subsection 7. That providence alone, or without the Rule of
Gods word does not signify to us the allowing or disallowing will of God in
matters either of human right, or positive institutim, p. 92.

CHAP. IV. The Question [how the text says the power is of God] stated and
resolved, p. 97. CHAP. V. Of the term, ordained of God, p. 101. Sect. 1. Of
the several acceptions of the word ordained, being put for an action of God,
p. 102. Sect. 2. What the special and proper acception of the Term ordained of
God, is in this Text, p. 107. Sect. 3. Reasons to prove that Gods ordination of
the power is preceptive, or warrantive, not merely providential, p. 109. Sect.
4. Gods preceptive ordination of the power explained, particularly how it is
communicated to this or that particular Magistrate, p. 120. Subsection 1.
Ordination contains institution, and constitution: and what each of these
signifies, p. 121. Subsection 2. That institution of the power is of God: and
whether by the law of nature in man innocence, p. 123. Subsection 3. That
constitution of the power, or putting in of the particular Magistrate is of
God, and how, or by what means he does it? p. 124. Subsection 4 That Gods
ordination is conveyed to the particular Magistrate by the consent of the
community, p. 136. Subsection 5. Three other ways of conveying into persons a
title to Sovereign Magistracy exami^ed, viz. 1. That of Father-hood, and
primogeniture. 2. That of Conquest. 3. That of voluntary benefi^iallnesse by
protection, p. 144. Subsection 6. A solution of some objections made against
the passing of Gods ordination unto the person of the Supreme Magistrate by the
consent of the people, p. 167.
Sect. 5. That distinction which some give betwixt the power, and the
acquisition, or assumption of the power; and its aptness to resolve the
question [Whether a violent intruder into Dominion be among the powers in this
Text, that are of God, ordained of God?] considered, p. 191.
CHAP. VI. Of the universal negative note, in the words, there is no power but
of God. p. 204. Sect. 1. The original is not in those words, [no power but of
God] expressly universal, p. 205. Sect. 2. The several qualifications which
sentences in terms universal do admit, p. 207. Sect. 3. The sutablenesse of
some of those qualifications of universalls to this (supposed) universal in
the Text, p. 210.
CHAP. VII. Of the being of the powers, in that proposition, the powers that be
are ordained of God, p. 216. Sect. 1. The question moved, wherein consists the
being of the power, or, what it is, that makes the power to be, p. 217. Sect.
2. Reasons to prove that prevalency, or actual possession of the seat of
Government does not make or infer one to be the power, p. 218. Subsection 1.
Argument 1. Taken from the nature of (...), p. 218. Subsection 2. Argument 2.
From the absurdity of admitting Satan's, and the Popes usurped powers upon the
ground of actual rule, p. 220. Subsection 3. Argument 3. From the custom of
hereditary Kingdoms, accounting the succeeding to be King in the moment of the
death of his predecessor, without actual investure, p. 225. Subsection 4.
Argument 4. From the lawfulness, and us^fulnesse of fundamental Laws, and
provisions for the future continuance of Government by succession, and against
encroachers upon the same, p. 226. Subsection 5. Argument 5. From the practice
of Nations, owning them for their Sovereign powers who have not actually ruled,
p. 228. Subsection 6. Argument 6. From another practice of Kingdoms, their
admitting some to the place of Supreme command whom they acknowledge not to be
the Supreme power, p. 233. Subsection 7. Argument 7. From the approved custom
of determining controverted Titles unto Sovereignty by arbitration, p. 234.
Subsection 8. Argument 8. From the expressions of the holy Ghost in Scripture,
owning men for Kings in relation to the Kingdoms of which they have been
unpossessed, p. 236. Subsection 9. Argument 9. Taken from the nature of
Magistracy, p. 245. Subsection 10. Argument 10. From Gods express disallowance
of some in actual command, p. 249.

CHAP. VIII. Some Arguments to prove, that by the power in the Text is to be
understood a power lawful as to title, and not a mere possessory power, taken
from the context, p. 252. Sect. 1. A consideration of the duty to be yielded to
the power in those words, ve^s. 1. Be subject, p. 253. Sect. 2. Of the term,
higher, annexed to the powers, verse. 1. p. 259. Sect. 3. Of the whole style,
higher powers, verse. 1. p. 262. Sect. 4. Of the resistance of the power
concluded under the penalty of damnation, verse. 2. p. 263. Sect. 5. The
opposition and distance which the Text puts betwixt him that is the power, and
him that is the resister of the power, verse. 2. p. 269. Sect. 6. Of the work
of the power, described verse. 3, 4. p. 274. Sect. 7. Of the Magistrates style,
the Minister of God, verse. 4, 6. p. 279. Sect. 8. Of the Magistrates bearing
the Sword, verse. 4. p. 281.
CHAP. IX. Some other Arguments for the conclusion insisted on in the former
Chapter taken from other Mediums, p. 283. Sect. 1. Argues from the sense of
some Scriptures forbidding the retaliating of evil, ibid. Sect. 2. Argues from
the Prophets comparison of the Jewish State under the Predatory power of the
Chaldean, unto that of such Animals as have no Ruler over them, p 287. Sect. 3.
Argues from the nullity of a self-created power, declared negatively in
Christ's, positively in Babylons case, p. 288. Sect. 4. Argues from the sundry
absurdities following upon the attributing of a mere possessory power unto God,
as his ordinance, p. 290. Sect. 5. Argues from that State-maxim, Political
power is originally in the people, and in the Magistrate, only derivatively
from them, p. 294. Sect. 6. Argues from the rise, or nature of Civil
Government, p. 295. Sect. 7. Argues from the received d^st nction of a
Sovereigns legal, or public, and his personal, or private capacity, p. 297.
Sect. 8. Argues from the being of Civil power by the Law of Nature, p. 299.
Sect. 9. Argues from the general, and solemn disclaim of Arbitrary
Government, p. 300. Sect. 10. Argues from the impossibility of determining
what measure of possession shall make a power, p. 301.
CHAP. X. Answers to some objections, and doubts concerning that sense of the
Text which the aforegoing Chapters have stated, and confirmed. p. 303. Sect. 1
The Objection [that this Text commands the Roman Christians obedience to the
then Roman Emperor, as the Supreme Power of God, ordained in that Empire, and
that he was a Vsurper] answered, p. 304. Sect. 2. The Objection of Christ's
paying, and commanding Tribute-paying to Caesar: of his owning Pilates power:
of Soldiers serving the Roman without disallowance of the Baptist, Christ, or
his Apostles, answered, p. 311. Subsection 1. The question, whether the Romans
were Usurpers over Judea in our Saviors time, discussed, p. 311. Subsection 2.
Of Christ's paying Tribute, Matthew. 17. p. 326. Subsection 3. Of Christ's
commanding Tribute-paying to Caesar, p. 327. Subsection 4. Of Christ's
acknowledging Pilates power to be of God, p. 329. Subsection 5. Of the
Soldiers serving the Roman without the disallowance of the Baptist, Christ, or
his Apostles, p. 329.
Sect. 3. The prejudice which it is alleged, the requiring a good title to the
making one a power ordained of God, may cast upon all Governments, (inasmuch as
their beginning is ordinarily either unknown, or known to have been violent)
weighed, p. 330. Sect. 4. The force of the examples of the Jews submitting to
the Babylonian, Persian and Grecian Kings, and of the Christians to others,
and the command the Jews had of submitting to the Babylonian, viewed, p. 334.
Subsection 1. Of the examples of the Jews, and Christians submission to the
(supposed) Usurpers over them, p. 335. Subsection 2. Of the command the Jews
had of submitting to the Babylonian, p. 337.
Sect. 5. The Allegation of the supposed goodness which may be in the
administrations of a mere possessory power, considered, p. 340. Sect. 6. Of the
sayings of some Protestant Authors interpreting this Text, not only to require
obedience to present Rulers, whatever their Title be, but to justify their
being ordained of God, p. 342. Sect. 7. Many examples of exemplary persons
disowning, or opposing mere possessory powers in such recognitions, and rights
as are due to the powers ordained of God, p. 349. Sect. 8. Three other
Enquiries spoken to, viz. whether the power of a mere possessor may not be made
use of? whether subjection to it be not lawful, and necessary? and, if it be,
whether the subjects conscience, or practice be at all concerned in the
justness, or unjustnesse of the power that is over them? p. 364. Sect. 9. The
conclusion is, with a short view of the question, what kind of consent of the
Community it is which is requisite to the conveying of Gods ordination to the
power, p. 371.

FINIS.

