THE RELIGIOUS and LOYAL PROTESTATION, OF JOHN GAUDEN Dr. in Divinity; Against
the present Declared Purposes and Proceedings of the Army and others; About the
trying and destroying our Sovereign Lord the KING.

Sent to a Collonell, to be Presented to the Lord FAIRFAX, And His Council of
War, this fifth of January 1648.

Jan: 15th London, Printed in the Year 1648.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and with a Tudor
rose and Scottish thistle on either side
To the Reader.
NOt any vanity or ostentation of bold and unseasonable freedoms, (which are
not worth the hazards and displeasures they may contract) but only duty and
integrity, commanding me, resolutely to look at Gods glory, and the discharge
of my own Conscience both to God and Man, has made these ensuing Papers
become public, which I lately, with all humility and charity, presented by
the hand of a Colonel (my worthy friend) to his Excellency, and the rest of
the Council of War: Indeed, I am persuaded that God requires, and looks for
(in the general over-awings of men's spirits, who behold the Army more with
terror, than with love and charity, which I do not) some men speedily to
assert both his righteousness and their own uprightness amidst, and against
the crooked and perverse motions of others, in this untoward Generation, which
is ready to father upon God and the Christian Reformed Religion, one of the
most adulterous, deformed, and prodigious issues, that ever the corrupt hearts
of the men of this world conceived, their unbridled power brought forth, or the
Sun beheld.

Wherefore, as not by my assent, so neither by my silence must I have any hand
in the midwifery of so monstrous productions, which seem to threaten the ruin
of the King, and the subverting the fundamental constitutions of Parliament,
Laws, and Liberties.

Next, to the betraying and killing of Christ, was their sin, who either
denied, or deserted Him.

The impetuous torrent of present power, having broken all banks of Ancient
Legal Forms, affairs seem now let out to such general and popular
diffusions, that they admit no other restraints, but those which the common
Peoples assents, or dissents, may give to them.

It is hard if among such a multitude of men, all our Oaths, Protestation, and
Covenants, sacred and civil ties will not obtain so much of Loyal and
religious Subjects, as by a word or two both decently and seasonably to
enterpose, when (as the Lord lives) there seems to be but a step between the
life of our Sovereign Lord the King, and some violent death.

Me thinks I hear His Majesty in His Agony, solitude, and expectation of an
enforced death, calling to me, and all other His Subjects, You that never
believed My Life was sought after in the bottom of this War but My safety
and Honor, you that never fought for Me, yet professed to abhor the fighting
destinately against Me, or destroying of Me; Cannot you, dare not you now speak
one word to save My Life, and your own Souls? shall your silence seem to
encourage and make up their suffrages, who therefore pretend they may, and will
destroy Me, because it pleases you, and the generality of My people?

For my own part, as I hope to have communion with God in Christ, I dare not
have any fellowship with so foul a sin, as the Killing of the King, but
rather I ought to reprove it, and fairly contest against it: whatever His sin
may be, yet I think Him not criminal or obnoxious to any Tribunal but that
of God, whose Deputation, Authority, or Commission they can in no sort (that I
see) produce to any satisfaction of religious minds, who at present undertake
to be His Tryers, Judges, Condemners, and Destroyers, only because the KING is
in their power. Whereas Gods Commission warranting such an Act ought to have
not only the stamp and image of prevalent power on one side, (Which the most
flagitious actions often have) but also the superscription of his Word, and the
express signature: of his will, in the municipall Laws on the other side, by
all which, power is derived, limited and warranted to act with moderation and
right eousnesse.

I beseech God to restrain power, to soften hearts, and to frustrate those
purposes, which to me seem to have so much of sin, Hell, and honor; that if
I hated the Actors the most of any men, (which God knows, I do not but love
and pity them, and pray for them) I could not show my hatred more against them,
than by wishing them engaged and suffering them to go on, and thus to fill up
the measure of their sins, by destroying Him, for whom I have always been
taught, and now most of all to think it my duty to cry aloud, GOD SAVE THE KING.

So clearly poynting that ambiguous Verse, which most men are afraid to do:

Regem occidere noli. Timere bonum est.
Jan: 10. 1648. JOHN GAUDEN.

TO His Excellency the Ld. FAIRFAX, And his General Council of War.
RIght-Honorable, and Honored Gentlemen,
Your Power and Actions render you terrible, but that candor and affability
which you say you bear to all, makes you accessible, and invites Addresses to
you, even from those who differ from you. I am one of the least considerable of
many, as to any contesting with you, or obstructing your proceedings; yet since
some of you yesterday invited me, or any man, to a free declaring of our
judgments, in order to the great Affairs you are now upon, wherein although
your selves, as principal, are most concerned, yet my self and others are
like to be involved in the success of your actions, both as to my temporal
and eternal welfare if either approve or dissent. My humble Request to you
is, That without contracting your displeasure, I may use that liberty which God
and Reason has allowed me, and your selves have not yet forbiden to me or
others in this way.

Happily I might with more safety in silence tremble before, and humbly adore
the Justice and Power of the great God, which he has by your means, and yet
may carry on further against the sins of this Nation, yet I consider not you
only, but my self am highly responsible both to God and Man, for what you do
and I seem to consent unto in matters so enormous, of so vast and public
influence, both to the present Age and Posterity.

You are not ignorant that Success is a great Bribe and Snare to the
Judgment, where the heart is not very watchful over it self, and much in
Prayer to God for his wisdom and Grace, which is most set forth in the using
Successes humbly, and honestly, to the advantages of Piety and Charity.

Prosperous Power is loath to stop it self with moderate bounds, or to suspect
it self, either to want or go beyond the line and limits of Justice; It is
compassed about with many applauders and flatterers, who easily mistake the
fact it self, or the confidence of the Agents, for the rule of Righteousness,
and interpret Gods permission of what may be very wicked and un-just, as his
approbation and witnessing to their Justice,

The rule and standard of which (that is humane Justice) I think to be fixed
and immovable, either as to those general expresses which are in Gods written
word, or those settled Laws of humane societies, by which his Providence (for
the good of men) has in ways of public and National consent, clearly
brought forth that light of common and politic reason, which but dimly shines
in man's heart, singly and apart, the divine goodness confining by such
public and settled regulations those exorbitant varieties to which men's
private Reason, Will and Power, are prone to break forth in the fulfilling of
their particular Lusts, to the injury of their Neighbors, and the detriment of
the public good: I confess I am not able to resolve my self, by any thing
yet set forth, as to any grounds of God's or Man's Laws, or your own sometime
time declared Principles, so as in the least kind to justify what you formerly
or lately have done, without and against the mind of the two Houses of
Parliament, yet I see much of Gods light in their and your darkness, of his
Order and Glory in these Common Confusions.

But there are many Persons of abilities far beyond mine, who in the point of
their Privileges are more Personally concerned to vindicate and assert them,
against the impressions by force upon them, who were undoubtedly the fathers
and fountain of your Power, as Soldiers, and their Commission, the Limitter as
well as Licencer of your Military Actions.

What is past upon the Houses, can only have such a remedy and reparation as
Providence shall see meet to grant.

That which strikes my Soul with the greatest horror and astonishment is, how
to reconcile your declared purposes against the King, either with the fair
opinion I desire to retain of your Persons, or with that common tenderness
and duty which both you, and my self ought to beard toward his Majesty.

The Justice you pretend to do against him, seems to me most questionable
both for the matter or merit, as also for the manner and form of the doing it:
Since no power, that I know, has; or can under Heaven, invest you with any
Authority to do what you seem to intend.

The Laws of this Kingdom (I presume your selves confess and others have
evidently evinced) are fully against you, giving no Subjects, in any Case,
Judicial power over the life of their King, or his Soveraigntie.

The Word of God (so far as he has given me to understand it, neither
affords any Precept, nor commends any example, in this kind, to your
imitation, but in both is absolutely against you: you cannot be ignorant of
David's both Conscientious and Generous respect to Saul's safety and life, whom
he leaves to Gods Justice, by no usurpation of power, success, or oportunities
of revenge, suffer himself to be tempted to prevent the hand of God.

Never any man in the Church of God, of any name for piety and holiness, are
recorded to have done any such Act of violence against their lawful Kings,
such as ours is confessed to be; never did Christ or his Apostles, by practice
or precept, give the least intimation of the will of his father, as agreeing to
what you declare to be your purposes; yea, I am fully persuaded in my Soul,
that if my Savior Jesus Christ were now living upon Earth, he would be
utterly against your Councels and Actions in this point; agreeable to whose
most holy mind, doctrine and example, all Christians that have truly feared
God, have also honored their Kings.

Such has been the violence of pretorian Soldiers, Janisaries and Mamalukes,
such as have followed a Casar, or a Scilla, or a Marius, not knowing the mind
of God in Christ: But never of any Christian Soldiers, living in the power of
Godliness.

So that being thus wholly destitute of any support from God's word or Man's
Laws, either for rule or example, to gain my approbation to what you mean to
perpetrate in a way exposed to so many horrid aggravations: Truly I should
think it not only my infinite sin to declare for you, but even by my silence
to betray you (in other things so gallant men) as much as in me lies, to so
great, and almost unexpiable a sin; where you being destitute of any clear
grounds must needs sin more against the clear light which shines upon you, and
against your proceedings; since to your Souls, I awe and bear a great
Charity, next to the salvation of mine own.

Furthermore, by silence, I should fail of that poor remainder of duty which
yet lies as the last point of my power to express to my Sovereign Lord and
King, being one of his Subjects, and upon whom the many Oaths of God do by
obliegeing me to desire, and in all fair ways to promote his hoth honor and
safety.

You seem to take the first and greatest rise, for the justification of your
proceedings from those advantages of mere natural or martial power which are
in your hands: of which you can have no comfort, as any token of God's gracious
and special favor to you, though never so prosperous, unless you have his
fear before your eyes, which teaches you to refrain, and depart from doing
evil: by keeping the exercise of your Power within those bounds of moral and
political good, to which God calls you by his Word, the Laws of the Land, and
most particularly by your own derived Commission: To all which, not only the
prime ties of Conscience to God, and Allegiance to the King, but those also of
Honor, Faithfulness, Modesty, and limited Trust from the Parliament, should
obliege you as men of true worth and sober valor, whose will should never be
the measure of their Power (as is in Pirates and Robbers) but their Power is and
always ought to be contained in those Religious and Honorable bounds,
wherein Godly men allwaies keep their mortified and subdued wills, as David
did, when he had to the personal in juries offered to him, the advantages
added both of Power and Opportunity against King Saul; for that of Samuel's
severity against Agag, you know that neither is the King an Agag to you, nor
you as Samuel to him.

Your next support, seems to be settled upon the Peoples Petitioning, and
seeming to assent, to what you intend to do: when as I am very confident; and
your selves cannot be ignorant of: that if free suffrages, or subscriptions of
all the People were taken in the three Kingdoms; you would find twenty to one
against your Judgment, and Proceedings; and this of very grave, sober, and
considerable men.

So that I cannot in oder to my own, and others eternal peace with God; but
in all freedom; yet with all meekness, and due respects, but exhibit to you,
as the chiese Counselors, and Mannagers of eht present designs against the
King, this my Loyal and Religious protestation against it, and earnest
obtestation of you; not to bring upon your souls, and the Kingdom, as much as
in you lies, the blood of His Majesty, the Lords Anointed.

That I may at least, as Joseph of Aremathea, keep my self unspotted from it;
whose voice cannot but cry as much louder, then any other man's unjustly shed;
as the blood of Adam would have done if Cain had slain him being his father,
instead of Abel his brother.

You know the Caveat of the wise King Solomon, given and repeated: There is a
way which seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of Death.
[ Prove. 14.12. and 16.25.]

I beseech you therefore, in the name of God, and for the love of Jesus Christ,
let not your being advanced so far be any hindrance to your penitent and just
retreat; to which I think God calls you, as by many others worthier and ablet
then my self: so by this my humble Remonstrance; in which my unfeigned charity
to your souls eternal good; as well as the Kings and Kingdoms temporal
welfare, may and will with men that have any touches of Gods Spirit in them,
plead my excuse, for my thus presuming to contradict your Counsels, or
intercept your proceedings.

Matters of so high a nature, should either not be attempted, or publicly
argued, with the greatest calmness, clearness and freedom; the last of
which you have so obstructed, that most of those Lords, and Gentlemen, who are
as much related to the King and interessed in the Affairs of the Kingdom as
your selves, are denied to use or enjoy it.

I beseech you to remember what mercies you proclaim to the world, God has
already showed you, and what mercies you may yet stand in need of; what
pretentions and assurances of Moderation and Loyalty, you sometimes made to the
King: O let not the World find in the event; that your pretended mercies were
intended cruelties.

After so long and so hard a restraint which the King has suffered with so
much patience, after so many Concessions to his own diminutions, in order to
the satisfaction of the Parliament, the Kingdoms, and the Armies Interest,
both joint and several: how can you in cool blood, without any color of due
Authority from God or Man, destroy your and our King; who cast himself into His
Subjects Arms, and was received with all assurances of safety and Honor?

If His Majesty erred in His Judgment or Council, which put Him, and He
thought, upon the necessary vindication of His just Rights against those, whom
He was jealous went about to deprive Him of them, yet can no less revenge
serve Subjects upon their King, or Sons, toward their mistaken Parent, then
after long and many heavy Afflictions, utterly to destroy Him, and His?

Forget not (as I hope you do not) the common Errors, to which all men are
subject; and those notorious ones, with which, mutual re-criminations have
aspersed both Parliament and Army, and with which we have all cause to fear,
the most just Judge of Heaven and Earth will charge the most presuming
Innocence of us all.

O do not stain the Renown of your valor by so merciless an Act, as the
destroying your King; Renowned even by some of you selves, for the greatness
of His understanding, and many other Princely virtues, and incomparable
endowments.

You are Gentlemen that pretend to walk by the rule of a good Conscience before
God and Man; which must needs fail you, when God has not given you either any
Scripturall command, or any Magistratick power, over or against the King; nay,
you cannot but feel (I think) many checks and scruples, if not strict ties to
the contrary upon you, as well as other Subjects, by no failings of the King,
or any earthly Power to be dispensed with.

The presage of that deluge of miseries, likely to follow the ruin of the King
in these miserable Kingdoms, does not so much terrify me, as those sins which
have deserved and brought upon us, so vast Judgments. To all which, the
Addition of this both grand Sin and Judgment of destroying the King; against
all Laws of God and Man, of War and Peace, of Valor and Honor: must needs
become so far the Heavier, as it becomes the more National, by drawing with it
the consent of others.

Wherefore I thought it my duty, being exempted through the love of God, and
Charity to your Souses, from that spirit of Bondage, which makes too many
servilely fear your power; of so great a Sin, and stand in the gap, both
against the Sin, and ensuing Judgments: Having no other end in these sudden
lines. but to witness to the Truth of God, (as I conceive it) to the Honor of
the true Christian Religion, to my particular Duty, and Oaths of Allegiance, as
also to that Charity and Respect I bear to the welfare of my Country, and your
own Persons.

I had rather you should see and prevent you sins in such glasses of free and
fair Remonstrances, then hear of them too late by the Clamours, Curses, and
bitter reproaches of others, or in the fearful Echoes of your own most
troubled and terrified Consciences, and the just wrath of God upon you and the
Kingdom.

I earnestly beseech God, the most wise and just disposer of all things (whose
executive power wicked men often unjustly usurp, but gracious men never either
invade or execute, without an orderly Authority derived either immediately from
God, or mediately from those politic Laws, and fetled Magistracies which are
Gods Ordinances among men;) Him I beseech to look upon you in mercy, whose sin,
with success, will make you infinitely more miserable then the King, or any
man can be, under the greatest wordly sufferings, which (I hope) God has, and
will further sanctify to him.

That great God and King will (I hope) incline your hearts to those ways,
which are clearly his will; not as to private imaginations, which are various,
falacious, and dangerous, but as to those public and infallible Declarations
of his Oracles, and Providence, viz. the Scriptures, and our Laws.

With regard to both which most clear and constant lights; that which you call
Justice against the King, seems to me the greatest and most unparalled
Injustice. What I humbly present to you in a way of a most just, and (at least)
a merciful tenderness toward your Sovereign, and your Souls, is not more
your duty, then it will be both your Comfort, and Commendation for ever.

When the world shall see your power bounded with Loyalty, sanctified with
Piety, and sweetened with Pity, not foolish and feminine, which I would have
below you, but masculine, Heroic, truly Christian and Divine: which commands
you to add to your many other Victories, this Crown of our rejoicing, and your
triumphs, the Conquest of your selves: by over-comming what you conceive evil
and blameable in another, with such unquestionable goodness in your selves.

Wherein I humbly entreat the God of mercies to make, you to abound,
over-powering all passions and frailties in you as men, and perfecting all
graces in you, as true Christian Subjects to a Christian King. This I write,
and pray, as

Your faithful Monitor and Servant, according to the Will of. God, John Gauden.
Janu. 5. 1648.
To Colonel W.
Sir,
Your friendlinesse and great Civility has given me some encouragement to
entreat you, that by your hand these enclosed papers may be presented with my
due and Christian respects to his Excellency, and the Counsel of War, when
they next meet, my Motives to them, and the contents of them you will best
understand, when you shall please to communicate them as they are directed, I
shall not, I hope, seem when you hear or read them, to have made any sinister
or uncomely use of your favor, in offering to you, and by our mediation to
them, such considerations as carry with them, the weight, not only of
temporal, but eternal lives; and the Concernment of many Souls as well as
Bodies.

Sir, I doubt not of your faithfulness in fulfilling my request to you, nor
yet of your Candor, in not mis-interpreting that modest freedom I have taken;
for which, as I have the greatest compulsions from within, so I had no small
invitations from your self, and others of your Company yesterday; when by your
wonted and Commendable Courtesy you added many obligations to those which you
formerly had upon

Your most faithful friend and servant in the Lord, J. G.
Jan. 5.1648.
FINIS.

