An Elegy upon the most lamented death of the Right Honorable and truly
valiant, ROBERT Earl of Essex, etc.
I Thank thee, Grief, that thou have found a voice:
Some think there runs no stream, where is heard no noise;
And yet I Will bear thee witness, when there stood
No water in thine Eye, thy Heart wept Blood;
So may the stealing Brook mourn under ground,
When on the surface, naught but Flint is found.
Advance my Tears then, and your Office be
To bring the Rear up of this Obsequie.
A Rear of Mourners, which shall reach from hence
To Doomes-day, mourning not for Form, but Sense.
We now but see the Pomp; but after times
Shall make us feel our Loss, due to our-Crimes;
When Monarchy shall-faint, and Faction thrive,
How shall we then wish Devereux alive?
When there is none to dry up Widows Tears;
None to Repulse our Jealousies and Fears:
When Justice self shall want an Advocate,
And truth in coward silence read her Fate;
When those days come, (O never come those Days;
Never to us!) that he shall wear the Bays,
And be accounted valiant, who shall dare
To whisper Truth, though only to the Air:
When the mean Feet shall trample ore the Head;
How shall we then feel Devereux is dead?
Devereux, the Nobles Orb, the Gentries Starr,
The Cities Altar, the wronged Countries Bar:
Devereux, the Just, Devereux, the Stout, the Wise,
The maimed Soldiers Limbs, the Blind man's Eyes.
The Armies faithful Alm'ner; or what is more
Devereux, the very Devereux of their Poor;
Yet he, this Cedar's fallen: or rather, is
Transplanted, for to grow in Paradise.
How the Ghosts throng to see their great new Ghuest;
Talbot, Vere, Norris, Williams, and the rest,
Those valiant Shades, England's best Sons! each one
Courting Him to then Bowers; (Bowers, whereof none
But was of conquering Laurel) there to hear
A story, which would force from Ghosts a Tear.
(Their Mothers Tragedy) as 'twas acted late
By her own Children, to make sport for Fate;
For they had seen the Stygian Boats even sink,
Laden with Souls up to the very brinke;
Had known their Charon tugg and sweat, and say;
England did find him most work and best pay.
He (the new Ghuest) who (since he did afford
To hold in peace the Scales, in War the Sword,
Could therefore give best Judgment: the pure stamp
How things'ith Senate passed, how in the Camp:)
Dissects the Body politic, and with weight
Lays open the Griefs and Maladies of State.
Shows how those hands that held the Scales were numb,
And how that Tongue which should preach Peace was dumb;
The Feet (says He) went staggering, and it is sed,
Some Clouds and Vapors did possess the Head,
Whose little singer, had the poison moved,
Heavier then all his Fathers Loins had proved;
The Eyes grew dim and darkish, whiles the Ear
Deaf to sage Counsel, yet strange Tales could hear;
And the whole Frame did so with Fever burn,
Fever might serve for Piles to fill the Urne;
And England mouldring thus through Feverish Ire,
Save Heaven the labor of a Doomes-day Fire.
All now was turning into Ashes: so
Consuming Flames Incendiaries blow.
Hence Englands best Physicians judged it need
(To save the Body) that some veins should bleed;
Surgeons from all parts come to work the Cure
(She now was patient and must all endure.)
Leeches and Emp'ricks (College fulls) all came,
To cure? no, but to practice on their Dame.
And thus they let her bleed too much: so they
Can gain, no matter though she bloodlesse lay.
Yet some there came, Artists, and honest too;
Men that without a plot their work would do:
Men, that to stop her blood, their own did give,
And paid their Deathlesse Lives to make her live.
So sharp a Pill is War, that some have thought.
Even Health it self, at this price, too dear bought;
Physic on a Swords point can seldom please,
Men count such Remedies worse then the Disease.
And thus as he was blazning States, and Men,
Persons, and Things, the Cause; why? how? and when?
Still passing ore Himself, as if he were,
Though others Trumpet, His own Silencer:
Still his own Mute, whilst yet he Trumpets forth
Great Warwicks, and Northumberlands great Worth.
With other Heroes placed in high Command,
Neptunes at Sea, and Marses on the Land;
But who was He, cried some, (not but they knew:
But that they longed to hear those gests anew
Which they so dearly loved) who is he that fought
So much for Peace 'bove Victory? that thought
The bloodlesse Bays the best? He that aimed more
To save one Citizen, then kill many a Foe?
He that knew how to value Lives? the Man,
So much good Soldier, and good Christian;
That killed and sighed, mourned as he Trophies wore,
Mingling his own Tears with his Enemies gore?
As if his Grand Commission did not give
Him power to kill and slay, but kill and grieve.
And yet again, that most undaunted He,
(When th'Armies were to join, to disagree)
Who speech'd his Soldiers first with Voice and Drum,
Then Caesar-like bad them, not go, but come?
He, who Himself an Army was alone!
He, who was then most General, when yet none?
And had whole Legions ever at his need,
Legions of Soldiers not to Fight, but Feed:
Yea but who is He, cried one among the throng.
That with so few men raised a Siege so strong?
That made Retreat from twice his odds, the while,
As he Retreated, fighting, threescore mile?
And this, not through fenced Lanes, and in thick nights,
The Downs and Midday Sun saw all his fights.
An honor, we could envy, could this place
(Loves Throne) admit a wrinckled Heart or Face.
With that, some Cavalier Ghosts (for there come
Of them to rest here in Elysium)
The Learned Faulkland, and Carnarvan stout,
Fierce Lindsey, (Spartan shades, above the Rout;)
Such as had paid him Homage with their Blood,
And fallen his Sacrifices, when he stood
Pointed at our dear loss, and faid; all this,
And more is Devereux; this, and more is His;
Which made him blush; His pale Ghost blushed; and then
He looked, as if he had been alive again.
But when such praises even from Enemies come,
It were a sin in us, should we stand dumb?
And is it not pity so Famed worth should dye
Without an Heir? No Son to close his Eye?
No Child to wear his virtue with his Name?
None to inherit his well-gotten Fame?
But as great' Paminondas answered those
His Friends, that mourned his Fall, (mourned by his Foes)
'Cause he fell Childlesse; as if Greece were done
Since so much virtue dyed without a Son:
But yet (says He) still bear it in your mind,
I Have left two Daughters with you here behind,
Leuctra and Mantinea; who shall keep
Their Fathers Name from Death, and Thebes from sleep;
So when our Devereux, ( Devereux, a word
Great as that Greek's, and keener then his Sword:
A Name that fills the Mouth, and wounds the Ear:
A Name that Machiavell would be pleased to hear.
He, who admires the Pagans large-siz'd Name
'Bove Christians; as if words could create Fame.)
So when our Devereux is bemoaned in Death,
As one that leaves no Son to breath his Breath,
Answer is made, He leaves two Daughters fair,
Reading and Gloucester, Daughters such as are
Sans parallel; and which will cost the State
Millions to match them with an equal Mate.
Or should this Issue fail, yet how can He
Want Sons and Heirs, who is Pater Patriae.
C. G.

FINIS.

