AN ADMONITION Moving to Moderation, Holding forth certain Brief Heads of
wholesome Advice to the late, and yet Immoderate Party.

PHIL. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men; the Lord is at hand.

Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 4. Est etiam mensura aliquid agendi: ne sit
irrevocabilis and immoderata progressio; and est numerus and affectionum animi,
and virtutum; quo ab stultitia deformitate, ad sapientiae formam decusque
colligitur: and est pondus voluntatis, and amoris, ubi apponet quanti, quamque
in appetendo, fugiendo, praeponendo, postponendoque pendatur.

By JOHN GAUL, Minister of Great Staughton, in the County of Huntington.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Lloyd and Roger Vaughan, for Henry Brom, at the Gun
in Ivy-lane. 1660.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY Charles the II. By the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King; Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread Sovereign!
BEsides that your trials have taught you Moderation, together with
magnanimity; your Majesty learned both of ^im, that not only lived in both, but
(oh horror!) dyed for them. So that now your Moderation (as well as your
Magnanimity) is become not only your erudition, and your Religion, but even
your nature also. VVitness those your Gracious Letters, and Proclamations; the
perfect model of a mind that is truly moderated with all graces and virtues:
and so the abler to moderate others, Which made me the more afraid of this
presumption, of casting in this my small Dropp, into that immense Sea of yours:
(albeit it were toward the quenching of our intestine conflagrations) and of
lighting so dim a Candle, before so bright and glorious a Sun. But (Great
Sir!) I remember, I saw (on your blessed Birth day) a Star at noonday, look
out with constant luster, though before, and near the then shineing Sun. Our
Nativity-spellers (who were not a little guilty in promoting the men of our
portentous shame and misery, to be what they were, and do what they did;
through their delusions meeting with those of their own) durst never meddle
with this famous natalitiall Star; not so much as once to peep at it. They
know well I (for my part) am no Astrologer to Prognosticate. Yet can I (with
sobriety I hope) affirm from a more sure word of prophesy, it was a Light that
shined, though in a dark place, to their Art; but in a light place, to your,
and our hopeful Expectation (and we did well to attend it) till the day of
Your, and Your Kingdoms happiness, should dawne; and that great Day Star,
both by His Graces and Comforts arise in Your heart. This Day Star did
signify to our hopes; That although the morneing of Your life might be
somewhat (alas too much) benighted with afflictions: yet the noonday of your
felicity (and the Lord God promote it to be a perfect day) should shine clear.
That you are chosen as a Star, to shine before the Sun of Righteousness.
That He that had his extraordinary Star at His birth, was pleased to
vouchsafe you yours also; that was borne to be his Vicegerent here on Earth. To
the end the wisemen of our Kingdoms might be guided in the right way, to come
and honor you. And withal, that we the lesser Stars might not be over dampt,
in our presumeing to approach the glorious Sun of your Majesty. Whereupon
(most Excellent Moderatour, both of Church, and State!) I am bold to crave
access in presenting you with a slender speculation of that, whereof you are
known the eminent Practitioner. Bold again, to say; It is sufficiently known to
your self; what the Immoderation of zeal, Malecontentednesse, Ambition,
Covetousness, Fraud, and Force, has both machinated and perpetrated, to the
distraction (well nigh the destruction) both of Church and State. But blessed
be the great God of Heaven and Earth! who has made good unto us that old
maxim: no immoderate thing is diuturnall. And this (we trust) you will make,
and find as good: Nothing is to be firmly founded, or established in either of
them, but upon Moderation alone. There Is no doubt therefore, but your Sacred
Majesty will be piously, and prudently active, and ordering in it. All the fear
is, least we our selves might fail in the passive, or observing part thereof.
God grant therefore, we may make it our maxim also. Nothing can be easy,
sweet, and safe to us (in our lives, Religion, Consciences, Laws, Liberties,
Proprieties) without it. Without it, we can never agree in the exercise of our
Duties, either to God, or Man. Without it, we shall be tedious to our selves,
and troublesome to one another. Without it, we shall but wrangle, or wanton
away our hopeful peace and prosperity again: though that hydeous outrage,
with the grievous oppression, and more then Moorish Slavery, that ensued
thereupon, be not as yet sufficiently (nor ever can be) abhorred, and bewailed.
For this cause I have attempted (as I was able) to make known this virtuous
Moderation in the Truth, and Fruits of it: that men might so learn, and labor
after their own happiness. Having mine in this, to be made known (among
others) to be one endeavoring (by Gods grace) still, as heretofore, to moderate
my self, as becomes

Your Majesty's Loyal Subject JOHN GAUL.

ERRATA
PAge 3. line 4. for walking, read so walking. and l. 2. dele only and read
ascertaining. p. 4. l. 21. for disputed r. disposed. p. 6. l. 16, evercovet r.
overcovet. p. 7. l. 3. occasion r. ovations. and l. 14 not. sound r. out
sounded. p. 11. l. 23. observation. r. obsecration. p. 14. l. 17. out minder
one mind. and l. 18. some r. so in. p. 16. l. 12. our moderation. r. one
Moderatour. p, 17. l. 1. wall r. well. p. 23. l. 15. changed r. charged, p. 25.
l. 14. r. (...), and (...). p. 28. l. 7. our part r. one part. and l. 8. so on
r. so on. p, 35. l. 19. importened r. importuned. p. 38. l. 3. principle r.
principal. p. 39. l. 12. synanimous r. synonymous, p. 40. l 12. formal r.
female. p. 43. price r. piece. p. 45. l. 1. after r. as for p. 46. l. 14.
aggrestions r. aggressions. and l. 16. perpestions, r. perpessions. p. 49. l.
8. decoited r. decocted. and l, 13. care. r. fear. p. 54. l. 1. by being r.
being by. p. 58. l. ^. our uniformity r, one uniformity. p. 61. l, 13. so r.
for. and l. 20. (...) p. 62, l. 4. affects r. effects. and l. 13. commended r.
commanded. p. 64. l. 16. fit r. set. p. 68. l. 16. brings r. being. p. 69. l.
20. out r. but. p. 70. l. 9. our moderation r. one moderation. p. 71, l, 17.
invitation r. imitation. and l. 10. our subject r. one subject. p. 73. if r, I.
p, 77. l. r. evidencings, p. 81. l. 9. fall r. fell. p. 85 l. 24. soundness r.
fondness. p. 86. l. 3. imperfectly r. in perfectly. p. 89. l. 21. as r. at. p.
95. l. 14. pricked r. pretended. p. 97. l. 4. last r. best. p. 103. l. 13. good
so r. so good. p. 108. l. 5. r. overbending.

AN ADMONITION Moving to MODERATION.
Phil. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.
IF all virtue be well defined by a mediocrity, as consisting wholly in a
middle betwixt two extremes. What a virtue of virtues then is Moderation? whose
proper work it is, to labor both in the study and practice of that golden
mean. Let virtue in it self be never so equal betwixt excesses and defects;
yet is it but a barren and sloathful speculation, not fruitful or beneficial to
us, till this elective habit of a practical proportion bring it within the
compass of lively operation. All her Equity is but as an idle number, till
Moderation comes to give her her quickening measure. It serves indeed to set her
even upon the very summity of affection and action, without either addition or
diminution; yet trenches upon neither extremity, so as to alter the nature and
quality of the thing, as touching the least that appertains to the vitiousness
of excess or defect. And as it holds an equal opposition to extremes of all
other virtues, so especially to those of its own; being an apt mediety or
mediocrity, betwixt the rigid contention of a furious zeal or emulation, and
the lukewarm disposition, of a reachless indifferency or neutrallity, detesting
alike, to be over-just, and over-wise, as to be over-wicked, and over-foolish,
Eccles. 7.16, 17. It approves of neither pace, to drive on furiously with Jehu
in matters of policy, nor that he go softly with Ahab in matters of piety. In
matters of controversy or scruple, or scandal, it likes well of nothing, but
of walking with a right foot, Gal. 2.14. And for walking, as to turn neither to
the right hand nor to the left Deuteronomy. 5.32. And that also of choice, like the
Israelites among the Edomites, Numb. 20.17. Not of constraint, as Balaams Ass
between the two walls, Numb. 22.26. It loves to churne the milk so as to bring
butter, but hates to wring the nose so as to fetch blood, Prove. 30.33. But
above all, it hates so much as to hear of removing the ancient bounds or
land-markes (whether of Religion or Laws) Deuteronomy. 19.14. For it knows there is a
curse thereunto belonging, to which every moderate man must say Amen, Deuteronomy.
27.17. Nay, and to break but the hedge (of a particular prerogative,
privilege, propriety) ascertain only it self a Serpent will bite for it at
last, Eccles. 6.8. It in no wise endures the wisdom that descends not from
above but is earthly, sensual, devilish, where is ^^vying and strife, and
confusion, or tumult, and every evil work, but delight in that wisdom which is
from above, as first pure, then peaceable, gentle or Moderate, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits without partiality, or wrangling, and
without hypocrisy, Jam. 3.15, 16, 17. And thus is this Moderation, not only a
Queen among moral virtues: but a mistress and governess even in spiriritual
graces and duties. And so indeed it is admonished by the Apostle in this place.

Let your Moderation be known to all men. There is some difficulty, to conceive
what consequence this exhortation of the Apostle can have upon that immediately
foregoing, or upon what connection it comes in here? say it had none: yet there
may be a method, whether the matter be synthetically or analytically disputed;
Divine Laws and Lessons are Aphorisms, not Declamations. And as for this of
Moderation, it skilleth not much to enquire how it offers it self, for
(whether it be in speaking or doing) it never finds its order, but makes it;
yet least want of some coherence might make it seem impertinent, let us
expostulate a little with our Apostle about it. Would he so earnestly have them
to rejoice, (a good act of spiritual exultation) and it set upon a right object
in the Lord: (contemplating the Divine Majesty, Perfection, Love, Promises,
Benefits,) and exempt from carnal and creature-joyes. And that so incessantly,
as always (in act or habit, in adversity as well as prosperity) and that with
a Repetition; Again, (to be renewed upon every occasion, and extended to the
utmost degree.) And that too upon his own warrant, experience, inculcation, I
say rejoice; Now then would he so suddenly recall that his incitation? or
correct such their consolation, by an immediate caution to Moderation herein:
Is there any such fear, that Theological virtues, and their spiritual
affections, should so soon degenerate, and be vitiated by excess? Certainly,
there can be no nimiety in exulting in grace, and the love of God, and Christ.
Nay, there is no mediocrity that may here be admitted. No indeed; there can now
be no exuperance in respect to the primary object. But there are also secondary
objects, and acts about those objects; with the manner also of those acts; all
which may very well admonish men to moderation. Though there can be no fear of
redundancy, or superfluity of spiritual graces; yet spiritual delectations are
here subject to the suspicion of both extremes. For a Christian man may ever
covet the sensible and evidential comforts of them (which are not here to be
ingrost) and likewise may be too faint in the defect of their sensible
evidence. And therefore uses he this motive, in this very point; the Lord is at
hand: viz. to come, and supply you with such everlasting comforts, and
rejoycings, us shall need no moderation, because subject neither to addition,
nor diminution. But does he not rather give the caution to our spiritual
exultations, to put a check upon our carnal occasions? praised be our all
provident God! who has exceeding graciously given us of this Land occasion of
rejoicing, even beyond our expectation at this day. But I am greatly afraid of
our immoderation, nay inordinatenesse. That out Feasting, and drinking of
Healths, our Music, and Pageantry, our May poles, and Garlands, and
Morrice-dancers, and ringing of Bells, our Drums, and Trumpets, vollyes of
Short, and shoutings; have not sounded the soundness of our hearts, both in
the Ears of God, and men. I pray God give us grace to be moderate in our
meats, drinks, apparel, pastimes, or recreations, and revellings, in our vain
glories, boasts, threats, presumptions, expectations, least the Lord see it,
and be angry, and so provoked to turn our mirth into mourning. But God grant
us, to be merry in the Lord, after a more sober, sincere, and sacred way. And
that instead of being drunk with wine, wherein is excess; we may be filled
with the Spirit: speaking to our selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, singing, and making melody in our hearts to the Lord. Giving thanks
always for all things unto God, and the Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ: submitting our selves one to another in the fear of God, that his
delight may be in us, to rejoice over us for our good; and go on (as he has
graciously begun) to turn all our sorrows into joys.

Further, to let you understand this Admonition was not without the Occasion.
Let us look a little higher to this purpose, and draw down the context from the
two verses before that aforesaid. Thence you may observe with me: There was a
kind of schism or dissension, arising in the Philippian Church, (as what
Church, even from that time, has had the happiness to be without such
enormities? nay, what Church has not been unhappy in them?) But this division
of theirs is nameless. For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and the holy
Apostle, to silence and conceal it, as touching what point, or what particular
it was. And so indeed all schismatical dissentions ought to be dealt withal.
Its enough for the Church to complain that they are; though she speak not what
they are, while errors and offenses are but only known in their generals,
Moderation may come in more easily to compound them, and that with less noise,
opposition and scandal, then when she is put upon the scanning of every
particular. And therefore she holds it both wiser and safer, to silence them in
gross, then minutely to dispute them, especially, how tender is she to discover
those precise nakednesses, when she perceives their Piety (for the main)
observable in either Party, inviting to hide, nay, smother the singularities
and personalities of each others infirmities? But oh the temerarious immoderacy
of, or more then Cham-like immodesty! How audaciously have we defiled not only
our own nests, but ripped up our own mothers belly, and spit in our own fathers
face? errors and persons, crimes and names, how have we told them in Gath, and
published them in Askelon, to make the daughters of the Philistines and
uncircumcised to rejoice and triumph? what scandalous Ministers have we made,
till we made the Ministry it self a scandal? while we labored, yea, and
usurped to the paradigmatizing of others, and they our betters. Woe, and alas!
what have we done but stigmatized our selves to the uttermost of infamy? by
publishing our controversies, of Presbytery against Episcopacie, of Directory
against Liturgy: of Independencie against settled Ministry, and that grand
quarrel of Oligarchy, or Anarchy against Monarchy: what has all this
immoderate clamor prevailed? but to make us a reproach to our Adversaries, a
grief to moderate reformed Churches, and a scandal to all good men, and a
ludibrious hissing to the whole world.

But to go on; This dissension, it seems, began betwixt women. And such has
always been the immoderateness of passions, and affections in that Sex. And
women (I wist) had a finger also in ours, when they sacrificed, from their
Plate, to their Thimbles and Bodkins; toward an Antiepiscopal, if not
Antimonarchical War, not unlike those other, that break off their golden
Eare-rings, to make up a molten Calfe. But I would to God, they had been women
of no unworthier rank and worser report, then they spoken of in this place?
And I would withal, that our men (a many of them) had not been so uxorious,
and men womanish in this same case; Then certainly they had made a much
earlier, and easier way to moderation; which indeed is the thing that the
Apostle labors here, and he labors it by entreaty. For moderation works, and is
wrought, not by absolute commanding and imposing, but by fair entreating, and
persuading. And his observation to this end is personal, mutual, equal. I
beseech Euodias, and I beseech Syntic^e. O rare way of Apostolic moderation!
that has respect to all Persons, and yet without any respect of Persons,
moderation is always impartial, and nothing more partial, then immoderation.
As we have seen, and heard, how some have bin wooed, and soothed even to
flattery; and others (more conscientious, and meriting) deterred, and checked
even to calumny and contumely. One party has been entreated to preach, and to
print; and the other (abler for both, and honester in both) forbidden not the
Press only, but the Pulpit also. One has thanks given him for his pains,
another has pains set upon him, instead of thanks. To such I will say with
St. James. (Iam. 2.1, 4.) My Brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. -- Are ye not then partial
in your selves, and are become Judges of evil thoughts? But if this work not
with them, then I must say of them with St. Paul. The time will come when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears. And they shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth, and shall be turned into Fables. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. But I cannot
pass by that detestable immoderation of their horrible partiallity, in
approving, or rejecting only by tradition; making their own characters of men
among themselves, and so taking the Testimony, and giving the verdict upon them
accordingly. One they will have gifted, though ignorant; another shall not have
grace, though learned. But the most horrid of all was, to hire or to call in
Accusers, and condemn; the accused unheard altogether, and unseen. But our
excellent Moderator proceeds in his Moderating way; beseeching them both to be
of the same mind. This verily is the way, and this the work of moderation. For
there is nothing in all the World, that makes men to be more immoderate, then
their being of many mind. Whereas Unanimity is the Mother, and Unity the
Daughter of moderation. And they have a near Kinswoman, that follows next after
them; which they call Uniformity. He exhorts them to be of the same mind, not
only between themselves, but even with the whole Church, of which they were
Members. For moderation is nothing betwixt particulars, except it be toward
the general, or whole communion. We have known two dissenters (of Persons, and
Factions) so to moderate, or suspend, or dissemble themselves, as to consent
and combine to a more immoderate conspiracy. Wherein they have proved like
Herod and Pilate; made (as it were) unanimous Friends, or confederated, only
for the uncontrolled (the paricidal, regicidal) crucifying of Christ their
King. This being of our mind (in exact speaking) is to relish, savor, resent
or be wise about the same thing. (For the u^i y of moderation ought to be in
minds, as in things: and some things, as minds.) And thus it implies a moderate
union, or united moderation in the sense, will, and affections all at once. Now
some have combined to follow their Senses, or Sensuallities. Their wills, or
wilfulness; their affections, or affectations; without Judgment. Some again,
to follow their judgments, or opinions, or rather delusions; without any good
will, disposition, or affection at all. And thus have they run (headless,
and headlong) into the utmost of unlimitted immoderation in all their actions,
and affairs. Now would such had listened, how the Apostle limits it here; to be
in the Lord: that is, according to Gods word, Spirit, Religion, good
Conscience, and right Reason. Otherwise it will be (as it has been) no
unanimity, no moderation; but an immoderate association, confederation, and
conspiracy, of Foxes tied together, with firebrands in their Tales, or Rumps;
raunging, and ravening, to the consumption of the good and fruitful Field. Yea,
and like to the Brethren in iniquity; of whom it was said (and is to be said)
Instruments of cruelty are in their Habitation. O my Soul, come not thou into
their secret: unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united: for in their
anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they dug down a wall. Cursed
be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Genesis 49.5, 6, 7,

After he had thus concluded upon the matter, and defined the manner: See now,
how he seeks, and sues to the means, or instruments, for the apt composing of
the fore-intimated differences. To a work of true moderation, the help of more
then our moderation is required. And here also, to neglect the means (such as
may be most aptly isntrumental) is always to fail of the end. And good Lord!
how have we forsaken our own mercy, in refusing, nay and rejecting the means;
and that through the most monstrous abomination of immoderation, that our Sun
might be darkened, and totally eclipsed; only because he labored to shine as a
light, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation. Our Glory put to shame,
by the most shameless of all. Our Head spurned at by the very Heel, because he
propounded the wall governing of the whole body. Our father abdicated (by
Bastards surely and no Sons) because he would have arbitrated betwixt the
Brothers fallen at odds. Our Sovereign Physician massacred most barbarously;
because he endeavored to have healed the Frenetick and Fanatic Patient. Our
great and gracious Moderatour mainly opposed, only because he offered all he
might to reconcile. Oh skillful Pilot, unmercifully, and outragiously wrackt,
because he stood in the storm, to save all, but himself. Oh! The breath of our
nostrills, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their Netts; of whom we
said, under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen, Lament. 4.20. The
Apostle invited both sexes, (men and women) to moderate in this matter. But in
that case, (woeful case!) no sex, age, degree, no Nation or Language, no
Religion or Conscience, no Praedication or Petition, would be admitted to
moderate or mediate one whit. Oh, the abomination of immoderation; not
inferior i^ the abo^^^^ion of (...) it self!

To ^^ith^r of the ^^^^^^ting (...) h^re ^i^^s their (...) ^^^mendori^^s, Take
(...) that (...) in the Gos^^l. Surely, he praised them not for the^^
preaching, nor once all owed a (...), for to speak in the Church? No, but for
their other administrations, that might be advantageous thereunto. No, no, such
an immoderation and immodesty, (...) never approved of, tolerated, or so much
as connived at, until these our immoderate and inordinate times. But he denied
them not (on neither part) their due praise, for other, their known graces, and
virtues, Which was indeed the most ingenuous, and compendious way, to win them
both fairly and briefly to a moderation, and union; As touching their lesser
considerable dissentions. How far otherwise was it with us, who were so
immoderate, and disjoynted in Sects, and parts; as to deny, and disclaim each
others (...), and virtues. And all because each (...) would ackn^^^edge (...)
S^^^t, (...) of hi^ own S^^^; ^on^ ^^dly, but of his o^^ g^^b^, and gang, (...)
bu^ o^ (...) own, ca^^^ ^^d (...) ^o (...), h^re^f his o^^^ party and (...),
b^^ of his own affec^^^^n, (...) it l^gious, (...) not z^^l (...) in the i^
^^^in (...) that ran not the (...) oth^ (...) su^^^ of riot. I had almost sa^^,
none (...) but of their own Errors; and enth^^^^^s^^^ But the Apostle here
spoke it, from a be^ter discerning of Spirits; when be st^i^^ even of these
dissenters, their names were written in the book of life, which undou^^edly be
pronounced not upon their, dissension, but as a motive, yea and pers^^sion of
their moderation. For nothing moves the very Elect more (...) an accord here on
Earth, then the thought, and persuasion of their recor^ i^ (...). But Lord! how
were we reprobated, (...) by those that had most need to examin^ themselves,
and prove their (...) selves, whether they were not the repre^ we (...) they
shall know th^^ we (...) reprobates. Nor will we say, they are, but hope their
following moderation will make it known they are not. If they will convert with
some of the exorcists, let them bring their books together and burn them before
all men. Even those black books, in which both the Ministers, and the
Magistrates of England were deciphered, and as it were proscribed, either to
calumny, or confusion. Else we may justly fear, their names are writ in that
fearful black book; who resolve to live, and dye, in their dissensions,
divisions, seperations, factions, fanaticismes, seditions, treasons,
rebellions: and (which is worst) in the immoderations of them all.

Well! Moderation now having hopefully sped, or happily done her work. Mark
now! how she invites to partake the Fruits, Rejoice in the Lord, seeing ye are
now of the same mind in the Lord, and that with all the extentions, and
inculcations as before. I add, upon the Authority, and temperament of
moderation. Which he will have now proclaimed to all, though their dissension
was concealed. Let your moderation be known unto all men. How happy a thing is
it, when men's dissensions are not known, but so, as folded up in their
moderations? would God ours were so wrapped up! we need not care who knew it. But
alas! all men know our divisions; but what man knows our moderation. That is
revealed, which should be conceald, and that is conceald, which should be
revealed, and so we go altogether by contraries. And shall their glory and
rejoicing be always, and altogether our shame and misery? Now mercy forbid it.
Sirs! Ye are Brethren, let there be no longer strife betwixt you. Behold how
good and joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in unity: (unity
of Doctrine, unity of Discipline, unity of communion, unity of commerce, unity
of Administration and Officiating; for it is especially spoken of the
Sacerdotall Brethren.) If there be any Oil of moderation, to cause you to
account that conse^^^ting Oil which was powered upon (...) head ^^ecious;
stri^e no more so f^^^ly (...), I pr^y you, pull him not by the ^ea^d, by which
it ^^nne: nor (...) those ^ki^^s of his G^^^^^^s down to which it w^^, but
(...) us revere (...) ^^her in the^ ^^der and d^g^^e: Th^^ so the ^^e of
H^rmon, (the grace, and comfort^ of moderation and concord) may fall upon the
Hill of Zion (the Church of C^^^^.) For there the Lord has commanded ^ot in
promise only, but effect^ the blessing (here) and (hereafter) like for evermore.

Now^, that ye may perceive, this Text respects, ^o^ only that which wear
before, bo^^her which follows also. It so easily and necessarily (...) to the
subsequent voi^^. That it is not safe for him to say (^e ^^^^full for nothing)
nor for you to receive it as f^^nd unless you understand him, as indeed he
me^^s; viz. immoderately, and after an inordinate manner. Yea, the next clauses
stand (not out, but (as the scope of the Holy Ghost) come in very p^rti^^^^ly
(...) this purpose. Whether it (...) (thou good things) or ^^pplication
(against (...)) or Thanksgiving^ ((...) received benefits) your Requests ((...)
any ^rg^^^g of occasion) cannot be made known (that is approved) to God: unless
in these externalls and temporalls especially your moderation be known not only
to God; but men also, which puts me in (...) of the (...) immoderation of men's
prayers for War, and blood; with those of their Thanksgivings, for sad
Victories and outward success. How in th^s^ things, and ways; they appealed,
expostul^ted, challenged, changed, ar^^ga^ed, owned, adjured, obliged,
limited, directed, pretended, ^oasted, tempted, and even mocked God. Having no
other ground and assurance in all these, but the Spirits (Oh enthusiastical!)
moving, without the word. And his secret will permitting of successes (Oh
^^^^^^ticall!) without the warrant, and approbation of his will revealed. When
that almost deicidall murder was committed; what ground, or Law had they for
it? but (as they said themselves) their own seeking of God by prayer; and his
immediate answer. (Oh fanatic, and nefarious Blasphemy) and Amen thereto?

Let us now go a little lower. And as above we had the Occasion, the Means or
Instruments, and the fruitful Issue: so below we shall find the Matter, the
Example, and the End of Moderation.

1. The Matter; Whatsoever things are true. (Whether in doctrine, discipline,
conscience, or manners: For there is no thinking to find true moderation in a
false matter. We found that too true, in the false moderating or purging of the
Parliament; the new modelling of the Army; the new erecting of a high Court of
Justice; the Agitatorship, Major Generalship, Committee of Safety, and in the
Protectorship it self. To say nothing of the Excessive, or Defective Errors,
and Feignings; of Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptisme, and (the scumme of
all) Quakerisme. Whatsoever things are honest, or venerable. Yea, the word
signifies also grave, and comely: and points mainly at a decorum, in Persons,
Manners, Offices, Gestures, Vestures, and sacred Places. About all which
moderation is mostly conversant, and to which it is most convenient. And we see
sufficiently, what an unhonest, and unhandsome indecorum immoderation has
wrought hitherto in all these. Whatsoever things are just. Here the Schoolmen
more aptly place the thing of Moderation, then hence derive the name ((...),
quasi (...)) making it an equitable and convenient part of Justice, to regulate
and direct the rigor and severity of the Laws, according to their wholesome
intention rather then strict words: for the common good, and the particular
relief of certain persons, in certain facts; the contingencies and
circumstances well considered, contrary to the unjust immoderations of so many
Draconick Laws, Edicts, Impositions, and Exactions, of subscribing, swearing,
protesting, cove^^ing, confederating, associating, eng^ging, addressing, and
a^^juring, Whenever things are p^^^, (...) ch^st^. For Moderation is also
apart of Temperance; ^e^ ^o^^^ and dec^^t culture is in the modesty of the o^^^
a^ w^^t in the i^^er man. Whatsoever things are lovely. And here also it is
this fr^^^dly Moderation of men and manners, than renders all matters i^
Church, State, City, Country, Parishes, and private f^^^ties) so amiable, and
so mi^able: laboring thus to recone^^ them, and so to conserve them;
Contrarily, how odious and inimical was our immoderation, that made us call and
count those of our own Religion, nay, those of our own blood^ The Common Enemy,
Whatsoever things are of good Report. How famous Moderation is would be known,
and it is partly from this, that all men know how infamous immoderation has
always been: without Moderation, good things lose of their name and fame;
Indifferent things have none in themselves at all but what they borrow from it;
and even bad things have their infamy ^^ss^ned by it. It is only Moderation
that gains a good report to men and things, and keeps it too, and promotes it
also. However immoderate men have affected a good report, even from things of a
bad report, And have presumed to raise a good name to themselves, only by
taking away that of others. Yea, they have covered and conceited a fame from
infamous actions. And it is not strange to see or hear of it; for such has
always been the folly and madness of immoderate ambition. Yet (me thinks) this
is strange, that the infamy should be inured upon nothing else but Moderation.
Who bore all the brand at first, but moderate men from both sides? And that
under the Nickname (forsooth) of detestable Neutrallists. But fierce friends, I
beseech you, If no body had stirred on either side, where bad all this stir
been? If no man had meddled, had there not (think you) been more innocence on
the one side, and less guilt on the other? without all doubt, the first brunt
had been brought to nothing; if that the seconds (of City and Country) had not
flockt in so fast, to the making of the Fray. Even in foreign Wars, the
cause can be just, and good, but upon our part: In Civil Wars, it is seldom
so on either, (where all things are to be moderated not by Arms, but Laws.)
More seldom when it is of the Inferior against the Superior, or of the private
against the public. In a word, know this; moderate men, though they have not
bin the greatest Sticklers, yet they have been none of the least Sufferers. And
likewise, whatsoever was wrong, the right has prevailed at length; not by
others Swords, but their prayers. And verily, if there be any virtue
(intellectual, moral, or theological) it must be in moderation: which is
both the Center, and Circle of all virtues. And therefore, if there be any
praise (as the reward of a good conscience, or a good work from God, or men)
moderation will obtain (on all hands) at last. Wherefore think on these things.
Because things of moderations are not for light opinions, conjectures,
suspicions, fancies, humors, affectations: but for serious meditation, solid
ratiocination, sober reputation, certain resolution, firm conclusion, and
diligent endeavor.

2. The Example. See it, and hear it; for thus says he that gives it. These
things which ye have both learned (as true Doctrine) and received (as good
Discipline) and heard (by my preaching) and seen in me (my exemplary practice)
do (in a real imitation) Or, which ye have learned (to inform your
understandings) and received (to guide your affections) and heard (to satisfy
your consciences) and seen in me (to direct your conversations) do. And do
these things indeed as well as think of them. For things of moderation (whether
in Doctrine, Discipline, Conscience, or Manners) are not for contemplation
only, and discourse: but for practice also, and execution. We all can
speculate, and exhort to moderation, in all these things: but who, and what is
the President and Example? we easily observe the passive party always, and
earnestly pleading for it: but when (on when) shall we see the active penny
endeavor to any performance of it? If we should do no other, then what we have
either (learned by observation) received (by custom) heard (by complaint) or
seen (by experience) in this particular: I am afraid we should all be
immoderate enough.

3. The End, The God of peace shall be with you. God is the God of peace
within, and the God of order without. And as both, and in both, is with the
unfeignedly moderate, by his promise, presence, direction, and blessing. With
whom then (I wonder) was that Devil of Warm, and disorder? or with whom already
are many of those diabolical Instruments that lived, and acted, and dyed
immoderately; some so Distracted; some so Desperate? But set them alone to
stand or to fall to their own Master. Albeit, we may justly (...) ^^ith (...)
and (...) were ^ig^ (...) ^^^sing, yet ^e cannot absolutely say their ^od was
to be burned. How (...), we are p^^swaded be^^^^ things of (...) moderate men;
and (...) things (...) accompany salvation. For the God of (...) shall not only
be with them, but wh^^^, the Peace of God (int^r^^d in their consciences, and
external in their ^ffairs) And such a Peace as passes understanding, (it is
meant of cr^^^d minds, whether of Angels or Men) to apprehend completely, or
entirely ^asti^^^e, especially while mortality end^^^^. But we poor mortals
(blessed be the immortal God!) have now also a peace subject to our senses, or
happily come home to our very sensible experiments. And yet surpassing our
understandin^ (...), namely, when we go about to con^^^^^ or consider, by what
means it has pleased Almighty God, (who can work without means, and against
means) to bring it thus about. We can impute it to nothing (under him,) but to
the pious and prudent designs, consultations, votes, and resolutions of very
moderate men; And that when all eyes were failing, all hands were feeble, and
all hearts were faint. To the end it might be known to be his own work alone.
For which (again and again) yea, everlastingly let his holy Name have the
praise, and that peace of his (we hope) shall now keep us in this of ours.
Shall keep as with a watch, and guard. For which still to the all Provident God
be the blessing, the honor, and the praise! And (next to the Tutelary Angels)
thanks to that Presidiary Soldier, with that Presidentiary Assembly. Whose
gravely moderated Counsels (as a safe custody) we trust, will wall us about,
against the seiging of our open, and the undermineing of all our secret
Enemies, As we pray the good God of Heaven, to keep both their, and our hearts,
and minds (in sound judgment, and sober affections) against all the Temptations
of Satan himself; and of all his Ministers. Yea, though Satan should transform
himself into an Angel of light (as he did of late) and though his Ministers
should transform themselves into Ministers of Righteousness, as they are
ready enough to do, that can change themselves upon all occasions. Against all
which, the Lord keep their, and our hearts, and minds, through Christ Jesus:
Both through the merits, promises, and mediation, and in the faith, profession,
yea, and even the moderation of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Thus has this Text and Truth looked round about to furnish it self from
accessories, and appendents. Now look upon it as a Continent fortified
sufficiently within it self, and standing altogether upon its own strength. Or
view it as an entire compact of a goodly Fabric raised upon two main Pillars.
Where had I but the Keys to let a man into every room and closet, he might see
to satisfy a covetous mind: and could I but open every Casement, might
discern a prospect large and fair enough to delight even a curious Eye.
First, take notice of the two Pillars.

Which are 1. An Admonition. 2. A Motive.


1. The Admonition.
Let your Moderation be known unto all men. In which are notable; 1. The Person
admonishing, Saint Paul. 2. The virtue, or thing admonished, moderation. 3. The
Subject, or Relation, your moderation. 4. The Manifestation, or Evidence, Let
it be known. 5. The object, or Extent, unto all men.

1. The Person here admonishing. It is St. Paul the great Apostle, and he a
pure moderate man. 1. An Apostle. Know then; it is for Superiors (and such as
are emine^tly called in Church, or State) to be the Admonishers: and for
Inferiors (in their private callings) to be the observers of moderation. Their
part is to be the Agents: and ours to be the Patients in it. To give Laws, to
our Lawgivers: regulate our Rulers; or moderate our Moderatours: if immoderate
Polypragmonists, and Allotricepiscopists will usurp it; yet is it not for us,
that would be accounted moderate men, to undertake it. Be it for our Governor
to advise it, and injoyne it. Be it for us to pray for it, and expect it. And
let us be admonished withal^, besides presumptuous expectations, there have
been, and may be even immoderate Petitions for moderation. Perhaps they
proceeded from that old politic proverb: Ask an unequal, and an immoderate
thing: that a moderate, and equal may be obtained. But they should be so
politic, as to be advised, by whom, and from whom, it is to be so importened.
Otherwise, beggars that would be their own insatiate carvers may well be sent
away without their Alms. And moderate men do count an immoderate arrogator to
do as much, as deny himself his own suit. 2. A moderate man. For so indeed he
was; according to that complete character given of, and by himself. 1 Cor.
9.19, 20, 21, 22, 23 -- I am made all things to all men -- But the immoderate
man says quite contrary: I would have all men made all things to me. Thus you
may distinguish them by their motto's, and their manners are accordingly. For
the one condescends to others necessities, capacities, conveniences,
advantages: the other must have all apply to his own opinion, humor, fancy,
affectation. One makes himself a Servant, where he was free: the other makes
himself a Tyrant, where he was a Slave. One becomes a Jew to the Jews
(complying with them) in all lawful observations: the other becomes a Jew even
to Christians; compelling them to undergo their unlawful exactions, and
impositions. One is as under the Law, to them that are under the Law,
(dispensing with a harmless and decent ceremony) the other rather then endure
a ceremony, will let go the Law it self. One is as without the Law, to them
that are without the Law (in matters of liberty, and equity) the other is
without Law, even to those that are, and would be under the Law. Because
(however it be with others) he would have no Law over himself, but his own
will. One is all this, to lose of himself, that he might but gain others: the
other is all this, to the loss of all others, that he might gain to himself.
Now then, how aptly may he admonish to moderation; that so acted it? But how
scurvily it founds in all such men's mouths, as were adversaries to it? to hear
an immoderate man advise, or ask for moderation, that never afforded it: or to
urge it, that never intended it. Is, as if an Anarchicall Leveller should
remonstrate for a regulated Monarchy: And a rigid Presbyterian should preach
for a moderated Episcopacy: unles it be to serve the Truth, rather then the
Time.

2. The virtue, or thing admonished. (...), Moderation, which is a virtue of
virtues (as I said at first*) And would require not only a whole volume in
Morallity, to show how she governs every virtue: but a just Treatise in
Divinity, to set forth, how she serves every grace, and seasons every duty. I
shall labor to present her only as in a Type. For being such a transcendent,
exactly defined she cannot be. Neither indeed is she to be described, but
according to her equitable and well proportioned circumstances of things, and
persons, and time, and place.

1. The Hebrew knows it by no other name, nor has a more principle expression
of it, then by that of Rectitude; or (plurally altogether) Rectitudes. To note,
That moderation comprizes in it all kind of directnesse and uprightness, both
in matters natural, moral, politic, and religious.

2. The Septuagint make use of the word ((...)) as Gods attribute only: as if
creatures were scarce capable of it. And that as an attribute of his mercy only
(as if Gods mercy were the greatest moderation of himself) in his
propitiousnesse, indulgence, condonation, reconciliation, acceptance, etc. For
so they use it in Psalm 86.5. Ezra. 8.9. 1 Samuel 12.22. Even the Apochrypha
also adds it to his justice, and judgments. Wisd. 12.18. his chastenings and
corrections. 2 Mac. 10.4.

3. It is severally translated both in the Text, and new Testament; moderation,
modesty, equity, humanity, gentleness, clemency, courtesy, patience of
Spirit, and softness of mind. And all these sunanimous rendrings are but to
signify, how many qualifications of virtue go to make up this great one of
moderation. As modestly, not only in the shamefast culture, but humble
apprehension of a man's self. Equity, in case of due and right, with respect to
convenience and necessity. Gentleness of Natures; Clemency of Superiors;
Courtesy of Equals; Patience in Trials; Softness of Inferiors; and Humanity
of all, and in all rational conversation.

4. The ancient Fathers (Greek and Latin) generally translate it modesty: and
mean it, some of a decent demeanor of a man's self; some of a benign
interpreting of others actions; but mostly of a patient tolleration of the
Cross and persecution. Inferring hereupon the Lord is at hand: so to redress
and reward all: Among which I may not forget Tertullian, for a translation by
himself. Probum vestrum coram hominibus appareat. Let your honesty appear
before all men. He so speaks in his Book of Formal Culture. And speaks to such
women as were careless of their modest behavior before men; upon pretext of
the purity of their hearts and intentions to God. To these he makes the
Apostles intent to be this. Ad quid, nisi ut malitia ad vos accessum omnino non
habeat; and ut malis and exemplo, and testimonio sitis. To what end is it? but
that the malice of the Devil, the flesh, and the world may have no access to
you: and and that you may be for an example and a testimony to bad, both women,
and men. Moderation then is a thing very meet, and much becoming all Sexes. It
not only prevents the evils of either Sex by it self: but especially the
scandalls of both Sexes met together.

5. The Critics also in their notation of the name, do confer something to
the signification, though not enough to the perfect definition of it. Whether
it be (...) of (...) and (...), justum, or of (...) cedo, or of (...) simile,
consentaneum conveniens, put all together, and they help somewhat toward the
description of it, viz. Moderation is that whereby Justice departs from her
rigor, and a man yields of his right, only to do that which is convenient in
equity, consentaneous to right reason, and decent in every circumstance.

6. The Schoolmen and Moralists, some make it to be a potential part of
Justice, bringing (not in severity) the fact home to the Law; but rather (in
equity) the Law down to the fact. Not suffering the Law to be in force against
any, before her self had a being. And though the Law takes upon her to censure
of no more then the postfact, yet even so Moderation benignly interprets it in
some favor to the Sufferer, all circumstances considered. It would have every
censure warn, before it strikes. But above all, it cannot abide the
immoderation of such a sentence, as shall exalt and set up it self for the
present, and against one: and at the same instant to repeal and cry down it
self for the future, so as to concern any other. Because it takes Laws to be
intended, not for an execution at once, or upon one: but for a perpetual rule
and example to all severe penalties, and such as wherein it is hard to observe
a Moderation or Proportion; it takes them to be (like those of the Talion Law)
intended rather in terrorem, and for prevention; then precise execution where
it seems to desert the strict Letter of the Law, it does but now appeal to the
mind of the Lawgiver, what he himself would have done, if the particular case
had been now brought before him, and whether his Reason would not there
somewhat have ruled the case, where it was not possible for words sufficiently
to provide? And whether the Law it self was not intended for somewhat
indefinite; where examples and contingents are so indifinite; and so often
found to fall out? And all this it does, least summum jus might become summa
injuria. And that Justice her self migh have her commendation for moderative,
more then vendicative: as minding rather to amend, then confound.
Notwithstanding all this; though moderation be not cursed, and cruel, like a
Stepdame, in her corrections, but tender, and compassionate as a mother: yet is
she far from being over indulgent, remiss, dispensing, arbitrary, or
licentious. Not so, as that men should grow immoderate in their vices, and
crimes, upon a presumption of a moderation in the censure or penalty. Some
again take it for a price, and master-peice, of Prudence; wisely discerning
betwixt what is just, and fit: and so giving sentence, rather congruously then
severely. Not rashly, and arbitrarily dispensing with the wisdom of a Law; as
if it were no more but a leaden Rule: but circumspectly and benignly
interpreting it, as that it may not prove an Iron Rod. Gravely supposing that
there is a natural intended equity in every Law (although unwritten) to
correct (upon occasion) the literal written rigor. In as much as a Law
intending general events, cannot be so cautiously devised, and composed; as to
provide sufficiently, and conveniently, in case of every particular accident.
And therefore the prudent dictate of right reason is often feign to interpose,
and moderate between the bark and heart of the Law. That the Law being but one,
and bound up in Syllables; might abound in its sense; and might justly and
wisely apply to the variety of Facts, and their more various circumstances.
Moderation is wise; and has her eyes in her head, to look round about her: And
so likewise, wisdom is moderate, in judging what is necessary, what
convenient. But after the imprudence, nay, and impudence of immoderation, it
rushes forward arrogantly and unadvisedly to what it affects, (Like a Horse in
a blind Halter) not seeing what is considerable on either side. Mark an
immoderate man; and he never marks what you say; because he minds only what he
would say himself. And it has been observed (even in matters of no less
importance, then Church, and State (Government) none have been more immoderate,
then the unlearned; or but half-witted at most. For biased affecti^ns have not
been aware of any true advertisements. And so they have boldly mott their
bolts, without either fear or wit. As we have a Senate: Oh that we had a
Synod of moderate men! never till then will prudence play her part, for the
peace and truth, both in Church and Commonwealth. But to proceed with the
Cardinal virtues. I find moderation is a chief property even of Fortitude also.
For in the body, it is no more but the strength of a beast: it is the mind
that gives it the moderation of a man. All other things are but the Iron and
Ammunition: but this is the Gold, and precious mettle of Fortitude. By those
indeed others may be conquered, but by this alone it is, that a man overcomes
himself. A man that is immoderate in his passions, you shall always have him
either daunted, or desperate, in the appearance of difficulties, or approach of
dangers: what is it but moderation, that makes the true temper, betwixt a
pusilanimous fear, and an over-confident audacity? what are all the Aggrestions
of Fortitude, but over-dareings; and all the perpestions of it, but
under-shrinkings; if moderation be a way? And how comes in that Heroic Spirit
(our Royal Martyr) with his Motto of more then Conqueror, Who left nothing of
moderation unattempted: who set upon nothing of force but to which he was
forced and necessitated. Who labored to have made his Religion, and reason,
and Laws to prevail, more then his Arms, who studied to prevent or remove
all difficulties; although they were not occasional only, but contrived. Who
looked upon dangers, as others more then his own. All whose fears were for
nothing more then the common misery, who strove altogether to be on the
defensive, and not on the offensive part, who did all these honest and
honorable things, that ought to be done: before he suffered these more then
dishonorable and dishonest evils, that must be suffered, who looked death (to
mortals the utmost of terribles) clearly in the face, bold as a Lion, while the
Foxes and Tygres stood by trembling and amazed, both covering their faces and
hanging down their heads. In a word, who left his Empire with more true courage
and valor, then all his enemies could usurp it. After so great a pattern of
magnanimous patience: there is no telling of our Sequestrations, Decimations,
Confiscations, Imprisonments, Banishment, Mancipations, Mutilations Murders,
Deaths: no, though peradventure it might be said we moderated our selves to
suffer them, with courage and constancy too in our kind. Lastly, as for
Temperance, who but the sensual are insensible that the All of it is in
Moderation. It were long to speak of the immoderate luxury and
voluptuousness, in meats, drink^, apparel, and other carnal pleasures, and
vain delectations; which they of every Sex, Age, and Degree, had given
themselves up unto. And they not only our oppressors, who had engrossed to
themselves the fat of the land, and lived to no other purpose, but to suck the
sweet of it. But they also, who have no other ways to sweeten their
oppression, but by helping to devour their own honey; since the robbers had
entered the Hive, making this their only contentment to follow the time in all
the vanity of it, for all the misery of it; even these men also seem to me
(whether they live in War or Peace) to be borne to no other end but consume
fruits. Of these therefore I say, It will be hard to find moderate men to
reason, that are immoderate in sense. Neither are such men fit to be consulted
about the public health and soundness, that have addicted themselves to spend
their own days, in a continual sickness and distemper. Who but dispensing
Epicures (though pretending Stoics)(men of decoited patrimonies, or of
desperate and despicable fortunes) were the authors of all our disorders?
(whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame) Phil. 3.19. And
there is no greater care of any, then of such, to lavish and squander away our
hopeful peace and prosperity again.

7. Thus has Moderation entered the nature and definition of all the four
Cardinal Virtues, (Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance) And if I
should now speak of the three Theological graces, (Faith, Hope, and Charity)
Moderation comes in to the description or true consistency of them all. For
exempt them from this, and Faith easily degenerates either into credulity, or
infidelity: Hope into Presumption or Despair: and Love into hatred or vile
affection: yea, and all Religion, either into Superstition or Profanation. Let
the Grace or the Duty be never so good and holy: yet Moderation is well-busied
to the bettering of them. Though not in their absolute nature, (peradventure)
and necessity, yet in their best convenience, and in every meet circumstance,
that may concern or adorn them. And so is no allay even to the highest Powers
of Godliness, and operation of Gods Spirit, but is the very height and
eminency of all such devout exercises, as amount to no more but a reasonable
service of him. Yea, even in the deepest mysteries, it is a being wise unto
sobriety; and in the outward practice, a being wise unto salvation: tending
only to order and edification in them both.

8. As it is the salt, or discreet seasoning of things spiritual. So it is the
soul and vigorous life of things adiaphorous. Nay, it changes their very
nature, converting them into that of its own. For it is moderation that makes
indifferent things good: as it is immoderation that makes them bad. It is the
whole substance, in a matter of circumstance. Yea, it is the rule and Canon, in
all Rites and Ceremonies. Since our breaches and irregularities seemed at first
to burst forth about Rites and Ceremonies ecclesiastical (and they so
immoderately rejected, upon pretense they were immoderately imposed) let me
here speak as a moderate man, to moderate men. All actions (humane, or divine,
private or public) must necessarily be attended with some circumstances. In
the humane, and private, every private man has his liberty: in the divine, and
public, every public man ought to observe his order. And whether is it not
just and meet, that the public should be of a public choice, and
determination? without all question, it belongs peculiarly to the
ecclesiastical polity to have her liberty, and authority, for the making of
her Canons and Tenets about external and indifferent matters. To which liberty
of the Church, every private man's liberty ought to subscribe, even for the
authorities fall. If such things retayn but their middle nature, and no more;
what now should hinder a conscience (informed and guided according to the
dictates of right reason) from assenting, and subscribing? especially, when
they neither labor, nor savor of impiety, idolatry, supersticion,
insignification, burdensomenesse, lightness, nor profaneness: but contrarily,
are moderate, decent, solemn, devout, adorning and edifying. Though Rites and
Ceremonies ecclesiastical be not accounted simply as parts of divine worship;
nor to have an internal sanctity in them: yet are they not without their
external integrity and beauty; and therefore to be reckoned of as sacred
appendices ornaments, and adjuments at least. Whereby the Church is rendered
more reverential, and estimable, not only to those that are within, but also to
those that are without. It may here be distinguished betwixt Rites, and
Ceremonies Divine, and Humane. Those that are purely Divine, are universally to
be retained of necessity. Such as are these which formally concern the
Sacraments in their institution. The merely humane are not to be admitted, if
they come with an austere imposition, and strickt obligation upon conscience,
as necessarily tending to salvation; and yet having no more ground for all, but
tradition only. Nevertheless, the ecclesiastical, as they are not to be
esteemed as purely Divine: so are they not to be accounted of as merely Humane.
For they are the order and harmony of Religion; the guide and help to devotion,
and have something consonant to Gods Word even in this, that they have nothing
repugnant to it. If then there be nothing in them directly against Faith,
Reason, or good Manners, but that they may conveniently serve for uniformity,
and consent, for exhortation, and incitation: they are not only to be not
reproved nor opposed by any; but being lawfully instituted, or by being an
innocent custom received, they ought rather to be praised, and followed by
all. And therefore they rather are to be reproved, who do account it their
singular praise, and as it were part of their private authority; to reject or
alter, ancient and harmless uses and customs: whether it be because they would
have all such to be utterly neglected; or because they would have some of their
own fancies or inventions, to be introduced and embraced in their stead.
Although such Rites be not to be estimated, as of a Divine right; perpetual,
immutable, necessary, efficacious; as the Word, Faith, and Doctrine it self.
Yet ancient and well settled Ceremonies (not superfluous, nor defective; but
comely and useful) are not to be changed, upon a pretext, no, nor upon every
probability of something more profitable. Because all the benefit may be such as
may not countervaile the danger and damage of the innovation. Therefore, in all
such as are of a sober and settled use; it is temerarious to seek, or work their
alteration; and it be for no more but the peace and unities sake. If at any
time an alteration or abolishing of them (or any of them) be thought either
necessary, or convenient; it ought to be the act of the whole Church in her
representative, not neglecting her also in her diffusive capacity. But a thing
of so much consequence, ought not to be usurped by every private man, in his
private place. This is the business, not of the Ministry alone, nor of the
Magistrates alone: It properly belongs to a Synod (rightly convened) and a
Senate, to decree, and effect it; by their prudent and mature consultation, and
consent. Nor are they so much to respect the factions, or seditions, petitions,
complaynts, remonstrances, objections, importunities, or tumults, of Recusants,
Sectaries, Schismatics, Fanatics, Separatists, or Singularists. Because they
that turbulently, or peevishly oppose the Church in her order, and peace; will
consequently (nay, peradventure do it purposely) to oppugn her in sound
Doctrine, and entire profession. But of late have we had the sad and shameful
experience, how the over-heady exploding of our Discipline has sinisterly
proved to the much prostituting, and almost profligating of our Doctrine; and
that by enthusiasmes, mere lies, and blasphemies, horrible to be uttered unto
Christian ears. If it may not be otherwise persuaded, or ruled (by all that
moderation can do) something of indifferency may be yielded or remitted, or
permited (as then it was) during the impetuousnesse of such headstrong violence
and extremity. But all immoderation is to be examined, now that (by Gods good
and wise providence) moderation is come in place. Clamor is not now to
prevail, but reason. Nor are immoderate affectations to be admitted; but
moderate affections. Every pretext or cry of Christian liberty, or weak
conscience, is not presently to be accepted for such indeed, as it does
pretend. The property whereof, is to be more willing to hear, then earnest to
object; to be readier to depose it self, rather then plead only for its
dispensation; to look at, and labor to acquiesse in others satisfaction, as
well as its own. Something (when they are found to be such) may be indulged to
weak Brethren, but nothing to false Brethren. Act. 16.3. Gal. 2.4. and 5. verse.
2 Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5.11. If they be but things indifferent, why then should not
a man be as equal for their acception, as for their refusal? nay, why not for
their reception rather; when moderation has made them good, and Authority
lawful? They may be superstitiously abused, and so they may be profanely
neglected. There may be a superfluity of them to scandal and offense: So there
may be a deficiency of them to disorder, and confusion. These things perhaps
may not simply approve our consciences to God: but by these things we may
commend our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. To conclude
this point; though uniformity be no absolute note of the Catholic Church: yet
such Canons and Rites, as have been decreed in general free Counsels, are to
be preferred before those that are constituted in this or that particular
Church. Albeit these are to be observed, rather then those: because it is
neither necessary, nor possible to bring the universal Church (whose unity is
that of the Word and Spirit) to our uniformity. Hence it is a hateful thing,
for particular Churches to make comparisons in matter of this Nature: Or for
these things to be undervaluing, or invective one against another. Most of all
for one Church so to arrogate, as to seek to reduce and conform another herein
to it self. Because it is to be charitably supposed, that every Church has
good cause and reason for those of its own. To which every member of it is
bound in conscience to submit, and conform. Yea, a member of one national
Church sojourning in another, is not now obliged to the Rites of his own
Church: but (to avoid scandal, and for unities sake) ought rather to apply
himself to the laudable uses of the present place. How odious is it then, for
one of the same Church, to take upon him to propound, and promote the customs
and usages of another Church; before those of his own? This (in a moderate way)
have I said for Ceremony. Much more might easily be said of Episcopacy,
Liturgy, holy Festivalls, sacred Temples, Music in Churches. Canonical
hours, Decent Vestures, and Gestures, Ecclesiastical goods and Tithes. (In
most of all which there is something more then Adiaphorous;) though nothing
more then requires moderation: albeit much to the confutation of immoderate
men. But rather then to check at these immoderations, or propound a moderation
in these particulars; I will here wait (with all moderate men) to accept it
from a Synod most willingly. Which the Lord (for Christ sake) send us! even a
reverend, and blessed Synod, of moderate men.

9. Besides what moderation has plainly appeared to be in it self: it is not a
little illustrated from its contrary, immoderation. Which is nothing else but
an extreme vitiousnesse of Persons, in their judgments, opinions, passions,
affections, actions, manners, pretenses, and designs. Of all which we are not
so pathetically apprehensive in the qualities, as in the effects. What was it
but immoderation? that turned Episcopacy into Presbytery, Presbytery into
Independency; Independency into Anabaptisme; Anabaptisme into Quakerisme; and
Quakerisme almost unto all kind of Jesuitisme? That turned Religion into
policy; Reformation into Innovation; Profession into Pretense, That turned
Ministers into Soldiers; and Soldiers into Preachers; Prophets into
Prognosticators; Churches into Stables; Palaces and Collegiate places into
Taverns and Alehouses; Cathedralls into private habitations; Church-Organs
into Tavern-Musick. That turned Parliaments into Juntoes; Parliamentary edicts
into military remonstrances; The Counsel of State into a Counsel of War; and
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy into Covenants and Engagements; Fundamental
Laws into arbitrary impositions and exactions. That turned Liberty into
Licentiousness; Order into Confusion; Government into Tyranny; Freedom into
Slavery; Propriety into Sequestration; Degrees into Parity; Plenty into
Poverty; Peace into War; Security and Safety into Jealousies and Fears. That
turned Courts of known Law, into an High Court of unknown Justice; and lastly
(so it could go no further) Principallity into Protectorship, and all loyal
Subjection into most horrid parricidall, regicidall Assassination.

10. After all this upon Moderation at large I have yet once more to take a
narrower veiw of it, as it is described in my Text. (...). That Moderate thing.
The Adjective neuter put Substantively, or the concrete in stead of the
abstract. May not this emphaticall form of speaking be to note the quality of
moderation invested with all its acts, and circumstances, for take moderation
in the abstract merely, as a naked quality, disposition, or habit; and however
it may even so affect a man within himself, yet it affects little or nothing in
others. Or that, be it never so fair or moderately contrived, and concluded,
for the manner of it, yet all this is nothing to manifest a moderation, if the
matter or thing it self be immoderate. Or that moderation (as all other Graces
and Virtues) are to be commended and extolled in the abstract: but admonished
and commended in the concrete. Because the quality is for applause: but the
practice for exhortation. Or, would he thus prefer some one moderate thing
before another? For there is a meliority, and a putiority in things of
moderation. Or would he not thus bring every thing, though not to one measure,
yet to one nature of moderation? For true moderation is but one thing in all
things. I rest with this thought, that the Apostles (...), is the same
reciprocally with (...). which is the conveniences and behovefulnesse of all
actions, and passions (which our Savior himself had respect unto in all his)
Mat. 3.5. and 2.10. and 7.26. and is required in all his Saints. Ephesians. 5.3. Tit.
2.1. 1 Timothy 2.10. 1 Cor 11.13.) For whatsoever is meet, is moderate and
whatsoever is moderate, is mere. And so it amounts to as much as the same
Apostles (...). 1 Cor. 7.35. That which is comely, which has with it there
expressly the just bounds of moderation: that is to say, when neither the
Imposer casts a snare, nor the Submitter is distracted in his Duty. And so (on
Gods name) let all things be done decently, and in order. 1 Cor. 14.40.

3. The Appropriation, or Subject to which the Admonition relates, (...) your
Moderation.

1. Yours primely, and chiefly, let your moderation first be known to others;
yea, though their moderation be not known to you: that so theirs may come to be
known to you at last. But first yours, and then theirs, Always in the way of
Moderation, some (and they chief ones) must first begin, that so the rest may
follow after, Admonition may peradventure much persuade it: but ti is example
that most induces to the perfection of it. I hear many say, would God things
were well and handsomely moderated amongst us. But all proves but a vain and
fruitless wish, while no man begins to go about it: In this therefore we are
all to be dispraised, that we sloathfully leave the praise to others, to sit
upon it. Notwithstanding we are all ready enough to own it to our selves: that
is, to challenge it, rather then to attempt it, which is as much as each man
exacting another moderation, but no man exhibiting his own. How eager are that
sort of men now to claim it, that did so furiously disclaim it heretofore.
Moderation is with them now a favorable dispensation; which before was nothing
else but a cold lukewarmenesse, or a detestable neutrallity. While their fiery
zeal burned, we heard no other, but curse ye Meroz, because they came not to
the help of the Lord against the Mighty: cursed be he that does the work of the
Lord negligently; cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from blood. -- down
with it, down with it even to the ground. -- cut it off root and branch -- with
hundreds of such like abusive fumes and flames. But now (that God be thanked)
he has quenched their thorns; they begin to call for poor Lazarus to dip the
tip of his finger in water to cool their tongues, etc. Though I wonder, with
what face or confidence they can ask that, which themselves would not afford:
or presume to obtain that to themselves, which they denied to others:
Nevertheless, I wish with all my heart, they may find moderation in all her
bowels (so they would not prove Snakes in her bosom) that so she may heap
coals (in the best sense) upon their heads.

2. Yours personally. For moderation is of Persons, before things. They are our
passions and affections that first ask moderating: and then nothing can be done
by us immoderately; nothing can seem so to us, that is not simply evil. Had we
but this Salt in our selves, we should soon have peace one with another. Mark.
9.50. For it is impossible he should be unsavory without, that is so well
seasoned within. Mark, how men dispute, discourse, preach, pray, plead, nay
clamor about Moderation: when all the immoderation is in themselves only. Such
and such contends to have Courts, Offices, Jurisdictions, Discipline, yea,
Prerogatives, Privileges, Liberties, etc. regulated so and ^o: and yet (would
they examine themselves, and others discern them) there is nothing needs more
regulation then their own judgments, opinions, passions, affections, humors,
fancies; affectations. O man! do but moderate thy self, and all things else are
soon made so unto thee.

3. Yours plurally, A single moderate man can only satisfy, and sedate
himself, but no more. And the moderation of a few avayles little; especially
where the moderate party is out voted by the immoderate. This, (oh this!) is to
be looked upon, and lamented as the spring, the stream, and the Sea of all our
immoderations. The Lord increase the numbers, and measures of moderate minded
men! for the peace of the Church, for the flourishing of the Land, the honor
of the King, and the glory of his holy Name.

4. Yours properly, as Christians and not as morallists only. To read so much
of moderation in morallity; and to find so little application made of it in
Divinity; would make one think it to be their virtue, and not ours. But that
the Mistress might not borrow of her handmaid; St. Paul first observed it on
Christ: and so, as Christians, appropriated it unto us. If therefore we
observed or consider it in our selves as we ought; our moderation has these
Prerogatives to theirs. First, theirs had no more but mere men for their
examples; ours has for its patte n the Son of God himself. Next, theirs had
but only the Rule of Reason to moderate it self by: ours besides the moral Law
of God, has also the Law of faith. Again, theirs was to govern inordinate
passions, affections and appetites as vices to nature: ours, as sins against
God. Again, theirs rended to moderate a Republic only, but ours the Church
also. And again, their passive moderation was to die like Stoics: but ours
like Martyrs. Lastly, theirs looked no further then men and mortallity, but ours
at God and eternity. Now though their moral virtues needed those moderations,
which our spiritual graces simply do not, brings the more immediate, and
special measures of the Spirit. In which there is no fear of excess, and from
which there is no danger of an utter defect. Yet for all that, our exercises of
them want moderation very often: because if not through our contrary
corruptions; yet through manifold emulations, and indiscretions; they are too
subject to either extreme. Now God grant, that moral men may not excel us in
moderation! least so their moral virtues may take scandal; and have cause to
call our spiritual graces into question.

5. Yours collectively; as a Church. For the Apostle speaks it to the whole
Church of the Philippians. The moderating of a Person, is much; but of a Church
or Congregation, much more. Because, it is always harder to bring a
multiplicity of Spirits, unto the unity of the Spirit. Oh this Church
moderation! that indeed is to be labored for above all. For the Commonwealth
can never be moderate, where the Church is not first so. What but immoderate
conciliables, and conventicles, have hatched, and fomented all our
immoderations? And now there is no hope or likelihood, out of a moderate Senate,
and a moderate Synod, to allay them. And this we hope in God they wi l do:
because the Lord is there at hand. At hand to moderate, at hand to help, and
bless their moderation.

6. Yours precisely; as of the same particular Church, and especially among,
and within your selves. For though all Churches ought to be moderate, and ought
to remark and consider the moderation of all Churches: yea, and one Church is
bound to make known her moderation to all Churches. Nevertheless, our
moderation is not necessary to all Churches, in every matter. Because (all
things well weighed in their causes, or circumstances) this, or that thing may
be moderate to this, or that Church; which to another may seem, or prove
immoderate. Surely then these men must needs be very immoderate, that cannot
content themselves within themselves; but must seek to moderate or model, to
reform or conform, one Church to all Churches; or all. Churches to one
Church. How incongruous is such a thing, and absurd? Especially when it is of
the more famous, and renowned; to the more slender, and obscure. We detest (and
not unworthily) the usurpation of the Romish Church; in that she so arrogantly
presumes to reduce into her communion, all Churches, by an uniformity of
discipline, as well as doctrine. And shall we devise, or endeavor so far
forth in her invitation, as to make another proud Catholic, of a poor
particular Church? God forbid.

Thus far of the appropriation here, or relation to our Subject. Now give me
leave to take all the Subjects of it along; as I find them elsewhere. Whereof
the most eminent is

1. Christ himself. 2 Cor. 10.1. Now I Paul my self beseech you by the
meekness, and gentleness, or moderation of Christ. Lo here Christians!
moderation is Christ's own attribute. Whose Person was a moderation, betwixt a
God, and a man; whose actions were a moderation, tempering graciously betwixt
his great perfections, and our no less infirmities; whose passion was a
moderation, satisfying the Justice, and meriting the Divine mercy both at once.
But we are chiefly to consider, what use the Apostle here makes of it. Though
he makes here a tripple propounding of his own person, yet it is not as a
perfect pattern of moderation; he leaves that to Christ alone. Yet doubtless
he does it to single out himself from some others. And indeed, though we all
may admonish to moderation; yet no man is so fit to adjure others thereunto, as
he that is of a singular eminence therein. Some have conceived him to speak
here ironically; speaking now to false Teachers, and their Followers. And
verily, a man scarce knows how to speak to such of moderation, and speak in
good earnest. They may well be taunted and reproached with the best men's
moderation: For they will never be entreated, or reduced to it, no not in an
ordinary way. He beseeches them, but he says not what. For they that will not
be entreated by moderation, a man may spare the rest, because they will be
persuaded by nothing at all that good is. It was upon some immoderation of
theirs, whereupon he was enforced to challenge them by this. And that was a
despicable estimation, first of his Person, then of his Office, and lastly of
his Doctrine. And this was the very immoderation of them with us; Oh this was
theirs altogether! I need say no more. But these had a fond conceit or
presumption of his being more meek and moderate in presence, then in absence.
Just so it was with one (of blessed memory) who while he was in presence, they
presumed him easy, and soft, and mild (and that moderation was his only
immoderation) but in absence, they found him wise and bold, (not only beyond
their expectation, but to their admiration) And this (even this) was the maine
reason why they durst not endure to hear of his presence any more. But
notwithstanding all this, the Apostle conjures these false Teachers, and their
followers by the moderation of Christ. And so will I do ours. Now I beseech you
by the moderation of Christ, (by which your sins must be pardoned, and your
Souls saved) learn moderation yet at length: and if you will not be Friends
with it, yet be not Enemies to it: despiseing, dominion, and speaking evil of
dignities, on the one side: and having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage, on the other.

2. Ministers. 1 Timothy 3.3. For such an one ought to be, not greedy of filthy
lucre, but patient ^r moderate, Why such an affirmative enforced upon such a
negative? but to teach, That Ministers (and others also) had yet been moderate
in their opinions; had they not first bin immoderate in their covetousness,
what else was it, but a greedy aim at their great livings, which caused them
to convent (nay, and circumvent) so many for scandalous Ministers, and
Malignants? But the next word to it is also to be taken notice of, Moderate,
not a Brawler. (Not quarrelling whether with tongue or fist. But if like i^ in
the strickt original, (unfighting) which puts it into my thoughts, that if
Ministers had not been so immoderate as to turn Soldiers: Soldiers had never
been so immoderate as to turn preachers. There was a scandalous report of a
Minister so traitorously pugnacious, as to take that fatal Axe in hand, and
do that diabolical execution. Which if it had been so, the Papists might have
boasted, such hellish King-killing Instruments were to be found amongst others
also; as well as among their own Priests, and Jesuits. But Brethren of the
Clergy! you know moderation is among the most excellent of the ministerial
endowments. Now by the moderation of Christ I beseech you, (in matters of
discipline, order, uniformity) let it not be said, A Minister, and nor moderate.

3. All Christians. Tit. 3.2. Gentle or moderate. 1 Pet. 2.18. The good, and
gentle, or moderate. The places speak it of all Christians, of all sexes, ages,
degrees, callings, conditions. For it is Moderation (the universal virtue) that
be fits and becomes them all.

4. Moral men, and Heathens. Act. 24.4. -- Hear us of thy clemency, or
moderation. It was there the apologetick complement of a Heathen Orator to a
heathen Governor. However, it serves to let us observe, that moderation was
required and expected even among Heathens, and that not in their persons only,
but in their places also. Now then, what a horrible shame were it, that we
should be driven to suspect it, or bidden to despair of it, in the persons, or
places, of Christian professors.

4. The Manifestation (...), Let it be known; Thus namely,

1. Simply apparent in it self. He does not say, make them to know it. As he
uses a word of near kin, in the next verse, to signify so much. Let your
requests be made known, etc. For in truth it is an easier thing to make our
requests known to God: then to make our moderation known to men. And because
the Apostle puts these two evident things of our selves (to God, and men) so
near together; it learnes us, that no man can rightly make his prayers known to
God, that neglects to let his moderation be known to men. For even while he is
offering his gift at the Altar, he may there be convinced to remember, that his
Brother has something against him in this defect. But if a man want this
moderation within himself. Lord, what prayers does he make? Surely, he is like
one of those immoderate Suitors to whom Christ said, ye know not what ye ask:
or rather like one of those, of whon St. James said, ye ask and receive not,
because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. Or else he kills
and desires; in passionate, uncharitable, envious, and revengfull prayers. Or
he asks not in Faith, nothing wavering, etc. Or he first seeks not the Kingdom
of God, etc. Or he cried not to God in his heart, when he howled upon his Bed.
Or he prayed to be seen of men. Or he used vain repetitions, thinking to be
heard for his much babbling. This minds me to put those men in mind of their
inordinate prayers; who prayed, not in their immoderation only, but for their
immoderations also. But to proceed upon my first hint; It is sufficient, if
moderation be known, or evident to be such in it self: whether all, or every
one will conceive it to be so; yea or no. For if she had no more evidence, and
demonstration in her self, but what she must be glad to borrow, or obtain from
all, or every man's apprehension and opinion of her: One man would fancy her to
be one thing: and another to be another: and so she should be nothing at the
last. Whereas (whether they will conceive it so, or no) that indeed is
moderation, that satisfies the best reasons, and suits with the most
conveniences, although it be not answerable to some men's opinions; yea or (for
the present) may be to some men's particular inconveniences.

2. Known really, to be very moderation it self, and no other: the same and not
the contrary. Not austerity, rigidness, inexorablenesse, imposition,
compulsion, on the one hand: nor yet remissness, dispensation, connivence,
arbitrarynesse, or licentiousness, on the other. But a middle kind of equity,
indulgency, benignity, betwixt both extreamities. Men overstrickt and nice;
yea, and men very profane and loose; neither of them will know moderation to be
as it is: but rather, as either of them have a mind to make it to themselves.
And betwixt them both, it never scapes the imputation or calumny, either of a
superstitious restriction; or of a profane relaxation. And (which is strange)
the strict man thinks it too strict for his liberty: and the licentious man
thinks it not remiss enough to his libertinisme.

3. Known plainly and sincerely: not pretended, or dissembled; not vaunted or
boasted. For if it be either insimulation, or ostentation, neither of these can
make a true manifestation of it. Because one makes it appear to be what it is
not: the other would make it appear to be more then it is. Over-backward men,
and likewise such as are too forward; neither of these are the true
propalatours, but even both of them (what through fear, or flattery) are but
the pretenders to it. One sort of them are too slack to promote it: and the
other are so hastily anticipateing, that they even prevent it. But there is no
such pretext or counterfeiting of moderation as when the false is borne before
men, in stead of the true. I have observed that a seeming moderation, or
peradventure a presumption of that which was true, upon false grounds; has
been the cause of all our immoderations: and in the Church more especially. As
namely, a pretending to reformation, and yet an innovation intended. A conceit
of the necessity, or perhaps but the expedience, of conforming one Church to
another, in circumstances and external matters. An affectation of conn'd
phrases and garbes, as a token of unity, and concord. An expectation, yea and a
gloriation of the Enthusiastic motions of the Spirit; without, beyond, yea,
and against the word. An unnecessary scruple of Faith not to be compelled. An
abusive arrogation of that they call Christian liberty: And a politic
toleration of all kinds of Sects. And thus indeed while we would feign our
selves to be moderate, we fall into all manner of immoderations.

4. Known; positively so determined, and declared; not questioned, not disputed
in scepticall way. Moderation, albeit it offers it self to the sober and solid
discoursings of reason: yet it cannot endure the stubborn, or peevish
tergiversations of opinion. Nothing makes more against it, then when men meet,
not like Arbitrators, to moderate; but like Antagonists, to controvert; nay,
and like Adversaries, to contend. I wonder, how shall other questions be
moderated, if moderation it self be the thing called in question? when it is
not admitted in any controversy, it is the itch: but if she her self come to
be cavil'd at, it is the scab of disputation.

5. Known effectually; not merely known, and no more but known; As if all were
but barely to propound it to every man's indifferent judgment; and so leave it
to every man's arbitrary prosecution. Why does the Apostle exhort and admonish
to make it known? if that the very making known, had not fully in it th force
of admonition, and exhortation? No doubt, the promulgation or Proclamation, was
not without the virtue of the authority, and of the obligation also. Because in
vain were it known, if it were not to be observed, and imitated by all that
knew it. What, Friends, I beseech you! Is this all that you call moderation (or
that you understand in the way of it?) a thing only to be known; not done? To
propose something, and yet impose nothing, though never so necessary, or
convenient? Ye would make an indulgent Law of it indeed; that must only give
you leave to give Laws unto your selves. Nay, and to make your selves the
Moderatours of moderation it self. Oh let your moderation be known (even yours)
yet at length! As well by receiving the Rules of it from others (especially
your Superiors) as in giving Rules of it either to your selves, or others. Are
you ignorant? Moderation will bear with it, till you be instructed. Are you
erroneous? be not immoderate, and you will more easily be rectified concerning
your Errors. Are you scrupulous? Moderation will commiserate you, and labor
with you for the deposing of those needless scruples. Are you weak, truly
weak? Moderation will plead to a dispensing with your weakness: so you your
selves plead not too immoderately to have your weakness only dispenst withal.
Intending only to retain it, such as it is, and hug your selves in it: not
careing, nay, not abiding to be either informed or conformed. But are you
factious? what hope can their be of any moderation from you? what help of it to
you? Oh the forlornenesse of this inconsistency! It were not Faction, nor would
not be, if it were not immoderate. Are you frowardly cavilling and wrangling?
Moderation will confute and convince you though she cannot appease and sedate
you. Are you subtle and dissembling your selves for the present? Moderation
may permit you, and peradventure (for the time) connive at you: but she cannot
approve you, not applaud you, not repose in you. Lastly, are you schismatically
and seditiously turbulent and pernicious? Moderation must now (of necessity)
look about her, least you spoil her of all she can call her self, and of all
that can come of her. And must be forced to let you know and feel, she has as
her tender remissions for her requisite coertions.

6. Known thoroughly and completely, to Faith, Conscience, Reason, Sense. For to
appear fair and open in one thing, (a mean one) and to act covertly and
cunningly in another, (and that the main) This is not (...), but (...): not a
single-hearted equity, but a dissembled and double-hearted iniquity. But
immoderation is this veteratory hypocrite, which can even sooth and dandle a
man in things of less moment: the rather to ensnare and enslave them in
matters much worse. We have heretofore beheld with regret, how versatilely and
versutiously she has played her part, betwixt rigor and remissness upon one
or other. And how with sounds of liberty, she would have lulled us asleep in
our slavery. But God be thanked, her Comi-Tragedy is done, and her Actors
hiss't off the Stage; yea, her nails are not only pared, but her hood also is
pulled off, to the undeceiving of many well-meaning people, who were partly
persuaded by the painted Sepulchers, specious glitterings; and could not
suspect that noisome rottenness that was within, till they also had smarted for
their learning, and that their sensible experience had beaten them off the
soundness of their faith. But this veil of immoderation done away) we all may
now behold with open face, how Moderation (that Princely virtue) is come
imperfectly to appear what she is; and to manifest her self to all others (that
will not be blind) according to their several faculties and capacities. As to
be known to faith in things of faith; and to conscience in things of
conscience; and to Reason in things of Reason; and even to sense in things of
sense. What more then this remains, either for Moderation it self to do, or
for all moderate men to desire? How extremely then should they divert, and (as
it were) wyer-draw her, that would hale her up to the doctrine of Faith, when
she is now only about wholesome Discipline. Or that would drag her down to every
pettish and petty scruple; when she is now upon things, first of hers, then of
their Christian liberty. But to object irrationally against her reason, or to
be senslessely refractory to her sense. This is to be exploded as altogether
immoderate.

7. Known multiplicitely. For as there is no exercise of grace and virtue that
ought to be more universally notable in the Church of Christ then Moderation:
so none has more apt and eminent ways of making it self known. By the quality
or habit so it is to be known to our selves: but it is the moderate thing, or
act, whereby it must be made known to others. To others made known exactly, ere
it can be exacted and importuned from others. Actively made known in affection
and discretion: passively known, by approbation and acceptance. Known in
preaching, prayers, profession, disputation, demeanor, conversation. Known by
sight and experience, by hearing and good report. Known so as communicative,
not in grost. For of a hid treasure there is no benefit, even our personal
moderation is to be imparted; but our official much more. Known so as now
evidenced, but attained long before. For always it is to be supposed, where
there is grace in some measure, there also is Moderation in some degree,
because Moderation comes along with reason, but much more with grace. Made
known so palpably as that it may be past all suspicion. For in truth we are
mostly affected so immoderately our selves, that it is not an easy matter to
persuade us thoroughly of others moderation. Known, to stir up others to
moderation, at least to prevent the contrary in them. Known to Gods glory, the
Churches peace, the Commonwealths prosperity, one another edification, and
every man's own praise. In a word, Moderation is that by which all other virtues
are made known to be such: what virtue then is required to the making known of
it self?

5. The Extent, (...), unto all men. Men, and men universally, are the objects
of our Moderation, of whatsoever Nation, Sex, Age, Degree, Vocation or
Condition they be.

1. Jews and Gentiles, so was the Apostle moderate toward both, and between
both, for the gaining of both, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21. But by our immoderations we
lose both them and our selves to boot. What Jew will convert to that Church,
that is distracted about harmless and convenient ceremonies? That will have all
ceremonial discipline and order extirpated, under a color of their ceremonial
Laws abrogation. St. Paul would dispense even with their legal rites, that so
he might win them to the substance of the Gospel; and shall we lose this
substance both to them and to our selves, in contending about the shadow? This
is not the way to promote them to jealousy and emulation; but to intrusion
rather and commixtion. As it was too evident of late, when they proposed to
purchase our Churches, and petitioned to set up their Syn^gogues amongst us;
and not a few of our own Christians, (as a scandal no doubt of our immoderate
distractions) turned Jews. What Gentile (that favors any thing of true
morality) would convert to that Church, in which he can perceive little or
nothing of a virtuous Moderation; Can he believe there is the divine Ordinance,
where is such humane inordinatenesse; will he imagine that such can be religious
to Godward, who provide not things honest before men? Dearly beloved
Christians! let us learn Moderation, even for the Lords sake, That so we may
give none offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of
God, 1 Cor. 10.32. (It is spoken of a modification in matters indifferent, and
the discreet use of Christian liberty therein.) And therefore it is admonished
(in things of a middle nature) to give scandal to none; least the Church and
Gospel might hear ill: both from those without and those within. But that there
might be such a modest and moderate condescension on all parts in things lawful
and expedient, as they without may not be deterred, but attracted, and they
within not aggrieved, but confirmed.

2. Heretics, It was immoderation that made them such; and nothing but
Moderation can make them otherwise; will they easily be reconciled to that
Church, wherein they observe less harmony and concord, then is to be found
among themselves? where there is such branding one another for Antichristian
and Babylonish, even about matters that are far enough from entrenching upon
the foundation. How have we provoked the old Popish challenge, to show our
Church, and to upbraid us of late, that we wanted so much as the face of a
Church? Wot ye well (Brethren,) how many have turned Papists, upon scandal
taken at our intestine broils? Besides, those other that have confirmed
themselves in their errors. Alleging, that Church was built upon no
foundation, that could keep it self into consistencie. Come on therefore, in
the Name of Christ, all ye moderate ones, and let our moderation be known to
them, I mean, not to tolerate or connive at them, but if not to convert, yet to
convince them.

3. Schismatics, If our Moderation had been known to Schismatics,
Schismatics immoderation had not been known to us. It is certain, there was
too much of animosity and acrimony of spirit on either part. Either the bridle
was not carried on handsomely, or the spurr was putting on too hastily, or else
these wild and untamed beasts, cunningly got the bit between their teeth, and
so ran headstrong, with the reins upon their necks, to the casting of their
riders headlong. And so they committed Religion with Policy, Doctrine with
Discipline, Liberty with Licentiousness, Law with their own wills, Sovereign
with Subjects, Nobles with Peasants, Priests with People, City with Country,
to the confusion almost of them all. But I hope they will now have the patience
to hear a wor-of Moderation. Brethren! have ye done well and avisedly to rent
Christ's Coat? nay, have not some of you done as ill and odiously as to pierce
his side? was it heresy that caused your schism? nay, what heresies has your
schism caused? was yours no more but a separating from the Church? nay, was it
not a turning the Church into a separation? what say you else to your separate
Congregations? Moderation will tell you, that differences about Discipline, can
be no causes of Separation, (much less of Subversion) so the Doctrine be safe,
and agreed on on either side; yea, and that the Churches unity and peace ought
not to be infringed for every inferior truth, or lesser good, or seeming evil,
much less for every unsatisfied scruple, or taken scandal: least of all, when
all is but to satisfy men's malevolence, ambition, covetousness, singularity,
peevishness, blind zeal, ignorance, and the like. If any man be irresolv'd
(God be blessed) we have (one and other) Laws now again to appeal to; and not
Arms: which (we may be sure) will (with great Moderation) indulge the simply
seduced; and severely censure none, but such of the Seducers, as wilfully will
perish in the gainsaying of Core. Come then, and let us meet in our Mothers
bosom, and consult moderately, and consent. And (to stop the mouths of our
insulting adversaries) we will tell them of their incurable schisms, after (by
Gods mercy) we have healed our own.

4. Weak Brethren, In my apprehension, Moderation has a harder task to search,
and discern such as these, then she has to indulge or succor them. For the
Patient once found out, the wound is soon cured. These for the most part are
like some Beggars by the way side, that cover themselves with scurfe and
clouts, pretending lamenesse and diseases, on purpose to move compassion, for
the readier obtaining of a larger Alms. But if they be thus sickly minded
indeed, the symptoms are, To discover their disease, and especially the part
affected, to bewail their infirmity to Godward, and not to bemoan it only
before men: to labor after their own cure, and not cherish their own diseases
themselves; nay, and look that others should foster them likewise. If they
cannot yet be cured themselves, yet (mean while) to be cautious of infecting
others. To repair to the Hospital in that case provided, and not to delight in
roving up and down. And there is Moderation (the skilful Physician and expert
Chyrurgion) not to lance and fear, burn and cut, but to treat their sores
tenderly; as readier to pour in oil then vinegar into their wounds: but if
these apprehend not the Allegory, let me say to them in few and plain terms,
Children! if your infirmity be neither pricked indeed, nor affected: Learn ye
these Lessons, as ye look for the favor of Moderation, Do not think that she
must always part with her strength, if ye will always keep your weakness:
nor that she must therefore lose her liberty, because you will not attain to
yours: or that she must never follow the dictate of her own conscience for the
dispensing with yours. But let your conscience be informed by her conscience,
and your liberty subscribing to her liberty; and your weakness depending upon
her strength. So shall you neither take scandal, nor she give it, because it is
now moderately accorded betwixt you.

5. All, both Christians and men, That by the means of known Moderation, men
may become Christians, and Christians Saints, and Saints like the Angels of God
in Heaven. That beholding our comely order, and godly conversation, and hearing
our sound prophesying: if there come in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he may be convinced of all, and judged of all; and thus the secrets
of his heart may be made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he may
worship God, and report that God is in us of a truth; That the heretical may
know, that after the way which they call heresy, so worship we the God of our
fathers: yea, that their mouths may be stopped while they see our moderation, in
yielding to all that's truth in them, even while we are opposing their errors.
That the schismatical and factious Zealots, may be convinced that they are
carnal, and walk as men, or are but Babes in Christ at the last. That the very
Babes in Christ may see, we that are strong are doing all to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves, but every one of us to
please his neighbor to his edification. That every man may abide in the same
calling wherein he is called, and therein abide with God. (Oh, I cannot but
here call to mind the great immoderation of men surpassing the bounds of their
proper callings, the maine cause of all our miseries. While Cobblers and Tinkers
turned Preachers, Soldiers turned Lawgivers, Subjects turned Tyrants, and
Servants turned Masters) Moderation goes on in good lessoning to make her self
known. That such as are called being Servants, should be obedient to them that
are their Masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of their heart as unto Christ. That Masters forbear or moderate
threatening, knowing that their Master also is in Heaven; neither is there
respect of persons with him. That children should obey their parents in the
Lord, for this is right. That parents should not provoke their children to
wrath, but bring them up in nurture and admonition of the Lord. That wives
should submit themselves unto their own husbands as unto the Lord. That
husbands should love their wives, even as Christ also loved the Church. That
the aged men might be sober, grave, temperate, etc. the aged women in behavior
as becomes holiness, etc. the young women that they be discreet, chaste,
keepers at home, etc. the young men that they be sober minded or discreet, That
an Elder be not rebuked, but entreated as a father, and the younger men as
brethren; The elder women as mothers, the younger as Sisters with all purity.
All this is the end of Moderation, being made known to all men, yet even in all
this she boasts not of things without her measure: but according to the measure
of the rule or line, which God has distributed to her; she is a measure not
only to reach to all men in general, but to every man in particular.

6. If Christian Moderation must be known to all men; how much more then to one
another; and to one as well as to another? Can we call that Moderation, which
some men feign before some; and yet flinch from it before others? Here they are
much in the approof and applause of it: there they are altogether in the
invective and calumny against it. Whatsoever these men are, certainly
Moderation is always the same. Bidding us always be moderate, first within
our selves, then amongst our selves; Bearing one another burdens, and so
fulfilling the Law of Christ, pleasing all men in all things, not seeking our
own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved: Restoring a man
that is overtaken in a fault, in the spirit of meekness; every man considering
himself, that he also may be tempted. Nevertheless, so to withdraw our selves
from every brother that walks disorderly, as noting that man, and having no
company with him, that he may be ashamed, yet not counting him as an enemy, but
admonishing him as a Brother. This is the way of Moderation, and would God it
had been always so with us! But oh Brethren! we cannot but be sensible of what
measure you meted to us; what measure soever you expect from us. It was through
your immoderations that we were made a spectacle unto the World, and to Angels,
and to Men. We were fools for Christ's sake, but ye were wise in Christ, we
were weak, but ye were strong: ye were honorable, but we were despised: ye
were full and rich, and reigned as Kings without us, and would to God you had
so reigned, as that we also might have reigned with you. Ye were they that gave
up your names to Christ, but you cast out our names as evil. You called your
selves the called, and the godly party: but we could hear nothing but
Antichristian, and the common enemy. Who sowed the enmity (which has ever
since continued it) under the names of Episcopal and Presbyterian;
well-affected and Malignants; Parliamentarians and Royallists of Roundheads and
Cavaliers? If you have a mind the enmity should cease, let these differential
nicknames be objected or mentioned no more betwixt us. Let Heretics, and
Schismatics, Anabaptists, Independents, Quakers and Levellers, and such like,
merit the perpetual inurement of such diacritical appellations. But let us (in
Gods Name) who are children and brethren, glory only to bear the Name of our
Father. And in as much as we were baptized into one Name Christ's: let us carry
one Name before us, Christians. But if (by the immoderation either on your part
or ours) hearts be so tainted, and tongues so tipped, that these divisive terms
cannot be forgotten. Blessed be God for that Royal Advice, and that wise
Counsel that sits to compose all our differences. By whose Authority (under
God) we trust (to make it a perfect Amnestie or Act of Oblivion) all these
shall (will we, nill we) be utterly put to silence. But we that are willing (I
hope) shall herein also, and hereby, Let our Moderation be known to all men.

2. The Motive.
The Lord is at hand. Moderation certainly must be both a most excellent grace,
and a most necessary duty. For more could not be said to the inforcement of it.
As will evidently appear, whether by this moving cause be meant the Lord
Christ's being near, or at hand.

1. In his Word and Gospel which is nigh unto us, to instruct us sufficiently,
(yea, perfectly) to Moderation, in body or mind, in persons or places, and in
all Affections, Actions, Passions, Speeches, Gestures, Habits, Accidents, or
Affairs. It is our line, cord, measure, cannon, rule, both to regulate us in
our faith, and moderate us in our manners also. As for things adiaphorous, or
of a middle nature; hence likewise have we the true Touchstone for their Trial,
and the equal balance to weigh them by. For if they be not here commanded, we
know they are not good, or not good so to be made necessary, and so imposed.
And if they be not here forbidden, we know they are not evil, or not so evil,
as to be thought unnecessary, and so neglected. The word that moderates in all
things else, has left these things only to our Moderation. Nevertheless, has
not in these things left Moderation (active or passive) to us as a thing
indifferent, because it is there commanded, yea, and the things so moderated,
consequently commanded also.

2. By his Spirit: abiding with his Church to guide, or way lead it into all
Truth: and into all order and expedience of it. For it seems good to the Holy
Ghost, as well as to us, to be moderating and directing, even in matters
indifferent and ceremonial, Act. 15.28. And mark how moderating, to lay upon
you no greater burden then these necessary things. If the Spirit and the Church
think them necessary, it behooves us to think them no great burden; Nay
(according to an emphatical kind of akyrologie) the necessary things of these,
or the things that are necessarily of these: For there may be some things
necessary, or necessarily to be advised, and accepted, even in things of
themselves not necessary. Such as are in outward ceremonies, peace, order,
unity, decency, avoiding of scandal, preciseness, singularity and the like.
And that this is according to the Moderation of the Spirit, no body (thoroughly
scanning that place) can deny.

3. In his Presential Providence, or Providential Presence, viz. to observe,
approve, promote, and reward our Moderation. 1. To observe it And therefore let
us behave our selves moderately, as children before the face of their Parents;
and as Servants in the eye of their Masters; It is the Lord, let us therefore
gird our Coats unto us, (Joh. 21.7.) not only for natural, but Christian
modesties sake. Let us buy of him white raiment, (pure and innocent Moderation)
that we may be clothed, (with order and comeliness) and that the shame of our
nakedness, (loose and slovenly services) do not appear, (not only for him, but
for all the world to take notice of) Rev. 3.18. But above all, let us be
careful to cover the dung (of our filthy immoderations) for the Lord our God
walks in the midst of us, Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14. 2. To approve it, of which we have
proof sufficient and clear, both by his own will revealed, and in the eminent
examples of his Saints. 3. To promote and further it. For Moderation that meets
with so many enormities, exorbitancies and obstacles, to resist or retard it:
needs always a more special presence and assistance of divine grace and power,
both for the propagation and establishment of it. 4. To reward it. For where
had not Moderation (right Moderation) the blessing and comfort of peace and
unity in the Church, of plenty and tranquillity to the Commonwealth, of plain
satisfaction to consciences, and of plenary contentation to all sorts and
conditions of men?

4. By his own instruments and ordinary means, ordained by him to that end. At
hand now indeed, graciously and wonderfully presenting himself in presenting to
us, his great Vicegerent, our Royal Moderator (the very picture and pattern of
moderation, modesty, equity, clemency, courtesy, gentleness, patience, and
all that this present grace can be said to signify or intend,) Ready (in his
Restoration) to restore the Church to her former unity; the Kingdom to its
ancient liberty, and both to their fundamental and perpetual safety. All which
(he well knows) is not to be done by any more apt expedient, and convenient
means, then in and by moderation, understood in her full and perfect sense and
sway. At hand to help that multitude of Counselors, for the establishment of
truth, of peace, and safety, that neither good purposes may fail, nor the
people fall. That matters may be consulted and concluded, though not answerable
to every man's immoderate importunity: yet to the moderate expectation of all.
At hand (we hope) in a godly, learned, grave Synod, where ignorance may be
informed, weakness confirmed, perplexity resolved, wilfulness convinced, and
heresy, faction and hypocrisy utterly exploded. And are all these at hand?
and the Lord himself in all these? Hold then dear Christian Friends; and you my
Brethren of the Ministry especially; and let us not now run hand over head. Is
it for us Privates, (I beseech you) to preoccupate and forestal the public
Authority? let it be a mark upon those that have been too backward heretofore,
to be now too forward: that so they may give some testimony of their pliable
disposition to become straight again, by overbending themselves. But as for us,
let us stay the time, and yet a little longer possess our souls in patience. If
we have lost, they will redeem it: if we have been disgraced, they will
vindicate it; if we petition, they will answer it: only let us so moderate our
selves, as to wait their moderation.

5. Lastly, by Death and the last Judgment; to visit and do vengeance upon all
the iniquities of Immoderation; when he shall stop, not only the mouths but the
breaths of immoderate men, and cut them off from troubling his Church, yea,
giving them over to a desperate immoderation of cutting off themselves, and by
being over-wicked and over-foolish, to die before their time. That is, by their
own wickedness, rather then others Justice; yea, and that raging rather then
repenting. And as for such of them whom he has suffered to die in their nests:
It was but a sad sign that humane judgment was too moderate or mean, for
their dreadful deserts; and therefore he reserved them (it is to be feared) to
that of his own. As for all the rest, Almighty God has wonderfully made use of
no more evident means then their own Immoderateness, (of pride, ambition,
treachery, hypocrisy, covetousness, lusts, oppressions,) whereby to supplant
cunningly, and utterly overthrow one another. To the end, that Moderation
(which is the stability of Church and State,) might again (by his wise, just,
and good Providence,) be restored and established. So be it.

A Contemplative Invocation for MODERATION.
O Almighty, Everlasting, and only wise Lord God! who judge the world with
righteousness, and thy people with equity. Are not thy ways equal, O
Righteous Lord! nay, are not our ways unequal? unrighteous wretches that we
are. For we have gone astray like lost sheep, stumbling from the ancient path,
the good old way; loving to wander in ways not cast up. Our whole life and way
has been either a backsliding, or a halting, or a turning either to the right
hand or to the left. We have not walked with a right foot, no not in our best
actions; but have started aside like broken bows, even in our best aims. Our
manifold transgressions in all their inordinatenesse and immoderations (the
fire in our bosoms, and rottenness in our bones,) are not unknown to thee; who
markest all our steps, and tellest all our fl^ttings. Now, because it has
pleased thee to moderate thine own Law, by the Gospel of thine own Son. Most
humbly and heartily we beseech thee, (for the meekness and Moderation of
Christ, our blessed Savior) to pardon and heal our backslidings, and grant,
that by the leading of thy gracious spirit, our ways may be so directed, that
our steps may be ordered according to thy Word. That our eyes may look right
on, and our eyelids look straight before us, to ponder the paths of our feet,
that all our ways may be ordered aright, and we turn neither to the right
hand nor to the left, but wholly removing our feet from evil. And for as much
as it has pleased thee in great mercy, and after a wonderful manner to free
our necks from that iron yoke of those mighty Hunters and Hammers of the Earth,
our Egyptian Taskmasters, that scourged us with scorpions: and have in like
manner restored to our Head our Nursing Father, to carry us in his bosom, to
draw us with cords of a man, and bands of love; Thou that have thus raised him
up in righteousness, establish thou the Throne of his Kingdom as the days of
Heaven; direct thou his ways, and prolong his days, that thy pleasure may
prosper in his hands. And teach us now to be subject unto the higher powers,
and to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, giving
to Caesar the things that be Caesar's, and to God the things that be Gods. He
whose is Counsel and sound Wisdom, so counsel our multitude of Counselors,
that they may be to us in stead of eyes, that their good and wise purposes may
not be disappointed, nor the people fall; but that the peace and safety of us
all may be therein; Vouchsafe so to order and moderate all those, to whom thou
have committed the Word and Ministry of Reconciliation, that they may pray and
beseech men, in Christ's stead, to be reconciled first to God, and then to one
another: Approving their Ministry, by being indeed the Salt of the Earth,
(through their discretion and moderation) salted with fire (of love as well as
zeal) And never suffer that Salt so to be infatuated, or lose the savor, that
it be thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot
of men. Let it be our study and care, (not others reproaching) first
(Physician-like) to heal our selves: that having cast out the beam out of our
own eye; we may see the more clearly to pull the mote out of our brothers eye.
Purge us therefore (we pray thee) from all immoderatenesse of passions,
affections, or affectations: those dead flies, that cause the ointment, (which
should heal our divisions) to send forth a stinking savor: A very little of
which leaven is enough to leaven, or sour the whole lump, or mass of all our
actions and affairs. Far be it from us, to be so unwise as to measure our
selves by our selves, or to compare our selves among our selves; be it our part
rather not to please our selves, but every one to please his neighbor for his
good to edification. Lead us (O Lord) in thy Righteousness because of our
enemies: make therefore thy way straight before our faces; least they blaspheme
and say, Where is now their God? where is now their Church? Do thou quash those
Cockatrice-Egges in the shell, which heretics have hatched, that they break
not forth into vipers; and so thy children be not only starved with stones in
stead of bread, but even poisoned with Serpents in stead of Fishes. And for as
much as a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand; knit thou thy Word,
the Church, and our own consciences so together, that the gates of hell may not
prevail to break this threefold cord. Break down therefore the partition wall,
and let the enmity be slain: that we of one body, one spirit, one faith, may
be of one mind in the Lord. And not divide the child, nor halt between two,
nor serve two Masters, nor couch between two burdens. Nevertheless, let us not
be so precise, as to forbid even the casting out of devils in thy Name, because
they follow not with us. Nor yet so censorious as to say, he that is not with
us is against us; but to say more aptly to this purpose, he that is not against
us, is with us. Since there may be the same substance of truth, though not
exactly under the same circumstances, yet (we beseech thee) stir us up to the
keeping of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And seeing so many as
are perfect are thus minded: if any man be otherwise minded, do thou (Lord God)
remark it to him in good time. Howbeit, whereunto we have already attained,
grant us to walk after the same rule, minding the same thing. Neither suffer us
to judge one another any more, but to judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way: To the intent our
good of liberty be not ill spoken of either by one or other. That so we sin not
against the brethren, wounding their weak conscience, or set them at naught by
our not walking according to charity. Abate therefore the vigorous zeal or
emulation of all such Sons of Thunder, that are for nothing else but sire
from Heaven, not knowing what spirit they are of, in contending so bitterly to
break the bruised reed, and quench the smoking flax, wholly bent to bind
heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, yet can even therein so dispense with
themselves, as scarce to touch them with one of their fingers. Be pleased
withal to rectify and establish their judgments that are yet children in
understanding, tossed to and fro (like waves of the sea) and carried up and
down with every wind of doctrine, by the sleights and cogging juglings of men.
Who are so superstitious in their scrupulosities, as not to sow in observation
of the wind, neither yet to reap in their regarding of the clouds, and those
no other but clouds without rain. As they abound in their own sense, so let
them be fully persuaded in their own minds, that to the clean all things are
clean: neither let them presume to call that common or unclean, which thou thy
self have cleansed. Discover to them their own nakedness, that seek no
further, but to sow to themselves Fig Leaves of frivolous pretenses, and their
lamenesse too, that trusts only to the broken reeds of their own wilfulness:
and so kick against the pricks of lawful Authority; and strive against the
stream of universal consent. Quiet each one of those querulous spirits, and
malcontents amongst us, who (worse then the wild Ass) brayeth, when he has
grass; or the Ox that loweth over his fodder. Confute them likewise to their
faces, that dote about questions, and strife of words, with perverse disputings
of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth. Pull down and deface
those whited walls, and painted sepulchers, where there is no other cleansing
but that of the outside of the platter. That compass sea and land to make a
Proselite, that strain at gnats and swallow camels, and put on sheeps clothing
to no other purpose, but to the rending of Christ's seamlesse coat. Quench the
tails of those smoking firebrands, whose peevishness and perverseness has
proved smoke to our eyes, vinegar to our teeth, and thorns in our sides. Teach
us with submission to admire thy wise dispensation, of clean and unclean beasts
in the Ark. And therefore so moderate us, as that we may neither be too hasty,
nor severe, in offering our selves, to the plucking up the tares from amidst
the wheat; least we root up the wheat also with them. But let us be content to
possess our souls in patience, if both must grow together till the harvest,
Nevertheless, help us that are of Christ, to have no communion with those that
are known to be of Belial. For what has the wheat to do with the chafe?
Remove from us all such as would remove the ancient Landmarks, and break the
common hedge, and let their own conscience be the first Serpent that bites
them. Confound both the tongues and the hands of all those tumultuous ones,
children of noise and clamor, that are given to change: who to build their
Babel, would not care to turn the whole earth upside down. Free us evermore
from the tyranny and slavery of men overwise and overjust, that wring the nose
till they bring forth blood, strip the naked of their clothing, sell the poor
for a pair of shoes, that turn judgment to wormwood, cause truth to fall in
the streets, and equity cannot enter. That have set servants to rule not only
over us, but over Princes: And (like Ismaels own sons) not caring whose hand
could be against them; so their hand might be but strong enough against every
man. Uncover their skirts, open their own faces, and let them be clothed with
no more but the shame and dishonor of fanatic God-mockers, that have fasted
for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, bowing down
the head like a Bulrush, and yet putting forth the finger nevertheless. Hating
their brethren, and casting them out for thy names sake, and yet saying, let
God be glorified, yea, killing them, and thinking they have done thee good
service. Put to confusion that harlots forehead that cannot blush; break to
pieces that crooked thing which will not be made straight; and who so will dash
against that rock, let it fall upon him again and grind him to powder. Arise,
(O Lord!) and disappoint the cunning craftiness of men that lie in wait to
deceive. And let not the children of this world boast themselves in their
generation, far wiser then the children of light. But graciously prevent us
with thy watchful Eye, that while Judas is awake, the Disciples may not be
found asleep. Laugh to scorn the vanity, and negligence of all them, that in
the work of the Lord, build upon the Sands; labor for, sow, and feed on the
wind; and nothing but beat the air: and so ran altogether in vain. Stir
up the slothful spirits of such as (sluggard like) only fold their hands, and
cry out (at every difficulty) there is a Lion in the way. But they that pray
for the peace of Jerusalem, and bear good will to Zion; comfort all their
hearts, and cover all their heads, and strengthen all their hands; to be
valiant for the truth, fight the good fight to the finishing of their courses,
and receiving of the Crown. Satisfy, or rather stint thou the stomachs of
those Daughters of the Horse-leach, that cry continually give, give; and never
say it is enough. And let it always be a snare to those sacrilegious
God-robbers, who devour that which is holy, and yet never once vow to make
inquiry. Sopp those stolen waters, and break the staff of that bread of
secrecies which are sweet and pleasant to the thief, that entered not in by the
door: to the end that he who planted the Vineyard, may eat of the Fruit; and
he that feeds the Flock, may taste of the milk: and the Ox treading out the
Corn, may not be muzled; but that the labourer may be accounted worthy of his
hire. So order thou every man in the calling wherein he is called, that he may
therein abide with God, not walking disorderly, like a busibody; nor wandering
from his place, like a Bird from the nest, nor exerciseing himself in great
matters, or in things that are to high for him; neither yet essaying or seeking
great things for himself. Especially not meddling with the strife that belongs
not to him; least it so falls out that he holds a dog by the ears. So
moderate all our sensual appetites, that we may remember to put the knife to
our throats. And though we have found honey, yet temper us so as only to eat so
much as is sufficient for us; least we be filled therewith, and vomit it up
again. Give us neither poverty, nor riches; but feed us with food convenient
for us. And having food and raiment, grant us therewith to be content. As
knowing both how to be abased, and how to abound. That in all cases and
conditions our moderation (both of body and minds) may be approved by thee; and
known to all men. Grant this for Jesus Christ (our only Mediator, and
Moderators) sake. To which blessed Son of thine, with thee (merciful Father)
and the Holy Spirit, be the worship and the glory, now, and ever, world without
end. Amen.

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of some Books printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
The Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
England since the Reformation: by Hamon l' Estrange Esquire The Souls Conflict
being 8. Sermons, preached at Oxford, and so much recommended, by the late Dr.
Hewyt. Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns, and Garden of Cyrus. Two Essays of Love and
Marriage. The Queens Exchange, by Mr. R. Brom. Five new Plays by Mr. R.
Brom, never before printed. Adam out of Eden, by Mr. Speed, an excellent piece
of Husbandry. Poemes on several persons and occasions, by No body must know
whom. Crumbs of Comfort 43 times printed. Most of Mr. Pryns Books. Shepherds
Duty of Constables in 8o. St. Bonaventures Soliloquies in 24. Healths
Improvement in 4o. using the Nature and Method used in this Nation. Mr. Baxters
Treatise of Conversion in 4o. That long-expected piece, The Survey of the Law;
containing directions how to prosecute, or defend Actions brought at Common Law
by William Glisson Esquire A Second Ternary of Sermons, by the Learned Dr. Stewart
in 12o. The Elements of Water-drawing, in 4o the price 6 d. Mr. Sprats plague
of Athens in 4o. Jews in America, by Mr. Thorowgood. The Royal Buckler in 8o,
or a Lecture for Traitors. A short view of some late remarkable Transactons,
leading to the happy Government, under our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the
Second, by L' estrange Esquire, The Rump, or all the Songs and Ballads made upon
those who would be a Parliament, and were but the Rump of an House of Commons,
five times dissolved. The Pourtraicture of his Sacred Majesty King Charles the
Second, from his Birth 1630. till this present year 1660. being the whole Story
of his escape at Worcester, his Travels and Troubles.

