Antinomianism Discovered and Confuted: AND FREE GRACE As it is held forth in
Gods Word: As well by the Prophets in the OLD TESTAMENT, as by the Apostles and
Christ himself in the NEW, showed to be other then is by the Antinomian-Party
in these times maintained.

By THOMAS GATAKER, B. D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. and are to be sold by J. B. at the Gilded
Acorn in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1652.

To the Christian Reader.
DUring the time of my restraint and confinement to my chamber; (which I am not
yet wholly freed from) by a late sickness, that brought me very low, and some
relapses, that kept me down; being by a friend, that came to visit and assist
me, advertised, that there was a Treatise abroad, of one Mr. John Saltmarsh, (a
man to me then, save by one or two short Pamphlets, utterly unknown) wherein I
was among other late writers produced, (traduced, I might say) as giving some
Testimony to the Tenants of the Antinomian party: I could not but desire
greatly to see it; wondering not a little, as (...) Plut. in apop^^^* and in
Phoc.
Phocion sometime, what should slip from my tongue or pen, that to that party
should be pleasing. Having therefore, to satisfy my self therein, procured a
sight of the book, and finding therein the matter reported answerable to the
report that had been made to me of it; I was the rather thereby induced to
look into the work; albeit the very Free Grace: or, The flowings of Christ's
Blood freely to Sinners, etc. too long at full length to relate.
specious, glorious and deep promising Title it self, (which yet sometime is
wont to moove matter of Multa fidem promissa levant, ubi before aeqo Lavdat
venales, quas vult obtrudere merces. Flaccus ad Fl^r^m.
suspicion) that the Frontispice at first presented me with, as affording upon
an experiment of many years, a cleerer discovery of Jesus Christ and the
Gospel, sundry soul-secrets opened, and the Gospel in its glory, liberty,
freenes, and simplicity for salvation further reveiled; might have been
Inscriptiones propter quovadimonium de(...)* possit* Plin. in prae^^t* hist.
not.
a bush sufficient of it self to invite to such precious pretended liquor, and
to such choice, abstruse and useful matter. I took some time therefore to
read it thorough; and having upon a serious and advised survey of it, observed,
that not only the godly Ministry both of these and former times, (and as well
the Divines themselves as their Divinity) was therein grievously traduced; but
the doctrine of the Gospel also miserably corrupted; I could not forbear,
notwithstanding my present weakness, yet to strain a little; and to hazard
the incurring of some inconvenience; partly for the clearing of my self from
compliance with those, whose opinions both in Pulpit and by Pres I have
publicly protested against; and partly to unbowel and lay open some part of
that unsound stuff that lies closely couched in this covert vault; leaving the
further prosecution and discovery of it to some other skilful Anatomists, of
more strength, and of better abilities for such a business then myself. To
this purpose I had inserted the present discourse a good part of it, by way of
digression, into a work of another nature, that then hung in mine hands. but
having dispatched that, and finding it to have risen to a far greater bulk then
at first I intended, or expected; in regard whereof it was not suddenly like to
see light; I thought good again to extract thence what concerned this subject,
and having somewhat further enlarged it, to let it go by it self, that it might
the sooner come abroad. If by it any may be stayed, that are but wavering or
winding yet that way; or any strengthened and warded against the wiles of such
as would withdraw them thereunto, (for of those that are fixed on it, I
conceive little hope) I shall have cause to bless God for it, and to think my
pains therein well bestowed. However, my prayer shall be to the Jam. 1. 17.
Father of lights, that he will be pleased in mercy, to Ephesians. 1. 18.
enlighten the minds of his faithful people amongst us, with that Spirit of
wisdom and of light, whereby they may be enabled to (...) Romans 2. 18. Phil 1.
10. Ex'perare qae discrepant. Beza.
discern between sound and seeming, between true and falls lights; lest mistaking
their way, while they are misled by the latter, like those Ignem fatuum qui
sequntur, in ^via abducuntur, and in praecipitia ^^^sslque saepenumero ruunt,
Leloger. 16. c. 3. and Keckerman. system. Phys. l. 6. ^^^4.
that fondly follow some blazing meteores, they fall upon perilous and
pernicious precipices to the ruin of their souls; and while they think to make
a shorter cut of it, as imagining to have found out an easier and more
compendious passage to heaven, declining those paths, because to flesh and
blood they seem the more harsh and unpleasing, that Gods Ministers out of his
word, have formerly chalked out unto them, instead of attaining what thereby
they expected, they run hedlong on toward hell.

IT is no good prognostik, when men to maintain a cause that they have
undertaken to defend, shall either for the gaining, or for the faining of a
party, wrest and writhe other men's words, to wring that out of them that
neither they speak, nor those that uttered them, ever intended in them. In
which kind I find the speeches of many worthy men, some deceased, some yet
surviving, by one Mr. John Saltmarsh, in a work of his lately come abroad,
much abused; being strangely strayned, to make men believe, that they held
forth in their writings some glimerings at least of those new counterfeit
lights, which those deceased ones, were they surviving to see, would together
with such of them, as are yet surviving, in all likelihood, not disclaim only,
but even abominate. But they are gone, tho their works yet remain, out of which
matter enough might soon be collected, to show, how many miles the Antinomians
of these times and they are asunder. As for those of them that yet live, they
may, if they so please, and deem it a work worth their labor, take a little
pains to clear the passages produced out of their writings, where they find
them misapplied. Sufficient it shall be for me, to vindicate mine own from that
which out of them this Author would extract.

Among the rest therefore of those Page 204.
approved Writers, with whom some Truths of Free grace are related by him to be
found Sparkling, in Testimony to what is in that his Discourse in part
asserted, and in these times, by others Assertors of Free grace; (those of the
Antinomian party, he means, as he Page 82.
elsewhere expresses himself:) I find my self, and some words of mine
produced; which I shall endeavor here to clear.

The Point, that he propounds from my writings to be proved, is thus laid down
by him.

Page 109.
That we and those commonly called Antinomians differ little.

Concerning which Proposition so delivered by him, as speaking in his own
person, albeit I could not then, when I wrote, speak any thing at all to it, as
having at that time seen nothing of his; yet now I see nothing, but that I may
very freely subscribe it. For I find very little difference between many of his
Assertions. and theirs: and they may very well therefore go together. Neither
do I conceiv that he intended any whit less, where he makes Page 104.
the Truths here asserted by him, the same with those that are asserted in
these times by others Assertors of Free grace. the arrogant Title that our
Antinomians usually take and engrosse to themselves, as the only maintainers
of it. Nor, I suppose will he deny them to be the men that he meant. Mean while
this seems to be no better then dissembling, if not downright halting, to rank
himself among those that dissent from them, whom he had before professed
himself to concur with.

If, to salv the matter, he shall say, that he spoke thus in the first person,
because my words afterward alleged so run, The matter in controversy
between us and these men. I could easily show him by some instances, what
difference may arise, and See J. H. Christianity maintained, chap. 9. 3. p. 66.
against G. C. Preface to the Author of Charity maintained, 8.
has arisen from the mere alteration of the person intended or pretended to
speak, where no word or title has otherwise been altered. But I say only for
the present, that this his Proposition is an Axiom of his own, distinct from
my ensuing Allegation; and is such, as unles he include himself among those
that differ in opinion from the other party therein mentioned, carries with it
no good sense.

But let us hear, what it is that is produced as my Testimony; to prove so
little difference, between those, in whose person I speak, and those commonly
and deservedly called Antinomians.

The words, (with this title prefixed, Page 109.
Mr. Gatakers Testimony in a late Treatis, Gods eye, etc. in Epist. to the
Reader, p. 10.) are these; The matter in controversy between us and these men,
is not how far forth sin is removed or abolished in believers, or how far forth
it is by Justification abandoned, or in what sense God is said to see or not
see sin, or take notice of it in believers and justified persons, etc.

Now follows Mr. J. S. his gloss hereupon, Page 110.
As if all these were granted on both sides. And then comes in his Annotation.
Ibid.
Note. Men of learning you see, and judgment do not cry out Antinomianism on
Free grace, or free Justification, as others do, etc. but acknowledge a consent
in all these, etc.

I will not stand to question what his et ceteraes should mean here; or who
those other are, that should cry out Antinomianism on Free grace, or free
Justification. I know none that so do. Nor will this Autors glosing terms of
Whom yet he asperseth as men of no understanding or judgment, Page 85. and 40.
men of learning and judgment, (in both which mine own wants and weaknesses
are best known to my self, and I rather In aliis admirer, qod* ipse non
asseqor, Hier. apolog. ad Pammach:
reverence them in others, whom I see my self come far short of in either, then
dare to arrogate any eminency in either kind to my self) any whit work on me,
or on any other, I hope, so qualified, as to make them the more flack in
vindicating Gods truth against those, that under colorable and plausible
pretenses endeavor cunningly to corrupt it; or to comply in the least degree
with those, whose opinions and tenants they shall justly deem, (as my self
according to my weak judgment, others not a few, of far deeper reach and
better judgment, concurring with me therein, have in express terms avowed
them to be) both Gods eye on his Israel. p. 2.
pestiferous and pernicious.

But for his Maledict a (mala sals^m) gloss^, qae corrumpit textum.
gloss; such an one as corrupts the text; as if all those things were granted
on both sides; and that my self and others, I know not who, learned and
judicious, acknowledge a consent in all these. He would herein make men
believe, that I come a great deal nearer the Antinomian party, (for of others
I say nothing) then I ever did, or do still profess my self to do. and would
pick out of my words, such a consent between our Antinomians and their
Opponents acknowledged, as I never therein intended, nor do my words there,
duly weighed, necessarily import. That which may more clearly appear to any
that shall observe the course of my debate and dispute; and might have done so to
him likewise, had he been pleased to look back to my foregoing discourse,
whereunto I there refer my self, in those words, Gods eye, etc. Epist to the
Reader, p. 10.
as was before said: in which place, both my meaning is more fully expressed,
and the ground of using that speech withal adjoined.

My intent and purpose in that Treatise was not, either to discuss or deal
with the sundry Antinomian tenants that are abroad; but to single out one
only, and to qit one passage of Scripture from their abuse thereof therein.
This point in particular, as by them maintained, having propounded in these
terms, Ibid. page 2.
that God does not, will not, cannot, in these times, see any sin, in any of his
justified children: to cut of all by-debates, and keep close to the point
intended to be dealt in at present, after Ibid. page 3* 4.
some discovery of their wonted tergiversations, I subjoyn these words, to
which those cited relate;

Ibid. page 5.
The question then is, what it is that these men maintain, concerning Gods
sight of sin in the faithful. which (to state aright the controvesie, as it
stands between them and us) is not either concerning the efficacy of
Justification in general; or concerning Gods sight of sin generally in such as
believe and are justified, (that which would be observed, to discover the mere
impertinency of a multitude of allegations, which out of Orthodox Autors
concerning those points these men heap up to no purpose) but whether God do or
will, or can see sin in the same manner in persons so qualified and estated
now, as in former times he did.

Which words having reference to that single point or question in present
controversy so stated, do in no wise imply any consent between us and them in
those several branches there mentioned, (wherein I doubt not but differences,
and those vast ones may be found) but to cut off the scanning of them, or ought
that might be cast in concerning them, as not appertaining to the present
debate. And to discover the weakness and unsoundnes of this inference: suppose
we that a Protestant writer being to debate the controversy between us and the
Papists concerning their Mass, should in stating of it, say, The Question
between us and them, is not concerning the nature and efficacy of Sacraments in
general, nor concerning the difference between Sacraments and Sacrifices in
general, nor concerning Christ's presence generally in every Sacrament; but
whether Christ in the Mass be really offered as a Sacrifice propitiatory for
the sins of qick and dead. could any man with color of reason hence infer,
that the party so speaking should acknowledge a consent in all those
particulars between Papist and Protestant? Yet the inferences are alike.

Yea suppose we that the Antinomians and we were acknowledged to agree in those
two heds at first propounded: or in those three, which they are afterward
sliced out into, (which this Author the rather pitched upon, that he might say
all these, which of two only so congruously he could not) or in many more
points then those three, to make out his and caetera, which he was pleased to
annex, as if there had been more behind, wherein consent and concurrence should
be acknowledged, whereas indeed no more then those three are mentioned, and
those not, as he would have it, to be granted, as on both sides agreed in, but
to be laid aside, as impertinent to the question in hand. But grant, I say all
these, to be agreed in, and more then all that is there mentioned: yet would
not all this be of force sufficient to infer, that therefore there is little
difference between the Antinomians and us. no more then if one of ours should
in precise terms say, there is no controversy between the Papists and us
about the unity of the Deity, the Trinity of Persons, the Deity of Christ, his
suffering to save sinners, his rising from the ded, his ascension into Heaven,
his return to judgment; it could thence be inferred, that therefore there is
little difference between the Papists and us. The one inference sure would be
as good as the other; neither sound nor of validity to bring so near together
either the one couple or the other.

And this shall suffice to show that in those words of mine nothing les was
intended, then this Author would either persuade them, or enforce them, to speak.

Thus having dispatched briefly, what concerned mine own particular, I shall
take the boldness to pierce a little into the main body of the book, and to
consider of the work it self; the rather, that my judgment in this business may
further appeer, and how far I am from deeming, much more from asserting such a
petite difference between the Antinomians and us, as if we strove but about
sticks and straws.

The Title holds out Free Grace; and the Preface pretends Peace. Grace and
Peace, very specious, very plaufible inscriptions. But if the work it self be
thoroughly dived into, it may not undeservedly be doubted, whether the contents
of it will be found answerable to what is promised in the Title page, or
pretended in the Preface; or whether it will not proov rather (as he said
sometime of some Philosophers and their writings) like some Quicksilvers box,
Q^um tituli (...) remedit, pyxides venent. Seneea (...) Lactant. institut. l.
3. c. 15.
that has the name of some wholesome simple, or sovereign receipt (...), or
printed on the outside, when it contaynes ratsebane or some other rank poison
within.

For first, as concerning the former, Free Grace; it is that, I hope, that all
true and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ highly esteem, frequently preach,
eagerly contend for, and by all means labor to advance; such Free grace, I
mean, as the word holds out as well in the writings of the Old as of the New
Testament: and such as the Prophets of God propounded and preached in the one,
and the Apostles after Christ himself in the other. But that Free Grace, that
we find here described, and is by our Antinomians usually asserted, is such
(which I doubt not by Gods assistance but to make plainly appeer) as differs
much from that, which either the Prophets of God held forth in the Old
Testament, or Christ and his Apostles preached in the New.

For first as concerning the Prophets and their preaching, albeit this Page 24
and 3c.
Author allege, as other of the Antinomians also do, that passage of Esaias 55. 1.
Esaias, so much pressed by them (but no les abused then that other of* Number. 23*
21.
Balaam, to proov such a free grace as they now fancy; as if it had been an
exhortation made not to those that then lived, but to such only as then were
not yet in being*) Yet when he speaks out his mind, concerning the ministry of
God by his Prophets in those times, he tells us in plain terms, that, Page
167.
The whole frame of the Old Testament was a draught of Gods anger at sin. --
and God in this time of the Law appeared only as it were upon terms and
conditions of reconciliation: and all the worship then, and acts of worship
then, as of prayer, fasting, repentance, etc. went all this way, according to
God under that appearance. Ibid.
and in this strain (says he) runs all the ministry of the Prophets too, in
their exhortations to duty and worship, as if God were to be appeased and
entreated and reconciled, and his love to be had in way of purchase by duty and
doing, and worshipping. so as under the Law, the efficacy and power was put as
it were wholly upon the duty and obedience performed, as if God upon the doing
of such things, was to be brought into terms of peace, mercy and forgivenes; so
as their course and the service then, was as it were a working for life and
reconciliation.

Now whether these words do not evidently and clearly hold out an utter denial
of Free grace then taught, especially as they now decipher it, let any
indifferent reader judge. But in few words, (to pick out one medium only, made
up of two clauses alone, that will easily evince it,) I thus argue; Where Gods
love is to be had in the way of purchase, and the whole efficacy and power is
put as it were on the duty and obedience performed; there is no free grace,
much les such as these men describe it: But so it was (says this Author) in all
the ministry of the Prophets. No free grace therefore was preached by them.
yea consequently, none saved by free grace in those times. for 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2
how could they be saved by that, that was never preached to them? Yet the
Apostle Paul affirms, that all that were ever justified, either in those times
or these, were Romans 3. 23, 24 (...).
justified by free grace. and by it the Apostle Peter assures us, that those
were Acts 15. 11. (...).
saved that lived in those times, as well as we that now live.

Besides that herein he makes the Prophets of God (as he does the like also by
the Ministers of the Gospel, for treading, as he says, in their steps) no
better then mere mountebanks and deluders of Gods people; yea God himself
speaking by them, Occasional word, p. 4.
not unlike the Gentleman, who because he would seem free to his neighbors,
(he will not refuse, I hope, to own his own similitude) bid fill out wine freely;
but bad commanded his servants before hand so to burn it, that it should be too
hot for any of them to drink. For so he intimates in his application of it,
that by some Ministers the Wine in the Gospel is so overheated with
conditions and qalifications, that tho they seem to fill it out freely, yet poor
souls cannot taste of it; and tho free grace may be in the notion of it, yet
not in the truth of it. Now what may be the ground of this sore and grievous
charge? do our Ministers clog their offers of grace with any other conditions
and qalifications, then the Prophets, Gods Ministers and messengers; in those
times did? No. it is not that, that this Author charge them with: but this
rather* that Treatise, p. 169.
they run in a legal strain, and would work God down into his old and former
way of reveiling himself as under the Law, when he seemed to be only in the
way to reconcilation and peace, rather then pacified; such as he formerly
described. If then the Ministers under the Gospel, whom he thus traduceth, fill
out this Wine heated with no other conditions and qalifications, but the very
same that the Prophets did in the time of the Old Testament; and they filled it
out then no otherwise then they had good warrant from God; then I see not, how
it can be avoided, but that God is hereby made like that Master, and the
Prophets, his Ministers and Messengers, in those times at least, guilty of such
deluding snd juggling with men, as this comparison of his imports. So that when
Esaias Esaias 55. 1.
inviteth all to come and drink freely without money or price; he makes a show
indeed of filling out the Wine freely, and there is in his words as it were a
notion of free grace* but when he comes in afterward with so many conditions
and qalifications, Ibid. verse. 3, 4, 6, 7.
of audience, and obedience, and supplication, and reformation, and reversion,
etc. he does so overheat it, that poor souls for fear of searing their lips,
dare not put the cup to their mouths.

I conclude for this former branch: If the grace of God tempered with such
conditions and qalifications, as the Prophets generally used, tho it may in
notion seem true, yet in truth it is not free; (nor is any notion indeed true,
that has not truth in it) then the Grace of God preached and propounded to the
faithful in the time of the Old Testament was no free grace; and consequently
no grace: (for Nifi gratuita, non est gratia. Avg. de great. Christ. l. 1. c. 31.
grace is no grace, unles it be free) and the Prophets in those days did but
delude Gods people, pretending to propound and preach grace unto them, when as
indeed they did nothing les. And whether these things follow not from this man's
grounds, let any intelligent and indifferent Reader judge.

Yea but whatsoever God and his Prophets (for whatsoever they did, was by his
direction and appointment done) did in the time of the Old Testament; yet I
hope Christ and his Apostles propounded and preached free grace in the New. Let
us pas therefore on from the Old to the New; and consider whether by this man's
grounds and principles our Savior himself preached either Gospel or free grace.

Treatise, page 1^5.
God then, says our Author, makes no Covenant properly in the Gospel as he did
at first; but his Covenant rather is all of it a Promise. -- Page 126.
and yet God covenanteth too: but it is not with man, but with Christ. -- God
agrees to save man. but this agreement was with Christ. and all the conditions
was on his part. -- no conditions on our parts. And again: Page 152,
A covenant in the strict legal sense, is upon certain articles of agreement
and conditions on both sides to be performed. thus stood the old Covenant;
there was life promised upon condition of obedience. but the Covenant under the
Gospel is all on Gods own part. Page 153.
like that with Noah, Genes. 9. 11. -- against the way of the old; wherein man
was to have his life upon condition. How this agrees, with what elsewhere he
tells us, that Page 163.
the Gospel is formed up of exhortations and persuasions, and conditional
promises, etc. I stand not now to discuss, but proceed. Page 191.
Salvation, he says, is not made any puzling matter in the Gospel. it is
plainly, easily, and simply reveiled; Jesus Christ was crucified for sinners.
this is salvation. we need go no further. -- all that is to be done in the work
of salvation, is to believe that there is such a work, and that Christ died for
the amongst all those other sinners he died for. And again, Page 193.
This is short work, Beleev and be saved? and yet this is the only Gospel work
and way.

As for repentance, and sorrow for sin, and self-denial, and the like, to tell
men of these, or pres them upon any, as things required of all those that
expect a share in the salvation purchased by Christ, it is taxed by this Author
as a legal, no Gospellike way: and they are ever and anon girded at, as Legal
teachers, that He bid me repent, and be sorry for my sins, p. 19.
bid men repent, and He bid me be humbled for my sin, and pray, p. 17.
be humbled, and be sorry for their sins, and pray, and Others bid me be sorry
for my sin, and lead a better life, p. 21.
lead a new life, Repent and pray, and live an holy life, and walk according to
Gods Law, p. 27.
walking according to Gods Law, by the way implying, as if those that pressed
those things upon them, spoke I heard not any thing of Christ spoken yet, p. 17.
nothing at all of Christ) and that He set me upon duties, p. 17.
set them upon duties; and Did he not bid you see for qualifications and
conditions first in your self? p. 22.
tell them of conditions, and qalifications. against which that passage in Page
30.
Esaias before mentioned is v opposed. Yea for faith it self, albeit sometime,
with Heb. 11. 6.
the Apostle, he acknowledge, that Page ^5.
without faith it is impossible to please God; yet neither is that reqired as a
condition to make Christ ours; for, Page 189.
Christ is ours, says he, without faith.

Now consider we in the next place, what manner of preaching our Savior
Christ's was; that collating the Gospel by this man described, with the Gospel
that Christ preached, we may see how well they sort and suit the one with the
other. Matthew. 3. 13.
I came, says our Savior, to call sinners to repentance: and, Luke ^3. 3, 5.
Unless ye repent, u Esaias 55. 1
ye shall all perish. and, Matthew. 18. 3.
Verily, I say unto you, Unless ye be converted, and become like children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And, Matthew. 16 23.
If a man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me. And, Luke 14. 26.
If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And, Luke 14. 33.
Whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he can not be my
Disciple. Here is no such short work as Mr. S. makes of it. Here are
conditions, you see, reqired; and those not of faith alone, but of repentance,
and humiliation, and self-denial, and conversion, and renouncing of all,
Proposito saltem tenus. Adrian* qodlib. 10. Qantum ad affectum, licet non
qantum ad effectum. Ludolf. de vit. Christ.
in disposition and purpose at least. But compare we now his new model, with
these and the like passages of our Savior, and see how they agree; whether the
Gospel that he describes, and the Gospel that Christ taught; the free grace
that Christ taught, (if at least he taught any) and free grace, as this man
fancies it, be one and the same. and whether graee and Gospel come nearer to
Christ's way, that that he gives out, or that that he girds at. Or, if you
please, cast we our eye back to his former comparison, and consider whether it
may not as well be applied to our Savior himself and his preaching, as to them
and theirs, whom he would fasten it upon, going no further then he did. For may
not a man, building on Mr. S. his grounds, and speaking in his langvage, say of
our Savior, that he made a show indeed of filling out his Wine freely, when
Matthew. 11. 28.
he called upon all that traveled and were heavy laden to come to him, with
promise to refresh them; but he has heated it so with conditions and
qalifications of believing, and repenting, and humiliation, and conversion, and
self-denial, and renunciation of all, that men could not drink of it without
sealding their mouths? and it was no marvel therefore, that the young man
Matthew. 19. 22.
went so heavy away from him. Nor do I wonder now so much that Mr. Eaton, in
whose steps this man treads, should make Christ a legal teacher. (and what
should it greiv any servant of his to have that name given him, that is given
his Master either before him, or with him?) Jo. Eaton, Honeycomb, c. 5. p. 84*
Christ's Sermons (says he, as the Prophets, says Mr. S.) for the most part,
run all upon the perfect doctrine and works of the Law. relating withal some
of the abovementioned passages. And if such as this be no Gospel preaching,
nor such as will stand with free grace, then undoubtedly our Savior never
preached, either Gospel, or free grace.

If any shall object, as this Author does, that Page 103.
Christ tells you in few words; and his Apostle in as few. As Moses lift up the
Serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lift up, that whosoever
believes on him, should have life. John 3. 14, 15 it should be.
John 6. and Paul tells you, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him from the ded, thou shall be saved.

The answet is easy. Our Savior Christ in his preaching cannot cross, or
contradict himself. what he says in this latter place, does well concur and
consist, with what he said in the former. He propounds faith, and mentions
it only there; not as if he reqired nothing else but faith of his followers, or
of those that shall have share in the salvation by him purchased; for there is.
no exclusive in the text; nor are his words les peremptory in those other
passages, then in this. and although Romans 3. 28.
unto justification nothing but faith is reqired, because faith has a peculiar
office in that work that no other grace has; yet there is more then faith
reqired unto salvation. nor was it needful that Christ should every where name
whatsoever he reqired. and sufficient it was for him sometime to name faith
only: for that the faith which he there names and reqireth is such, as
without those other reqisites joined with it, cannot be sound and sincere.

As for the Apostles of Christ, what the subject matter of their Sermons was,
and what method and manner of preaching they used; how exactly treading in
their Masters steps, as himself did in the steps of John his forerunner; how
dissonant from that that this Author propounds and commends; how consonant to
that he thus girds at, and traduceth as a legal and no Gospellike way; will
plainly appear, if we shall but briefly consider, what John Baptist began with,
our Savior himself seconded him in, gave in charge to his Apostles, and they
constantly observed, from the first to the last: wherein we shall have a short
breviari of the whole Gospel, as in Scripture it is described.

John, we know, began with preaching of pardon of sin, and salvation, upon
condition of faith and repentance, and newnes of life. For he called upon them
to Matthew 3. 2.
repent, and to verse 8.
bring forth fruits beseeming repentance. that is, whereby the sincerity of
their repentance might appear and be approoved; withal telling them, that for
satisfaction to be made unto Gods justice for their sins, they were to believe
on Christ, to rest and rely on him, as John 1. 29.
the Lamb of God, who by his sufferings did take away their sins. for Acts 19.
4.
so the Apostle Paul tells us he preached; and this Author therefore spoke not so
exactly or warily in another Treatise of his, where he says, that Smoke in the
Temple, p. 66.
John preached repentance; Jesus Christ faith and repentance. as if John had
not preached as well faith as repentance: which the Apostle says he did.

Now as our Savior in his first Sermon went the very same way that John did,
(He began to preach, saying, Matthew. 4. 17.
Repent; says one Evangelist; Mark 1. 15.
Repent; and believe the Gospel, says another.) so in sealing the Apostles his
Disciples their commission; he bids them, Mark 16: 15.
Go out into the wide world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. But what
Gospel? or what manner of Gospel was it, that they were to preach? the Gospel
of life and salvation, upon condition of faith, and repentance, and obedience.
that, Mark 16. 16.
whosoever believes and is baptized shall be saved: whosoever believes not,
shall be damned. Yea but, where have we repentance, will you say, and obedience?
And, that Luke 24. 47.
repentance and remission of sins, (that is, remission of sins upon repentance,
as before with John, Mark 1. 4.
repentance unto remission of sins) be preached in his name. and, Matthew. 28. 19
teaching them (says he) to do, whatsoever I command. and what he commands and
requires of all his, was before in part showed.

And did not the Apostles, think we, keep to their commission? or preached they
any other Gospel then what Christ their Master had enjoined them? No other,
undoubtedly. We may boldly say of them all, as one of them of himself. they had
the grace 1 Cor. 7. 25.
to be faithful. but had not so been, had they swarved from their charge.

Yea but, says this Author, Page 41.
What did Peter preached, Cornelius, or Philip to the Eunuch, or Ananias to
Paul, or Paul to the Jailer, but Jesus Christ only?

I answer. 1. It is most certain, they could lay 1 Cor. 3. 11.
no other foundation, for man to rest and rely on Acts 4. 12.
for salvation, but Christ only. But it follows not hence, that they preached
nothing else; or that they offered and tendered salvation by Christ without any
condition at all; or otherwise then as Christ had himself propounded it, and
enjoined them to preach it.

2. We have Acts 2. 40. and 16. 32.
not their whole Sermons, but some brief summaries, or some principal heds of
them.

3. In these summaries of them, we have those things preached and pressed, for
which this Author taxes his brethren as legalists; repentance by Peter, in his
Acts 2. 38.
first, and Acts 3. 19.
second Sermon; and that in the former pressed upon those, that were Acts 2. 37.
pricked in heart already; in the latter backed with Acts 3. 19. (...), repent
and return.
a return, that is, alteration of course of life.

4. In some they needed not to pres much, what they found them wrought unto
already. Ananias needed not to pres Paul to prayer, as Acts 8. 21.
Peter does Simon the sorcerer, because he was Acts 9. 11.
by God informed beforehand, that he prayed. nor Peter to pres holiness of
life upon Cornelius, whom he found Acts 10. 2.
molded and wrought in that regard to his hand; but to Acts 10. 38.
acqaint him with the particularity of the Messiah his person, whom yet he had
believed on, and expected before: and yet he preached more then Jesus Christ
only to him; when in that Sermon he assured him that Acts 10. 35.
in every Nation, whosoever he were that feared God, and lived righteously, he
was accepted with God.

5. It is as absurd to imagine that Acts 16. 31.
Paul preached not as well repentance as faith to the Jayler; because there is
no expres mention of repentance in the Text; as to suppose that Peter preached
not as well faith as repentance to the Jews, because in his Sermon there is no
express mention of it: or that our Savior preached not faith, but repentance
only in his first Sermons, because Matthew. 4. 17.
Matthew makes mention of this latter alone: what if I should ad? or that the
twelv preached not faith as well as repentance, because Mark says no more, but
that Mark 6. 12.
they went out preaching that men should repent. Such negative arguments proov
nothing.

6. If we shall demand of Paul, what his constant course of teaching was in his
preaching of the Gospel, and publishing the covenant of grace, he will tell us,
that it was the very same, both for matter and method, that his master began
with, and not one way to some, and another way to others, as this Author seems
Page 42.
sometime to imply, but the same for substance, both to Jew and Gentile. Acts
20. 21.
Testifying, says he, both to Jews and Gentiles, (...), paenitentia^ sive
resipiscentiam ad (...) qa ad Deum acceditur. sicut Heb. 6. 1. (...).
rescipiscentiam (...) operibus. i. qa ^b istis (...).
Repentance toward God, and (...), ^idem in Christum, qa Christo fidetur,
(...) fiducia in Christo colloc^tur.
Faith on Christ. and he puts repentance (therein following Mark 1. 15.
his Masters method) in the front. And yet more fully, relating both his
commission from Christ, and his putting of it in execution: for the former he
says, that Acts 26. 17, 18.
Christ sent him to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receiv
remission of sins, and a share among those that are sanctified by faith on
Christ. and for the latter, that (...). verse 19.
out of obedience to Christ's command, and in pursuance of this his commission
(which I suppose he understood as well as this Author, and kept as close to it,
as any Antinomian of these times, yea as any that ever preached Christ) Acts
26. 20.
he preached, or published, both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, that they
should repent, and turn to God, doing works beseeming repentance; such as might
show them to be truly penitent, and their repentance to be sound and sincere.
And thus Paul's preaching to the last, comes home to John Baptists preaching at
first; and is the very same, you see, with that, which this Author makes to be
the very character of a Legal Teacher.

Oh but the pressing of these things as Page 17.
duties, without which a man can have no interest in Christ, that is it that
argues a legal Teacher.

I might for warrant hereof allege that of our Savior, as John 8. 24.
Unless you believ that I am he you shall die in your sins. so Luke 13. 3.
unless ye also repent, ye shall perish. and that of the Author to the Hebrews,
Heb. 12 14.
without holiness no man shall ever see God. (but that Mr. Eaton Honeycomb ubi
sup. p. 85.
tells us, that that of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; is not Gospel, but Law.
tho therein I believe him not) and that of John, 1. John 2. 6.
He that says he is in Christ, is (...).
indebted, (is obliged to it, as a debt, as a duty: for what is duty but du
debt?) to walk as Christ walked: to live as he lived. But I will insist only
upon Paul, as zealous and as precise a preacher of free grace as ever any. he,
albeit he affirm confidently, that Romans 8. 1.
there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ; yet he subjoyneth
withal, (and that is, I suppose, a qalification at least) Ibid.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. and yet further, a little
after, Verse 12.
Therefore, brethren, we are (...)
debtors (we stand obliged and bound to it as a du debt; if ever we look to be
saved) not to live after the flesh; but (as before he said, to be thence
supplied here) to live after the Spirit. and that this is his meaning, and it
is in nature of a condition on man's part reqired, it is apparent by what
follows; Verse 13.
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if by the Spirit ye mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Which tho it be pure Gospel, and life even
upon such terms propounded, free grace; (for no Law ever promised life unto
mortification of the flesh; no more then the sight of God to such imperfect
purity, as our blessed Savior above spoke of) yet if the Minister of Christ
shall in these days pres, he shall not escape the odious and opprobrious brand
of a deep and downright Legalist.

Howbeit we need not be ashamed a whit of our teaching, when we can vouch such
precedents as these are for it, in regard either of this or any the like
aspersions or ignominious terms, that presumptuous and self-conceited persons
shall endeavor to fasten upon us, and must light upon them as well as upon us,
who have in their teaching taken that course before us, and with whom if we must
be deemed erroneous, we shall not blush so to be; but shall Acts 5. 41.
esteem it (...). elegans (...). Casaub.
a grace to be disgraced with them, and for doing as they did.

To draw all to a head, if the Gospel propound and promise pardon of sin and
salvation Page 126.
without any condition at all, as this Author tells us, required on our parts;
and all conditions and qalifications which he is so Ocas. word, p. 5. Treatis,
p. 22* 29, 97, 188, 198* etc.
often girding at* destroy the freenes of grace: then neither John the Baptist,
nor Christ, nor the Apostles of Christ, from the Matthew. 10. 2.
first to the 1 Cor. 15. 8.
last, did any of them preach either Gospel or free grace: and if the Gospel
and free grace, that this Author and other his coasserters of free grace, hold
out to us, be such, as admits not, nor acknowledges any such conditions or
qalifications as have been above-recited, then we may boldly conclude, that it
is another Gospel, and another free Grace, then ever John, or Christ, or his
Apostles preached.

But this Author, Occasional word, p. 9.
if he have erred in any thing, he says, it is in filling out that Wine too
freely, which the Master of the feast, if he mistake not, has bidden him,
saying, Drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved. Can. 5. And, Treatise, page 82.
if he must err, he would err rather with those that pas for Antinomians,
then with those that go for Legal Teachers. The latter in his Treatise,
because he mentions the other first.
the former whereof he must prefer before the Latter; for that they being
jealous least free grace loose her ^, cry down men to exalt Christ; whereas
those other being jealous, lest bolines should be slighted; to exalt men cry
down Christ. and the danger here, it seems, therefore also he supposes the
less, because Occasional word, p. 2.
Free grace can not of it self tempt any to sin.

Where first, for the filling out of this Wine TOO freely, let me advise him in
sober sadness, to be well advised what he does, and to take heed how he contract
the guilt of so heinous an exces. it is liqor too 1 Pet. 1. 19.
precious to be wastfully spilt. If the Master have choice Wine reserved for
his reconciled friends, that are willing (tho before at ods, yea at dedly fewd
with him, yet now) to come in, and entertain terms of amity with him; and the
servant shall pour out of it to dogs and swine, or serve it out to e Matthew. 7. 6.
sturdy rogues and idle vagrants at the door, such as either scorn and curs his
Master, or refuse all commerce and acqaintance with him, tho invited thereunto,
because they like not his disposition, nor can endure his demeanor; I suppose
such a servant would have little thanks from his Master for his labor. And had
not this Author clipped off the first words of the Text, which he points us to,
for his warrant herein, it would alone have been sufficient to check this his
professed profusenes, and have informed him withal, what manner of persons
they are, unto whom this Wine is to be dispensed? Eat, O friends, Cant. 5.^.
says he, and drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved. But what special
warrant by revelation or enthusiasm (matters now a days much pretended) he may
profes to have for this, I know not. Well I wot, and am sure, that neither the
place alleged, nor any other Scripture (the only sure touchstone we have now
to try truths by: for the Spirit speaks not but according to it) does or can
warrant, much les enjoin any such exorbitant exces, either in this particular,
or in ought else.

2. For the crying down of Christ; it is a foul and falls calumny: which
together with many others of the same stamp, this Author here would fasten on
the faithful Ministers of Christ; men as jealous of, and zealous for, the
honor of Christ their Master, (I may boldly say it, for their labors show it)
as himself.

3. It is true indeed, that Free grace cannot of it self have such an effect as
he speaks of. but this brother may remember, what a zealous preacher (as Simon
Judas surnamed the Cananite, or Cannite, Matthew. 10. 4. not of country, but of
condition or disposition, from the Hebrew (...) zealous, the Zelote. Luke 6 15.
Canin. de voc. N. T.
his name imports) and assertor of Free grace tells us, that there are not
wanting, and those not a few, that Jude 4.
turn Gods grace 'E (...)
into wantonness, or lasciviousnes. and men may preach and publish free grace in
that manner, that they may by such their preaching, pave a path to that foul
abuse. which that many of our Antinomian tenants do, is to me beyond
controversy and I shall leave it to the consideration of others religious and
judicious, to deem and determine, whether some assertions scattered here and
there in this discourse do not warp too much that way. among the rest whereof
take these for a taste.

1. Treatise, p. 102.
The promises belong to sinners as sinners: Page 104.
not as repenting, or bumbled sinners.

Whereas our Savior says, that Matk 9. 13.
he came to call sinners to re pentance. and to save consequently not all, but
penitent sinners only. for, Luke 13. 3, 5. (...)
unless they do repent, he tells them expressly they shall perish.

2. Page 186.
All that ever received Christ, reeeived him in a sinful condition.

Yet the Apostle enformes us, that that faith whereby we receiv Christ (for
John 1. 12.
to receiv him, the Evangelist tells us is to believ on him) is not an holy
only, but Jude 20.
a most holy faith. nor can a man be said to be in a sinful condition, whose
Acts 15. 9. and 26. 1^*
heart is possessed of so holy an habit or disposition; term it whether you
please: nor can the heart act to the receiving of Christ, until it be thereof
possessed. For how can a man put forth an holy act, while he remains still
altogether unholy? s Page* 17^.


3. They are but weak believers, and like melancholy people, who think things
far otherwise then they truly are, right smoking Flax, wherein there is more
smoke then light, more ignorance then true discerning. Which among other things,
Page 173.
think (poor souls) that tho God be reconciled with them, and love them at some
times; yet he may be provoked again and angry again for new sins and failings;
and are then much troubled, how to come at any peace again, as they were
before. -- Page 174.
they suppose they can not sin so as they do, and yet not be accountable. *
Ibid.
and think that afflictions are sent upon them for their sins.

Yet the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that they might and did 1 Cor. 10. 22.
provoke God by some unadvised courses and carriages: and that 1 Cor. 11. 30.
for some such Gods afflicting hand was upon them; and I suppose God called
them then to account. But what is this, but to encourage men freely to offend
and sin, without fear of offending of God, or provoking him to wrath, or being
ever called to any account, or chastised at all for it? making God like a fond
indulgent father, an other Ely, if not more regardles then 1 Samuel 2. 23. 25.
he of his childrens carriage; not affected at all with it, tho it be never so
scandalous, and disgraceful to their Christian profession.

Of the same, or the like stamp is that which follows; tending to beat men
off from being troubled at all for their sins, as Psalm. 51. 1, (...). 2 Samuel 24
10.
David, or Matthew. 26. 75
Peter were; and from seeking to make up the breaches made between God and them
by their sins, and to make their peace again with him, by their renewed
practice of repentance.

4. Page 168.
All worship and spiritual obedience is to run in the way of this
dispensation, not for procuring love or peace with God, nor for pacifying.

5. Page 44.
There is nothing but the taking in of the Law, and accusings and condemnations
of it, that can trouble the quiet and peace of any soul. for where there is no
law, there is no transgression; and where there is no transgression, there is
no trouble for sin. all trouble arising from the obligement of the Law, which
demands satisfaction of the soul for the breach of it, and such a satisfaction
as the soul knows it cannoe give, and thereby remains unqiet; as a debtor, that
has nothing to pay.

Yet David, albeit 2 Samuel 12. 13.
having from the mouth of God, by a special express, received a release from
the condemnations of the Law, was Psalm. 51. 3.
troubled, and that not a little for his sin, if we may believ him, or the
Spirit of God speaking by him. nor was that therefore the ground of his trouble
for his sin; nor is it the only ground of such trouble, that this Author here
affirms. But proceed we.

6. Page 79.
No sin can make one les beloved of God.

Had he added but, or les liked; he had spoken full out in plain terms after
the usual Antinomian strain, but he is somewat more cautions herein then some
other. Yet being a scholar, he need not be minded of that distinction so
common in the schools of a love of benevolence, and a love of complacence. tho
God never loved David the les in regard of wishing well to him, for any sin
committed by him: yet was he not so well pleased 2 Samuel 11. ^7. and ^4. 10.
with him, when he committed some sins; nor was he in regard of his paternall
displeasure after the committing of them, Psalm. 32. 3 5.
reconciled unto him, until he repented of them* and humbled himself for them.
But his reason.

7. Page 80.
Nothing in us can make God love us les; because he loves us not for any thing
in our selves, but in and through Christ.

Yet God does love us also, (by his good leav) for his own graces in us, and
our exercises of the same. John 6. 27.
The Father himself loves you, (says our Savior to his Disciples) because ye
love me, and believ that I came out from God.

8. Ibid*
If he should love us more or les, as we sin more or les, he should be as man.

And in some things he is as man. for Genesis 1. 27. and 9. 4. 1 Cor. 1^. 7.
man bears Gods image. and Ephesians. 4. 24. 1* John 3* 3.
a good man resembles God. God is in somethings as a natural father. himself
says it. Psalm 103. 13
As a father pitieth his children; so the Lord pitieth those that fear him. Yea
in this particular he is like a discreet parent; who tho he love his child
deerly, as well when he does amiss, as when he does well; yet is he not so well
pleased with him, nor can take that delight in him, when he sees him take some
evil course, as otherwise he might and should; yea therefore is he then angry
with him, because he loves him; and chastises him for this end, to reclaim him
from the same. Thus the Antinomians themselves confess that God carried himself
toward his in the times of the Old Testament. And the like Christ himself
professes of himself in the New Testament. Revel. 3. 19, 20
As many, says he, as I love, I rebuke and chasten. be zealous therefore, and
repent.

To these may be added those other his assertions concerning Faith.

1. Page 94.
Faith is truly and simply this, a being persuaded more or les of Christ's love.

And what profane wretch almost is not prone enough hereunto? or may not
nourish such a persuasion more or les upon groundles grounds? we may well say of
such persuasions as himself elsewhere of desires. Page 28.
Who is there that have not a desire? All the World of common believers are
carried on by this principle of a desire. and are they not by the like
principle of a persuasion?

2. Page 97.
Men cannot believe too suddenly.

Yes; they may believ too suddenly, as did Simon the sorcerer. suretoo soon
(and if too soon, then too suddenly) presume and be d Acts 8. 13.
persuaded they may of Christ's love, if that be faith.

3. Page 98.
None can beleev too hastily on Jesus Christ.

True. but to beleev on Jesus Christ, and to have some persuasion more or les of
Christ's love, are diverse things.

4. Ibid.
We ought not to stay the exercise of our Faith, for repentance, or
humiliation, or any other grace.

As much as to say, beleev we may, tho we do not repent. directly contrary to
Mark 1: 15.
Christ's own and Acts 20. 21.
his Apostles method. Yea but can we have true faith then without repentance,
and without any other grace?

5. Page 92.
None ought to qestion whether they beleev or no.

Yet the Apostles incite men to try their faith, and the sincerity of it, both
2 Cor. 13. 5.
Paul and James 2. 14, 18, 20.
James.

6. Page 97.
In the Gospel all are immediately called to beleev. To day, if ye will hear
his voice.

Were they called on so in the Gospel? and were they not called on in like
manner under the Law? I suppose those words were the Psalm 95. 7
Psalmists, before they were the Heb. 3. 7.
Apostles.

And are not men called upon in the Gospel to repent immediately, as well as to
beleev. Acts 17. 30:
Paul was mistaken sure if it were not so* and our Savior himself says, Mark
1. 15.
Repent and beleev.

7. Page 93.
Christ commands to beleev. and this is his commandment, that we should beleev
in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Now commands of this nature must be
obeyed, not disputed. Gods servants do not reason their duty out first with
themselves, but fall to doing as they are commanded.

And does not Christ command Matthew. 4. 17.
to repent as well as to beleev? yea does he not Mark 1. 15.
command first to repent, and then to beleev? for in that order his words run.
And had this Author but writ or red out the text he cites, he had found somewhat
more then faith in it. 1 John 3. 23.
This is his command, that we beleev in his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love
one another as he gave us commandment.

But why commands of this nature? is not the commandment of repentance, and
charity, and conversion, and humiliation, of the same nature with that of faith
and belief? or are there any of Gods Commandments then, that because not of
this nature, may be disputed, and not obeyed? for some such matter do these
terms of restriction import; to wit, that some of Gods commands are of that
nature that they must be obeyed and not disputed; others of that nature, that
they may not be obeyed, but disputed.

No servant indeed of God ought to reason his duty, why God should command him
to do this or that, either with God, or with himself. but when he doubts what
it is, that God enjoyneth him, he may Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 10.
examine and search what the good will of God is, that he may not be mistaken
in it; and so think that he has done what he should, when he has done nothing
les. like those that John 16. 2.
thought they did God good service, when they did that that he utterly
abhorred. and when they have done, what they supposed they should do, they may
without wrong or disparagement to their Master, unles the Apostle were
mistaken, Gal. 6. 4.
try and examine their work, whether it were so done as it should be.

Yea but, says this Author;

8. Page 95.
We ought no more to question our faith, which is our first and foundation
graee, then we ought to question Christ the foundation of our faith.

9. Page ^3.
I find not any in the whole course of Christ's preaching or the disciples, when
they preached to them to beleev, asking the qestion, whether they believed or
no, or whether their faith were true faith, or no. I find one saying, Mark 9. 24.
I beleev, Lord, help mine unbelief, but not, Lord, whether do I believ, or no?
and, Luke 17. 5.
Lord, increase my faith. but not, Lord, whether is this true faith, or no? It
would be a strange qestion, to ask the Master of the feast, whether his
dainties were real, or a delusion? would not such a question disparage him for
a sorcerer? So in the things of the Spirit, to be over-jealous of the truth of
them, as in my tempted poor souls are, does not become the faithfulness of Jesus
Christ*

Why Faith should be called the first and foundation grace, I know not: tho See
Robinsons Observations, Chap. 10. 4.
many of our Divines so speak. I suppose, with See Pe(...)bell of Grace and
Faith, p. 7. 12.
others, and without prejudice to any of contrary judgment, that as there is
the (...), Plut. de irac. cohib.
seed and spawn of all sin together in man's heart from the time of his natural
birth* so there is the seed of all grace sown together in man's soul at the very
first instant of his spiritual new birth: and that faith is a branch of
sanctification, as all other graces of the like nature are.

But to let that pas; a man may qestion his faith, and yet not qestion Christ.
for Christ may be Christ; tho this or that party have no share in Christ, or
(to use his description of faith) be not persuaded more or les, that Christ
loves him. a man, tho he qestion not the foundation it self, yet he may qestion
whether he have built on it, or beside it; and so whether that be a foundation
unto his building, or no. And I make no qestion, but that many that pretend to
believ, yea that are persuaded they do so, and will not easily be beaten of from
that their persuasion, and stick not to compare for belief with the best, yet
had need to have their faith tried, and may well have it qestioned, as well by
others, as by themselves. Yea we find in Scripture examples and instances of
such as might well have qestioned whether they believed aright, or no; and
whether the faith, they made profession of, were true or no. Acts 8. 13, 23.
Simon the sorcerer sure might have done well to qestion, and try the truth of
his faith. nor might those resembled by Luke 8. 13.
the seed sown in the rockie ground, but well have done the like by theirs: as
also those John 2. 23, 24.
, who tho they are said to believ in Christ, yet Christ himself would not trust
them; and those vain James 2. 14, 18, 20.
ones James speaks of, that had a fruitles and baren faith.

Nor were this to ask the master of the feast, whether his dainties were mere
delusions, or to make our blessed Savior, (for he, I suppose, is the feast
master he means) a sorcerer; but to enqire, whether we our selves have not
been deluded, when in some night vision (such as the enthusiasts of our times
too much hanker after) we have, with Luciani Micyllus in Somnie, (...) Gallo.
Esaias 29.7, 8.
Lucians sowter, dreamed of a great feast, and of such his dainties, and of
communion with him in them, when as all has been nothing but Esaias 29. 7, 8.
a nightly delusion. They did not qestion the truth of God, that sought for
wisdom, whereby to discern between Gods messages brought by his Prophets, and
those Jer. 23* 25, 26.
dreamers dotages, who yet pretended to be sent by God, as well as the best, and
would not stick to demand of Gods Prophets, (...) Kings 2^. 24
when the Spirit of God went from themselves to speak unto them. Nor did the
Apostle Paul, when he called upon the Corinthians to ^ Cor. 13. 5.
try their faith; nor the Apostle John, when he called on the faithful to 1
John 4. 1.
try the Spirits, whether they were of God, or no; thereby incite them to
qestion Christ the foundation of faith, or to qestion Gods Spirit, the worker
of it; but to be wise and wary in discerning between truth and falsehood,
between sound and unsound, between faith well grounded, and deceitful fancies
and groundles presumptions; between teachers delivering the doctrine of life
and grace according to the word, and such as warping from that rule, yet
pretended to have the Spirit.

True it is indeed, that man's weakness in the apprehension of the work of Gods
Spirit in him, may make the truly godly without ground or good cause, sometime
to qestion the truth of it in them. but there is no ground, or just cause for
any thence to infer, that no man ought to qestion whether he believe or no, or
whether his faith be true or no. every one otherwise should be bound to presume
that he does beleev, and that his faith is true faith. For not to infist on that
which we lately touched on, that, when the Apostle called upon some to try
their faith, he presumed that some such faith there was as would not go for
current, but would proov (...).
unsound, when it came to the touch or the test; and when he uses more then
once, that discriminating term of (...) 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 Timothy 1. 5.
faith not counterfeit, or unfeigned; he implies therein, that there may be
counterfeits, (and there are indeed not a few) as of Christianity, so of faith.
Not to insist hereon I say; this Author himself acknowledges, that Page 9.
there may be a kind of faith, as in them that believed in the parable, and in
time of temptation fell away. -- and yet not in the power of Christ, nor in the
life of the Spirit. and that Page 8.
such faith, tho a ded faith, may go far in resemblance, carrying the image of
something like the new man. and whether, think we then, is such faith to be
questioned, or no? or will this Author say, that for those that have such a
faith, to call their own faith in qestion, is to qestion Christ himself?

But indeed according to this Autors ground, there is no need for any man to
qestion what manner of faith his faith is, since that without any such ado,
whatsoever his faith be, he may have interest in Christ.

For, says he,

10. Page 30.
For the way of coming by a right or purchasing an interest in this
righteousness, or salvation wrought by Christ, it is held forth without price or
works, only for taking and receiving, and believing on, all being wrought to
our hands. so as this is as good a ground for one to belief on, as another,
without exception. -- Page 153.
the covenant being such as was established with Noah, Genesis 9. 11. nothing
reqired on man's part. and Page 30.
this being a Scripture way, he would upon these principles leav a soul.

Where to set aside his terms of purchase and price, as if ought in that kind
were by any of us attributed to faith or repentance, or any work of ours: and
yet herein he contradicts himself, when he tells us one while that
salvation is held out Page 24, and 30.
freely by the Prophet Esaias, in that phrase without price; and yet an another
while that Page 167.
all the ministry of the Prophets did run in this strain, as if Gods love were
to be had in way of purchase by duty and doing. Nor to resume again, what has
been formerly said of believing and receiving; another manner of matter then
this man makes of them. And that the like may be charged on him, to that he
charge upon the Legalists, to wit, Page 29.
propounding to men the promises of the Gospel with such conditions of
repentance Page 19. 21, 27
and sorrow for sin, etc. which because they are things that they Page 27.
can not do Page 29.
in steed of drawing a soul unto Christ, put it further of from him* for may it
not as well be objected to him, as it is by him to them? that he professes
indeed to make an offer of free grace and free promises, but he propounds them
so clogged with conditions of receiving, and taking and believing on, that,
these being such as men are not able to do of themselves; Ibid.
they dare not meddle with them, until they be prepared by Christ. Unles this
Author can, or dare say, that men may and can believ on Christ, tho they cannot
repent of their sins, or be sorry for them. and that the one is an easier work
then the other; or is not of Ephesians. 2* 8.
Gods gift, and Phil. 1. 29.
a work of grace, as well as Acts 5. 31. and 1^ 18. (...) Tim (...). 26.
the other? But not to insist on these things; If there be as good ground for
any one, without exception, to believ as another, that is, (as he defines
faith) to persuade himself that Christ loves him, and he has a share in the
salvation purchased by him: why did not Peter exhort Simon the sorcerer to
persuade himself so, but bad him Acts 8. 22, 23
repent, and pray for pardon? yea, why does he himself make distinction of
persons, saying, Page 57.
I speak now to the weak and wounded believers for sins, not to the earnall and
unregenerate in sin?

Yea if the Covenant of the Gospel, that is, of life and salvation by Christ,
be as absolute, without any condition on man's part, as that Genesis 9 9, 10.
with Noah concerning the not drowning of the whole world again, then it is all
one whether men receav it, and believ it, or no: the promise of life and
salvation, and the covenant made with Christ concerning it, shall be made good
unto them, as well as that made with Noah, shall be made good unto men, whether
they know it, and hear it, and believ it, or no. so that his clause of only
for taking, and receiving, and believing on, is here idle and frivolous, the
promise and covenant being as free and absolute in the one as in the other; and
nothing at all, not so much, or les then so, in that other reqired.

This therefore is not only no Scripture way, tho he so term it; but a course
directly cross and contradictory to Scripture; tending to encourage men, whether
they be penitent, or continu impenitent, whether they come out of their sins,
or continu still in them, yet to persuade themselves, or presume rather, that
they shall be saved by Christ, and such unsound and rotten principles, will in
the end proov like Egypt unto those that rely on them, as Esaias 36* 6.
a bruised staf of reed or cane, that is not only unable to stay a man up and
support him, but will run into his hand, and with the shivers maim him, that
shall rest himself on it.

Will you see then the sum of this man's Diviniti, who complains so often of, and
taxes as Page 71.
gros and carnal, Page 40.
the Divinity of former ages, and these times.

The result of all the forementioned assertions is in effect this. The
promises of the Gospel, to wit of life, and salvation by Christ, belong to all
without exception; to sinners as sinners; and to all consequently, because all
are sinners. and all therefore are immediately bound to believ. what, but these
promises? which are not at all conditional, but absolute; as absolute as that
promise to Noah, of never drowning the world again. nor is any man in any wise
to question his faith, nor what ground he has for such his belief.

And what follows from these premises, but that men may be saved, whether they
repent or no, tho they never turn to God, or persist in a lewd and loose course
of life to the last? I might well have added, whether they believ or no, tho
they never attain to true faith. For Christ, he says, may be ours without faith.
and if no condition at all be reqired on man's part, as in that covenant with
Noah, then not so much as belief. and he rejects therefore Page 198.
the reformed and more generally received opinion (as himself terms it) of
salvation in Christ by faith, instrumentally intervening. and Ibid.
that none are partakers of free salvation but by faith. as if he were directly
bent to cross and contradict that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Ye are saved by grace through faith. and, 2 These. 2. 13.
God has elected you unto salvation by sanctification and (...), sicut (...)
Ephesians. 4. 24. and (...) 2 Cor. 6. 7. and (...) Col. 1. 5
true faith. Which what is it but to teach men to believ a lie; that God will
save such, as indeed never shall be saved: and to encourage them upon groundles
persuasions and misapprehensions, the more securely, never qestioning how it
stands with them, to run on hoodwinked, until suddenly they fall headlong into
hell?

I remember, while I abode at Lincolns Inn, to have visited sometime a
religious Lady, sister to a reverend Divine of special note in those days:
whom I found somewhat perplexed; the ground thereof arising from some
conference that had newly passed between her and a grave Divine of great
repute, but in somethings warping a little the way that these men now run. who
qestioning with her about her estate, upon delivery of such principles as she
supposed to have good ground from Gods Word for the trial of her faith and
interest thereby in Christ; began to chide her, and told her that she went
needlessly about the bush, when she had a nearer and readier way at hand. Then
being demanded, what course he would advise her to take, he told her she must
thus reason, much after this Autors manner, God will save sinners. But I am a
sinner. Therefore God will save me. To pass by, what I farther spoke, either
in confirmation of the way she was in, or the confutation of this new one; I
told her, (not to trouble her with rules of Logike, or Schole maxims, to
discover this fallacy) she might with as good ground thus reason; God will damn
sinners. But I am a sinner. Therefore God will damn me. And the conclusion, I
doubt not, in this latter, how ever it follow from the premises, for twenty to
one at least, will by woeful experience proov the truer of the twain. Howbeit, if
as the Apostle says of some, that 2 These. 2. ^1.
they are given up to strong delusions, that believ some kind of lies, I know
not what to say or think of those, that teach men to believ such lies as these
are.

Yea, but this way of trying our faith and estate by signs and marks, it is
but Page 28.
a broken work, Ibid.
a narrow, a weak, Page 29, and 96
a puzling, Page 34.
a perplexing, Page 77.
a distracting, Page 71.
a gros, a carnal way. For with all these deterring and debasing terms is this
Author pleased to commend and adorn it.

Yet 1. some, ye see, have been needlessly puzzeld and perplexed by suggestions
from such principles as this Author here lays, when they were quietly settled on
good ground in the other way before, by such as have disturbed them in it, and
sought to beat them out of it, as this Author, throughout his whole discourse
here does. And as for his Title Page.
experiment of a disquieted soul, tossed to and fro by times for twelv years
together among See out of this Author, p. 37, 40, and 85. hereafter.
those bungling or cheating Surgeons, our Legal Teachers, who either for
want of skill could not, or for their own ends would not, give him any ease, but
powered in Wine, or Vinegar rather, in stead of Oil, into his wounds, to keep
them from closing, and could have no rest or ease therefore, until he was
settled on those Antinomian principles, the relation whereof is the main subject
of his whole dramaticall discourse: I could quit him, if need were, with somewhat
the like story, of one that having taken some evil courses, and troubled much
and long in mind about them, could not satisfy himself in ought, until he
turned Papist, and had upon shrift by a Popish priest been assoyled but these
are unsound and sandy grounds to build new courses upon, for assurance of sound
peace here, or salvation hereafter.

2. Be it a puzzeling way or no, and such as it is here said to be, it is a
Scripture way sure, as this Author himself can not deny, but is enforced to
confess; tho in the very same place, where he makes such acknowledgement,
speaking of it in very base and broad language, il-beseeming a Minister of the
Gospel, as he professes himself to be.

For first in way of answer to that doubt.

Page 81.
Because ye feel not your self sanctified, you think not your self justified.

1. Ibid.
I shall allow you (says he) your sanctification so far as the Scripture does,
as a lower motive, and more carnally mixed way of persuasion and assurance of
justification: Page 32.
such as by spiritually carnal works of obedience and holiness, can give but a
mixed act of assurance at the best, being of a mixed nature of flesh and Spirit.

Where 1. I will not stand to pres those places, where Christ is said to be 1
Cor. 1. 30.
made unto us as well sanctification, as righteousness and redemption. and where
those that are 1 Cor. 6. 11.
washed by him, are said to be as well sanctified as justified. I will give him
only his own words out of his Preface, Occasional word, p. 3.
Righteousness and Holiness, blood and water, Jesus and Lord Christ, called and
justified, are still to be found together in the word. And if they go thus
together, then the one may with good ground evidence the other. nor can the one
be, where the other is not. Nor are Gods Messengers to be jeered and scoffed at
as Legal Teachers, and Miscelane Divines, for joining them together in their
teaching. Yea if God in his word have so linked these together, what guilt
incur they that seek to divorce them, and bear men in hand, that they may have
the one, tho they have not the other?

2. For those broad and base terms that he brandeth this assurance with, for
which he might justly expect an heavy reckoning, but that he fancieth See
before from page 174.
no believer accountable to God for any sin. I shall for present only demand of
him what he thinks of Faith, (because he says, that tho Page 189.
Christ be ours without faith, yet by it we know him to be ours) whether our
Faith be not of a mixed condition, like the poor man's in the Gospel, that had
some dregs of Mark 9. 24.
infidelity mixed with it; and whether the assurance arising from such Faith be
therefore but a mixed act of assurance at the best. as if the assurance that the
pledges, Ephesians. 1. 14: 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. (...). pignus, vel ar^a poti^s.
or earnests rather of Gods Spirit gives to the soul, depended upon the
perfection or qantity of them: and Gods penny were not an earnest for that
purpose, as good and as sure as a pound.

But let us hear what he says further to those Scriptures where such marks and
signs are to such purpose propounded.

2. Page 32*
The marks (says this Author, as others of the same stamp before him) delivered
in the Epistles of John and James, etc. are rather marks for others, then for
our selves to know us by.

Which is so directly contrary to the main intendement and expres words of
either Apostle, that it may worthily be wondered that any man of an ingenuous
disposition should have the face or forhead to aver it. For whom does James
direct his whole discourse unto, but to Thou, vain man, Jam. 2. 20.
the party himself, whose faith was to be tried? or whom did John labor to
give assurance to concerning their estate, but to those, 1 John 1. 5.
whose joy and comfort, arising from the apprehension of that their own blessed
condition, he intended and desired thereby to improov? Yea that both James and
John's intendement is, as to undeceiv those, whose faith and profession was not
sound and sincere in their (as frivolous because groundles; so perilous and
pernicious, because presumptuous) conceits and mistakes concerning themselves,
whereby they deceaved and beguiled Page 9.
not others more (as this Author himself speaks) then themselves: so to settle
the truly faithful and religious in a more firm and ample assurance of that
their estate, their own words evidently avow. James 1. 26.
If any man among you, says the one, seem religious, and bridle not his tongue,
(...). sicut Gal. 6. 3. (...). and 1 John 1. 8. (...).
he deceives his own heart, and his religion is vain. And, 1 John 1. 6.
If we say, says the other, that we have communion with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and deal not truly. and as in those words for the negative, so
in the next for the affirmative. Verse 7.
If we walk in light, as he is in the light, we have communion (God and we)
either with other, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from
all (...).
sin. And yet more expressly, to cut of all cavils. 1 John 3. 14.
We know, (not that you, or others, I know not who, but) that we (our selves)
are passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. And again, 1 John
3. 19.
Hereby we know, that we are of the truth; and may (...), (...) Synes. in
encome alv. cor, navis instar rudente valido, anchorae littorive aeffixae,
firmatum habebimus. ab Homero sumptum qi de Vlysse Odyss. v^ (...). de qo Plut.
in garrul. unde emendanaus idem in de irac. cohib. ubi pro (...) ligitur (...).
qod ansam dedit Gilb. Cognato in Adag. and Jo. Hartungo in loc. memorab. novum
proverbium comminiscendi, (...). qod Obedientiam Homericam verterunt. qo modo
and locus alter ille Hadr. Junio imposuit, qi Animum in Pisa obfirma, tanqam
aliud a certaminibus Pisaeis tractum, proverbium ind^ procudit. Voculae sensum
usumqe optime exprimunt, illa apud Plut. de virt mor. Poetae nescio cuju^, sic
emendanda, (...). ubi Plut. (...). inde (...) eadem, qae and (...) Epicteto l.
2. c. 20.
stay, or assure (not other men's minds of us, but) our own hearts, (not in man's
ey, but) in his (that is, in Gods) sight. And whence arises this assurance of
aeceptance with God, and prevalence with him in their prayers? (for that is
also subjoyned, And whatsoever we reqest of him we receiv:) 1 John 3. 22.
because, says the Apostle, we keep his Commandments, and do those things
that are well pleasing in his sight. We might again here urge that of Paul
willing the Corinthians, to 1 Cor. 11. 28
examine (not others, but) each one himself: and to 2 Cor. 13. 5.
try (not others, but) themselves; whether they were in the faith, or no; and
whether Christ were in them, or no. which sure must be by some marks. and
enjoining the Galatians Gal. 6. 4.
each one to examine his own work, that he may have matter of joying, not in
another, but in himself. in his notice of himself and his own estate, not in
other men's opinion and estimation of him. But to pitch upon Peter, whose words
also this Page 98.
Author himself takes notice of elsewhere; and we the rather therefore presume
them to come within compass of his et caetera; tho whether they do or no, is not
greatly material. when he advises those to whom he writes, that is, (...), 2
Pet. 1. 1
all the faithful without exception, to (...), verse 5.
give all diligence (...), Verse 10.
to make their calling and election sure, (...), etc.
by adding unto faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and so forward: he that
shall say, his meaning was to make it sure to others rather then to themselves,
may as well assay to bear men in hand, that it is Mero meridie si dixerit ille
tenebras esse, credet. Petron.
midnight still, at midday.

But, Page 85.
All other assurances, (says this Author, his own only excepted, these mixed,
gros, and carnal ones, as before he styled them, tho not denied to be Page 81.
fonnd in Gods Word) are but rotten conclusions from the Word, and such things
as true Legal preachers have invented; not understanding the mystery of the
Kingdom of Christ; Page 40.
nor being clear enough in judgment to unmingle things, that Antichrist had
confounded and put together: thereby Page 37.
like some Surgeons, who keep their Patients from healing too soon, that
they may make the cure the more admired, keeping wounded souls accordingly with
their wounds open.

Thus our Ministers he makes no better, then mere Mountebanks. for so to
lengthen his cure, that he may seem to have done some great matter, says a
grave Physician, in a Surgeon is but Histrionis est parvam rem^attollere, qo
plus praestitisse videa^^^. Celsus de re* medic. l. 5. c. 26. 1.
a Player-like, or a Mountebanks part. and what is it, think we, then in a
Divine?

But why did he not add, and to draw the more Fees from them? as the Orator
complains of some Teachers of youth in his time, that Culpa est in
praeceptoribus prima, libenter detinentibus puorum, partim cupiditate diutius
exigendi mercedulas, partim ambitione, qo difficilius sit qod pollicentur
Fabius instit. l. 12. c. 11.
kept their Scholars longer in their rudiments, then was needful, as well to
draw the more money from their parents, as to make that they taught them seem a
more difficult matter. For sure, as good ground he might have had for the one
as the other. None good at all, I assure my self, for either. For whose
spectacles has this brother borrowed? or, what prospective glass has he
gotten? by which he is able thus to pierce and pry into men's hearts, to descry
what their secret intents and ayms are in the courses they take, as before he
described them, (tho I suppose not very faithfully neither) for the satisfying
of such as repayr unto them, for direction, or for comfort? Herein therefore
this Author, as he transgressed the bounds of Matthew. 7. 1, 12 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
charity, so he encroacheth too much upon the 1 Kings 8. 39 1 Cor. 2. 11.
Jerem. 17. 10. James 4. 11.
royal prerogative. both which the Lord in mercy (...), 2 Timothy 4. 10.
remit to him. whether he suppose he need remission of any sin, or no. which
according to his own principles See hereafter out of page 77.
he deems he does not.

Besides that in these passages he seems more then once to cross and contradict
himself.

For 1. he charges these points on the Legal Teachers, as their own
inventions: and yet (as verifying therein the old Greek Proverb, (...), Menand.
The tripping tongue sometimes tells truth) he confesses them to be conclusions
drawn from Gods Word. for if conclusions fetched from Gods Word, how then the
inventions and devices of men? or how conclusions from the Word, if inventions
of men? not to insist upon that unsavory term, that may seem to cast an
aspersion on Gods sacred Oracles, when conclusions from the Word, so confessed
to be, are styled rotten conclusions.

Again, he ascribes those preposterous courses, that these Legal Physicians
take with their spiritual patients, one while to unskilfulnes, an other while
to unfaithfulness. Sometime he makes them a company of sely ignoramusses,
blind blundering bussards, men of no understanding or judgment; unable to dive
into those deep mysteries that he and his are so well seen in, or so to
distingvish those things, that Antichrist has blended and jumbled together, as
they do; or Page 28.
to give a troubled soul any sound satisfaction. whom yet in Ibid.
this dim light, such as it is, that they have, he says, he does not wholly
despise and contemn, and that upon condition too; so that they contend not
against the more glorious light of truth, that he, and those of his strain hold
out, Page 104.
whereof some slight glimerings yet he has observed in some of their
discourses. Sometime on the other side he makes them a crew of cunning, (I
might well say, cheating) companions, that have subtly for sinister ends
invented and devised these courses of cure, Page 93.
under a pretense of thorough humiliation, to keep their patients in pain the
longer under their hands, for their own admiration and advantage, not regarding
the whilst what they poor souls endure, while their wounds are on purpose kept
from closing. All the help he can have to salv this contradiction; (for if it
be of mere ignorance for want of better and cleerer light, then not of set
purpose for by-ends; or if of this, then not of that) all, I say, that I can
think on, to reconcile this contradiction, must be to say, that some of them
are failing in the one kind, and some faulty in the other, or that all of them
generally do in some things err by mistake, in others wilfully transgres.

But leaving him to make his cross and uncharitable censures of his brethren
good, as he shall think good himself: let us, in steed of that rotten stuff, as
he is pleased to style it, that these Legal Teachers have, (yet from Gods
Word) invented, see what stays and supports for men's souls, this Author himself,
therein (...), Plut* de Isid. and Osir.
like the Spider, that weaves her web out of her own bowels, has spun us, not
out of Gods Word, as the Legalists, (that Page 27.
spin out, he says, such fine threads in Divinity, as are not strong enough to
bind up a broken spirit) but out of his own brains.

Page 84*
We must believ (says he) that Christ has believed perfectly, he has
repented perfectly, he has sorrowed for sin perfectly, he has obeyed
perfectly, and he has mortified sin perfectly. and Page ^5.
that our repentance is true in him, who has repented for us; our new obedience
true in him, who has obeyed for us; our mortification true in him, through whom
we are more then conqerours. and why he altered his style more in this, then in
the rest; or why he spoke not here the same of belief, as before he did, that
he does of repentance, I wot not.

But these. I may truly say, are not conclusions from Gods Word, but groundles
assertions, wrought out of his own curious head and fancy, without warrant from
Gods Word. For where finds he in the whole book of God, that ever Christ
repented for us, or that he mortified sin, not in us, but for us, in himself;
as in himself, or in his own person, he obeyed for us; and yet not to free us
from obedience neither, but to set us (...), 1 Per. 2. 21 and 3. 17.
a copy, to give us a precedent, that we might tread in his steps, as for
matter of patienee, so for matter of (...) John 13. 15. and 15. 10. 1 John 2.
6. Phil 2. 5. 8.
obedience. tho that neither the principal end with him of either. These
glorious lights therefore, set up to dazel men's eyes, and amuse their minds, we
can not admit; until they can be showed to be rays of that light, that the Law
and Testimony holds out: according to which unles men speak, Esaias 8, 20.
we are taught and warranted by the Spirit of God speaking in his Prophet, to
deem, that there is no (...)
spark of true light in morning, or dawning, as chap. 58. 8.
them.

And indeed, what is this, but to bear men in hand, as for confession of sins,
(which some of them have taught) that it is sufficient for men to believe that
Christ has confessed their sins for e See Gods eye on his Israel, p. 25
them; so for matter of sorrow for sin and repentance, that it is sufficient
for them to believ, that Christ has perfectly sorrowed and repented for them?
and what he has done for them, they need not do themselves.

Howbeit, Occasional word, p. 8.
by this time, he hops, Free grace is no Antinomianism.

By what time he means, I know not. for this is but in his Preface. but by this
time, I hope, it may evidently appear in what has been produced, that
Antinomianisu holds out an other manner of Free grace, then either the Prophets
of God, or Christ and his Apostles ever preached.

Yea but, Ibid. p 3.
shall we call every one Antinomian, that speaks free grace, or a little more
freely then we do?

No. God forbid, that Christ and his Apostles, yea or Gods Prophets, should by
any of us be so termed or esteemed, tho they speak free grace, as far as any,
and as fully, consistent with truth. But if we speak free grace as far and as
fully as they do, we may justly give some such title for distinction to those
that go further; not because they go further then our selves go, but because
further then they went; yea if further, I say, not then the Apostles, but then
the Prophets went, (for Gods grace was ever alike free) whose sayings tho they
produce for such free grace as they hold, yet in truth they deny them to have
preached free grace, affirming them to have propounded life and salvation in
those times to Gods people, See before from page 167.
not of free grace, but by way of payment and purchase. Howbeit true it is, that
not so much for this opinion, as for some other tenants, as See Gods ey, etc.
page 2. and pref p. 17, 18.
the denial of the moral Law to be any rule of direction for believers to
walk by, and other assertions of the like stamp, was this title not unfitly
given to those of that strain; who concurring yet in the principles by this
Author here insisted on, (as is usual to style a faction by a term taken from
some one special tenent among others) are therefore deservedly so called.

And this leads me from the specious Title of Free grace that he holds out in
the Frontispice of his Fabrik, to the amiable and amicable pretense of Peace,
that he hangs out in the Portall, or in the Porcb before his Preface.

Occasional word, p. 1.
It would be much matter of peace, he says, amongst believers, if the Names of
Antinomian and Legal Teachers, and the rest, might be laid down; and no mark
or name to know one another by, but that of believers, that hold thus or thus
for distinction.

And for my part I like not the imposing Names of such note, either groundlesly
or needlessly. But why such as in their tenants do so palpably oppose, slight,
vilify, yea traduce, and See in the Preface to Gods ey, etc. page 18. that
horrid speech of a principal ring. leader of that party.
blaspheme Gods sacred Law, as these men have done and do, (especially making
such faction and fractions in our Churches) should not be termed Antinomians, I
see no ground of just exception. and it would be over teadious, and a needles
wast of time and pen, for those that have occasion to deal with them, to be
continually paraphrasing or periphrasing of them, by such circumlocutions of
believers that hold thus or thus.

But why does this Author himself transgres those bounds, that he would have
others confined unto? For why may not others call these men Antinomians, as well
as he calls some other but Occasional word, p. 5.
a little after Arminians? Since that albeit the opinions of both be bad enough,
yet he will not, I hope, deny the name of Believers to the one, no more then to
the other; especially if the definition of Faith above by him delivered, be a
sufficient index to denote a believer. If he deem this such an effectual means
to make peace, why does he not keep precisely to it, but fall so soon, by
taking the way himself taxes, to break peace?

But to let them pas, whom we have at present nothing to do with; why does he
in this very work of his so often use this very term of Legal Teachers, in the
entry whereunto the very first motion he makes is to have it wholly laid down?
Or what is this but mere colluding and glosing, to commend one thing, and
practice an other, to prosecute the direct contrary to that which at first
himself propounded? I remember to have read sometime a Catechisticall Treatise
of one, who in his Preface complained much of the variety of Catechisnts,
ascribing the ignorance or nonproficiency at least of people hereunto, that
Teachers made use of many several Catechisms, and kept not to that Common one
publicly allowed, to which for matter and method he gave the preeminence; and
yet himself at the same time together with that Preface set out such a form, as
differed more from that common one so highly by him commended, then the most of
them ordinarily then in use did. The very like does this Author. In the
Introduction to his Treatise, he commends Peace to his Readers, and wishes the
name Legal Teachers wholly laid down as a course thereunto much conducing: yet in
the Treatise it self, and the body of his Book, he is ever and anon girding at
our Ministers, under the name of Page 85.
true Legal Teachers, and those Page 82.
that pas for Legal teachers, and that Page 29.
are of a legal strain, and that Page 169.
run in a legal way; whom also he does insolently and contumeliously not
reprove only, but reproach, as in part also has already been showed. Indeed
the truth is, Mr. Eatons spirit seems to be in this man revived, tho carrying
the matter somewhat more covertly and cunningly then he did. For thoroughout
this whole Treatise this is one principal mark and matter, that his discourse
mainly drives at, to tax and traduce, to debase and disgrace, the Ministry and
manner of teaching of the most faithful, painful, famous and renowned servants
of God, as well of these times, as of former ages, by whose pious labors and
religious endeavors, backed with Gods blessing, an innumerable number of souls
have been won and brought in. To which purpose, let these few ensuing passages,
among a multitude of others, be observed.

Page 71.
The way of the Spirit is not so gros and carnal, as the Divinity of former
times, and some of this present age would make it.

And why so, but because they teach men, by such signs and marks as they meet
with in Gods Word, (and Esaias 59. 21.
the Word and Spirit, I hope cross not, but concur) to try their spiritual
estates? For so afterward

Page 72.
They that write so of a regenerate estate, and set us down such infallible
signs as we meet with commonly, do take their experiences too low and
earnally: and mistake the allegory, and way of the Word or Scriptures, which
speaks of things, because of the infirmity of our flesh, write upon Spiritual
workings as Philosophers upon moral virtue; and do bring down the Spirit into
the Allegory, and so allegorize and incarnate, or make fleshly the things of
the Spirit.

Where by the way observe a pretty evasion, here closely insinuated, a little
before more expressly propounded, that may serve to shift of, whatsoever of the
Apostles method, matter, and manner of teaching was before related, contrary to
that that these men approov, and agreeable to that which is by those practiced,
whom they control and oppose. Ibid.
The Apostle speaks many things too, as himself says, because of the infirmity
of our flesh. and they belike have found out a more spiritual way, then that
the Apostles in their teachings and writings used. which if they have, much
good may it do them: we shall be content to tread in their steps, whom we know
to have had John 16. 13. 1 Cor. 7. 40.
an unerring spirit. Again;

Page 186.
Man's obedience to God is not so notionally, nor orderly carried, nor so purely
as the Gospel calls for.

This because we reqire of those that desire pardon of sin, peace with God, and
salvation by Christ, repentance, and bumiliation, and sorrow for sin, and
prayer for pardon, and a new course of life, as our Savior himself and his
Apostles did. But, says this man,

Page 169.
They run in a legal strain, and would work God down into his old and former
way of reveiling himself as under the Law, when he seemed to be only in the
way to reconciliation and peace, rather then pacified. and thus in prayer, and
fasting, and other acts of obedience, they deal with God, as they did under the
old Testament; not considering the glorious love reveiled in Christ crucified;
and how all Gospel ordinances are only ways and means to reveil this love and
grace by the Spirit of adoption; not any ways or means of ours for getting
some love from God, which Christ himself has not gotten for us.

Then belike in the time of the old Testament, these were ways and means for
Gods people that then lived, whereby to get some love from God, which Christ
himself had not gotten for them. But if God in those times were not pacified,
or did not carry himself toward them as pacified, how says the Psalmist? Psalm*
85. 1. 2, 3.
Lord, thou have been favorable to thy Land, (that is, the inhabitants
thereof,) Thou have forgiven the iniqity of thy people; and have covered all
their sin: (a passage See Gods eye on his Israel, p. 6.
absurdly pressed by the Antinomians, to proov that to be done now, which they
deny to have been then) thou have wholly taken away thy wrath; and turned from
the fiercenes of thine anger. Was not Christ's blood, think we, as effectual
for the pacifying of Gods wrath in those times, as in these? These be new
doctrines indeed* But,

Page 27.
This is the common way of dealing with souls, and bringing them up into
assurance, as thus, Repent and pray, and live an holy life, and walk according
to the Law of God.

And dare this man without any of these give any man assurance? If he do, he
dare do, and does more then Christ or his Apostles are read to have done.

But in jeering way mine Author proceeds.

Ibid.
If they answer, they can not do thus, ob then say they, can you not desire to
pray, and repent? and if they say, they cannot desire, ob but then say they,
can you not desire that you may desire? and thus they wind them up by acts of
their own spirit; and run theni out to the end of their own working, when as
their desires of desires; and the spinning of such fine threads in Divinity, are
not strong enough to bind up a broken spirit.

Thus is he pleased to skof some questions, that such Divines as go Jerem. 6.
16.
the old way of the Prophets and Apostles, with repentance and sorrow for sin,
(which these of the new cu^, can not away with) do some time propound to
disquieted consciences, in which they seem to descry some beginnings of grace;
not, as this man speaks, to wind them up by acts of their own spirit, but to
sift out the workings of Gods spirit in them, and thereby to make way for such
further matter, as may give fuller satisfaction, then they are as yet able to
attain. Nor is this Page 29.
to place them on the bottom of their own righteousness, as he injuriously
charge it, Page 28.
like the botome or point of a top, as he is pleased to resemble it; as if this
were that which they persuaded men to rest^on, as that whereby the guilt of
their sins were discharged, and Gods justice satisfied; which yet according to
this man's principles was done in the the times of the old Testament, when by
such means as these Gods favor and pardon of sin was Page 1 67.
purchased as with a price; but to give them assurance by Romans 8. 23.
the first fruits of the spirit bestowed on them, and begun in them, which the
holy Ghost is pleased to call ^ Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. Ephesians. 4. 14.
Gods earnests, and the Seal of our redemption, that they are of the number of
those that have interest in Christ, by whom, as freedom from Hell and the gvilt
of sin, so Heaven and happiness is purchased for them. But this f Ephesians. 5. 30.
2 Cor. 1. 22.
wary man,

Page 29.
Dares not take this way: -- for that is to take the disease for the Physician,
and to give men no ointment, but blood of their own wound to heal them.

And so belike John did, when he went this way to work, as before was showed.

Ibid.
Nor would be take that other way, which many do that are of this legal strain
too, as to apply promises to them first; which many times in steed of drawing
the soul to Christ, puts it further of, bringing some conditions, which the
soul qestioning in themselves, dares not meddle with before it be prepared by
Christ and his freenes.

He might have said, which man's corrupt and carnal heart, until it be wrought
upon by Gods Spirit, and prepared by Christ, (who is said to Acts 4. 26.
give as well repentance, as remission of sins; yea first repentance and then
remission of sins; to Israel; and to bles k Acts 5. 21.
them as well by turning them away from their iniqities, as by discharging them
of the gvilt thereof) is very loath to condeseend unto; and we therefore have
invented a readier way, and a shorter cut for them, without all that ado. But
let them carry men on along, so long as they please, in a fools paradise; unles
the conditions, that Gods Prophets (for there is no new way to Heaven now, but
the same that ever was) and Christ's Apostles propound to all that look for
salvation by Christ, be performed, there is little hope for any man to attain
life eternal; unles some other way can be discovered that the Word of God has
not. But you see the man is humorous, and very hard to please by any way that
these Legal Teachers take, tho never so consonant to Scripture. And therefore
although that Peter, when

Page 36.
They in the Acts, after he had laid open their sin of shedding the blood of
Christ, were pricked to the heart for it, and being inwardly troubled and
wounded said, Men and brethren what shall we do?

Acts 2. 37, 38
Exhorted them to repent; yet these Legal Preachers when they* take the like
course,

Page 39.
They run (says this Author) to the Law, in their dealing with such souls for
their through humiliation, as they say or pretend, (for such sinister ends as
before you heard) and not to the Gospel, and faith in Jesus Christ; (and who
ever severs these?) and so Ibid.
bring fire, and not water to quench them, but kindle them the more; and
setting the everlasting burnings of the Law before their souls, put them all
into a spiritual flame and vexation.

And that he may not pretend, that this is spoken but by way of supposition, if
they do so and so. which yet the whole drift of his discourse, will easily
unmaske. he tells us a little after in express terms, that

Page 40.
The Divinity of some former ages to these present times, he knows it, has
made up all their receipts for distempered souls of so much Law and so much
Gospel; and usually but a grain or dram of Gospel to a pound of Law; not being
clear enough in judgment, to unmingle things that Antichrist has confounded
and put together, as the two Testaments, and two Covenants, and not rightly
discerning Christ's manner or way of preaching, and the Apostles, both in their
holding out Law and Gospel.

Who belike then, Honeycomb c 7. p. 137.
making a miscelan and mixture of the Law and the Gospel, (as Mr. Eaton says
of these Legalists) preached neither good Law nor good Gospel, but a miscelan
and marring of both. And we do no other now then they did. But thus says this
Author,

Page 41.
They would make the Law the ministry of life, and of the Spirit, being not of
such a spiritual discerning, as the Lord has now reveiled.

Reveiled to whom, think we, but to himself, and those of the Antinomian
strain? by some dream or enthusiasm sure it must be, for not by the word which
holds out that course that the Legalists take, pressing men upon repentance, and
sorrow for sin and humiliation, which these men can not abide. And I would
gladly know of them, whether of the two, is Matthew. 7. 13* 14.
the streit gate, and the narrow way, that leads to life, and few list to take,
ours or theirs. But, says this man,

Ibid.
Such put a soul upon a legal method of conversion or coming to Christ.
First, they must be kept so long under the Law, for humiliation, and contrition
and confession, and then brought to the Gospel, as many books and Teachers do.

Thus he describes the dealing of our Ministers with men, for the bringing of
them to repentance, as if he were painting out some Popish Priest, pressing men
to shrift, and putting them upon hard penance: as ye shall anon hear him
resembling their preaching remission of sins unto the penitent, to the Popes
giving out his pardons. But that which follows is far wors.

Page 37.
Who, like some Chirurgians, that keep their Patients from healing too soon,
that they may make the cure the more admired, do accordingly keep such souls
with their wounds open; and if they pour in any thing, it is rather Wine then
Oil, rather something of the Law then of the Gospel: so as they are not only
long in healing and getting peace through Jesus Christ; but they carry a scar
with them still; and are as it were lame in their consciences a long time
after; like some poor Patients, that have had as much of the sound flesh cut
away as the rotten, and so have been healed, tho but to a bodily infirmity all
their life time.

And what is all this indeed, but mere Mountebank practice, to tell men, that
the Physicians and Surgeons, they have formerly made use of, do but vex them
by plying them with purges and pills, and searching their sores, and searing
them and cutting them to the quick, and with their causticks and corrosives put
them, poor souls, to a world of needles pain; and all this they do but to
lengthen the cure, and hold them long in their hands; whereas they will give
them that, that shall put them to no pain, and yet shall perfectly heal them
without all that ado? But it may justly be feared, that these new ways of cure
that these men profess, will in the end proov little better then such
Qacksalvers receipts, but stupifying pills, or palliating remedies, or topicall
playsters, which tho they may give some ease of pain for the present, yet
effect no sound cure, leaving the root of the disease the same still that they
found it.

But to free men from further trouble of daily craving pardon of their sins
according to Matthew 6. 12.
our Saviors prescript, he tells them, that

Page 77.
The consideration of the pardon of sin in this sense that our Divines have
commonly taught and preached it, not minding the spiritual analogy of the
Word, concerning the righteousness of a believer, breeds all this distraction;
while they deal out Christ's blood, as the Pope his pardons for one sin after
another, never stating a believer in the righteousness of Christ, and in a fully
pardoned condition.

So that I wonder not now, why your Antinomians should be charged, and that
with good proof brought of it, to deliver, that, See Gods ey on his Israel,
etc. Preface, p 18.
A child of God need not, nay ought not, to ask pardon for sin: and that it is
no les then blasphemy for him so to do.

But I shall only for the present demand of this Author, whether believers
before Christ's appearance in the flesh, such as Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
David, and the rest, were stated in the righteousness of Christ or no. and
whether it be not a profane scof, unfit to come out of any Christian man's, much
more any Minister of the Gospels mouth, to say, that Nathan and other the Seers
of those times dealt Christ's blood out, to David and other believers, then
overtaken with some sin, as the Pope does his pardons. But any base comparison
is scarce bad enough to spend upon these unchristian Legalists, that Page 82.
to exalt men, cry down Christ. Mean while, as the Persian that was scuffling
with the Magician in the dark, (...), Plut de amic. and adul.
bad one that stood by with his weapon in his hand, but forbearing to make use
of it, for fear of smiting the wrong party, thrust at all adventure, so he slew
the Magician, he cared not, though it were thorough his own side; so this man
(therein not unlike c others of the same strain) little regards how he asperse
Gods Prophets and his dispensations by them, so he may * See Gods ey, etc.
Preface p. 13, and 15. quest. 7. 10.
break some broad jest upon his Legal brethren, their doctrine and dealings.

But all this, and much more, this man of peace, that moves to have the name of
Legalist laid down; and yet not only commonly so styles them that are not of
his strain, but lays load on them, as you see, to make them and their Ministry
as odious as may be, in the eyes and minds of men. And indeed better a thousand
times be termed Legalists and Legal Teachers, then to be deciphered by doing
and dealing so and so, as he is pleased to describe them. For what by any
malignant, or malicious Papist, could more opprobriously and contumeliously
have been spoken of the ministry of those, unto whose labors in his own work,
God has bin pleased to give so ample a testimony, by his blessing thereupon?
But, I hope, some other of them, being men furnished with abundance of
spiritual abilities, will take pains to lay open more fully and largely this
mystery of iniquity, like to ruin millions of souls, if with out control it be
permitted to spread. Occasional word, p. 8.
It has ever been Satan's policy, says this Author, to manage a truth in an
other name then its own. And it is no less an usual policy and subtle engine
of Satan to manage errors under other names then their own. they would not
otherwise so soon find acceptance, and be owned as truths. Nor are errors ever
more dangerous, then when they come abroad, and appear, as 1 Samuel 28. 14.
Satan himself in Samuels weed, so shrouded under the specious titles of Gods
Love, Free Grace, Gospel of Peace, Glorious Lights, and the like. Read but the
discourses and Treatises of your Familists; and you shall find all their
newfangled conceits, and fantastical dotages represented unto you under the
most specious and glorious terms and titles that may be: and withal (that
which in some of these men's writings also I have lately observed) stuffed with
such strange abstract metaphysicall notions, clothed with metaphorical and
hyperbolicall expressions, as may ravish the minds of simple people, and raise
them to an high admiration of them, as containing such deep and abstruse
mysteries, as ordinary capacities are unable to apprehend; and tend rather to
darken and cloud what they deliver, then to make it clear and conspicuous, that
being brought to the light, which such usually shun, it may come to trial, and
appear what in truth it is. And to my weak judgment it seems a thing much to
be feared, that this course (which I see some affect, and many people are much
taken with) of extracting Divinity in a kind of chymicall way into qeint and
curious, but groundles and useles speculations, and (as I may well say of some
of them) even See a taste hereof in Gods ey, etc. Preface p. 30.
chimericall conceits, will if it hold on, as much corrupt the 1 Cor. 1. 3
simplicity of the Gospel, and the doctrine of faith, as ever the qirks and
qillets of the old Scholemen did. But the Lord, I doubt not, will raise up those
among us, that will Jude 3.
contend for the faith once given, and endeavor to preserve it in its purity
and simplicity, by discovering the vanity and unsoundnes of these sublimated
speculations, wherewith those of this new strain, under pretense of The Autors
Title page.
a cleerer discovery, and a greater and more Treatise, p. 18.
glorious light, endeavor to taint and contaminate it. For mine own part, as I
account my self the weakest and meanest of many herein interessed, so I should
not peradventure have stirred further in this business, had I not been called
in, as a party, to give testimony to that, which my soul utterly detests, and
for opposing whereof I suffer (as I am told) the il affections of not a few;
being one as well nigh spent with age, so much shattered with a late sharp
encounter of sickness, which I am not able yet to shake of: and can do no more
therefore, then the (...), Sophocl. Electr. (...) Gregor. Nyssen. de immat.
abrept.
old steed they speak of, that tho past years of service, yet when he hears the
alarm given, upon the incursions of some advers forces, sets up his ears, and
bestirs him as well as he can, and by his neying and prancing incites others of
his kind and rank to that employment and service, which himself is unable to
perform. But whatsoever else I have done here, I hope, I have made it to appear,
as well by this as by my former, how far I am from supposing, what this man
would make me speak, that there is little difference between the Antinomians
and us.

FINIS.

