AN EXERCITATION CONCERNING USURPED POWERS: WHEREIN The Difference betwixt
Civil Authority and Usurpation is stated.

That the Obedience due to lawful Magistrates, is not owing, or payable, to
USVRPED POWERS, is maintained.

The Obligation of OATHS, and other Sanctions to the former, notwithstanding
the Antipolitie of the latter is Asserted.

And the Arguments urged on the contrary part in diverse late Printed Discourses
are Answered.

Being modestly, and inoffensively managed: By one studious of Truth and Peace
both in Church and State.

Tyrannus sine titulo ille est qui imperium ad se, absque legitima ratione
rapie, huic quisque privatus resistat, and si possit e medio tollat.

Vide sacram Theologi per Dudleium Fennetum cap. 13. de pol^t civili page 80.
Si Invasor impetitum arripuerit neque pactio u^la seq^ta sic, aut fides illi
data, sed sola vi retineatur possessio, a quolibet privato jure potest
interfici.

Grotius de jure pacis ac belli. p 86. Luke 21.8. But when ye shall hear of
wars, and commotions (or seditions) be not terrified.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

(...) ^sper, practice, and destroy the mighty and holy people. Dan. 8.24, 25.

This Authors zeal for the obligation of solemn Oaths, Vows, and Covenants may
well be born with; if it be a fault, there is but little (too little) of it in
England. But the good man though he swears to his own hurt, changes not.
Psalm. 15.4.

I will say no more, but Toll lege, take up and read, understand what thou
read; Remember and practice what thou understandest to be the will and mind
of God, and pray for such (whether of the Gentry, Ministry, or others) as
long, and labor for thy information, and reformation, if thou wandrest; and
for thy confirmation, and consolation if thou walk aright. The God of truth
and peace be with thee. Amen.

CHAP. I. Of Usurpation, what it is; a Case propounded, wherein it is not hard
to determine whether Usurpation be chargeable, or not.
USurpation is an intrusion into the Seat of Authority, a presuming to
possess, and manage the place and power thereof without a lawful calling,
right, or title thereunto. A lawful call or title to that rule, and Government
which is supreme (of which I have to speak) is derived, or comes from God,
There is no power but of God, (says the Apostle) the powers that be are
ordained of God: Romans 13.1. It were a sense too large, and not to be defended
to take these words absolutely, and unlimitedly of all power, in regard either
of title, or measure, and use. An unjust power in regard of Measure, or the
stretching of Power beyond its due bounds, or the abuse of it is generally
denied to be of God by way of warrant; and an unjust power in regard of title,
or an Authority set up, and admitted against, or without right, God himself
denies to be of him. They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made
Princes, and I knew it not: says he, Hosea 8.4. Which speech is by the current
of Zanchius, Iunius, Geneva interpret. Pareus, Diodate: Anotations of Divines
in Iocum.
Expositors applied to Jeroboam, and his successors, coming in to be Kings of
Israel in that manner as they did; For although Jeroboam had a prediction (yea,
suppose it a grant) that he should be King of ten Tribes, 1 King. 11.29. yet
the people, at Solomon's death, had no command, or direction from God to cast
off Rehoboams government, and make him their King; it was therefore sedition,
and rebellion in them; and both a manifest breach of the fifth Commandment;
Vide Paraeum in Hos. 8.4.
and of the positive Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. and Jeroboam was faulty in
that, though he had Gods preconcession of a Kingdom over ten Tribes; yet having
had no order from him about the time, manner, or the particular ten which they
should be; he did not seek and tarry for a further direction, and calling from
God; as David did in the like case 2 Samuel 2.1.
. And although the Lord, when it was done, testified that the thing was from
him 1 King. 12.24
; yet we must understand it to have been so by his permissive counsel, and
general concourse, or providence only, as all actions as they are actions,
and all events that are evils of punishment; and as they are such, are, though
the actors among men that bring them be never so sinful in them; but not by
his approbation, appointment, or constitution; the event was from God; but not
the sinful means by which it was accomplished; he ordered the evil carriage of
men to that effect, but he gave them no order for that evil carriage: so that
though, in a sense, it was of him; yet in regard of authorizing, it was
without, and against him, and, in the Apostles sense, none of Gods ordinance.
But of this we shall have occasion to speak again hereafter.

God gives a calling, or invests with a right to Sovereignty, either
immediately, by making and declaring the choice, and designing the person
himself; or mediately, by committing it to the people to elect, and constitute
both their form of Government, and the persons that are to sway it over them,
which he has done to all Nations; yet with a reservation to himself of power
to interpose with his own immediate designation when he pleases: and when he
does not so, the vote of the people is the voice of God, (ordinarily) and they
passing their consent when a Magistrate is to be set over them, that power, so
constituted, is of God, as his ordinance. And this may be the reason why that,
which in one place is called the ordinance of God, is, in another called the
ordinance of man, or an humane creature: 1 Pet. 2.13. By the former way the
Judges and Kings of Israel had, or ought to have had their admission to rule,
Deuteronomy. 17.14.
and that was extraordinary, and peculiar to that people; the latter is the
only ordinary, lawful, and warrantable way of creating a right, and title to
the helm of Magistracy in other Nations. And as in the former the call of God
was sometimes personal, or of one single person; as was that of Moses, Joshua,
Samuel, Saul, and others: and again, sometimes lineall, or of a whole race: as
was that of David and his seed 2 Samuel 7.12.
: So it is in the latter, Prin^ (...) ^in mu^^ appe^unt, nec boni ipsi. nec
boni fine, quos repress^^ tamen mos sive le^ Gentium repagulo duplici, Elect
onis and lu^cessionis, etc. Iusti Lipsi polit: l. 2. c 4.
the peoples constitution of their Governors may either be individual, or
intransient; as in those kingdoms, or States which are called (in a strict
acception) Elective; or it may be continuated, and successive; as in those
Kingdoms, or Principalities which are called hereditary, and possessed by
descent: both ways Princes are by the peoples Election, and Consent; and the
latter is preferred, by many wise Statists, before the former Minore discrimine
sumi principem qu^m quaeti. Tacit. Hist. l. 2
.

I shall not insist on the distinctions, that might be observed touching the
manner of the peoples passing their consent; nor determine which of them is
sufficient, and which not, to make this right or title, whether it must be
antecedent to possession, or may be consequent, express, or tacit:
collective, or representative: absolute, or conditionated: free, or enforced:
revocable, or irrevocable. The consideration of these is not material to the
resolution of what is in question; it suffices that it be yielded, that the
peoples consent is (besides that which is by commission immediately sent and
signed from heaven) the only derivation of a lawful call, or claim to
Government Quirtum ver^ regalis Monarchiae genus est quae iam temporibus
Heroicis voluntate civium, and patriis legibus atque institutis approbata est.
Aristot politic. li 3. number. 8^. Luke 12.13, 14
. When our Savior Christ (who being such an extraordinary person, might have
warrant to do what would have been presumption in any other) was appealed to in
a cause that appertained to the civil Magistrates decision; he refused to deal
in it, with these words, Who made me a Judge, or a divider over you? according
to which words of him, who was the truth, he that may rule, must be placed in
that office by some body, and may not undertake it of himself: no man may take
this honor to himself, or be his own advancer to the Throne; but he must be
installed by another: and what other creature, besides the Nation it self, can
challenge a power to appoint over it its Rulers is not to me imaginable. Angels
are not of this Oeconomie, do not intermeddle in this business, and for other
people, or foreign States they are but in an equality, and have no partnership
in this matter; they have no more to do to impose Governors over their
neighbors, then they have reciprocally over them; and to whichsoever may
attempt it toward the other, by the analogy of our Saviors words, it may be
said, Luke 12.13, 14.
Who made thee a Judge, or Rule maker over me?

A calling from the people, who are to be subject being so necessary, and
essential to a humanely constituted Magistracy; it is easy to discern what
is Usurpation, viz: that which is opposite to it, or privative thereof, which
is a snatching hold of the Scepter, and wresting it out of the hands of those
who are to dispose of it, or have it committed to them: it is ordinarily
termed, a tyranny in regard of title, or without title: The distinction
betwixt lawful Magistrates and Tyrants is thus given by Aristotle: Reges enim
non solum secundum legem, sed etiam volentibus, Tyranni autem invitis imperant.
Aristot. polit. l. 3. number. 87.

Etenim si nolentibus imperatur, regnum protinus esse desinit. Tyrannis
efficitur quae vi dominatur.

Verum regnum est imperium voluntate civium delatum: at si quis vel fraud, vel
violentia dominatur manifest^ Tyrannis est. idem. li. 5. number. 112.


Kings do reign, not only according to the Law, but over them that consent to
them; Tyrants rule over men against their wills. If any govern against the mind
of the governed, it cease to be a Kingdom, and becomes a Tyranny which
rules by force. All lawful power then is founded upon the wills of those over
whom it is set; Contrariwise Usurpation is built upon the will and power of
them that hold the Government; it is a self-created, or self authorized Power,
such was that of Deinde Cinna, Carbo s^se, sine comi^iis consules creabant in
biennium. Chro. Carrion. li. 2.
Cinna, and Carbo, who made themselves Consuls, without any Court-election, in
the time of the Roman sociall war betwixt Sylla and Marius; and that of Ex
Dictatore Consulem se cum P. Servilio ipse facit. Cluver. Hist. li 7. page 235.
Julius Caesar who made himself Consul, together with Publius Servilius; such
was that of the Chaldeans over the Jews, Hab. 1.7. Their judgment and their
dignity shall proceed of themselves, says the Prophet, that is, as Deodate
expounds it, they received no Law, nor assistance from any; their right
consists in their will, and the execution in their power.

Usurpation being defined, we may proceed to distinguish of it according to
several heights, or degrees it is capable of; as 1. It is either where the
Throne is vacant, and undisposed of (which may happen sundry ways, as when a
Commonwealth is new erected, or the possessors of the Government resign, or
are extinct, and none left to lay claim to it) or, where it is full, and
possessed de jure, and the Rulers are only violently extruded, and kept out.

2. Usurpation is either merely in point of Title, and administration of a
received and settled Government; or by way of innovating in the Government it
self; over-turning the constitution of it, and forming it a new.

3. It may come to be acted either from those without, viz: Forreiners, and
strangers to the State; or by Natives, and natural Subjects of the Kingdom.

4. It is done by these, either against the single tie and duty of obedience
and Allegiance owed to the present lawful Authority; or against Allegiance
bound with Oaths and sacred Covenants. All the sorts of each of these
distinctions are direct, and formal usurpations, but the latter of each far
surpasses the other respectively, and a conspiration of them all makes an
Usurpation of a meridian altitude; when a party owing obedience and subjection
to a long continued, and undoubted lawful power, and solemnly sworn to submit
too, and support that Government, shall rise up, and presume to thrust out the
possessors, and invest it self, yea, and not only seize on the Power; but of
its own mind, and will, or, by its force alone, abolish the settled, and set
up a new mould of government; this is Usurpation to the culmen or height of it.

Having thus found out what Usurpation, and what the Zenith of it is; we may
put a case wherein it will be easy to give a Judgment clearly. Suppose a
Nation in America, whose fundamental government is, and has been anciently
and confessedly constituted, and placed in a King, an House of Peers, and an
House of Commons sitting in a collateral, or coordinate rank, in regard of
supremacy of power; the King being the supreme in order (unto whom, in such an
association, Oaths of Allegiance and supremacy are generally sworn) next to him
the Peers as the Upper, and the Commons as the Lower House of Parliament.
Suppose also, the King, according to his place, summoning them, and they
conformably assembling together in Parliament, and he and they personally
concurring to act in the highest affairs of government; in the process whereof
differences arise betwixt the King, and the said two Houses; which grow to that
height, as that he in person departs from them, a war breaks out betwixt them;
the Kingdom is divided by partieship with them, on the one side or the other;
the two Houses continue acting jointly, no: only in managing their military
defense; but in the other public, both religious and civil affairs of the
Kingdom; they petition, remonstrate, and declare for a necessity of an
association, and conjunction of the King and the two Houses as the fundamental
constitution, and government of the Kingdom; they enter into, and prescribe to
the people. Protestations, Vows, Oaths, and Covenants, for the upholding of the
Authority and Power of both so constituted: they professedly fight for that
associated Power, they proclaim them Enemies and Traitors, they prosecute them
with fire and sword, sequestration of estates, and other punishments, that go
about to divide them asunder, or oppose the aforesaid Authority; and all this
they do, and avow as the indispensably necessary discharge of their trust.
Suppose after all this, the Army raised and employed by the said two Houses in
the aforesaid war, confederating in their Leaders (as by the immediate sequel
manifestly appears) with a small party in the Lower House; Remonstrates to that
House (without any address to the other) many high and strange things they
would have done by them, and amongst the rest, that the King be proceeded
against, as for treason, and other capital crimes; in like manner his two
eldest Sons, if they render not themselves within a day to be set them: that it
be declared that the peoples Representatives in the House of Commons shall have
the supreme Power, and all other shall be subject to them; in which demands,
that House not being so obsequious to them as they expect, but standing upon
the collegueship of that Government, which they with their associates, the
King, and the House of Peers are entrusted with; the Army, forthwith, marches
up to the doors, and by force of Arms seizes on, and shuts up in hold one
sort of them; and by a strong guard set at their doors shuts out another,
suffering only a small number of them, and such as please them to sit in the
House. Suppose lastly, this little number, left in the House, shall approve of,
and second these proceedings of this Army; and by their act, or Vote confirm
the seclusion of that greater number of the Members of that House; and, taking
upon them to Act in the name of that House, shall Enact or declare themselves
to be the only Supreme Authority in the Nation, and by that pretended
solitariness, and supremacy of power shall take away, and abolish the other
House of Parliament, destroy the life of the King, deny, and disanull the Title
of his Heirs, and Successors, to the Crown and Kingdom; abolish the office of
a King, and ordain and govern solitarily over the people, as their only
supreme Power, and require their obedience, and subjection as to such. The
quaere, in this case thus propounded is, whether this said party, as thus
acting, and as to this latitude of Authority, be usurpers, yea, or no? whether
this their removing others from the Seat of Supreme Power, and assuming it
peculiarly to themselves, be, or be not Usurpation (as Usurpation has been
before prescribed) and that to the very apex, or highest pinnacle of it; yea,
whether they be, or be not guilty of a double Usurpation?

First, in usurping the name and Authority of that House. It may happily be said
for this. 1. That possibly they may make a quorum, or as many in number as are
required to act. R: But are they not supposed to be under actual and present
force, which has been, without contradiction by any, adjudged a ground of
nullity to Parliamentary proceedings. For though all are not required to be
present, yet the House must be free for all to come to, that their acts may be
free and authorative.

2ly, That perhaps they may be most willing, voluntary, and free in their acts,
and the force that has taken away others may be no force but a security to
them, being of the same principles, apprehensions, and designs with them. R:
But though they as men may be free, yet taking upon them the name of the House,
are they free as an House? the House includes virtually every Member of it,
many whereof being violently excluded by those that guard the meeting place,
how free soever those persons are that sit, how can the House be said to be
free? nay, does not their voluntarinesse and free compliance make the
Usurpation compleater? Could they be said to be enforced to declard, and act
such things, we might by a favorable interpretation, only judge their Acts to
be null; but when their proceedings flow from their own wills, and they so
concur to the exclusion of others more then themselves from the exercise of the
power they with them are entrusted with, and assume to themselves a power,
never confirmed on them by the people, but merely of their own creation, how
can this be less then Usurpation to the life?

2ly, In usurping (in the name of that House) the sole supremacy of Power in
the Nation. It will be pleaded: perhaps, that the House of Commons, in the
supposed case, is the only Representative of the people, to whom alone the
Nation has committed the Supreme Power. R: 1. That House is not a
Representative of the whole Nation, but only of the Commons, which though the
bulk, and far more numerous part; yet cannot stand for the whole in choosing a
Representative, but only for themselves. 2. If it could be made good, that to
that House, the whole Nation, in the original constitution of Government, had
committed the sole Power; the quaere would easily be cast in the negative: but
how will that be proved? The case, at it is put, presupposes Antiquity, and
by past practice: and the actings of the present House of Commons, until
brought under force, to proclaim the quite contrary. 3. If nothing, ab origin,
can be showed for that, did the King that summoned this Parliament, or the
People that chose this House of Commons, supposed in the Case, pass over any
such prerogative to them de novo; If either of them did, let us hear how. 4. It
is too gross an absurdity to be charged upon the supposed present, and all
former Representatives; that being intrustsed by the people with the sole
Supremacy, they have of themselves associated to them the King, and the House
of Peers, it being beyond the power of the constituted, and only in the
Constitutors to make such an alteration in the fundamental Constitution; as
Representatives cannot make Representatives or Proxies, so can they not take in
Associates, or advance others, not empowered by them that empowered them into a
Collegueship with them. I leave it therefore to every Reader to determine the
Case, and pass Judgment. Whether the sole supreme Power, in the presupposed
party, be derived to them legitimately, or be not a Self-created power, and so
a mere Usurpation, and that of the fullest dimension; being against a lawfully
settled Government, in prejudice both of the just Magistrates and the people:
and in contradiction to both the single tie of Subjects Allegiance to
Sovereignty, and the sacred sanction of Vows, Oaths, and Religious Covenants.

CHAP. II. Of yielding obedience to a Power usurped as abovesaid. That it is
not lawful to give up ones self to the Allegiance of such a Power.
COncerning Obedience to an usurped Authority, I meet with two opinions, which
I shall severally examine. 1. Is of those who hold obedience as due, and
necessary; and that in as full a manner to such, as it is to the lawfullest
Power. This is held, and argued for in a Tract, entitled, The lawfulness of
obeying the present Government: as also in A Discourse, wherein is examined,
what is particularly lawful, etc. By Ant: Ashcam Gent: See in his 2d. Part.
cap: 9. Although indeed they both propound their opinion in the Title of their
Discourse for obedience as lawful; yet, in the prosecution, they plead for it
in that fullness of latitude as due, and necessary. This their Tenent they
strive to maintain in relation to the present State of England. I shall deal
with it in reference to the case above proposed, and in thesi: 2. Is of those
who, reserving their obedience as due and devoted to the lawful Power,
supposed to be still existent; do yet conceive they may submit and act under a
usurped Power for the time, and during the intervall of its prevalency.

I begin with the former; wherein it is asserted by one of the foresaid Authors
A Discourse, wherein is examined. etc. by Ant: Ashcam Gent: Part. 2. Chap. 9.
pa. 84.
, (and the other comes not short of him in the sense and current of his
Discourse) That upon the issue of a war, and the Expulsion of a just party, a
man may lawfully give up himself to the final Allegiance of the unjust party.
Against this Position must my Judgment stand, which dictates to me that I owe
no obedience to an Usurper; and to yield up my self in obedience or Allegiance
unto Usurpers, who have no other title but their usurpation, is unjustifiable,
and unlawful, and that upon these grounds.

1. I cannot (if I would) yield up my self in obedience to him that has no
authority over me; take him as a Usurper, and my Allegiance is incompetible to
him; obedience and authority; Magistrate, and Subject, are terms of relation,
and do Se mutuo ponere and tollere: they are inseparable from one another; if
there be no Magistracy in him, there can be no obedience properly, and formally
in me to him. I may (either warrantably or unwarrantably) do an act possibly
which he commands, but that cannot be truly and properly said to be an act of
obedience to him: his authority is null, of no reality Tyrannus absque t^tulo,
qui est invasor, quilibet privatus potest, debet e medio tollere: neque enim
ille Rex est, sed privata persona, etc. Alsted. Theol. Cas cap. 17. Regul 8.
He is no Magistrate, but a private person; my fellow Subject, (if one of the
Nation) or a forreiner to me; his commanding over me and others is, as if a
private Soldier should take upon him to give orders to his Company, or an
inferior Officer to an Army; or a servant should offer to rule over his fellow
servants.

In saying he is a usurper, you say enough for the nullifying of his Authority,
and my obedience; whatever strength he may have to compel, he has no
Authority to command me: He is a Magistrate that has the Subjects committed to
his charge and care, say the Leyden Divines Magistratus subditos fidei, ac
curae suae commissos tanquam Dei minister guber. not. S^nops. pur. Theol
disput. 50. these. 3.
in their Synopsis, and principality, Lypsius Principatus est imperium moribus
aut legibus delatum susceptum, gestumque parentium bono. Just. Lyps. polit. li.
2. c. 3.
defines to be, A government delivered by Custom, or Law, and constitution to
him that sustains it; and undertaken and managed by him for the good of the
Subjects. Another defines a Magistrate to be Magistratus est publica persona
successione, sort, aut suffragio electa, etc Io: Can^ Sphaera, Cin l. 4. cap.
15.
A public person, elected by succession, lot, or suffrage; which has the
right and power of Consultation, Judgment, and Command.

2. I may not (if I could) yield up my self as a Subject to the Usurper; in so
doing, I should take away the right of the lawful Magistrate which he has
over me, and injure him in the allegiance which I stand tied in to him, and he
still retains the claim of at my hands. The Magistrate is (in the case in
hand) granted to be in being; he is but deprived of possession and enjoyment,
not of property or title; he is yet standing in the relation of a Magistrate to
me; and is only outed of his station perforce. The obedience of a Subject is
not so arbitrary, or loose a thing, as that I may place and remove it at
pleasure, or as affairs go; Romans 13.7.
but it is a debt which I must render to him unto whom it is due. Neither is
Sovereignty so common, ambulatory, or prostitute a matter, as that its title
cease unto him that is violently extruded, or dispossessed of it, and
becomes any ones that by force captivates it to himself; the expulsed
Magistrate still standing upon his claim and right, and the power in possession
having no title but his injurious and forcible entrance; the Subject is not
disobliged from him that is expelled, nor at his choice to transfer his
obedience to another, neither can the violent intruder challenge it. But in
respect of the consequence of that which I here assert as unto resolution in
this case, and for that I find the Gentleman, in the aforementioned Discourse
Discourse of Ant: Ashcam part. 2. ca 9. page 88.
positively delivering the direct contrary to it; and that which is (as I
think) very strange doctrine both in Christianity and politiques, viz: That we
are bound to own Princes so long us it pleases God to give them power to
command us; and when we see others possessed of their Powers, Part. 1. Chap. 5
page 22, 23. Part. 2. cap 9. page 90.
we may then say, that the King of kings has changed our Vice-royes; And
further, that the point of right is a thing always doubtful; -- possession
generally is the strongest title that Princes have. And if possession was
really the truest evidence to us of their (to wit, the expelled Princes)
rights, then it is equitable to follow it still, though it be perhaps in a
person of more injustice then they were. And the other book, I before cited,
(viz: The lawfulness of obeying the present Government) maintains the same
thing (both whose arguments, for what they say, I shall take notice of, when I
have laid down mine own sense and Reasons) I shall therefore here labor to
make good these two things: 1. That mere forcible extrusion deprives not any
lawful Magistrate of his right and title to supreme Power. 2. That violent
possession gives no right to the Seat of Authority; and consequently the
Subjects allegiance is not turned about by the changes of powerful possession,
and dispossession.

1. Forcible extrusion or dispossession divests not of Dominion, that the state
of the Subjects allegiancec should be altered by it.

First, if the vindication or recovery of a Princes, or peoples right of
Dominion, out of which he, or they are ejected, or excluded be a justifiable
ground for his, their, and others in their behalf leavying and waging war, and
prosecuting with the sword those that withstand the said recovery; then the
right of him that is expulsed by force is not cancelled, or disanulled. The
reason of this consequence is of it self evident, for nothing can be the ground
of a war but a just and real title, either to be defended, or recovered; but I
assume, the recovery or redemption of a Princes or peoples right to a Kingdom
withheld, or wrested from him or them, is a just ground of drawing the Sword,
and commencing a war. This is proved (if it needs any proof) by the war of
the Judges and people of Israel, against the Kings and Nations that at several
times invaded and ruled over them; against whom they rose up, and rescued
themselves, and the Dominion of their Land from them: the story of which acts,
we have in the book of Judges, and by the wars of Samuel and Saul against the
Philistines recorded in the 1. Book of Samuel: as also by David's warlike
undertaking against, and suppression of Absalom, who had carried away all
Israel after him, into a Rebellion against David, and expulsed him out of the
Land, 2 Samuel 15. etc. and 19.9. In like manner by Jehoiada's and the peoples
rising in Arms against Athalia, the usurping Queen, 1 Macca. chap. 1. etc.
in the right of Joash; and their suppressing, and destroying her, and
enthroning him by force of Arms. 2 King. 11. And by the wars of the Maccabees
against Antiochus, Epiphanes, and his successors. Joseph. de Bell: Iudaic. lib.
1. cap. 1. Cron. Carrion. lib. 2.
And the many undoubtedly lawful wars of other Princes and States in such
causes as these, which to insist on is superfluous in so clear a matter.

Secondly, If right and title to Sovereignty be not built upon possession, but
upon the Law of the Land, or other consent of the people, then it is not lost
by dispossession; this consequence is founded upon that which a learned Statist
Considerations touching a war with Spain, written by Francis Lo: Ve^ulam,
etc. pa. 3d.
says, Is a received maxim almost unshaken, and infallible, Nihil magis
naturae consentaneum est, quam ut iisdem modis res dissolvantur quibus
constituantur: There is nothing more agreeable to nature, then that things
should be disolved by the same means they are constituted. From which he
infers, very pertinently to our case in hand, That if the part of the people,
or Estate be somewhat in the Election, you cannot make them nulloes or ciphers
in the prorivation or translation. But the right and title of Sovereignty is
not built upon possession, (which the proof of the latter Position will clear)
but upon the peoples consent, which has gone for so current an axiom,
especially of late, that it will certainly pass without contradiction.

Thirdly, If a private property be not lost by loss of possession, neither (or
rather much less) can such a public property be lost by that means; there
can be no such difference made betwixt them as to enervate this consequence,
and however, who sees not the incongruitie of this, that that which is the
conservatory and protection of a private man's property, should be of a so much
more slipperie tenure then it; but a private property is not lost by
dispossession, if it were, for what use serves the Law, or Magistracy? one
main end of which has been, to vindicate the Subjects right from usurpation,
or what call you property? But he that either has any, or grants such a
thing to be as property, will let this assumption pass.

Fourthly, If violent extrusion take away a Sovereigns right, then rebellion
where it prospers and prevails is no treason; for there can be no treason, or
other crime imputed as against the Crown, dignity, or authority of them, whose
right therein is extinct and null; so that they are only (according to this
opinion) traitors or rebels, that rise up in Arms, and rebellion against the
lawful Power, and do not succeed and speed according to their desires. By this
account, treason and rebellion shall consist, not in the maliciousness of the
intent or attempt; but in the misfortune of success, or impotency of the
prosecution of it.

Fifthly, If force dissolve Magistracy; then that prohibition of resistance
under pain of damnation: Romans 13.2. is in vain, in that it concerns only them
that cannot resist effectually, and is no more then if he had said, resist not
ye that want power to do it, lest if ye do, ye incur damnation: for they that
have power, and please to use it to the deposing of the Magistrate, being that
in so doing they put an end to his right, how can guilt remain on them?

2. Violent intrusion into, and possession of the Seat of Authority gives no
right to it; and consequently neither draws allegiance after it, nor evacuates
it in relation to another.

First, an unjust action cannot produce, or create a right. Non est aequum ut
ex actu injusto, ius sibi quis acquirat D. Sand. de Iuramenti oblig. Praelect.
6. Sect. 4.
Moral good, and evil are at such distance, that the one cannot be the cause,
the other the effect; but violent intrusion into Authority is an unjust action:
Luke 12.14. Man who made me a Judge, etc. and that whether it be by one that
should be a Subject to that power, Romans 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists,
etc. ver. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, etc. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. or
by a Forreiner, Judge. 11.12.27. 2 Chronicles. 20.10.

2ly, If violent occupation made a right; O pubes domitura Deos,
quodcunquaevidetis pugnando dabitur: praestat victoria mundum. Cl. Claudiani
Giganto machia.
then it were lawful for any, that could make a sufficient strength for it, to
rise up in Arms, invade, and seize on any Kingdom or Territory, he can prevail
over; yea to kill and destroy men and Countries for Empire and Dominion, as
Cicero scribens de officiis tertio libro semper Caesarem in ore habuisse
Euripidis versus, quos sic ipse convertit: nam si violandum est ius regnanti
gratia violandum est. aliis rebus pietatem colas Sucton. in lul. Caes.
Caesar inclined to hold; for that which is of it self the way and means to
place a man in a lawful estate, or calling, and makes him a lawful possessor
of it, must needs be lawful: but it cannot be held lawful for any, that can
find power, and advantage, to invade Crowns and Countries, as is evident by
the proof of the Assumption of the preceding Argument.

3ly, If possession by power give a title; then its unlawful for an oppressed
Prince, or people to raise war, or use any other means to expel an Invader,
or remove such as have come in, and hold merely by force; for its unlawful to
resist, or fight against a just Magistrate, Rom 13.1, 2. But it is lawful for
an oppressed Prince or people, by Arms, or otherwise to free themselves from a
forcible Usurper, as manifestly appears by those presidents given in the
proof of the assumption of the first argument for the former Proposition, to
wit, the wars of Israel in the book of Judges, and 1. of Samuel, of David,
Jehoiadah, and the Maccabees, and by the known Law and practice of all Nations,
and consent of all Divines, and Christians, who with one vote allow defensive
and recuperative Arms, excepting the Anabaptists, and some ancient Heretics of
their stamp.

4ly, All force ought to presuppose a right in that about which it is
conversant; whether for the defense or recovery of its wars (says Francis Lord
Verulam, Considerations touching a war with Spain. pa. 2d.
etc.) (I speak not of ambitious predatorie wars) are suits of appeal to the
tribunal of Gods justice, when there are no superiors on earth to determine
the cause, and they are as civil Pleas, either Plaints or Defenses: Force
therefore cannot create a right, seeing it is to follow it, and both give it
the precedencie in time, and own it as its groundwork; Add to this, that the
Sword is committed to the Magistrate ( and to him alone, says Peter Martyr
Gladius (ut ad Romanos habetur) potestatibus duntaxat est datus. Loc. commun.
^l^ss. 4. ca. 20. loc. 12.
) as its subject or owner; so that the Magistrate is before it, not made by it.
The Sword makes not the Magistrate, (that is, it is not its principle of
Generation,) but the Magistrate a warranto authorizeth the Sword; the sword may
make for his conservation, but not for his Creation.

5ly, If force give a title (renitente populo) then that late so much
decantated Aphorism, All Power (to wit, Authority) is from the People, must be
called in again; yea all Donations, Elections, Compacts and Covenants betwixt
Prince and people are void, and null businesses. A third person that can get
hold or power, and lists to usurp, may dissolve and evacuate them all; yea the
Prince that comes in by them, when once he has possession of the Power, holds
by his power, and not by them, and can no longer, nor further look to retain
his right to Authority then he can enforce it; and what Turkish and tyrannical
practices does this doctrine put him upon of necessity, if he will sit fast.

Mr. Ashcam part. 1. ca. 2. Sect. 4.
6ly, No man naturally is more a Magistrate then another: Magistracy being in
truth not a natural, but a civil relation; as is that of husband and wife,
master and servant: it must therefore be founded on some mutual and reciprocal
act, or agreement of both parties, to wit, Rulers and Subjects; and cannot
result out of the action of one alone of them, nor can neither party be merely
passive, in contracting such a relation. A mutual civil obligation cannot
arise but of the joint or interchangeable concurrance of both.

7ly, Power and right, as also possession and right, are separable, as all
experience demonstrates; so it was in the controversy betwixt David and
Absalom, and so it frequently happens to be: success and victory does not
seldom follow the wrong party; and he would be thought irrational amongst all
men, wheresoever in the world, but where reason it self is brought under
tyranny, that should say, success is the only Arbitrator of Controversies of
right, and is ever infallible.

8ly, Strength and Authority also are two distinct and separable things, and
rarely meet in the same subject, but where either bruitishnesse, or all
miseries prevail; man has dominion given him over the beasts, many whereof are
(and were by creation) stronger then he; What is a Generals natural strength to
that of the Army over which he commands? What is a Kings, or a Counsels
personal strength to that of the body of the people over which it sways? yea
what is the hand in the natural body to all the members under its government,
in point of force? We see a small board or two, put in the place of a rudder,
guides the whole vessel. Amongst some beasts indeed the strongest rules; but
amongst men it is not regularly so: yea, among some unreasonable Animals, not
force, but fitness designed by Election obtains the rule. Bees, they say,
choose their king, of whom Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11. Chap. 17.
Pliny observes, that either he has no sting, or Nature has denied him the
use of it; being only armed with majesty. And Aristotle says, Arist.
politic. lib. 1. number. 8. Naturali enim jure meritoque fit ut qui provida mente
sagacique fuerir, is imperet, ac dominatur, qui autem corporis viribus and
lacertis haec ipsa obire possit, is contra subjiciatur, and serviat.
It is by a kind of natural equity and merit, that he that is of a sage and
discreet understanding should rule; on the other hand he should obey, and be in
subjection, that has more strength of body, and Arms to perform service.

9ly, Where there is no title but power, there can be no rule for Government
but power and will: only that which gives right to Magistracy must set bounds
to it; how can they be tied to Laws, in exercising Government, that are tied to
none in coming by it? If the basis or bottom of Government be power, that must
also be the measure of it; Nec quisquam imperium flagitio quaesitum bonis
arti^us exercuit. Tacit. Histor. 1.
so that a Magistrate, so holding, is confined to no justice, or Law;
restrained from no violence, or sacrilege that his Power may extend to. That
power, against whose forcible intrusion the Laws, and Constitutions made by
Prince and people, for the settling of the Crown or Sovereign rule, are of no
validity, can reasonably have no obligation upon it from any other Laws made by
the same parties; Magistratus est lex animata. P. Martyr.
the Authority that makes the Law is the Soul that quickens it; the Law springs
from Authority, as the act does from its habit or principle; so that grant, or
prostitute Authority to the Sword as its right, and you subvert all settled
Laws, whether fundamental or superstructory; and this all experience, as well
as reason, dictates; for where, or in what Age did mere force assume the Empire
without a lawless arbitrarinesse challenged to it self?

10ly, If you yield the Sword such a right where it can be master in the
public or civil State; why should it not have the same interest in the
private, domestical, and personal? So that pirates, thieves, and robbers, may
justly claim a right to that which they can lay their hands on, and be
accountable to none for their spoil and rapine.

(...).
11ly, Whereas the Apostle to the Romans Chap. 13.2. forbids resistance (or
contraordination) to the lawful power ordained of God, and that upon pain of
damnation to be received by him that does it, if force give a right to that
power; his action, that resists with victory, shall be justifiable, and the
resister shall gain a Crown instead of receiving damnation; and none shall fall
under the guilt and penalty of resistance, but he that offers to resist, and
cannot make it good. The sense then which this Position puts upon this text is
catachresticall, and it glosseth the words so, as to be an encouragement to
resist the power, for he that resists the power prosperously (according to
it) possesses justly that ordinance of God, and in truth purchases to himself
(not damnation, but) domination.

Having thus, I hope, sufficiently cleared the duty of Allegiance to be not the
violent intruders, but the oppressed and violently extruded Magistrates; I
shall proceed to other Reasons against Subjects giving up themselves to the
obedience of a usurping party.

3. If I should do that, I should yield assistance to the Usurper in his wrong
doing, and usurpation; and so become a partaker of his sin: obedience to one,
as the supreme Magistrate, is a comprehensive thing, and includes many duties
toward him at a power, viz: Receiving Commission from him for offices, or acts
otherwise not competible to me; maintaining and defending him in his power by
pay, counsel, intelligence, Arms, and prayers; all which I am bound to yield
the Usurper, to my power, if I resign mine allegiance up to him: and how shall
I do these things, and not 1. support, and have communion with him in his
wickedness. 2. Combine against, betray, and resist the right of the injuriously
dethroned Magistrate. 3. And make my self incapable of obedience, or being a
Subject to the lawful Power hereafter.

4. It were a public wrong to the Nation I am a member of so to bestow mine
allegiance; were I and the Country free from all tie of subjection (in the
presupposed Case) to the expulsed Magistrate; yet I could not lawfully make
such a private bargain of my allegiance, its the part and duty of a particular
person in a Nation (that is joined together as one body politic or
Commonwealth) not to choose his head, or supreme Governor by his single
election, or vote, but, when a new Magistracy is to be erected, or Magistrate
advanced, to attend the common and general vote of the people, or body
politic he is of; solitarily, or with a small party to alter the state and
posture of my public allegiance (in this case) would be sedition, and faction;
the current of the people or community I am of is to be followed, at least
where they justly dispose of the Sovereignty over them. It was in it self a
loyal, and right resolution (had it been in such a case as this, and not
misapplyed) which Hushai expressed, Nay, but whom the Lord and this people, and
all the men of Israel choose; his will I be, and him will I follow; It would be
to me (I confess) a difficult case, and harder then I will here undertake to
resolve, if the body of the Kingdom (in the case in hand) should either
collectively, or representatively conspire; notwithstanding their oaths, vows,
and Covenants, to abrogate the ancient Sovereign Power, and to set up the
Usurpers; but that is not the present case, here is no general consent of the
Kingdom presupposed, or pleaded for in behalf of the Usurper; the dispute is
about obedience to mere Usurpation. And in this state of things, to leave every
man free, to make over his allegiance by himself, is to open a door to more
divisions then ever yet were in any Age, or Nation, and would confound all, not
an heptarchy; but a chiliarchy, 1 Samuel 10.27. 2 Samuel 19.41.20.1.
or myriarchy might follow. When Saul had a general vote of the people to be
King, they were children of Belial that refused him; and at David's re-investing
after Absoloms treason, and fall, the men of Israel challenged them of Judah
for going about to restore the King without them; the far greater part of the
Kingdom, and that man of Belial, Sheba, the son of Bichri, was justly pursued
with the sword unto death, for blowing a trumpet of defection from David, when
they both had consented to re-advance him.

5. But there is a bar yet behind, of as main a strength as any yet stood on,
to keep back such a submittance to the Usurper, and that is the Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, and Covenants presupposed above to be taken by the people, for
their owning, obeying and defending the power or Magistracy displaced, and in
opposition to whose right the Usurper comes and continues in.

I have hitherto discussed the question in a case without reflection upon any
particular Kingdom, or real Subject; and so I shall do still, only I shall
borrow leave, in the prosecution of this Argument, to presuppose, in the
aforesaid Case, the Oaths and Covenant were the same that have been taken in
this Kingdom of England. The Author of the book called, The lawfulness of
obeying the present Government, in his 11. page moves an inquiry thus: It were
good to consider whether there be any clause in any Oath, or Covenant, which,
in a fair and common sense, forbid obedience to the Commands of the present
Government, and Authority: and proceeding, he only makes enquiry into one
clause of the Oath of Allegiance, which he strives to bow to his sense, and
passes by all besides. I shall speak to what he says on that clause anon; and
shall here only interrogate, or propound by way of quaere, concerning diverse
clauses in the Oaths, Protestations, Vows and Covenants.

First, concerning the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, whereas in the
former, it is sworn, I shall bear faith, and true Allegiance to his Majesty,
his Heirs, and Successors: and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all conspiracies, and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against his, or their persons, their Crown, or dignity. And in the latter, I
shall bear faith, and true allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs, and
lawful Successors: and, to my power, shall assist, and defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminencies, and Authorities granted to the
Kings Highness, his Heirs, and Successors; or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. First, do not these Oaths bind, whomsoever has
taken them, clearly, plainly, and in terminis to an Allegiance, over-living his
Majesty's person, and pitched upon his Heirs and Successors; so that he is not
tree from the Oaths at his Majesty's decease, or then left at random to pay
his allegiance to whom he will choose? 2. Do they not intend, by His Majesty's
Heirs and Successors, the same persons, joining them together with the
copulative (and) and not using the discretive (or) and the former Oath twice
comprizing both in the following clauses under the same term or pronoune, (
viz: them, theirs) so that, according to these Oaths, His Heirs, are of right
his successors, and none can be his Successor, (whilst he has an Heir, and
longer the Oath lasts not) but his Heir; and if any conspiracy or attempt
should be made to prevent his Heir from being and continuing his successor, or
to make any one his successor that is not his heir, (if he has one) is not the
Subject sworn, by virtue of this Oath, to continue his allegiance to his Heir
as the right successor, and to defend him in that his right to his uttermost?
3. And does not the term (lawful) annexed to Successors (in the Oath of
Supremacy) manifestly exclude all cavil of a distinction betwixt Heirs and
successors; the word (lawful) (whether you interpret it of legitimation of
birth, or proximity of succession in regard of line, according to the Law of
the Land, entailing the Crown upon his Majesty's issue; or rather both the
latter including the former, restraining successors from meaning any other then
his heirs? 4. And do not both these Oaths bind the swearer to assist and
defend to his uttermost power, against all attempts, Monarchy, or the Kingly
Office, and Government (in the race of his Majesty) clearly expressed by many
terms, to wit, Their Crown or dignity, all jurisdictions, privileges,
preheminences, and Authorities, granted to the Kings Highness, his heirs, and
successors, or united, and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. How
then can he yield obedience to them that are not his heirs, nor lawful
successors, nor do so much as wear his Crown, or sway the Regal Scepter? How
can he not oppose, and withstand them in the assistance and defense of the
right of his Majesty's heirs and lawful successors?

2. Concerning the Vow and Protestation of the 5. of May, 1641. and the Solemn
League and Covenant. 1. How can any that has taken the said Protestation
according to it, maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion, expressed in
the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish
innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine; and yet yield
obedience to an usurping authority, coming in, and holding in derogation of,
and opposition to the lawful Prince; when as the public doctrine of that
Church (laid down in the 2. Tome of Homilies, and the last Homily thereof
approved of by the 35. Article of Religion) fully and flatly refuteth, and
condemns any Subjects removing, or disposing their Prince, upon any pretense
whatsoever?

2ly, How can any man according to the Protestation, maintain and defend, the
power and privileges of Parliament, and according to the Covenant preserve the
rights and privileges of Parliament; and yet yield obedience to a small party
of one of the Houses of Parliament, as the Supreme Power, the said party
excluding the rest of that House, and the other House wholly; and deposing the
lawful Prince, and abolishing the Office of the King, whose presence,
personal, or legal, and political, has been declared inseparable from the
Parliament, and joining with an Army, that with force has demanded, and
carried on these things?

3. How can be, according to the Protestation, maintain and defend the lawful
rights, and liberties of the Subject; and, according to the Covenant, preserve
the liberties of the Kingdom; and yet obey, and own a merely usurped power.
Whereas the most fundamental civil Liberty of a Kingdom, and Subjects is to
have a Government over them, set up by the constitution, or consent of the
people; not obtruded on them by those, who of their own will and power, without
any calling from them, assume it to themselves?

4. How can he, according to the Covenant, preserve and defend the Kings
Majesty's Person, and Authority, etc. and yet yield obedience to those
usurpers, who, after his death, cast down his Authority, and place themselves
instead thereof as the Supreme Power; whereas his Authority, in the plain
intention of the Covenant, is to be preserved and defended beyond the term of
his life, and in his posterity; as it appears from this clause compared with
those words in the preface, Having before our eyes the glory of God, -- the
honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his posterity?

5. Lastly, how does he, according to the Protestation, to his power, and as
far as lawfully he may, oppose, and by all good ways, and means endeavor to
bring to condign punishment all such as shall either by force, practice,
counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of
any thing in this present Protestation contained; and, according to the
Covenant, not suffer himself directly, or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion, or terror to be divided, or withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction; whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give himself to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdom, and honor
of the King, but, all the days of his life, zealously, and constantly continue
therein against all opposition, and promote the same, according to his power,
against all lets and impediments whatsoever, that yields allegiance, and
obedience to a party standing, and leading all those that agree to obey them in
so palpable contradiction, and opposition to some material points, and
concernments of Religion, diverse most fundamental rights of the Parliament and
people, and all the Authority and whole being of the King, contained and
covenanted for, in the aforesaid Protestation and Covenant respectively.

CHAP. III. The question discussed, Whether submission to, and acting under a
usurped Power for the time, be lawful, with a reservation of Allegiance to the
lawful Power supposed to be expulsed.
I Now come to enquire into the other opinion before mentioned, viz: That one
may submit, and act under a usurped Power, for the time, and during the
intervall of its prevalency; with reservation of allegiance, as due and
cordially devoted to the lawful Power expulsed. And about this we shall not
insist long, because we find not much contestation or difficulty.

In regard of the justnes, and necessity of some things which may be the
subject, or matter of the Usurpers command, and the Arbitrarinesse of others,
and the lawfulness of either, not depending upon the command or warrant of a
superior, but resulting out of the nature of the action it self; so that a
private man might do it, were there no Magistrate to command it, or no command
from the Magistrate for it. We must needs grant, there are things which may be
done upon the Usurpers command or injunction, (though not because or by virtue
of it) for the command of him that unwarrantably assumeth power, cannot, by it
self, make that unlawful which were lawful if that were not. For instance,
the performance of acts of common equity, charity, order, public utility, and
self-preservation is requisite: suppose it be in concurrence with a Usurpers
command, and in thus doing we do materially, but not formally obey him; the
ground of acting, in such things, being not at all any relation, or principle
of subjection to him; but conscience of obedience to the will of God, and due
respect to others, and our own safety, and good. Under this sort of actions I
comprehend:

1. Taking up Arms for the preservation of our selves and the Country against
a common Enemy, upon the Usurpers summons; the which we might do of our selves,
were there no Authority; or if a just Authority were in being, yet if it could
not, or did not, maturely enough call us forth to it.

2. Payment of taxes, and bearing other impositions for the usurping Power,
where, and while we are under his compulsive power, because such contributions
may, and will be taken whether I will pay them or not; and I yield them under
his enforcement, as a ransom for my life, or liberty, or somewhat else that is
better to me then the payment; and consequently I am to choose the parting with
it as the less evil, rather then with that which is better, which to loose is
to incur a greater evil for the avoidance of a less. In this point Mr.
Ascham, the before named Author, (Part. 2. Chap. 1. page 35.) determines well
(had he not contradicted (as I understand him) that he delivers in this and the
next Chap. with that assertion of his part. 1. cap. 6. page 25.) distinguishing
rightly betwixt that which cannot be had, nor the value of it, unless I
actually give it; and that which may be taken whether I contribute it or no. Of
this latter kind is paying of Taxes in this case; Nolite igitur fortunam in
culpam convertere; neque regis injuriam hujus crimen putare; nec consilium ex
necessitate, nec voluntatem ex v^ interpretari. Cicero Orat. 39. pro C. Rabino
postumo. So he defends Posthumus his changing his Roman gown for a cloak at
Alexandria as compelled by K: Ptolomie.
herein I am but morally passive, as a man that is fallen into the hands of a
pack of bloody thieves; and, being demanded it, takes his purse out of his
pocket, and delivers it to them, though with his own hand (says that Author)
he puts his purse into their hands, yet the Law calls not that a gift, nor
excuses the thief for taking it, but all contrary. Or a man, apprehended by a
party of the invading Enemies, or Usurpers Army, walks or rides along with them
to their muster or battle, when as he cannot escape them, and otherwise they
would draw him. But it is commonly objected thus. Obj. This payment or other
charge is taken, and will be used to an evil use as to maintain Usurpation. R:
But that is beyond my deliberation, not in my power to prevent; it will not be
avoided by putting them to force it from me, but rather more gain will accrue
to them, and damage to me, if I stand out; my denying will be made an occasion
by them to take more: this case is like that of entering into a Covenant with
those that in covenanting we know before hand will swear by a false god,
wherein, Divines Augustinus ad publicolam. Epist. 15 4. Genesis 21.31.31.31.
resolve, the party swearing by the true God participateth not in his sin that
swears by a false one, in as much as he communicates with him in the Covenant,
not in the oath taken on his part, and provides thereby for his necessary
security; and thus did Abraham, and Jacob, in their respective Covenants with
Abimelech and Laban.

3. Complaining, petitioning, or going to Law before the Magistrates or Courts
authorized by the Usurpers. (Provided, you give not the Usurpers, to whom you
petition, such Titles as you give to the lawful Magistrate.) In thus doing, I
seek my necessary self preservation; neither do I yield, Excusantur a peccato
inducendi tyrannum ad actum, and opus illicitum petentes ab illo iustitiam,
quia non petunt actum illicitum, sed justitiam illius actus illiciti pre
interpretandae sunt petitiones tam iustitiae quam honestae gratiae quae
esterantur Tyrannis, scilicer si vis, seu ex quo vis detinere, and exercere hoc
deminium, utere illo just, utere honest, utere pie, utere ad utilitatem
publicam, and privatorum, prout deceret dominium nec intendunt, nec petunt
actum usurpatum, sed qualitatem sanctam inactu usurpato exercendo. Ca^etan
summula, Tit. Remp. tyrannice, etc.
or ascribe to them to whom I have recourse any just power of judicature, or
participate in their sin of usurping it; only I acknowledge they have might
and ability in their hand to right me; which, though they ought not to assume,
yet I may take the benefit of their unjust use of it; as a poor man may
receive relief at the hands of him that has gotten those goods he distributeth
unjustly; and I may receive my money, with a good conscience, from the hands of
a thief that is willing to return it to me, though he took it by robbery, from
another thief that robbed me of it; and if the party, with whom I have a
controversy for my right, will agree to refer the matter, betwixt us, to a
private person as an Arbitrator, and stand to his arbitrament; that is a
lawful means of coming by my own, though by his help, and award that has not
claim of Authority over me; my submitting therefore my private right to the
judgment of an usurping Magistracy, is no placing or owning a public power of
judicature to be in him. It has been ordinary (and there is no doubt of the
lawfulness of it) for a Soldier to ask quarter, a prisoner liberty, a man his
plundered goods of his Enemy: yet in all this there is no concession of a
legal power in that Enemy to be a Judge over the said Petitioners, either in
case of life, goods, or liberty; only in the form of address to the Usurper,
we had need be cautelous that such a style be not used as will be a plain
concession of his title to the power which he usurps.

But, in granting liberty of concurrence with some commands of an usurped
Authority, we neither yield any obedience at all to be due, or performable to
it; nor can we allow a correspondence with it in diverse things, and therefore
we are to put a difference.

First, betwixt things that are in themselves necessary, and those that are of
a middle or an indifferent nature in themselves considered. In the latter,
though, in some cases, I may act upon the Usurpers injunction; as our Savior
paid tribute where he was not bound to it, to avoid scandal; yet I must be
cautious, 1. of owning, justifying, or upholding the usurpation, or injustice
of the party commanding, the very appearance whereof I must as much as I can
avoid. So did our Savior, in paying the tribute gatherers their demand, by
declaring his freedom, and the consideration upon which he paid, viz: not the
equity of the demand, but his willingness to prevent scandal. And therefore
in the observing of a duty of Religion, necessary in it self, and appointed, by
unjustifiable Authority, to be kept on such a set day, which is in it self,
arbitrary; the best way is, to take another day for it, for the shunning of the
appearance of the evil of obeying an unjust power. 2. Of doing any thing that
I may foresee will bring a worse scandal being acted, then the omission of it
would; it being required of a Christian, where scandall-takeing lies both ways
(as not seldom it does) to shun the offense that is of worse consequence,
which is usually that which is more generally taken, or by persons more
considerable, or worthy of tender respect. The Apostle Paul, condemning
Judaisme in Peter, and others at Antioch, practiced in favor of a few, where
the most part were Gentile Christians, Gal. 2.11. etc. but admitted it at
Jerusalem, where the greater sort were believing Jews, Act. 21.20, etc.

2. Betwixt moral, or prudentiall acts competible to private men, or subjects,
and political acts, or judicial proceedings that flow from power, and
Authority inherent in the person that acts them, or are the issues of
distributive justice, and either come forth from a person clothed with
Government, or unto which is requisite a stamp of Authority to make them
lawful, and justifiable: as to bear the office of a Magistrate, or Commander
in Civil or Military affairs, or to be any under Agent, or servant in carrying
on, or assisting the Government. An Usurper, in giving out Commissions,
Commands or Warrants for proceedings of this nature, I conceive may not, in
this kind, be obeyed. Men are not to act as subordinate rulers, or agents,
under such a power, or as sent by him as supreme in the Apostles sense, 1 Pet.
2.14. For,

1. The Usurpers authority being indeed null, and of no effect, he being in
truth but in a private man's capacity, as to the power he assumes; he cannot
communicate, or derive any authority unto me, whereby I may act, that which
before I could not; so that those actions, which require the seal of Authority
to make them lawful, and which without it would be irregular and sinful, it
must needs be clearly unlawful for me to do, by virtue of his Commission.
Conscientious advised men will generally judge it presumption, violence,
oppression, bloodshed, respectively for a private man to take upon him of
himself, to imprison, chastise, amerce, or put to death any supposed, or really
manifested malefactor; and if I have no other humane warrant but the Usurpers,
it leaving me but in a private man's capacity, will leave my actions of that
nature under no better a character. If I should, being about such undertakings,
be asked that question of our Savior, Luke 12.14. Man, who made thee a judge,
or a divider over us? What satisfaction would it be to him that so enquireth,
or to mine own conscience to allege the name of the Usurper, who, as to
supreme Authority, and consequently to the making of a competent Officer of
Justice, is as good as no body.

2ly, So to act would make me a usurper also, and bring me in to be a partner
in the supreme usurpers sins; in as much as political or State instruments,
to wit, their subordinate agents, share together with the superior in the
moral qualification of the work of Government.

3ly, This were manifestly to uphold, and maintain Usurpation; thus I should
contribute assistance and support to the unjust power, and oppose the right of
him, or them against whom he holds it; they that favor this kind of acting as
requisite, in regard of the subjects protection, and safety, seem not to
consider, that a subordinate officers acting looks upward, as well as
downward; and he that is such a one to the Usurper, serves his turn of
subsistence in an unlawful possession as much, or more then the subjects
benefit. For first, he acknowledges and justifies his authority as sufficient
and valid by officiating under, and by it. 2. He keeps up that authority, and
extends it to as many as he has to do with. 3. He gives an example and
encouragement to others to embrace and propagate it, as he himself does. 4. He
lays an engagement upon himself to stand or fall with the Usurper; and so to
do his utmost for him. 5. He involves himself, either wittingly, or blindfoldly
in a concurrence with those counsels, and actions, which both in their own
nature, and in the intention, and projection of the Usurper, directly tend to
the Usurpers establishment, and the impeachment of the lawful Governors claim,
and re-advancement.

Upon these grounds, and the like, the secluded and the sejoyned members (in
the case stated, Chap. 1.) had need be advised well before they enter, or act
among the presupposed Usurpers: though they might be admitted by them without
questioning, or purging, I question how they can enter amongst them without
self-soyling: though they should, in going in, resolve to act honestly, yet, I
see not how they can be untainted in a concession with those, who in their
present comprehension or totality, assume a power not legally in them, and act
legislatively, and otherwise in the highest sphere of Supreamacie: a force
being upon the House, and the majority of Members, and the Authority of the
King, and the Lords-House being professedly excluded by them. They that are out
may do well to resolve, before they join, how it can be lawful for them that
sit to act at all (though never so just things) the whole, or body, to which
they belong, being so mangled in its Members, and manacled in its freedom.
And, if at all they may act, how according to Law, conscience, and their Oaths
and Covenants, they can govern in that solitariness of supreamacie, and
deposition of their compeers: if they think these things unjustifiable in them
that sit, have they not cause to be wary how they involve themselves in such
men's actings, whilst they stand in that posture? Besides, that they in coming
in help to strengthen the usurpers by increasing their number, and giving them
countenance in the eye of the Kingdom, as much as if they in all things
concurred with them; for without the House, who knows how men sway, or give
their votes? And, on the other hand, they weaken and much prejudice the claim
of the lawful Power, by appearing on the contrary party, putting themselves
into an incapacity to act for it, as otherwise they might, and engaging
themselves to assist, or at least, not to oppose the Usurpers.

Finally, let them recollect, before they enter that door, what they have
sworn to his late Majesty, his Heirs, and lawful Successors; what to the
Parliaments Power, rights and privileges, and what to the Kingdom, Et magnum
sit (...), veniendumne sit in Consilium tyranni, si i^ aliqua de re bona
deliberaturus sit. Quare si quid ejusmodi evenerit ut accersamur, quid censea^
mihi faciendum, utque scribito. Nihil enim mihi adhuc accidit, quod majoris
consilii est. M. T. Cicero, epist. ad T. Pomp. Atticum. l. 10 ep. 1.
and Subjects lawful rights and privileges; and deliberate how they, keeping
of those things, and sitting down with these men, will be reconciled. I find
that even wise Heathens have scrupled at this, without the supposition of such
Oaths.

CHAP. IIII. The obligatorinesse of the Oaths and Covenant, urged in the 2d.
Chap: against obedience to Usurpers, made good against diverse late Authors.
BEfore I take in hand to answer Arguments that are brought for the
confirmation of those two opinions for obedience to Usurpation, and against
which I have argued in the preceding Chapters; it will be convenient in this
place to take notice of such allegations and Exceptions, as are made against
the obligation of the Oaths and Covenants before urged as binding out from that
obedience: sundry late Authors having pleaded that the Oaths, and Covenant
either are not now in force, but expired, or do not extend too, and bind in
the case to which they are applied. I begin with the Remonstrance presented to
the House of Commons, November: 20. 1648. which unto the clause in the Solemn
League and Covenant, Art: 3. obliging to endeavor to preserve and defend the
Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom: alleges diverse things, some of
which concern only the obligation to the preservation of the Kings person,
those are past consideration, other reflect upon it in relation to his
Authority, as unto which I have urged it to be still in force, and therefore
shall examine what the Remonstrance says for the invalidating of it as unto
that, bringing in only so much of its argumentation, as can be construed to
tend to this purpose: and of this nature I observe two Allegations.

1. The words (in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and
Liberties of the Kingdoms) are a restriction to the engagement for preservation
of the Kings person, and Authority, so as to oblige them to no further, nor in
any other way then shall be consistent with the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms, but if by reason and experience
we find the preservation and defense of his person to be not safe, but full of
visible danger (if not certainly destructive) to Religion, or public interest,
then surely (by the Covenant itself) the preservation of his person or
authority is not to be endeavored so far, or in such a way, or at least the
Covenant obliges not to it, but against it: page 55, 56.

1. It is not necessary nor proper to take the words, in the preservation, etc.
as restrictive to the engagement either way, that is either for the
preservation and defense of the Kings person and Authority on the one hand; or
of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms on the other: It is not
necessary (I say) for those words in the Article (in our several vocations)
are an express, and fully sufficient restriction, taking in, and binding to
all lawful and just ways of preserving and defending each of them, and
excluding all unlawful. Neither is it proper, [in] there being clearly
conjunctive, and as much as [with] and equally looking both ways, that is,
both to the preservation and defense of that which goes before, and that which
follows, unto the preservation and defense of all which (though they be not of
equal worth or intrest, so that one of them must come behind the other in the
order of our endeavors of their preservation and defense, yet) the Covenant
binds equally (in regard of the firmness of the obligation) yet if any shall
still contend, that clause to be restrictive in that manner which the
Remonstrance says, I will not strive in a verbal contention with him; for the
taking of it so no more lesseneth our obligation to the preservation of the
Kings Authority, then if it had not been inserted; we being tied
notwithstanding it, to all just ways of preservation thereof, and no more had
been involved if it had been left out.

2. But the sinews of this Argument lies in the pretended or employed
inconsistency betwixt the preservation and defense of Religion and the Kingdoms
liberties; unto which I say:

1. There is doubtless a fair consistencie, non-opposition, or agreement
betwixt the safety of every one of these, the being of each of them may and
can stand with the other, it is a groundless surmise, and gross absurdity to
imagine an inconsistency betwixt the just intrests of any of them, our taking
of them together into the Covenant yields thus much; if there were any
incoexistency amongst them, we could not have sworn to their joint
preservation; or if we did, the Oath was of impossibles, and so (as to this
branch) both unlawful and void, or non-obliging in the making of it Regula
juris rei impossibilis nulla obligatio.
.

2. An endeavor to preserve the one and the other will well enough stand
together; a lawful power indeed actually and effectually to preserve them all
may happen to be wanting, and any one of them may fall under danger, and I may
want just means to relieve it, but an endeavor (which can only import a doing
what is within power and warrant) may be yielded still to the preservation of
every of them.

3. Seeing then that an inconsistibility either of the things one with another,
or of the endeavoring their preservation cannot be pleaded as possibly incident
or occurrent, evident it is, that there cannot at any time lie a necessity of
taking a way of any of them, and that the obligation of the Covenant to the
endeavor of preserving every of them continually stands in force during their
respective existence, and consequently it binds out from intending, seeking,
attempting, or prosecuting the abolishing or destruction of any of them; for
that is indeed truly inconsistent with the said endeavor, and therefore a
palpable violation of the Covenant.

It must here be granted, that the lawful and necessary defense and
preservation of one of them, sometimes may so employ me that I cannot at that
time by the same means act for the others safety; ye^ what I act for one, may
put the other in hazard, and in the issue not only be accompanied with, but
(though against my will, and endeavors to the utmost of my lawful capacity)
contingently, and besides my intention prove the loss and ruin of the other:
and this is incident not from any contrariety or inconsistency that is betwixt
them, but both because they are distinct, and separable things, and so cannot
always, and by the same medium be concurrently prosecuted: and because some of
them are more worthy then the other, which must therefore have the preheminency
thus far, that if they cannot altogether with my best endeavors be secured, I
am to prefer the security of the most precious, and expose any of the other
rather to danger then it. As for instance, it will (I suppose) be admitted to
be agreeable to the Covenant, for the Kingdoms rather to omit the safeguarding
of their Liberties, and put them to the hazard then the true Religion,, where
both cannot be jointly put out of danger: but all this amounts not to a
disobligement from the endeavor of preserving them all; nor to a liberty upon
any emergency of active, direct, and purposed making away, or removing of any
of them, though under pretense of securing the other. I have read of one Alcon,
who finding his son fast on sleep upon the grass, and a Serpent creeping upon
his breast, he not apprehending how otherwise it was possible to save his son,
took his Bow, and shot at the Serpent upon the boys breast, which (though to
the manifest endangering of his life) yet the chose rather to take that course,
then by suffering the Serpent to leave his life to a more certain destruction;
and either his art or good hap was such, as that he prevented and slew the
Serpent, and preserved his Son: Ars erat esse patrem^cit ^tura pe^ic ^m: Et
par^er ^^venem somnoque and mort^ levavit. Manilius li 3.
those whom we are bound and most solicitous to preserve, we may upon an
extreme exigence put in some hazard that we may preserve them; but there is a
great difference betwixt this, and a deliberate purposed, declared prosecuting
them to destruction.

3. But how does the Remonstrancer prove the Assumption, viz: The inconsistency
pretended betwixt the endeavor of the preservation of the Kings person and
Authority, and the preservation of Religion and liberty? thus he says, By
reas^n, and experience we find the preservation and defense of his person and
Authority, to be not safe, but full of visible danger (if not certainly
destructive) to religious or public Interest.

If the one could be said to be certainly destructive to the other, you would
have said it without an [if not] but it seems you have not confidence to
assever so much, and yet they cannot be purely inconsistent without such a
destructivenesse; so that your own extenuation sufficiently discovers the
weakness of your proof; all that you affirm is, That there is no safety, but a
full visible danger in the preservation which you impugn.

1. The danger you pretend is in the disposal and use of the things to be
preserved, not in the nature of the things. For instance, the Kings Authority
is politically and morally good, the ordinance of God, and if well used may be
eminently advantageous; if evilly used may be dangerous enough to Religion and
liberties: the like may also be said or the privileges of the Parliament, and
of the liberties of the Kingdoms in relation to Religion, and to each other;
will you thence infer an inconsistency of these with Religion, or a
disobligement from the Covenant for preservation and defense of these?

2. As there may be danger that way to the things specified, so there may be
danger and insecurity to the same things on the other hand, viz: in the
destruction of the Kings person (suppose it were undone) and Authority, and let
impartial Reason and Experience judge, whether the preservation or destruction
thereof has more danger in it to Religion, and the Kingdoms Liberty.

3. But seeing there may be some danger on each side, and in the preservation
of the Kings Authority, there is no more pretended but danger, and that but of
suffering, not of sin, it is apparent, that as there is no such inconsistency
as is intimated, so the obligation of the Covenant to the preservation of the
Kings Authority stands good, and our safest way is to avoid the horrid sin, and
greater danger of Covenant Breaking, by standing upon the said preservation.

2ly, The other thing which the Remonstrance alleges, and is to be cleared is
this. Where several persons joining to make a Covenant, do make a covenanting
clause therein to the good or benefit of another person not present, no party
to the agreement, but whom, and whose Interest they would willingly provide for
as well as for their own, to the end be might join with them in the agreement,
and partake the benefit thereof as well as themselves, if this absent party
(when it is tendered to him for his conjunction) shall not accept the
Agreement, but refuse to join in, and oppose it, and begin, prosecute and
multiply contests with all the Covenanters about the matters contained in it.
Surely that person in so doing by his once refusing upon a fair and full
tender, sets the other Covenanters free from any further obligation, by virtue
of that Covenant, as to what concerns his benefit or interest therein. Now
whether this be not your case, etc.

1. True indeed, a releasement from Covenants and promissory oaths, which
concern matters betwixt man and man is granted lawful some ways: But, 1. this
must be done by the party with whom the Covenant, and to whom the Oath is made
Si is cui juratur ratum habuerit iuramentum, and veli^ servari, non potest ab
alia quacunq, tertia persona relaxari ratio est, quia nemo potest ius alteri
acquisitum, nisi ipse consenserit adimere. D Saunderson de iuram: 1. rom oblig.
praelect. 7. Sect. 8.
, but as the Remonstrancer acknowledges, this Covenant was made the King being
not present, nor a party covenanting, or covenanted with but a third person,
the persons covenanting, and covenanted with mutually (as by the Introductory
part is manifest) were the Noblemen, Barons, Knights, etc. in the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, it was it may be desired, and hoped that the
King and his Issue would afterward approve and join in it, but the Covenant
was actually plighted, and therefore did actually bind in every branch of it
they not taking it; and (the parties with whom we covenanted not releasing us)
the pretended refusal of the King could be no discharge from it. 2. A
releasement can be made by the party covenanted with and sworn too, only where
the Covenant is for the particular and proper interest of that party, or so far
only as concerns him, but not to the prejudice of a third parties
concernment without his consent Dico sexto, relaxationem partis valere ad
vinculum juramenti solvendum, quantum ipsius interest: non tamen valere in
praeiudicium tertiae personae. Ratio est, quia potest quilibet per actum suum
de iure proprio quantum vult remittere: sed non potest quisquam de alieno iure
quicquam demere, ipso vel inconsulto vel invito, si alterius cuiusquam intersit
ex aliquo suo iure obligationem non solvi, obligatio non solvitur. Ibid.
; but the Covenant (even in that part of it) was not merely or chiefly of a
private or personal importance to the King himself, but was, and is of a
public interest to the Covenanters themselves and the Kingdoms; the Kings
refusal therefore and opposition to it could be no release from it: we say on
all hands, the King is for the Kingdom as the means is for the end. We have ten
parts in the King, said the men of Israel of David; and at another time they
said and swear, Thou shall no more go out with us to battle, that thou quench
not the light of Israel. What portion have we in David? and we have none
inheritance in the son of Jesse, the ten Tribes said, when they made a revolt
from, and rebelled against Rehoboam.

The Introduction of the Covenant in laying down the concernments and ends for
the making of it, expresses it self thus: Having before our eyes the glory of
God, and the advancement of the kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ,
the honor and happiness of the Kings Majesty, and his posterity, and the
true public liberty, safety, and peace of the Kingdoms wherein every ones
private condition is included. And a little afterward, We have for the
preservation of our selves, and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction,
resolved, and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn, League and
Covenant, etc. And Art: 6. it styleth its cause, This Common cause of Religion,
liberty and peace of the Kingdoms: which cause, it says presently after, so
much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and honor of the
King.

2. The King never refused to agree to, nor did he oppose the matter of this
particular clause: as touching this there could be no dissent on his part, his
prescribing and standing upon the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, wherein
this clause is contained, his avowing the difference and war on his part to be
for the defense of his person, and authority; his putting forth Oaths to them
that adhered to him for the preservation of these, makes it as clear as
noonday that he refused and opposed not this branch. Now upon this
confideration, the Remonstrancer has not only failed in his allegation, but
overthrown his own argument; he saying in the place before cited, Although the
Kings refusing sets the Covenanters free from any further obligation by virtue
of that Covenant, (...) to what concerns his interest and benefit therein, yet
the Covenant as to other matters concerning the right and benefit of the
Covenanters one from another stands still obliging, and in force. I may by the
same reason say, the Kings refusing the Covenant upon exception against other
clauses, not this, and his opposing other matters in the Covenant, not this,
could not dis-ingage or release the Covenanters from this, about which there
was not the least dissent or reluctance, but a concurrence full enough on his
part; so that the Covenant must stand still obliging and in force as to this
part.

3. If the Kings said refusal and opposition could have discharged us from
this member of the Covenant as to his own person and interest in the Authority,
yet with all your straining you cannot stretch them to our release from
preservation and defense of the Kingly Authority in relation to his posterity,
who were in proximity to him interested in it; and for whose interest therein
the Covenant was also made Having before our eyes the honor and Happiness of
the Kings Majesty, and his posterity.
; and whose refusal of it, nor yet a tender of it to them, you do not, cannot
once plead.

I have done with the wrong gloss of the Remonstrancer endeavoring to impeach
the obligation of this clause of the Covenant. I find another (a dear friend
of his) tampering with it also to clude the tie of it; and he offers it no
less violence, but in a more unhandsome and gross manner. It is that
Polemick, or Army-Divine, Mr. J.G. in his Defense of the Honorable Sentence,
etc. The man in that book undertaketh, and bends his skill to a double
unhappie, and cross design, to wit, to varnish and guild over that which is
very foul, and to besmear and obscure that which is very clear. In his
prosecution of the latter he falls upon this sentence of the Covenant, in
dealing with which he correspondeth with the Remonstrancer, and as this has
challenged to himself a prerogative to enforce men and Magistrates, so does he
arrogate to himself to be a bold enforcer of words and Covenants; a more
strange and presumptuous perverting of plain words, I never read nor heard,
then that which he uses to this clause, when he says, page 51. Evident it is,
that those words in the Covenant in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and liberties of the Kingdoms, import a condition to be performed on
the Kings part, without the performance whereof, the Covenant obliges no man
to the preservation or defense of his Person or Authority. And this condition
he makes to be, page 52, 53. That he preserve and defend the true Religion, and
liberties of the Kingdom: and of this his paraphrase of the words he says, If
this be not the clear meaning and importance of them, the Covenant is a
Barbarian unto me, I understand not the English of it. The vast exorbitancy,
audaciousnesse, and impiety of this his wresting, and straining of these plain
words, I leave the Reader to take the measure of: I shall only endeavor to
free them from this his distortion.

1. Let the words themselves speak, they do not say in his preservation and
defense, etc. but in the preservation and defense, etc. plainly referring to
the same preservation and defense of Religion and Liberties which is before
promised, and sworn in this and the preceding Articles, and as evidently
referring to the same persons preservation, and defense of them here, which are
to preserve and defend them in the former clauses, and which are to preserve
and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority in this, viz: the
Covenanters. If the Covenant had intended to pitch the preservation and defense
in this clause upon another person, or persons, as the performers besides those
to whom the same actions are referred immediately before, it would have pointed
them out distinctly; but when it expresses no other, ordinary construction will
attribute them to the parties before nominated; and no regular construction can
put them upon any other. This reading is plain English to him that knows the
language, and will understand, and Mr. G. proves himself a barbarous dealer
with the covenant, in that he will have it, either to admit of his
antigramaticall sense, or to be a Barbarian to him. I dare appeal to Mr. Gs.
own conscience, if it be not either speechles, or a Barbarian to him, whether,
when he took this Covenant, he understood this clause in the meaning he would
now thrust upon it; or rather has not played the Doedalus since, in shaping,
and bringing forth this sense to serve his turn, and defend what has been
since acted.

2. In making this the importance of those words, Mr. G. contradicts his
friend, or Patron the Remonstrancer, in his expounding of them, and takes away
the very medium, or ground of his argument before brought in out of his book,
page 55, 56. and answered above. For he page 55. takes those words either as a
restriction to the engagement for preservation of the Kings person and
Authority, to wit, as obliging no further then is consistent therewith: yea he
proposes whether the said engagement may not be so understood as to be
fulfilled in the preservation of Religion and Liberties; neither of which
senses can carry that clause to the King as the performer: and in page 56, he
explaineth this preservation, and defense of Religion, and liberties to be the
Parliaments Covenanted utmost endeavor to preserve them. Let Mr. J. G. then
leave endeavoring to reconcile the Covenant and his cause which are at too
great odds to be reconcilable, and go make the Remonstrancer and himself
friends, who differ so diametrically in their sense of these words.

3. How will Mr. G. make this sense of his, and the proceedings against the
late King stand together? for before the King was so proceeded against, he had
consented to all that was positively proposed to him for Religion, at least for
3. years; and for the privative part propounded, to wit, the Abolition of
Episcopacy he had not denied it, but granted the present suspension, and
referred the utter extirpation of it to the deliberation of the Assembly, and
ordering of Parliament; against whose consent he had agreed nothing should be
done for the restoring of it: and had granted fully the Parliaments overtures
for Liberties. Neither does the Remonstrancer, or any other (as far as I have
observed) insist on the shortness of the Kings concessions in any particulars
of either nature, as the ground of those capital proceedings, but on the
inexpiablenesse of his former facts, and the unsafenesse of trusting him for
future upon any terms. If then the King, immediately before the fatal
prosecution against him, did (as his present state would permit) concur so
amply in the preservation of Religion and Liberties, they were bound that had
taken this Covenant by virtue of this clause taken in Mr. Gs. sense, whatever
had been his former carriage) then to endeavor the preservation of his person
and Authority. The Covenant in this branch is indefinite, and unrestrained in
regard of time; it does not say (suppose Mr. Gs. meaning had been its words) we
shall preserve the Kings person and Authority, if he shall (within a year or
two after this) preserve Religion, and Liberties; but obliges the Covenanters
whenever the King should join in preserving Religion and Liberties (as Mr. G.
understands it) to the preservation of his person and Authority. Here then
Mr. G. instead of weakening the Covenant, as to the end it was urged by those
whom he opposes, has by wringing turned it against himself, and that his
adored cause which he would have defended, and that with more strength then is
in any of those reasons (or rather shifts and colors) brought by himself or
any other Roscius -- for it.

4. If that indeed were the sense of that clause which he would outface us
into the accepting of, what can be said against the binding of it to the
preservation and defense of the kingly Authority still? (though the then King
be deceased) it being before proved, that this clause obliges to it in
reference to the Kings posterity, against whom there can be Objection of a fail
in this supposed condition, it being unperformable without default whilst
possession of the Authority is withheld; and the Authority being withheld
before, either any refusal of the supposed condition, by him that should
perform it, or any overture to him, for the obtaining of it be made.

I have thus done with the exceptions made against the obligatorinesse of the
Covenant, in the matter in hand; I now pass to the Examination of what is
pleaded against the force of the Oaths of Allegiance amongst the impugners of
them; I Will begin with him whom I had last to deal with, Mr. J. G. who in the
same book, page: 58, 59, 60. thinks to discharge us from these bonds, with a
Reason framed as follows.

(In recital whereof I shall rehearse as much of him as expresses his
Argumentation, omitting those two hetorogeneous instances [of keeping back a
mad man's sword, and of a States dis-engagement from league with another State
that has first broken league with it] as impertinent both to his reason and
our case.)

Peter Martyr (says Mr. G.) well observes concerning the promises of God [that
they are to be understood according to the present state and condition of
things when they are made] meaning that no performance of them is intended ^y
God in case men shall decline from that integrity under which, and in relation
unto which such promises were made unto them: so neither are the promises of
men, whether made with oath, or without to be so understood, as if the makers
of them stood bound to perform the terms of them under any possible change or
alteration what soever in the persons to whom they are made. Chrysostom
writing upon those words, Matthew. 19.28. shows, that Judas, though the promise
of sitting upon a throne was made unto him as well as unto any other, yet by
reason of that change which afterward appeared in him, through his
wickedness, forfeited and lost his right of interest in that promise, nor does
any promise though confirmed with an oath, of allegiance, obedience, or
subjection unto a King, and his Successors, or posterity, bind any longer or
otherwise, either before God or men, then whilst, and as this King or his
successors, shall continue in the same deportment of themselves in the
discharge of their trust, and administration of their power, whereby they
commended themselves to us at the time when we swear such allegiance to them,
and in consideration and expectation whereof the same was sworn by us;
therefore the King being so notoriously changed, etc. evident it is that God
himself by the tenor and importment of his promises, and Jesus Christ by the
like tenor and import of his, fully and fairly acquits us from all engagements,
and ties which the Oath of Allegiance at the time of our taking it laid upon
us.

2 Pet. 1.4. Psalm. 138.2.
What? and must the exceeding great and precious promises of God, and his
fidelity and truth therein, which he has magnified above all his Name, be thus
traduced? must the honor of God, which is so much concerned in taking, and
violated in breaking an Oath, be yet much more impeached in the bringing in,
and mis-reporting of his example to patronise men's fa^shood and perjury
therein? And when an Oath cannot lawfully be dispensed with, or justly rendered
non-obliging, must the forcible and ungodly bursting of it asunder be fathered
on him, who is the Truth, the Amen, the faithful and true witness?

But to endeavor a vindication briefly.

1. Mr. G. you have here done that learned and solid Divine P. Martyr a double
wrong. 1. In curtailing his sentence, and breaking it off in the middle,
suppressing those following words which would have cleared his sense to be none
of yours. 2. In mis-translating the words which you cite, his words truly
rendered and rehearsed out are these, Therefore those promises of God, (to wit,
that of our Savior, Matthew. 19.28. which he had in the Section last before
brought in, with Chrysostomes interpretation upon it, quoted by you, and those
of Genesis 9.2. Jer. 18.7, 8. with Chrysostom also upon them) are to be
understood with reference to the present state of things, wherefore when we
bear the promises of God, it behooves us thus to conceive, either they have some
condition annexed, or they are laid down absolutely; Furthermore either they
are of force only for the present time, or they must be fulfilled in after
time Promissiones itaque illae De^ prostatu praesenti rerum intelligendae sunt.
Quamo^. rem cum Dei promissiones audimus sic oportet cogitare: vel conditionem
aliquam conjunctam habent vel abso u^e ponuntur. Dei^ vel in hoc tantum tempus
valent velin posterum sunt implendae. P. Martyr loc. com class. 3. ca. 13.
Sect. 5. mis cited by him ca. 12.
. It is by this recital evident, how you by leaving out the word [illae] have
falsified P. Martyrs text, who is speaking only of some particular promises,
conditionally made, and (as he says) respecting the present time which he
distinguishes from others; but you would have him understood of any promises,
and draw an universal negative from his words.

2. You are not content to misconstrue this servant of God, but you dare to
mis-represent, and mistate the mind of God himself; you say indefinitely of
the promises of God, That no performance of them is intended by God, etc.
whereas the Scripture is clear, (and most unhappie were men if it were
otherwise) that 1. there are absolute promises wherein performance is intended
by God, notwithstanding men shall decline in their said integrity, and
whereunto such promises have no relation as to their validity or fulfilling.
Take for instance, Psalm. 89.33, 34. Hosea 14.4. Ezekiel. 36.25. etc. Heb. 8.10.
etc. 2. In conditional promises, though there may be partial and temporary
declinings in men from their said integrity (as there was eminently in Peter,
one of those parties to the promise, Matthew. 19.28.) yet God performs the
promise to true believers, through, and for Christ's sake, In whom all the
promises are yea and Amen, and that always, 2 Cor. 1.20.
if it be a promise of the life which is to come; and often, if it be a promise
of the life that now is, namely, when it is good for them, according to those
promises, Psalm. 84.11. Romans 8.28. 1 Cor. 3.21. And if there be a performance by
God, certainly there was an intention in him of that performance,
notwithstanding such declining, For he works all things after the counsel of
his own will. And for this you might have hearkened to P. Martyr your own
Author, in the place whither he refers you in the Section quoted by you,
speaking thus. But because the conditions of legal promises could not be
performed by men, God out of his own mercy has substituted Evangelicall
promises in their place, which though they have conditions annexed, yet they
are held out gratis. And a little further he says, The Evangelicall promise
may stand good without those conditions. How this is, he presently after
explains thus. Therefore impossible conditions are annexed, that men warned of
their infirmity, and fully understanding it, they may betake themselves to
Christ, of whom they being received into favor, and justification being
obtained, they may obtain those very promises, for as to them they of Legal
are made Evangelicall Sed cum illae ab hominibus praestari non potuissent, Deus
ex sua misericordia subjecit promissiones Evangelitas illorum loco: quae quam
vis conditiones adiectas habent tamen efferuntur gratis. Promissio Evangelica
fine illis conditionibus constare potest, idcirco enim conditiones impossibiles
adiecta sunt, ut homines suae infirmitatis admonerentur ea que penitus
intellecta, se conferent ad Christum a quo recepti in gratiam, adepte iam
iustificatione, illa eadem promissa possent obtinere. Nam quod ad ipsor
attinct, iam ex legalibus redduntur Evangelicae. P. Mart. loc. com. Class 3 c.
12. Sect. 4.
.

3. You rest not in this mis-alledging of Gods promises, (though in it, you
bewray audaciousnesse, and unsoundnesse enough) but you rise higher in
presumption, making an odious comparison, or rather equality between God and
man, in promises and covenants, whereas the case of the covenanting of these
two is far enough different; for if it were granted, that God in some of his
conditional promises intends no performance nor obligation on his part, but
upon condition of man's perseverance, must there needs be therefore an
equivalency, or conformity throughout thereunto in man's Covenants with man?
must they therefore be all of them so made or understood? or rather is there
not of right a vast disparity? God is no man's debtor, he is not bound to man,
there is no right in the creature from God, he can claim nothing from him,
otherwise then by promise: God may do what he will with his own, and all is his
own. But with man it is not so, Alia enim ratio est obligationis ubi debitum
fundatur inpromissione, ubi vero promissio fundatur in debito long alia. D.
Sand. de jurament. praelect 6. Sect. 9.
either toward God, or man, he stands in diverse relations, and is tied in many
duties, even toward men, before he covenant or swear, unto which single tie,
the bonds of Oaths and express and solemn Covenants are often in weighty
matters added, for confirmation and greater security. And thus it is in the
point in hand, there is Allegiance due without the interposition of an Oath, or
any such engagement by particular persons; we are in a settled State, born
Subjects, and both claim the immunity and protection, and owe the duty of such,
without personal indenting, or oath-taking; and this obedience is owing to
Princes, or Magistrates without condition of Religion, or Justice on their part
performed; the Scripture is clear for an irrespective (and in regard of the
Rulers demeanor) absolute subjection: Exodus 20.12.21.25. Romans 13.1, 2, etc.
Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. 1 Samuel 24.6, 7. 26.9, 10, 11. Jer. 27.12.29.7. Matthew.
22.21. And the Doctrine of orthodox Divines generally is, that obedience is due
to the most degenerate, tyrannical, and oppressive Magistrates Call. Instit. l.
4. c. 20. Sect. 24.25. etc.

P. Mart. loccom. clas. 4. ca. 20. Sect. 12.18 19. Alsted.

Theol. cas. cap. 17. Reg. 8. number. 9.

Schar. ^ymph. 5. epot. Quaest. 44. and 45. cur Perk. cas. consci. B. 3. cha.
6. Sect. 1.


. When therefore this necessary and unconditionated duty (as to the parties
behavior) becomes the subject of an oath, or personal engagement, it is not
capable of capitulations or conditions to be performed by the persons sworn to,
upon which the obligation of the oath shall be dependent; to admit such
qualifications, would frustrate the end of a promissory oath, which is to give
assurance and security (and that the strongest men can give) to the party unto
whom the oath is made, of what, either was before, or is then made due by
promise; instead whereof the inserting of conditions of this nature in this
case would make what was before clearly owing now more dubious and uncertain to
the expectation of the proprietor: and would be apt to beget in the debtor a
persuasion, (upon nonperformance of conditions) of a discharge as well from the
matter, as from the obligation of the Oath.

4. Of Humane Covenants, or promissory oaths, whereof the subject or matter is
arbitrary, and we are not otherwise bound to then by Covenant, or Oath, there
are several sorts, Vide Alsted. Theol cas c 5. Reg. 2. number 3.
some are absolute, having no express condition annexed, but are simply
undertaken, saving that those general and constant provisoes of every promise
or oath which need not expressing, are to be understood therein, viz: that the
thing when it comes to be performed be lawful and possible, and
notwithstanding the understanding of which the obligation is absolute. As for
instance, such was that promise and oath of Joseph to his father Jacob, Genesis
47.29, 30, 31, etc. and that of the children of Israel to each other, Judge.
21.5. And that of Jonathan to David, 1 Samuel 20.12, 13. Others again are
conditional, wherein something future, that is contingent, or depending upon
man's will is particularly, and expressly comprised as a qualification of the
matter to be performed, the failing of which is a discharge of the person
engaging from the promise or oath. Such was that of the servant to Abraham,
Genesis 24.2.3.4.8.9. And that of the Spies to Rahab, Joshua 2 12. to 21. Now then
for Mr. G. to say generally of all oaths and promises whatsoever, whether they
be of things in their own nature necessary, or of things arbitrary; whether
they be absolute, or conditional; and to say specially of all promises and
oaths of Allegiance, or subjection, and particularly of these oaths in
question, that they are conditional, and bind no longer, nor any otherwise
then whilst, and as the party covenanted with, or sworn to, behaves himself
as he did at the time of covenanting, is both in it self, and by what is here
said, as also by the ordinary practice of men in Indentures, and oaths
apparently inconsistent, and absurd; and to infer such an universal loosening
of men from Oaths and Covenants, of what nature soever, upon the parties
miscarriage to whom the engagement is made, from the conditionality of some
divine promises, is (besides the impiety of it above denoted) an insupportable
non sequitur, and by Mr Gs. ^ophistry never to be maintained; yet this is all
the Logic of this Argument.

Having thus (I hope) sufficiently taken away the Exceptions of this Author
against the force of the Oath of Allegiance, I leave him straining and
travailing about that stone of Sisiphus, (to wit, the guilt of Royal blood)
which he labors to ^oul away in that his book, and proceed to another.

The next I meet with that strikes at the obligation of this Oath, is one that
asserteth himself to be of those whom he that I had last to do with, professes
himself a Champion against, that is, the Presbyterian part, but in this (as far
as my ken will reach) he is alone for them: I mean the Author of The
lawfulness of obeying the present Government, who in his 11. and 12. pages
pleads against it with the Reasons which follow, being here set down by
parcels, with my Answer to them so distinguished.

1. It were good (says he first) to consider, whether there be any clause in
any Oath or Covenant, which in a fair and common sense forbids obedience to the
Commands of the present Government, and Authority, much less when no other can
be had, and so the Commonwealth must go to ruin.

1. The many clauses of several Oaths, and of the Covenant and Protestation,
which strictly forbid such obedience, I have urged [Chap. 2.] whither I refer
him.

2. But by his last sentence recited [ much less when no other, etc.] together
with his marginall quotation [of a Popish Schoolman or Casuist telling us, When
a thing sworn is too difficult, or he that swore is by the change of abilities
or estate rendered less apt to perform: or lastly, when the thing sworn is an
hindrance to the swearer from consulting the public good, then there is a
lawful cause of dispensing in the Oath] he seems as if he would insinuate a
cessation of the Oath in our case, unto which I say.

1. Take dispensation, in the usual Popish acception, and all power of
dispensing in Oaths and Vows, in whomsoever it be supposed to be, is denied
with one consent, (as far as I have observed, or ever heard) by Protestant
professors: and it is a mere popish doctrine, and papal arrogation exploded
from amongst us. Vide D. Sanderson de jur. oblig. praelect. 7. Sect. 3. and 4.
They say, in omni voto, aut juramen to subintelligi debere illam conditionem si
Domino Papae placuerit.
And this Oath has it self precluded and cut off all use of this shift of a
dispensation in these words. I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that
neither the Pope, nor any other person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of
this Oath, or any part thereof. And this I the rather note, upon occasion of
this Authors quoting a Doctor of the Papacy for the dispensabilitie of an Oath,
in regard that some of late (if I mistake not) have taken upon them to
discharge people from this Oath, or (which is all one) from the Allegiance
therein sworn to. Unto which act I shall only speak thus much, either they
assume power to do this as the party to whom the Oath is taken, or as a
superior, by the analogy of that Law, Numb: 30.3, 4. But, 1. they cannot do it
as the party sworn to in that Oath, for they are not that party in the Oath,
the King, and his Heirs, and Successors are the only persons to whom, and in
whose behalf the Oath is taken, and consequently they only that can release
from it as parties; nay they are the party swearing, and therefore far from a
capacity of discharging others from that Oath, as presently I shall show. 2.
Neither can they do it as a superior by the equity of that Law, Numb: 30. For,
1. their lawful superiority in the case they now stand, is the matter under
question. 2. The power of a superior to undo the Oath, or bond of the inferior,
prevails only in those matters wherein the party is under the power of the
superior, and not in other matters, which are without the extent of the
superiors authority Vide D Sander. de iuram. oblig. praelect. 5. Sect. 5. and
praelect. 7. Sect. 6.

Animadvertendum tamen est penes hos non esse facultatem rescindendi quodlibet
iusiurandum subditorum; sedillud duotaxat, cuius materia est little potestaal
subiecta Alstod. Theol. Cas. cap 15. Reg. 2. number. 16.


. Now this Oath concerns a duty owing to another, which they that interpose to
discharge from it have no right to dispose of. 3. But however the superior can
only by the Law cited, or any other right come in to make void the Oath of the
inferior, which was taken without his knowledge and consent, and that also he
may only do in the day that he hears of it; but if he either allow the making
of it, or declare not against it presently, when he comes to know of it, he
has no power thenceforth to recall it, as is clear by the Text. Now the Oath
of Allegiance was so far from being disallowed, or declared against as soon as
it was known, that it was inacted and enjoined by both Houses of Parliament,
and moreover it was constantly to be taken by all the Members of the Lower
House at their entrance into that House; so that besides their incompetency to
discharge from the Oath who have assented to it; Let any man show how they who
are parties to the oath, and have themselves taken it can disanull it; the
obliged parties disanulling is a strain above Papal dispensation.

2. But to speak to these causes of dispensing with an Oath according to the
Casuists Divinity, which the Author applies to the case in hand. 1. When the
thing sworn is too difficult, or the swearer is by the change of ability, or
estate, rendered less apt to perform. If by this difficulty of the thing, and
unaptnesse of the person sworn, he mean, the thing is become impossible, and
the party utterly unable to observe it. All reasonable men will grant so far
as the impossibility lies and so long as it continues the Oath binds not, but
this is not to our Authors purpose, for to cease from an act, that is, from
obedience to the present Government, can never be impossible Qui facit quod in
se suit ut adimpleret quod promiserat iuramenti fidem exolvit. D. Sanders de
iuram. oblig. praelect 2. Sect. 10.

Obligatio tollitur quoad id solum quod est factu impossible quoad reliquum
vero manner, and qui non potest omne quod debet, debts tamen omne quod potest.
Idem Sect. 12.

Est regula inris, rei impossibilis nulla est obligatio.


. But if he intend by difficulty and unaptnesse, that the thing sworn to will
bring hard terms upon the swearer, or breed him temporal loss, and trouble,
this is no cause to infringe the tie of an Oath, or give a discharge from it;
He that has sworn to his own hurt, must not therefore change from it: Psalm.
15.4.

2. When the thing sworn is an impediment to the swearer from consulting the
public good.

1. If the thing sworn should become privative of, or opposite to, the public
good, or well-being of the Nation in its own nature, and necessarily, it were
unlawful, and consequently the oath would be void, for to a sinful thing
there can be no obligation. But if it be only of that nature which they call
impeditive of a greater good, that is, if it stand in the way (not of the good
of the Kingdom simply, and absolutely respected, but only) of some higher
degree of good supposed to be attainable; this consideration will not bear that
weight, as to frustrate an oath. As for example, when a people that has sworn
obedience to a lawful form of Government, which yet is not absolutely the
best, as suppose to a Democracy, or Aristocracy, or that has sworn obedience
to a lawful Prince, who yet is not simply the ablest that can be found for
regal parts and qualifications, such may not take themselves discharged from
their Oath, because there may be a better model of Government, or a better
qualified person to make a Prince sound out, and for that cause cast off their
present Government and King, and set up another because comparatively better.
It was doubtless better for the people of Israel, that the Gibeonites had been
destroyed, as the rest of the Canaanites were (if there had been no oath to the
contrary) then that they were spared (besides that the sparing of them was
against an express positive Law: Deuteronomy. 20.16.) and so the congregation judged,
and therefore grudged at the sparing of of them: yet in that case the Oath for
sparing them stood inviolable. Josh. 9.15.18, 19. 2 Samuel 21.1, 2, etc. It was
in like sort for the Kingdoms greater good, that Zedekiah and his people should
be free from Nebuchadnezzars subjection, yet that was not a dissolution of that
Kings Covenant and Oath, Ezekiel. 17.12, 13, etc. 2. It will at no hand be
granted, that to withhold obedience from a usurped Power is in it self
impeditive of the public good at all, I know inconveniences are by this
Author urged to follow, if such a Power be not obeyed; as that, Else all
Authority must fall to the ground, and so confusion, (which is worse then
titular tyranny) be admitted. But all Authority hangs not upon the back of
Usurpation, this may come down shortly again, and that recover it self, and
stand upright. Present quietness and security are like to be but in a sickly
state, obey, or obey not; and for justice, as there is none where every man is
left to himself, so there is usually little to be had from the hands of an
unjustly gotten Power; Dominion being wont to be worn as it was come by Nec
quisquam impetium flagitio qu^situm boni^ artibus ex^^cui^. Tacit.
. An Issachar-like bowing down under the Commonwealths oppressions is not for
public good (neither were we told thus when the Parliament began to stand up,
and awaken the people to shake off Expilation and oppression) the Orator will
tell us, Servitude is the worst of Evils, and to be repelled at the charge not
only of war, but death Et nomen pacis dolce est, and ipsa res salutatis, sed
inter pacem and servitutem plu^imum interest; pax est tranquil^a libertas:
servitus malo^um omnium postremum, non modo bello sed morte etiam repellendum.
Cicero in M. Anton. Philip 2 ae. Prove 14.34.16.12.
. Nay Religion will dictate to us in the words of the wisest earthly King, That
righteousness exalts a Nation; and, The throne is established by
righteousness. Under Usurpation then we can expect no settlement; and to
submit to it, is to help to fasten that which is certain to fall, and to fall
with the greater confraction, by how much it is more favored. Commotion and
tumultuousnesse is sure (in reason) to follow violent domination. Let Isreal's
many and turbulent changes of their Kings (after their departure from the house
of David) be a president for it, of whose kings for their speedy and fatal
ends, it may be said, as it was of many of the Roman Caesar's, that they rather
seemed to be kings in a Scene, or personated on the Stage then real
Authorities. The standing off from obedience is but like to speed the
Commotions, and make them easier. To persuade men to couch down under
Usurpation, when it is gotten up to ^ave troubles, is as if a man that is got
into the briars should stick therein, because he may rake himself in offering
to get out; or he that has a festered sore, or grown disease in his body,
should let it alone, and go on, because it will stir the humors, and cost him
some pain to be cured.

2. The same Author proceeds, And whether it, (to wit, any clause in any Oath
or Covenant) forbids obedience to the present Authority, more then to Laws that
have been formerly enacted, by those which came into Authority merely by Power.
1. You have not yet produced any former Princes that had any hand in the making
of a Law, that came into the regal Authority merely by power; for although
some of them got possession by the Sword, yet (to omit the alleging of other
title) they were confirmed, by the Kingdoms consent in Parliament, before they
concurred in Enacting Laws for the Kingdom. 2. The Laws you reflect on were not
merely made by those Princes whom you pretend to have come in merely by Power,
but were constituted by Parliamentary Enacting; And for any former Parliaments
coming into the Authority merely by force, you neither do nor can allege any
thing.

3. He urges further. If it be said, that in the Oath of Allegiance,
allegiance is sworn to the King, his heirs and successors, if his heirs be not
his successors, how does that Oath bind? Either the word successors must be
superflu^us, or it must bind to successors as well as to heirs; and if it
bind not to a successor that is not an heir, how can it bind to an heir that
is not a successor? And if you will know the common and usual sense (which
should be the meaning of an Oath) of the word Successors, you need not so much
ask of Lawyers and learned persons, as of men of ordinary knowledge, and demand
of them who was the successor of William the Conqueror, and see whether they
will not say W: Rufus, and who succeeded Rich: the 3d: and whether they will
not say, Hen: the 7th: and yet neither of them was hei^: so in ordinary
acception the word Successor is taken for him that actually succeeds in
Government, and not for him that is actually excluded.

This Author in these lines raises much dust, that it may serve him for a
double end: 1. To obscure the genuine sense of this clause of the Oath, that it
may not seem to make against him, as indeed it does; and then to detort and
wrest it, to the advantage of his Usurpers interest. 1. He would cast a mist
upon the words of the Oath, to over cloud its true sense, and this he attempts
in the forecited Discourse until you come to this mark: he endeavors it by
placing an ambiguity in the word [Successors], and setting it at odds with the
word [Heirs] whereas this clause of the Oath is clear enough in it self, and
far enough from the use he would make of it; and firm enough to the sense which
he opposes. Which that I may evince, I desire the Reader to observe these two
things.

1. That the Oath intends by Heirs, and Successors, the same persons which may
evidently appear, 1. By the manifest drift of the Oath, and intention of the
Authority that prescribed it, which is the continuance and assurance of the
Crown (upon concession of his then Majesty's just title) to his Heirs in
succession after him, and one another lineally, and the defense of them therein
against all other corrivals or opposers; this I cannot see which way will be
gainsayed; and being so, it will enforce us to grant the Oath, and Oath-giver,
could not mean by successors any other then heirs. 2. In that the words [heirs
and successors] are joined by the copulative [and], whereas if they should have
intended different parties, the discretive [or] should, in true syntaxis have
been put betwixt them. 3. In that his heirs and successors are immediately in
the Oath denoted by the same pronounce [them], and again by the same possessive
[their] in those words, ( and him and [them] will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against his or [their] persons, [their] Crown or dignity) but if they be not
the same persons, how come they to be thus particled together? especially how
can they immediately after his Majesty be instituted to the same Allegiance,
and defense therein in relation to the same Crown and dignity; admit them
diverse, and the Oath will import a contradiction: and will any man imagine, so
irrational a thing as that Authority has so long imposed, and the Kingdom,
especially the most intelligent persons in it, have universally taken an Oath
so irreconcilable to it self. 4. The Law of the Land (unto which this Oath
must needs be yielded to be consonant) ordains his Heirs to be his Successors.

2. That the Oath understands by Successors, those only that are so de jure,
and not any others, that contrary to right may intrude into the royal Seat,
and injuriously make themselves successors only de facto. For, 1. In the Oath
we swear Allegiance, and defense to Successors; now what man of conscience
would ever impose, or take an Oath of this nature to any (but in his intention)
a just party, for to such a one alone could he swear in righteousness
according to Jer. 4.2. 2. The Oath appropriates the Crown and dignity to
Successors, as theirs, in these words, [their Crown and dignity] now theirs,
and their right are all one. 3. The Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy must
needs accord, and this may be the best Explanatorie of that: now this, viz: the
Oath of Supremacy prefixeth the word [lawfull] to Successors, and confineth our
allegiance to his lawful Successors in these words, The Kings highness, his
Heirs, and lawful Successors: which epithet will not permit the word
Successors, either in that or in the Oath of Allegiance (unless you will
unreasonably make them jarring) to be carried to any successor but him that is
such of right. And this reason will also irrefragably confirm the former
Proposition, viz: that the Oath intends by Heirs and Successors, the same
persons, for who are his lawful Successors? the Law will tell you, his Heirs.

By these two Propositions (sufficiently cleared I hope) we may understand how
the Oath (in that clause) binds; and that, 1. There is no superfluity in the
word Successors; for an Identity in sense of diverse words is no vain
Tantalogie, many words signifying the same thing being ordinarily used (and
especially in Oaths, and such like punctual forms, and particularly in the
Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy in diverse other clauses) for explication,
and significancies sake. And though heirs and successors in the clause in hand
mean the same persons, yet it may be in a diverse consideration, as thus: They
are Heirs in his Majesty's life time, and Successors at his death respectively.
2. That the Oath binds neither to his Heirs, nor Successors disjunctively, or
the one taken from the other, but to both conjunctively, as one: and taking
Successors aright, that is, for lawful successors, we need not, cannot say
that it binds either to a successor that is not an heir, or to an heir that is
not a successor, viz: de juce, though perhaps he may be prevented, or delayed
from actual succession, or rather possession.

2. But this Author will have [Successors] to signify such as are so de facto,
and do actually succeed in Government; And by this means this passage of the
Oath shall make for the Usurper if he be in possession. I have said (I think)
that which is enough to fore-stall this already, but let his Argument be
heard, and receive a formal Answer; it is in effect thus.

The common and ordinary acception of the word Successor, means him that
actually succeeds in Government; but the word Successor in this Oath, must be
understood in the common and ordinary acception: Ergo, the word Successor in
this Oath must mean him that actually succeeds in Government.

1. I answer to the major by denying it if taken universally; and if it be not,
the Syllogism is false: the major not being universal in the first figure.
For although one common sense of the word Successor, is he that actually
succeeds whether by right or wrong, yet that is not the sole usual acception of
the word, and this I shall evince the same way that he goes about to prove his
acceptance to be the common one; and in so doing, confute also his proof of
his major which is thus. If you would know (says he) the common sense of the
word Successors, ask not so much Lawyers and learned persons, as men of
ordinary knowledge, and demand of them who was William the Conquerours
successor? they will say, W: Rufus. Who succeeded Rich: the 3d: they will say,
H: the 7th: and yet neither of them was heir. R. Although I yield not his rule
to be the best (for if Successor be a term used in the Law (as it is in this
Oath prescribed by Law) Lawyers, and learned men in the Law, were there any
obscurity would be the fittest Interpreters of it; for it is a maxim, we must
believe every one in his own faculty or Art Credendum est cuilibet artifici in
art sua.
) yet I shall refer the matter to it so the question may be rightly propounded,
and as the case in hand will allow. This Author propounds it fallaciously, and
unapplicably to the present purpose, in that he demands de praeterito, and so
as the question only interrogates of an actual Successor [who was successor,
or did succeed such a one?] and then the answer (whether made by men learned or
unlearned) must needs bring in him that did succeed in fact. But let the
question be put de futuro, and thus only it is suitable to a promissory oath
which respects the future time, and a thing to be done in it; and
consequently to this Oath which is promissory, and runs de futuro. I shall bear
faith and true Allegiance; and I will defend, etc. and was taken of a successor
not that had succeeded, but that was to succeed, and it will be this, who is to
be his Majesty's successor? and then let even the man of ordinary knowledge
answer it, and see whether he will not say, not every one that can catch it,
but he that has right to the Crown. And by this fitting of the question to the
current of the Oath, and the resolution that the thing it self gives to it, as
the proof of his Proposition is taken off, so the contradictory to it is
necessarily inferred, to wit, that the sole, common and ordinary acception of
the word Successor, is not him that actually succeeds in Government. But if the
word Successor be capable of a diverse acceptance, what obligation can there be
to successors in the Oath? R: Although Successor in common usage may be taken
two ways, to wit, either for a successor in fact, or a successor in right, yet
in the Oath it can be taken but in the latter sense. For, 1. It is a rule for
the finding out of the sense of an Oath agreed on among Casuists, that in Oaths
enjoined, or imposed by others, we must construe them in that sense which is
known, or may most probably be judged to be the prescribers Vide D Sanders. de
juram. oblig. praelect. 6. Sect. 9.

Ant. Ashcams Discourse 2d. part. Chap. 41.


; but his end in this Oath being the support of his Crown in a lineall
succession from himself, according to his right settled by the Laws, his sense
intended by Successors could only be, they that are such de jure, and the same
that are his heirs. 2. To take the word in the other sense, viz: for Successors
de facto, how unjustly soever possessed is inconsistent. 1. With the nature of
an Oath, which must be taken in righteousness: Jer. 4.2. that is, to oblige
only to that which is just. 2. With the word Heir, which being placed first in
the Oath, must first be served; and successor can be only understood in
congruity with it. 3. With the Oath of Supremacy, which binds us to the
lawful Successors. 4. With the Law of the Land, which appoints succession to
the Heir. 5. With a possibility of keeping the Oath, for if heirs and
successors mean diverse persons, how can the Oath of Allegiance, and defense of
the Regal dignity be observed toward both?

Having vindicated this passage of the Oath of Allegiance from this Authors
distortion, I cannot let him pass without without a brief animad version or
two more. 1. Whilst he contends about the sense of Successors, and would have
it understood of actual succeeders, that it may favor the Usurpers, he
forgets what is the object of that succession, viz: a Crown, and regal
dignity, wherein by virtue of that Oath those Successors are to be defended:
whereas they whose power he pleads for, (and in whose behalf he undertook to
answer this clause, as not forbidding obedience to them) have not only put by
the rightful Successor, but abolished the Crown and Regal dignity it self;
unto what then would he have his mecenates to be successors? or how will he
reconcile obedience to them with defense of the Crown, and royal dignity? 2.
It is to be admired, that a person of so fair a character (as is given him by
the worthy Authors of the Religious Demurrer) should begin this Section of his
with a general deliberative, (It were good to consider, whether there be any
clause in any Oath or Covenant, which forbids obedience to the Commands of the
present Government,) and yet take no notice of any thing in this or the other
Oaths and Covenants, save of this clause only in this Oath, which it seems he
thought he could not only loosen from obliging against him, but draw over to
be accident to him, which how well he has performed, I leave the Reader to
consider. And I further admire how (seeing he accounts Oaths sacred bonds,
and reverend obligements) he feared not to use such enforcement to the clear
letter of so tender and sacred a thing; for though any body can say a tyrant
sine titulo, or a Usurper is a Successor de facto when he is in, yet that he is
such a successor as the Oath intends, viz: one that we are sworn in allegiance
to, and are bound by that Oath to defend to the uttermost of our power, etc.
Having withal (probably at the same time) sworn in the Oath of Supremacy
Allegiance to the lawful Successors, and to our power to assist, and defend
all jurisdictions, privileges, etc. belonging to those Successors, is a
grosser interpretation, then I hope he himself will own when he considers it,
or any considering and conscientious men can receive. And I could wish he would
consider, whether when he took the Oath he had this sense in his mind, or
rather it be not newly excogitated, upon the coming into question of these late
transactions; and how nearly this practice entrencheth upon perjury Alterum
perjurii genus est ubi recte jura. veris, non sincere agere, sed novo aliquo
excogitato commento iuramenti vim (salvis tamen verbis) declinare and cludere
D. Sanders. de Iuxam. oblig. praelect. 6. Sect. 7.
.

4. But having said what he thinks fit to the clause, he will have one glance
at the urgers of it. Yet withal this quaere may be added, while the son is in
the same posture in which the father was, how comes this Oath at this time to
stand up, and plead for disobedience in regard of the Son, that was asleep, and
silent in regard of the Father?

1. They that plead this Oath for disobedience, or rather denying obedience to
the present Power in regard of the Sons right, did the same in regard of the
Father; when it was apparent, that not a mere defense of Religion and
Liberties, and a recovery of the Kings personal presence to the Parliament was
the end of the war, but the Fathers death, and the Sons dis-inheriting, with
the deflowering of the Crown, and over-turning of the Throne it self. Witness
(amongst other testimonies) what the London, Essex, Lancashire, and Banbury
Ministers have declared publicly in their respective writings, they are alike
sworn to, have according to their power and vocations, stood for the Authority
of both, and not allowed the deposition of either, or the usurpation of their
Power by others: they have prayed against, bewailed, stood astonished at,
witnessed against the proceedings that have been against both of them: and to
this day they lament that the clear Word of the Lord, held forth by their
testimonies, has not prevailed for the prevention or retractation of those
direful, and (the world throughout) scandalous courses.

2. The Son cannot yet be in the same posture his Father was in, whilst an
overture or proposal for satisfaction has not once been made to him, wherein
he is in the view of the Kingdom more harshly and extremely dealt with then
even his Father was; and as his Fathers sufferings as to life were without
president, so are his as to succession to the Crown.

Mr. Ashcam (whom I had in hand before, Chap. 2.) has diverse strange, and
unapproveable passages reflecting upon the Oaths under debate; which I shall
cull out as I meet with them in several places. In his 2d. part, Chap. 8.
Sect. 6. he lays down four Cases, wherein he says, Subjects are freed from
their sworn Allegiance. His three first, ( viz: 1. If a Prince abandon. 2. If
he alienate. 3. If Nero-like through mad fury or folly, he seek in an hostile
way the destruction of his whole Kingdom) will I presume be taken not to
concern our case in hand; the fourth possibly may be judged applicable to it,
which therefore I shall take notice of: and a brief animadversion will serve,
he delivering it (as he does other odd and unsound stuff) with a
pythagoricall magisteriousnesse, and without the assistance of reason to induce
a persuasion to it in the Reader.

Fourthly, (says he) if the Prince have part of the supreme right, and the
people the other part, then notwithstanding an Oath of Allegiance to him, he
may be opposed if he invade the other part of Supreme right. And a few lines
after he affirms with Grotius, He may lose his right by the Law of War. And in
the next Section he says of all those four Cases, and therefore of this, That
they show how we are absolved in our own consciences from all Oath and
Contract, when one party forfeits his Conditions first.

The defensive opposing of a Prince, invading his Compeers part by the party
invaded where the Supreme right is so shared, (supposing the Oath of
Allegiance to be cautioned according to that sharing) I shall not dispute, it
being beside the present question; but his losing his right by the Law of War;
and the Subjects absolution from Oath upon that his supposed forfeiture of
conditions, I shall a little call into question. 1. He tells us (if we will take
it upon his word) if the Prince invade the others right, he may lose his right
by the Law of War. What the Law of War means (if diverse, or varying from Gods,
and other humane Laws) I understand not, nor is it material; in discerning
into the permanency, or cessation of right, and of an oath concerning it, we
are to have recourse to the Law of God, and Nature; and if by these the Princes
title, and Subjects oath remain firm, notwithstanding his invading the peoples
right, the Law of war like Alexanders Sword may violently cut in sunder, but it
cannot unloose either the single tie of right, or the superadded of an oath.
How should this forfeiture come? if any ways, by way of satisfaction for the
trespass upon the others right. But theological Justice appoints not, that
where one invadeth another right, the Invaders right should thereupon be
cancelled; and that it may be lawful for the invaded, upon that injury
received, to invest himself therewith, and finally to alienate and disposse him
of it. A liberty of defense it permits to the Invaded in relation to his own
right, and a prosecution of the Invader unto his full satisfaction for the
wrong inferred by him, and for that end (if there be no other mean but war left
to effect it) the invaded (if he have power of war) may sease the Invaders
right unto a just recovery or restitution of his own; but that being compassed,
and proportionable satisfaction for the trespass being given or gained, the
Invaded party must sit down therewith, and not extend his line over all his
late Invaders right. Every transgression toward man calls for satisfaction; and
whosoever does wrong, is bound to make reparation; and his right is responsible, or
obnoxious so far: but it is more then summum jus to carry this compensation to
a total and perpetual translation of the Injurers possession to the Injured:
total confiscation is too high a penalty to be set upon every encroachment.
Look into the laws and rules of satisfaction in Scripture, as Exodus 22.1, 2,
etc. Levit. 6.4, 5. 2 Samuel 12.6. Luke 19.8. and it will appear the deepest
amounts but to a fourfold restitution of the damage. Nay look into that order
(which comes home to our Case) concerning the Princes of Israel, who having
formerly used oppression, violence, spoil, and exaction toward the people of
God, are not therefore adjudged to be deprived of their whole Inheritance
(Office, and all) but are only reduced to their own portion: Ezekiel. 45.7, 8, 9.
But because this Gentleman flies to the Law of War for this his extreme
dealing with Princes, hear what a learned Judge, and profound Statesman
delivers, in the case, in relation to that very rule. It is the Lord Verulam,
who (insisting on the justness of a war on the King of Englands part with
Spain, for the recovery of the Palatinate, although the Paulsgrave in whose
behalf that war should be commenced, should be accounted to have made an unjust
war in Bohemia, Considerations touching war with Spain, written by the right
honorable Francis Lord Verulam page 3, 4, 5, 6.
by means whereof he came to lose the Palatinate) resolves thus: An offensive
war is made, which is unjust to the Aggress^ur, the prosecution, and race of
the war carries the Defendant to assail, and invade the ancient and indubitate
patrimony of the first aggressor, which is now turned Defendant, shall he sit
down, and not put himself in defense? or, if he be dispossessed, shall he not
make a war for the recovery? No man is so poor of judgment as will affirm it.
This resolution he confirms with many instances worthy to be perused in the
Author; and in the end with this Reason: Wars are vindict; revenges,
reparations; but revenges are not infinite, but according to the measure of the
first wrong or damage. And within a few lines after he says of the case he is
arguing: It is the more clear on our part, because the possession of Bohemia is
settled with the Emperor. For, though it be true, that Non datur compensatio
injuriarum, yet were there somewhat more color to detain the Palatinate, as in
the nature of a Recovery in value, or compensation, if Bohemia had been lost,
or were still the stage of War. According to the rule of Justice then, yea even
that of War, the peoples right being recovered, and satisfaction given or
tendered for the securing of it for future, the late invasive Prince should
enjoy his right again, and the oath that was given for the securing of it
stands in force, and obliges to it. And this may be further cleared, in that
the Solemn League and Covenant was prescribed, and taken when the King was
judged to be in the actual invasion of the peoples rights; when the people
could not be reasonably required to swear the said Covenant in behalf of the
Kings right, if such an invasion did forfeit it, and absolve the Subjects from
their oaths to him; and if they did then swear, they cannot afterward plead an
absolution from their Oaths by virtue of that invasion. And if the late Kings
actions could be a forfeiture of all rights, and dissolution of all Oaths as to
himself (which I cannot yield) yet how can either of them be said to be
disanulled in relation to his Heir, upon whom the right legally descends, and
unto whose title the Oaths were sworn. If it be said, he was partaker in the
same actions, the Religious Demurrer will tell you, 2. part. page 8.
that the right and title to the Crown upon his Fathers death, does quit him
from all stain by the Laws of the Land.

2ly, Whereas he would infer this absolution from all oaths, by the Princes
forfeiture of his Conditions first. What Conditions does he mean? 1. If he
understand any conditions to be in the Subjects Oaths which are to be fulfilled
by the Prince, upon which terms the Subjects Oaths shall bind, he is besides
the book; the Oaths of the people put no conditions upon the Prince, but are
all absolute and irrespective, and run without ifs, or and's; in like manner as
the obligation of Subjects allegiance to their Sovereign is irrespective
according to Divine Institution, as I have before (in this Chap.) proved. If
this Author fancy any such conditions in the peoples Oaths, let him show where
they lie, and what they are. 2. If he mean conditions in the Kings Oaths of
Government, they are also unconditioned, or not dependant on terms to be kept
on the Subjects part: and, as the Subjects miscarriage is not a releasement of
the King from his Oath of Government, so the Kings failing is no discharge of
the Subject from his Oath: the validity, or obligation of either cannot be said
to hang on the performance of the other; unless it could be proved that each
part swore with respect to the others observation of his duty and oath, which
neither the tenor of the Oaths, nor the subject matter of them will permit to
be granted; nor has this or any other Author that I have seen, said any thing
to prove that.

3ly, If by conditions he mean the capitulations which the Kingdom may be
supposed to have made with him at his Installment in the Throne, upon the
keeping, At si duo homines mutuo se obligent promissis diversi generis, aut non
codem tempore, aut alias citra mutuum respectum: violata ab uno fides non
liberat alterum obligatione; sed uterque tenetur id servare quod ipse juravit,
etiamsi alter qoud suarum erat partium non effecerit, exempligratia. Rex
aliquis simpliciter, and citra respectum ad fidelitatem subditorum jurat se
regnum administratum just and secundum leges: subditi alio tempore simpliciter
and citra respectum ad Principis officium iurant se ei debitam fidelitatem, and
obedientiam praestituros, utrique obligantur quod suj est officii fideliter
facere, et si defecerit altera pa^ a suo o licio: ita ut neque Rex solutus sit
a suo iuramento, si subditi debitum obsequi^ non praestiterint; nec subditi
suo, si Rex a ^ustitae tramite dest x^rit. D Sanders de Iurament. oblig.
praelect. 4. Sect. 8.
or breaking whereof he should enjoy, or lose his dignity; there are no such
capitulations made either with him personally, or with any of his predecessors
to be alleged; they are inconsistent with the Supreme Power entrusted with
him. The truth is, it is a weak error, though somewhat apt to possess the
minds of unconsidering men, that in those estates of life ordained of God for
the help of man, wherein there is a mutual relation, and answerable offices to
be performed (as of Magistrate, and Subject; parent, and child; husband, and
wife, Master, and servant) where there is a departure from duty on the one
side, there is a cessation of the debt of duty on the other. If this were so,
it were a frivolous thing for men, subject to corruption, to contract any
relations; and there would be no place left for the exercise of gentleness,
patience, charity, betwixt relatives, nor for the inferiors passive obedience
in case of innocence; but this is directly contradicted by that of the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet 2.18, 19, 20. and those rules of the Apostles, Romans 12.17. 1 These.
5.15. 1 Pet. 3.9. There are indeed some particular cases wherein the
beneficial duty of those relations is expireable, as is that of the married in
case of adultery; that of parents when their children are rebellious
un^e^cla^mably; that of Magistrates toward a Subject capitally offensive. But
such particulars are warranted by Scripture; otherwise, wherein God has not
given a discharge, man may not. Now let any case, wherein the Subject is
dis-engaged by Divine Warrant upon the Magistrates mis-administration, be
produced, and made out to extend to the point in hand, and it will be yielded;
But this is yet to be done. But I go on to another passage of the Author.

In the same Chap: Sect: 7. he has these words. Now I shall endeavor to show
how a man may take an Oath from an^ just invading party, contrary to those
Oaths which perhaps he to^k fl^s^ from the just party, who p^ssibly brake no
conditions with him. This his undertaking he prosecutes in Sect: 10. where he
says thus. I conceive but two ways of taking such opp^site Oaths. To take an
Oath in contradiction of a former Oath, is so high a matter, that the way to it
had need to be very clear; and it can be no way allowable save one, that is,
when the former Oath cease to oblige; let us examine therefore whether his
two ways fall under this ^ne^. When it is in a thing wherein a man may justly
presume that the right party for a time releases him of his former Oath or duty
to him. 1. The swearers presumption that the party sworn to, does release him
from his former Oath, un^esse he has actually released him, and declared so to
him, is unto him no dis-obligation; there can be no just presumption of such a
releasement, without such an antecedent act of the same party; without it
evidently appearing, it is but a groundless presumption, and highly impious:
if it carry on to the taking of an opposite Oath, the content of the party
(...) to being not passed, o^ made known to him, this presumption is but the
swearers own act, and his own act cannot di^charge him; what is it that must be
the ground of this presumption? The obliged persons persuasion of the equity o^
reasonableness of the thing? that is but his own judgment, the party he is
bound to may happily judge otherwise; however it is at the best but a probable,
not a certain ground to conclude upon, that another does a thing because it is
just, and that the party thereupon consents to a release is but his own
fiction, till he has so expressed himself to him. This were an easy way of
escaping out of any promissory oath to man, and would be ordinary if it would
hold; for men would be apt to induce themselves to believe an expediencie and
justness of an absolution from the party, when their oaths pinch them in the
performance; but this presumption is but a superficial device.

2. The party sworn (in the case in hand) standing upon his title, preventeth
this presumption, and plainly declares the contrary: 3. In the Solemn League
and Covenant, the party sworn to (as before has been manifested) is not the
King, Dico relaxationem istam in juramentis, faederibus, pacti, alusque
contractibus humanis locu^ habere, non item in votis. ratio discriminis est,
quia vota Deo fiunt ut parti: ab homine autem ea sola rel^xari fas est quae
homini facta sunt D. San^. de jurament. oblig. praelect. 7. Sect. 8.
but the people of all ranks within the three Kingdoms entering into the same
Covenant: and how can they be presumed to release one, whilst they hold
themselves bound by it? 4. The Protestation of the 5. of May, 1641. is a Vow;
now Divines resolve, that though an Oath may be cancelled by the party to whom
it is made, yet a Vow no man can remit, because it is made to God as the party,
and no man has to do in altring the right wherein we are bound to him. The
things therefore concerning the Government included in that Vow, cannot so much
as be pretended to be unloosed by this way.

2. His other way he thus lays down. A man cannot by Oath be obliged further
to any power, then to do his utmost; and the Oath is to be understood
conditionally, if the action, or passion may be for that Powers advantage. In
an Army each man being obliged by Oath to lose his life for the Prince, rather
then turn back, or avoid any danger; this Army having done its utmost, is
beaten; and now the Soldiers can do no more for their Prince then dye; in
these straights therefore it is not repugnant to their Oath to ask quarter, or
a new life, and having taken it, they are bound in a new and just obligation of
fidelity to those whom they were bound to kill few hours before. They who live
under the full Power of the unjust party, may be said to take quarter, and to
be in the same condition with the former: and so have the liberty to oblige
themselves to that which the Prince now cannot but expect from them, viz: to
swear to those under whose Power they live, that they will not attempt any
thing against them. All that this amounts to is, it is praeter, non contra
prius juramentum; and as the condition which is the ground of this promissory
Oath is such, that it is impossible for a man in it to advance his parties
cause, so it is impossible for him to be bound to an impossibility. Here is
much strength of confidence in asserting, but none of Reason to a warrant, and
prove what is here intended to be concluded. That a Soldier, or Subject, being
sworn to serve his Prince to the utmost of his power, may ask, and take
quarter, and passively submit to a captivating Enemy, when he is fully under
his power, I shall not call into question; his Oath binding him to do what he
can, for his Sovereign forbids him not to yield when he can do no longer; and
for him to suffer death, or harder usage by contesting with his enemy, when he
lies at his mercy, as his Oath binds not to it, so it is for his Princes
disadvantage, there being yet hope that his life may be reserved, and his
liberty recovered, for his Princes further service according to his Oath, in
regard whereof he is rather in that case bound to ask, and take quarter, then
bound out from it, but what of all this? will it thence follow, That the
Soldier, or Subject thus brought under an adverse party to his Prince, owes
fidelity, and may oblige himself by Oath to that party not to attempt against
him? If his Allegiance and Oath were expired, there were some probable way for
it; but here is little said, or can be said for that. Let us particularly
examine, what this man alleges.

1. He has done what he could, and the Oath bound him to no more. R: He has
done what he could hitherto, and so far has kept his Oath; but if the Oath was
(as the Oaths in the case under debate are) not limited to that particular
design, or battle, wherein the Prince has the worse, and his sworn followers
are fallen into the unjust parties hands, but to endure whilst life lasts, and
the Prince has any service for him, he has not done what possibly he may yet
do, nor has he satisfied his Oath, so that it can demand no more of him.

2. He has a new life given him of his conquering Enemy, and thence becomes
bound to him. This is but a rhetorical flourish, or complement, and has no
Logic in it, his life is the same it was, and therefore the man is still under
the same obligation of his duty and oath which he was before under. If this
Author can prove his life to be really another, I will grant an evacuation of
all his former contracted obligations. And in truth although the custom of War
calls an Enemies sparing of the life of a worsted person Mercy, yet if that
persons cause were good, though he has found bad success, he has not
forfeited his life to his prevailing Enemy, neither is he beholding or in debt
to him for it, no more then a true man owes his life to those thieves that
only rob him; or a weak man is indebted for his life to a strong man, because
he kills him not. 3ly. This is besides, and not against the former Oath. 1. If
it be not against it, you are besides your undertaking, and prevaricate it, for
you promised to show how a man might take an Oath contrary to his former Oaths.
2. But it is plainly against the former, for to swear to do the utmost that can
be for, the Prince, and to swear not to attempt any thing against that Princes
Enemy which has dispossessed him of his right can be no other then contraries.
4. It is impossible for him to be bound to an imp^ssibility, Sed rei
impossibilis ex accidente tantum aliquantum diversa est ratio. Vt si quis
^uratus solv^re centum infra mensem, quod non est per se impossible casu
aliquo in opino in^rim impediatur, ut non possit tantum pecuniae summam tempore
p^aefi^to consi ^^^^et si non obligetur in foto conscientiae ad faciendum quod
promisit, scil: ad solv^ndum totum debitum debito tempore quod i^m redditum est
e^^mpossibile; obligatur ^^men ad facen^um quod in se est, viz. ad sulvendum
qu^ntum potest, and quam cito potest Ratio ut^iu^que est q^a cum in hoc casu
sola impossibilitas impediat obligationem: obligatio tollitur quoad idso^um
quod est factu impossible, quoad reliquum vero manet, and qui non potest o^
quod debet, deb^t tamen omne quod potest. D. Sanders. de Iur. oblig. praelect.
2. Sect 12.
and it is now impossible for him to advance his parties cause. That which is
in it self, or in its own nature impossible, an oath cannot bind to; but that
which is in it self probable, and therefore promised under an Oath, may by
accident, or by the interposition of some casual impediment become impossible,
this is very ordinary, and this kind of impossibility does not dissolve an
Oath, but only suspends it for the time, until the present impediment be
removed: so that though the Oath bind not to the hic and nune of the
accidental impossibility, yet it stands in force still, and obliges to the
thing is it is in it self possible, and may (the obstacle being removed) be
hereafter fealible. 2. Whilst it is impossible for him to advance his parties
cause, it is a f^ivolous thing for him to swear that he will attempt nothing
for his party against the Enemy, for so he only swears not to attempt an
Impossibility; and when this impossibility cease, the former Oath to his
Prince takes place: so that this objected Impossibility can be no warrant for
such a latter oath.

Our Author in his Chap: 9. Sect. 3. thus opposes the obligation of the Oaths:
God says, By me Princes reign: the governing Powers which are, are of God. God
has declared that he will chastise, and change Princes, and Governors; and
when we see the changes and chastisements, we may be sure they are by Gods
order, yea, though the invading or succeeding Governors be like Jehu,
Nebuchadnezzar, or those who by cruelty show us nothing but Gods wrath.
Wherefore it can be no less then sin in us, or treason against God, to swear
we will never obey any, but this, or that Prince, or State, or any but of such
a Family: for this depends on Gods Providence and Justice, which sets bounds to
the duration of Governors, and Governments. 1. It is certain that all the Kings
and Potentates of the Earth are set up and pulled down by God, and every change
of Governors, even the advancement of those who are heavy scourges to the
people, is in a sense by and from him; and it is as certain, that some Princes
in some sense are not of God, as is clear enough, Hosea 8.4. We must therefore
distinguish thus. 1. A thing is said to be of God, in that it was foreseen,
and pre-ordained of him before it came to pass; and falls out by his
providence and disposal. And thus every act or event is by him, whether it be
right, or wrong, agreeable or repugnant to his revealed will or Commandment: 2 Chronicles. 25.20. 2 Samuel 24.1. So are all thefts, robberies, oppressions, murders,
violent dispossessions, and occupations. Thus even Antichrists power that is
derived to him by the devil is yet given him of God, Rev. 13.5.7.17.17. And so
was Pilates power to crucify Christ: Joh. 19.10, 11.2. To be of God, imports
the thing to be enjoined, warranted or approved by his word, or revealed will;
and thus Gamaliel uses the terms, when he speaks hypothetically of the
Apostles preaching and working miracles. If it be of God, in opposition to that
which is of men, although in the former acception nothing is of men, but it is
of God also. Act. 5.38, 39. Now to discern what is of God, so as to impose upon
us, we must not go to his secret will or providence, many things come about to
us that way which we are not bound to embrace and acquiesce in, but may, yea
ought to use remedy against, and strive to avert, or remove, such as are
tentations to sin, diseases of the body, captivity, oppression, dishonor,
defamation, and such like. These evils, albeit we are patiently and
submissively to bear them for the present, as they come from Gods correcting
hand, when they are come to pass; yet we are allowed and required to seek the
preventing of them when threatened, and the removal of them when befallen;
Unjustly advanced Magistrates are of this nature; A passive submission under
whom as a divine castigation, whilst we can find no redress, is expedient;
but an embracement of them (as those that are authorized and warranted by God)
active obedience to t^em, and maintenance or support of them (which is the
matter in question) cannot upon this ground be inferred as necessary. To do
evil, because it is in the power of our hand by Providence, or to persuade
others, or our selves to sit down under intolerable wrongs, because they are
come to pass that way, is an ungodly and foolish construction of Divine
Providence, and of a late invention in these every-way erring times.

2ly, This Author in urging obedience upon this account, not only crosses
Scripture and reason, but cont^adicteth himself in what he says elsewhere: for
the making good of this, I shall only present the Reader with his own words
pa. 79. God many times finding some Nations grossly peoc^nt, and obnoxicus to
his severest just^^^e, instead ^f ^esh^^ing gives them up as a prey to another
Crown ^ thus were the seven Nations; and afterward Israel it self was thus in
the hands of Nebuchadnezzar: which particular case is not a general argument,
or consequence (as some a^oue it) for the manner of Government, or latitude of
subjection in all Kingdoms. And page 89. he speaking of Antichrists dominion,
says, There is one kind of Usurpation which by no possession or prescription
can ever become lawful; and a Christian can never submit himself to it,
without wounding his conscience and faith. And yet let this man say if this
power of Antich^ist be not of God, and by his providence in the sense wherein
his Argument runs. 3. Who ever said, that men might swear they will never obey
any but this or that Prince, State, or Family? or who ever knew it required, or
done? All oaths, and particularly those of obedience, carry still in them a
caution of possibility; and when the matter becomes in it self impossible, the
Oath cease, and is void: We therefore swear to obey Princes, and States,
whilst it pleases God to continue them to us; and this tie a present
interruption of Government (though to an Invaders full possession) cannot
dissolve: the oath, and allegiance of Israel contracted with David, 1 Chronicles.
11.4. continued till his death, though Absolon rose up against him, drew all
Israel after himself, and drove him out of the Land: 2 Samuel 19.9. But when a
Prince or Family is irrecoverably lost to a Kingdom the Oath expireth.

CHAP. V. The Reasons brought for obedience to the Usurpers, answered.
THe next, and last part of my work is to answer those Arguments that I have
met with, which are brought for the obedience which I have disallowed in the
2d. and 3d. Chapters: the book entitled, The lawfulness of obeying the
present Government, says the most for such obedience of any that I know; it
therefore I shall chiefly deal with.

1 Argument.
First, his first and main Argument is taken from that of the Apostle, Romans
13.1, etc. from this text his Argument set in frame is this: If the Apostle
commands submission and obedience, and that for conscience sake unto those in
his time that came unlawfully into their power, and authority, then obedience
to such may be now lawful. But the Apostle commands submission, and obedience,
and that for conscience sake unto those that in his time came unlawfully into
their power and authority. Ergo. The major will not be stood upon. The minor is
to be denied; And for his full confutation therein, and vindication of the
Apostle in this text, I shall, 1. by way of Elenchus make good the
contradictory to this Proposition. 2. Answer what he brings for the maintenance
of it.

1. Then I am to clear this contradictory to his minor, viz: That the Apostle
in commanding obedience to the higher powers, can only be understood of such
as possess their Authority lawfully, or have a just title, and regular calling
thereunto. And this I shall undertake to do out of the Apostles own words, or
by the characters he gives of the Powers he would have obeyed.

1. There is (says the Apostle) no power but of God.

1. To be of God here must import not merely a permissive counsel, or
providence, but a divine approbation, authorization, and vocation; they are
said to be of God thus, that come in by Gods way, or are called to their places
as God has appointed in his Word; and that, not the former only, but this
stricter sense of being of God must be here taken, appears thus. 1. Otherwise
the Apostle had said no more for Magistrates in this Character then the
Scripture says of plagues, famines, and other judgments Fanatici dicant
potestates omnes sic a Deo esse, sicut pestes, morbi, and paenae a Deo sunt.
Pareus in loc.
, yea of the sins of men, which in the first and larger sense are said to be of
God, 2 Samuel 24.1. 2 Chronicles. 25.20. 2. A derivation of them from God in regard of
providence merely, could be no argument for obedience, non-resistance to them,
and maintenance of them; for we are not to subject our selves to, support, and
refrain from resisting a thing merely upon this ground, because it comes by
providence; then a foreign Enemy that invades us, or a robber must be submitted
unto, and may not be resisted; the plague or other sicknesses in the body, nay
the outward temptations to sin might not be prevented or removed, for all these
come by proidence But the Apostle alleges their being of God, here as an
argument for subjection to, non-resistance, and maintenance of them.

2. By Powers in this place, this Author tells us, he means not merely power, or
authority abstracted from persons, but persons clothed with that Authority. Now
that persons clothed with Authority may be said to be of God, there must be not
only Gods institution of the office, or magistracy in the abstract, for the
mere ordaining of the office makes not this or that man a Magistrate more then
another, but also his ordering of the persons to the office, but they that are
thus ordered of God ( viz: not providentially alone, but by way of vocation,
approbation, and authorization, as it is above proved, the sense of the words
[of God] must import) to the Magistrates place, must needs be granted to be
lawfully possessed of it, or to have to it a just title. This universal negative
therefore of the Apostle, There is no power but of God, must not be taken in
the simply universal sense, as if there were no other power in the world but
such, but as a restrained universal, to wit, There is no lawful power but of
God: and so alone can I conceive it consistable with that of the Prophet, Hosea
8.4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I kn^w it
not. These two sayings of the holy Ghost must needs be true, and therefore must
not be contradictories; which they are not, if you take them uttered in a
diverse respect, the former of a lawful, the latter of an illegal magigracie.

2ly, The powers here are said to be ordained of God: and v. 2. to be the
ordinance of God; Jud^ 4. Ier. 33.25.
that is, not by his decree, or handiework merely, as ungodly men are said to
be ordained to condemnation: and the being and posture of heaven and earth are
said to be Gods ordinances, but by his word or written sanction, a person in
this acception is to be termed Gods ordinance, that is, by divine rule put
into a place, or state: those Magistrates then only can be said to be ordained
of God; and his ordinanance, that (for the substance at least) enter by the
door that he has made, or the means and manner he has prescribed. The sons
of Aaron in their priesthood, and the Levites in their ministry were Gods
ordinance, in as much as they were ordained according to Gods appointment.
Whereas Korah, and his company, Levit. 8. Numb. 8.
though they officiated as Priests, yet they were not so, because they wanted
that ordination. A man and a woman are by Gods ordinance husband and wife, who
are espoused together according to divine rule, and not they who only perform
the acts of such one to another. In like manner, not whosoever can get into the
Seat of Authority by any means are Gods ordained, but they who come in
according to Gods prescript and regulation. Abs^l^m, and Adenijah, though they
got into the kingdom of Israel, were not Gods ordinance; but David, and
Solomon, whose places they usurped were, these being put into the place by Gods
direction.

3ly, The Power here may not be res^sted under pain of damnation: v. 2. But, 1.
An usurped Power, or they that get men under their command by force without
right, may be resisted, and subdued. Genesis 14.
Abraham and his confederates justly took up Arms, and by them rescued Lot, and
the Sodomites from Chederlaomer, and his participhants. The Judges and Tribes
of Israel righteously warred against, and vanquished the Nations that
successively obtained and exercised dominion over them, in the book of Judges:
so did Samuel and Saul against the Philistines, that were for a time their
masters: 1 Samuel So did David, whilst he was king in Hebron, with the house of
Judah, against Ishbosheth, Abner, and all Israel: 2 Samuel 2.8, 9, etc. 3.1. 2 Samuel 18. 2 King. 11.
so did David and his men against Absalom and the people that followed him: so
did Jehoiadah in the right of Joash, against Athalia. Lastly, thus did the
Maccabees against Antiochus and his race; Which examples I but mention, having
urged the most of them before Tyrannum absque titulo qui est invasor, quilibet
privatus potest, debete medio tollere, neque enim ille Rex est, sed privata
persona. Alsted Theol. Cas ca. 17. Reg. 8.
. And indeed to imagine the Apostle here to tie men conscientiously, and under
pain of damnation to obey, and sit down without any reluctance under, yea to
maintain, assist, and sight, for them, who do by force, without any right at
all, usurp Authority over them; though they were Turks, theives, Irish, Rebels,
Papists, or whoever, the worst of men, and cruellest of Tyrants, and though the
sufferers should come to have strength in their hands to relieve themselves, is
an imposition (I think) beyond the thoughts of any sober mind, and that which
none, but they of the Anabaptisticall spirit will advisedly own, and them also
we may rather find saying, then doing so; the proceedings of the Parliament,
yea of all parties on both sides in the late war disclaim this doctrine; yea
the Army it self may be judge in this matter, who must either condemn this
sense, or all their own warlike actions: this would make the Apostle not only
to put an insupportable passivenesse upon people, but to discourage just
Magistracy, if opposed, and grown weak, whereas his manifest scope is to uphold
it. 2. They that come in by mere force, with expulsion of the just Magistrate,
have apparently committed this crime of resisting the Power that is the
ordinance of God, and so have incurred the sentence of damnation, or
condemnation (which may be understood of punishment by men) and its a strange
conceit to think, that the Apostle dosh here at once both condemn their act,
and confirm their authority gotten by it, and that the same persons should by
the same means be both the resisters that are (...), or set in an opposite
order to that ordinance, and condemned for it, and the power and ordinance it
self that is to be obeyed, and not resisted. 3. If they that come in by force
against the just Magistrate are the resisters of the Power here to be submitted
unto, then those that shall obey those resisters in the full latitude of
obedience here enjoined (which comprehends assistance and maintenance of them)
do become therein resisters of the said just Power also: so that obedience to
the Usurpers is rather forbidden, then taught in this text.

4ly, The Power here to be obeyed, is the minister of God to thee, a revenger
to execute wrath, etc. v: 4. 1. No man can be called a minister of God, but he
that is called of God to that service, wherein he is his Minister, not only
the office must be authorized, but the person must be invested with it by God;
there must be some act of God, either immediately or mediately put forth
toward the person, or this relation to him of being his Minister cannot be
founded; now whosoever is the subject of such a divine act or vocation, has
without controversy a just title to Magistracy. 2. He that is a Revenger to
execute wrath under and for God, (that is not by providence only, as thieves,
robbers, and foreign invaders are, but by place and calling) not for
destruction, but for good, he must receive a warrant from God for it: vengeance
is Gods alone, by property, so that none can take it in hand but by deputation
from him: others whatever power they have to do it, are expressly prohibited to
be avengers, immediately before this text, Chap. 12. 17. Now he that receives a
warrant from God for it, is lawfully empowered.

By every one of these Characters affixed by the Apostle, to the Magistracy
spoken of in this text, it must needs be evinced, That the Apostle in
commanding obedience to the higher Powers, can only be understood of such as
possess their Authority lawfully, or have a just title thereunto: and this is
the contradictory to his Minor, which I undertook to make good.

2. I come in the 2d. place to give Answer to what he urges for the proof of
his Minor, which may be gathered up thus. The Roman Emperors, Claudius and
Nero, came unlawfully into their Power, or Authority: but the Apostle commands
submission and obedience to them: Ergo.

In this Syllogism both his premises are peccant, and may be denied. 1. For
the minor the Apostle speaks in the general of powers, without particular
application to the Roman, or any other Non de hoc vel il^^ ^rincipe loquitur,
sed de ipsa re. Chrysostom. apud Parcum in loc.
; the carrying of them to the Roman Emperors is this Authors own. If he shall
say he may safely argue a thesi, ad hypothesin, or from the general to the
particular, it is true, if he hold to such hypotheses, or particulars as are
contained under the thesis or general: but it is not granted to him, that the
Apostle in this text speaks illimitedly, and without exception of all men that
by any means may get power into their hands; but on the contrary it is stood
upon, that he intends his precept only of lawfully called Magistrates, (the
which I have above proved) he cannot therefore include under the Apostles
general, them whom he supposes to have unlawfully got into their power, this
were Transire a genere in genu^, or to argue A dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. Neither can he be allowed to argue after that manner here, seeing
he has begun his Argument ab hypothesi, ad thesin, or from the particular to
the general, for this were to walk in a round, and to prove this by that, and
that by this circularly. As for that which he hinteth on as if he would prove
the minor by it, viz: this Epistle was written in the time of Claudius, or
Nero, it has no shadow of proof in it: for they were not the only Powers then
in being: there were others even among the Romans as well as they, himself
names the Consuls, and Senate, as those to whom the power of right belonged,
and they were then existent, and in some possession and use of the power:
although the Emperors ruled with them, and in some things overruled them, as
they were happily in other things ruled by them Quinetiam speciem quendam
libertatis induxit, conservatis senatui and Magistratibus, and maiestate
pristina and potestate: neque tam parvum quidquam, neque tam magnum publici
privatique nego^i fuit, de quo non ad P. C. referretur, etc. Vide Sueton. Tibet
ca. 30, 31, 32. Heb. 13.7.17.
; there being a kind of mixture of power, and alternatenesse of prevalency
betwixt them. Now that the Emperors were then in place (whereas others also
were in power) is no more a proof that the Apostle commands obedience to the
Emperors, then the being of false Apostles, and Ministers among the Churches,
when the Apostle wrote to Christians to obey, and follow them that had the rule
over them, proves that he commanded them obedience to those false Apostles and
Ministers.

2ly, The major Proposition ( That the Emperors Claudius and Nero came
unlawfully into their Authority) must also be denied: taking [unlawfully] in
the sense of the question, or case in hand, that is, in regard of title: for,
although the tumultuousnes of the Soldiers, and the craft of the persons
intrested, were ingredients in the manner of their entrance, yet they were not
the basis of their claim, or groundwork of their title: but they had, or came
to have, before this precept of the Apostle could intervene, sufficient
challenge thereto, otherwise; we must therefore distinguish betwixt an error,
or unlawfulness in the way, or manner of a Princes coming in, or obtaining
possession of the throne, and an unlawfulness in regard of title, or of that
which is of the substance or essence of his calling to that place. The former
is that which can only be objected against these two Emperors; the latter is
the unlawfulness in the case, or question, viz: when the Rulers hold merely by
usurpation, or have no other color of claim but force, or other intrusion: and
to argue from the former to the latter, is plainly fallacious, being A dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. But let us hear what unlawfulness the
Author urges against the Emperors, and see whether it be not short of that
which is under debate, multis parasaugis.

The Consuls and Senate (he says) anciently had the chief power of Government,
these at the death of C: Caligula entered into a consultation how they might
restore the Commonwealth to her ancient freedom, which by the Caesar's had
been taken from them, Claudius in the intrim is proclaimed Emperor by the
Soldiers, and takes it upon him: ^
Nero his successor was also first saluted Emperor, by the Soldiers:
Britannicus, who was Claudius Son being kept in by the cunning of Nero's Mother.

Unto all this the Answer is easy. Notwithstanding all these disorderly
proceedings, these two had a title (for substance) sound and good enough to the
rule they bare: take for this a short narration out of History.

The Roman State was often changed, and received many forms of Government
successively Tacit. Annal. l. 1. c. 1.
, the beast in the Apocalypse wherein the great Whore sits, is by the current
of Expositers understood to be the City or State of Rome: and his seven heads
are construed to be seven forms of Regiment that have been in it, viz: Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemviri, Dictators, Emperors, and Popes. Brightman, Mede,
Symonds, Napier, Forbs, est Apuc. 17.
If Antiquity must decide which of these Governments had the best title to be
over the Romans, it will give it to the Caesar's, for the kingly (from which
that of Emperors essentially differs not) was the first in time among them
Vthem Romam a principio Reges habuete. Tacit. Annal. l. 1 c. 1.
. If possession must determine it, the Emperors were at this present in the
Throne, and had been for a considerable time, for four of them had reigned in
succession to one another before Claudius came in. It the consent and
constitution of the people (which is the truest groundwork) must carry it, the
Emperors also were supported with this title, both originally, as to the form
of Policy, at the first setting up of kings, in the infancy of this State, and
personally at their respective comings in. By what means this consent was
gained from the people, it is not necessary to insist, it were easy to prove,
that if there were any unworthy carriage in it, it was as much at least on the
submitters as on the Caesar's part. Vide Tacit. Annal. li. 1. ca. 1, 2.
Julius Caesar (the first of them) had a concurrent agreement of the State
which was (for substance) valid enough; Tum vero abs^ns Romae Dictator creatus
pacisque and belli dominus. Cluveti Histor. mundi, lib 7. page 236. Vide
Chronicon. Carrion l. 2. pa. 180, 181. Muneribus, monumentis, longiariis, epulis
multitudinem impertitam lenierat: suos praemiis, adversarios clementiae specie
devinaerat. Quid multa? attulerat jam liberae civitati, pattim metu, partim
patientia consuetudinem serviendi. Cicero in N. Anton Philip 12. Orat. 44.
so had Augustus after him Caesari quia arma sump^erat Reip: pro ^op. Romano
imperium a Senatu datum, cum Consularibus ornamentis. Cluveri Histor. lib. 7.
page 240.
: the same had Tiberius his next successor. Sex. Pempeius, and Sex. Apuleius
Coss primi in verba Tiberii Caesaris iuravete; apudque cos Seius Strabo, and C.
Turranius: mox Senatus milesque and populus Tacit. Annal. l 1. ca 2. Vide
Sueton in Tiber. c. 24.
Caligula the next to him had the cheerfullest, and most affectionate assent
that ever Prince had Sic imperium adep^^s, populum Romanum, vel ut ita dic^m,
hominum genus voti compotem fecit, exoptatissin us Princeps, etc Vide Sueton.
in Caligula. c. 13, 14.
. By this time the Government of the Caesar's had by these reiterated acts of
consent, establishment from the people sufficient to give it a just title, and
free it from usurpation; The next that followed was Claudius, who was left by
Tiberius joint Heir with Caligula Vide Sueton in Tiber. c. 76.
, but was put by for the time by the excessive love which the people bare unto
Caligula Vide eundem in Calig c. 14.
; after whose death, the Consuls, Senate, and City Regiments talked indeed of
standing up for a public liberty. But Claudius being saluted Emperor by some
of the watch, and the cry of the City Soldiers being at length that one should
have the rule; the Consuls, and Senate, perceiving the Soldiers bent that way,
and thereupon fearing a combustion, and suspecting their own inability to make
good their design, they being divided also among themselves, and other
competitors for the Empire beginning to start up, and Agrippa the king of the
Jews, strongly counselling and persuading them to it, they withered, and shrunk
in with their undertaking, and at last accepted of Claudius Verum postero die
Senatu segniore in exequendis conatibus, per taedium, ac dissentionem di versa
censentium, and multitudine quae circumstabat unum rectorem jam, and nominatim
exposcente, armatos pro concione jurare in nomen suum passus est. Su^ton in
Claud c 10. Ad firmandum eius imperium non parum contulit Agrippa Rex
Iudaeorum, author and Claudio retinendat dignitatis, and Senatui non offendi
veteranos. Itaque Senatu segniore in exequendis conatibus, and milite urbano
Praetorianis se aggregante, in Claudii nomen iuratum est. Cluver. Histor. lib.
8. page 267. Hoc exemplo optimates deserti in magno metu esse caeperunt, ac
deinceps videntes sibi adversationem tutam non esse, secuti milites ad Claudium
transierunt. Claudius susce pit in castris advenientem senatum, and indulgenti
honor complexus, egreffus cum patribus confestim obtulit Deo hostias, ut mos
est pro imperio supplicari. Joseph. de bello Iudaie. lib 2. ca. 10. Vide eundem
Antiq. Iudaie. lib. 19. c. 3.
: as for Nero who came in next, Britannicus indeed was nearer to the Empire in
succession then he, but Agrippina, mother to Nero had prevailed with her
husband Claudius to adopt Nero, and prefer him before his own Son Britanicus;
which he did with the Senates consent p: Nero accordingly succeeded him, and
had the consent of the State at his inauguration, without any reluctance
Sententiam inclitam secuta pattum consulta; nec dubitatum est apud provincias.
Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. c. 14.
.

It appears by all this, that the Caesar's, and particularly Claudius, and Nero,
(insisted on by this Author) had other foundation for their Empire besides the
Soldiers promoting, and sufficient to give them a lawful calling, and title
to their rule, and to excuse them from Usurpation, such as has been before
described. And that Claudius came in (though cross to some unripened motions,
and consultations of theirs, yet) not against any Act or Decree of the Senate;
but with their concurrent or subsequent approbation.

If it be objected in behalf of the Usurpers in our case, that they also have a
consent of the people, by the act of the presupposed House of Commons. I
answer, besides what has been said in the close of the first Chapter, of the
peoples noncommittance of any power to their Representees, to alter any thing
in the constitution of the Supreme Power, or to erect a new one; all that they
have to do, being to manage that proportion which is committed to them: there
are moreover two main things that impeach that Acts validity. 1. That the Lords
who are an eminent integrall part of the Kingdom, as also the far greater part
of the elected Commons, are, not only absent (so that a very small part of the
Kingdom, even locally considered is represented by them that sit) but not
permitted to come in, and professedly shut out (and consequently the parts of
the Kingdom which they represent are excluded) at the passing of this consent.
2. That the object and actors in this consent, the promoted and promoters are
the same persons; on whom is the new Supreme Power conferred, but on themselves
that confer it? You cannot find two parties in this act, an agent, and a
patient; so that it is so far from being a legitimate contract, or transaction,
that it is no political act at all. What reckoning shall we make of that
consent which men bestow on themselves, in relation to an interest of power
over others? if such a grant could create a right, few men that could get
strength would lack preferment.

Having thus answered this Authors main Argument, I shall in the rest be
briefer. 2. He alleges, In this Nation many persons have been settled in
supreme Authority by mere force, without title of Inheritance, not any three
immediately succeeding each other have come to the Crown by true lineall
succession. Five Kings on a row (the Conqueror being the first) had no title
at all by proximity of blood, Hen: the 7th by mere power came in, was made
King, in, and by an Army, upon this foundation of military power he got himself
crowned at Westminster, and called a Parliament, wherein the Crown was entailed
upon him, and his Heirs. Those that came in thus, the main body of this Nation
did obey, yea does yield subjection unto their Laws to this day. Not to stand
to examine what he asserts in these premises: 1. The mistake of this Argument
is, that because the Kings by him mentioned came not in by true succession, or
proximity of blood, they therefore must needs be granted to have come in by
force alone, or otherwise unlawfully; whereas though, some of them entered by
the Sword, others by anticipation, yet they all, whose persons were, and Laws
now are obeyed, had the concurrent, or subsequent consent of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, and that without their Houses being dismembered, and a
force set at their doors. 2. The Laws made by those Princes were not made by
them alone, but by them with the Parliament; and by them, not as so entering,
but as received by Parliament, and so legally invested. 3. The three last
Princes of this Realm did come in by an indubitate lineall succession, and
proximity of blood, and the Son of the last is in being, and claiming by that
title. It is observable then that this title should be denied, and cut off,
when it was at the clearest state. 4. No doubt there have been unjustifyable
proceedings about the Crown by some of the former possessors of it: which have
been followed with remarkable punishments, and public calamities sufficiently
pointing out their injustice, and fore-warning others from making them their
examples to practice by. What has been, is no warrant to conscience that the
same may be done.

3ly, He cites some Divines, and Casuists as concurrent with him in his
opinion. Their words are too many for me to recite, and the nature of this
kind of Argument exacteth no long Answer. In a word therefore. 1. Azorius his
words allow obedience to Tyrants in regard of title, with restriction, and in
some cases, (such as are granted by me, Chap. 3d.) But your part is to prove
obedience to them, in its full latitude as you have propounded your thesis,
without limitation, and concluded (though not validly) by your first Argument.

2. Alsted distinguishes of Tyrannus, titulo, and exercitio, a Tyrant in
regard of title, and in regard of use: and his words immediately before these
alleged by you are spoken of the latter, and so may therefore these be
understood; but the former only is the subject of our question. Besides within
a few lines before he has this passage: A Tyrant without title, who is an
invader, every private man may, and ought to destroy, for he is not a Prince
but a private person Alsted: Theol: cas cap. 17. reg. 8.
. Which will not stand with the words quoted by you, if understood of a Tyrant
in regard of title.

3. Paraeus in your place speaks nothing pro, or con, of obedience to Usurpers,
but is explicating how the Apostle is to be taken in those words, The powers
that be, are of God, ordained of God: and he distinguishes thus in the words
brought in by you. The power which is of God is one thing, the getting, and use
of the power is another, which is indifferent, sometimes lawful, sometimes
unlawful, ut in dublis Aliud est potestas quae a Deo est, aliud acquisitio,
and usus potestatis, quae indifferens, alias legitima, alias illegitima. Par.
in Romans 13.
. Whither if you had followed him, you should have found him answering the
doubt about Nimrods power thus We must discern betwixt the power which is ever
of God, and betwixt the getting and usage of the power, which as to men is
often most unjust not of God, but of men's lusts, and Satan's malice Discernendu^
est inter potestatem quae ^emp^ d^ Deo est, and inter acquisitionem. and us^
pationem quae quoad hominessae potest iniustissima non a Deo sed ab hominum
affectibus, and Satana malitia. Ib. in Dub. 3.
. By which words it is evident, you have but half quoted him, as well as
impertinently; and if his Authority may sway with you, unjustly gotten power is
not of God, in regard of the person, or man, owning it, and consequently not to
be obeyed by virtue of Romans 13.

4. For the rest I have not their books to peruse, but their sayings set down
by you reach not the case at all. This therefore I offer you produce any one,
or more Authors, of any account amongst Protestants, that allow obedience to an
unlawful Power, [in the full latitude of obedience to a Magistrate, where
there is a ^e-ingagement of conscience pleaded by Law, ancient inheritance, and
oaths sworn to another Power in being, claiming, and endeavoring to recover
his right] and I will (by Gods assistance) return you a particular Answer.

4ly, His next Reason is, Either that authority which is thus taken by power
must be obeyed, or else all Authority and Government must fall to the ground,
and so confusion be admitted.

First, why must this needs follow? 1. May not Usurpation fall to the ground,
how strongly soever it be set up, and lawful Government be raised up again?
The experience of former times has observed, That no ill gotten power can be
long lived Nulla quaesita scelere potentia diuturna esse potest. Q Curt. apud
Lyps. Poli^. li. 2. c 4. Quamvis enim demersae sint leges alicujus opibus
quamvis tremifacta libertas, emergunt tamen haec aliquando -- nec vero ulla vis
imperil tanta est quae premento metu possit esse diuturna. Testis est Phalaris,
cuius est preter caeteros nobilitata crudelitas -- in quem universa
Agrigentinorum multitudo impetum fecit Quid? Macedones nonne Demetrium
reliquerunt, universique se ad Pyrrhum contulerunt? Quid? Lacedemonios in just
imperantos nonne repent omnes fere socit deseruerunt, spectatoresque se
otiosos praebuerunt leuctricae calamitatis? Cicero de officiis lib 2. Ad tempus
fortasse insidiosa and violenta valere possunt inventa hominum, sed absque
iuslitia, and aequitate prevalere non possunt diu: quippe vana and infirma sunt
stratagemata civitatis quae columna virtutis non fulciuntur. Boter. Tractat.
lib. 8. cap 6.
. Although (says Cicero) Laws should be plunged over head, and Liberties
overawed by the power of a party, they will sometimes recover again. There is
no strength of any power so great, that it can continue by keeping men in aw,
etc.

2ly, If Usurpation have a party to join with it, that party will suffice to
administer such justice as that Authority will afford; if it have no party, it
falls to the ground (for it subsists only perforce) and a clear way is open for
the right Government to take place: which will be so much the more readily
entertained, by how much it has been interrupted Arciores autem morsus sunt
intermissae libertatis, quam tetentae. Cicero de offic. lib. 2.
.

2ly, However things succeed, evil of sin must not be done, that good of
profit may be attained. It must first be proved lawful to obey, before this
Reason can be heard, which will only plead its expediencie, if it be honest.
Though commodum may be consulted, especially publicum, yet we must first be
satisfied of the justum of it. It was not long ago pleaded, Fiat justitia, ruat
coelum. And we were not told thus, when the late wars for Laws and Liberty were
first begun: If this be a cogent reason now, it was to have been so then; and
we might better have prevented the miseries of a war by he^ning to it, then by
refusing it, have, by so dear a means, purchased to our selves an harder
condition, and now be bound to bide under it for that very reason.

3ly, If Government fall, and Confusion come, let them bear the guilt that have
wrought these effects: we that detract from obedience shall only bear the
misery of it, which will be lighter to us, it may be hoped, then their
greatness with the guilt it is gotten, and kept by, will be to them.

Fifthly, he adds, Otherwise the King being for the Commonwealth, and not the
Commonwealth for the King, the end should be destroyed for the means, the
whole for a part. First, the King as a man, yea as a royal person, or most
noble part of the Commonwealth, is not the prime matter to be laid on the
balance; but if the King may be looked at as ours, and so as we are in piety,
and justice bound to him, to seek his preservation, and yield him our
obedience; thus considering him, equity and a good conscience are the things
stood for as the end; which although they may undergo the notion of means in
reference to the Commonwealths good, yet they are desirable, and to be sought
absolutely, and for themselves; and the subordinate means of the Commonwealths
political good, must be subordinated or submitted to them, and that end is
only so far, and by such means to be pursued, as will consist with these. 2ly,
The Parliament, and the Army also, a^ no more then a means, or a part in
relation to the collective Commonwealth. Must not the rights of these
therefore be stood for, with the hazard of the whole? If this rule might have
guided men in relation to their claims, such courses and events as have been,
had been prevented. 3ly, Though certain destruction of the end, or whole, must
not be run upon for the means, or part, yet those may be hazarded for the
saving of these from certain destruction. As we see it ordinarily, men do
adventure their lives and liberties for the preservation, or recovery of their
estates by war; and their whole bodies for the regaining of their healths, or
one wounded, or festered member, by Physic or Chyrurgery. 4ly, We are not
active in the destroying of the end, or whole (if they be destroyed) and we
were better both to suffer their destruction, and suffer in it, then sinfully
to concur in destroying the means, or a part, or in substituting an unlawful
means, or part for the legitimate, that we might preserve them.

Sixthly, If a masters mate had thrown the master overboard, and by power
would suffer no other to guide the ship but himself, if the mariners will not
obey him, commanding aright for the guiding of the ship, the ship and
themselves must needs perish. 1. I conceive the mariners may in this case obey
the Masters Mate for self-preservation, till they come to shore; in like manner
that we may obey an Usurpers power, that is, act according to his command in a
thing which is not only lawful, but simply necessary both to be done, and to
be done by us, as in the case of self-preservation, by repelling a foreign
Enemy, or common danger of certain and important consequence; but shall it be
inferred from hence, that the mariners are bound to obey the Mate, or we an
Usurper, in all other things of his own concernment, or separable from
self-preservation, and every other necessary duty. I am bound to submit my
self to the wholesome, and necessary direction of my Pastor, and Physician in
their respective ordering, touching my soul and body: must I say therefore I
must resign up my self in obedience to them in all other matters? 2ly, The
case is not parallel. For, 1. The mariners (without respect to their exigence)
in that posture are bound to obey none, the Master being dead, and so are
conscience free. But the people (in the case) have a Magistrate surviving, and
challenging power over them, to whom they have sworn Allegiance. 2ly, The
Mariners are supposed without obedience to the Mate, to be sure of destruction:
but by what has been above said, it cannot be pleaded that the Nation, or the
scruplers at obedience without obeying are sure to perish.

Seventhly, you quote a saying out of Cajetan Summula. Tit. Rempub. Tyrannice,
etc.
, but it suits not with the obedience you stand for; he in all that Discourse
speaks nothing at all for any obedience to Tyrants in respect of title, his
subject being the point of going to such Tyrants for Law and Justice Nunquid
gubernanto Tyranno peccent illi qui recurrunt ad ipsum pro justitia.
, (of which I have spoken Chap. 3.) and his whole speech being confined to it.

Eighthly, lastly, (for I will not follow you in repeating again what you had
said before, and I have answered above) What can the common people do in this
case? they cannot judge of titles; but they see who does visibly, and actually
exercise Authority. 1. Bruit beasts do indeed only see him that actually
leads, or drives them; and therefore they follow without making difference
betwixt the owner and a thief: but are men, though but common people so stupid?
The people you speak of are not altogether so brutish, they themselves
disprove you, if you observe (as it is easy to discern) whom they generally
abhor from, and whom they look toward: and whosoever shall compare their visible
bent with your present book, they whom you make but like Balaams dumb Ass, yet
in this case do speak with man's voice, and forbid the madness, etc. 2ly, If
they be so incapable of discerning of titles, wherefore has not only the late
King, but the Parliament published so many Declarations, and Appeals to the
people, wherein they plead for the justness of their title, to what they stood
and fought for? yea why has the Parliament drawn the people into the
Protestation, the 2d. Vow, and Oath, and the Solemn League and Covenant, all
which concern the several claims and rights of King and Parliament? either
they are thereby supposed to be somewhat competent to judge of those titles; or
it was both vainly, and irreligiously done to lead them into such sacred bonds,
which we may neither take, nor cause others to take, but in judgment. Jer. 4.2.

3ly, Although they, yea the primest Statesmen, may find it difficult enough
to judge of titles in some nice, and intricate cases that may happen, yet the
present case is not so deep or doubtful, the right of title in this question
is written with clear and capital letters, in Laws, Oaths, and actions open
before all. Yea this Author in the title and current of his book, (as does Mr.
Ashcam in his) plainly enough grants where the right of title is.

This Author in the latter end of a second Edition of his book, viz: beginning
at page 15. adds some things upon the question of active obedience, and
acting under this present power, and government. Although this Edition come in
late, and in some passages is but an amplification in terms, not in matter, of
what he had said before; yet I shall take a brief notice (whether sufficient
let the Reader judge) of the things in it, that may seem material.

First, he premiseth, That the present Power is in possession of the whole
Land, and no visible force to oppose, and so it is not like that between David
and Absalom, when David had an Army in view. Consult the text, and you shall
find the case exactly parallel. 1. The present Power is in possession of the
whole Land; you say, you mean of this side the Sea, not of Ireland also;
suitable hereunto Absalom was possessed of all the Land unto Jordan, yea, and he
went over Jordan, and pitched in Gilead, and all the people throughout all the
Tribes of Israel had anointed him King over them: on the other hand David and
his men fled out of Jerusalem, and out of the Land, beyond Jordan, and stayed
not till he came to Mahanaim by the ford Jabock. 2 Samuel 15.14, etc. 17.22.24,
25, 26.19.9, 10.

2ly, You add, And no visible Force to oppose, whereas David had an Army in
view. David had no Army in view within that land before spoken of: all that he
had was at Mahanaim. And though there be no visible Force to oppose in England,
yet there is said to be a considerable Force in Ireland, and it may appear by
the Preparations sent thither. Besides there is one thing indeed wherein David's
condition, and his whom the present Power excludes, differ, but not to the
advantage of this Authors Reason, which is, that David had no other Kingdom to
own, and declare for him, which yet he has.

Secondly, You come with Arguments. 1. Obedience to such a Power in good things
is lawful. But acting for Justice and order is a good thing: Ergo: I have
before distinguished betwixt moral acts which are for private men to do, though
there were no Authority; and political acts, which flow from magistracy. The
latter sort of acts may not be done in obedience to an usurped Power, for the
Reasons given before. The execution of justice is a good act in it self, but it
is not good to be done by every man, nor upon every man's command; but is only
good in him that is lawfully authorized to it.

2ly, You say, what reason is it, that those that will not act because they
hold it unlawful, should expect that others should do an unlawful act to
benefit them? To this let Cajetan (an Author cited by you, and that in the
place you cited from him) answer you; They are excused from the sin of inducing
the Tyrant to an act unlawful for him, that ask Justice of him, because they
do not petition him for the unlawful act, but for the justice of that
unlawful act: it is honestly done to persuade him to use his power less
sinfully. This Petition is in effect thus much. Seeing thou wilt-hold and
exercise this power, use it justly, use it honestly, use it religiously; use it
to the benefit of the public, and of private men, as it would become the
Power. It is plain such Petitioners intend not to ask the Tyrant to usurp the
act of Judicature, because they had rather he would give it over: but seeing he
does usurp dominion, and judgment, they intend he should use justly and
honestly his usurped Power and Judgment: and that which they intend, that they
petition for: so that they neither intend nor petition for and usurped act, but
an holy quality in the exercising of that usurped act Excusatur a peccato
inducendi Tyrannum ad actum, and opus sibi illicitum petentes ab illo
iustitiam: quia non petunt actum illicitum, sed justitiam illius actus
illiciti. Sancte suadetur, quod minus mase utatur dominio illo; scil: si vis
seu ex quo vis detinere, and exercere hoe dominium, utere illo just, utere
honest, utere pie, utere ad utilitatem public^m, and privatorum prout deceret
dominium Constat ^^mque quod non intendunt ipsi petere, ut tyrannus utatur
tyrannide, ut usurpet actum Judicis ^quoniam mallent ut cederant tyrannidi, and
iudicio; sed ex quo usurpat libi dominium ac iudicium, intendune ut just, ut
pi^ utatur usurp^to dominio, and usurpato iudicio, and qu^d intendunt hoc
petunt; ita quod nec intendunt, non petunt actum usurpatum, sed qualitatem
sanctum in actu usurpato exercendo^ Caietan Summul Tit. Remp. Tyranni^e, etc.
.

Again, Why should others give right to them, that will not give right to
others? A fallacious, and frivolous interrogation in the true meaning of it. In
commutative justice (wherein the rule of doing as we would be done unto) only
holds, with reference to persons that are to do it) they who refuse
magistraticall acts, are ready to render every man's right to him. But this
question would have a private man (such as they are) to have no distributive
justice, or right by the Magistrate done him, even when the Magistrate is
lawful, because he cannot, and therefore will not vicissim administer
distributive justice to the Magistrate. Every common Judgment knows that a
private subject is to receive judicial right, but not to give it.

3ly, It is cleared before in this Discourse, that those who have gotten to be
Powers (though by force) ought to give justice to those whose government they
have undertaken, but (supposing them to be but one, or a few) this they cannot
do without subordinate agents; to disallow acting under them then, is to say in
effect they shall not give justice. 1. Suppose them but one or a few, and they
cannot get or keep the place by force. Suppose them many, and they have no need
(in that respect) of others to be their under-agents. 2ly, If this that you say
be cleared, or so much as said before, I have forgotten it, though I have read
all that is before, and rest confident there is no such thing. When you show
where this is said and cleared, I shall then find by what reasons it is
maintained, and so give you an Answer thereunto. In the mean time, that which
is here but barely affirmed, it is sufficient for me to deny. If you could
clear this, the whole question were decided. If he ought to give justice, he
has a special warrant, and calling to it, and how Force can give such a
calling you have not yet aslayed to clear, the contrary I have brought many
reasons for (Chapter 2.) and am therefore before hand with you in this point.
It will be confessed, that if a man will take upon him to administer judgment he
were better, or it is a less evil in him, to do right, then wrong therein:
but of two evils of sin, neither is to be admitted.

4ly, This Doctrine of not acting is the very doctrine of Levelling. For when
no man may act, every man may take freely from his neighbor, etc. 1. Levelling
may be the consequent of non-acting, but it cannot be the consequent of it; it
is the consequence of their doings, who take away the settled Magistracy. 2.
Levelling in point of goods, you like not it seems: but why do you not as well
abhor from it in point of Government? that is but levelling the private, this is
levelling the public Interest; that Levelling can never come in, till this
Levelling go before, and lead the way, but who are Levellers this latter, and
(as you see) worse way, but they that teach, or practice the deserting of the
lawfu^l, established Magistrate, and the competency, yea duty, of any that have
force to play the Magistrate. Hence arises that which they call an
interpretative consent of the people: because it is supposed every rational
man does consent that there should be order, property, and right, given under a
tyrant, rather then all to be under confusion, etc. 1. Every rational man
consents indeed that there should be order, property and right; and his being
under a tyrant (by experience of the want) confirms his consent to the
necessity thereof: but that such things should be maintained magistratically by
a tyrant (in regard of title) you see (if all that are your Antagonists in this
question be not stark Irrationals) some rational men deny. And in this they
appear rational, in that they would hear some reason for it, before they
consent to it. Which rather then you will strain yourself to give (for truly it
is hard to do) you choose to suppose them that will not consent without it, to
be out of the number of rational men. 2ly, This shift of an interpretative
consent of the people, that the Usurper shall administer judgment, will not
serve you. For, 1. It will be difficult to find out, and agree, when such an
interpretative consent is given by the people. 2ly, What thing is it? as near
as I can conjecture it is possibly. 1. Either that these men shall be the
Power, or Magistrate; and then, 1. Either the people had power to give this
consent, and this makes these men no Usurpers, but lawful Magistrates, and so
puts them out of the compass of this question. 2. Or they had no power, being
pre-ingaged, and then this consent is void, and null, because it prejudicates
another right. 2. Or it is, that these men, though they have no consent of
theirs to be Magistrates, but come in, and hold against their wills, and by
their own mere force, and against another right, yet they shall for present
execute judgment, because it cannot be had otherwise. This consent (suppose
it really past by the people) cannot bottom their acting, or others under
them. For it is in the essence of it an unlawful act, and therefore of no
force. It is of the same validity as was that of the people which joined with
Korah, and his company, who gave consent, that though Korah, and the rest were
no Priests, yet they should offer incense; or as that would be, if the people
of a Congregation now, that can procure no lawful Minister, should take a
private man, and say, this man is no Minister, yet he shall, in this defect of
one, preach, and administer the Sacraments to us. Such consents are
contradictions to the established ordinance of God, appointing that no stranger
to those functions shall execute those acts. In like sort it is in this point of
Magistracy.

5ly, How could Ezra, and Nehemiah justify their acting under the Persian
Monarch, who had no right to the Crown of Judah, either by blood or just
conquest. 1. That the Persian Monarch had not that right, you say, but prove it
not, but if just conquest give a title, Cyrus the first Persian King justly
warred against Balshazer the last Chalcedon Monarch as Historians Crusus
fiducia potentiae inferi bellum Cy^o gerenti justum bellum adversus Tyrannum
Babylonicum Chr. Carrion. li. 2. page 69. Balshasar conspicatus Cyri, and
Medorum potentiam coalescere, Craesum ad Infringendas eorum vi^es incitat.

Cluveni Hist. li 6. pa. 64.


say, and therefore justly conquered him, and his Empire; under which the Jews
were then subjected, and that by special warrant from God. Jer. 27.12. to
16.29.1. to 8.21.8, 9.38.17. to 21. 2ly, But Cyrus had both an indubitable
title to that Empire, and an unquestionable Commission for what he did in
reference to the Jews releasement from captivity, and restoration of their
Temple, Keligion, and Civil State; and that from God himself, by immediate
designation. Hear what he himself says in his Proclamation, unto which he was
stirred up in spirit by the Lord. Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the
kingdoms of the earth, has the Lord God of heaven given me, and he has
charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem which is in Judah. 2 Chronicles.
36.22, 23. Ezra 1.1, 2. And compare this with what the Lord says not only of,
but to this Cyrus. Isa. 44.28.45.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13. and a clear calling or
title to the Empire of the world, and to the acting of what he did in reference
to Judea, will appear to be in him. It is conceived that Cyrus had certain
knowledge of this Commission, recorded and given to him by name, in that
Prophecy of Isaiah, and that by means of Daniel the Prophet Agnovit hoc ipse
Cyrus, and publico est edicto ad hunc modum testatus: Haec dicit R^x Persarum,
etc primo Esdra. Musculuin Isaiae 45.1. Cyrus lecto vaticinio Isaiae de se
nominatim edito Isa. 45. proposuit edictum quo Iudae is in Babylonia captivis,
reditum in partiam, and facultatem, in staurandi templi concessit. Chytraei
Chronol. in (...) Herodat p. 147. Arbitror autem and tunc cum rexit Persiam
Daniel, praesos in Susis fuisse ejus auditorum Cyrum adolescentem, and ^b eo
dediciste veram de Deo, and de Mossia doctrinam, and praedictiones Isaiae in
qua nomen Cyri express positum est. Chron Carrion. li. 2. pa. 69.
; and that which is therein written he understood to be his charge given of
God, which he mentions in the aforesaid Proclamation See Annotations of
^ivn^s on 2 Chronicles. 36.22. and Ezra 1.2. Diodat. ibid. Musculu: in Isa. 45 1.13.
. Add to this that Mr. Diodati interprets that speech of God to Cyrus, viz:
I girded thee. Isa. 45.5. of the Lords making him King, and giving him power
and authority: v. 1. And that of ver. 13. I have raised him up in
righteousness, he understands thus. That is, by a firm decree of my justice,
and by a just calling. Now if Cyrus the first of the Persians had a valid
title, what can control his Successors right in Judea?

2ly, If there had been no right in the Persian King over Judea, yet the acting
of Ezra and Nehemiah, could be no president or warrant for a now acting under a
usurped Power in the case we have in hand. 1. Consider the special
qualification, and call of these two persons. Ezra 7.1.2.
1. For Ezra, he was a Scribe, and a Priest, and some think one of the highest,
to wit, that he was that Josedech, who was the father of Joshua, the high
Priest (this is Jerome opinion Ludovivlves, in August. de civet. Dei lib. 18.
cap. 36.
; and so might be authorized by virtue of that office, to transact all that he
is said to have done in his book. 2. He is said by some of the Ancients to be a
Prophet, Neither can he be denied so to be, (says a late learned and solid
Divine Mr. Roberts his Clavis Bibliorum on Ezra.
) in that he was a Penman of Scripture. 3ly, And besides these functions, he
seems to have had a special call of God in his undertaking what he did: it is
said, The hand of the Lord his God was upon him, when he first enterprized his
work: Ezra 7.6. which phrase is often rolterated upon the several passages of
his employment. Chap. 7.9.28. etc.

2ly, Nehemiah was the Governor, Neh. 8.9.10.1.12.26. it is not any where said
(that I find) that he was sent with that power by the Persian King, but it is
more probable he was chosen to that office by the people of Judah, both because
he was one that was very zealous for the interest and public advantage of that
Nation, and by reason he came thither some years Ezra 7.7. compared with Nehe.
1.1.
after Ezra, and acted in conjunction with him. Neh. 8.9. Now in Artaxerxes
letter to Ezra, at his first going up from Babylon to Jerusalem, it is
committed to Ezra's trust, To set Magistrates and Judges up among the people:
Ezra 7.25. with this proviso, After the wisdom of thy God that is in thine
hand; by which is meant the Law of God. But by the Law of God the people of
Israel were to create their own Magistrates and Kings, Deuteronomy. 16.18.17.14, 15.
And besides his Governorship it seems he had (in like manner to Ezra) a divine
instigation, and vocation to his work. It is said, That God put that in his
heart to do at Jerusalem; Neh. 2.12.18.
which he went about, and when he was come thither, he told them of the hand of
his God which was good upon him: upon which report, they said, Let us rise up
and build.

2. Let it be more narrowly observed, what Ezra's Commission was from
Artaxerxes, and it will be found, 1. That he himself was not authorized to
fine, imprison, and put to death, as this Author affirms; let the text be
better marked, Chap. 7.26. 2. In the charge of setting up Magistrates and
Judges, it cannot be thought he was intended to do it; otherwise then as a
private man, or Priest might be instructed to do it, viz.: with the peoples
concurrence; For he (as I even now observed) was to manage that business after
the wisdom of his God that was in his hand, to wit, according to divine Law,
which appoints the people to do it.

3ly, That in all this Commission he and the rest that went up with him were
authorized to do no more, and in no other manner then the Law of God required:
Ezra 7.14.18.23.25. and consequently they were warranted before by it, to do
all that they did, and this of Artaxerxes was but an encouragement, and
strengthening of them to it. 4ly, Whatsoever he acted, Chap. 10. in the matter
of the Oath, Proclamation and reformation in the point of marriage. Besides
that there was nothing done by him in it, that was solely appertaining to the
Magistrates office; all that he transacted was by the motion, appointment, and
consent of the Congregation, the Princes and the Elders: Ezra 10.1.3.7.8. etc.
ver. 12.19. yea even by the free assent of the parties. 3ly, As for all the
authoritative actings of Nehemiah, which he alleges they must be attributed
to his place of Governor, and whence that is to be derived, I have spoken
before.

Lastly, You bring in the Judgment of two or three Popish Divines. Which I
shall altogether pass over, for that their reasons taken from the tacit, or
interpretative consent of the people, the confusion that comes in by having no
government, and the expedience of choosing the lesser of two evils, I have
answered before. Only one thing brought in, by the last of them being not
before answered, I shall here reply to; which is as follows.

It is manifest that the Romans by tyranny did possess Judea, in that very
time wherein Christ and John Baptist did preach, yet Christ, Matt. 22. did
teach, that tribute was to be given to Caesar, yea himself did give it, John
Bapt: Luke 3. commanded the soldiers this only, that they should do violence
to no man, and he content with their wages, wherein he did rather persuade them
to continue in the service of Caesar.

First, To that of Christ, Matthew. 22. wherein the main of this allegation lies
which is stuck at by many, I have two things to say.

First, His Answer to the Question about the lawfulness of giving tribute to
Caesar is to be weighed, and therein it may be questioned, whether he
positively taught that tribute was to be rendered to Caesar. His words are,
Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: and unto God the
things that are Gods. Here Christ delivers a precept of giving to God and
Caesar each their right in the general, without asserting, or explaining what
the right of either is in particular, or m^king application to the case, then
before him; he seems to leave them that moved the question to do that. His
words determine not the point either way expressly; all that can be inferred
from the plain current of them, is a conditional rule equally favoring the
affirmative, and negative; if it be Caesar's due, render it; if not, etc. Such a
waving answer will not appear unbeseeming him, if it be considered who they
were that propounded the quaere, to wit, the Pharisees, with the chief Priests
and Scribes; and with what intention it was put forth by them, viz: to entangle
him, and so to betray him to the Governor for his destruction: See v: 15. and
Luke 20.19, 20. and how well this was known to him: v: 18. The case was put not
so much of conscience, as of design; and there was this biformed, or cornuted
trap in it. If he should disallow that tribute paying, they would accuse and
prosecute against him, before the Roman Governor as an enemy to Caesar; if he
should hold with it, they would traduce him to the people, as one that
consented to the Romans tyranny, and sacrilege Marlorat. Muscul. Dieterius
Iansenius, Deodate.
: Upon this ground he might prudently (and justly enough) give an Answer not to
satisfy the doubt, but to silence the propounders. And unto this
interpretation Mr. Calvin inclines Ita temperavit responsu^ admirabili sua
sapientia, ut neutri parti se redderet obnoxium. Calv. apud Marlorat. in locum.
. He so tempered (says he) his answer by his admirable wisdom, that he might
render himself obnoxious to neither party If he did indeed so expressly command
tribute paying to Caesar in these words, which were publicly, and before all
uttered in the Temple, with what face or color could they, within two or three
days after, accuse him unto Pilate; as one whom they found perverting the
Nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar. Luke 23.2. This accusation
would import to us, his Answer under question to have been so positive, and
punctual, for tribute paying; for though no doubt these men accused him
maliciously, and would not stick to do it falsely, yet they would have some
hint, or appearance of occasion for it, as in other their accusations they by
straining, and misconstruction had.

2ly, But unto those who will not believe, but that in the said words he
teaches paying tribute to Caesar: I further answer. Let the notion under which
he is supposed to enjoin it be observed, and the so understanding him will help
not to strengthen, but to answer the Argument. He commands them to render that
which he speaks of to Caesar as a due or right: Render as a debt. Romans 13.7.
Anno^ of Divines.
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; now if tribute or any thing
else belonging to a Magistrate were Caesar's due and right, then was Caesar no
Usurper, but a lawful Magistrate, for tribute of due can only belong to a
rightful Sovereign. A debt on the Subjects part of tribute must needs infer a
right to it in the Magistrate, to whom it is payable; and a right in him to it
must needs infer a right in him to all allegiance Non dicit date ergo, cum illi
interogassent, liceretur dare se dicit reddito tanquam caquae eius sunt,
quaeque ab eo accepistis.

Reddite, inquit, Caesari, sed quae Caesaris sunt, qu^que tunquam sua iure
postulare potest. Jansen. com. in conc. c. 116.


. How it came about that the Romans were invested with the Sovereignty of
Judea, is not necessary for me to clear, when there is (taking the words in
this latter sense) so plain a proof that it was so in these words of our
Savior.

But for the Readers sake, I will observe thus much out of History to him.
About 152 ye^rs before the birth of our Savior, the government of Judea came
to be in the Maccabees who were Priests. At that time Judas Maccabeus being in
fear of that grand Enemy of the Jews, Antiochus sought aid of, and entered into
a League of friendship with the Romans; Joseph. de be^o Iudaic l. 1. c. 1. 2.
Chro. carrion li. 2. page 138.
which continued till about 60 years before the birth of Christ, when Hircanus
and Aristobulus, the Sons of Alexander falling into contention for the Kingdom;
and Aristobulus the more warlike man having possessed himself of it, and usurped
it from Hircanus the elder brother, in whom the right then was, the said
Hircanus fled to the Romans for remedy, and by the mediation of Antipater, he
procured Pompey (then nigh that Country with an Army) to undertake his aid;
who thereupon besieged Jerusalem: Hircanus his party within the City
immediately delivered it up to him, and Aristobulus friends withdrew into that
part where the Temple stood, which was by Pompey taken by storm; and by this
means that City came into the hands of the Romans, and Hircanus was restored
to the high priesthood and kingdom of Judea. Who, with the party that cleaved
to him against Aristobulus, having gained the upper hand of those that usurped
over them, they were fain by the same means to k?ep it, by which they got it,
to wit, by the Roman power and protection Iofe. de bello Iudaic l. 1 c 4. 5 6.
Antiq. Iudaic l. 14 ca. 1.2 etc chron. carrion li. 2. pa. 148. Stella in lo c
20.22.
. Whence it may appear, that the Jews under Hircanus, were not brought under
the Roman subjection by mere force, but (through the necessity of their
affairs, whereinto they were driven by the factions within themselves) from
their own consent and choice. And to this dedition of the Jews to the Romans,
agrees that saying of Josephus concerning Pompey, when he had taken Jerusalem
Per quae sicut bonum imperatorem decu^^ been volentia potius quam timore plebem
conciliavit. De bello udaic. li. 1. ca. 5.
: He did as becomes a good General, rather by good turns, then by terror
conciliate the people to himself. And another passage in the same Author
plainly proves it. He tells that Antipater replying to the accusations of
Antigonus the Son of the aforesaid Aristobulus, laid in by him against
Hi^canus, and himself before Caesar, Non propter inoptam desi d^rare facultates
sed ut in cos qui dedissent Iudaeorum seditiones accederet. De bello Iudaic and
li. 1. en 8.
complains of Antigonus, That be sought not relief of Caesar, because he was
poor, but that he might kindle Jewish seditions against those who had made a
dedition of themselves. And thus continued this relation and subordination of
the Jews unto the Romans, to our Saviors time, and that still with a faction,
part of them adhering to the Caesarian Authority, and part reluctating; which
division among themselves occasioned the question to be really controverted
amongst them, which is here insidiously propounded to Christ about the
lawfulness of giving tribute to Caesar; Nam divisi erant Iudaei interse, ita
ut pars dandum censeret cributum Caesari, pars negaret qui negabant faciebant
cum Pharilaeis, qui sentiebant populum Dei debere liberum esse, nec tributa
pendere impiae potestati Caesatis, qui dandum sentiebant facicbant cum Herod,
qui Caesaris parts tuebatur, atque ideo Herod^ni dicebantur.

Muscul in loc. Vide etiam Ians. in comment. in concord. ca. 116.


the party that was for the negative were the Pharisees faction, whose reputing
and speaking of the Romans as Usurpers, might occassion that vulgar opinion of
their power which we meet with in some Authors, viz: that they were indeed in
our Saviors time Tyrants without title over Judea; Although it is evident (by
what is here said) that they came into their Authority by the consent of the
Juster, and better authorized party, and at this time had one part agreeing to
them.

2ly, That which is further alleged, viz: That our Savior himself paid
Caesar tribute, and that John Baptist persuaded the souldi^^s to continue in
his service, is taken off sufficiently by what is already said; for if Caesar
was a lawful Prince to the Jews, these things make nothing for the Arguer.

I have thus gone through, and endeavored to give a satisfactory Answer to
every Argument, which by this Author, or any other I have observed to be urged
for the obedience which in this Treatise I impugn. If I had been apprehensive
of, or could have extracted any material argumentative grounds out of. Mr.
Ashcams Discourse, for his high assertions mentioned in my 2d. Chapter, I had
here taken notice of them. If he has any brief and slender hints of Reasons, I
suppose them to be Answered in what I have already said.

FINIS.

