e^^elea Ga^^

CHRIST at the WEDDING: The pristine Sanctity and Solemnity OF Christian
Marriages, As they were Celebrated By the CHVRCH of ENGLAND. Humbly presented
to those Gentlemen whom it concerns to Consult and Resolve what is best.

By John Gauden, D. D. at Bocking in Essex.

HEB. 13.4. Marriage is Honorable among all Men. AUST. de NUPTIIS. Tanto
fortius quanto sanctius charitalis vinculum inter conjuges. CHRYSOSTOM. in Ephesians.
5. (...). LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and are to b^ (...)

To the Honorable or Worshipful Gentlemen of the Committee for Marriage, etc.
HONORED GENTLEMEN,
I Once more presume to find so much public patience and candor, Tithes, to
your short-lived and (for the most part) lower bred predecessors) another great
and public Consideration, very worthy, as I conceive, of the review and advice
of wise, unpassionate, and unprejudiced persons, such as you are either hoped
or wished to be; having a public influence in a Parliamentary way upon this
Church and Nation; (Which employment (you know) requires wary Counselors, not
voracious C^rmorants of business; swallowing greedily like Ostriches all that
is offered them without any chewing: You have seen some men almost choke
themselves, while they sought to show how good stomachs they had, when all the
world knew they had very ill digestion.

The business I now humbly propose is, Touching the public celebration and
decent Solemnizing of Christian Marriage; Ann. Chr^ Interesse d^ Presbyter
h^tioni qui ^^nedictione juvare debe^ consortium omnem san^ tem, page ^ Sir
Hen. S^ Council. Britannica. Ann. Christ. 740. Can. 88. in Synodo Eboracensi sub
Egberto. Sponsus and sacerdote benedicendi.
whether after the new mode, (which is but as a Mushrome of yesterday, a Gourd
of a nights growing, under whose shadow some peevish spirits fancy great
refreshings); or, whether after the Ancient and Venerable way, ever used (for
the main) in the Church of England, by Ministers and People; wherein, Godly
Instruction, Pious Exhortation, solemn Obtestations, public Declaration, and
Divine Benediction, were with all religious reverence applied to the glory of
God, and the great benefit of Christians; to the honor also of this reformed
Church, and the renown of this Nation: Agreeable, not only to what had been for
many hundred years settled in England by the wisest and most unanimous
Parliaments, with Civil sanctions, as well as Ecclesiastical Canons; but also
to the practice of most Christian Churches in all ages and places, who
generally esteemed such sacred solemnities, ^he Impe^onstituti^^ Hot^man. ^p
tiis and Gau^i lib. de se^^ ^ustinianaei ^us. c. 15. ^aritanda ^ima Chri^ ^er.
attending and crowning the civil Contracts of Marriages among Christians, to
be the best way, both as to piety and policy, sanctity and civility, to
public order, and private comfort; to inward conscience, and outward
conveniencie. So far were your and our pious Progenitors from excluding
Christ or his Disciples and Ministers from their Weddings; that they always
invited them, as expecting both an honor and a blessing from their presence
and Ministry.

From which holy use and decent custom, famous Churches for any Christians not
fairly and rationally to recede, but suddenly and abruptly to fly with
somewhat short turns, and (as it were) scornful reflections, upon the
wisdom of their Ancestors; Truly it may seem not only some reproach to their
Christian piety, but also to their natural generation and civil extraction.
As if our fathers had been either ill married parents, or we misbegotten
posterity, whose descent or production must be thought to have had less
honesty, religion and honor, in the public obsignation and solemnity of their
Marriages, than their new fangled Nephews and reforming Minors have lately
found out.

Some of whom, piece of factious novelty, any fanatic fancy, any Plebeian
prostitution as of other holy things, so of that great and venerable mystery
Marriage, (as it is called by St. Paul, ^s. 5.32.
Ephesians. 5.32.) before that most judicious, grave, and useful celebration,
which both hallowed and adorned, with the word of God and Prayer, the happy
Marriages of their forefathers who may seem only unhappy in this, that they
were the origin or fountains of such less clear, or more turbulent
derivations, as have succeeded them. Who not content to vary in their own
judgments and practices from such worthy paternall precedents and
ecclesiastical customs, are impatient not to swerve others also. And this,
not only to no advantages (yet decernable) but also to the very great charge,
trouble and vexation of all sorts of people.

Which so great and (as some think) grievous alteration, change, v. 24.21.
unless it be to the better) rather the effect of some men's itching humors,
and innovating genius, (who like no coin but what bears their own image and
superscription; and this, though copper or brass, they prefer before old gold
or silver) Or else it is the fruit of a bitter spirit, and an implacable
despite against the dignity, office, and calling of the Ministry; which they
seek (as much as they can) to disparage and depreciate; studying to represent
it as burden some; and to render it every way useless to the public; that so
it may seem justly to be despised, and after utterly destroyed, by the enemies
of this (as of all) well reformed Churches; Nor is there any great doubt to be
made, but that the project of prohibiting the Ministers of England to officiate
in the marriages of others, is (in some men's design,) one of the first dishes,
which are to furnish the Jesuitick feast; which (after) they hope may be
followed with such a second Service, as shall fully gratify the palates of the
most spiteful Papists; by forbidding Ministers themselves to be married;
unless they will degenerate to a Lay kind of concubinacy.

So far (as in other, so) in this part of some men's deformation, may we seem to
have warped from that pristine weight, gravity, Allegoriam A^ mi and Evae
Christo interp^ tatur and Ecc^sia: Locus ineffabilibus nus est Sacramentis, and
dinum cor quae interpretis. Naz.

Reliquit Chr^ stu^ Patrem, um, matrem c^ lestem Jeruslem; venit a^ terras
propt^ Ecclesiam sua^ e latere Christ fabricatam, (...) Jerome. in Ep^


and impartiality of wisdom, which heretofore honored our happy Parliaments;
blessed this unanimous Nation; and crowned this reformed Church: while it kept
a prudent and just medium, between Papal excess; (which raises Matrimony to
the height of an Evangelical Sacrament, properly so called as Bellarmine
matrim. Vid. Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 5.32. (...) non in Mosis historiam sed in
Christi amorem ^^ctans. (...).
Bellarmine disputes: beyond any Scripture grounds or Primitive doctrine, that
we can yet see, save only the wresting of that place of the Apostle St. Paul's,
Ephesians. 5.32. where he calls marriage a great mystery, as relating to Christ and
his Church; agreeable to which the Fathers often use the word Sacrament to set
forth the honor of Christian Marriages) And that Plebeian loosnesse, or
mechanic profaneness, (on the other side) which seeks to abate Christian
marriage, either to notions, ends, and affections merely natural, sensual and
brutal; or at the highest to designs and customs only humane, politic, and
civil; without any solemn and serious reflections publicly to be made either by
Ministers, or people, upon the Divinity of the Institution; the sublimity of
the Mystery; or the sanctity of the relation, representing the love of Christ
Jesus to his Church.

Alas, how dull, indevout, and even profane, that Covenant, which is called the
vow, or Covenant of God, between man and wife: How bald and bare (like a shorn
captive) must it appear, wherein nothing is propounded of that excellent
wisdom, v. 2.17.
set forth in the Word of God; which may teach, and furnish us, with what
graces we need, both to begin, and carry on the duties, cares and comforts of
that condition; ^jugii aurea (...) vincula; sed ^ula tamen: ^b.
when no sacred charge, no solemn injunction in the name, and fear of God, is
either heard, or thought of; whereby to keep (as by an holy charm) both souls
and bodies, within those bounds of chastity, honor, and fidelity, which God
requires; also to repress the sordid extravagancies of sensual fancies,
inordinate affections, and even brutish desires; to which lapsed and corrupted
humanity is but too subject, both by its own innate impulses, and by the Devils
temptations; which are prone (as St. Hierom says) to sour the sweetest
marriages; ^il in rebus ^anis perinde ^erandum est ^ue matrimo^m; generis ^mani
fulcrum; (...) pub^icae fun^nentum; ce^iae sustentacu^^, etc. Justi.
and corrupt a sensual matrimony to a spiritual adultery: while God, and
Christ, and the Church are all neglected; and only the world, the flesh, and
the Devil are gratified. Oh! how sad and simple is that Silence in marriage,
which suggests not a word (or very flatly, poorly, and coldly concerning any
blessings, which sinful mortals extremely want, and ought earnestly to pray
for, that their choice may be both pious and prudent; their obtaining
prosperous; and their enjoyments holy; so as becomes thankful souls to God, for
those special mercies and gifts, which from him alone must crown with
happiness the marriages of Christians! ^omnis congre^io haeretico^n Christi
Ec^sia dici non ^est; sic nec ^rimonium ^d secundum ^risti praecepta (...)
conjungitur ^jugium dici ^est, sed magis ^lterium. Je^m. in. Ephesians.
In which there is a momentary shadow, and little emblem of a short Heaven or
Hell; So that no part of our sinful life requires (as St. Chrysostom observes)
more wise conduct, more religious care; For next to the disposing of our souls
to God, and our spiritual marriage to Christ; it is of greatest concernment,
how we dispose of our persons as to a conjugal relation in this world; So much
cause there may seem, indeed, rather to have heightened and augmented the holy
solemnity of marriage, being so weighty a matter, than any way to have
depreciated, or lightened it, by putting it (only) into Lay hands, and making it
seem a matter merely of civil transaction among Christians. (...). Chrysostom.
in Ephesians. 5. Ad observantiam disciplinae, ad sancti gernis foecunditatem, ad
augmentum pudoris, ad custodiam castitatis, ad superni Thalami sacrum
reverenmque secretum, ad Mysticam Thor^ coelestis unitatem. Crysologus. ser.
115.


And however some thing seemingly godly, or Religion, of sacred or civil
interests, as to the public good, hitherto have appeared, to sober and
unpartial judgments; some private fancies, or passions might possibly be
gratified, by the change; but it never was, nor will be justified, by the
children of true wisdom; who are rather amazed, to see the pristine sanctity
of Christian marriages, so abased and abolished in England, by so easy heads,
and heavy hands. In which if Parliamentary Authority had been as indisputable,
as themselves voted it; yet neither their choice, nor their number, nor their
delegation (as from the people) nor their representation, as to the community
of this Nation, was so complete and satisfactory, as Parliaments of former
times, and of contrary judgments had been: Their conduct also and managing of
great public affairs, (which some thought to grasp within unwashen hands and
narrow fists) was not so every way conspicuous, for discretion, and prudence,
as to render their Edicts Oracles; or to make their dictates like the
irreversible Laws of Medes and Persians; nor indeed was that Convention free
from the suspicion of being shrewdly leavened with some illiterate, weak,
passionate, and plebeian spirits; who better understood their counting books or
tallies, than our Laws and Statutes; having better skill in ordering of cattle,
than governing of States or Churches: whose inexperience of things beyond their
private and small fortunes, made them less proper or pertinent, for any
influence in a legislative way, than ever Phaeton was for Phoebus his Chariot:
Insomuch that (we see) in a short time they hampered and so entangled
themselves in their own traise and carriere, that they could go no further;
but finding public business and Parliamentary authority, like Saul's armor,
too large and ponderous for their narrow breasts, and feeble shoulders, they
were glad to put it off quickly; lest the pressure and encumbrance of it should
have made them a ridiculous and deformed spectacle to the world; while like
short legged Pygmies some men in vain stretched themselves to support heaven;
which is the work only of a mighty and invincible Atlas.

Why then so small a rivolet lately derived from so troubled a fountain, which
lasted not so long as that in Lehi, (commonly thought the jaw bone of an Ass,
which satisfied Sampsons thrist) why this should so prevail against (as either
quite to exhaust and drain, or wholly to divert) that ancient, fair and goodly
stream of devout solemnity in which marriage had its course here in England,
through the Sanctuary and Ministry (as in other Christian and reformed
Churches) no great account in reason can be given, but only this; That Civil
changes are commonly attended with some changes in Religion.

But you (O worthy Gentlemen) are looked upon as persons formed of better
earth, and hewed out of nobler quarries: Your convening seems more benign, and
propitious to the Public; from You such things are expected, as become
persons generally of better extraction, more ingenuous education, larger
capacities, and more generous spirits; such as may answer the expectation of
all wise men, in those things whereof you have cognizance.

And certainly in this point of marriages (which however it be the foundation
of all humane and Ecclesiastical Society; yet is it no sundamental of
government) as I presume you have liberty to consult; so your own wisdom and
discretion cannot but tell you,

1. How much you owe to the vindication, as of the honor of marriage in
general, so in particular of your own, and your forefathers marriages; which
were sacred, solemn and most Christianly; not deserving in any kind to be
reproached, traduced or overpowered by any Mechanic invention, or Laick
innovation.

2. You owe also a reparation to the discretion, honor, and piety of the much
lessened and degraded Ministers of Christ, in this Church, who are fully as
able, (without disparagement) and I believe more willing to discharge the
Office of holy and decent celebration of marriages, then many country Justices
are.

3. You owe also a relief and ease to the people of this Nation, who are far
more troubled, perplexed, and charged to find a Justice of Peace at leisure or
at home, (to whom they must travel with their friends some miles and possibly
miss of him, to their great defeat and vexation,) than ever they were to find
their Ministers; who are ten, to one Justice; and generally, as of less forain
business, so more constantly at home, and more within the reach of the people;
who now are forced with horse and man to make two or three long journeys, to
have a short breathed marriage dispatched: often times in a hasty and hudled
manner; wherein is little relish of God, nor much savor of Religion.

The main, Ministers officiating in the case of public marriages, The danger
of stolen and concealed marriages: ^e publicis ^^iis nemo ^ere vel uxducere
sumat. Con^ Arelat. ^.6.
which are indeed (for the most part) little better than consecrated felonies,
and hallowed rapes of minors; without and against their parents, or guardians
consent; which (they say) was sometimes done by some Ministers; who being
either obscure, or unsettled, or sordid, cared not (for a little reward) to
prostitute the honor of their function, by setting their mark or seal
Ministerial to stolen goods and furtive compacts: which are always injurious to
Parents, and often very dishonorable, as well as miserable, to the parties so
married.

My answer to this is; to the intent of laws Divine, Civil, and Ecclesiastical,
which generally forbid and abhor such clandestine marriages, as that ancient
Canon of Euaristus in the second of the first Century declares, to prevent such
mischiefs, as afflict mankind in the nearest relations and most tender
affections; which are fixed upon their children, as the Centers of all secular
cares, hopes, and joys.

But it seems very strange, Talia matrim^ nia apud Ecc^ siam firmitatem non
habitura, nisi nevi^ consensus robu^ accesserit, etc. Gratian.
that the wisdom of this Nation and Church could find no remedy for such a
mischief, but only such an one as brings with it other great inconveniences, if
not mischiefs too. Was there no means to cure that disorder, (which was but
rare neither) save only by putting the whole Nation upon a new charge and
trouble? Could no bar be put in against furtive and injurious marriages, but
only this, that they must be done by Justices of the Peace? who the more grave
and understanding persons they are, are (I am sure) less pleased with this new
encumbrance; and less ambitious of this less congruous employment, than those
that are more simple and pragmatick, who no doubt may be wrought, as well as
some Ministers, to comply with things less commendable.

The Laws of England in former times, Vid. Cousin. Politcia Ecclesiae Ang. in
(...) bulas digesta.
or other Ecclesiastical Officers, which arose, rather from the Indulgences
they usurped, than from any license granted them, by any laws Ecclesiastical or
Civil: by which they were severely punishable in such cases, if they had not a
credible Certificate of the parties being thrice asked; or else had a special
License, under the hand and seal of Authority; which (yet) could not be
regularly granted, without good security, and band, first given, as either
attesting the consent of parents; or that the parties were no longer minors.

But how easy (I beseech you) and obvious (under favor of better judgments)
was the remedy, against such hazards, Nomina conjugandorum per^ trinundinum ^
ad ministeriu^ Ecclesiastium public denun ciantur. So^ Hist. Eccl. l. c. 5.
no marriage should be legally valid; nor any Minister might, at any time,
marry any persons (without special License in special cases) but only
publicly; and this after three times public asking in the respective
Churches: to which either party belonged; This to be done, by no Minister, but
such as is responsible, either as beneficed and resident in a Living; or of a
known good estate and integrity; under the penalty of losing his Living,
forfeiting his personal estate, sequestring his lands; and (in some cases) of
perpetual imprisonment; This publication so long before, is sufficient notice,
and caution to parents and friends: And the severity of the penalty upon any
Ministers offending, would be full as good security, as the putting of
Matrimonial power, wholly into Justices hands; who are men too, and may have
their temptations: The laying aside of the Ministers Office in marriages, only
upon this account, seems like the project of cutting off the right hand or leg,
to add more united strength to the left; or the putting out the right eye, in
order to see more acutely with the other.

Having answered this Objection; That Ministers in this case of marriages,
seem very much to seek their own interest, either for profit or reputation, or
both; Hoping, some benefit will accrue by such marriages; and getting hereby no
small advantages, upon peoples love, and respects; while they would appear the
only fit instruments to gratify mankind in those affections, and in that
happiness, which every one hopes and fancies to enjoy by their marriage.

Some, supercilious spite, add further; That in vain do Ministers seem
touchy, and so concerned in this case of marriages; as loathe to go less, or
to be laid aside, when as the through reforming genius of this age (which is
against leaving any horns or hoofs of the Beast) wholly against root and
branch, is so seraphically zealous, as it intends not only to pare the nails,
and shave the beards, but wholly to cut off the Antichristian hands and heads
of all Ministers: yea and to hew in pieces this old Amalekite of the ordained
Ministry; Their all-consuming Tophet is not only for diminishing, but quite
extinguishing the order and succession of such Ministere; they burn, not only
to mutilate, but utterly to annihilate the pretended power, peculiar office,
and divine authority Ministerial in the Church; (how Christian, how Catholic,
how ancient, how divine, how useful, how successeful and blessed soever it has
been.)

They have (it seems) found out cheaper prophets, and more compendious ways
of piety; so that they are not only for taking down the old exalted brazen
Serpent of the Ministry, but for the beating it to powder; and making that
Nehushtan; which the godly simplicity of our forefathers (even from the
Apostles time) for 1600 years ever esteemed as sacred, most Christian, and
divine; the only ordinary means instituted by Christ, sent and settled in all
the world, ^phes. 4.11, ^2.
for the planting and watering, the propagating and preserving of the Church of
Christ; Thus these Antiministeriall spirits.

First, I must answer as I lately did in the case of Ministers challenging that
maintenance, which all Reason, Law, and Religion,

That a gross stupidity or careless indifferency does in no sort become
discreet Ministers in their civil and lawful concernments; it being no sign of
sanctity, to forget humanity. 2. That many of these objecters who pretend to
some Saintship, are yet so vigilant and intent to their secular profits and
worldly preferments, that no Spider is more sensible of any Fly or prey that
touches her cobweb snares. And Ministers hope they may (without blame or
scandal) follow such examples, as daily teach them, that Religion is not
always straight-laced as to be wholly mortified with selfdenyals. 3. That, in
a case so honest, convenient, and comely, as this of Ministers officiating in
Christians marriages, they do not more plead for their own accustomed honor
and advantages, than for the peoples, both ease, and benefit every way; who are
generally troubled, justly unsatisfied with, and much disaffected to the new
way. 4. That since able and worthy Ministers, both as to their persons and
their function, find so many ignorant detractors and envyous enemies: also so
few generous Patrons, and assertors in this or any other duty or privilege of
their function, they are forced to fly to the patrociny of Gods protection, to
magnify their office against false and detracting Apostates, and to make their
public appeals to right reason, order, justice, and religion. 5. That,
however it should succeed in this point of marriages for the future with them,
yet it very much becomes them, as men of learning, virtue, and courage; who
have an eye beyond the fear or flattery of worms, (as in other things, so) in
this of Marriages, to justify their own former practice and judgment: Also to
assert the honor and wisdom of your and their pious ancestors; who enjoyed
more peace and happiness in one year, or month, than has been discovered in
many last past; or may be rationally hoped for, in a century of following
years; if they should be pregnant with monstrous novelties and misshapen
productions: to the daily amazement of the world; more then the comfort,
advantage, or improvement of any wise and sober Christians; that either dote
not on bables, or are not scared with bugbeares.

2ly As to the Antiministerial menaces, England, have indeed found by sad
experience, the ungrateful minds of some men, the cruel and implacable malice
of others; who have so much of Nabal and Judas in them, that they grudge the
Ministers of the Church of England so much as a cup of gold water; while
themselves are ready to swallow (without scruple) whole Palaces, and great
Cathedrals, goodly Manors, and rich revenues, formerly given to, and enjoyed
only by Churchmen; That there is no doubt, but the drift of such All-devouring
Reformers, (who are the greatest Factors for Atheism, profaneness, and
superstition) is to make the Ministers of this Church, as the filth and
offscouring of all things; that the precious sons of Zion, who were heretofore
comparable to fine gold, might be esteemed as earthen pitchers, Lam 4.2. What
wise man sees not the doggednesse, of some men to be such, that they rather
fawn on those, that can feed their bellies, then their souls? That either want
of breeding, or depraved affections drive some people to such Scythian
fierceness, that they have no veneration, or esteem of any man's learning,
knowledge, virtue, gravity, wisdom, or piety; if they do not (as in
conscience they cannot) concur with their sacrilegious and injurious projects;
who are therefore justly impatient of such able and worthy Ministers, as the
Church of England formerly bred up, nourished, and honored; because these, as
Eliah to Jezebel, or Micaiah to Ahab, do most discover and upbraide, both by
Scripture rules and holy examples, the exotic folly, the fanatic giddiness,
the gross hypocrisy, the crying injustices, and endless madnesses of such
Antiministerial intruders; who are never to be seen, on the self-denying part
of Religion, being altogether for the Crown and Kingdom (as they call it,)
nothing for the Cross of Jesus Christ; still dreaming, as Zebedees sons, of
sitting at his right and left hand, judging the Tribes of Israel; but never
mean to taste of his bitter cup, or to be baptized with Christ's baptism which
was of his own, not other men's bloodshed.

These finding (to their great vexation) that hitherto they have got little or
no ground against good Ministers, Ministers, their calumniating folly is much
discovered; and proceeds no further, (as to the Gangrene of popular credulity)
so that they are looked upon (now) by all sober and unflattering Christians, as
much inferior to their wonted excellent Ministers, as the Asses loud and harsh
braying was to the singing and Music of Apollo; It is no wonder, if their
wrath grow fierce; if they meditate all extremities of insolent and superfluous
malice, against true Ministers; could they but once be Masters of that power,
which might answer their rage and despite; O what a sacrifice would those
furious Jezebels make of the Priests of the Lord to their Baalims! But God and
good men have hitherto preserved a remnant of grave and good Ministers, by
keeping these cursed cows with short horns; who are in nothing more concerned,
than to leave Ministers nothing to do, and nothing to enjoy; that so at last
they may leave no true Ministers living, of a Catholic Ordination; of
Apostolical succession; of Primitive authority; of duly tried and approved
sufficiency; But rather bring on a mendicant and mercenary race, of new stamped
Teachers; of popular Prophets; Pagan Pastors; Plebeian pieces; sons of the
Earth; creatures of the vulgar, unliterated, unauthorised, untryed, unhallowed,
unordained by any due authority; who are to assert their new calling, title and
places, not by pregnant abilities, by sober reasons, Scripture grounds,
Ecclesiastic custom, Primitive patterns, and domestic laws; but either by
pretended inspirations and soft assurances of grace, (which no man can try in
another) or with such arguments as those used, who came to take Christ; swords
and staves; by tumults, faction, and sedition: who (thus initiated) must
preach, pray, and act, not by Scripture rules, or moral precepts, or humane
laws, or Ecclesiastical order, but by providence, events, successes, and
interests; wherein their chemical heads, and hands are so very intent and
busied, that they are always (by a circle of self-preservation) either
distilling piety into policy; or extracting policy out of piety; Seeking to
turn Sion into Babel; or building Samaria out of the ruins of Jerusalem; And
no wonder if those that affect a levelling self-exalting Magistracy, do also
affect a levelled and self-ordaining Ministry; whose necessitous meannesse may
make them always dependents; and their dependency may pay the tribute of
Pulpit parasitism, and offering up the calves of their lips, more to man than
to God.

But, as in all other main concernments, England have hitherto found in great
measure the merciful power of God, and the just protection of worthy men; So
they have never been so partial to themselves, as to refuse any competent
Judges; (not declaredly their enemies).

Also in this matter of marriages, they dare appeal, and do humbly submit to,
the impartiality, and prudence of your selves, and others; who now sit in the
place and bear the name of Parliamentary power: Not doubting, but upon the
recognition of the bufinesse, your wisdom will easily discern, as the little
and weak motives to so great a change; so the grand inforcements of reason,
civility and religion, which prevailed in the former establishment; which so
required the Ministers religious assistance in the solemnity of marriages,
among sober Christians, that none was legitimate or valid without them.

I know it is needless, Gentlemen of your knowledge and wisdom; How much in
the lawful and holy marriages of Christians, the glory of the Creator is
concerned; How much the sanctity of Christ's Incarnation is to be remembered; How
much the honor of Humanity is to be regarded; How much the exemplary modesty
due to Civil and Christian Societies is to be maintained; How much the good
and edification of the Church is to be tendered; How much need there is of
grave instruction, of good exhortation, of holy admonition, of earnest
supplication, of solemn adjuration, and of comfortable benediction in the name
of God; whereby to raise up the carnal minds of people, from what is brutish
and only natural or humane in marriage, to what is spiritual, Christian, and
divine; Since no charms or bands can be too strong, and potent, whereby to
oblige both parties to their duties; to ratify so inviolable a conjunction; to
keep their passions, and affections from all licentious extravagancies; To
bring them to reverence God and nature; to sanctify his holy Name, in the
allowed indulgences; To look with an holy regard to the great and eternal end
of marriage, beyond the momentary pleasure of the means; Fr. Bacons ^ayes.
to which, as my Lord St. Albans observes, the peopling of the world is most
beholden.

Certainly there are so many marks of honor and holiness, marriage, in all
ages among such as seared the true God, that they cannot but mightily sway the
judgments and excite the conscience of wise and religious men; still to
preserve the pristine veneration and esteem of that so sacred and mysterious
transaction.

As first, (...) 1. (...) 2.
Gods immediate institution, with solemn declaration and divine benediction;
who himself made the first match: He built, brought, and gave to man the first
wife: In whose stead, first the fathers of families; afterward the Levitical
Priests; now the Evangelical Ministers, are as the ordinary means and conduits
to convey to Gods people divine benediction, and graces, in the name, according
to the Word, and by the Spirit of the same God, the first Institutor of holy
marriage.

In the paternal Priesthood, which continued till Moses his time, the holy
Fathers of families were not only careful to have their children marry
prudently as to estate and kindred, but also piously as to the true religion
professed. So was Abraham for Isaac, ^n. 24.3. ^n. 27.46.
so Isaac and Rebecca for Jacob and Esau; That they might in marrying enjoy the
blessing of God, a means, Type, or Emblem of which was that of paternal and
sacerdotal benediction.

2ly Among the Jews after the Mosaic Law, ^st. 20.
the light of Nature, and traditional Divinity (agreeable to the Scriptures,
was so clear and convincing, as to the sanctity and solemnity of their
marriages, that they esteemed it the holy Covenant of their God; Prove. 2.17.
Mal. 2.14. Numb. 5.^.
The trial of which in point of jealousy was to pass before the Priest, with
solemn execrations; Not only the parents and friends bestowed their blessings,
verbal and real, by prayers, and gifts, but the Levitical Priest (and
Congregation, as some learned men suppose) also added to the solemnity, by such
forms of blessing, as were proper for that occasion, reciting (as other
passages in Scripture) so that Psalm. 128. which is the Psalm of marriage
blessing, Psalm. 128.
used with other proper Scriptures in that office of marriage.

3ly In the New Testament, we read the beloved Disciple St. John emphatically
recording the presence and first miracle of Christ at a marriage; As if he
would thereby teach Christians, Joh. 2.
that conjugal love ought to be Christiened, before it be consummated: That our
demeanor in those solemnities and festivals ought to be such as became Christ's
conversation; which certainly, was not only civil and social, but to some
spiritual, and gracious advantage; That we can never expect a married estate
should be blessed, or happy, unless Christ be there in holy duties, and to the
best advantages of Piety: Nor now in his bodily presence (as then he was) but
in his Deputies, Mat. 28.20
and Ministers, who are to supply Christ's visible presence and external
Ministry in his Church, to the end of the world: who, while he strictly
confirms the Mosaic bond of marriage, by that prohibition against causeless
divorces; Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder, Mat. 19 6
intimates clearly, that the ties of conscience in marriage and its comforts
are so much the firmer, by how much God is most evident in their marriages, by
the presence of his Ministers, with the Word and Prayer, invocating Gods grace,
blessing and Spirit, upon the married parties in the name of Jesus Christ, the
holy and only Spouse of the Church and all true believers.

4ly The Apostle St. Paul's judgment of the holiness, Ephesians. 5.^ Heb. 13.^
honorablenesse and mysteriousnesse of marriage among Christians is such as
does evidently imply, that it is best begun in the fear of the Lord, carried on
with the love of Christ; and cannot in Christian society be worthily solemnized
without some such modest, reverend and useful form, as is most comely for the
occasion, and most tends to the edification of Christians; According to those
general rules of Christian prudence, 1 Cor. 14.^
which commands us to do all things decently, and in order; and to the
Churches edifying in love. Also take care that all things be sanctified by the
Word of God and prayer; 1 Timothy 4 5
Which are presumed then best done, when by the assistance of those men's gifts
and piety whom God has appointed in the Church for those ends, and who ought
of all men most to give themselves to the Word and Prayer, for the Churches
good, upon all occasions: and very justly upon this; as a business of civil
and religious polity; which if honorable in all Nations, and sorts of people,
what reason can be given, why among Christians any dishonor, and vilifying
should be cast upon it; by making of sacred, only civil, and in some sense
common profaneness?

The Primitive practice, so far as we are by the writings of the Fathers, or
others acquainted with the customs of those times, was such, as became the
name of Christ and profession of Christians; (...) 1.5. ^^deburg. cen^^^ 2 de
rit. ^^im.
who were holy in all manner of holy conversation; And in this of marriage they
were so devoutly solemn, that the superstition of after times by mistake raised
Matrimony to an Evangelical Sacrament; properly so called; and so, only under
the Ministerial authority and special power to consecrate it, as a great, and
holy Mystery.

Baronius and others tell us, (...). 1. Council. ^^6.
in the year of Christ 97. Euaristus Bishop of Rome, in an Epistle to the
Africans, tells them, it was an Apostolical custom to have parents or friends
consent, and the praying of the Church with the Sacerdotal blessing in
marriages of Christians: if this be authentic.

So Anno Christi 174. ^^^i. n. Sot.
Platina tells us that it was as a Canon of the Church, that no marriages should
be celebrated by Christians but with public devotion.

I omit that of Justin Martyr in Epist. ad Ephesios, as of least credit. ^^n.
Alex. (...). l. 3. (...) 132. ^^s. ed. (...), etc. ^^tul. l. 2. ^^uxor. c. 6.
(...) Dei men^^^ quae Chri^^vocatio! ubi ^^enta fidei (...) cripturae (...)
one! ubi ^^itus refrigerium; ubi divina benedictio! etc.


Clemens a Presbyter of Alexandria (who flourished in the second century)
advising women against the needless use of false hair, to augment their own
tresses, and impose upon their suitors; urges this, as a gross absurdity; that
when in their marriage the Presbyter or Minister of the Church, shall lay his
hand on their heads, (as the custom then was) to bless them; he shall rather
touch, and so bless the false hair and head of one dead, than of her living,
and which he counts a reproach to God and man; urging that place that the head
of the woman is the husband, and the head of the husband, is God: Intimating,
That as they carefully use the duties of true Religion; so they should content
themselves with the true ornaments of nature.

Tertullian also who lived in the beginning of the 2. century, after Christ's
birth, (in the Primitive, and persecuted times) dehorting his wife (in case she
outlived him) from marrying to an unbeliever, uses these expressions,
referring to the holy and comfortable manner of marriage, among Christians;
That in such unsanctified and unblessed marriages with Infidels, there can be
nothing sacred to initiate the mysterious solemnity; No mention of God; no
invocation of Christ; no Scripture fuel, administered to maintain, and excite
the light and heat of faith and divine love; no refreshings of the holy Spirit;
no benediction in the name of God.

So he tells us, Lib. de pudic^ c. 4. Occultae^^ conjunctiones non prius apu^
Ecclesiam professae juxtamaechiam, and fornicatioren judicari periclitantur
that secret marriages not publicly professed and celebrated in the Church,
are next to the scandal and shame of fornication.

Again the same Tertullian, more clearly and precisely to my purpose;
commending the happiness of those marriages which are with pious and wonted
solemnities celebrated in the Church of Christ: Thus; Cap. 9. L. 2. ad. ux.
Vnde sufficiam ad enarrandam selicitatem eju Matrimonit, quod Ecclesiae
conciliat, and confirmat oblatio, and obsignatum angeli renunciant, and Pater
ratum haber^
What words shall I use sufficient to set forth the felicity of that Manrimony,
or those matches, which the Church of Christ makes up; which (oblations) (i.
e.) the joint offering of prayers and praises to God, the reception of the holy
Communion; and the charitable donations to the poor do confirm; which the
Angels (or Ministers) of the Church do solemnly proclaim, being signified and
sealed by mutual consent, which God the Father of all, (both in nature and in
the Church) does by his blessing ratify or establish?

Upon which words Franciscus Junius, Fran. Jun. No^ tae in Ter. L^^ cum,
Quator^ hic ponuntur conjugii. inter fideles elogia, etc.
(one of the most learned Protestant Divines) thus paraphraseth in his notes
upon Tertullian, Here (says he) Tertullian expresses four commendable things
in the marriages of Primitive Christians. 1t They did not only follow the
dictates of nature, but took the directions, and rule of the Church of Christ.
2ly They presented themselves (for so he explains oblatio) before the
Congregation in the public service of God, expressing their mutual consents,
and enjoying the joint prayers of the Church. 3ly The Ministers, (which are as
the messengers or Angels of God in his Church) did with holy instruction,
solemn benediction, declare the marriage vow, covenant, as in the name and
presence of God. 4ly That they had from hence the comfort, and hope, that God
their Father in heaven, blessed and confirmed such orderly and consecrated
marriages on earth.

Thus Junius: at once expressing his approbation of the ancient Christians
custom; and of the best reformed Churches practice; agreeable whereto that in
England was, as to the main, most exactly consonant.

St. Ambrose tells us, as the use of his times, in the the beginning of the
fourth Century; ^^mb Epist. l. 9. (...) 70. ad! Vi^ium. Conju^um velamine
^cerdotali and ^nedictione ^ctificari o^tet.
That marriages of Christians ought to be sanctified by the Bishop or Presbyter
in the public Congregation; who put upon the Bride and Bridegroom a vail in
token of modesty and chastity.

That they were wont to come to the holy Table or Communion Altar, who were to
be married by the Minister.

That the married parties expressed their consent and love by a Ring given and
received: ^mb. de Insti. ^rgi. c. 17. (^tarihus tuis) ^istit non ^mmeo
nuptia^^^ etc. Amb. sermon. 9. de Agnete. Annulo fidei suaesubarrhavit me
Christus.
to which the holy Virgin Agnes alludes, when he brings her in saying, that
Christ Jesus had wedded her to himself with the ring of Faith, etc.

St. Austin, ^ust. lib. de ^no conjugal. (...) 18. In no^^atium nuptiis ^us
valet san^tas Sacramen^^ quam foe^^nditas uteri.
in his Book of the Benefit of marriage, has this excellent commendation of
Christians modesty and sanctity in their marriages; That they much more
regarded the holy Sacrament, or Mystery in it, than the natural pleasure of
posterity by it. Nor does he scruple often to call the marriages of the faithful
an holy Sacrament, in the latitude of that sense which the word then did bear
in the dialect of Christians. In his Tract of Faith and Works, thus he speaks;
^e Bono Con^g. cap. 24. (...). de fide and ^eri. c. 7. In ^vitate Domi^^, in
monte ^cto ejus, hoc (...) in Ecclesia, ^ptiarum non solum vinculum, sed etiam
Sacrament um commendatur.
In the City of the Lord, in his holy Mount, (the Church of Christ,) not only
the civil bond of marriages, but also the holy Mystery or Sacrament of it is
commended; Namely by the holy regard Christians had to Christ; and the holy
duties they used in the Church to sanctify the name of the Lord in their
marrying.

St. ^rysost. in Genesis (...) in Ephesians. (...).
Chrysostom in his Commentary on Genesis 2. and on the 5. chapter of the Ephesians,
and other where largely, and after his manner, most eloquently sets forth the
honor, duties, and sacred mysteries to be considered in the marriages of
Christians; which he says, God from the first took care of, and which he
commends, not as a natural or civil relation only, but as a sacred bond to us;
and such as falls not more under the care of the civil Magistrate, than of the
Minister of the Church; The one looks to their age, estates and consents, as
men; The other to their graces, and blessings, as Christians: The one considers
the Citizens, which may thence arise to earthly societies; The other prepares
them by prayer, institution and benediction for the polity of heaven, the new
Jerusalem.

Synesius, who lived in the beginning of the fifth Century, Nicepho. (...) l.
14. c. 55 (...) Omnibus prae^ dico, testatu^^ que volo, m^^ illam prorsi^^
deserturum n^^ esse, quam mi^^ and Deus ips^^ and leges, ips^ sacra Theop^ li
manus ux^ rem dedit.
being by the choice of the Citizens of Ptolemais, and the consent of
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, designed Bishop of Ptolemais; Thus writes to
his brother Euopius; excusing himself, as unfit for so great a dignity, and
burden; That (among other diversions of life, which indisposed him to that
high Office) He was married; nor would he part with his wife, which God, and
the laws, or Canons of the Church, and the holy hands of Theophilus himself had
given to him.

The fourth Council of Carthage (Century fourth) testifies, that it was the
ancient and usual custom for Parents, to express their consent to their
childrens marriage, Carthag. c^ cil. 4. can. Vsitatum es^ ut ad testific^ dum
parentur^ consensum spo^ sus and spo^ sa a parenti^ in Ecclesia s^^ cerdoti
bene^ cendi offeran^ tur. Socrat^ hist. Eccl. l. 5 c. 5.
by offering them to the Ministers of the Church, that they might by them be
publicly blessed; when they were first examined touching their faith in Jesus
Christ, and other articles of Christian religion.

So the Lateran second Council, Cant. 51. appoints marriages to be published
with convenient delays in the Church by the Presbyter or Minister; that there
may be no impediments when they are to be blessed and declared.

Isidore Bishop of Sevil in Spain, in the year 605. tells the custom of the
Church in those days was, That the Bishop or Minister of the Church did
always bless the married parties, after the example of God, at the first
marriage, made between man and woman: That after the Priestly blessing,
Isidorus Hi^ palen. de of Eccl. l. 2. c. (...) Jam quod in ipsa conjunctione
connubii^ sacerdote ber^ dicuntur, h^c Deo in prima^ conjunctione ^^ctum. Hac
(...) militudine fi^ nunc in Ecclesia, quod tunc factum est in Paradiso.
the parties were by a ribband, white and purple colored, wound about both
their arms, as it were tied together, in sign of their holy and inseparable
band. That the Bridegroom also gave Ad perpetuam vinctionem and individuam
con^^ gatorum societatem annulus spectabant. Scaliger de Art Poet.
a ring to the Bride, as a token of endless or eternal love, etc.

Zonar tom. 3. calls the whole celebrity of marriage in the Church, ((...)) The
Priestly consummating or consecrating of marriages, speaking of the marriage of
Constantine and Zoes the Emperesse.

Thus holy Antiquity generally practiced, especially among Christians turned
from Heathens, whose customs superstitiously sacred, they raised and improved
to such solemnities as most became the honor of Christianity, which had the
substance and truth of those shadows, which either Jews or Gentiles fancyed,
Seldom. ux. braical. 2. c. (...) Ritus benedi^ctionis sacrae ac celebrationis
nuptialis a Ministro sacro peragendae usus obtinet, ac per plurima setula ^^
nuit passim tum in Orient tum in Occidente.
as to things sacred or religious. All which, a Gentleman of immense learning,
and no partial friend to the honor or interest of the Clergy of England,
confesses to have been the constant ((...) and (...)) among all Eastern and
Western Christians, Reformed and Pontifician, for many ages past, in the sacred
celebration of marriages by the Ministers of the Church.

What the judgment of the Churches Roman communion is, ^^^cil. Tried. matrim.
^llar. Tom. 3. (...). c. 2 and ^.33.
as a Sacrament properly so called, sufficiently appears in the determination
of the Tridentine Council, which Bellarmine and others endeavor to assert, by
proving (or rather supposing) three things, essential to a Sacrament, to bein
Matrimony, 1. Divine Institution; 2. Divine significancy; 3. Divine grace
conferred; And these, says he, not so much to be considered in the first
contract, or solemn celebration; as in the continued social union of man, and
wise; which is sacred and inseparable, while they live as becomes Christians;
who thereby (as he tells us) represent the indissoluble bond of love and
spiritual communion between Christ and his Church; ^^hes. c. 5.
(which St. Chrysostom makes rather a mystical Allegory, than a Sacrament:)
and obtaining hereby daily those increases and confirmations of divine grace,
which says the Cardinal are conferred upon such, as hold this sacred Covenant,
or Mystery and Sacrament, in a pure heart, and with a good conscience.

Certainly all those that are of the Roman profession, do so necessarily
require the office of some Evangelical Priest or Minister, to consecrate,
ratify and bless Christian Marriages; that without it, they must needs
esteem all conjugating but fornicating, and all posterity so produced, not to
be beyond the reproach of Bastardy.

Now it no way becomes Christian charity so to study sides, England, and the
reformed Religion here professed, to remove and quite extirpate, (as the
immoderation of some men have sought to do at the expense of much treasure,
many lives, and the best blood of England) the ancient, and Catholic order and
government of a moderate and paternal Episcopacy; And herewith also, that
regular ordination and succession of Ministers, duly tried, blessed and
appointed to the ser vice of Christ and his Church by Bishops and Presbyters in
the presence of the people; (which truly was a great desense of us, against the
calumnies of those Papists, who were most bitter against us, either as
Heretics or Schismatics; for it very much took off and blunted the edge of
their malice, and heat of their disputes against us, while we were able to
justify an holy, and lawful succession uninterrupted, as to the Ministerial
Office and power, residing in Bishops with their Presbyters; which since the
Catholic practice and judgment of the Churches Christian in all places and
ages, from the first primitive persecuted and most unsuspected times had joined
together, (agreeable to the divine pattern, the Apostolical precedents, all
rules of holy order, and principles of right reason in government) It will
never seem (to unpassionate men and times, who hope to gain nothing by the
ruin of Episcopacy) either commendable, or except in cases of civil force and
necessities, (as are pleaded for some few reformed Churhes) justifiable
causlesly to divide Bishops and Presbyters a sunder, by a violent dissection,
and voluntary tearing in pieces such a renowned Church as this of England was,
which cannot but hold very much in the opinion of our adversaries to the
questioning or annulling of all divine Office and authority in Ministers; and
in the duties they perform.

In like manner here, as it must needs enlarge the breach, Papists shall (to
their great content) behold, how (much under the notion of further-reformation)
we degrade and abase the honor of this Nation and Church, not only in the
authority and succession of Ministers, (poorly tried, and pitifully ordained:)
but also of our persons and posterities; by withdrawing all sacred solenmity
and benediction from our marriages; prostituting them to plebeian looseness,
and vulgar profaneness, So that in after ages neither the spiritual nor
natural succession, (either as Christians, or as men) will by the greatest part
of the Christian world be counted as legitimate; if we have neither lawful
Ministers ordained, for our spiritual Fathers, nor lawful Marriages solemnised
for our natural parents: but both will be thought, by our adversaries, and
reproachfully objected against us as base and spurious.

The dishonor or prostitution of which, the best reformed Churches in all other
Countries (as well as in England) were so careful to avoid by their confessions
of doctrine, and by their Liturgies, that they still sought by all means to
preserve the reverend and holy esteem of marriage by those Scripture forms and
holy solemnities they appointed and used in the public celebration of
marriages by their Ecclesiastical Ministers only; as at large appears in the
Dutch and French Liturgies, with others.

And however they did not come up to the Roman opinion, That Matrimony was
properly a Sacrament; ^rdus de ^ug. page ^. S. 462. ^mnitius ^m. Council. ^d. de
matri. ^. 256. Li^er aliquo ^ and Sacra^tum vocaconjugium; ^praeclarius
^ugustius Ecclesia de ^gio and ^endum and ^endum mo^us.
yet they owned it as a mysterious emblem, and in some sense a sacrament or
honorable and holy sign of divine love, and Christ's communion with his Church;
whereto they were induced by the divine Institution; by the sacred allusions in
Scripture speaking of Gods Espousing and marrying of his Church; by the Honor
Christ conferred upon it; by the Apostles high expressions to the dignifying of
Christians marriages as honorable, and their children as holy: Also by the
judgment and answerable practice of pious Antiquity, in all ages of the
Church; who perfectly abhorred the devilish opinions of those heretics, Simon
Magus, and his scholar Saturninus; the Gnostics, Manichees, Tatianus, and
others (of most profligate lubricity) who denied Matrimony to be of God; That
it had nothing sacred or Christian; opus hematrimoreliquist is ^em a
scele^ssate. Salv. ^ub. contra ^games.

^em. Alex. (...): Tertul. de monogam. Iren. l. 1. c. 22. Just. de haeres.
Jerome. l. 1. cont. Jovin. ^ide deus pro rei honestate conjugio henedixit.
Tertul. l. cont. Marcio.


That it was from the Devil; and was but the necessity, sin and burden of
humane nature; against which Tertullian, Irenaeus, Clem. Alexandrinus, St.
Austin, Jerome, and others of the Ancients justly inveigh, as against persons
of profane spirits; and advancers of the doctrine of Devils, while they decryed
and debased marriage; which says Tertullian, God, foreseeing some men's
blasphemies, providently blessed; to vindicate and perpetuate its honor against
their reproaches.

Which not only the best Christians in all ages, ^orf. Synag. ^i. c. 38.
but the Jews as of old times to this day look upon it, not only with civil,
but sacred regards; Having not only signal espousals, (...) ^utio de^atorum.
(...). ^lictio con^orum. ^ 4 11.
contracting or betrothing, by gifts, dowry, and writing declared before
friends and parents; But they used, and use also holy rites and religious
solemnities, which were performed in the assembly of ten at least, with
blessings and thanksgiving to God by some person of prime honor and sanctity in
the family, who herein sometimes acted, in the right and form of sacerdotal
primogeniture, or as Father and Priest in the family.

The form of their espousals, marrying, and benediction; is still extant in the
writings of the Rabbis; as Genebrard and others recite. Blessed be the Lord
our God, King of the world, who has created man after his own Image; and has
thereby prepared to himself an everlasting building: Blessed art thou O Lord
our God, who have createed joy and gladness, the Bridegroom and the Bride,
charity and brotherly love, rejoicing and pleasure, peace and security; We
beseech thee O Lord let there be heard in the Cities of Judah, and the streets
of Jerusalem, the voice of joy and gladness; the voice of the Bride and
Bridegroom; the voice of exaltation in the Bride chamber, which is sweeter
then any feast; and of children sweeter than the sweetness of any song. The
company invited following the Master of the Feast, comprecated all blessings on
them by that ((...)) which was their usual form; wishing them the influences of
propitious and good stars from heaven; And a learned Minister tells us, Plin. l.
3 de. Annu^ ferteo sim Que sponsi^ pignorasser^ Annulum (...) nubum vo^^
Terrul. d^^ tu foem. (...) Locus ben^^^ctionis. Luke 1.
that the Bridegroom gave the Bride a Ring, (as the Heathens and Christians
after did so:) with that Inscription, or Posie; These solemnities in marriages,
among the sober and religious Jews were so sacred and signal, that the house
where the celebrity was kept, was called, The House of praise; the place of
blessing: and persons married were said to be praised or the blessed of the
Lord: as Psalm. 78.63. Their Virgins were not praised; which we translate, given
in marriage; as the taking away of their reproach, was by bearing children;
Agreeable also to our English form, these words were in the Jews marriage
solemnly pronounced by the husband, when he took his wife; (as they are cited
out of the Babylonick Talmud)

Be thou to me a wife according to the law of Moses and Israel; Esto m^hi^ orem
scci^ legem Mo^^^ Israel: (...) juxta verb (...) Dei colum^ honorabo ^^^lam and
re^ etc. Do tibi dotem virginitatis.
I will worship and honor thee according to the Word of God (to which St. Peter
1.3, 7. alludes, Honor your wifes as the weaker vessels) I shall seed and
govern thee, as those who worship, honor, maintain and govern their wifes
faithfully; I give thee fifty shekels for thy dowry; Also thy food, clothing,
and necessaries; together with the kindness and custom of the whole Earth:
Thus the Jews.

Yea the very light of nature and sparks of right reason, (...). Fboti. cod. de
Alexan^^^ nis. The Priests of Isis consecrated all their marriages to make them
lawful. Plat. l. 5 rep. F^ augusationem, Sacerdotes, preces and facrificia.
Veniet cum signatoribus auspex. Juv. sat. 10. Val. Max. l. 2. c. 1. Nuptits
auspicia-interpomentus. Sigon. de jure Romans l. 1. c. 9. Lactant. Just l. ^
^olla Me^ perd. ^ l. 4. L.
among the civilized and soberest Heathens, Greeks, Romans, made them both
venerate the Creator, and humane nature in their marriages; as Plato relates;
having many sacred and (as they esteemed) religious ceremonies; which their
Augurs, Flamens, or Priests performed publicly and solemnly with Prayers,
Benedictions, Festivities, Sacrifices, farreations, immolations, and the like;
which they thought monitory of duty, expiatory of sin, defensatives against
mifortunes; and propitiatory to obtain the divine favor of the Gods. They had
their Sacrament of sire and water, which one touched, the other sprinkled;
Their sacra (as they called them) in Spears, Crowns, Vails, Torches, emblemes
of love, joy, and lusture and modesty; in the anointing of the posts of the
house where the Bride came forth (whence uxor is from unxor as Servius
observes;) ^rch. Q. quae. 87. neid. l. 4. ^i ante (...), cui vingalia curae. l.
4. Ae^
They had a God and Goddesses special; as Genius attending and blessing
marriage; Jugatina Juno, Diana, Suadela, Ciexia, Manturna, Hymen, and
Viriplaca, in order to the peace, prosperity, and fruitfulness and gravity of
marriage; intimating thus much, that (by Natural Divinity) they thought
marriage sacred, ^genium ^nnere Juvenal. ^ba Juno ^. Ovid.
and the blessings of it not to be obtained but from the God of Nature.

Thus the very Heathens that knew not the true God; who brought not only the
married parties to the Priests, Altars and Temples of their Gods; but they also
brought the Images of their Gods into their Bride-chamber, as St. Austin
observes, lib. 6. de Civit. ^ 27. ^ sacri so^ and pub^ore omni^entium in ^ii
con^tione ^mur. Ge^s.
Dei.

So that I cannot tell from what principle of Sanctity, Reformation, or
Religion, that custom (which some would call sacrilegious) should be brought
in among Christians; so as may strip marriage of all sacred initiatings and
Christian solemnities; to degrade the holy honor of it below what Jews or
Gentiles ever did; or the Turks themselves at this day do, who have such
religious regard to marriage, Afric^ap. In noniis ^hendis Pater filiam proco
despondet; mox in Templumitur, etc.
that they marry not but in their Temples, and with the decoration of many
Ceremonies, which among the Mahumetans are counted sacred.

I beseech you are we (now living) a more Angelick offspring, (...) brysost.
or more Saintly generation of men and women in England? Are we less brutish,
sensual, libidinous, or licentious; Are men more sober and severe, as to native
extravagancies and the impulses of inbred flames; that they should so easily
dispense with the Churches prayers, the Ministers Institution, and the divine
benediction, and rather bring in their old Fescennina or ribauldries, then use
any divine service or orisons? Do they now less need grave and holy counsel;
strict and weighty charges; pious and Christian injunctions proper to such
occasions? Do they want nothing of direction, of comfort, of grace, of
blessing; formerly urged and inculcated upon their minds? Now not so much as
mentioned, or suggested to their consideration or consciences; or if it be,
(which is not usual with some Justices) yet it is for the most part after so
insipid, consused, and rustical a Rapsody of devotion, as carries no great
beauty of holiness; no honor of religion or marriage: and many times great
deformities even as to common sense and ordinary discretion, or civility: And
this in an age when men and women too, under pretense of Christian liberty are
pleading for divorces; for plurality of wifes and husbands; for a ranting and
fornicating Devil under the notion of spiritual freedom.

Which slight or slovenly fashion, either of mere Givil, celebration, all wise
men judge to be far short of the Majesty and honor of Christian Marriages, in
which God and Christ are so discernable: Being the greatest and most ponderous
passage of our mortal pilgrimage: (...). Naz. or. 19. (...). Naz.
Then which nothing should more exercise the prayers and tears, the piety and
devotion of good Christians: Nor can indeed the sacred pomp, or holy parade of
Christians marriages, easily be too rationally serious, or too religiously
solemn, whereby to make deep and lasting impressions on the minds and
consciences of men and women.

Since in marriages is laid the foundation, or root of both humane and holy
successions; of Christian families, States, and Churches; This is as the
conduit and conservative of our reason, and religion; of learning and
experience; of truth and faith; of all virtue and sanctity, either preceptive
or exemplary, as divine Plato observes. To the fruit of our marriages, as our
houses, lands, states; (...). Cl. Al (...). 3. c. 13 (...).
so our good examples, our commendable customs; our Religion, our God, our
Savior are to descend; and by these to be derived to after ages, when we are
dead and gone; from their nursery hopeful plants arise, which may know and
worship and serve the same true God of heaven; and partake of the blessings
offered to mankind by the incarnate Messiah; and who may after the ruin of
their parents fleshly Tabernacles, (...). Plato l. 6. de Leg. Elementum mundi
and seminarium generis humani, Aeternitas quaedam and immortalitas humanitatis
(...) Arist. oeconom. 1.
still erect new and lively Temples for the inhabitation of the blessed Spirit.
Now where I pray can the Type or Emblem of the communion between Christ and
his Church be better celebrated than in the Church and Congregation; by the
Minister of that Church, who is to them in Christ's stead, and over them in the
Lord?

How incongruous then (I beseech you) must it seem, momentaneous business of
Christian Marriages, thus sorely circumcised, and sadly eclipsed, as to its
wonted honor, and holy solemnity; That so large a Volume, in which are wrote
either so many blessings, or so many curses, should be shrunk and rolled up, to
such a poor Epitome; or bound up in a Lay decimo sexto? That this tree of life,
which anciently stood and flourished in the midst of the Paradise or Garden of
God, the Church fensed and adorned with both civil and sacred solemnities,
should now, either be removed to the outsides, and skirts of civil and mere
secular transactions, (as a plant rather profane, then sacred: and fitter to be
placed in the circumference of State policy; than in the center of
Ecclesiastical piety;) or else be represented, as the forbidden fruit, guarded
by flaming swords, to which neither Minister, nor people may safely (as
heretofore) have access, under any religious notion or Church form and holy
solemnity, under great penalty, and peril. And all this, as may seem from a
principle more of despite and affront to the learned and faithful Ministers of
this Church, than from any motive tending to the good and benefit of the people
as men or Christians.

Which truly is never to be sought, by wise men, nor gained by weak or wilful
men, in any ways, so contradictory to Natural divinity; to Scriptural light;
to divine precedents; to Apostolical judgment; to Primitive practice, and
Catholic custom in the Churches of Christ.

In all which, Gentlemen, either are, or easily will be so satisfied, by your
own reading the Scriptures, and other good Books (from which I take you to be
neither strangers nor enemies, (as some sorry undertakers to reform, (before
you) have been, who must ever expect from learned pens, either to be buried in
oblivion, or only to live in infamy); that you will never think it just or fit
to sacrifice all those pregnant testimonies, important reasons, and imitable
authorities of ancient times, to novel ignorance, Plebeian prejudice, or modern
simplicity; And certainly if it were sit, (as some have, though but as bunglers
endeavored) to reform elder deformities in the Church; there is no cause why
wise men should be scrupulous, or fearful to take away later spots, to supply
new defects, or to remove recent inconveniences brought upon us: Which arose
most what from new modelling shrubs: as far short of our forefathers
Cedar-like eminency in all worth and wisdom, as gloe worms, or falling stars,
and prodigious Comets are, of that glorious light and benign influence which
flows from the munificent constancy of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

Having then with great preponderancy of reason and religion, England, whose
wise and comely order in this point, neither as to expression nor ceremonies,
merited so savere censures as the ignorance of some hypercritical Reformers put
upon it; mending all by one blot or dash of severe abolition.

It will be (I suppose) less necessary for me to cast into the balance of your
judgment, the lesser and additional grains of civil and secular conveniences,
or inconveniences; wherein you cannot but see, and daily hear from all parts,
how much vexation, trouble, pains, defeats, charges, and encumbrances, are
brought upon the people, by this new and exotic mode of marrying; far beyond
what was formerly ever felt, while grave Ministers worthily officiated.

I may add (without any injury) how in this new plantation the weeds of
wantonness, licentiousness, petulancy, scurrility, levity, and impudence,
grow up to great rankness in the minds and manners of all sorts of people,
which St. Cyp. de disand hab. virgi^ number. Inter^ nuptiarum tu^ bas, contra ^
dicos and sobr^ mores licenti^ sibi de usurpa^ one secerunt. ^ Lascivientiu^
libertas, ser^ ^num colloqu^ incesta misce^ audiunt quod non decet: q^ non
licet dic^ inter verba ^ pia and temu^ ta convivia, bus libidinu^ fomes accen^
tur, etc.
Cyprian long ago observed as ill weeds to grow too easily in such meetings,
while they are not now as formerly either seasoned with any modest thoughts of
religious principles; nor summoned to consider of any holy duties or purposes,
becoming conscientious Christians; beyond mere Heathens or brute beasts; Indeed
there is little or nothing usually now passes, befitting so solemn vow and
Covenant made for life, in the name and presence of the great God; But commonly
the whole matter of marriage is made up in small cocks, by a Justice many times
other ways busied, or bent and designed; (who is sometimes less knowing in
his Office than his Clark) With some brow and severity, he (good man) makes a
shift to huddle over with have, and impatience the pronouncing them man and
wife, according to the power given him by a late act or ordinance; Fees are
paid; and so Godbuy; (which I mention, not to reproach, or lessen the honor of
any grave and worthy Gentlemen, who being Justices of the Peace, do in this
what is enjoined them; as not very willingly, so not unhansomely; But to show
how poor and peddling a matter some make of Christians marriages.)

What grave and godly spectator or auditor will think this so quick, so short,
so superficial a dispatch, as some use, highly concerns the bodies and estates,
souls, and consciences, the temporal and eternal welfare of Christian men and
women; which offers no occasion of holy meditation or prayer, such as Isaac
entertained his soul with all before his bride and wife met him, Genesis 24. v. 33.

As in many other changes matter of wonder (if not astonishment) has surprised
grave and godly people in this Church of England; so truly in nothing more,
than in this vertigo, or turn of the course of marriage; which having held
forth so little, or no reasons, also producing so no advantage civil or sacred
to the public; is thought (by many) would never have been done, by any
persons, but such whose weakness sought to make a show of strength, and
activity, by safely trampling upon the dejected Ministry of the Church of
England; for they appearing (in the effects which I have hitherto in vain
attended, for any convenience or public good, beyond the former comstitution)
so little friends to the peoples conveniences, by this change, they may easily
seem the more perfect enemies to the Ministers honor and employment, which is
not the mote but the beam in some men's blind or bloudshotten eyes.

Not that learned Ministers are so impertinent, precise precept of God, or
particular command of Christ; whereby to enjoin them to this holy officiating,
or blessing, at the solemnities of marriages, as much as in those duties,
properly divine, of Sacramental consecrations; and other undoubted offices of
Religion: which require an authoratative, and duly ordained Ministry, no
less, than all public civil transactions, or Embassies do require
Ambassadors or Agents of public credence and authority: They well understand
that Heathens or Jews were married before they became Christians, and had no
after ceremony to renew or confirm their marriage, when they turned Christians;
whence we conclude Matrimony no Evangelical Sacrament, because it may go
before Conversion, Baptism, and admittance into the Church; and yet be valid,
and after consecrated by believing.

They well know, ^ugium est and mulieris ^nctio in luamvitae eiudinem ^ens.
JustiInstit.
that the (esse) or being of marriage (as Civilians define it) consists in the
mutual consent, and individual communion of one man and woman, who may lawfully
choose and consent to live as man and wife; That the first root or spring is
natural; (yet divine, as from the God of Laws and Nature;) Its rise and
emanation is social (yet divine, as from the God of order and civil
government;) Its highest sublimity and perfection is spiritual and mysterious;
^consorti^ctissimum humani vini juris as. Mode^s de rit. ^i.
) Divine in the highest notion and degree; In all three regards marriages of
Christians are to be highly reverenced, in nature, in policy and in piety; So
then, in order to the (been esse) well being, of marriage, wherein decency,
honor, edification, good example, sanctity, holy undertaking the duties, and
happy enjoying the blessings of that estate, (all which must come from God) are
to be regarded; ^nsus manialis ma^nium con^, quoad ^entiam; blicatio ^ebet,
prop^blicam ^am, and Ecclesiae (...). Gerard. e Cyp. Presbyter nuptiis
interesse debet, ut cum Dei Be^one eorum consortium adjuvet in omnem
sanctitatem. Council. Brit. H. Spel. page 462. An. 940. ^nem felicita^is
plentudine in promovebit.
the public prayers and sacred solemnities of the Church, are as far
necessary, as comely clothes and handsome houses are to civil societies; And as
Christian conversation is ever necessary for those, that profess to live in
the pale of the true Church, where all things ought in prudence and conscience
to be done, to the glory of God, to the honor of the Gospel, and the
edisication of others.

All which ends are undoubtedly best advanced by such celebration of marriage,
as the Church and Parliaments of England had excellently settled after the
manner of the best Primitive and reformed patterns, wherein there was most seen
of Gods presence in his word and worship, in the gifts and graces of his
Spirit. All which are as eminent in the former way of Ministers officiating, as
they are now diminished and vanished, in this new and naked way; wherein so
little is to be seen of private blessing, and public benefit: of Gods glory,
or the Churches honor.

Certainly, if it would seem very grievous to Bridegrooms and Brides, to be
denied the use of their best clothes, their richest ornaments and Jewels, which
God permits, Ephesians. 5.8. Apoc. 19.7.
and Scripture alludes to as tokens of divine bounty; as emblemes of man's
dignity, and memorials of inward graces, adorning the soul: If it were a
ridiculous tyranny to compel any people to be married, Ezekiel. 16.10
in their Gibeonitish garments, in filthy rags, or mean and slovenly apparel,
(Such as Joseph and Joshua had, till God changed them) how much more may it
justly seem a dehonestation, indignity and affront, put upon Christians in
their marriages, to strip them of all those grave, religious and comely
adornings, which were allowed and appointed both for poor and rich in this
Church; by persons that had more fear of God and reverence of man, than those
may seem to have had, who were the contrivers of this desolation which has
stripped and plundered marriage of all its Primitive Jewels and ancient
ornaments of piety, holiness and devotion?

No wonder then if Ministers and other sober Christians looking upon Marriages
as now among Christians under the general rules and directions of order, piety
and prudence, which God has given all civil societies, and specially to this
Church; do humbly conceive the former use and custom of solemn and Religious
celebration of Marriages by Ministers, had far more pious, and prudentiall
grounds for order, decency and edification, then can be alleged against it, or
for any change of it. Besides, the Laws and constitutions of the Nation were
added to the Churches custom, which was agreeable to faith and good manners;
which ought to have been sacred and inviolable to peaceable Christians (as St
Paul intimates 1 Cor. 10.) unless they had potent objections against them, or
offered something better in lieu of them; which yet has not been done; whereby
to justify the perverting their course of Marriages from the Temple to the
Hall, from the Sanctuary to the Grange, from the Pulpit or Desk to the Market
Cross, from the Minister to the Justice, which is to take off those Crowns
and Garlands, wonted (as St. Chrysostom well, in Gen.) to be put on the heads
of Married couples, at the day and solemnity of their Marriages, ages, and to
make them appear as with shorn and shaved heads, which is a shame for Man and
Woman too, as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.

But I shall not need to intimate further any such suggestions to your wisdom,
who I believe well know how to distinguish between gold and copper, between the
Idol of power, and the God of reason, between the Teraphim of policy, and the
Cherubim of piety, between the Galves of Bathel, and the Altar at Jerusalem,
between the childish babies of passionate novelty, and the stately statues of
Masculine prudence and venerable antiquity.

I only thus far thought it my duty (who am as little as any man concerned in
this, England, who have serious regard both to the honor of the present age,
and to the benefit of posterity; who all think, that the late change of
Marriage, is like turning Christ's wine again into water, or giving it such a
dash of water, as takes away the taste of the good old wine, which was much
better; that it is as much short in life, spirit and vigor of the former grave,
solemn and godly way, as the purifying liquor in the Jews waterpots was, of
that generous wine which Christ miraculously furnished to the Wedding of Cana
in Galilee.

And truly it will be not much short of honoring Marriage with a new miracle,
your wisdom and authority can change the late watery Ordinance of
Lay-marrying, into the wine of former pious and Christian solemnity; which did
as with the right hand of blessing, with a cup of salvation, as much cheer the
spirits of Married cupples, by grave counsel, holy comfort, Scripture
promises, devout prayers, and divine benedictions, as this last left handed Act
has damped and quenched them, as to Religious joys and Christian duties,
which ought not (like the Fiddlers and Ministrels which Christ turned out of the
Chamber of the dead) be excluded from the Weddings of Christians, who are
commanded to marry and to be merry only in the Lord.

If what I have in this Epistolary Tract alleged of reason and Religion in the
case of Marriages, England.

If you do not discern the weight of these reasons, and prudentiall, which I
have produced with all plainness, and with all due respect presented to you;
or, if for some unreasonable reasons of State you think it not fit to own and
follow them, (so as to make any just revocation or restitution) yet you will
give me leave not to despair of your ingenuity and honor, so sar, as to excuse
my boldness for interrupting you; which I beseech your nobleness and candor
to interpret (as it is) a fruit of my plain hearted Parrhesie and integrity;
who in great changes, and public concernments (wherein men of my calling are
made only spectators or sufferers) cannot (yet) learn how by a servile license,
to smother my sense of what I think dangerous or inconvenient; nor my
approbation of those excellent things, which were long since justified by the
consent and suffrages of many persons and Churches, famous for their learning,
godliness and wisdom; Least of all do I know how to flatter or comply with
any imperious novelty, to the disgrace of primitive verity; which is, and I
hope ever shall be the measure of all the counsels, endeavors and actions of

Your humble Servant in the Lord John Gauden.
October, 1654.
(...). Solennis in Atheniensium nuptiis cantilena. Emendate ergo ecclesiae
regulam, damnate qui in toto or be sunt sacerdotes, nuptiarum initia
benedicentes, consecrantes and in D. imysteriis sociantes. De concupis.
Scripturn anno Christi 400. l. 3. p. 210. editum a Sirmondo, 1643. Luculentum
sade de p^is o Benedictionis nuptialis, sacrerumque ad muptias spectantium usu
in Christian^mo testimonium. Seldom. uxor Ebr. l. 2. c. 28. p. 301.
FINIS.

