A Letter from a Scholar in Oxfordshire to his Uncle a Merchant in
Broad-street, upon occasion of a Book entitled, A moderate, and most proper
Reply to a Declaration, Printed and published under His Majesty's Name, December.
8. intended against an Ordinance of Parliament, for assessing, etc. sent to the
Press by the Merchant, who confesses himself converted by it.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, and the two Books you sent me on Saturday last by the
last Carrier, and have ever since employed my thoughts and best Reason upon
them, and in summing up to my self the whole state of the Case; which is truly
the subject matter of this dispute. You know, Sir, what obligations I have to
you for your care and expense in my education, and for recommending me into so
pious and honorable a Family, and therefore would not willingly dissent from
you in an Opinion, to which (to my sorrow) I find you so much wedded; But since
you require from me to try to persuade my Father (whom you call Malignant) to
make himself a good Example in the City, by freely bringing in the twentieth
part of his estate, before the Assessors fetch it; and to persuade, and enable
me to persuade him to it, you enclosed the Kings Declaration against the
Ordinance for that Payment, and an Answer (as you are pleased to call it, a
most clear and convincing one) to that Declaration. I suppose you will sooner
excuse me for giving you my Reasons, why I cannot obey you, then for a silent
sullen disobedience. And I differ from you with the more confidence, because it
seems by your Letter that I have the Authority of a Father for me, though I
have that of an Uncle against me. Truly Sir, I am so much satisfied with the
Kings Declaration, and so little with the Reply, That I cannot but think that
the two Houses did purposely avoid replying themselves, and turned it over to
another, as finding their side too weak to be mayntained, and thinking it less
dishonorable to be confuted by Proxy. And that the most proper Reply to such
Declarations is to forbid the Printing and publishing under pain of Plundering
and Imprisonment. And indeed, if all that has been written on both sides had
been suffered freely, and indifferently (as was required by Justice, and
desired by the King) to have been communicated to, and examined by the People
(to whom the House of Commons had first (and without any president) in that way
begun to appeal) those Paper-bullets (as he calls them) would have killed this
War in the womb, and the same People who have been now seduced into
Rebellion, would have kept their Seducers to their. Loyalty, whether they would
or no.

I shall now come to the Reply it self, in answer to which, if I shall speak
of things that you may conceive me a stranger to, I shall desire you to
remember how industrious a curiosity, I have ever had to inform my self fully
in all the Questions of the Times, how carefully I studied the Questions of
Arminianisme, the point of Ship Money, and the disputes about Altar and Table,
and then you will not wonder, if in a question which concerned as well the
subsistence, as the Salvation of all the Subjects of this Kingdom, I have not
been lazy to satisfy my self, as well in Right as in Fact; of which though
the latter (by reason of my condition) was harder to me, yet what with my
Interest in the Gentleman of the House of Commons who was my Pupil in Oxford:
What with my acquaintance with some Exeter Colledge-men, Chaplains to some of
the Kings Regiments (men ever till now rather esteemed Puritans, then Popishly
affected) and by being often, present by their means, where some discreet
Officers of the Kings have often met; I am confident, I am so well informed
that what I shall say is come to me by very good Conduit pipes, though I had
it not from the Springhead.

Me thinks, if the Author of this Reply had intended, that his moderation
should have reached any farther then the Title of his Book he would not in the
very first lines have confuted his Title, and spoken so scornfully of a
Declaration under His Majesty's Name, as he does in the Phrase of the Pen,
that drops this Declaration, and so falsely and maliciously as to say, It is
fellow to the Tongue which cuts like a sharp Rasour; to say, that Malignity
was the Whetstone, and that it cares not though it mangle Truth and goodness:
For suppose, that his implicit belief in some Vote of the House of Commons, as
when to free Sir Henry Ludlow for saying in that House upon the reading of a
Declaration sent from the King enclosed in a Letter signed and sealed by His
own Royal Hand and Signet, That he that made that Declaration deserved not to
be King of England; they Voted as if pretending to Inspiration, that that
Declaration was not the Kings (for you know I was present when this was related
to you the same night at Supper by a Parliament man.) Suppose, I say, this
confidence in some such new Vote upon this occasion, should have persuaded him,
that the King did not wholly endite it Himself; yet since He visibly did allow
of, and send it, I wonder He should not conceive it to be as much His, as this
very Ordinance is the Act of both Houses; Since it is more evident that the
Houses did not write this, then that the King writ not the other, and that
being drawn up by their Command, and published by their Authority (as the other
is by the Kings) is all that can make it theirs; And yet I believe a Person
that were brought to the Bar for using the same words of their Ordinance, would
not be excused from breach of Privilege, by answering that not the Houses, but
some Committee, or particular Member of them was the Author of it.

Next the King objects the total destruction of the Liberty and Propriety of
all His Subjects by the imprisonment of their persons without cause, and
disposing of their Estates without Law: and the Reply acknowledges as much as
the Declaration objects, by that full and sufficient Answer. What have these
men to do to talk of fundamental Laws? It were well he would have it moved
that an Ordinance be made, that the Laws should no more be spoken of; for doing
as they do, they can get little advantage by such discourses; else, that the
King who is sworn to protect the Law should alone not have leave no name it,
were a very hard case. But perhaps the Replyer may defend himself by saying he
imitates only the Style of the Psalms, why do the wicked take my Law in
their mouth? and follows only the usual Style of all their Sermons, who
whatsoever is said of wicked Kings and Persons, assume Authority to take it for
granted as applyable to the Person of our gracious Prince, and of all those who
venture their Lives to assist and defend Him: for to defend himself he may
well accuse his Friends, I am sure, to defend his Friends, he is no other way
able to do it then by recrimination upon his Enemies, and for that runs up as
high as Loans, Knighthood, and Ship-mony. His memory is very good concerning
those grievances, but very ill to forget by whose just and gracious concurrence
we have been cased both of them, and even of the fear of the like for the
future; and sure, if any known Authors or Ministers of those Calamities, remayn
still about His Majesty to frame His Declarations, it has been by their
negligence, not by His Majesty's opposall of their Remove and Punishment. And
it is not so strange that His Majesty upon information, how grievous those
pressures were to His Subjects, opposes the introducing of the same
illegalities, and miseries under no other color then of new names and has
learned Law enough this Parliament to know that the pretense of necessity and
Propterea quod Regnum nostrum periclitatur, is no sufficient cause of levying
money, either by Writ or Ordinance; As that this Author will talk of such past
faults, when there was nothing then suffered by the Subject, which has not
upon the same Pretenses, but with less color, been since acted and exceeded
by those, who were called together to ease them from the like sufferings. But
alas, they only take away men's estates in the defense of their Propriety, and
imprison their persons in defense of their liberty, and I believe will shortly
hang them up to save their lives (as they already shoot at the King in his own
defense) for he says, the Parliament (and by that throughout he means both
Houses) has power not only of liberty and imprisonment, but of life and
death. Nor are we like to stay here, for he says, that the House of Commons
alone is trusted with all the estates of the Commons of England, and
consequently may shortly save the Lords a labor of joining with them in
disposing of the estates of Commoners. And if they shall after pretend (as by
the same Right they may) to a power over the lives of the Commoners too, a
Member of such a House in a perpetual Parliament may get more Revenue and
Mayntenance by His Place, then ever any Penman of his Majesty's Declarations
will do by His. The truth is, the King and Lords both are as much trusted with
the Estates of all the Commons of England, as the House of Commons is; neither
it without them, nor they without it can dispose of them: and whatsoever Rights
the King has in Him by the Law, as the choice of Counselors and Officers, of
Commanders of Forts and Castles, and of the Militia of the Kingdom, and the
like; with them He is trusted by the whole Nation, and neither one nor both
Houses have any more superiority over that Trust, then he has over any Trust
committed to them. He represents the people too in what the Law has left to
Him, nor do they represent them in any thing which the Law has not trusted to
them. But unless such Ordinances be made, the War cannot be mayntained. I
wonder not, that this Argument should appear a good one in their Army which
lives by War, bus I wonder, it should be suspected likely to prevail upon the
City, which can as little subsist without Trade, as Trade can continue without
Peace, and which by this War has been so much already diverted, that many
years will scarce return it into the former channel. I wonder the Citizens do
not consider, that by this War their charge increases, whilst their gettings
diminish: That their Train-bands are already suspected (and perhaps will
shortly be disarmed and plundered too) and the City awed by Red-coats. That for
this War the twentieth part of their estates is voted away, and Assessors most
of one Faction appointed, who may call nineteen parts the twentieth; That they
are (under that terror) imprisoned, upon grounds upon which no man should be
imprison^d* and imprisoned by persons who ought to imprison no body; (for
suppose both Houses had an Arbitrary power over their goods and liberties, they
never claimed any till now by Ordinance, or otherwise, to transfer that power
to a Committee; which yet is daily acted by them without reporting to the
Houses) and this slavery is only evaded by saying, it is thus far a
voluntary slavery, that they may free their persons if they will by voluntary
Contribution, and that it is done to fright them from a perpetual slavery: And
truly, the Kings, Attorney had no great invention, if he could not have found
the same Answer to justify all the Imprisonments for Ship Money,
Knighting-money, Coat and Conduct-money, etc. to have been both voluntary and
necessary.

Nor is this reason of mayntaining the War any better as to the leg^ll, then as
to the prudentiall part. The King (who has power of making War and Peace,
which both Houses, how ^^ll and free soever they are, have not) in never so
just and necessary a War has no legal power to leavy money to mayntain it,
without consent in Parliament. But this War for which this Ordinance is made,
is not only as illegal as the Ordinance it self, (I can make no greater
expression) but it is as ungrounded as it is illegal. They first make a
necessity, that they may make a War; and then root up liberty and property,
that they may continue it: Schism, Pride, Faction, and Ambition, were the
only grounds; Fears and Jealousies were the only pretenses; and Misery,
Slavery, and Desolation, are the only effects, of that which now to petition
against is become a crime.

And if I make this appear to you, I doubt not, Sir, but you will then
confess, that not only these illegal proceedings of theirs are not justified
by the War, but that even the illegal pressures to which they have
necessitated the King; (what Tax soever He can have laid upon Oxfordshire, or
my Lord of Newcastle upon Yorkshire, or Sir Ralph Hopton upon the West) are to
be imputed to the beginners of this War; and that both the plundring of
Master Speaker of his Wine and his Battelaxe, and the plundering of Braineford,
(which though it were done to a Town taken by assault, yet for want of other
instances is twice repeated) and the danger of London (which he says was as
near to the state of Braineford, as Braineford is to London) is to be charged
upon the same score. Let us consider the beginning of these distractions. When
with so much difficulty, by so few voices, that unexampled Declaration of the
house of Commons had been spread among the people, which incited them against
the established Laws, and against the house of Lords, which would not alter
what was established* And when the people, giving credit to their information,
that there was no hope of happiness for them without their concurrence, had
(to the dishonor of Parliaments, and with the breach of the highest
privileges of that most honorable Court) come down in Tumults to make them
concur; and by affronting and injuring some of the Members of both houses, so
awed the rest, that the Army, if it had really been brought up to London,
could have done no more (though a mere discourse concerning that was voted to
be Treason.) When all these Tumults (of which I speak the more knowingly,
because I was then by accident in the court of Requests when the Rabble came
up, and heard, no Bishops, no Bishops, cried with that animosity and violence,
that it rings still in my ears; and saw Sir John Strangewayes threatened as
their enemy; and one (I think they called him Master Killigrew) laid hands on,
and so much fear in the faces of some other Members, that I believe they
hardly knew what they voted in a week after, and the next day saw Westminster
Abbey assaulted by the same Rabble) when these Tumults were not only not
punished, nor the Authors enquired after nor so much as the complaints of the
particular Members considered, but the Lords were twice refused to be joined
with in a Declaration against the like for the future, And this Rabble
commended and styled their friends by the most eminent Members in that House:
When Justice Long was committed by the House of Commons for obeying a writ sent
by direction of the Lords House, and sending a watch to guard them, and the
Sheriff forbid by the same House to proceed legally against a Riot in
Southwarke, When this countenance to Riots, and discountenance of Law had made
Tumults ordinary and familiar even at the Gates of White Hall and occasioned
that accusation of the Lord Kimbolion; and the five Members which has been
since five hundred times repeated as the principal ground of Jealousy,
(though they were accused in so legal a manner, as had been formerly accepted
by the House of Peers in the Earl of Bristols Case: and though the King
offered them so much satisfaction for it, that any private Christian that
should refuse to receive it from his equal, were in no case to receive the
communion.) Who ever after that saw the great Leavies of armed men in London,
and the multitudes of people every day flocking to them from several
Countries, and the low condition the King then was in, removing from place to
place, without the convenience of ordinary Accommodation, (some of His servants
leaving Him, and others refusing to attend him) could not believe that He could
then give them such a Terror, as no less then all the Castles and Forts of the
Kingdom, and the sole disposal of the whole Militia could give them security
enough against Him, who had not with, or near Him, money enough to pay a man,
nor powder enough to kill a bird; and could never have arrived at such a
condition, as to be able to raise an Army, if the violence which has been
since offered Him had not asisted Him. Nor were the Lords then so afraid of
the King, or yet so afraid of the people, as to demand so unreasonable
security; so that the House of Commons having twice in vain attempted their
consent, were feign to ask it of His Majesty alone. But when after the usual
Satellites came up to them with a Petition, seconded and countenanc't by the
House of Commons, demanding those Lords names who refused to join; This
Eloquence prevailed, or rather this Militia made the other pass; and in a few
days (the King granting most, but not all they asked) the Lords (who were
unwilling to put the people to the trouble of comm^ng again) joined in
Declaring (and were as good as their words) that if the King would not consent,
they would put the Militia in execution without Him. Thus illegally was that
Ordinance past both Houses, which would have been most illegal, however it had
past. Thus was the Kings highest Right, His Negative voice, and in the highest
point (which alone enabled Him to defend the rest) forced from him. Thus was
England put in Arms without his consent, whose Commission only could legally
warrant the least Assembly in that kind* and a few Officers by his command in
a peaceable manner, attending him at Kingstone for his security, was voted
leavying of war against himself; and this was the first beginning of this
necessary war, which now must make all things lawful in order to that
necessity: Whilst the King presses still his Message of the 20. of January,
that he may but know what they would have, and is not thought worthy of an
Answer. But to justify their actions by their fears, Armies are daily
threatened from Beyond Sea, (though they have lain wind-bound ever since)
because all the world saw he had nothing in England he could fright them with;
but still the lower he was, the higher they grew; and the more they contemn
him, the more they fear him: Nothing that he can do will satisfy them;
Nothing that he can say shall satisfy the people, for they shall not be
suffered to see it. Care is taken by order to the several Burgesses, That all
the Towns of England must hear of his coming to the house of Commons; and
that in a manner in which he did no te^me. But his sorrow that he has by this
brok any Privilege, his offers of satisfaction for it, and his Resolution both
to observe and defend them all for the future; If this be printed and offered
to be published, his Secretary must be questioned for sending it to the Sheriffs
by his Majesty's Command, and the Sheriffs forbid to publish it according to
the Kings own Warrant, and sent for as Delinquents if they do. Would he have my
Lord of Newcastle command his Town? he must not. Would he not have Sir John
Hotham command it? he must. Dares he not come to London? He must. Would he be
waited on in the Country by his meniall servants? he must not. Will he not
choose such Officers and Counselors as they will name, and displace such evil
Counselors as they cannot name? Then the prevalency of the Malignant Party is
cried out upon; his not encountering Colonel Burges and Captain Venne in the
head of their Mermidens, is called deserting his Parliament: The Rebellion of
Ireland (which he had disarmed himself to resist) is laid to his charge, and
his offer to venture his Royal Person against the Rebels there, is voted to be
an encouragement to that Rebellion. If he deny or delay any thing they ask,
though never so much in his power to grant or deny, a new Vote passes upon the
Advisers, of being enemies to the State; and (having once found that Word to
have great influence upon the people) whatsoever he says or does, he cannot
but break their Privileges; and whatsoever they say or do, they cannot
break his. And indeed their observing no Rule at all in their Votes, and the
peoples readiness to observe all their Votes as a Rule, had so hared him and
all his servants, that I had rather be not only Master Pym or Master Hampden,
but Master Cromwell or Master Pury, then King of England, Scotland, France and
Jreland, in so sad and distracted a condition. And I wonder not, when they
asked him his Crown in the Nineteen Propositions, that they thought they had
made him weary enough of it, to part with it for asking. Still the Militia is
every where press't and Sir John Hotham having before pretended to keep Hull
for the King, now keeps the King out of Hull, though he offered to enter but
with twenty servants; he is justified in it by the houses, and the houses
slander themselves that they may justify him, and acknowledge a direction they
never gave. Upon this he takes to himself a much smaller Guard then they had
daily kept together many months at Westminster, This is voted an intention to
leavy War against his Parliament, and the Sheriffs are ordered to suppress
it. All this while (to prepare the people to suffer any wrong to be offered the
King) the Presses and the Pulpits (the two seed-plots of this War) had
swarmed daily with slanderous Invectives against his Majesty: (besides
Declarations of a strange nature.) And if any grave pious Minister did write,
preach, speak, or almost think for the King, he was accused by the factious
part of his Parish before the Committee for scandalous Ministers, and their
mere receiving and countenancing of such an Accusation, (though their leisure
would not admit him to clear himself before them) was enough to blast him
with the people.

After this, all that could be taken of the Kings, or any of His Friends,
Arms, Goods, Ships, any thing is good prize; and (as if the Maxim were
inverted, and He now could receive no wrong, who was wont He could do none)
they proceed really against Him (though in pure civility they pas't no such
Vote upon Him) as an enemy to the State. And at last, having protected all
Delinquents against Him and the known Law, and voted all Delinquents who had
refused to become so by submitting to their illegal commands: Though the King
had for His Guard only one Regiment of the Yorkshire Trained-bands, and one
Troop of Horse, Volunteers, of the Gentlemen of that Country, And though the
King never protected any man, till Sir John Hotham was denied to be brought to
a legal trial; yet an Army is voted to be raised to defend them from the King
and His Cavaliers, and to fetch up his Majesty and His fellow Delinquents. Yet
to this Vote his Majesty opposes only His own Declaration, and that of the
Lords with Him, (who saw best what was done toward it, being upon the place)
that he had no such intention as was pretended; and till contributions were
raised to raise men, He desired no contribution to be prepared by His friends
for him; and till they had leavyed men, and mustered them in some number, He
gave not out so much as one Commission to leavie a man; But then (not thinking
it needful to stay till my Lord of Essex should come and take Him En Cuerpo,
that he might satisfy the world how defensive the War was on His part) He
grants out Commissions, but then grant not any to any Papists; and takes all
possible care, and gives all possible Orders, that they entertain no Soldiers
of that Religion; yet these men (who well may couple Peace and Truth together,
for their actions and words have a long time showed that they love them alike)
charge him to the people in daily Declarations with raising an Army of Papists
against the Parliament; which makes it the less strange, if his Majesty since
confented to have the assistance of some Papists, (for they are not so many as
you think for) since He saw that without their assistance He could not avoid
all the scandal, which having it could produce, especially since He saw many
of that Religion were entertained in their Army; (having taken at Edgehill
several Wallons, English, and Irish, of that Religion, who confess of many
more:) And since He saw a great part of the rest to consist of another kind of
Recusants, which by the Law of this Kingdom not only ought not to be armed in
it, but not toremaine in it at all. Well, his Majesty is come to N^tt^ngham,
and though He was confident the Commissions He had sent forth, would time^y
enough bring him in a sufficient* Army to beat theirs; (as the event has
since showed) yet preferring Peace even before Victory it self, He sent twice
to desire it (I had almost said to petition for it) from both Houses: How it
was received all the world knows. After this he meets them, He fights with
them, he beats them, (of which the suffering their Ordnance to be taken away
next morning before their faces, the quitting Banbury which they-came to
relieve, and marching to London themselves in stead of bringing the King up
thither, was so g^e^t a proof, as far outweighs the single assertion of my
Lord Wharton, or my Lord Brook to the contrary.) He is still constant to his
Principles, and (though after a Victory) gives a quite other kind of Answer to
their Petition at Colebrooke, then they had done to his Message from
Nottingham. VYhilest the Committee was with Him there, part of their Army
marches out of London; That He might not be enclosed on all sides, he
marches to prepossesse Brain^ford, (but at the instant sends word of His march,
and the reason of it to the Houses) He found them there, he beats them out; And
if His intention had been to have marched on and sacked London, what altered
that intention? Could He think himself so much weaker by the loss of ten
men, or them so much stronger by the loss of two of their best Regiments,
besides their loss by water, as for that reason to change his mind? No:
As Soon as He found Kingstone quitted behind Him before any approach or notice
of any Forces of theirs, he gives orders to march away. He again and again
repeats his desire of Peace, which is so far from being accepted, that the
English Petitioners are threatened, hurt, and imprisoned, for desiring it too,
and a Scots Army is invited to continue the War. But I hope our brethren
will remember that those against whom they are called, have paid and are to pay
them more of the brotherly assistance then those that call them; and these men
will find themselves as much de received in their hopes of their own
foreign Forces, as they were in their fear of the Kings, and that the Scots
will stay till the Danes come.

To sum up this point, If to take away by force all the others just Rights,
be to begin the War, his Majesty is not the Aggressor: If to have a Guard
first be the beginning of the War, (as the Replyer pretends) certainly this
War began at London, and not at York; the first being raised by the power of
a Committee, upon some thing (which after came to nothing) fetched as far off
as Edinburgh: If the raising men first by Commissions were to begin it, it was
begun there too: If the denying of Delinquents to be legally tried were to
begin it, London was the place, and Sir John Hotham the per on, where and for
whom it was first begun: If the eagerness of continuing can show who begun it,
does not this Aversion from Peace declare sufficiently that they begun the
War, who now so carefully nurse their own child? And I suppose no
indifferent person can think these visible Arguments confuted by the Replyers
wonder, and his only Arguments in the Reply to the contrary; which are a tale
of a Papist in York, that should say, Let the sword try it; (when it were
little to any other purpose whether a Papist had said so, then to show by the
Kings backwardness to follow this Counsel, that the Counsels of Papists were
more prevalent with the Parliament; then with Him;) And of Sir Francis
Wortley's drawing his sword, and saying, Who is for the King? When it is well
known at York, that this was not said at all by him: and that what was said
and done, was to a very Different end: But indeed upon such an information upon
hearsay, (which Mr Rushworth brought from York in short hand) Sir Francis was
likely to have been accused of high Treason, but it being put off for that
time, the truth was discovered, the Relater was ashamed, and Sir Francis
Wortley never further accused for it.

Yet as little as he can say to prove the War begun on the Kings part, and as
much as is said to prove the contrary, he has the face to compare the Kings
making War upon his Parliament to Saul's hunting of David, and that, as if the
case were so exactly the same, that nothing but not having heard of the Bible
could make us not know it. You took, I thank you Sir, very early care, that I
should not be unacquainted with the Book he speaks of, and I wonder not
(knowing it so well as I do) that he should be better able to justify this
Rebellion (though this case too differs wholly from that there quoted) out of
Bodine, then out of the Bible. A Popish Author is fittest to justify, that
which has been raised out of Popish Principles. But to return to David; had
he ever given Saul any cause to fear him by spreading Declarations, or raising
and encouraging Tumults, against him and the established Laws? Had he nothing
to make him apprehend Saul, but mere fears and Jealousies? Did Saul attempt
him with an Impeachment, or with a Javelin? And did he ever offer after to
quit him by a Bill? Did David upon his Apprehension seize the Citadell in
Jerusalem and keep Saul out with armed men? Did he seize his Arms, Goods, and
Ships, and then justify the seizure by saying, He took from him not the
Property, but the mischief? or fly into a remote Cave for security? Did he
invade Saul's Privileges, and deny him a Negative voice? Did he pretend to
command the Militia of all Israel without Saul's consent? Did he ever demand
from him such nineteen Propositions, as the only way to compose differences
between them? Did he raise an Army to fetch those Evil Counselors from
about Saul who had persuaded him to seek his life? Did he pursue him with it,
and give him battle, and then charge the malignant Party about him, for going
about to destroy him, by bringing him ^etweene the two Armies, and so into the
danger of that Destruction? Or did l^^ ^eart smite him for cutting but the lapp
of his Garment? Did David ever reject such messages from Saul as that of the 20
of January, and those from Nottingham? Or did he ^er imprison any of his
followers for desiring an accommodation? Certainly who ever ^ath read that
story and seen this, will find a wide difference between what the King ^id,
and what was done to him; and Saul's provocations of David, and David's returns
^owards Saul. And who ever had waited on the King this last year from place to
place would easily conclude, whether he or the Parliament were hunted most like
the Par^ridge.

Yet, Sir: I charge not the Parliament with this. The replier thinks not so
well of, and wishes not so well to that honorable Assembly, as I do: Nothing
offends me more in the present Actions of the remaining part of the Parliament,
then that by them they furnish those who wish Parliaments but ill, with
Arguments to infuse into Princes an il Opinion of Parliaments, and furnish
Princes with principles which with more pretense may be applied by them to the
Destruction of their Subjects. Parliaments are indeed the Root of our
propriety, and their genuine Privileges are the Root of Parliaments. But the
Parliament consists of three estates, and for any two to deny the third his
just Rights and Privileges, and for one, or both, or a part of both or either,
a Committee, to usurp the rights and Privileges which belong only to the
whole three, is the way to root up both privileges, Property, Parliaments, and
all; and to make the People more weary of their Physicians, then they were
before of their diseases. Who knows not that the House of commons consists of
near five hundred Members, and that usually fourscore is now counted a full
House, and that of at any time they make one hundred and forty (as for a rare
instance, the replier tells us of once or twice, and that only by report) it is
when the military Members are sent for up from the Army to pay their gratitude
to their new profession by opposing of Peace? And that many of those, who are
present do not believe themselves secured by their Army, though they are too
much frighted to dare to complain of fear? And can it be thought that so many
persons of Honor, trusted by their country, would be absent from the service
of it, if they thought the work now in hand so necessary to the public
defense of Religion, Laws, Liberty, Property, and Parliaments, and that the
highest service they could do them were to countenance the present cause with
a full House, as they must do, if they were of the same opinions with the
remaining Party? and on the other side, if they be confessed to be of contrary
opinions can it be thought, that so many as are able to make up a major part
(for that is most true ^ill as to the house of commons, though they have put
out a great number, because their conscience bound them either to defend their
King, or not to assist against him, and it is evidently true as to the House of
Lords) would not have chosen rather to have stayed and hindered this war, or
yet to come up and compose it, by over voting the rest, if they had not known,
or did not know, that then and now, the tumults, and the Redcoats had and will
have the casting voice in all such Debates? And if the example of Sir Sydney
Mountague, by so much as the Replyer confesses, did not show them, that if
they came not at all at a time, any single men that should refuse to swear to
assist them, in that which already by several Oaths they are bound to resist,
and being asked their reason, should say that which their absence has expressed,
believe the statute of 25 Edw: 3. before some late ordinances, and call a Spade
a Spade, and Treason Treason, they should but chang their places in the House
for one in the Tower; since my Lord Kimbolton himself upon such an occasion
could not save his uncle, though he could his Father. And indeed who ever
observes the differences betwixt the Actions of the Houses, will find
something to have interceded besides time, and that either they are not
composed of the same men, or the same men have not the same freedom. In a
fortnights space the Lords House twice denied to ask the Militia of the King,
and declared that they would put it in execution without Him. In two months
time the Lords House desired the House of Commons to join with them in a
Declara^ion against tumults (with reasons expressing a great sense how
scandalous it would be even to the past Laws made by this Parliament, if such
meetings were not suppressed) and joined with the House of Commons in a
Declaration to His Majesty denying that there had been any tumults, and
justifying those meetings which they had called so before, When His Majesty was
going into Scotland* it is well known that the principal reason upon which
both Houses pressed his stay, or to have a Custos Regni in his absence, was
that without His authority concurring, money could not be raised ^n that time of
extreme necessity: and yet it seems they have now discovered, that His absence
From, is a desertion of His Parliament; and that This and necessity enables
them by the fundamental Laws to impose levyes, and other Laws upon his
Subjects, without his consent, and contrary to his command: and that the case
is now the same as in the minority of a King, though even then Sir Simon Dewes
himself cannot produce one record, that ever such levy was made by both
Houses alone, without the concurrence of the Royal assent by some Protector.
It is well known by the many long debates about it without prevailing, what
little hopes at first appeared in the House of Commons, that the Bill against
Bisho^s Root and Branch, should pass in that House; that a clause to that
purpose was dashed even out of their first Remonstrance, when the appear not to
have been in any humor of complying beyond their ordinary inclinations* and
how impossible it appeared for a long time after, that such a Bill should ever
pass in the House of Peers, not six Lords then appearing of that mind, and
yet since a Declaration is past, and a Bill is passing both Houses to that
purpose. They past a Bill upon my (...) of Strafford, of which the principal
ground was, that he had said, that the King having endeavored to have the
assistance of his Parliament in great necessity, and for the defense of
Himself and Kingdom, and being deserted by them, was absolved from all the
rules of government: and yet since (as if his Judges had been his
Successors, and had cut off his head only to take out his princi^les) they
upon the same pretenses have absolved themselves from all rules of obedience,
and only differ in not using the power they claim with the limitation he gave,
that is Cand^de and Ca^te. Nor is this only since an actual War (though
that being begun by them is no excuse) but when all was quiet, and no dangers
but from fears, Mr. Hothams Letter (in answer to a complaint he expected from
the inhabitants of Hull for some violent and illegal actions) was read and not
reproved in the House of Commons, saying, that he hoped, since what he did was
in order to their commands, they would not stand upon the form^lities of Law
and Lawyers.

Sir, it is true, those formalities are now wholly laid by, but till we shall
return to them, and by them to some known Rule, we shall have a most
miserable form of Government. If we fight yet another year in this Kingdom,
by that time this Kingdom will not be worth the fighting for; And when those
armies which shall have impoverished you by their (...)y, shall have kept the
land from being tilled by their te^rour (for the Countryman will not sow what
he cannot hope quietly to reap) as omnipotent as an ordinance is, it will not
be able to forbid a famine, and to secure you from starving by the authority of
both Houses: you may yet secure your selves if you please; make but good your
Protestation; let ^ot London help to undo it self, and the Country, and the
thing is done. Defend the Religion established Suffer not Alderman Pen^ington
(so known a Brownist and des^iser of the Common Prayer that the Replyer has
done his best to prove him none, when he has been able to name one time in
which he could bring himself to endure to be present at some twenty lines of
it in the House of Commons, as good an argument as he is a Major) to encourage
^rabble of the same opinion whom I will name, when he names that new Truth
which he would have joined to our Peace) to suppress That, and the Act of
Parliament that appoints it Defend your Liberties, and suffer not a close
Committee (for your last jour^all tells us, that such an excluding Committee
there is, and that they commit men by their own orders as Col^onell Bro^^e for
one, whether that be the same with the Committee for examinations is not much
material, which by the course of Parliament can have no other course derived
to it, then to consider and report; to imprison you by no Rule, but that of
their discretions (which is more then they from whom they have their power have
right to do) or suffer an Order o^ the House of Commons to stop Habeas
Corpusses, the Birthright of every subject. Defend your Propriety, and suffer
not the twentieth (for as much they will call the twentieth) part of your
estates to be taken from you, by so insufficient Authority, upon so invalid
security, for so rebellious an end, as are an ordinance, public Faith, and
this present War. Defend the Privi^edges of Parliament, and His Majesty's
honor and rights, and join not to take away His Majesty's negative voice, by
submitting to that authority, to exclude him as no part of the public; by
accepting of that security, to include him among the public enemies, by
contributing (beyond your abilities, and contrary to your Duties) to a War
against him. Let not your money and plate be turned into the price of the blood
of your fellow Subjects. Suffer not a few men to set a whole Kingdom on fire
to roast their own eggs by it; at lea^^, become not you the incendiaries, by
ministering fuel to this public fire, which else must instantly go out of it
self; and give the King but what is his, and that you may keep what is your
own. Who can secure you, that his Majesty may not prevail by force? And if he
do (after so many desires of peace, and proffers of pardon) who can secure you
from an offended P. and a victorious army, that your Citizens shall not be
destroyed, and your City ashes? Who can secure you (who believe His Majesty's
Protestations no better) that if he come once aga^ne to govern by the help of
an army, that he may not be tempted to govern always by one, and learn of you
to declare necessi^e, and rule according to those principles, which you have
taught Hi^ to be lawful by the fundamental Laws in times of Necessity, and
acce^t of no security from future rebellions, but such as shall leave us none
from future oppressions? Who can secure you, that if the Papists shall have
assisted Him in the actual recoverie of his Crown by force, in so great an
exigent, (and in so great numbers, as you would have us think they do) that
his gratitude to them may not be a temptation, to incline Him to such favors
toward, and trust in them, as may in time be more prejudicial to us and our
Religion, then He may either discover or suspect? But who can give you hope if
the Rebels prevail, that the close Committee will be ever content to be
private men again. That the Parliament shall not be everlasting, and their
necessity, and your pressures as eve^lasting a^ the Parliament; and that you
shall not suffer more under the Tyranny of many th^n any one (how witty and
industrious soever in it) can inflict upon you? be^^des the perp^tuall danger
of war from abroad (from the potent allies to the Crown who for the general
interest of Princes, and hope of particular advantages, will be always ready
to assist the discontented party here in the recoverie of the just Rights of
it for the King and his Posterity) and of Schisms and Factions at home, and
many other evils not to be particularly foreseen, which will undoubtedly
arise from the total alteration both of Church and State: whereas if such
moderate and equal propositions shall be offered, as may and ought to produce
a Peace, either they will be excepted, or refused. If they be refused, your
cause will be mended, and your Power increased: if they be accepted, the Armies
will be disbanded, poor Magna Charta (which has of late been so ^^u^ht
between two supposed Necessities) will be again in credit and estimation, and
will be preserved in it by Trienniall Parliaments; and the people having now so
full a since of their Liberties. and His Majesty having such experience, how
much it endangers the Prerogati^e to encroach upon those Liberties, and being
restored to that sweetness of honor and quiet, which no reasonable man thus
warned, will endanger, and quit, for a possible increase of unnecessary power,
there will be little cause to fear any slaverie for the future, and the King
will have no more temptation or means, then I hope he has will to oppress
us. Then the Papists (when Peace has resetled the Laws) will be disarmed by
those Laws to secure us from them for the present, and the Law (of which His
Majesty has showed himself so desirous) for the education of their children
in the Protestant Religion, will (when it is past) secure us from them for the
future: and then the Government of both Church and State being new settled in
the old way, the King may again be honored, the Parliament again respected,
Ireland regained, and this Kingdom happy, Which. God of his mercy grant. Amen.

Sir, I confess, I have been transported into an unusual style, and less
remembered to whom, then against whom I writ this. But I beseech you pardon me
for it, since it is my affection to you, and desire to disengage so good a man
from so ill a cause, that has so transported me. Nor would I have hazarded
your displeasure, and the loss I may sustain by it, if I had not been far
more concerned to save your soul, then to inherit your estate. And so Sir,
beseeching you to commond my duty to my Aunt, and God to have you both in his
h^ly protection, I remain

Your most affectionate and dutiful Nephew.

A brief Relation of the great Victory obtained by Sir RALPH HOPTON near
Bodmin, in the County of Cornwall, Ianua^y 19. Anno Dom. 1642.
AMongst those fortunate successes, wherewith Almighty God has crowned His
Majesty's designs, for the redem^tion of his Church and State, from that
calamitous condition, in which they have been plunged of late by some factious
spirits, there is not any more remarka^le, then that which has b^fallen Him in
the Western parts. For if we look upon the Theater where this prize was
played, it is a country most remot^ from the power and presence of His Majesty,
and therefore less provided of such help^s by which the sub^ects might receive
encouragement in their faith and ^oyalty. Next look we on the principa^l Actor,
and we shall find he was a stranger to the place, a man of no al^iance nor
dependence th^re, and so by consequence of little power and estimation amongst
that people. In each regard we must acknowledge his success, or rather His
Majesty's by him, to be more then ordinary; and that there is a special
providence which guides His Majesty's affairs, even there where humane reason
could conceive least hopes. We will not recap^tulate the story of his carriage
there since the first beginning, when he was forced to fly to Cornwall for his
life and safety like one abandoned to all extremities ^f ill fortune; nor make
a general muster of th^se happy accidents which gave him credit and authority
amongst the natives of that Country, These have a long time been the subjects
of our tongues and pens. The Argument of this relation shall be that notable
and signal victory, which he obtained against the Rebels not far from Bodmin,
that being as the latest, so the greatest evidence of Gods blessing on him and
his affections and fidelity to Gods anointed.

How after his retreat from Exeter he was pursued almost to the edge of
Cornwall by the Rebels forces, and with what courage and felicity he made those
fly before him, who had followed after him, has formerly been imparted to the
Court by letters of unquestioned credit, and from the Court communicated to the
rest of the Kingdom. His purpose was to rest and refresh his soldiers till
the spring came on: and would have sat down quietly til then, if the unquiet
nature of the Rebels, or rather their unlucky destinies would have given him
leave. But they forgetting with what ill success they had in vain attempted to
cut him off in his march through Devonshire, gathered their scattered troops
together, which they increased by the accession of new forces; some from the
Garrison at Plymmouth, some from other places til they had made themselves so
strong, as to adventure once more on their own destruction. In the mean time,
he seeing how the clouds did begin to gather, and that some terible storm was
like to fall upon him from the hills of Devonshire, thought it not fit to stay
at Lanceston or Saltash, Towns on the very e^^e of Cornwall, and therefore
more in danger of the threatened tempest, but retreated toward Bodmin, being
more in the middle of the County; and consequently far more l^kely to afford
him shelter, then the other, places. The fury of the storm might break in so
long a course; if not, he should be better fitted to withstand the violence.

Two things there were which gave him some apparent hopes, not only that he
might be able to make resistance, but presume of victory. The one was, that the
Rebels as they marched through the Country, committed such intolerable out
rages and rapines, th^^ ^ll the people of those parts who were fit for Arms,
came freely to him, and offered ^^m their ^blest service, that by his conduct
and command they might reprive themselves (...) so (...) deaths as did daily
threaten them. There is a London Pamphlet which (...) last week, The Kingdoms
Int^lligence, I suppose they call it; wherein it is a(...)d (...) certain, (and
who is of so little faith as to think the contrary) that the Cor(...) men
being weary of Hoptons government, had craved the Earl of Stamford to pro^^^^
them against his Forces; and that the Earl consenting to their just desires,
had so dist^essed the man both by Land and by Sea, that there was no possiblity
for him to escape. if he should attempt it. How impudent a tale this is, need
not hee^e be told? It is enough to say it came from London, where there is
coining every day of these foolish ^^^tions, though of nothing else. But
loosers must have leave to talk, there is a proverb for it. The other of those
happy accidents, which advanced his hopes, was that whilst he provided for the
entertainment of such troublesome guests, a fleet of forty sail of ships were
driven by weather and good fortune within the Ordinance and command of
Pend^nnis Castle, then and before that long, in his possession. These ships
being bound for London, and the two Houses of Parliament, he stayed and seized
on, and took their lading into the Castle: in which he found some store of
Arms: and such a liberal stock of ready money, as did not only serve to pay
his Soldiers the Arrears then do, but encourage them to stand stoutly to him,
by giving them a fort-nights pay before hand, to their content. There was no
need to bid his Soldiers work^ out their own safety, when once they were
assured of so good a Play Master; or to persuade his men to stand bravely to it,
when they perceived they should not sell their lives for nothing. The victory
must need^ be clear, and eminent, when not God only, but his enemies did
contribute toward it.

Tuesday the 17. of this Month was that luckie day in which the lading of these
ships was brought in by Sir N. Slaning and the soldiers satisfied. And the next
day, Colonel Ru^hen who hither to had kept a garrison in Plimmouth, by the
appointment and command of the two Houses of Parliament, drew up his forces
toward L^stithell, ten miles from Bodmin: and thence, as if he had waited a
convenient time to ruin both himself and all his followers, he sent a
challenge to Sir Ralph Hopton to meet him the next day being thursday, and to
commit the point which was then in difference unto the issue of a battle. The
place designed for this great trial, was in the middle way betwixt Lestithell
and Bodwin, where they might meet on equal terms, and so fight it out. Sir
Ralph who knew his own advantages, did willingly accept of the invitation* and
very early on Thursday morning marched unto the place, where he expected the
approach of his daring enemies on a little hill upon the brow whereof he had
planted six good piece of Ordinance, and by advantage of the ground had so hid
his men, that those who did appear were not held considerable. What his whole
number was is not yet made known. The Army of the enemy consisted of 4000 men,
conducted by a man much spoken of for his abilities in the art of war, and one
thought himself much wronged in that he had so weak an adversary to encounter
with. For thinking the Kings Army to be all in sight he fooled himself into a
false conceit of an easy victory; and ran so fast upon the sp^^^ on the
hopes thereof, that unawares he came within the reach of Hoptons C^^he p^ed so
fast upon him with all care and diligence, that he retreated with more have
then he came upon him:

Sir Ralph perceiving their retreat, fell furiously upon their horse, which he
charged in ^^^reate, and routed them with little labor, b^ing before
disordered by the Cannon.

By this time Ruthens foot were got into a lane which they were to pass, the
horse coming after in the rear: who were so closely followed by the conquering
army, that ^^ey had no other way to save themselves, then by riding over their
own men, whom they killed most miserably. Sir Ralph pursuing his good fortune,
not only drove them to, but out of Lestithell, and there took all their
carriages and money, and a thousand ^^mes, which they had thrown away as
heavy lu^gage, unusefull unto those who resolved to fly and trust unto their
legs, since their hands failed them. It is most credibly ^^ported, that the
Rebels lost three parts of their army, of which 200 only were taken prisoner;
the rest being killed either in the battle, or the chase. And of the Prisoners
those of special note were Sir Shelson Colmadam (the Knight of the hard name
as they ^se to call him) one of the Pophams, together with Sirode of Street,
and Pine of Somer^^^shire; which two his Majesty has excepted (amongst
others) out of his general ^^^don for that County: and as he has attached
them without a Sergeant, so he may ^arrantably proceed against them without
breach of privilege. Some other Gentlemen of quality were then taken also,
whose names as yet are not come unto us: and it is ^^id that Ruthen was
himself either killed, or taken: but this is built upon report only, and not
yet signified by letters.

Whether the Earl of Stamford were there in person, is not yet ass^red: but
s^re it is that he was present there in his power and forces; the certainty
whereof appears by some particulars* which are these that follow. For upon
friday, being the morrow after this famous victory, news came to Exeter, that
the Earl of Stamford had lost ^500 foot, 300 of his horse, and 3 pieces of
Ordnance, requiring some supplies from thence with all speed that might be; and
the next day there was an hundred foot sent toward him, as part of those
supplies which he had required from that City, which though they were many as
the Town could possibly provide in so short a warning most of the^r men being
gone before in pursuit of Sir Ralph Hopton, when he re^re^ted from that City:)
yet were not many enough; as the case then stood, to be a gu^rd unto ^^s person
in that desperate exigent. And it was generally said, that some of those his
^^de, and sacrilegious Soldiers, who had so more then barbarously demeaned
th^mselves in the Church of Taun^on, were the first men that were cut off in
the day of battle wherein it is pity that they were no better followed, by him
who should have punished such a misbehaviour. The story is, that upon Thursd^y,
being Twelfth Eve, the Earl of Stamfords Chaplain, a vicious and sed^t^^u^
fellow preached a Sermon like himself in the Church of Taunton, which was no
sooner done, (as he, and such a^, he have most excellent ar^s to inflame the
people) but presently the soldiers ^u(...)ed into the Chancell, where they
brake down an Organ which the Parish had set up of late, at no less charges
then the sum of 400l. That done they went next to the Reading pew, where they
found the book of Common Prayer: which though they spared, I know not upon what
notion, yet they thought fit to purge the same of some unnecessary prayers,
those namely for the King, the Queen, the royal Issue, and the Bishops, We
see by this what ^ that greeves them, and that they will not be content with
defacing Churches, or destroying Bishops, as long as there is King or Queen to
control their insolences, and any of the Royal issue, left to revenge those
injuries, which with such bold pretence^ are committed against sacred Majesty.
But this is somewhat from my purp^se, I rather should have noted Gods most
righteous judgment, in bringing those unchristian sacrilegious wretches to
such a speedy execution, and hastening them to their destruction, when in all
likeliehood they took most delight in such a special piece of service.

But to go on, the news of this defeat fell very heavy on all those, who
either have their hands or hearts in this Rebellion. One writes from Exeter,
unto a zealous Minister in Somersetshire, in these words that follow: There is
very sad news come hither* God has not blessed us in this expedition into
Cornwall, most o^ our forces are cut of^ There are some Achans amongst us not
yet discovered. We desire you would double your prayers for us; there never was
more need. Farewell. Never was truth more fully spoken, where it was less
me^nt. There are indeed to many Achans; he says true in that, (for Achans
sin we know was the sin of Sacrilege) and those not yet so perfectly
discovered, as it is wished they were. Till they be rooted out there is no
peace for Israel. Another writes from Dorchester to a friend in London, That a
post came from Exeter thither with a letter to Sir Walter Earl, bringing
intelligence that Sir Ralph Hopton had cut off 1500 of the Parliament Forces,
and took many prisoners, which had put that town into great sadness, I must
needs say the gentleman to whom this letter came, was most fitly chosen, to be
the man that should receive the first intelligence of that heavy accident. He
may new set himself on work in finding out some notable piece of treason
against Colonel Ruthen, and the Earl of Stamford, whereby they came to be
defeated by so weak an enemy: having so fine a faculty in disc^v^ring of
treasons which never were intended against the State. Seriously to conclude
this business, although it be not known at how dear a price, His Majesty's Army
bought so great a victory, yet it is hoped that it was purchased at an easy
rate, because there is no mention in those letters which came from Exeter and
Dorchester, or those dispatched unto the Court of any loss that did befall
them: Not that we think so great a victory could be obtained against an Army
of the Rebels, but with expense and loss of some faithful Subjectis but that
the loss was inconsiderable both for the number and quality of those happy
souls who gladly sacrificed their lives for their King and Country. The like
success God send His Majesty in His enterprises, til these disturbers of his
peace be all rooted out. And that no hand be left to hold a sword against HIM.

FINIS.

