SELECT Cases of Conscience TOUCHING Witches and VVitchcrafts.

By JOHN GAVLE, Preacher of the Word at Great Staughton in the County of
Huntington.

Deur. 18. 10, 11, 12. There shall not be found among you any one that makes
his Son or his Daughter to pass through the fire, or that uses Divination, or
an observer of Times, or an Enchanter, or a Witch.

Or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a
Nocromancer.

For all that do these things are an Abomination unto the Lord: and because of
these Abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them out from before thee.

London, Printed by W. Wilson for Richard Clutterbuck, and are to be sold at
his House in Noblestreet. 1646.

May 29. 1646.
I Have with much satisfaction and content perused this learned and judicious
discourse, entitled [Select Cases of Conscience concerning Witches and
Witchcrafts.] And finding it to be very solid and seasonable, I allow it to
be Printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME.

To his ever honored Valentine VVauton Esquire, Colonel, and one of the
Honorable House of Commons. As also to the other worthy Gentlemen; together
with all the good people of the Parish of Great Staughton in the County of
Huntington.
SIR,
YOU heresee, what the the rest of the Parish heard; under one months
occasional pains in my place. I am forced to make it public, partly because
I suffered some opposition and affront in my preaching, from one I never saw
before; and partly because some opinions of it are spread since, by and among
those that know me not. But chiefly to answer the expectation of those amongst
whom I am known. I hope (what I here tender you) will speak the Truth of an
honest Conscience to the World; the Affection of a careful Pastor to the rest;
and to you Sir! the grateful (because much engaged) mind of

Your humble Servant, JOHN GAUL.

To the Judicious Reader.
Reader! I present thee here with a Letter; on occasion of this publishing. It
were but lost labor to gloss upon it. Thou may easily, read him, in his
Letter, and me, in my Book.
M. N.
MY service to your Worship presented, I have this day received a Letter, etc.
-- to come to a Town called Great Staughton to search for evil disposed
persons called Witches (though I hear your Minister is far against us
through ignorance) I intend to come (God willing) the sooner to hear his
singular Judgment on the behalf of such parties; I have known a Minister in
Suffolk preach as much against their discovery in a Pulpit, and forced to
recant it (by the Committee) in the fame place. I much marvel such evil
Members should have any (much more any of the Clergy) who should daily preach
Terror to convince such Offenders, stand up to take their parts against such
as are Complainants for the King, and sufferers themselves with their Families
and Estates. I intend to give your Town a Visit suddenly, I am to come to
Kimbolton this week, and it shall be ten to one but I will come to your
Town first, but I would certainly know before whether your Town affords many
Sticklers for such Cattle, or willing to give and afford us good welcome and
entertainment, as other where I have been, else I shall wave your Shire (not
as yet beginning in any part of it my self) And betake me to such places where
I do and may persist without control, but with thanks and recompense So I
humbly take my leave and rest,

Your Servant to be commanded, Matthew Hopkins.

The Contents.
1 Case. WHether it ought to be believed, that there are any Witches? 2. How
many kinds of Witches may there be conceived? 3. Whether there be not sundry
degrees of Witches, and Witchcrafts to be considered? 4. What it is that makes
a Witch to be a Witch; and one that may justly be so called and accounted? 5.
What are the signs and marks of a Witch, whereby such an one may be rightly
discerned, and so Censured? 6. Whether Witch-seeking or witch-finding be an
Art, Vocation, Profession, Office, Occupation, or Trade of Life, allowable in a
Christian Church, or State? 7. Whether all such Feats, tricke^ prankes, and
Exploits, as Witches ar^ said to play; be credible to prudent Christians? 8.
Whether the power of a Witch be such, as is ordinarily supposed? 9. How the
power and malice of Witches may be prevented, or redressed wit^ a good
Conscience? 10. Whether it be lawful to consul^ with a Witch upon any
occasion? 11. What punishment are Witche^ worthy of; or may justly be inflicted
on them? 12. Whether a VVitch may repent, and so be saved?
SELECT Cases of Conscience touching Witches and Witchcrafts.
1. Case, Whether it ought to be believed, that there are any Witches?
He that will needs persuade himself that there are no Witches, would as feign
be persuaded, that there is no Devil; and he that can already believe that
there is no Devil, will ere long believe that there is no God. For there are
much what the same grounds or motives both for the Atheist, and the Adiabolist.
Both are errors and evils issuing, not only from a fond presuming folly, but
also from a carnal dispensing security. Psalm. 14. 1. And therefore when I
consider that opinion of the Sadduces, Acts 23. 8. I cannot but wonder at the
received ground for it. Who are said to deny all there cit^^, only for this
end; that so they might serve God more sincerely, and for himselfes sake;
blessing him even for a present being; and not doing his will, out of any
expepectation of a future reward. Whereas our late leaners and lingerers after
such a kind of sect, could be content to deny all these, merely for this
intent that so they might serve themselves wholly, sin more greedily, live now
more securely, and fear no future penalty. But as doting sleeps or dreams,
awaken to greater distractions: so do false opinions, to the more fearful
Convictions; Especially all fond persuasions touching God or the Devil (if not
otherwise recanted) are confuted by their own sad experience at the last. And
(as to the point in hand) I could instance from Story (but that I resolve
against all such dilatations in this Epitome) how many have had no faith of
witches being, til they have had a sense of them, and then their bewitched body
or goods, has served to unbewitch them of their opinion and Conceit. But there
are also a sect or sort, that (on the other hand) are as superstitious in this
point, as these can be infidelious. They conclude peremptorily (not from
reason, but indiscretion) that witches not only are, but are in every place,
and Parish with them, every old woman with a wrinkled face, a furred brow, a
hairy lip, a gobber tooth, a squint eye, a squeaking voice, or a scolding
tongue, having a rugged coat on her back, a skullcap on her head, a spindle in
her hand, and a Dog or Cat by her side; is not only suspected, but pronounced
for a witch. Every new disease, notable accident, mirable of nature, rarity of
art, nay and strange work or just judgment of God; is by them accounted for no
other, but an act or effect of witchcraft. And for this the Witch must be
suspected; and this suspicion, though it be but late, of a few, and those the
under sort, yet is it enough to send for the Witch-searchers, or witch-seekers
(a trade never taken up in England till this) whose lucratory skill and
Experience is not much improved above the outward senses. For if you will not
admit a big, or a boil; a wart, or a wen; a push, or a pile; a scar, or a
scabbe; an issue, or an ulcer; for a palpable Witches mark: yet then shall it
certainly be determined to be in such a place, as for shame, and in very truth,
is not to be named. Put to save the trouble and Charges of the witch-finder,
they will undertake to try the Witch of themselves, yet by no other rules then
those traditionall, and of their own superstition. Nay and (I tromble to record
it) they will have the witch presently punished, and the issue thereof shall
prove no less then capital; and yet by no Law, but that of their own Law
less fury. Now of these two sorts, I hold the last not only the more numerous,
but the more dangerous of the two. Not that I think there is charity in the
one opinion, as I am sure there is iniquity in the other. But for as much as
the superstition of the one, is one maine cause of the others Infidelity. For I
have known the simpler meaning therefore backward to believe any are thus
guilty; while they have observed the ruder conditioned so overforward to
pronounce upon the innocent: yea and some wise men too, have put it to a great
dispute, because they have read (as appears in story) that men of the most
eminent wisdom and holiness of their times have (by such people as these)
been slandered for Witches. I could give instance in Abraham, Joseph, Moses,
Daniel, Athanasius, Wicklef, Luther, etc. And it is the more easy to be
believed, in that our Savior Christ himself, not only escaped not so
blasphemous a Calumny, Matt. 9. 34. and 12. 24. (I abhor to speak what like
Imputation of some in after Ages) but also foretold that his chiefest servants
should be slaundered in like manner, Mat. 10. 25. But what? did Christ
therefore deny that there were any Witches? nay he rather confesses it for
distinction sake, Matt. 12. 27, 28. And verily no abuse of men (either on one
side or other) must debar from concluding of Truth. I therefore (in a plain
and full way) determine here, as do the orthodox, viz.

That as there have been; so there are, and will be witches unto the worlds end.
When Witches first were in the world, is uncertain, before Pharaohs Magitians;
we read Joseph talking (like an Egyptian) of divination, Genesis 44. 5. 15.
(which he spoke certainly not to bewray his Profession, but conceal his
Person.) Old Authors relate that Cham was the first Witch (who among the
Gentiles was called Zoroaster) and that he taught this divellish Art to his
son Mizraim, and he to the Egyptians his People; and they that their learning
to the world. Some say, the Devil was the first Witch when he played the
Impostor with our first Parents, possessing the Serpent (as his Impe) to their
delusion, Genesis 3. and it is whispered that our Grandame Eve was a little guilty
of such a kind of Society, inasmuch as such an Enmity was immediately denounced
upon it. But no matter whether Witches and Witcherafts began with the world or
no; we are too sure they are not like to end, but with the world, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
And speaking of the world and Witches, I take room enough to determine their
Existence. For happily in some Places, and at some purer Times of the Church, a
Witch may not then and there be found, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Micah 5. 12. Zach. 13. 2.
at least wise comparatively, not in those Multitudes, or Multiplicities. And
thus explained my determination stands firm to any man's belief for these
Reasons following.

1. Because the holy Scriptures speak of Witchcraft as of a specifique sin, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Gal. 5. 20. Now no accident can subsist without a Position or
Concession of its proper subject in whom it must of necessity inhere. 2. The
word of God discovers and describes them by their several names, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
Now names are not given to things that are not: nay the variety of names serve
to note their Multitude in the Concrete, as well as their multiplicity in the
Abstract. 3. God Almighty has Enacted Laws and Penalties against them, Exo.
22. 18. Lev. 20. 27. which were not instituted for, nor can be executed upon
shadows and mere nothing. 4. It is carefully forbidden to seek after such,
Levit. 19. 31. which how vain were it if none such were to be found? Because
though individual acts may perish with the Authors, yet never any specifique
sin (once here) quite vanished hence; but (through the common root of
Corruption) was propagated to all Ages. 6. Because the Devil (through his
depraved knowledge) has devised perpetual Rules of Witch-crafts; such as he
not only suggests immediately and occasionally; but has delivered them to
impious wretches, to be traditionally taught and communicated from one
Generation to another. 7. Because the Devil labors continually to uphold the
visibility and eminency of his kingdom, which he does in and by, none more
then such as these. 8. Even Heathen by the light of Nature, have asserted such
to be: nay and by the Law of Nature, convinced them to be such. 9. The opinion
and judgment of so many learned men in all professions. (Philosophers,
Historians, Lawyers, Physicians, Divines, Schoolmen, Summists, Casuists, Kings
and Princes) that have shown so much Art and industry, in their demonstration
and discovery. 10. The observation, Tradition, confession, practice and
experiment hereof (in all Ages, and among all Nations) is more then manifest.

The General thus confirmed, let me also add a touch upon these particulars.
1. That Witches have been more frequent in some Ages of the World, then others,
namely, the more blind, dissolute, paganish, Idolatrous, superstitious. 2. That
Witches have always abounded in some coasts of the World, more then others; as
namely, where the Gospel is not; where it is not so plain, pure, and
powerful; and where Witchcraft is made either their Religion, or their Trade.
3. That Witches are to be found in some Religions, more then others, that is to
say, not only where witchcraft it self is counted a Religion; but where
Religion it self is superstitious, and so disposing to Witchcraft. 4. That
there has been, are, and are likely still to be, more Witches under the
Popish; then in the Protestant Religion. For not only their Popes, Priests,
Friars, Nuns, (many of them) have been notorious Witches: but their
praestigious miracles, and superstitious rites little better then kinds of
Witch-crafts.

Now though I find it easier to determine of Witches, that they are; then to
discover what they are, yet I may give occasion to apprehend something to that
purpose, from this one maine conclusion, viz. That Witchcraft, or the sin of
Witches, is the most great and grievous, the most deadly and damnable sin, that
a mortal man may be guilty of. I conceive it second to none that can possibly
here be committed, and my Reasons are,

1. Because it is called an abomination unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18. 12. which is
never said but of those Impieties that are of all other most Execrable.

2. Because all other sins and disobediences, are but compared to this for
heinousness, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Now the thing compared is always inferior to
that to which it is compared.

3. Because Witchcraft in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin is commonly called by the
name of Evill-doing: signifying (as say the Ancients) that it is the greatest
evil that can be done.

4. Because it is the most malicious and immediate aversion from the greatest
Good; and the most malicious and immediate conversion to the greatest Evil.
For here is God Renounced and defied; and the Devil embraced and adored.

5. Because no sin upon earth so tempts God, as Witchcraft does. Next to the
Devils impudent tempting of Christ: was Balaams importunate tempting of God.
It even tempts the Devil to tempt God. For little or nothing can the Devil
do for the Witch by a Leaguer Commission; but as he is feign to tempt Gods
Permission at every turn. Else Satan had not craved a second power against Job;
after a confession of the first.

6. Because it is the most abhorred of all those sins, which we call the sins
against Nature. Not only in regard of that horrid illusion of an Incubus: but
also in respect of common society; for as it is most natural for man to be
sociable, so it is most unnatural to him to associate himself contrary to his
kind. And so much the more in this, in that it is against not only a naturally
arising, but a divinely imposed Antipathy, Genesis 3. 15. 1 Cor. 10. 20.

7. Because a Witch is an Antichrist, opposite to Christ not only in his Works,
but in his Person; for as Christ is a God incarnate: so is a Witch (as it were)
a Devil incarnate. I do not say, a Witch is the Antichrist; but I am sure, the
Antichrist must needs be a Witch, 2 These. 2. 8. 9, 10, 11.

8. Because the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, is grounded upon an
imputation of Witchcraft, Matthew. 12. 24, 31. And the sin it self appears (by
direct literal deduction) to be a malicious imputation of the works of the
Devil to God; and of the works of God to the Devil: which who are so guilty
of as are Witches, that make God their Devil, and the Devil their God? as is
evident to be observed, in their solemn and explicit pact or League. Neither
do I know any one particular sin, to which the expression of the sin against
the holy Ghost in Scriptures, with the properties that Divines make thereof,
may be more aptly and precisely applied, then to this sin of Witchcraft.

2. Case. How many kinds of Witches may there be conceived?
A Right belief of Witches cannot be without some distinct conception of
their kinds, holy Scripture (to set forth their several kinds) reckons up 8.
several names of them at once. Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 11. Some say nine; making the
first paraphrasticall description (that of causing the son or the daughter to
pass through the fire) to be a certain species of Witchcraft: which I
conceive rather to be a general Act or Rite, of consecrating or devoting
themselves and theirs to the Devils service; answerable to that which we
commonly call the Witches Covenant, Compact, or Confoederation with the Devil.
Because it is still set before those other particular Acts, as if it were but
some kind of preparation or disposition to them, Lev. 20. 5, 6. 2 King. 21. 6.
All the rest of the Words, or Names (were it not that plenary Enumerations
cannot be without distinctions) are so promiscuously used, variously
translated, and indifferently interpreted, that it is hard to observe any
specifique difference between them. Give me leave to guess at them as
distinctly as I may. 1. We thus translate the first, One that uses
divination. But the Hebrew speaks somewhat more Emphatically, One divining
divinations. To show, that such his divinations were of his own divining, or
devising; who presumed, or undertook to teach or tell of things contingent and
fortuitous, whether future, or absent; and what hereafter might happen to such
a person, such a State; And such a one I may not amiss call the Gypsy, or
fortune-telling Witch. 2. An Observer of Times. The Radical derivation of this
Word or Name is thought so various, that I know not well how to determine here,
what kind of Witch. Some conceive it from an Hebrew root that signifies to
answer, being interrogated in dubious matters; and so I may say it is the
Oracle Witch. Some from casting a mist before the eyes, and then is it the
juggling or praestigious Witch. Some from a word of the Clouds; then is it the
Astrologian, Starre-gazing, Planetary, Prognosticating Witch. Some from a word
that notes a Time, and that destinate or determinate to such a purpose, as
lucky, or unlucky; then is it the superstitious season-searching, or (if you
will) the Time-serving Witch. 3. An Enchanter, or a chaunting Witch, using to
that purpose certain Odes, Songs, Verses, Tones, Numbers, and may signify
either the Canting or Calculating Witch. But there is a word of fuller and
nearer sound to the original, that signifies the Serpent: so may it be the
Serpentine, the venesick or Poisonous Witch. 4. Or a Witch. The Original Word
is used so promiscuously, for all manner of Witches, that makes our Translators
to render it in the common English word only. Yet does it more narrowly
import, such a kind of Witch that works partly after a poisonous, partly in a
praestigious way. 5. A Charmer, and that is an Exorcist or conjuring Witch. But
the Hebrew expresses it thus, one joining Society, viz. either with the Devil,
or with other Witches: and so it is the assembling or the associating Witch. 6.
A Consulter with Familiar Spirits. The Hebrew intimates, one that carried the
Spirit in a Bottle, a Bag, a Pitcher, and so kept it as a familiar; or rather
whose Belly heaved, and swelled, and sounded like a Bottle, whence the Devil
spoke or replied: and thus is it the Gastromanticke, the Ventriloquist, or if
you will, the Bottle-bellyed Witch. 7. A Wizzard, or Sciolist, that is the
Magical, Speculative, Scientiall, or Arted Witch. 8. A Negromancer; that is
one that sought to the Dead, and consulted them, to know what should become of
the Living. Or, that haunted Graves and Sepulchers, as well praedigiously to
raise the dead, as to be praestigiously resolved by them. You may call such an
one, the Mortal or the deadly Witeh.

To all these Names, more then ten times might be added from other Languages,
expressing the several sorts of Witches and Witcherafts; either from their
Nature, Art, power, practice, matter, form, end, author, means, instrument, or
effect. But (because I labor all I may to bring the whole business to a
Previate) I shall only treat of such kinds or sorts of them, wherein they are
more universally both comprised and distinguished.

1. According to the vulgar conceit, distinction is usually made betwixt the
White and the Black Witch: the Good, and the Bad Witch. The Bad Witch, they
are wont to call him or her, that works Malefice or Mischief to the Bodies of
Men or Beasts: The good Witch they count him or her, that helps to reveal,
prevent, or remove the same. But such consider not, that devils (with as
certain a Science and as safe a Conscience) may be distinguished into Good,
and Bad, as Witches. Rather, that the accounted Good Witch, is indeed the worse
and more wicked of the two. For as Satan, being a Fiend of darkness, is then
worst when he transformes himself into an Angel of Light: so likewise are his
Ministers. Now both these working by the Devil, whereas the worst hurt that
the one does, proves but to bewitch the Body, or outward man: the best help
that the other can do, tends and turns to bewitch the inner man or Soul. In
as much as it begets in the party to be thus helped; either a Petition, or at
least an inquisition: either a persuasion, or at least an expectation; which is
a faith or assent of the same nature that the Witch now works by.
Notwithstanding all this it is objected, that the Good Witch does good, and
opposes the Bad Witch, and the Devil, and therefore certainly can be none of
his, nor have any dealings with him. For if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself, how shall then his Kingdom stand? Matthew. 12. 26. Are not
these now the Patrons of Witches themselves that can make Scripture plead for
them? To whose mis-applying it is thus replied: That if Satan should cast out
Satan spiritually, or out of the soul, here were a division indeed, and now
his Kingdom could in no wise stand: But for Satan to cast out Satan
corporally, or out of the Body only; this may be done by a combination, and so
his Kingdom may grow the more. For thus he agrees, and willingly yields to his
own Children and Instruments to be (even by them) ejected out of the Body:
that so by the faith (both of the doer and receiver) he may the more easily be
admitted into the Soul.

2. Witches may universally be thus distinguished into either the Arted or the
Pacted Witch. The Arted Witch, or one only speculative upon the abstruse
Mirables of Nature: who by searching into her occult Qualities, her hidden
powers, and secret virtues, her Sympathies and Antipathies; and by applying
fitly Actives unto Passives; now urges nature so Artificially, that he makes
her conclude and assent to work wonders: (And happily thus far may proceed both
with true Science, and good conscience.) But what through vanity of Science,
error of Conscience, lability of innocence; what through curiosity, Credulity,
vain Glory, etc. is at length taken in the snare of praestigious and
Diabolical delusion. And now applies the Creature to those ends and uses; to
which, either by its own propensity, or by Gods Institution, it was never
inclined. The pacted Witch is one only Operative, about some prodigious or
Praestigious things, and that only by virtue of a superstitious Compact or
Contract made with the Devil, without, or against all Rules and orders of
Nature, Art, or Grace.

3. A general distinction (as touching kinds) may be of the Active, and the
Passive Witch. The Active Witch I conceive to Act together with the Devil; but
the Passive Witch to be Acted rather by him. One by way of Confoederation; the
other by reason of some obsession, One as it were tempting the Devil; the
other rather tempted by him. One as it were the Author, and the Devil the
Instrument; the other but the bare Instrument, and the Devil the sole Author.
One maliciously rejoicing and glorying in prodigious prankes and Exploits; the
other somewhat irking and ashamed. One not infesting only, but infecting also,
by seeking to make others Witches; the other willing or wishing rather to be
unmade it self. Of the one kind I reckon the Witch of Endor* I Sam. 28. of
the other, the Damsel in the Acts, Acts 16. Yet ought even the Passive Witches
to be distinguished into the merely, and the mixtly Passive. The merely
Passive be simply daemoniacks, but not Energumenists. That is mainly suffering,
rather then Acting by the Devil: more excruciated and afflicted, then occupied
or exercised by him. The mixtly Passive be not the Obsessed only, but the
Operative likewise. Of more Active at first in giving up their Wills to Satan's
slavery, now become more Passive and led Captive by him at his will. First
offering themselves freely and voluntarily; after forced, and as it were
necessitated to do his drudgery. The Devil now infesting them, if they grow
slack to infest others.

3. Case. Whether there be not sundry degrees of Witches and Witchcrafts to be
considered?
Original sin indeed (being one and alike in all) admits of no variety of
degrees in any. But witchcraft is an actual, and therefore none are borne, all
are made Witches. Talk they what they can of an Incubus, the Devil and the
Witch produce not to witchcraft by Generation but seducement. Moreover, when
by witchcraft one grows so high as the sin against the holy Ghost, there is now
no further measure (save in numericall Acts) for one Witch to exceed another.
Otherwise there is no sin (taken indefinitely) but may admit of several
Measures, and so (to every man's consideration) highten or lessen the guilt or
poenalty to that subject in which it inheres.

It is worthy to be conscionably waighed; that in witchcraft there is an
Inchoation, as well as a Consu^mation. 1. The Inchoation or disposition to
witchcraft is in superstition. The Fathers, and Schoolmen therefore are not
much amiss in defining witchcraft by superstition: Making this to be the
Genus, and gathering the other in all the species under it, so that no kind of
Witchcraft may be named, which is not found upon superstition, and works not by
it. Because in this main Act, superstition and Witchcraft both agree; to apply
the Creature as means unto those ends and uses; unto which it is neither apt by
its own nature, nor thereunto ordained by divine Institution. Only these two
differ in degrees; for superstition is witchcraft begun, and witchcraft is
superstition finished. Wherefore now, since Superstitions are the seeds of
witch-crafts; and we all have in us the seeds of superstitions; how ought we
then to take heed of nourishing superstitions; and those especially that bend
and dispose to witchcraft? which are indeed too much to be observed in the
Observations, Traditions, Opinions, Affections, Professions, Proverbs,
Practices, Occupations, and Conversations of the Vulgar. Lord! how many are the
sorcerous superstitions of the Many? As they are too too notorious; in
observing of seasons for lucky or unlucky; in foretelling of Fortunes and
destinies; in marking of Contingences and Casualties; in casting of Lots; in
regarding of dreams; in making of meals, in using of sports, in securing of
fears, in promoting of hopes, in curing of diseases, in making of Marriages,
in taking of Journeys; and the like: All which (in truth) are grand
superstitions, or petty kinds of witchcrafts. Yet are not to be neglected
neither: for without Gods good Grace, and great mercy, they easily grow to a
higher measure or degree of that kind of malignity. 2. The Consummation and
Completion of witchcraft, is in the Witches absolute Pact, and real Fact,
whereby it is covenanted and consented to work, not by God, not by nature; not
by Art, not by reason; but by diabolical delusions alone.

Likewise of real and absolute Witches, there are several degrees to be
considered according to several kinds of them. As the good Witch is to be
judged and esteemed worse then the bad; the Idolatrously pacted, worse then the
Cunningly Arted, the pernitiously operative, worse then the fondly speculative:
the mischievously Active, worse then the abused Passive. For if among very
Devils one may be found worse then another, Lu. 11. 26. how much more among
Witches? nay even among Witches of the same kind, there are also considerable
degrees or aggravations to guide a Conscience, either as touching private
Estimation, or public Censure, viz. 1. From the Time, as the inveterate Witch
is to be thought worse then the Novice. 2. Place, As a Witch at Court, is
worse then a Witch in the Country, and a Witch in the Church worse then a
Witch in her own Cell. 3. Sex, As the Male witch is worse then the Female. For
though she may be more envious and malicious; yet he has abused the Abler and
Nobler Sex. 4. Degree or Quality, as Jezabel was worse then the Witch of
Endor. 5. Profession, As the Christian Witch is worse then the Pagan. 6.
Office, As the Clericall is worse then the Layicke Witch. 7. Object, As to
practice witchcraft on Men is worse then if on Beasts only. 8. Malicious
intent, As to have made one Witch, is worse then to have bewitched many.

4. Case. What it is that makes a Witch to be a Witch, and one that may justly
be so called and accounted?
IT is safe to believe that there are Witches; and that those also are of
several kinds and degrees. But very unsafe to pronounce peremptorily upon
such and such for Witches; and that upon false grounds, as vulgar report, bare
suspicion, suspected Ancestors, decrepit age, froward affection, an ill tongue,
or any casual accident or Event. Right effects are only censured with a safe
Conscience, by those that are able to discern them in their proper Causes; Now
therefore 4. Causes are to be observed, al concurring to the making up of an
absolute Witch, viz. God utterly deserting, the Devil delusively invading,
special sins hereunto disposing, and the Compact thoroughly Completing.

1. God the deficient Cause. His desertion was enough to make an Angel become
a Devil: how much more then for a man to become a Witch? Yet all this is no
adding to the Creatures malice, but only to give it up to its own power, that
it may be known how evil it is, if his goodness be once subtracted. Nay,
God is here not only a permissive, but a directive cause. For what forbids that
God should not as justly and wisely concur in this Act, as in all other evils
of sin? Yea great Reasons are to be given both for his permission and
direction herein. As, 1. for the manifestation of his own Glory. As he did
the first Witches we read of, Exodus 7. 12. and 8. 18, 19. 2. For the trial of
the faith and patience of his Saints and Servants, Deu. 13. 1, 2, 3. 3. For the
hardening of the wicked in their wilful delusions, Exodus 7. 22. 2. These. 2. 9.
11. 4. For to make the Witches themselves examples of his justice both here and
hereafter, Exo. 9. 12. Isa. 19. 3, 4. and 44. 25. Act. 13. 11. Revel. 21. 8. 5.
For the more confusion of the Devil himself both in his frustration and
ejection. Isa. 44. 25. Mic. 3. 6, 7. Matthew. 12. 28, 29. 1 Ioh. 3. 8. Acts 16.
18.

2. The principal Efficient of a Witch is the Devil, who indeed is the father
of all such; and they his chiefly begotten Children. I mean it not by way of
Incubus; which I cannot believe to be other then the height of all
fantastical Delusions, though the Patrons of it never so earnestly instance
in those hairy ones, or shaggy ones, (for so the word sounds being either way
pronounced) Lev. 17. 7. Isa. 13. 21. By which are to be understood not devils
Brats, but Devils themselves that appeared to Witches in such shapes when they
worshipped them: Or in the Fawnes, Satyrs, Sylvaries or Sirens, that the Poets
sing of: Or in the Legendary Stories of our Merlin or their Magdalen: Or in the
Plebeian-traditions of Fairies, Elfes, and Changelings: Or in the old or latter
Stories of such like Indian races. All these are not enough to move my belief;
and so much the less, because they have impudently blasphemed Divum Lutherum,
to be one of this brood. But when, I say, the Devil is the Father of Witches,
I mean it after no other manner then as he is of all the wicked, John 8. 44.
by the seduction of sin, not any production of nature. Yet I grant them his
Children by a more special and mutual adoption, and of all others most
bearing his Image and similitude. And thus he goes about his work in their
forming and framing. All Witcherafts for their Original, Invention, Operation,
and use, being primarlly in the Devil (as the Issues of his depraved
knowledge) only he perceives that he wants fit instruments for their
execution. And therefore finding a faithless heart, a froward nature, a feeble
Sex, an impotent age, an illiterate Education, a melancholy constitution, and a
discontented condition: he now works further (and for his special purpose)
to blind the understanding more and more, to deprave the will, to inordinate
the affections, to perturb the passions, to possess the interior, and delude
the exterior senses: and so infusing execrable suggestions, of murmuring
against God, and desire of Revenge against Man; he thus though not absolutely
inforces them, yet efficaciously inclines them to become Witches. And it is
further to be observed, that the fittest subject or matter for him here to
work upon, are women commonly: And therefore (in Hebrew) a Witch is for the
most part rendered in the Foeminine gender; and there are many proverbs like
that of the Rabines, More women, more Witches. The reason hereof is rendered
variously, from the Sexes Infirmity, Ignorance, Impotence of passions and
Affections melancholy, solitariness, timorousness, credulity, inconstancy,
etc. But let not the Male be boasting, or secure of their Sexes Exemption or
less disposition. For we read of Pharaohs Magitians, Nebuchadnezzar's
Astrologers, Manassehs Wizzards, of Balaam, Simon Magus, Elymas the Sorcerer,
etc. As well as of Jezabel, the Witch of Endor, the Pythonisse, etc. And those
the more notorious and malignantly operative Witches of the two.

3. The moving or provoking Causes, are diverse sins, that more eminently
dispose to witchcraft: such as are, 1. Idolatry; therefore are these two
(Idolatry and witchcraft) conjoined so frequently, Lev. 20. 5, 6. 2 King. 21.
5, 6. and 23, 24. Gal. 5. 20. 2. Superstition* as is said before. 3. Swearing,
and blaspheming, Mal. 3. 5. 2 These. 4. 9. 4. Imprecation or cursing, and
therefore to curse, is as much as to bewitch, Number. 22. 6. 5. Inordinate vagrant
lusts, 2 Kings 9. 22. Nahum 3. 4. 6. Curiosity, this makes the Magical Witch,
Acts 19. 19. 7. Envy, hatred, malice, desire of revenge, Gal. 5. 20. 8.
Depraved and indulged Melancholy; which notably disposes the matter to the
introducing of such a form, Isa. 13. 21. and 34. 13, 14. 9. Covetousness,
poverty, etc. Mic. 3. 11. Nah. 3. 4. That all these are provocations to
Witchcraft, we have it abundantly in story, even from Witches own
Confessions. And this use are we to make of it, that as we would not be given
over to Witchcraft: so should we not give our selves over to those sins that
so proximately dispose and incline us thereunto.

4. The formal cause of a Witch, is the Covenant, Compact, Contract,
Confoederation, League, society, familiarity with the Devil. Which hidden
mystery of iniquity is more generally consented to, that it is; then exactly
disclosed what it is. All are ready to take the Witches Compact for granted,
yet few (for ought I see) can well tell us what it is. Nay the Learned, are
readyer to distinguish it, then to define it. So that hereupon it has been
somewhat dissented; and that moreover in regard of Satan's prestigious delusion
herein, Iudibrious convention, prodigious profession, impious stipulation,
perfidious intention, ridiculous obsignation, etc. And (in very truth) but to
Discuss this said solemn Pact or League (according to probability or
possibility) as it is merely related touching the formality or solemnity of
it: were enough to settle a judicious man's faith upon the vanity of it: if not
upon the nullity altogether. For thus Fryarly Authors, together with the
Tradition of the vulgar, make it up like a Tale or Legend, viz. How that the
Convention for such a solemn Initiation being proclaimed (by some Herald Imp)
to some others of the Confederation; on the Lords day or some great Holy day,
or chief Festival, they meet in some Church near the Font, or high Altar, and
that either very Early, before the Consecrated bell has tolld, or the least
sprinkling of holy water; or else very late after all services are past and
over. Where the party in some Vesture for that purpose, is presented, by some
Confederate or familiar, to the Prince of Devils; sitting now in a Throne of
Infernal Majesty, appearing in the form of a Man (only laboring to hide his
cloven foot) To whom (after often bowing, and homage done in kissing his back
parts) a petition is presented to be received unto his Association and
protection; And first (if the Witch be outwardly Christian) Baptism must be
renounced; and the Party must be Rebaptized in the Devils name, and a new
name is also imposed by him: and here must be Godfathers too, for the Devil
takes them not to be so adult, as to promise and vow for themselves. But above
all, he is very busy with his long nails, in scraping and scratching those
places of the forehead, where the figne of the Cross was made, or where the
Chrisme was laid. In stead of both which, he himself impresses or inures the
mark of the Beast, the Devils Fleshbrand upon one or other part of the Body:
and teaches them to make an oil or ointment, of live Infants stolen out of the
Cradle (before they be signed with the sign of the Cross) or dead ones stolen
out of their Graves, the which they are to boil to a Jelly; and then drinking
one part, and besmearing themselves with another, they forthwith feel
themselves impressed and endowed with the faculties of this mystical Art.
Further the Witch (for his or her part) vows, (either by word of mouth, or
peradventure by writing, and that in their own blood) to give both body and
soul to the Devil. To deny and defy God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. But especially the blessed Virgin, convitiating her with one infamous
nickname or other. To abhor the Word and Sacraments, but especially to spit at
the saying of Mass. To spurn at the Cross, and tread Saints Images under
feet. And as much as possibly they may to profane all Saints Relics, holy
water, consecrated salt, wax, etc. To be sure to fast on Sundays, and eat
Flesh on Fridays, not to confess their sins however they do; especially to a
Priest. To separate from the Catholic Church, and despise his Vicars primacy.
To attend his nocturnall Conventicles, Sabbaths, Sacrifices. To take him for
their God, worship, invoke, obey him, etc. To devote their Children to him, and
to labor all they may to bring others into the same Confederacy. Then the
Devil for his part promises to be always present with them, to serve them at
their beck. That they shall have their wills upon any Body, that they shall
have what riches, honors, pleasures they can imagine. And if any be so wary as
to think of their future Being, he tells them they shall be Principalities
ruling in the Air; or shall but be turned into Impes at worst. Then he
preaches to them to be mindful of their Covenant, and not to fail to revenge
themselves upon their Enemies. Then he commends to them (for these purposes) an
Impe, or Familiar, in the shape of a Dog, Cat, mouse, rat, Weafle, etc. After
this they shake hands, embrace in arms, dance, feast and banquet, according as
the Devil has provided in Imitation of the Supper. Nay, often times he marries
them ere they part, either to himself, or their Familiar, or to one another,
and that by the Book of Common prayer (as a pretender to witchfinding lately
told me in me in the Audience of many.) After this they part, till the next
great conventicle or Sabbath of theirs, which is to meet thrice in a year,
conveyed as swift as the winds from remotest places of the Earth, where the
most notorious of them meet to redintegrate their Covenant, and give account of
their Improvement. Where they that have done the most execrable mischief, and
can brag of it, make most merry with the Devil, and they that have been
indiligent, and have done but petty services in comparison, are jeered and
derided by the Devil and all the rest of the company. And such as are absent,
and have no care to be assoygned, are amerced to this paenalty, so to be beaten
on the palms of their feet, to be whipped with iron rods, to be pincht and sucked
by their Familiars till their heart blood come, till they repent them of their
sloth, and promise more attendance and diligence for the future. Thus you see
what we are likely to attain to, by searching too precisely into Diabolical
solemnities; amongst some probabilities to manifold Impossibilities, and
absurdities, among some truths, to manifold superstitions.

But laying aside all curiosity (as indeed not necessary) in seeking to inform
or resolve our selves of the form or manner of this Diabolical Compact: we
may with moderation content our selves, that some reality is to be conceived,
amongst many praestigious Delusions. A substantial Covenant, notwithstanding
all the fallacious Ceremonies. Though nothing but Impostures in the principal
Agent, yet real Depravation in the rational Instrument. For albeit this
mystical Leviathan will make no faithful Covenant, Job. 41. 4. nor can
because of the irreconcilable omnity, Genesis 3. 15. neither will indeed be
bound to be a SerServant, to be compelled at the Witches command:
nevertheless to inshare-such in their superstition, may he simulate the same.
And after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders,
and deceivablenesse of unrighteousness; God may send them strong Delusions,
that they may believe a lie. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11. Likewise the Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Neither
is there any doubt to be made, but that a Covenant may be made with death, and
an Agreement with Hell, Esa. 28. 15. and that fellowship may be had with
Devils themselves, 1 Cor. 10. 20. we know well that the Tempter is ready to
propose both the Condition and the Reward of a Compact, Matt. 4. 9. And we
heard before that one name of Witches is to be called Ioyners or Consociators,
scil. not only among themselves, but with the Devil also. Besides the Devil
is Gods Ape, and one that faines to imitte him though in contrary ways. And
therefore as God makes a Covenant of Grace with his: so does the Devil with
his a Covenant of Death. Neither indeed is the universal Confession of Witches
themselves (touching such a compact) to be disregarded. For who knows the
guilt of their own Consciences better then they themselves? and though they
tell us of never so much Delusion, yet can we conceive the corruption that is
in it. Nor yet is the consent and experience of all Ages to be rejected: that
tells us of such Facts of Witchcraft, as must necessarily be concluded to
follow the same. For where any extraordinary or wondrous thing is done; and
that neither by the power of God, nor of the good Angels; nor by the power of
Nature* nor of Art; it must needs be done by the power of the Devil. And in
the Instrument that does it either the force of a possession* or the virtue of
some Part* is necessarily to be supposed which is briefly thus to be
discerned. The Devil may work the first way upon a man against his will to
punish and torment him: But he works not with him, at his will, or to serve
him; but the second way alone.

Such a Covenant or compact is unanimously delivered by the Learned, to be two
fold* Explicit, and Implicit. 1. Explicit, or Express, by word or writing;
wherein it is mutually stipulated; the witch to do the Devils will; and the
Devil to do the witches will and all this more visibly, formally and
ceremonially Confirmed. ^. Implicit or more secret: which is conceived, may be
done diverse ways; as first* by a mere Assent that the Devil should do it,
and says that he will do it. 2. By a Pro^ey, yiedling and assenting to
receive and use, Rules, signs, and means from other Witches, without any
immediate vow or Conference as yet. 3. By using superstitious Innovations, or
Imprecations, witha persuasion or Expectation of their Issue. 4. By employing
means to those purposes, to which God never appointed them, nor their own
nature inclined them; and yet confident of their Effect. 5. By seeking too, and
consulting with Witches for their advice, help, etc. For there is the same
faith and assent now both of the Consulter and the Practiser. 6. By assenting
to use such means and signs as witches also use: (viz. Charms, Spells,
Characters, Figures, Circles, Ligatures, words, phrases, Ceremonies, gestures,
etc.) not well considering the superstitious institutions, but peradventure
persuaded of some real virtue in them. For even Witches themselves make certain
Confections (as Broths, oils, unguents, powders, etc.) the virtue whereof they
impute not solely to the Devil, but partly to the things themselves.

Now let Witches be Examined upon these two maine Grounds of their making: and
where one is so become after an explicit manner of Covenanting; more then ten
of them are guilty after the Implicit and Invisible way only. And there is
this Difference (which would be noted) between them. The Explicit Covenanter
is the notorious and audacious; the Implicit but a Novice and a Bastard in
comparison. The Explicit has always some visible or sensible familiarity; so
has not the implicit as yet. The Explicit is become a perpetual witch; the
Implicit may only be but so for that present Act, or time being: only this
is to be feared; the Implicit being hardened a while, may grow to be Explicit
at length.

5. Case. What are the Signs and Marks of a Witch, whereby such an one may be
rightly discerned, and so censured?
Signs of a Witch are either true or false; right or wrong: And this is a
sign that Ignorant and ill men have presumed to judge and censure here, as well
as others; Nay, in that the received signs or marks are more false then true;
more strong then right; it is a sign that such kind of men have been more
forward to censure here then others. For as the men were, so were their Marks
either more or less advised. Amidst which variety, let me here distinguish of
some unwarrantable, some probable, and some more infallible.

1. Some Marks, or Tokens of Trial altogether unwarrantatable; as proceeding
from Ignorance, humor, superstition; such are, 1 The old paganish sign, the
Witches long eyes. 2 The Tradition of the witches not weeping. 3 The Witches
making il favored faces and mu^bling. 4 To burn the thing bewitched, etc. (I am
loath to speak out, lest I might teach these in reproving them.) 5 The burning
of the thatch of the Witches house, etc. 6. The heating of the horseshoe, etc.
7. The scalding water, etc. 8. The sticking of knifes acrosse, etc. 9 The
putting of such and such things under the Threshhold, and in the Bedstraw, etc.
10 The seive and the sheares, etc. 11 The casting the Witch into the water with
thumbes and toes tied across, etc. 12. The tying of knots, etc. If these (or
the like) be signs, to try and know a Witch by; certainly it can be no other
Witch but the user of them. And if it be objected, that the expected Effect
has followed hereupon; I answer, that may be done by the Devil, not for the
Witches convictions, but to nourish the other in their superstition. To all
these I cannot but add one at large, which I have lately learnt; partly from
some communication I had with one of the Witchsinders (as they call them) partly
from the confession (which I heard of a suspected and a Committed witch so
handled as she said, and partly as the countrey-people talk of it. Having taken
the suspected Witch, she is placed in the middle of a room upon a stool, or
Table, cross legged, or in some other uneasy posture, to which if she submits
not, she is then bound with cords, there is she watched and kept without meat or
sleep for the space of 24. hours. For (they say) within that time they shall
see her Impe come and suck; a little hole is likewise made in the door for the
Impe to come in at: and lest it might come in some less discernible shape,
they that watch are taught to be ever and anon sweeping the room, and if they
see any spiders or flies, to kill them. And if they cannot kill them, then they
may be sure they are her Impes. If this be true, how should it trouble us, that
an invention or practice of so much folly and superstition should arise amidst
so clear a light of the Gospel? But as to the killing of the Imp, let me
further inform them, that if the Imp be of a wafted and condensed air, it
cannot be killd, because it never had life: But if it be a very Cat or Dog,
etc. only possessed with the Devil, it may be killed: And I have heard a
Committed Witch confess, that she killed one time her dog, another time her Cat
(both her imps) for going out and doing so much mischief against her will.

2. Some signs probable, yet not so certain as to serve for the Witches
Conviction. Such are, 1. Strong and long suspicion. 2. Suspected Ancestors. 3.
Bare Confession. 4. Some Appearance of Fact. 5. The corpse bleeding upon the
Witches touch. 6. The testimony of the party bewitched. 7. The supposed witches
unusual bodily marks. 8 The witches usual cursing and banning. 9. The witches
lewd and naughty kind of life.

3. Some more infallible and certain signs. As. 1. Declining Iudieature, or
Faltering, faulty, unconstant and contrary Answers; upon judicial and
deliberate examination. 2. When by a true examination (of Faith and Mannrs)
there are found all or most of the causes fore-spoken of. viz. God Deserting,
the Devil invading, particular sins disposing; and the Compact completing. 3.
The Witches free Confession, together with full Evidence of the Fact. For
Confession without Fact, may be a mere delusio^; and Fact without Confession,
may be but a mere accide^t. 4. The semblable Gestures and demeanures of
Witches, with Comparable expressions of passions and affections, which in all
Witches (of all Times and Places) have been observed and found to be very much
alike. 5. The Testimony of the party bewitched, (whether pining or Dying)
together with the joint Oaths of sufficient persons that have seen certain
prodigious prankes or feats, wrought by the party accused. 6. Haunting the
houses or companyes of notorious Witches, and especially frequenting their
nightly meeting. 7. Whom other notorious Witches have impeached to be as ill as
themselves. 8. If noted for long dis-frequenting and neglecting the Church, or
Congregation; the word preached, and Sacrament administered. 9. If it can be
proved that such an one has allured or enticed others to witchcraft. 10. A
maligning and oppugning the Word, Work, and Worship of God: and by any
extraordinary sign, seeking to pervert and seduce any from it. Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2.
Mat. 24. 24. Acts 13. 8. 10. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Do but ^arke well the places, and for
this very property (of thus opposing and perverting) they are all there
concluded to be arrant and absolute Witches.

Now to guide the Conscience in discerning and censuring; where the signs and
notes (one with another) of the last sort are found; there (as touching the
Witch) it may safely be pronounced and proclaimed. Where those of the second
only are; there may be some suspicion or estimation, and that irreprehensible.
But where no note of Trial is to be found, save only those of the first sort,
there it is egregious Calumny, and inf^^^y irreparable. We therefore approve of
the last, admit of the second, but altogether condemn the first. Yet (as
touching the second) there is need of some Caution, because it is much upon
suspicion. (And all suspicion whatsoever, cannot be but unsafe to Conscience,
if it want the due Caveats) What Conscience then can here be in common people
that are carried away not only with suspicion but superstition? Every poor
and peevish old Creature (such is their Ignorance and Uncharitableness)
cannot but fall under their suspicion, nay their infamous exprobation; every
Accident, (more then ordinary) every disease whereof they neither understand
the Cause, nor are acquainted with the Symptoms) must be suspected for
witchcraft. His Cow or his Hog, cannot be strangely taken, but straight it
must be reckoned and rumored for bewitched. And now their ill will to the next
neighboring silly Creature, must peremptorily tax her ill will (in the worst
sense) for the only cause of all. A bare Casualty, or accidental effect
(especially if any thing touches them in their own particular) shall now be
to them a more sure and certain Token of the Witch, then all the marks that
Learning and Experience speaks of besides. And there is no staving them off
their own conceited way of Trial, though it be never so unwarrantable, never
so unlawful. And but to advise them to prudence and Conscience in such a case;
is to be reputed and reported, a Patron, a Pleader, a Favourer and a Flesher of
Witches. But men that are either conscientious or judicious, will not easily
harbor a suspicion (either in this or any other thing) unless it be from some
very shrewd signs, probable reason, frequent Experience: nor will they lightly
admit of any report (be it never so old, so common) unless it be also from
the well reported.

6. Case. Whether Witch-seeking, or Witch-finding be an Art, Vocation,
Profession, Occupation, Office, or Trade of Life, allowable in a a Christian
Church or State?
THis Case is new; because such a Profession or occupation has not been heard
of heretofore. And therefore since I am to venture where the path is not trodden,
I shall willingly yield to any that can show me a directer way to truth in
this particular; then that which I now propose. Distinguishing here betwixt the
Authority, the Art, and the office of Witch-finding, and thereupon thus
determining.

1. That the Authority (of Governors in Church and State) is (to such a purpose
as Witch-searching or Witch-finding) not only Lawful, but laudable: not only
warrantable, but commendable withal. In Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found
among you scil. Gods People, etc. This imports an Authority from God to seek
out such; Else how should it be known, whether such were to be found amongst
them yea or no; In 1 Samuel 28. 7. Saul's Authority injoyning his Servants (Seek
me a woman that has a Familiar Spirit) was not unwarrantable, but his purpose
only. But every way commendable was Josiahs spying out of such, 2. King. 23.
24. as entirely both proceeding from obedience, and tending to Reformation.

2. That the Art of Witchfinding is very Difficult. 1. Because Satan is
subtle, and has even here a 1000 deluding Arts, and ways. 2. Most men are
ignorant of his Stratagems, enterprises, devices, 3. Witchcraft it self is a
dark mystery of iniquity. 4. It is so particular a Depravation, that it can
hardly be ghest at or imagined by any semblance of those common feeds of
corruptions that are in Men. 5. Even Witches themselves are ignorant of this
their own Art. 6. The true marks of a Witch (or mental Characters) are not
easy to be discerned.

3. That the office of Witchfinding is exceeding doubtful, Because he that
offers to take upon him such an office, cannot (I am afraid to give
satisfaction to these doubts, and the like. 1. Though peradventure he may have
procured some Authority from men: yet whether he be hereunto called and
enabled by God; 2. Whether he is able to execute it with a good conscience void
of offense both toward God, and toward men; 3. Whether he have any certain
and infallible Rules of Discerning to proceed by; 4. Whether (in this
undertaking) he aim not more at a private Advantage, then at the public Good?
5. Whether he often times uses not unlawful and indirect means of Discovery;
or incourages not the Common People to use the same? 6 Whether he may not give
occasion to Defame Ten that are Innocent; before he descover one that is
guilty? 7. Whether his Carriages in this business, may not be a great occasion
to augment the vulgar Peoples superstitions (and very dangerously
superstitious) opinions, suspicions, traditions, persuasions, affections,
admirations, and Relations? (I propose this to be well considered, because the
Country People talk already, and that more frequently, more affectedly, of the
infallible and wonderful power of the Witchfinders; then they do of God, or
Christ, or the Gospel preached). 8. Whether peremptorily to pronounce
beforehand what multitudes of Witches are to be found in every Country of
England, be not (besides a wicked Calumny,) an irreparable Infamy to the
Church of England, in causing the adversaries of the Reformed Religion to
blaspheme?

Besides all this; I require full satisfaction in these Doubts also: For I am
not satisfied: that such an office ought to be taken upon them by any private
persons, as a Calling, Profession, occupation or Trade of Life. Because, if any
Lawfulness be in such a kind of Calling; it must either be as ordinary, or as
extraordinary.

1. I conceive, not as an Ordinary calling, 1. Because ordinary Callings have
ordinary Principles, Grounds, Precepts, Rules, Documents, Prescriptions,
Directions, Examples, Presidents, Exercises, Practices, etc. 2. Ordinary
Callings have Ordinary Derivations, Propagatious, Continuation, etc. 3. We
worthily confute the Papists, for setting up the office or Calling of an
Exorcist, as Ordinary and constant in the Church. Of whose Office are two maine
Acts; one to discern, discover, and descry the Devil and the Witch: the other
to adjure, charm, expel, remove etc. The former of which Acts is here
confessed; and if any Forms of adjuration be used in the Examination or
Discovery, the other is not to be denied. And how wary must he be here in
Examining, that would take heed of Adjuring? 4. As touching the second Act of
such an Office, the Scripture plainly denies an ordinary or settled Calling,
saying They are Vagabonds, that they took it upon them, and for this cause it
is demanded, Who are ye? that is, where is your calling or power thus to do?
Acts 19. 13, 14, 15. And therefore may the first Act very well be doubted of.

2. Not as Extraordinary. For 1. The Extraordinarily Called, are raised and
separated, immediately, eminently, miraculously: 2. And that upon extraordinary
occasions; as when the Church of God is thereby extremely infested, infected,
obscured, endangered. 3. Such are evermore by God prepared, gifted,
strengthened, maintained, perfected.

All that can be objected to me is; How then would you have Witches found out?
I answer, by the power of the Magistracy and Ministry; appointing and
employing (upon evident and urgent necessity, as when not only common Reports,
but prodigious Facts cry out) fit persons to such a purpose. I say fit; both
for number and Quality. 1. For number, Competent. Not one or two obscure
persons, A man with a woman, etc. But even a sufficient number, the better to
Examine, Reason, Debate, Discern, Determine; in case of particular Respects,
Ends, fancies, opinions, humors, Passions, Affections, etc. 2. For Quality,
meet Persons for that purpose, which ought not to be, 1. Ignorant, 2. Profane.
3. Covetousness. But ought to be, 1. Conscientious, 2. Discreet. 3. Learned.
And Learned, very learned. 1. In natural Philosophy, that they may discern
betwixt things merely praestigious, and the Mirables of Nature, in her occult
Qualities, Sympathies, Antipathies, and apt conjunction of Actives to Passives.
Through Ignorance whereof, a Country Fellow is ready to cry a Witch, or a thing
done in the Devils name, if he see one make iron to walk after him, though
by virtue of a Loadstone. Or to create fire in a wide field, though it be by
force of a burning glass, so he would in ignorant manner think all bewitched,
that his ship should stand immovable, and nothing to hinder it, but a slender
Remora. So would an Indian, when he sees a man from a great Gunnes mouth, fall
down dead, more then a mile off. 2. In physic; to judge of Facts and Effects
(in Men or Beasts) whether natural, preternaturall, etc. For how apt are
ordinary people to apprehend the strange handlings in Ecstasies, Frenzies,
Lunaries, Lethargies, convulsions, falling sicknesses, etc. to be no other
then very Witchcrafts. 3. In Divinity, to examine the conscience by the Rules
of the word, and dictates of right reason; and to discern and declare how
utterly opposite the diabolical Covenant is, to the Covenant of Grace. 4. In
Law, to declare who are here liable, and how far; and to what kinds or degrees
of guilt or penalty.

Now that such as these (upon due occasion) are the only requisite and
approvable for such a purpose: and that even they themselves shall find this
undertaking a matter of no small difficulty; will plainly appear if the
principal grounds of a Witches discovery be well considered; which are either
from suspicion, confession, compact, practice, marks, or imps. As touching I
suspicion, whether causeless, or reasonable. Or the extent of suspicion whether
general or particular. Or the person suspecting, whether idle, or of honest
repute. Or the person suspected; whether his or her eminent virtues or graces,
will admit of such a thing, yea or no?

2. Confession; How warily would it be considered; if the party confessing be
of right mind: and not diabolically deluded to confess not improbabilities
only, but impossibilities: if it be not forced, but a free confession. If
Melancholy Humors, work not too fond and false self-perswasions. If they may
not be some seeds of superstition disposing to witchcraft only; whereof the
Conscience convicted and distracted, errs confusedly in apprehending and
acknowledging all the Completion thereof.

3. Compact; whether the League or Covenant made with the Devil be Explicit
and solemn; or Implicit and secret. If Implicit only; whether an Implicit
pact (being but a bare asset of the mind or will) serve utterly to renounce God
and Christ, etc. And to join in full society and familiarity with the Devil?
And whether all sins of malice, are not guilty in some degree of the like
renuntiation and Confederacy.

4. Practice; whether no Magical, sorcerous Charming, Conjuring, praestigious
Acts, can be done without a diabolical Confoederacie? whether every Effect of
malefice and mischief that is immediately consequentiall to a Cursed Tongue,
be to be censured as a work of direct witchcraft? whether of wondrous and
dismal Events, some be not to be referred to the Mirables of nature; some to
contingencie and casualty; some to divine judgment, some to Diabolical
obsession, as well as some to Effascination? whether the Devil may not work
the Facts and Effects of witchcraft; by such as only stand as yet, but in the
Temptation, or some disposition to be Witches? whether the devil (as author)
may not work some particular effects of mischief, against the Will and
Intention of the Instrument?

5. Marks. Whether the express Character of a Witch be Corporal or Mental;
Whether all Witches have Corporal Marks, or diabolical Flesh-brands? Whether
all Witches Flesh Marks be alike in every part, and so to be known by
Comparison? Whether the Devil sets his express and visible seal, upon the
Implicit and invisible Compact? How may it be discerned betwixt this Devils
body-mark, and any other Corporal Infirmity? I have hard it Traditionally
Fabled of the strange figure, color, noisomeness, bloodlesness, searedness,
deadness, etc. yet to me it is nothing Argumentative. But I will help them to
one which (I take it) is demonstrative. viz. If the Learned Physician can
solidly conceive and aver that such a thing can have no natural cause from the
Body, nor can be of any Issue or use to the Body; then it argues and
Demonstrates something indeed. For the Devils Brandes perish utterly, and are
lost to any natural use of the Body; as being impressed and muted to serve for
no other purpose, but as Seals to the Devils Sacrament alone. Lastly, what man
(of never so much observation or Experience) can with a safe conscience take
his oath directly, that such Marks are impressed by the Devil, and serve only
for his use?

6. Imps, whether all Witches have their Imps or deal with Familiars? whether
a visible Impe be given upon an Invisible Compact? whether the Impe works at
the Witches, or at the Devils Command or Instigation? How can a Familiar or
Impe be discerned, if it never did any thing, but what (by nature, or Art) a
Creature of that same kind, may stand in a Capacity to do? who can flatly atest
with a good Conscience; that this or that Dog, Cat, Rat, Mouse, etc. is the
Witches Imp or Familiar?

These things being considered (with many more almost irresoluble scruples, that
might pertain to this scrutiny) I see not but that I may conclude? Though the
Authority be commendable, yet the Case is doubtful, the undertaking difficult,
the profession dangerous, but the usurpation damnable.

7. Case. Whether all such Feats, Tricks, Pranks, and Exploits, as Witches
are said to play; be credible to prudent Christians?
The Feats or prankes of Witches, are nothing else, but an applying of
unnatural and unapt means, and unappointed by God, to bring some strange,
odd or infrequent, some prodigious, stupendous or wondrous things to pass;
and present them to the outward senses. The more light and Trivial of them are
done by the Witchmaking; having an Imp (as an Ape) ready to play such tricks at
a beck, or a nodde. But the more prodigious or stupendous are effected merely
by the Devil; the witch all the while either in a Rapt, ecstasie, a charmed
sleep, or a melancholy Dream: and the Witches imagination, fantasy, common
sense, only deluded with what is now done, or pretended.

All which Feats might be referred to the Witches Compacts, Conventicles, or
common practices. And though Learned men (that write volumes of this subject)
be much upon them, yet I (that intend but an Abstract) list not to belong upon
the Legend of Witches. And therefore forbear to order them: and shall only
give a Taste of them confusedly, and one amongst another. They tell us (and the
vulgar second them with numberles Traditions) of their reading in the moon, al
things that shall come to pass for a Thousand Generations. Of their reading by
starlight, what another has written in his Closet a Thousand miles off. Of
causing the voices of two in Conference to be mutually heard although as
distant one from another as the East is from the West. Of their being
metamorphosed, or turned into Beasts, Bears, Dogs, Wolves, Goats, Catts, Hares,
etc. of their cutting one another heads off, and setting them on again;
suffering their Limbs to be pluck tasunder and knitting the^ to again
immediately. Of their flying in the Air: and walking invisible. Of their riding
long and tedious Fourneys upon Broomes and Distaffes? and their sailing over
seas in Eggshells. Of their carnal Copulation with the Devil; and what feat
Elses and Changelings of such a Coition; now as big as Giants, and anon as
little as Pigmeyes. Of their Eating up whole Fields of Corn or hay, and
drinking up whole rivers in seives. Of presenting a Curious Banquet upon the
Table; and inviting thereto their Guests out of Fairy Land. Of making a garden
of delicat flowers to spring up in your Parlour in the dead of winter. Of
raising Storms and showers out of Tubs, turning Streams backward; haling Ships
laden against Wind and water, with Hairs or twined Threads. Of making a Cock
or a Fly to draw the hugest Beam. Of giving Potions to make people love or
hate as they please. Making the strength of youth impotent, and dead Bodies
viripotent. Of making bodies impenetrable or shot-free; annoynting the Weapon,
and curing the wound, without the least virtuall Contiguity: And turning all
Metalls into Gold, Drinking off a glass of Clarret, and make it to spout out
of the forehead presently. Showing you such and such Faces in Glasses etc.
Causing to dance naked etc. What should I tell of their Feats wrought by
Figures, Characters, Spells, Ligatures, Circles, Numbers, Barbarismes, Images
of wax or clay, Crystalls, looking-glasses, Baso^s of waters, herbs, powders,
urguments, sawes, knives, pins, needles, Candles, rings, garters, gloves, etc.
I fear I have even cloyd, while I talked but of giving a Taste.

A wise Christian and Conscientious will leave the faith of all or most of these
matters, with the Authors. No prodigious Acts (though avouched and attested by
hundreds and Thousands) must impose upon his Belief: If they utterly thwart
his eternal and infallible Rules of Truth, which are,

1. To beleve, that all the Devils stupendous Actions in this kind, are
praestigious Delusions. That is, either merely Delusive, where all else is
impossible, but the Delusion it self: or mixtly delusive, where peradventure
amongst some reality of means, matter, event, there is nothing but
praestigiousnesse of Form, End, Effect.

2. To believe nothing of all these, that (in the least) do usurp or trench
upon the divine Attributes; omniscience, omnipotence, etc. For though Devils
be intelligential creatures, and of admirable Ingeny and sagacity in comparison
to reasonable Souls; yet while (their Intellect was unobscured by their Fall)
all their perspicacity never reached to a shadow of Omniscience: much less can
all their long Experience, Observation, or Revelation, now attain to it. And
therefore if they foresee of themselves, or foretell some kind of Futures; it is
but as they are contained in their natural causes, or dispositions: And if they
ghess at some secret intentions or affections of the heart, it is no more then
from certain outward motions. So that we may well conclude, they are
ignorant, and err in very many things; whereof the Ambiguity of their
propositions and predictions, are a sufficient Confession.

Likewise, though Devils be called Principalities and powers, and that no power
on earth may be compared to them; yet was all their power (ere debilitated by
their fall) of no force to that power that belongs unto God; Wonders they may
work, but those lying ones, Deuteronomy. 3. 2. Mat. 24. 24. 2 These. 2. 9. And yet not
those, but as permitted by God, not Impedited by Angels, and having the matter
hereunto somewhat praedisposed. And even then it is (for the most part)
praestigious too. Illuding humane senses, abusing their Fancies, and (which is
worse) deceiving their hearts. Their utmost is but to produce phantasmaticall
or false species of things; and if any thing be now verily done, it is but by
applying Actives to Passives: which if we were as cunning in as they; we might
also do without them, and need never be beholding to them. But as for Miracles
(of a true name and thing) they are as strange and as admirable to them, as
they are to us. And indeed neither for them, nor us, nor for Angels to do,
but for God alone, Psalm. 72. 18. He only can work miracles, to whom nothing is
a Miracle. And it were easy (were it not too long) to distinguish betwixt
divine Miracles, and Diabolical Prodigies; both from the dignity and virtue of
the doere; the Quality, Excellency of the thing done, with the admirable and
advantageous manner and end of doing.

3. To believe nothing of these, that (being granted) must of necessity work
the universal disorder and confusion of nature. For though the Devil may
happily be able to perturbe some particular course of Nature: yet (Devils
themselves, being part of the Universe) have no power to work to the Confusion
and destruction of the whole.

4. To believe nothing of them, that utterly impugn the dictates of right
Reason. For that would directly imply contradictions; and then impossibilities
are necessarily to be concluded.

5. Not to believe any thing of these, contrary to the infallible Rules of Gods
word. For what Faith can be of those things, that cross the grounds of Faith?
Against which eternal Rules of truth (whether of precept, promise, or
practice) Devils and men, in all their Operations or Testimonies must needs
be found Liars.

6. Nothing must be believed of all these, as tending to truth or to God. For
the Devil is false, and can speak no truth, but to deceive; and the Devil is
naught, and will do nothing like to Good, but to hurt and endamage so much the
more.

9. Case. Whether the power of a Witch be such as is ordinarily supposed?
IF we would be led by the terrible Traditions, Opinions, and apprehensions
of the vulgar; they are mostly ready to imagine, the power of a Witch, to be
more like the power of a Devil, then of a Witch: and so, the power of a Devil
to be more like the power of a God, then of a Devil. And are eftsoons affrayd
of the power of the Devil, more then of GOD: And of the WITCH more then of the
DEVIL: yea and (out of that fear) are readyer to serve and please the Devil
and the Witch, then God himself. But to be better informed, let us here
inquire,

1. Whence have Witches all their power? And I say, firs, Not of God. For this
is it chiefly that makes the Act to be forcerous and prodigious, that the
wounder is wrought, but not by the power of God. Yet I dare not say, this power
of theirs (what ever it is) is not from God. For the evil Spirit was from the
Lord, that troubled and terrified Saul. 2 Samuel 16. 14. Neither did Satanltouch,
Job, (body or goods) but as God gave him, once and again into his hands. Job.
1. and 2. Nor had all the Devils power to enter into or infest the swine, but
as Christ was pleased to permit. Mar. 5. 12. whence I conclude that God has
even. here also a working power: viz. of permission, Limitation, Direction, yea
and of Cooperation; and yet all this without the least approbation of the power
abused by the Devil or the Witch. 2. Not from good Angels. For good Angels
and Witches never work one with another: Because Witches work by virtue of a
Compact, to adore the Power that they work by: and that the Good Angels can in
no wise endure. Revel. 19. 10. Neither (though they may be Instruments of Gods
just judgments) can they be assistant to the malice and iniquity of the
Creature. Neither yet will the Excellency and Ingenuity of good Angels, suffer
them to condescend (upon any terms between them) or dissemble a being bound at
a vile wretches beck. How much deceived then (through Satan's transformation of
himself) are those Witches that have imagined their Familiars to be no other
then good Angels? 3. Not from Nature. For they take her un-aptest means; and
apply them to the wrongest ends. 4. Not from Art, or Science. Because they are
indeed ignorant of all such grounds and principles; rules and reasons. 5. Al
their power therefore must needs be from the devil only; who conveys unto
them, what power is permitted him in that particular; by virtue of a cursed
Contract, or confederation. In the execution whereof, he himself nevertheless
is the sole agent; and they but the wretched InInstruments. For (as the Hebrew
has it of the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. 7. and is plainly rendered, Nahum 3.
4.) though they seem Ladies and Mistresses of their Arts and acts; yet are
they indeed but Satan's mere slaves and Vassals. Commanding openly that power,
as if they were superior to him: and yet secretly invoking it, as inferior.
And so the Devil seems as if he were now compelled to obey; when he
cunningly dissembles it, for his own ends. Only he is willing to have this
power both to be challenged by them, and imputed to them: that so he may
transfer upon them, the guilt, and hatred, of all those Mischiefs and
Malignities, both before God, and men.

2. After what manner do they use to exercise their power of bewitching?
Sometimes they practice their power with more Formality; sometimes with less.
Now on a sudden and all at once; now by times and degrees. Some by themselves,
some with their fellow Witches. Sometimes after this manner, and by these
means: sometimes by the clean contrary. As witnesses (what from confession, and
Tradition) their sundry bewitching places, Seasons, Vestures, Gestures,
Postures, Spells, Characters, Ligatures, Signs Images, Confections, herbs,
ungue^ts, meats, drinks, powders, boylings, broylings, scaldings, burnings,
buryings, etc. Indeed, what Act or Instrument of Man, can be named; that has
not been, or may not be, sorcerously abused? Let me instance more expressly in a
few particulars, 1. Some work their bewitchings only by way of Invocation, or
Imprecation. They wish it, or will it; and so it falls out. 2. Some by way of
Emissary; sending out their Imps, or Familiars, to cross the way, justle,
affront, flash in the Face, bark, howl, bite, scratch, or otherwise infest.
3. Some by Inspecting, or looking on, but to glare, or squint, or peep at with
an envious and evil eye, is sufficient to effascinate. (Especially Infants and
women with Child.) 4. Some by a demisse hollow muttering or mumbling, Isa. 8.
19. and 29. 4. 5. Some by breathing and blowing on; the usual way of the
venefick. 6. Some by cursing and banning. 7. Some by blessing and praising. 8.
Some revengefully, by occasion of ill turns. 9. Some ingratefully, and by
occasion of good turns. 10. Some by leaving something of theirs in your House.
11 Some by getting something of yours into their House. 12. Some have a more
special way of working by several Elements; Earth, water, air, or fire. But
who can tell all the manner of ways of a Witches working; that works not only
darkly and closely, but variously and versatilly, as God will permit, the Devil
can suggest, or the malicious Hag devise to put in practice?

3. Upon whom do Witches execute their power? If we can credit what is
reported of the old Pagan Witches; how they threaten the Gods, the Heavens,
Spears, Planets, Elements, etc. To pull down the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and
preserve their Influences in Boxes, to mingle all, and make a new Chaos, to dry
up the Seas, and remove Mountains, etc. Nay and some of our later Witches are
wont to brag of a power they have over the Devil himself, how they can
compel him, chain him, whip him, torment him. And these are they the Papists
call Exorcists, which we call Conjurers. Who are said to differ from other
kind of Witches in this, that they can imperiously command the Devil, etc.
Whereas others are glad to do all by Invocation or Entreaty. Indeed Christ gave
his Disciples an extraordinary power against him, Mar. 3. 15. and 16 17. and
for anything that he can do against us, has left us the ordinary means, 1
Pet. 5. 8, 9. But I would these kind of people could as easily extricate
themselves out of the Devils power: as we (for Trueths sake) must vindicate
him from theirs. And that 1. Because a Creature that is inferior by Nature,
cannot (without a divine power) compel one that is superior to it.

2. A pretense to or usurpation of a Divine power against him, prevayles not to
subject him, but inrage him rather, as Act. 19. 13, 14, 15, 16. 3. It is not
likely the Devil would invent or deliver any such Art, whereby himself might
verily be coarcted or constrained: who is of such a pride as can endure to be
brought into no subjection or obedience; whether to God, or Men.

But thus much is to be believed even by knowing Christians. That witches may
have a power from the Devil to perturbe all things sublunary. And therefore
they, and the Devil are not amiss said to move winds, Storms, Tempests,
showrs, Lightnings, (and some say Thunders) hayle, snow, Frosts, mists, Foggs,
smokes, Blastings, Skathfires, Earthquakes, Seawracks, Sicknesses, Diseases
etc. (I spare to speak of their more notorious power over things inanimate,
vegetables and all brute Creatures) But as touching Mankind (for there is all
the spite of the Devil, and the Witch) that abuse not the other Creatures, but
in his prejudice. Concerning such, it is commonly said, that witches have power
over Infants, more then the Aged; over Women, more then over men; and over
women with Child, more then over others. And for the proof we are put to
story, Tradition, and Experience. But the Question (best worth deciding in the
whole Case) is this. Whether Witches have any power against faithful and godly
men: as well as against the Wicked and profane. Some people are persuaded, that
a Witch can have no power at all against a faithful man. And think themselves
armed sufficiently to their opinion, from a great Witches own Confession.
Numbers, 23. 23. Surely there is no enchantme^t against Jacob, nor is there any
Divination against Israel. But it would be considered, that the Hebrew word
signifies (Notice) rather then (not against:) yea but say, not against Jacob,
not against Israel; Jacob and Israel there intimate a Congregation, not a
person. Thus therefore it may truly be distinguished, and determined; That
Witches and Sorcerers can have no power against the whole Church of God, the
whole body of Christ, but may doubtless over this or that particular person;
though never so pious, never so believing. Because such a subjection, follows
Gods permission. And being but a temporal evil, no faith or piety has here
an absolute promise of Exemption: Satan had his obsessing power even over Job,
a Godly man; as well as over Saul, a wicked man. Christ acknowledges one for a
daughter of Abraham, and withal that she was troubled with a spirit of
Infirmity, Luke 13. That is, an Infirmity wrought by the means of an evil
Spirit. How easy were it (but that I resolve against all such prolixity) to
instance from the Fathers, and other Authors, of more then Hundreds of good and
Godly men (in all Ages) not only immediately obsessed by the Devil; but by his
evil Instruments, most strangely and terribly bewitched? Besides Examples and
experience, there is reason also to establish this for a Truth, 1. Because
Corporal bewitching is (as I said) but an outward suffering; against which not
the best Saint has any Ground to plead an absolute privilege. 2. One of the
maine Reasons of Gods permission of Witches were thus eluded. viz. For the
Try-all of the Faith and patience of the Saints, which, how could it possible
be, if they were here Exempted? 3. The Devils hatred is greatest a against
Godly men, whom he labors most (by himself and his Instruments) to disturb
and Distract. Yet in this Community of sufferance, is there some difference to
be observed. As the Godly are bewitched in their Body only: the Wicked both in
body and soul. The Godly for the Try-all of their Graces: the Wicked for the
punishment of their Sins. The wicked Curse God to his face: the Godly bless
him so much the more. To the Godly, this is all their Hell: to the Wicked, but
as their Hells beginning.

9. Case. How the power and malice of Witches may be prevented and redrest with
a good Conscience?
THe Popish Schoolmen not a little leave our Consciences perplexed, in this
Question of theirs. Whether it be lawful to remove the signs of Witchcraft;
to the Intent the Effect thereof may cease? In that they who proposed it, are
so divided upon it. Some of them make it an Act meritorious, so to do: Some
again, an Act Superstitious. But their Resolution on either side satisfies
not. For it cannot be an Act meritorious in any (to dispell or destroy the
signs, means and works of the Devil) but in him alone that came into the world
for that very intent. 1 John. 3. 8. Nor is it to be counted for an Act
superstitious, to remove or dissolve any thing, that the Witch has left or put
in any place, for a Sign, Spell, Charm to bewitch by; and that such a thing
removed, dissolved, the Witchcraft is disappointed and must cease. So be, it be
certain that they are the signs or means of witchcraft, and placed there for
that very End. And that there be not a more diligent search to find out the
Witches sign or spell, then to betake to prayers and like duties. And that the
Effect of such ceasing be not hoped or expected merely from the Removal of
the thing; nor as the Consequent or Condition of the diabolical Compact. But
that it is done through Confidence in God; and a contempt of all such
Sorceries. For if a man were certain that such a thing were a Witches sign or
spell to bewitch by; it would argue more assent to the Devils working to suffer
it, and let it alone; then to remove or destroy it. Neither is there any doubt
to be made, but that Witchcraft (with all the Appendices) may be resisted and
removed by any unlawful means. Which cannot but be such, if there be no
consulting with, co^se^ting to, or expecting from the Devil: but a Reference
to, confidence in, and dependence upon God alone.

Indeed people are here but too superstitious, as touching the Fortifying or
relieving themselves. I pass over what superstitious Remedies are here taught
in that other Religion; as the tolling of a baptized bell; signing with the
sign of the Cross, sprinkling with holy water, blessing of Oil, Wax,
Candles, Salt, Bread, Cheese, Garments, weapons, etc. carrying about saints
Relics, with a thousand superstitious fopperies of their exorcising Trade. I
only speak of such superstitious practices, as are used by men of all
Religions. 1. In seeking to a witch, to be helped against a Witch. 2. In using
a certain or supposed Charm; against an uncertain or suspected witchcraft. 3.
In searching anxiously for the Witches sign or Token left behind her in the
house, under the Threshold, in the Bedstraw: and to be sure to light upon it,
burning every odd ragge or bone, or feather that is to be found. 4. In
swearing, railing, threatening, cursing, and banning the Witch: as if this were
a right way, to bewitch the Witch from Bewitching. 5. In Banging and basting,
scratching and clawing, to draw blood of the witch: an Act not only
superstitious, but so injurious; that it is rather a provocation to the malice
of the witch, then any Fortification against it. 6. In daring and defying the
Witch out of a Carnal security, and presumptuous temerity: Bebelieve well
(saythey) have a good heart and fear not, and the Witch can have no power
over, etc. A good Belief will now arm well indeed: But alas! that is quite
another thing, to this confident Audacity. One is in God, the other in
themselves. One is the Confidence of a pure heart, the other is the security of
the profane: One keeps within its own Calling, the other wanders out of it:
And so not only tempts God, but the Devil too. It is worth the observing, how
the Devil once served them upon such a presuming as this, Acts 19. 13. and 16.
But what say they for all this? Bold Bayard once daslrt out the Witches
brains. Never tell them; they have always observed that Witches least hurt
them, that worst use them; and they that are least afraid of them, still fare
best by them. Oh! how the Devil dissembles a fear of those men whose Cases are
most to be feared? how he spares them Temporally, that he may not spare them
spiritually and eternally? what cares he for bewitching their Bodies, when he
has thus bewitched their better parts, their souls?

Thus having removed all false means; Though we here approve of no kind of
exercising, much less admit it as an ordinary calling in the Church of Christ;
yet we freely profess, that God has not here left his church destitute of
sufficient and lawful Remedies, whether Preservative or Restorative. And these
be; 1. A Conscionable care against sin, the old Witch of all. That did
Effascinate our first Parents, and us in their loins; but since has directly
bewitched us, both in our professions, Gal. 3. 1. as also in our Conversations,
1 Samuel 15. 23. That has made us make a Covenant with Death, and an Agreement
with Hell, Isa. 28. 15. That has brought us to an Abnegation of the sacred
Trinity; and to a corruption and profanation, both of Word and Sacraments. That
makes us believe we are Lords and Ladies of our own Wills; when we are the
only servile wretches, led Captive by Satan at his Will.

That rewards only with mere delusions of momentary pleasures, to the hazard
of eternal pains. More especially it behooves us to take heed of all such
sins as (besides the Devil) more particularly expose us to the Witch. And
they are, 1. Morose Cogitations; For they tempt God to give us over to visible
temptations. 2. Dire Imprecations; for they want only Gods saying Amen unto
them. 3. Tyrannous and oppressive Actions; for they cause the Lord to depart
from us, and an evil spirit from the Lord to trouble us. 4. Hypocritical
professions; For if the unclean spirit find his house empty of all true
graces, and swept only by an outward Restraint, of some more scandalous and
notorious vices: and Garnished with simulated virtues, superfluous
observations, affected garbes, and formal services: then he takes with
himself seven other spirits, etc. Matthew. 12. 44, 45. And it is to be noted how
the Devil has always delighted to haunt and frequent Monasteries, Nunneries,
and old Abbeys, places of so much hypocrisy. 5. Superstitious and profane
communications, especially of Devils, Witches, and Witch-finders. We have some
stories of such as by making these their Table-talke, have made themselves the
more obnoxious to their infestations. It is strange to tell what superstitious
opinions, affections, relations, are generallyrisen amongst us, since the
Witch-finders came into the Country. And I pray God that these things do not
dispose and expose us to Witches, rather then help to rid us of them.

2. Next to a care against sins; is an endeavor after graces. And those 1.
Faith, for that makes every way strong to resist the Devil, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. 2.
Purity of heart, for the unclean spirit finds no rest in dry places, Mat. 12.
43. And to let him find no rest in us, is the way not to be molested by him in
any kind. 3. Prayer and fasting, for these are prevalent against the worst kind
of them, Matthew. 17. 21. 4. Confidence in Christ's name and power, word and
promises, Mark. 16. 17. 5. Frequent reading and meditating upon the holy
Scriptures, for there is the sword of the Spirit, to pierce the head of the huge
Leviathan: There Is the voice of the wise Charmer, to make the deaf Adder, and
the old Serpent burst in pieces. Search we there, and apply we the special
promises and consolations for our particular Case, Genesis 3. 15. Ps. 91. 11, 12,
13. Joh. 16. 33. 1 John 3. 8. Mar. 16. 17. Romans 16. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Jam. 4.
7. 1 Pet. 5. 9. But we must take heed of profaning Scripture names, phrases,
and fragments; as Witches themselves do, in their most execrable witchcrafts.
Or of setting apart certain incompetent, and in-concerning verses for Charms,
as the Papists do and teach. 6. The Prayers of the Church or Congregation, for
they avayle exceedingly in any manner of Infirmity, Jam. 5. 14, 15. 7.
Thanksgiving to God for his special providence; Blessing and praising him for
his own protection, and Angels administration. 8. A keeping us within our own
Callings, so shall the Devil find us, neither idle, nor ill occupied; so shall
occasion be avoided either for him to tempt us, or we him. 9. A just contempt
of the Devil, and of all his praestigious. Arts and Instruments, Jer. 10. 2.
as not to be secure, so not to fear, for the Devil is a false spirit, and
smiles in fayning a yieldance to a fond presumption: But he is a proud one too,
and therefore cannot be more vexed and troubled then at a just and true Contempt.

10 Case. Whether it be lawful to consult with a Witch, upon any occasion?
AL consulting properly implies; as if one would now be informed by another, of
what he would know, or Advised what he should do: Either of which are very
improperly sought for at a witches hand, that indeed knows neither truth, nor
right, and in express opposition to whom God has been pleased to appoint for
his a far better Counselor in that Case, Esa. 8. 19. 20. Neneverthelese, how
madly have superstitious and profane people always run upon their devices to
be here advised. Genesis 41. 8. 1 Samuel 28. 7. 2 King. 1. 2. Dan. 2. 2. Albeit God
has utterly prohibited and condemned it, Levi. 19. 31. and 20. 6. Deu. 18. 14.
And that the old Ecclesiastical Censures have been the same against all such
consultation, as against witchcraft it self. And that some Civil or Politic
Laws have decreed Death to the Consultor equally as to the Witch. And that it
has been the Common observation of all People, that none have ever thriven
after so tempting an Attempt. And that the same Judgments of God are yet in
force against al such as heretofore. 2. King. 1. 4. 1 Chronicles. 10. 13.

Upon these many Considerations I conclude, that althoug one way is more
damnable, yet there is danger in Consulting every kind of way. Whether out of
Curiosity, or for Exploration sake, as well as out of superstition. 1. If out
of Curiosity only to see and here, and tell what a witch or wizzard can say or
do. This is out of any man's calling or Commission, and so falls under a
tempting of God. 2. If for Exploration sake, so as to Examine and discover the
Witch. Herein (though the Authority may be granted. for safe and good) yet
special heed is to be had, either of adjuring, or yet of alluring the Devil
or the Witch. Forto adjurea Witch, if it be done by way of humane obtestation
and Entreaty, then is it palpable consulting: or if it be done by way of divine
Attestation (charging and challenging in the name of God) what else is it then,
but that we call Exorcizing? And likewise to Allure the Witch to do any Act of
Witchcraft, (through disguise, dissimulation, fair words, promises, or any
other pretext) yea although it be with intent to descry or make discovery, yet
even this is to do evil that good may come thereof. And therefore the Witch of
Endor justly exclaimes against the injustice and Treachery of such an
Inticement, although it might have been to such an intent, 1 Samuel 28. 9. 12.
Now then this it is, to enquire here over familiarly may be to allure: To
charge over highly is to adjure: but only to interrogate Rationally and
Legally, this is safely and sufficiently to explore.

3. But the damnable consulting of all is, if out of Superstition; to be
informed of what is Future, Absent, Lost; or to be helped against any strange
handling whatsoeever. For here is the same Faith that is in the Witches
operation and confederacy; and (at least) a mediate assenting and joining
society with the Devil. And a yielding or acknowledging the Devil to be the
Author of help; which stands in the Name of the Lord our God alone. Oh! that
people would be persuaded of it; then should we not hear so many fond
Objections, whereby they seek to justify themselves, and to evade all that can
be said against them. But mark how little all they can say for themselves
availes them: we will number their Objections, and set our Answer to them, not
only to refute, but instruct them.

1. I went for my own satisfaction, and at my own hazard, and what has any
body to do with it? Yes, the Church has to do with it, and censure it, as
inconsistent with her communion, 2 Cor. 6. 15. The State has to do with it,
and punish it, as enemy to the Society thereof. For the Diabolical associating
must needs be adversary to the Humane. Nay, and every private Christian has
to do with it, to complain of the grievous scandal thereof, and require
satisfaction.

2. It was not a Witch that I went to, but a Wizzard, a Wise man, or a Wise
woman, as they call them. All Witches are not of one kind: and several kinds
are not of seveverall Natures: neither does variety of degrees vary the kinds
or natures. Things may be of the same brood or Litter, though unlike one
another; and every one not so like the Damme.

3. It was neither Witch nor Wizzard, but a Juggling Impostor. But thou wentest
as to a Witch indeed. The delusive event, excuses not the delusion of thy
intention.

4. I went to none but a good Witch. Who ever called a Witch good, but bad men?
and if the Devil were called good, would thou therefore go to him?

5. I meant nobody hurt in it. A good meaning will not warrant the use of ill
means.

6. It was not I that went, but my wife, child, servant. No More was it
Ahaziah, but his wife, 2 Kings 1. Ask but thy conscience, if thy heart went
not along with them, either in the command or consent.

7. I meddled with none of their witcheries, etc. Thy faith or persuasion to be
satisfied and resolved in the Business thou went about, was enough to
mingle thee with the Witch in her confederacy. Nay, thou wast the very cause of
that Act of Witchery that was now practiced for thy sake, and upon thy occasion.

8. I saw nothing, I found nothing but good. All good is to be suspected that
comes from the Devil, who never did any thing like to good, but for the
greater ill.

9. I was told nothing but Truth. The Devil is a Liar of himself, and never
told Truth, but to deceive. Some light Truth peradventure, and that either
forcibly, or against his Will; or fortuitously and without his knowledge; or
falsely to deceive thee in a greater Truth, and others with greater Lies. He
that looks to hear Truth from the Devil, may soon hear it to his sorrow, as
did Sanl, 1 Samuel 28. 19.

10. I went but to see if I might be informed or find what I had lost. What
was all that loss, to the loss of thy Credit and Conscience? Nay, not only
loss of peace within thy self, and of Reputation with wise men: But of Report
with good men, and of favor with God. What if thou had not found? then was
thy labor and hopes lost to all the rest. Say thou didd'st find, it coming
by the Devils means, comes with Gods Curse. Thus is it lost though found.
Nay, and (in thy sense) shall be lost again. For (besides that God blows upon
it) the Devil (since thou art so ready to seek after him) will be ready the
second time to bereave thee either of that, or as much as that comes to, that
so he may make thee seek to him again. Thus shall thou be continually the
loser, and the Devil the Gainer: whereas hadd'st thou either despised thy
loss, or despised this way of finding it, thy loss had not only rested
there; but thou had been a great Gainer by Gods grace and blessing.

11. What would you have me do? I could not endure to see the poor* Thing so
strangely handled, but seek out some remedy for it; and no body could tell what
disease it was, all Physic would do it no good, etc. Because ordinary means
failed, was God therefore to be deserted, and his greatest enemy addressed unto?
But that I am resolved to speak English only in this Epitome: I could further
reply, out of an Ancient Fathers own words to one that had procured a Charm
to cure his Child, and objecting, What, would you have it perish? Yea, let it
perish; better it perish then thou; it temporally, then thou eternally. What
should I tell of Christians that have refused to touch, take up, or once remove
a Witches Charm, Spell, Sign; no not for their own present Cure? Nay, and of
very Heathens that have derided and rejected all such remedies?

12. I did it only in an humor, because I had a mind, or Fancy to know mine
own Fate or Fortune, etc. Because this is indeed the Fancy and Humor of too
many: Let them hear what I say now unto them, in sundry considerations. 1. So
did Saul, and heard his destiny to his utter despair, 1 Samuel 28. 19, 20. 2.
All future things are reserved in Gods own knowledge and power; and therefore
solely to be referred to him. 3. Who (of men or Angels) have been his
Counselors to be ordinarily acquainted with any such mysteries?

4. For a man to be foreacquainted with his own Fortune; though it were
expedient, yet is it not lawful: And though it were lawful, yet is it not
expedient. For if good things be presaged to him, and they false; that makes
him miserable in a frustrated hope: If bad things, and yet false, that makes
him miserable in a needless fear: If bad things and true, they make a man
miserable in his own apprehension, before he is so in himself. If good things
and true, yet the long Expectation both crucifies and takes off the edge of
Delight in their Fruition. 5. When did ever any Diabolical Predictions want
their Ambiguities or Equivocation? For so fallaciously does the Devil use to
frame his Oracles, as that they may stand good with either event; to the end we
may be either way deceived, and yet he neither way thought to deceive. 6. Is
there any certainty of their fore telling things future, that are ignorant of
what is past or present? or how can they tell what shall betide another, that
are not aware of what may befall themselves? 7. Have not the sager Heathens
derided all Astronomicall, Genethliacall, Physiognomicall Presages and
Predictions; and are they things to be believed by Christians?

8. He that will easily believe the Devil upon his Word, can hardly have any
right faith of God in his Promises: For credulity to Satan, is to Godward
infidelity. 9. One that is here over anxiously, or curiously inquisitive, as he
has much of the Infidelity of an Atheist: so not a little of the Carnality of
an Epicure. For it is a manifest Token he both loves, and likewise fears
himself too much as touching the Body and present Being.

11. Case. What punishments are Witches worthy of; or may justly be inflicted
on them.
THat Witches are to be punished is the Law and sentence of Nature, Reason,
Policy and Religion. Nature says so, because they abuse her order: Reason
says so, because they change her dictates for delusion: Policy says so,
because they disturb her peace: and Religion says so, because they pervert her
power. Hence have proceeded all those bitter invectives of Heathen and mere
natural men; all those solid irrefutations of Learned men and Philosophers;
all those severe Edicts of Princes and Magistrates; and all those sharp
censures of the Church against them.

To pronounce sentence therefore in a word; a Witch, (a real rank Witch) is
worthy of all poenalty that can either be inflicted or imagines More then
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal punishment cannot be devised; and al these
are here deserved.

1. Spiritual punishment, even the heavyest Anathema, or greatest
Excommunication, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Ezekiel. 12. 24. Mic. 5. 12. John 12. 31. 1 Cor.
10, 20. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16. And great reason that Witches should first be
spiritually or Ecclesiastically punished, 1. Because the sin of a Witch is
(formally considered) a mere spiritual sin. 2. Witches primely abnegate and
abjure the Churches Faith and fellowship: And therefore should first of all be
cast out of their Communion.

3. It is just Talion to deliver such up to Satan that have already given
themselves unto him.

2. Temporal punishment, Exodus 22. 18. Levit. 20. 27. And the reasons are, 1.
Because the Fact and Effects of witchcraft are External, and disturbing the
Civil peace. 2. Witches in joining Confoederacy with the Devil become professed
Enemies to all true humane society, and therefore deserve to be cut off from
it. 3. Their toleration is pernicious both to Church and State, not only in
regard of their Maleficiating mischiefs, but also of Gods judgments, Isa. 47.
9. 12. Nahum 3. 4. 2 Kings 23. 26. Conferred with 2 King. 21. 6. 4. Because the
longer Witches are suffered to live, the worse they are, not only do more
mischief to others, but grow more wicked within themselves. Humane mercy will
never amend them; nor the Devil never forsake them til they fall under the
Magistrates hand, and if ever they repent it is then, or not at all.

3. Eternal punishment, Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15. And there is Reason for that
too. 1. It is just that they who utterly deny God should be utterly denied of
him. 2. That they who give themselves to the Devil, and worship him; should
go to him, and receive their reward.

But the maine of the Case is touching Civil poenalty. And if you ask what
particular punishment is to be inflicted? The Scripture says stoning, Levit.
20. 27. Authors in their Stories likewise store us with Laws and Presidents of
their hanging, heading, burning, drowning, fleaing off their skins, breaking
upon the wheel, casting down headlong from steep hills and Rocks, cutting
theirh troats, pressing, racking, beating with stripes, braining with clubbs,
banishment, imprisonment, degradation, privation of office, forfeitur of
estate, etc. Thus thought they no punishment enough for Witches. All which
Inflictions, Witches (absolute witches) may be well worthy of. But God forbid
they should be thus punished for Witches; that indeed are no Witches. For so
Innocent blood may be brought upon a Land. Yet I speak not this, as if some who
are Impostors only, or but cou^feit Witches (as Juglers, Gypsies,
fortune tellers, Figure-casters, Wizzards, Conjurers, Calculaters of
Nativities, with false prophets and Prognosticators, that presume to presage
what Changes shall be either in Church or State, should be unpunished. But that
true and real Witches should be truly and really punished, to true and real
intents. And that Magistrates and men in place, may wisely and justly preserve
and discharge a good conscience, and do no otherwise (in this Case) then as
Josiah did, 2 King. 23. 24. Where note, 1. His wisdom in discerning; They
were spyed out in the Land: A word noting perspection, and circumspection; and
that both of the mind and senses. Showing how both the internal and external
powers of discerning should be employed, and weighing both the Abstruse
Mystery; and more palpable material Circumstances thereof. 2. His Integrity
or sincerity. That he might perform the words of the law, etc. Looking at
nothing more then the honor of God, the justice of the Law, the Truth of the
Church, and the peace of the Commonwealth. But to take heed of doing (in such
a Case) as Saul did, 1 Samuel 28. 3. who may well be deemed now to have done al
smisterly. 1. Because if the Intention of his heart had been right to cut them
off; then doubtless had it not been so soon disposed to consult with them. 2.
It is surmized he looked only at his own private sufferance by such, 1 Samuel
16. 14. and not at the Law of GOD or public good. 3. The Jewish Rabbines say
that he did it enviously. Because the Diviners also foretold of his Ejection
from the Kingdom, and of David's Election thereunto. And something is observable
to such a purpose, in that Samuels death, and the Witches execution are
mentioned both rogether. Noting he forbear to execute his malice upon them
while Samuel lived. Because Samuel (a Prophet of the Lord) had also foretold
the same. 4. Some learned Protestants are of opinion that under pretext of
Witches Saul now slew the Gibeonites, for which the judgment followed, 2 Samuel
21. 1. Neither indeed want we the storyed Examples of GODS Judgments upon
those that defamed, prosecuted, and executed them for Witches, that indeed were
none.

Wherefore I make bold to propose here these Cautionary Quaeries to be
considered, 1. Whether all kinds of Witches are to be punished with one kind
of punishment? And hereto I answer vulgarly at first hearing, God forbid. And
do confess further, that I have read diverse Laws cited for diverse degrees of
Mulcts and poenalties. Whereto I may add also our own Statute Law in that
behalf wherein (in my poor judgment) several kinds and measures of poenalties
are well Enacted against several kinds and degrees of Witches. And I could wish
with all my heart, that in the execution it were but so sctrictly observed, as
in the Law it self is wisely provided.

2. Whether a Witch is to be punished capitally for the Pact or for the Fact of
witchcraft? I know some (both Papists and Protestants) that are eager for
denouncing upon the Pact alone, without any Fact done. And would have Witches
cut off (as men kill Serpents) before they have once stung or poisoned any. But
(under correction of better judgments) I am bold also to pronounce my opinion.
That although the mere Pact be mortal before God: yet neither the Pact
without the Fact; nor the Fact without the Pact, is to be Capital before men.
1. Not the Pact without the Fact. For so it is not only a mere spiritual
sin, a mere sin of thought; but may be a mere Dream or Delusion. Neither
do I believe there was ever in any a real pact, without a real Fact. For the
Devil does not now Confederate for nothing; nor will he suffer his Associate
to be idle. Neither is the Covenant, but for the Arts sake; nor the Art, but
for the Practice. Neither yet can a Pact be well suspected, or prooved but by
some kind of Fact. The Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. was so Notoriously known to
be a Pacted Witch. that Saul's Servantscould tell him of her, at first asking,
and of the Familiar Spirit she had, verse. 7. yet does she only plead against
Saul, for alluring her to the Fact, and so subjecting her to the penalty of the
Law, ver. 9. which plainly declares that the Actor pleaded and the Guilty
apprehended their Obnoxiousnes to the penalty of that Law from the FACT, and
not from the Pact alone. 2. Not for the Fact, without the Pact. For then it is
to be conceived and Censured as the Effect of some other sin or Crime, and
not formally of Witchcraft^. A parent (like as Witches use) curses his Child,
and God says A men to it. Hereupon the Child is obsessed, or strangely handled
(peradventur perishes, a thing of two common Example) But what? must the Parent
hang for the Malefice? no; and why? Because here is only the Factor Effect
without the Pact.

3. Whether the Implicit Compact be liable to the like poenalty as the
Explicit? An Implicit Covenant is solely in the Faith and assent, now
prodigious Effects may follow without any other Familiarity. And whether
Familiarity so far forth as invisible Faith and Assent, be Felony, it is not in
me to determine. Only I desire to be satisfied what difference is between this,
and the Faith and Assent in every deeply malicious sin? For that likewise
Implicitly makes a malignant Covenant with the Devil. Esa. 28. 15. Me^ thinks
there should be some Differences made between them; and that very
Demonstratively. I have labored to Excogitate them, but find it Difficult to
set them so really Disparate and distinct as I would, in Affection, Intention
Operation. For to me there appears in all something of the same Corruption. And
this very difficulty tells my Conscience what a wary discerning should here be
for Censure and Poenalty. Nevertheless I do not judge those, that shall proceed
to judge them, upon a clearer distinguishing and discerning.

4. Whether one addicted to the speculative way only ought to incur the same
poenalty with the operative Witches? I am not of those that contend for the
lawfulness of Magical science. Because I cannot reach (in my judgment) to
conceive, how it can be preserved (by such as wade too far into it) in the pure
Naturalls: but must needs (what through Ignorance or Arroganee) be polluted
and depraved with some kind of delusions diabolical. Notwithstanding do I not
reprove the knowledge of these things altogether. Lest I might reprove Moses
and Daniel, Acts 7. 22. Daniel, 17. 20. Who knew them not to use or practice
them; But to detect, and refute them: or knew them to the perfection of the
understanding, not to the depravation of the Will. Yet do I think those
worthy to be reprehended that shall affect, commend or promote this study, (A
study as the most difficult, so the most useless) yea and to be censured too.
But nevertheless not like the Operative that have hereby wrought mischief or
offense to the disturbance of peace and truth, in the Church and State. Unless
laying aside all Scrutiny and Contemplation as touching the Mirables of Nature,
their SpeSpeculation be of Diabolical Magic only: in Contemplating and
musing of (I cannot tell what) Compact, Conventicles, Rites, Sacrifices,
Invocations, Conjuratio^s, Charms, Spells, Characters, Figures, Circles,
Barbarismes of words, Prodigies of Fact, etc. Admiring, adoring, boasting,
commending, teaching, etc. These (as Masters and Professors in witchcrafts) I
think worthy most punishment of all.

5. Whether a Passive witch be to be punished by the Law as well as an Active?
How extreme were it therefore to suffer from men; because they suffer from the
Devil? Can his ^^cruciation be a sufficient Cause for our Execution? I conceive
the merely passive therefore are here to be exempted. Because though the Devil
works by them, yet it is without them, yea and often times against them.
Nevertheless the mixtly passive, may be distinguished from those who are less
to be pitied or spared because though they may now be somewhat passive, and the
Devil (as it were) forcing them to malefice or mischief; yet they first were
Active, and freely gave their consent so to do.

6. Whether a Witches own Confession be sufficient to hang her? I cannot see
(in the maine) but a Witch may be eondemned out of her own mouth as well as
any other Malefactor. For her own mouth can speak, her own guilt best, and
may not amiss be taken for a right discovery of her own Conscience. Nor does
her Sex any whit invalidher own testimony against her self. Nevertheless it
would be well considered whether she was forced to it, terrified, allured, or
otherwise deluded. And withal, if in her own mind and perfect senses; If not
out of some Melancholy humor or coffeehouse working to say any thing
through tediousness of life; If her Becollection or recantation may not stand
with more probability if they be not mere impossibilities whereof not a
Circumstance tending to such a matter, can be made to appear. But it matters
not much, though she talk of never so many monstrous or ridiculous Delusions
or absurdities, (for the Devils Actions are now to be admitted for no less)
if so be some Reality of depraved Affections, Intentions, or Effects may be
observed therein.

7 Whether a Jury may with a safe Conscience give up their Verdict in finding
such or such an one for a witch? Doubtless it may be done. For whatsoever sin
or Crime is punishable before men, is also Convincible by men. Otherwise all
Laws against them were to no Effect. For the Law is not to be Executed before
the Sentence be pronounced; nor ought that to be before Conviction. Neither is
it requisite that so palpable Evidence for Conviction should here come in, as
in other more sensible matters. It is enough if there be but so much
Circumstantiall proof or evidence; as the Substance, matter, and Nature of
such an Abstruse mystery of Iniquity will well admit. But withal I could wish
that these Twelve good men and True, were not Impannelled of ordinary Country
People: but of the most Eminent Physicians, Lawyers and Divines, that a Country
could afford.

8 What if there be no such maine Evidence against Witches; Are they therefore
to be Tolerated or to Escape? Some are of opinion that a strong Presumption is
enough to cut them off: but that were a strong Presumption indeed; others, that
it is good to hang the^ out of the way however for terror and Examples sake: A
terrible thing indeed, to make them Examples in the Punishment that are not yet
fully found to be Examples in the offense. Others would have it done and it be
but for their repentance and Conversion. Because (say they) Witches will never
think of Repenting till they come to the Gallows. Were it so, it were then
happy for the Wretches; But say it were so, Gods mercy excuses not man's
Injustice, but aggravates it. In my mind therefore this is safest, and
satisfactory; where God has denied man full evidence, it is not for man's
Justice to fall to Execution of vengeance: Nor is that to be called Tolleration
where Conviction is wanting. This is plain in more sensible Cases (as of
Murder, Theft etc.) where the Law proceeds not (though upon never so strong
Presumptions) for want of Plenary and particular Evidence; and why not here
since it is a Matter more occult? And if it remaynes so occult, as not to come
within a Legal conviction; it is a sign God has reserved such for his own
Justice and Vengeance which all their devilish Darkness shall not be able to
elude, Malac. 3. 5. He will draw near to their Judgment though they think
themselves never so far from man's. He will be a swift Witness against them,
when man's is either slow or insufficient.

12 Case. Whether a Witch may repent, and so be saved?
I know the Churches of old have been so Charitable, as to suppose their
Conversion: and to that purpose, have (in several Cases) proposed their
penance. And I read in Story of the Notable Repentance of certain Pope
Witches; with the miraculous signs of their salvation. And have heard the
Tradition, how the Devil has been forced to cast up and Cancel some such
pacting Indentures, though written with the Parties own Blood. I will conceive
withal, that Witches have as great Cause as may be to recant them of their
bargain, and Labor to return. Because they have made a Covenant with one,
that (on his part) never intended to perform the least Tittle promised,
otherwise then praestigiously. They serve a hard Master, that hates them
according to an irreconcilable Enmity, Genesis 3. 15. notwithstanding all the
pretended Familiarity: and not only so, but renders them hateful both to God,
and Men. That infests their habitation night, and day; torments them sleeping
and waking; terrifies them with ghastly sights, and hideous sounds; makes them
familiar to the most loathsome Creatures, wherein are least footesteps of the
Creator to be perceived. Haunts them continually, to be still employing their
Imps about one Mischief or another: and will not suffer (would a Witch be so
good) to remove the evil done to any one, but by transferring it upon some
other; or else threatens to inflict it upon themselves. Keeps them always
poor, lean, naked, diseased, discontented; and deludes them utterly in their
most Imaginary pleasures and Contentments. If they chance to steal any thing
after a prodigious manner, he straightwayes as praestigiously conveys it from
them again; or so infects it that it is nothing useful to them. And after
once wholly his seeks to betray them to Temporal Justice, that so he may the
sooner get them into his infernal Possession; and this he is the more eager
upon, lest peradventure having wearyed themselves in this way of wickedness it
might come into their minds to repent them at length. And thus we have the
Devil also fearing their repentance; and by that it should seem there is some
hopes of them. There would be more hope if we could hear God promising and
promoving it. But God has universally declared himself for their damnation.
Malac. 3. 5. Revel. 21. 8. and 22. 15. And it is safest always to judge after
his Sentence. Wherefore though witches may have some slender thoughts and
wishes for salvation, as had Balaam, Numb. 24. 10. Yet I cannot but think it a
rare thing still for Magitians to come and worship Christ. Mat. 2. 1, 2.

As to the Case therefore; to say that of Witches, Some may Convert and be
saved; some cannot Convert, but shall be Damned. This were to leave the Case
as Indefinite, as I found it. For less then so cannot be determined concerning
the least of sins. Give me leave therefore to declare the Judgment of my
Conscience both somewhat more determinately and distinctly. viz. That the Arted
Passive and simply Deluded Witch may repent and be saved: But the solemnly
Pacted, maliciously Active, and utterly Apostate Witch neither can, nor will,
nor shall. The Arted Witches, Act. 19. 13 Converted and so were saved. For the
word of God prevailed to that Purpose. verse. 20. Yea they beleved and showed
their Deeds. verse. 18. But Simon Magus though heeused the means of Salvation
(he believed, wondered and was Baptized, Act. 8. 13.) Yet neither had he part
nor lot in the matter of Sanctification or Salvation, ver. 21. yea, though the
Apostle puts a peradventure upon his Repentance, Prayer, Remission; yet is he
peremptory upon his Reprobation, verse. 22. 23. And all is because of the
Diabolical and Indissoluble Pact the Bond of Iniquity. So the Damsel, Act.
16. 16. 17. 18. A merely passive Witch (whose Divination or Soothsaying was
forced through a Daemoniacal Possession) was saved no doubt. Of which her
opportune Occursion, her Confession, her Application of it, her perseverance,
with Satan's Ejection out of her, are sufficient Testimonies. But I cannot say
so much of Iezabel and the witch of Endor, who were malicious active witches.
Manasseh likewise (though some think he was no Witch himself, but only a
Consulter, a Favourer and a promoter of them) yet (led by the many notable
Expressions, 2 Chr. 39. 6.) I rather conceive he was a very Witch.
Nevertheless it is said he sought the Lord, and prayed, and the Lord was
entreated of him, verse. 12. 13. But he was no Apostate Witch. For it is not
spoken of him til after his Conversion. He then knew that the Lord he was God,
v. 13. But Simon Magus and Elymas the Sorcerer (two Apostate witches) who would
have hired the power of the holy Spirit for money, who maliciously sought to
pervert the faith and truth of Christ. These therefore the Apostles (Peter and
Paul) denounce expressly for damned Reprobates, Act. 8. 23. and 13. 8, 9, 10.

To conclude, when I shall be instructed, of any one particular and specifique
sin, so near to the sin against the holy Ghost as this of Witchcraft: Or
that there is any other blasphemy more imputing the works of the Devil to God,
or the works of God to the Devil: or such an Antichristian Mystery of
Iniquity with lying wonders, and strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Or such a giving
heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. Or such a treading
under foot the Son of God, counting the Blood of the Covenant a vain thing,
and doing despite unto the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. Or in very deed such a
sin unto death, 1 John 5. I say, when I shall be instructed that the sin of
Witchcraft is not all this: Or if there be any other specifique particular
sin so like to all this, as is the sin of Witchcraft: Or to which both the
Scripture phrases and properties that Divines make of the sin against the
Holy Ghost, may be more aptly and fully applied, then shall I be convicted in
Conscience to be more remiss in my Judgment against the
Pacted-Active-Apostate Witch.

FINIS.

