A VINDICATION OF THE Oath of Allegiance IN ANSWER TO A Paper dispersed by Mr
Sam: Eaton, pretending to prove the Oath of Allegiance void, and non-obliging.

Wherein his POSITJONS Against it are Examined and Confuted.

By the Author of the Exercitation concerning Usurped Powers.

PROVE. 20.25. It is a snare to a man after Vows to make enquiry.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

Mr Eaton's Positions against the Oath of Allegiance.
POSITION. I.
EVery Oath, to make it lawful and warrantable, ought to be taken in Judgment
and Righteousness, Jerem. 4.2. The Oath then of Allegiance, that it may be in
Righteousness and Judgment, must be

First, Conditional, not Absolute; mutual, not single; taken by both parties,
not by one only; by the Ruler or Governor, not alone by the Ruled; by the
Prince, as well as by the Subject.

Reas. It is against the Ground and Reason of the Primitive Institution of
Government, which is the good of the Subject, that there should be any Oath to
bind the Subject absolutely, whether the Prince or Governor rule for the
Subjects good or not: Therefore such an Oath cannot be taken by the Subject in
Judgment or Righteousness; Therefore such an Oath is not lawful. So again, it
is against Equity and Reason, and against the good of the Subject, That he
should be further or longer bound to the Prince or Ruler to submit to him, then
the Prince or Ruler is bound to the Subject to rule well, and administer
Justice rightly: If therefore the Obligation be not mutual, but single, it is
not lawful.

Consequence. Then if the Oath of Allegiance, taken to the late King, were in
Judgment and Righteousness, and so lawful, the King was, or ought to have been,
as strongly bound to all the Subjects by Oath, as any of them to him: Then if
he break his Oath, all the Subjects are absolved if they will: Then at what
time the King levied War against his Subjects, they were discharged by that
breach of Oath in him of their Allegiance, else the whole Parliament and
Parliamentary party were both perjured persons, so many of them as have taken
this Oath; and are Rebels, that have taken up Arms against the King.

Secondly, Nor to His Heirs.

Reas. Because who knows (as Solomon says, Eccles. 2.19.) whether the Heir
will be a wise man, or a fool? a just, or righteous man? or a wicked man, and
Tyrant? Now if no man know this, then it is not an Oath in Judgment, if any man
swear Allegiance to an Heir, nor is it a righteous Oath; for the Subject may
bind himself to his own hurt, yea ruin and destruction.

Conseq. Then the Oath of Allegiance was, in that branch of it that respected
Heirs, an unlawful Oath: for who knows what any of the late Kings posterity
might have proved? whether they would have upheld Religion, or changed it?
whether they would have upheld the Liberty and Property of the Subject, or
subverted it? We know what their education was, who then could take an Oath in
Righteousness and Judgment in reference to them? It is good to know first, and
swear afterward.

Thirdly, Nor to any one kind of Government, Monarchical, or any other, to
uphold and continue it in a constant way, without changing of it.

Reas. Because though civil Government in general be an Ordinance of God,
tending to man's good, therefore to reject it would be sinful; yet this or that
kind of Government is not an Ordinance of God, but an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet.
2.13. and if an Ordinance of man, then man may change it, for his own greater
good and benefit; and must change it, when he has proved any kind of
government inconvenient and hurtful: Then to swear not to change it, is sinful,
and in Righteousness and in Judgment may not be done; for all kinds of
Government are not equally good, nor are they equally suitable to all people:
and experience makes persons wise, to discern what is better, and what is
worse, for themselves; and therefore an Oath to uphold any one kind of
Government longer then it continues to be most safe and profitable, is unlawful.

Consequ. Then the Oath of Allegiance, serving to uphold Kingly Government
against all others, was an unlawful Oath; for who knows not what a plague this
kind of Government has been to this Nation? and who knows not that the most
of our Kings have been Tyrants? and who knows not what a Blessing the Change of
Government has brought to the united Provinces?

Object. But suppose there was some Unlawfulness in the taking of such Oaths,
yet is there not a necessity of keeping them, being taken?

Answ. If that Oath, taken against the life of one man by Herod, because
unrighteous and cruel, was not only sinfully taken, but more sinfully kept:
then such Oaths of Allegiance which are absolute, and not conditional, which
are single, and not mutual, which are to Heirs, whether wise men, or fools,
whether of just men, or Tyrants, which are to uphold Monarchy, the woeful fruits
whereof, though they have been long tasted and felt by this Nation, seeing they
are dangerous, and may prove (as often they have done) destructive to the lives
of many men, they are not only unlawful to be taken, but unlawful to be kept.

POSIT. II. Suppose the Oath of Allegiance to be a Lawful Oath, yet the Subject
is now absolved from it by those that have Power to absolve from it.
Reas. Because the Representative of the People, which in Reason are the
Supreme Power of the Nation, imposed this Oath upon the Subject by an Act made
in Parliament, by which they obliged the Subject to Allegiance to the King then
in being, and to his Heirs: And this Act done by their Representatives, was
their own Voluntary Act, to which they were not obliged by any Law of God or
Nature: for there is no Rule requiring them to accept of such a person to be
their Prince, and his Heirs after him, and to swear Allegiance to him and them:
but this was the Subjects free Act in their Representatives; Therefore if the
Representatives take away this Act, and repeal it, they thereby set the
Subjects at liberty from such Allegiance, and from their Oath by which they are
bound unto it: Abraham that imposed the Oath upon his servant, might acquit him
of it, because not bound by any Rule from God, but obliged by Abraham only.

Consequence. This Present Parliament having taken away that Oath of Allegiance
which which was enacted to be imposed, there remains no more Conscience of it
to such who have taken it: But then it will come to this. Whether the
Parliament be the Supreme Power: Whether the Representative of the People be
the Parliament: Whether the present Representatives, that now sit in
Parliament, be the Representatives of the People?

To the first, I say, it is evident that the Norman Kings, coming in by
Conquest, had never any true Right to the Crown of England, but what the
Parliament gave them: Then the Power of the Parliament was greater then theirs,
because that Power that is the cause of Power, is greater then that Power that
is the effect of Power. Secondly, The Power of the Parliament is the Power of
the People: Now in Reason the Power of the People is the Supreme Power, because
thence, as from the root, all Power first sprung and proceeded.

To the second, I say, if the Parliaments Power be the Peoples Power, and the
Supreme Power; Then the Representatives, or the People, are the Parliament, and
none else: for the Representatives are the People in them, and there is the
root of Power; therefore they are the Parliament.

To the third, I say, That the present Representatives, that now sit in
Parliament, are, first, all of them chosen by the People, therefore of right
they sit in Parliament. Secondly, The present Representatives are all that are
left to sit in Parliament: for the most of the rest have deserted their Trust
without any force upon them: For though some were secluded and secured, yet the
rest were not at all interrupted, but have voluntarily departed from the House.
Thirdly, The Representatives, that remained and continued to sit in Parliament,
were always, when fewest, and still are, above the number allowed of by Law,
and therefore are a Parliament. There is one Objection that may be urged
against the Parliament absolving men from their Allegiance to the Kings heirs,
and against their abolishing Kingly Government.

Object. It may be said, That Kings have the same Rights to their Kingdoms,
Crowns, and Revenues, as others have to their Manors and Demains.

Answ. Such Right as Kings have had, they never justly came by it, but by force
and flattery have obtained it, and have usurped upon the birthright of the
People, to whom it belongs to choose them that must rule over them; and
Kingdoms, with their appurtenances thereto, were never intended for particular
men's advancement, to lift up such Families in glory and greatness, or that the
Hereditary Right of any should be in them: but Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Virtue was to lift up men unto them; and crowns and revenu's were to encourage
them in acting in such places; and men that were so qualified, were to be Heirs
and Successors, set up by the People after them; and the People themselves, nor
their Representatives, could neither give, nor sell away this privilege from
their posterity, in which the welfare of the People is so mainly concerned, and
without which a People are given up, and sold to ruin. This cannot be said of
Manors and Demains, which are things fall under Commutative Justice, and are
things vendible, and wherein particular men are concerned, and not the
Commonwealth.

FINIS.
An Answer to a Paper pretending to prove the Oath of Allegigiance void, and
non-obliging: Containing two Positions, the substance whereof is repeated in
the process of this Answer.
THe drift of the first Position, and the prosecution thereof (with which I
begin) is to show the said oath to have bin unlawful and unwarrantable in the
taking of it, and so void in the fact or making.

First, I shall premise, for the clearing partly of what follows, That an Oath
may be unlawful Dr Sandos. de Juram oblig. proel. 2. sect. 14.
: 1. Either in regard of the matter, or thing sworn, as if a man swear to do
any impossible or sinful act. 2. Or in the manner or circumstances of swearing,
as if a man swear unadvisedly, or with a false intention, or otherwise unduly
for manner. The former way of unlawfulness makes an Oath void in the taking,
but not the latter. So that though a man swear an Oath (in some sort) not in
truth, that is, not intending to be tied to, or to keep it; or not in judgment,
that is, not con^iderately enough; yet if the Oath be in Righteousness, that
is, of a just and lawful matter or thing, it is of force, otherwise no Oath
could bind in foro externo, or be of any use for confirmation; for who can
discern with what mind another man swears? Again, this evidently appears by
the validity of that unadvised Oath of the Princes to the Gibeonites, Josh.
9.15, 18, 19. 2 Samuel 21.2. and of that Oath of Zedekiah and his people to
Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chro. 36.13. Ezekiel. 17.13, 21, 23. which they entered into
treacherously, Anotat. of Divines, and Dioda:. on. Hos. 10.4.
Hos. 10.4.

Secondly, I observe, what a gross imputation the first Position lays upon
the King and Parliament, that framed and ordained the Oath of Allegiance, and
all other Parliaments since, that have Conscience, and the Successive Houses of
Commons that have sworn it, with those multitudes of Magistrates, Ministers,
and of other professions in the Kingdom, that have taken, and still hold
themselves bound by it (having had all the while so much Divine and Gospel
Light shining forth to, and in them) as if they had published, pressed, taken,
and justified (as against the Papists by writing) an Oath in the matter of it
unjust and sinful: This man had need bring clear Reasons for what he here thus
charge upon so many WORTHIES for Place, Piety, and Judgment; and declare
them more publicly then by a PRIVATE PAPER, that he may call to repentance
the whole Nation that is (as he supposes) involved in this impiety of an
unlawful Oath. But let us first by the trial of his Reasons, see whether he
has not more need to repent of this his charge.

His general exception against the lawfulness of the Oath, is: That it is not
according to the rule, Jer. 4.2. in judgment and in righteousness. Were it
defective in judgment, that is, in deliberatenesse of taking, that would not
be (as I have said) a ground to invalidate its obligation ipso facto, seeing it
were but a failing in the manner, not a corruptnesse in the matter; a fault in
the person swearing, not in the Oath sworn; and in the person a defect
internal, or of the mind, not externally visible in the Act, and to be
presumed to be found only in some persons swearing, not in all: That part
therefore of the Allegation, were it true, might have been left out, and as
often as it is brought in to prove the Oath unlawful, so as not to bind, it
adds no strength to the conclusion: But to descend to his particulars.

1. To manifest the Oaths disagreement with the said rule of Jeremiah, his
first particular exception is, That it ought to have been conditional, not
absolute; mutual, not single; his argument in effect runs thus: That it may be
in judgment and righteousness it must be conditional, not absolute, mutual,
or taken both by Ruler and ruled, not single, or taken only by one party, but
this Oath is not so: Ergo,

That the Reader may understand us both, and I may more clearly pass on in my
Answer, I must interpose a distinction or two upon the terms.

First, says he, the Oath must be conditional, not absolute: First, I
conceive the words conditional, and absolute, may be taken,

1. Either in reference to the thing sworn, which is Obedience or Allegiance
to the King; thus the Oath must be conditional, not absolute, that is, the
obedience which we bind our selves to, must be with limitation and condition,
restraining it (as all obedience to men in any relation is to be) to just,
honest, lawful things, or so as to consist with our obedience to God, not
absolute or illimited in that sense.

2. Or in reference to the tie or obligation of the Oath, as the qualification
thereof: and so I say, it may be absolute, and must not of necessity be
conditional, that is, the subordinate and limited obedience, which is due to
the Prince or Magistrate, I may swear unto absolutely, or without any special
condition annexed to my Engagement. Special condition I say, for I must once
again distinguish, to wit, of conditions.

1. Some are general, and such as no promissary Oath that is lawful can be
without; those are, I think, all of them reduced to these two heads: namely,
that the thing sworn be honest and possible; these conditions are presupposed,
and not wont to be expressed, and notwithstanding the including of them an Oath
may be said to be absolute.

2. Others are special and proper conditions, which are ingredients in some
Oaths, the which (by reason of them) termed conditional; they are usually
either somewhat that is contingent, as when a Merchant covenants, and swears to
give a hundred pounds to another man, or to a public use, if his ship (that is
gone to Sea) return home safe with her Merchandise, or that which is
arbitrary, or in the choice of man's will, his (commonly) to whom the Oath is
engaged, as if a Master covenant and swear to maintain his servant with meat,
drink and such wages, if he be a true and diligent servant to him: It is not
the former, but this latter conditionality which he requires in the Oath of
Allegiance, to wit, that the Subject be only bound to his duty of Allegiance,
if, and so long as the Prince observes his duty of Government inviolate; and
this in truth is not in that Oath, nor is it necessary to make the Oath
lawful. The Major therefore of this Oath-impugners Syllogism I deny in that
first part of it, viz. It must be conditional, not absolute: To make good my
denial, first, I will ananswer what he says to prove it. Secondly, bring in
my reasons against it, and leave the Reader to judge betwixt us.

1. All that he says for proof of that assertion, is this: It is aagainst the
ground and reason of the Primitive institution of Government, which is the good
of the Subject, that there should be any Oath to bind him absolutely, whether
the Prince rule for the Subjects good or not. This were something if it were
proved, but the Reader is left either to take it upon his word, or to remain
unsatisfied both of it, and the conclusion which depends upon it; if he like to
do neither, let him try whether I can satisfy him to the contrary.

1. The Parliament that enacted this Oath, and all subsequent Parliaments who
were entrusted with, and most able (in all probability) to judge what would be
for the Subjects good, and who (without all controversy) were more sufficient
and competent Judges thereof then this man, have adjudged it not against, but
for the Subjects good.

2. It has consisted with the public good (yea contributed to it, or else the
Papists would not have so opposed it) from the time it was first set forth,
until now, in impartial men's judgments, and no complaint has been at all
heard against it from the Kingdom, nor scarcely if at all from particular men,
till within these few days, what the suppressing of it on the other hand will
tend to, a little time may fully enough manifest.

3. A thing may be said to be against the peoples good in two very far
different senses: 1. Either in it self of its own nature or simply considered:
of this sort are injustice, impunity of offenses, sedition, conspiracy, hostile
invasion, and the like; such things are in their own nature opposed to the
public good. 2. Or accidentally and contingently, thus any thing almost that
falls under a political consideration, and comes under the deliberation of the
Lawgivers, though lawful in it self, and for the present probably, yea, or
necessarily good for a Commonwealth, may prove in the event somewhat
incommodious and hurtful. There is a goodness of the end, which is one and
the same in all States and Governments, viz. the happiness of the Community,
and this is intended, not deliberated on, or chosen by the Lawgivers: Ac
deliberamus quidem non de finibus sed de it is quae referuntur ad sines. Aristot.
Eth. l. 3. c. 3.
And there is a goodness of the means tending to that end, and this is
variable in relation to times and people; that may be good in the nature of a
means for one people, or time, that is not so for another. Est enim genus
hominum natura vary comparatum atque affectum, aliud servile, aliud colendis
regibus accommodatum; aliud Democraticum and populare; atque horum generum suum
cuique est ac distinctum commodum. Aristot Polit. l. 3. c 12. number. 112. Itaque
manifestum est ejusdem disciplinae esse considerare, non solum quae sit, and
qualis optima Respublica, cujus status si nulla vis obstiterit, maxim
desideretur, and optetur; sed etiam, quae cuique congrua and consontanca est,
permulti enim optimam consequi nequeunt, quare neque Legislator, neque is qui
vere civilis habeatur, ignorare debet quae respub. tam absolute perfecta sit,
tum pro statu rerum praesentium maxim laudanda, tum denique quae pro
condition aliqua non sit improbanda. Idem lib. 4. cap. 1 number. 2. Itaque
cognoscendae erant rerum publicarum species, ac differentiae, and quot modis
inter se commisceantur, cumque hac eadem prudentia optimarum legum scientia and
unicuique Reipub. convenientium conjurgenda est, ad respublicas enim leges sunt
accomodauda non autem ad leges res ipsa publicae. Idem eodem Number. 6.27.
It is the means and its goodness which falls under the consultation of the
Legislators, and because of the uncertainty thereof, they are occasioned often
to change their advisements and Laws: But by reason that in things which
approach near the foundation, or do constitute it, changes are very perilous
in a State, and in those things it is better to bear an inconveniency, then run
the hazard of an innovation; therefore it has been the honest and necessary
wisdom of most States to settle them by a firmer Sanction then they use in
other things, and to ordain a kind of immutability in them, and consequently
to ratify them by Oaths, foreseeing that no inconvenience in the Constitution
of a Government, in it self lawful and eligible, can match the mischief of an
alteration; and therefore that the uncertain danger of that is rather to be
chosen, then the inevitable miseries of this: Such things as may by reason of
their changeable nature prove in the issue somewhat disadvantagious, may yet,
if for the present good, and probably hopeful so to continue, be sworn to
absolutely, as in voluntary Promises, Leagues and Contracts, both public and
private, among all Nations has been the practice, and by good
Scripture-presidents it is justified, Genes. 47.31. Exodus 13.19. Josh.
9.15.14.9. Judge. 21.5.18.15.12.13. 1 Samuel 14.24.19.6.20.12.17. 1 King. 1.13.29.
2 Samuel 29.23.
and the reason is, because if any future prejudice do redound, it can be (the
obligation of the Oath remaining) at the worst, but in outward incommodity, the
which is compensated by the avoiding of a greater evil, which the leaving of
the matter free and unsecured would more certainly breed and bring. To apply
all this to the case in hand: If any Impeachment of the Subjects good can be
supposed to result out of his swearing to his Prince absolutely, whether he
rule well or no, it is but accidental, and such as it is, it is overballanced
with a greater mischief which would accrue by leaving the Subjects uningaged:
for the shunning of which the lesser evil, to wit, the being bound to a King,
though he should prove a bad Governor, is to be chosen; for that, in
comparison of a greater evil, has the consideration of good, and is so
eligible: It is a less evil for a people to be bound to a Prince that
possibly may prove bad, then to be so loose, as to be at the liberty to cast
him off when they shall judge him to rule ill, that is, when they please; the
former does not so nearly and probably tend to the Subjects hurt as does the
latter: For, first, the Prince may prove just and virtuous. Secondly, the
Subject is only bound by his Allegiance to legal obedience, which obedience
(be the Prince never so bad) can do the people no harm. Thirdly, in his
lawless Acts there may be a remedy (as the punishment or resistance of his bad
instruments by the Parliament, without whom though he may will unjust things,
yet he cannot execute them) and yet his Government be continued. Fourthly, and
suppose the case that there be no remedy, as when he has got a party stronger
then can be resisted, or subjected to punishment, then to cast off his power
and depose him (suppose it lawful to do) will be no relief, his strength will
command subjection. Fifthly, the miscarriages of a Prince ordinarily (unless it
come to public contestation, wherein the Subjects sworn and unsworne, if
their cause be just, and the Parliament authorize their standing up, are in the
same capacity of resistance) extend but to the detriment of some particular
persons, rarely does any Nero-like, seek the destruction of the whole. But on
the other hand, set the people free to shake off the reins of their present
Government, when they shall think it unequal, and first, you destroy the
nature of Government, as will afterward be showed. 2. You expose the people to
an immediate loss of the very use and enjoyment of any Government, the power
of mobility and change being sure to invite all ill disposed persons
immediately to put that power in ure, and hurrie all [if they may prevaile]
into confusion. In short, a bad Government is better then none; it is more
tolerable for a people that one or a few, then that every man do that which is
right in his own eyes. To be bound to Allegiance, may lay the people open to
the former; to be loose, will precipitate them into the later: The former
inconvenience cannot be so universally extensive, speedily destructive, and
remediless, or unresistible, as the later.

2. The later thing I premised, is to give my Reasons for the contradictory to
his major Proposition in that first part, It must be conditional, not
absolute: Against which I say, the Oath of Allegiance may be absolute or
unconditionall, in the sense before given, and for this Assertion I render
these Reasons:

1. Were there no Oath, the limited obedience which is due to Princes and
Magistrates is due to them absolutely, that is, whether they rule well or no,
and that which is absolutely due, may be absolutely sworn; the former
Proposition I ground thus.

1. The Precept of obedience to Civil Governors, is without any condition or
reserve of a disingagement of the Subject in case of the Governors
miscarriage, read the fifth Commandment, and those other Injunctions, Romans
13.1.2. etc. Tit. 3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13. etc.

2. God commands his people to be subject to Heathen Princes, and the most
absolute and oppressive tyrants that likely ever have been, Ier. 27.12. Mat.
22.21. 1 Pet. 2.13. I speak not here of Tyrants in regard of Title, or Right,
that is, Usurpers; but of Tyrants whose title is just, but their Government
unjust and oppressive.

3. Servants are to be subjects to their Masters, not only that are good and
gentle, but those that are froward, that do them wrong, and from whom they
suffer for doing well, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20. and by analogy Subjects are tied in
the same terms to their Governors.

4. David would not stretch out his hand against Saul upon this ground, for
that he was his Master the King of Israel, and the Lords Anointed, though he
was then in actual, violent, and unjust pursuit his life, 1 Samuel 24.5. etc.
26.9. etc.

5. Otherwise you leave no place for passive obedience to pray for, and
patience toward Magistrates in case of their wrong doing, and your innocence,
which yet is generally acknowledged to be a duty Ames. medulla Theol. l. 1. c.
17. p. 57. Vrsin. Catech. pa. 3. qu. 104.
.

6. Else you dissolve all Magistracy, it will be impossible in man's corrupt
estate to retain or continue any, in as much as no man, or men, can in the vast
multitude, and difficulty of magistraticall affairs avoid offending every day,
2 Samuel 23.3, 5.

7. The Doctrine of Orthodox Protestant Divines generally is, that obedience is
due (in lawful things) to the most degenerate, oppressing, and tyrannical
Princes Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. S. 24, 25. etc. P. Martyr loc: C. clas. 4.
C. 2. S. 12. 18. 19. Alsted. Theol. case 17. Reg. 8. Mr. Perkins cases of
Gonsc. l. 3. c. 6. s. 1. Bucan. Instit. Theol. loc. 49. quaest. 21. Synops puc.
Theol. disp. 50. These. 18.27. Scharp. symphon. Epoch. 5. Quaest. 44. 45.
.

2. We find Oaths of Allegiance in Scripture, sworn to Princes without any
conditions inserted, Judge. 11.9, 10. 2 Kings 11.4. 2 Chronicles. 36.13. Ezekiel. 17.13.
and Nehem. 10.29. their Oath was to observe all the Commandments of the Lord,
whereof the fifth Commandment, with application to their present and future
Magistrates, was one.

3. It is a thing within our power to settle our allegiance absolutely, as well
as it is within a man's power to dispose of himself to service so, whether his
Master prove good, or evil, or as it is in a man or woman's power to bestow
themselves in marriage, whether the mate be observant of duty or no.

4. A Conditional Oath is not consistent with a necessary duty; obedience to
magistrates is not less arbitrary, but commanded, and that though they be bad,
but now the duty being necessary, if you would have it sworn with a proviso of
the Rulers performing his duty, you nullify the end of an Oath, which is to
confirm, put out of doubt, and give security of what is due. A thing sworn may
become due, either by the Rule of Equity, or by a voluntary Covenant: that
which is due the later way, if the Covenant be conditional; the Oath that is
to ratify it, may be also so far conditional, but what is due in the former
kind, to wit, by absolute and unalterable rule, or precept of Justice, cannot
be sworn to conditionally; for that would be no ratification to it, nay it
would be a debilitating, and rendering more insecure of that which was simply
due without an oath, a condition being put into your Oath being a very probable
medium to persuade the swearer that he is no otherways bound to the things
sworn then upon that condition, which being broken by the party sworn to, he
will easily conceive himself altogether free: thus the absolute Rule will
receive impeachment, and not strength in it is obligation by the conditional
Oath: such an Oath therefore is in it is end inconsistent with it.

2. I come to the lrtter part of his Major which exacteth, That the Oath be
mutual, or taken both by Ruler, and Ruled; not single, or taken only by the
ruled. Some explanation of his terms, more then is here he might have used: for
lack whereof I shall as I go observe some difference of sense appliable to his
words, and so express how I deny this branch of his position, and why.

1. His words sound, as if he would have the same Oath to be taken mutually
both by Prince and Subjects, which (if he remember that the Oath spoken of, is
the oath of a Subjects Allegiance, obedience, or subjection to be yielded to
his Sovereign, and that the King is the person sworn to) he will not, cannot I
suppose own to be his sense.

2. But the apter sense, and that which I suppose was in his intention, is,
that the Ruler and Subject should each swear to his respective duty; the Prince
that he will command and govern lawfully, the Subject that he will perform all
lawful homage, and obedience: and to this I say, although it be true it in
fact, in our case, that the King has sworn his duty on his part, as well as
the Subject does in this oath swear his, yet the Proposition is false in this,
and it cannot be said, that thus it universally ought of necessity to be
betwixt every Prince and his Subjects, much less can it hold that unless it
be thus mutual, the Subjects oath is not in righteousness according to Ier.
4.2. but that for want of this mutuality it it is null. for,

1. We read of many undoubtedly righteous Oaths in Scripture undertaken in
Covenants betwixt man and man, wherein one party only swears, and not both
mutually Genesis 24.2.47 31. Exodus 13.19. Josh. 2.12.9.15.14.9 Judge. 15.12. 1 Samuel
19.6. 1 Kings 1.13.29.51. 2 Samuel 19.23. Noh. 5.12. Ier. 38 10.
.

2. We find in Scripture Oaths of Allegiance taken by Subjects to their Rulers,
without the reciprocal swearing of the Rulers to them 2 Reg. 11.4. Judge. 11
10. Chron. 36.13. Ezekiel. 17.3.
; such was that engagement, Josh. 1.16, 17, 18.

3. Oaths are never to be taken but necessarily, that is, when not only the
matter is of great weight, but it cannot otherwise be sufficiently confirmed or
assured then by Oath D. Sanders. de Iuram. ob. pral. 7. S. 12. Tholos. syntag.
dur. 1.50. c. 3.
, but in solemn humane Covenants it comes to pass that sometimes the
performance lies only on one party, the other is to receive advantage, but not
to do any thing; sometimes the danger of breach lies only or more on one part
then on another, sometimes there is other satisfactory assurance given besides
swearing, and sometimes there is other remedy, if there should be a breach then
the forfeiture of an Oath: in such and other cases an Oath on the one party may
not need, and consequently is not be exacted.

4 But suppose the case that it be as necessary for security that the King
swear to the people, as that they take an Oath to him, yet if through over
much credulity, or otherwise it be that the people do swear, and not the
Prince, this cannot be the least color for the nullifying of the Peoples Oath;
for whether the King swear or no, that which makes the Oath obliging is, that
in a just and possible matter promised, God is invocated as a witness of the
promise.

3. There is another sense of mutual swearing more strict then the former, and
that is, when not only two parties swear to each other their respective parts,
but they both swear with a mutual respect, that is, the obligation of the one
party has a respect to, and a dependence on the performance of the other
party; as when one man swears to another to give him so much money for his
land, that other swears to conveigh to him his land for so much money: in this
kind a breach of the one is a releasement to the other. And here that Adage
holds good, Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem;
As also that Rule of the Law, Frustra quis fidem postulat sibi serv^i ab eo,
cui fidem a se praestitam servare recusat: But this sense (...)ll swearing
cannot come in to be meant in our case: For, (...) an oath is plainly
conditional, the one party swears not (...) the other absolutely and clearly
so much money, but to give him so much for his land: the having of the land
then is an express condition of his Oath, but the Oath of the Subjects
Allegiance is granted to be absolute, and is as such disputed against by him
here, and I have above proved an Oath of Allegiance cannot be conditional. 2.
The Kings Oath is also absolute, and binds without dependence on the Subjects
Loyalty, no man will say (I think) that the King is discharged from ruling
justly, and may become an absolute Tyrant, if his Subjects exceed the bounds,
or fail of the bonds of their oath, or duty; nay, if the Subject transgress
his duty, the King is bound by his oath to cause justice according to the law
and tenor of his oath to be done, and cannot otherwise escape violation of his
oath. 3. Such mutual oaths are entered into by both parties at the same time,
and have their mutual respects expressed, but neither does the King and
Subjects swear to each other at the same time; neither is there any such
mutual respect mentioned, or so much as implied in either of their oaths. 4.
Such mutually respective oaths have only place in matters arbitrary, or that
are in men's choice to do, or not to do until they bind themselves by Covenant,
but such are not the relative duties of Kings and Subjects, there being a
divine Law obliging each to the duties of their offices before they swear.

We see no sense imaginable of mutual nor single will fit this man's turn, but
it will make his Proposition false, either predicated of the Oath of Allegiance
at all, so does the first and third acception aforementioned, or if predicated
with that modus of a necesse est, so does the third: But let us hear his
Reasons for this clause of his major, whatever be the sense of it.

It is (says he) against equity and reason, and the good of the Subject, that
he should be further or longer bound to the Prince, to submit to him, then the
Prince is bound to the Subject to rule well, and administer Justice rightly.
Grant all this, and it will no way follow: therefore the Oath of Allegiance to
make it righteous must be mutual, in any sense; for the Prince may be bound,
and that as long to his part, as the Subject is to his, (and so he is, and it
is impossible to be otherwise; for Prince and Subject, his tie to rule in
justice, and his to obey in just things, are relatives, and do infer
necessarily each other) to wit, by the tie of Scripture, conscience, and
positive Laws, and yet not be sworn at all. His major being thus (I hope)
fully refuted, I need not to take notice of his consequences, as he calls them,
but in a word I shall touch on them.

The first is nothing but a hypotheticall repetition of some part of the major
Proposition, which I have been so long in disproving: If the Oath of Allegiance
were in judgment and righteousness, the King was as strongly bound to the
Subjects as any of them to him; this therefore I pass by, as the same that was
said before, and no consequence from it.

The second is, Then if he break his Oath, all the Subjests are absolved if
they will. This consequence I deny; I have I think, fully made it clear
before, that the Oath of Allegiance taken by the Subject is absolute, not
depending upon any thing to be performed by the King, whether sworn or not
sworn; and that it could not have been otherwise: and though the King and
people have each sworn their duties mutually, See D. Sanders. de Iuram. oblig.
Prael. 4. S 8.
yet not with a mutual respect, by virtue whereof a breach on one side might
be a discharge on the other, and that neither the tenor of their Oaths hold
forth any such thing, neither is the matter of them capable thereof, being
necessary, not arbitrary.

The third is, Then at what time the King levied war against his Subjects, they
were discharged by that breach of Oath in him of their Allegiance. This is a
consequence of the former consequence, and stands or falls with it; that
therefore being answered and disproved, this vanishes.

The fourth thing is no consequence, but a reason of the two last consequences,
and in method of arguing is therefore an antecedent to prove them, it is thus;
ellse the whole Parliament and their party were perjured persons so many of
them as have taken this Oath, and are Rebels in taking up Arms against the
King.

1. If their taking up Arms against the King (as he terms it) were rebellion,
their absolution from their Oaths (were it so indeed) by the Kings breach of
his could not unmake, or make it no rebellion; for the debt of obedience is
existent in the Subject before any oath-taking, and is not founded on swearing,
but only confirmed by it, and therefore survives after the pretended
dissolution of it; and consequently makes that taking up arms which would have
been (if the Oath had not been (as he supposes) nullified) rebellion
nevertheless.

2. We must therefore say, (as the Parliamentarian party has believed,
declared, and in many Treatises in print maintained all along the late wars)
that the Arms of the Parliament were not against any branch of the Subjects
Allegiance, or the Oath for it, (which they professed still to owe, persist in,
yea, and in the Act of their Arms-bearing covenanted to yield and maintain) but
concordant with the same. In as much as they enterprized not against the Kings
Person, his State or Government, they went not against his Majesty, his Heirs,
or Successors, they joined not against his Crown and dignity, the rights
whereof, and the bounds of the Subjects obedience are prefixed by the Laws of
the Realm: the ultimate interpretation whereof is in the Parliament, which
declared their arms to be for, and agreeable to the Laws.

The King as King acts only by his Court, and Laws, what he does besides or
against these is the man's, not the Kings acting, what is done by Order of the
Courts of Justice, and by virtue of the Laws, is done (though against his
personal presence or commands) yet for the King, his Crown and dignity.

2. His next exception against the Oath of Allegiance is, That it is an
unlawful oath, in that it is sworn to the Kings Heirs; his reason for this
Exception proceeds thus, Who knows (as Eccl. 2.19.) whether he will be a wise
man, or a fool, a just, or a wicked man, and tyrant? now if no man know this,
then to swear to an Heir, is not an Oath in judgment, nor is it righteous: for
the Subject may bind himself to his own hurt, yea ruin. Consequence. Then the
Oath of Allegiance was in that branch, that respected Heirs, an unlawful Oath,
etc. I admit of the Antecedent, but utterly deny the Consequence. For the whole
Consequence I answer.

1. This inference is directly contrary to that which Solomon in the place
cited, Eccles. 2.19. makes from the words: Solomon's is, yet shall he have rule
over all my labors wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self
wise under the Sun, this man's inference is (in effect) because no man knows
whether he will be a wise man, or a fool, therefore he shall not have Rule,
etc. that is, we must not engage before hand that he shall rule, while it is
uncertain what he will prove: though Solomon says notwithstanding that is
uncertain, yet he shall have Rule, and so Rehoboam (none of the wisest Princes)
had Rule over Solomon's labor, yet they that cleaved to him, did much better
then they that revolted from him, and I suppose this gentleman dare not say,
that an Oath of Allegiance to Solomon and his seed, or to Rehoboam himself
after the manifestation of his weakness was unlawful.

2. The same reason (if it held) would lie against any Oath or Engagement to
any Rulers, in being whatsoever they are, yea against the new Engagement to the
present Government: for say that Rulers be come to maturity, and for time past
and present have given proof that they are wise and (morally) just (which yet
in some cases is not evident) yet who knows what they may hereafter be.

The Scripture supposes, that not only a just Father may have a wicked son,
but a righteous man (in profession and external carriage) may turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, Ezekiel. 18.14. Neroes Quinquennium of
reigning well is generally known, the good beginnings of Ioash and Ozziah, 2 Chronicles. 23, 24. and 26. and thereafter degeneracies are sufficient instances of
the lubricity of men in authority. Yea it is well known how fearfully Solomon
himself with Asa, 1 Kings 11. 2 Chronicles. 16. and others fell in diverse
particulars of a gross nature, if we must first know, and swear afterward, we
must naver swear promissarily.

3. This consequence (were it of force) would equally condemn in general all
promissary oaths, and other Covenants, and Engagements, betwixt man, and man,
for it cannot be foreseen in any what the persons contracted with will prove,
or whether the Covenant will be beneficial, or hurtful, and in particular the
Laws and Sanctions of those Nations in all ages which have settled successive
regality, or any other Government, for longer then the present possessors of
the power endure, which yet is a way, not only more generally approved and
practiced then any other of vicissicudinary Election, but a warranted by the
word of God. Israel offered a successive power to Gideon, Judge. 8.22. and God
himself instituted, and bound the people to a lineall Government in David and
his seed 2 Samuel 12.15. 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
, The patriarchal power (which was political) was successive, and could not
have been cast off at pleasure: so was the Government of the Jewish Nation, for
about a hundred years in the lineage of the Maccabees.

4. We have Scripture examples (of an uncontroverted integrity) of oaths, and
Engagements to Princes and their Heirs, and to Princes in their young, unripe
and untryed years: Take for instance that of Abraham's swearing to Abimelech
King of Gerar, his son, and sons son, 1 Chronicles. 23.29.22.29.1.22.5. and that of
David's making Solomon King in his own life time, and engaging the people to him
when he was yet young and tender, 2 King. 11.4.22. and that of Iehoiadahs and
the peoples making Joash King, and swearing to him when he was but seven years
old.

2. For the two parts of the consequence in several.

1. The Oath is not in Judgment, because no man knows what the Heir will
prove: I say, it may be in Judgment so far as a future contingency can be
deliberated on: and this may be concluded on advisedly (as morally certain)
that it is better to have the Crown settled in a line, whereby sometimes a
vicious person may be advanced, then to have it under Election at every
personal change: this has been the experimented maxim of the wisest states,
Judge. 21.7.15. Sam. 14.24.37. Josh. 9.14.16. If it were not in Judgment, this
defect makes not an oath unlawful, as to the nullifying of it, a rash Oath, if
of a lawful thing binds, as before was proved.

2. Nor is it a righteous Oath, for the Subject may bind himself to his own
hurt, yea ruin.

1. Though the Subject may not bind himself to what is necessarily, or at the
time of his swearing may appear probably to tend to his hurt, or ruin, yet he
may swear (in ending the public good) to that which is of a mutual nature,
and may in the event turn to his own hurt, and ruin; and might he not so
swear, yet having so sworn, he is bound to stand to his Oath, Psalm. 15 4.
Josh. 9.15. Ezekiel. 17.13. 1 Samuel 14.26.28. Judge. 21.5.15.18. which is
contradictory to what this man here says.

2. If the Heir should misprove, his power is bounded by the Law, and commixed
with the Parliaments: If he vary, the power of Parliament, the Laws and
Liberties of the Subject are the same. The late King confessed and declared a
remedy against Tyranny to reside in the Parliament; there may be a prevention
then of the Subjects ruin (whatever the Heir prove) if the Kingdom be
faithful to it self.

3. His third exception against the Oath as unlawlawfull, and void, is, That it
is to uphold one kind of government for continuance, and in a constant way
without changing. His argument to make good this exception, proceeds thus.

If of the several kinds of government, all are not equally good, nor suitable
to all people: And man may change the government he is under for his own
greatest good and benefit, and must change it when he has proved any kind of
government inconvenient and hurtful, and must not uphold any one kind of
government longer then it continues to be most safe and profitable; then to
swear to uphold any one government continually and constantly, and not to
change it is sinful, and in righteousness and judgment may not be done. But
of the several kinds of government all are not equally good, nor suitable to
all people, and man may change the government he is under for his own greatest
good and benefit, and must change it, when he has proved any kind of
government inconvenient and hurtful, and must not uphold any one kind of
government longer then it continues to be most safe and profitable. Ergo,

For answer hereunto,

First, I observe there is fault to be found with the whole argument, as
somewhat transgressing the rules of arguing.

1. In the consequence there is something of the error called ignoratio
Elenchi; for we swear not in the Oath of Allegiance (indefinitely or
indeterminately as his words import) to uphold one government continually, and
not to change.

First, we swear only to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors: so that
when ever they are all extinct, (which may be sooner or later, as divine
providence disposes) the Oath of it self cease and determines.

Secondly, Notwithstanding the allegiance sworn to the said persons, their
Crown and Dignity, there is power of change in the government left to the
mutual consent of both parties, to wit, the sworn to, and them swearing, as it
is in all humane contracts and oaths of this nature Alsted. Theol. cas. c. 15.
Reg. 2. D. Sanders. de Iuram. oblig. prael. 7. S. 8.
.

Secondly, In the Minor there is somewhat of the fallacy called petitio
principii, namely, that any kind of government (granted to be lawful) can
prove inconvenient and hurtful to the subjects. The Governors indeed may
prove bad and noxious, and so the government comes to be abused, but a
perniciousnesse cannot therefore be charged upon the government it self, nor
can that be a necessary ground for the change of government: if so, you will
bring in a ground for endless mutations; a change in the persons, or a
regulating of them is the apt remedy for that hurt; but the government, the
abstract or essence of the thing never can prove hurtful, because it is an
Ordinance of God for man's good, and that in specie, (as after will be showed)
and as a government it has a political goodness seated in its being, by the
unchangeable law of Nature.

Secondly, But admit the argument were not peccant in form, yet the assumption
in the main of it, which is, that man may change the government he is under for
his own greatest good, and must change it when he has proved any government
inconvenient and hurtful, and must not uphold any one government longer then
it continues most safe and profitable, I must flatly deny. What position more
anarchicall could be delivered? for the disproof I offer thus. 1. He says, man
may change the government, etc. but the Holy Ghost says, Prove. 24.21. My Son
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: He allows a change to be for greater good, but the Holy Ghost tells
us in the next Words, verse. 22. for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both. 2. If men may change for the better and must
change upon a supposed hurt, then all oaths, engagements, or promises of
obedience, allegiance, or fidelity to Magistrates are unlawful to be
undertaken, for all such bonds are in relation to a present and particular
government, the Engagers are under: and they are not for the time present or
for an instant, but for a future continuance. And there is in all such
Engagements a making over of the right which the Engagers have in the matter
covenanted, to the persons engaged to, according to that known rule, omne
promissum cadit in debitum: either then such a change to be made by the persons
under authority may not, must not be, or such engagements may not, must not, be
by them undertaken: the former imports a power and duty inherent in the
subjects to reserve in themselves a liberty to alter and to practice it when
they Judge it convenient; the latter speaks a binding out from any such deed,
and an abandoning of any such right, but the scripture is clear enough for such
engagements, Eccl. 8.2. 2 Kings 11.4. Joshua 1.16 17, 18. Iugdes 8.9.10. 2. Cr.
36.13.

3. This position not only disallowes all such engagements, but dissolves the
natural, or moral bond it self of duty, and subjection to Magistrates for to
be free to change when a man judges it best, is to be free when he will, and
that is not to be tied at all, by this means any man is disengaged from
subjection both in foro interno and externo, when he will say, he thinks the
present government not safe or profitable, or another to be better, and having
so resolved, he is absolved, he may now disobey the Commands, stand out against
the Judgments, take up arms against the Person and Authority, and be exempt
from the sword of the Magistrate: yea although he have sworn, or subscribed
allegiance, because such an Oath or promise (says this Doctor) was sinful,
not in righteousness, but I would fain have him declare what thing magistracy
and what subjection is.

4. This Doctrine will acquit, and justify all the conspiracies and treasons
that ever were enterprized against the power of the Magistrate since the World
was. Was not the conspiracy of Absalom, 2. Sam. 15 1. Kings 11.26.12.1. etc.
and that of Sheba against David, was not the Rebellion of Jeroboam against
Solomon, and Rehoboam; were not the seditions of Thendas and Judas the Gaulnite
against Caesar; Acts 5.36
were not all the Treasons against Magistracy that ever have bin, attempted for
the parties (yea for the public) greater good, as the Conspirators judged?

If it be said that not particular men or a less party are to Judge the
expediency, and take in hand the change, but the whole people. Besides that the
people under authority collectively taken have no such power (as I intend
presently to show) it may be said. 1. Seldom or never does a whole nation
under a lawful government of themselves affect or move to a change, it is the
flatterers, and deceivers of the people (...) Anst. poli^. lib. 5. c. 5.
ordinaryly that desire and mislead the people to it, 2. How the Judgment and
will of the whole body of a people should be known and declared unto Execution
before particular men act to a change of their own private judgment, to me is a
thing unimaginable.

5. This necessity of retaining a power in Subjects to chang, and of using it
for a greater good, or removal of a temporal hurt, in opposition to an Oath
sworn against, the change is directly against the Scriptures, tying men, that
swear to their own hurt not to change Psalm 15 4 Josh. 9.18.19. and condemning
those that for such ends have receded from their oaths; Ezekiel 17 13, etc: Joshua
9, 15, compared with 2 Samuel 21.2.

6. That position so much now adays insisted on of the Peoples power to depose,
abolish, and alter the power of their Governors at pleasure, which is actually
settled, and both in it self lawful, and lawfully set over them, I hold is a
gross error, some of my Reasons in short are.

First such a course (supposing the governors dissent to it all along) is no
other then that resistance of the ordinance of God, condemned Romans 13.2.

2. It is directly opposite to that subjection commanded every soul that is in
the relation of a Subject, Rom: 13.1. and that 1. Pet. 2.13.

3. If the people may do it, then it must needs be that they have a civil
power and authority over their Magistrates. Which is contrary to those
Scriptures which make the King supreme, and call the powers which the people
are subject to, the higher powers higher in relation to them, who are below and
put in subjection to them, 1. Pet. 2.12. Romans 13.1 and indeed if the people
have a power over their Magistrates to Judge, or displace them, how are they
magistrates, their superiors, and rulers, the same persons cannot be under and
over others in the same kind of order or power. If the Magistrates be under the
people, whom are they over? If the people be above the Magistrates whom are
they under?

4. The Holy Ghost commands the people to render tribute, custom, fear, honor
(not at random to a Magistracy leaving them at liberty to what they please,
but) to whom they are due, they are a debt then, which respects a determinate
object, the present Magistrate, no debtor can pay a debt by transferring it
from one to another, or giving what he owes to another besides the proprietor.

5. Magistrates are of God, his ordinance and ministers, and they are Judges
for him as his vicegerents. Romans 13.1.24. 2. Cron. 19 6. and therefore tannot
stand at the mere will of the people. God must have a hand in their removal as
he has in their admission: or else it is injurious, he removes and admits now,
not by immediate revelation (as sometimes in Israel) but by the rule of his
word executed by man; he has given a rule for the setting up of Magistrates,
but where has he given any for their deposing. 6. If it were in the peoples
power to change at pleasure their magistracy, 1. Sam. 8.6.7.8.12.17.
then how could it be such a heinous sin as it is challenged to be for the
people to reject Samuells government, and desire and move for a King?

But let us next hear what he alleges for this his assertion of mutabllity.
Though civil government (he says) in general be an ordinance of God tending
to man's good, therefore to reject it would be sinful, yet this or that kind of
government is not an ordinance of God, but an ordinance of man, 1. Pet. 2.13
and if an ordinance of man, then man may change it etc.

First Civil Government in the general cannot be said to be Gods ordinance,
and therefore unrejectable, but this, or this, or that kind of government that
is a legittimate and true species of it, must necessarily be yielded to be also
Gods Ordinance, and unrejectable, for it is a sure rule, for whatsoever is
directly and per se said of the genus, or general nature must be also said of
the species or particular kind, and again the whole nature of the genus or
general is contained in every species or kind. Quicquid oredicatur de
praedicato praedi, catur de subjecto, Hist. 1. vala bados Tota natura generis
continctur in una quae que specie.


2. The Apostle cannot be taken to speak of power in general only; and
abstractly, but must not be understood distributively of all lawful powers in
their special kind, when he says there is no power but of God; the powers
that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God. Romans 13.1.2. He that shall say of this or that kind of
lawful government, as of Monarchy, it is not of God, it is not the ordinance
of God speaks direct Contradictories to the Holy Ghost here, no Subjects
obedience to this or that government he is under could be urged upon him by
virtue of this reason, There is no power but of God etc. If this, or that kind
of government were not of God, and were not his ordinance. 3. And for his
discretive, but an ordinance of man, it is no Inference of the former,
therefore not the ordinance of God. For this, or that government is both an
ordinance of God in Paul's style, and an ordinance of man in Peter's, and you
cannot say these two apostles, speak of government two different ways, the
former in general, the latter in particular, for as I have proved Paul must
be taken of particular kinds so it is clear Peter speaks first in general,
submit your selves to every ordinance of man etc. and then in particular,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors etc. This or that
government Paul calls an ordinance of God. 1 In that it is instituted in its
special nature by God, and warranted for any people, but not commanded or
imposed (as Government in the general is) upon every nation. For it is with
goverments in relation to Nations as with callings, in Relation to Persons;
every man must have a calling, but it is distributively this, or that, or the
other, all are not necessarily to have this one. 1. Cor. 77, 17

2 In that it is invested in the particular person by God, when they are called
to the government, according to his rule, though he do not point them out
imediately by his own finger, but mediately by men, in like manner as they are
the ministers of Christ in the Church, that are called according to his
appointment, though men in the same office ordain them. And in this regard,
the Magistrates (not the government abstractly) are caled Gods ordinance Rom 13
2. compared with 3.4. Peter terms it man's ordinance, either because both the
special form of government, and the persons holding it, are chosen and so
imediaaely constituted by men. Or rather because it is conversent about humane
affairs, Beza Marlor est Divines Anotat. Diodat.
and man's benefit, not as if it were invented by, or had its original from
men, for so it is of God, as expostitors interpret and compare that place of
Peter with the other of Paul and that Peter excludes not, but takes in the
Divine authoritation to that government he treats of, is evident, in that he
wills submission to it for the Lords sake. How for his sake, if it be not his
Ordinance.

Having thus answered the premises of his syllogism and what he brings to back
the assumptions withal, his consequence or conclusion following goes to the
ground, and the lawfullnes of the oath of Allegiance remains unshaken. But as
his manner is, he amplyfied his consequence with matters altogether in
consequentiall, and independent on the premises. First he says who knows not
what a plague this kind of Government (viz. Kingly) has bin to this Nation?
and that the most of our Kings have been Tyrants? I am one that know not these
things but Judge the contrary and will he tried by the experience and voice of
this Nation. And in the mean while, I request him to try these his words, by
the scriptures following, 2. Pet. 2, 10, 11 12, Jude 8, 9, 10 and to take heed
of the verdict and Judgment therein given upon government-blasphemers.

2. Who knows not what a blessing the change of government has brought to the
United Provinces? I am sure this man knows not, neither can say (if those
Provinces excel in blessings) that they are brought by a change of their
lawful Government, considering what Solomon observed of old, concerning the
disproportion of worldly successes to men's ways: and the inevidence of the
goodness or badnes of persons, and actions if estimated by events, which every
man's experience can second.

Whether those provinces have changed or recovered their government as Hugo
Grotius conceives. Or whether they yet stand but as our Parliament did with
the late King in the first War, defending, and demanding the security of their
just privileges, with the sword in their hand, I leave him further to
consider, and I assure him this, there have been observations great store, of
Gods Judgments upon those that have rebelled against, cast off, or murdered
their lawful Governors, gathered by worthy men, Theater of Gods Judgments by
Doctor Beard, and Doctor Tailor. lib. 2. chap. 2.3.4.5.
but I never before met with any that made observation of divine Blessings upon
any of those acts.

Thus far his exceptions by way of proof of his first position, go; He in the
close makes one Objection against himself, and gives his answer to it thus.
Ob; Suppose there was some unlawfullnes, in the taking such Oaths, yet is
there not a necessity of keeping them being taken? Answer, If Herod's Oath
against the life of one man being unrighteous and cruel was sinfully taken, and
more sinfully kept, then these of allegiance which are absolute not
conditional etc. and which are to uphold Monarchy, the woeful fruits whereof
seeing they are dangerous, and may prove, as often they have done, destructive
to the lives of many men, they are not only unlawful to be taken, but to be
kept. Not granting any unlawfullnes in the taking of this Oath, (having (I
hope) made good its innocence against all that has bin said; yet suppose I had
made this objection, I would not take this answer. My reason is, he cannot
parallel Herod's oath and ours in the matter wherein HEROD'S was unlawfulll both
in the taking and keeping, what was that? it comprised as he interpreted it the
shedding Innocent blood, the massacring of a guiltless and holy person. Now
what is the matter of ours? To yield obedience in lawful things, to a lawful
power. Is it any more? and are not the matters of these two oaths, as far
unlike as light and darkness? That which he heaps up to agravate our oath to
the height of the unrighteousness of Herod is nothing but the three exception,
which all this while I have been answering, and therefore shall content my
self with what has bin said to them. Only in the close he tells us Monarchy is
dangerous, and may, as often it has, prove distructive to the lives of many
men, and therefore its unlawful to swear or keep the upholding of it. This is
nothing but what may be as truly said of any kind of government how lawful
soever: none that has bin as much practiced as it can be affirmed to have bin
less distructive, or to be less dangerous then it; but the possibility of
being, or experience of having been abused, is no valid reason why a government
may not be upheld; if it be down must all government fall? and if yet it may be
upheld, to swear to uphold it may be an oath lawful for the matter; and if it
cannot in that respect be made a crime, it deserves not to be paraleld with
Herod's oath. What parallel in point of unrighteousnes Herod keeping his oath,
and others violating theirs, his execution and theirs may have, it is not to my
purpose in hand to show.

I have done with his first position, and proceed to his second, which is this.

Suppose the Oath of Allegiance to be lawful, yet the subject is now absolved
from it by them that have power to absolve from it. This position of a power in
any to absolve from a lawful oath is new, (as far as I have read or heard)
among protestants, and has until now been accounted by Papists, the Popes and
Prelates prerogative, by us their antichristian presumption. But let us see
where and upon what ground he builds such power.

Reason. Because the Representatives of the people, which in reason are the
Supreme power, imposed this Oath by an Act in Parliament; this was the Subjects
free Act in their Representatives, no law of God, or nature obligeing them to
accept of such a person as his heirs, and to swear allegiance to them. If
therefore the representatives take away and repeal this Act (as this
Parliament has done) they thereby set the subjects at liberty from such
allegiance, and from their Oath bind^ng to it, there remains no more conscience
of it to such as have taken it, Abraham that imposed the Oath upon his Servant
might acquit him of it etc.

1 For the antecedent I shall only note. 1 he sets up a supreme power over us
by reason, not by law, or the peoples constitution, and this reason is not the
Nations, but first either his own private judgment, and if that may treat a
supreme power to him, then every other private man's reason is to set up on to
him, even when there is one already over the people he is of. 2 Or is it the
common reason that is in all men naturally, and if so, how comes it to pass
that there is such variety of kinds in supreme government, and that
Representatives have it not in all times and nations, yea that scarce they ever
had it?

2. That in citing the power that Enacted this Oath, he omits the King and
House of Lords, who in the then Parliament concurred in this Enacting and
Imposition.

3. That although the King then was rightfully and actually inthroned in the
Regal power, and Dignity, and both the Law, and the Oath of Supremacy obliged
the people to him and his heirs, yet he dares to say no Law of God or Nature
obliged them to accept of such a person and his heirs, is not the 5th.
Commandment the Law of God and Nature, and those precepts. Romans 13.1. Tit.
3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13. repetitions, and divine ratifications thereof: and does not
that Law command every people and person allegiance to their particular lawful
Governors, and was not the King in being, his heirs in capacity, and
designation such?

2. But for the consequence there is no truth in it nor color of reason, or
inference from the Antecedent for it. Besides, that the act cannot (for ought
appears to me) be repealed but by the same power that made it; and the
allegiance sworn was not founded upon the Act or Oath, but due and paid before
them both. The Oath in its own words terms it self a recognition and
acknowledgment, and the first words of it are; I. A. B. truly and sincerely
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in my Conscience before God and the
World, that King James is lawful King of this Realm. etc. Suppose the
Representatives to be the supreme power, that the Imposing of this Oath was
their sole act, and the Subjects in them, and that they did it voluntarily or
unobliged to it: does it thence follow, the Representatives repealing that act
the subjects that upon their Enacting swore it, are now absolved from their
allegiance, and from the Oath.

1. They that have power to impose an Oath were never said (in any Divinity
extant) to have power eo ipso to absolve from it, when the imposers are also
the party sworn to, there it is granted (both by Protestants and Papists
Doctor Sanders. de Juram. oblig. prael 7, S. 8. Thol^s. Sir. tag. Jur^, lib.
50. cap. 12.
) they have so far as concerns themselves power to release from the Oath,
not because they are not the Imposers, but because they are the party sworn to,
for omnis qui promissit facit jus alteri, cui est facta promissio, the right of
the thing sworn is theirs to whom the Oath is made, therefore they may release
from it, and this is the true ground of that power he supposes in Abraham to
acquit his servant, being the imposer of his oath (if that was not rather the
interpretation then relaxation of the oath) but where the imposers are a third
party from the persons swearing, and sworn to, there they have no claim of
power of relaxation. And thus the case is here, the Representatives (as he
says) impose the oath, which is sworn to the King, and bind in allegiance to
him. If they that impose an oath may release from it, then may any Court or
Magistrate release a juror or examinate from the oath they have given him, then
if a man impose an oath upon himself (as in some cases he may) he may absolve
himself when he will from it, though he therein obliged himself to God or
another man. And this is truly the case here as he himself states it, the
subjects by their own Act in their Representatives impose this oath, and by
their own personal act swear it, and after by their own act in their
Representatives absolve themselves from it.

2 The repeal of the Act is no repeal or dissolution of the oath, the
Parliament that framed by their Act imposed the oath, did not thereby make it
an oath, but it was the subjects swearing, which made it an oath and an
obligation to him, as the Ministers rehearsing and dictating the words of
marriage, to the couple Marying each other makes not the marriage, but the
parties themselves declaring in those words. And as the clerk in a court
reciteing the words of the Jurors oath to them makes not the oath, but the
Jurors assent to it. The Parliament can injoyne, or punish the refusal, or
manifest breach of an oath, but a promissory oath being the act and covenant of
him that swears, and a part of Divine worship, the bond of conscience upon the
swearer, and the validity of Gods ordinance, and the obligation that is therein
entered into unto God, as the invocated witness, and judge, cannot be within
the Parliaments authority to nullify in all subjects oaths which may be made
with or without their imposition. There are cases indeed, wherein a superior,
as a Husband, Master, Father, Magistrate, may make void the oath of their
respective inferior, by analogy, or equity of that rule Numb. 30. but those are
1 in matters that are belonging to the right or power of the superior to
dispose of; as the Representatives may acquit from an oath in point of their
own right, Animadvertendum tamen est penes hos non esse facultatem rescindendi
quodlibet jusjurandum subditorum sed illud duntaxat cujus materia est eorum
potesta^i subjecta. Alsted: Theol. cas. cap. 15. Reg 2.
but the allegiance, in this oath sworn is none of theirs, but the Kings, and
therefore sworn to him by the subjects, and in particular by them. 2. By that
Law Numb. 30. the superior may interpose to nullify his inferiors oath made
without his knowledge, and consent, and that must be done in the day that he
hears of it, but there is no further power given by that law in the matter of
oaths. Now in this our case the Representatives have bin so far from being
ignorant of the making of this oath, and disalowing it as soon as it was known
to them, that they were the composers and commanders of it, yea and have taken
it themselves. Let any the least warrant, yea or president be brought for
releasing an oath in this case, and I shall sit down. Lastly for a close of my
answer unto this position, I shall observe what the tennor of this oath has in
it. I do believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath or any part
thereof. And do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. This
is not only the swearers declaration, but the Parliaments, in compiling and
imposing this oath, and all Representatives have personally thus declared in
taking it, shall we believe them concerning their power in this matter, or this
man?

In the end he brings in three questions and answers to them, unto which though
they have no immediate reference either to this latter position, or the proof
of it, to which they are subjoyned, nor to the question of the oaths
obligatorinesse, which is the subject of the precedent discourse, yet lest the
over-passing them should imply that they are unto me either current, or
difficult to be answered, I shall say somewhat.

1. His first question and answer is after this manner.

But then it will to this. Whether the Parliament be the supreme gower. R. It
is evident that the Norman Kings coming in by Conquest, had never any true
right to the Crown of England, but what the Parliament gave them, then the
power of Parliament was greater then theirs: because that power that is the
cause of power is greater then that power that is the effect of power. 2 The
power of the Parliament is the power of the people, now in reason the power of
the people is the supreme; because thence as from the root all power first
sprung, and proceeded.

The Norman Kings did not come in by Conquest, the first of them surnamed the
Conqueror did indeed so come in: although even he laid other claim to the
Crown besides Conquest, as the ground of the attempt thereof, namely a right
both by virtue of the Covenant, and Oath of Harold, and the Donation of King
Edward. Speeds H^st. Book 1. Chap. 7 Sect. 6. 13 14. 16. 30
Speed. B. 9. Chapter 2. S. 54 Chap. 3. S. 12.
The next to him William Rufus neither came in by Conquest, nor by lineall
succession: his father on his deathbed being in remorse of Conscience for his
cruel government of the Kingdom, durst not (as he said) dispose of the Land
to any other then to God, only he wished (if it might be the will of God) that
William his son might flourish in the Throne, Speed. B. 9. Chapter 2. S. 54 Chap.
3. S. 12.
who accordingly notwithstanding (Duke Robert was his elder brother) by a
general consent and vote was made King, The rest that have followed
successivly came in by descent, and title of inheritance [although in some
happily it was wrested] and were the most of them peaceably, and without
contest of any, seated in the throne, and that which the Parliament usually
did, was not a creating of a title to them, but a recognition of that which
they had, and a securing of it to their posterity, which was for the Kingdoms
safety, as well as the Kings interest. 2. It is well known this Land was
governed by Kings in supreme power long before the Norman race begun, so that
this exception from the manner of the Normans coming in lies rather against
their title (who came in by Conquest) to be Kings then against the Kings Title
to be supreme. 3. If the Judgment of Parliaments themselves to whom he would
appropriate the supremacy, may decide to whom it belongs, it will be yielded to
be in the King (though not exclusively, in reference to Parliament) witness
the Act of Parliament setting forth and enjoining the Oath of the Kings
Supremacy. 4 The causing or conveying of civil power, by way of consent or
election, whether it be by the Parliament to the King, or by the people to them
both, or to either of them, is no argument of a power in the said conveyers
greater then that which is so conveyed by them: because they that by Election,
or consent invest the Magistrate with power, Those axioms quicquid efficit
tale illud est magis tale Nihil dat quod non habet, are not meant of
Isntrumental but of principal efficients.
are not the proper or principal efficient causes of that power but only the
applyers of it to the person, and the isntrumental means of giving him a right
therein. God by his institution, and ordination is the efficient cause of the
Magistrates power, and therefore he indeed is superior to him; and he alone. In
the advancement of men to that office, God only acts authoritatively men by
the choice of the person, and consenting to him do it ministerially. This
proposition, that which is the cause of power is it self of greater power may
be true of the principal efficient, but cannot hold of the subordinate or
isntrumental cause, a wife as the means gives the power of a husband over
her to him whom she marryeth, by her consent in marriage of him, a servant in
like manner gives power to his master over him by his voluntary agreeing to be
his servant; yet can it not thence be concluded that the wife or servant, are
greater in power respectively then the husband or master, an over topping, or
super-regall power then in the Parliament, or a super-parliamentary and
super-regal power in the people cannot be bottomed on that reason. 5, As for
that which is said as the ad. reason, the power of the Parliament is the power
of the people, now in reason etc. I answer 1. There is a petition of a
principle not to be granted, not offered to be proved, which is, that
Magistraticall power or authority (even supreme) is seated in the people. I
have brought reasons for the refutation of this before, and I shall only here
say, first, Rulers are called the powers, the bearers of the sword, the
revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil, we read of their
commission and instructions for Magistracy in Scripture, but where find we any
such thing spoken of or granted to the people?

2 Rulers are styled powers of God, his ordained, his ordinance, his Ministers,
Judges for him, but where read we that they are the peoples power, or
subordinate ministers?

3 The people are the object about which, the subject over which the power is
set, and therefore cannot be the agent or subject in which it is stated.

4 If Supreme authority be in the people, then they may manage it themselves
(for in vain is that power that cannot be reduced into act) and hold it in
their own hands, and need not choose or constitute any higher powers, or
Magistrates over them, which cannot be if Magistracy be an Ordinance of God,
and necessary by divine precepts, as it is Deuteronomy. 16.18. and to reject it would
be sinful as this man tells us in his first position.

5 If the people be a power, and that supreme, they must have some to be their
subjects; and who are their subjects? either themselves or their Magistrates:
not themselves, for every relation (and therefore Magistracy, and subjection)
must have two terms; never was such a political state heard of, wherein the
same men are both under and over themselves in the same power. Not the
Magistrates for we read of no such ordinance of God as a humane power over the
Magistracy; but contrariwise they are said in relation to the people, to be set
over, to be the rulers, and heads of the people, and to be the higher powers
and the supreme. Deutr. 1 13.5.17.14.15. 2. Sam. 23 3. To. 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.


6 If it be so, then there is no specificall distinction, or distribution of
Government in general into diverse Species, as into Monarchy, Aristocracy, and
Democracy, as has been generally held, and accordingly practiced, but all
government is Democraticall, Monarchy and Aristocracy are specifically the same
with, and but subordinate offices under it. 2 Suppose the power were indeed
supremely in the people, how can he say, or does he prove that the power of the
Parliament is the power of the people, more then is the power of the King? he
cannot mean that the power of the Parliament is subjectively or formally the
peoples, for the Parliament and people being two distinct subjects, the same
individual power cannot totally be subjected or formally inherent to both, but
he understands (doubtless) that the Parliaments power is effectively causally
the peoples, that is, it is derived and received from them, and so (granting
the supposition) is the Kings also, and that as immediately (in the
constitution of the Kingly office) as is that of the Parliament, it was never
yet I think said, neither is there the least warrant for it, that in the first
constituting of the government, the people chose the Parliament and the
parliament founded the Kingly office, but rather the people ordained both
jointly and immediately, appointing kings to reign over them successively, who
should govern with the advice, and authority of Parliament, which should be
called by him, and consist of the Peers hereditarily, and the Commons by
personal election. Which three estates are collaterally incorporated together
in the fundamental constitution, and Government of this Kingdom (as even the
Commons have declared D^clarat. of Apr. 17. 1646.
) and therefore are not superstructory one to another.

3 And whereas he says, to prove the power to be in the people, that from the
power of the people as from the root, all power first sprung and proceeded. The
people are not the root from whence power first sprung: they are rather the
soil in which it grows, by which it is fed and supported. God is the Root,
Head, or Fountain from whence all power springs. There is no power but of God
etc. The people are only a channel, or instrument of its conveyance to the
Magistrate by their election and consent, which acts of theirs, do no more
prove the supreme power to be in the people, then the Electorship of the seven
Princes proves the imperial power, and dignity to be in them: or the choice of
a Major of a City by the aldermen, or freemen; proves the office, or authotity
of the Major to be in them.

2 His second Question and Answer follows.

Whether the Representative of the people be the Parliament? R. If the
Parliaments power be the peoples, and the supreme power, then the
Representatives of the people are the Parliament, and none else: for the
Representatives are the people in them, and there is the root of power,
therefore they are the Parliament. Here is an antecedent, a consequence, a
reason of the consequence: but very feeble all. First the Antecedent. If the
Parliaments power be the Peoples, and the Peoples the supreme power.] This has
been disproved above in the discussion of the 1 question, I have therein
manifested that the power of Parliaments as distinct from the King is neither
the peoples, not the Supreme by way of peculiarity; and that the Kings power
derives as strongly and as nerely from the people as as does the Parliaments,
though both have their principal original from God, and are but
instrumentally from the people.

2. The Consequent is [then the Representatives of the people are the
Parliament and none else] were the Antecedent granted, and most true, yet he
that knows what an argument is, or has but natural Logic, may see that this
has no kind of inference, or consequentiall force from it.

We say that the Lords and Commons of England assembled with the political
power and presence of the King are the Parliament: and for this we appeal to
all the use of the word, since there was such a thing as a Parliament in
England, till within these very few days and the general understanding of the
word still; to the Law common and municipal; to the Titles of Parliamentary
Acts, and Statutes; and to the Declarations, and constant language of
Parliaments themselves, from first to last, He says the Representatives of the
people, meaning the said Commons, are the Parliament; for this he brings no
proof in the world, from the application or use of the word by any, though he
cannot but know that words signify according to the pleasure of some Imposer;
all his medium is in those term. [The Peoples power, and the supreme power]
Whereas it is a question betwixt us whether there be such a thing as power, or
supremacy belonging to the people: and if that were granted, yet it is still a
question betwixt us whether the peoples, and the supreme power be any more
appertaining to the Commons, then to the King, and Lords; I cannot assent to
either; the affirmative of both are his positions and but barely affirmed by
him; so that in making this inference he does but prove one of his principles
by another improved, and in so doing does but petere principium. 3. His reason
of this consequence is [for the Representatives are the people, in them, and
there is the race of power.] This is still but to infer the conclusion upon an
unproved principle of his own, which I have denied, and refuted above: but I
shall here touch upon the wide mistakes about this term and thing,
Representatives, with which he, and others are, I see, overtaken. 1. he takes
for granted, that the Commons in Parliament are the peoples Representatives,
which me thinks cannot properly be said, if we understand by the people all
estates, members or parties in the Kingdom (and if he does not so understand
it I ask, how can he (after his own sense) place the power, supremacy, and
representablenes only in one part of the Kingdom?) for the said Commons are
chosen but by, and in the name of the Commoners, in distinction from the Peers,
and cannot, are not intended to represent any more then those by, and in whose
name they are elected, and therefore are called the Commons in Parliament,
besides the Peers are present, and therefore cannot be represented. If then all
the people are not Commoners, nor represented, how are those Commons truly and
completely the Representatives of the people?

2. He seems to found the Commons power, (and that in a degree above others
that are undoubted powers) upon their being Representatives of the people.
Whereas (I think it will upon scanning appear that) their representativenesse
is not the rise or ground of any Magistraticall power in them. 1. That which
makes them, or any men a power (as I apprehend the matter) is that they are
Gods Representatives, and that which ordinarily makes them so is that they are
chosen, or consented to by the people, either personally, or in the original
constitution of government, unto the administration of an authority ordained by
God; and thus are in this kingdom the Prince, the Peers, and the Commons in
Parliament though not all the same way, but some personally, others
hereditarily.

The said Commons have indeed this addition (but it is not of Magistraticall
power, but of popular action, and employment) that they are the Commons
representatives, because the colective Commons cannot convene, or treat; which
representation empowers them not to any public Magistracy, or Acts of
distributive Justice, but only intrusts and inables them to deeds of
Commutative right or contract, on the Commoners behalf, as the agreeing on
Taxes, Forces, or other requisites to be borne in an equal proportion, and
which are due as far as proportionable from the people to the public
Magistrates and service. 2. If the power of the Commons be grounded on their
representativenes of the people, then it is necessary all the Members should be
present to make them a representative of the whole Body of the people, and to
enable them to act so as to bind the whole; because the Members compose a
Representative; not so as that every one tepresents the whole, but each one
represents a part, and all of them collectively represents the whole. 3 He
places the dimension and prerogative of the Office of the said Commons in
their Representativenes of the people, where it seems to me they are not
mere (but more then) Representatives of the people. They that are merely
Representatives are, 1. To act what they whom they represent might act if they
were present. 2 To act nothing but what they have in charge from the
represented. But this is not the latitude of the Commons in Parliament, they
are not thus tied up. For first, If they be an estate endued with civil
authority, they may act authoritatively, and so could not the people whom they
represent if they were present: no such power being seated in them, as was a
little before alleged. 2 If they be a power, they are empowered by God, and so
have in charge from him to act the thing within their Commission, whether they
are charged from the people to do them or not; yea though the people should
command the contrary. If they be no more then representees, and so be bounden
by the latter rule here given, perhaps some would ask what charge or
Commission did the people ever give either to any Former, or to the present
Representatives for some actings?

Thirdly, His third Question and Answer is. Whether the present Representatives
that now sit be the Representative of the people. R. First they are all of them
chosen by the people, therefore of right they sit in Parliament. First, Whether
they be all so chosen, I shall not enquire; but I have read in Master Prin (as
I remember it is in his Speech upon the Treaty) who it is probable knew the
house better then this Gentleman) the contrary of some whom he there names. 2
But if they all be legally chosen, that proves not that they of right sit in
Parliament, unles there be a right Parliament to sit in. R. Secondly, the
present Representatives are all that are left to sit in Parliamet, for the most
of the rest have deserted their trust without any force upon them, for though
some were secluded and secured, yet the rest were not at all interrupted, but
have voluntarily departed from the House. First, he means they that sit are all
that are left de facto to sit, I shall not gainsay him. But he might say thus
if they were but two, and all the rest were excluded by force of arms, and
those two were prisoners in the place, those two in this case would be a
Representative, according to this his reason. If he would be understood, that
they are all that are de jure left to sit; I would hear that proved; all that
he brings for it here i^. The most of the rest have diserted their trust. 1 Say
they had, would that prove they that are left are all that de jure are to sit,
what say you to the less part of the rest whom you accuse not for deserters?
what say you to the secluded, and ^ecured, whom you cannot accuse of deserting
their trust? I do not know that the house, or those you call the present
Representatives have tried, or Judged any, or all of either sort of them unto
deprivation of the right of sitting: nay what say you to those most of the rest
taxed by you as deserters of their trust, as voluntarily, and without
interruption departing? are they actually divested of their right to sit?
because they do not perform their trust, therefore ought they not to do it? 2
But I can look upon this charge of those most of the rest, no otherwise then as
a railing occusation brought against men in dignity, and a presumptious
slander, intollerably cast upon those who have otherwise suffered so much in
their trust.

first, It has been currently, and without contradiction (to my knowledge)
published that were secured, or secluded in two or three days; and how can he,
or any man be able to know, or say that there is so much as one man of that
house left at liberty, that has not come to discharge his trust and been
actually debarred? much less can any one say that the most of them have not.

2 I would ask whether all that disclaimed not the vote about the Kings
concessions were not declaredly excluded, and actually put back if they offered
to enter, and if there be not still forces there ready to do the same?

3 Not long before the last breaking of the house, they that for fear of the
Apprentices departed the house, were counted the best performers of their
trust, and they that tarried behind in the house were accused as faylers of it.
Must now the charge be inverted, because the persons are varied 2. If they that
sit are all that are left to sit de jure, yet unless they be a number
competent in Law to make a house, and free from force, I would be satisfied how
they can be qualifyed to sit and act (especially in so high matters as the
taking away the King, and House of Lords, and establishing a new power, and way
of government, which if don by that house at the fullest, and freest would be at
least questionable?) the suspension and annulling the acts of the house upon
the proceedings against the five Members, and the coming of the Apprentices to
the Parliament doors are fresh in memory, and lively presidents. And if the
power of an Army not only captivating some Members, but keeping the house that
only a few (scarce the eighth part of the number of them that constitute the
house) may enter, and sit, whom they distinguish by no known Character (much
less by any open or legal sentence against the excluded) but only by a
private roll of paper reserved in their own hands, be not a taking away of the
houses freedom, I know not what can be so called: R. Thirdly, the
Representatives that remain were always when fewest, and still are above the
number allowed of by Law. What number is allowed of by Law, what Law that is,
where written, and when made, that allows of that number, and what that
number (suppose it were 40.) is allowed to do, this Gentleman tells us not; and
yet these things should be set down and scanned before this reason can pass:
There is a great difference betwixt forty and four or five hundred, betwixt
some acts of the house, and others in point of concernment. If the Members of
the house do not each of them represent the whole, but all of them
aggregatively, in that some represent this part, some another of the nation,
how can an eight part of them be said to make a representative of the whole
Nation, wherein possibly there is not one representative from seven parts of
eight of the Land? But the above alleged exception of a force upon the house
must be wiped off, or else the clearing of this point of the number (could it
be) will not serve.

The last thing in the Paper (which he would, it may be, not have to be
overslipped) is a new doctrine concerning the interest of the people in the
appointing of their Governors. Wherein he says. 1. Such right as Kings have
had, they never justly came by it, but by force and flattery have obtained it.
What a blasphemer of dignities is this, that presumes to revile the whole order
of Kings as Usurpers, and unjust possessors of the highest civil property,
Dominion? not one of them will he except from injurious attainment of their
Crowns; no not Melchisedech himself, the interpretation of whose name
bespeaks him King of Righteousness! Surely he that is the King of Kings would
never have styled h^mself so, if the universality of them had been so bad: and
the Apostle Paul's retractation Act. 23.5. The Angels modesty, 2. Pet. 2.10.11.
Nay the Prince of Angels his moderation, Jude 8.9. are high redargations of
this insolent evil speaking of dominions. If his intention be to reflect more
specially on the Kings of this Realm, he is yet therein reproved by the current
of History, by which it is apparent the most of the Kings of this Land received
their Crown by succession, which is neither force nor flattery.

It were easy, besides that, to derive to many of them that title which he
himself accounts the only just one, viz. The consent of the Kingdom, as for
instance, thus were Cassibelan of the British, Edward surnamed the Confessor of
the Saxon, and William Rufus of the Norman Kings invested. Speeds Hist. B. 5.
chap. 6 P. 8. c 6. S. 1. B. 9. c. 3^.
Yea all of them in a manner have had the Nations vote for their Crowns, either
antecedent in their predecessors, concurrent in their personal entrance, or
subsequent in their establishment by after acts of Parliament, and not a few
have had this threefold consent.

Lastly, the Parliament that Enacted the Oath of Allegiance, and all the
Members of the house of Commons, with all other subjects that have taken that
oath solemnly, give this man the lie (excuse it if it be incivility) in the
first words of it declaring the King sworn to be lawful King of this Realm.

I. A. B. Do truly, and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and Declare
in my Conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King James
is lawful King of this Realm etc.

Secondly, Kingdoms were never intended (says he) that the hereditary right
of any should be in them. With what forehead can he say that was never intended
which the laws and statutes of Kingdoms have ordained and settled?
Particulerly this Kingdom has for diverse successions provided before hand
both for acts, and oaths for the hereditary descent of the Crown. Will he
^verre that the estates of the Realm never intended that which they enacted,
and caused to be sworn?

3 He tells us, that men that were qualified with Wisdom, righteousness, and
virtue, were to be heirs and successors, and set up by the people after them
that last possessed them and neither the people themselves, nor their
Representatives could either give or sell away this privilege from their
posterity viz. of choosing, and setting up Kings, and rulers over them.

He ^eth still higher in absurdnesse of asserting, and in this passage he is
not content to cross the common sense of others, but he will needs overthrow
his own way. 1 As to common reason how in consistent is this that he delivers?
for by this position the arising posterity must first give their consent and
pass their elective vote to the power they find standing, before they can
either owe allegiance and subjection to it, or enjoy the benefit of protection
of it, so that Children (suppose ours of this age) whilst they are under years
of consent, and after that too until they please t^ consent (which is at their
own choice and may be denied for ever if they will) are both accountable to the
present Government, for any trespasses, or crimes they may commit, be it
murder, or whatsoever is the worst, and left out of the laws protection, and
redress, in any thing they may unjustly suffer. And suppose their judgment, or
choice concur not with their parents, they must during their parents lives,
either continue in that estate, or chose another government, and become another
commonwealth, apart by themselves. Yea and by this reason all those that have
sitten down under a present power, which they find in the thron, and have
given no consent to it, are in the same condition of outlawednesse, and liberty
to chose rulers for themselves, yea by this means a Kingdom may come presently
to be divided into a thousand pieces of states, and petty co^monwealths
according as their different choices may sway them, to the inflaming of the
whole with endless seditions, and the overthrow of all government.

2 As to his own way I ask, 1 upon what constitution of the people does the
present House of Commons (so called) claim to be a power? not by any made in
this age certainly, the present people having not as yet chosen any new
government, but do either acquiesse in the old received from their forefathers,
or are subjected perforce, without their consent to a new, if any such be. I
appeal to the several proposers of the agreements of the people that have
been lately published whether the people of this age have yet settled or chosen
any government in their time. If it be here suggested, that the present people
have chosen these Representatives, I say to that. True the Countries or
Corporations have chosen them to be Parliament men, but in so doing they
ordained not, founded not, any Parliamentary power; they acting distributively
within their several precincts and only nominating two, or a few persons upon
a writ sent out in the Kings name, to consult on the difficult affairs of the
Kingdom, according to a known, and ancient custom, and constitution of the
Realm, cannot be conceived to constitute a new power, it must then be said they
are a branch of the ancient and hereditary government of this Nation, and this
is not opposed by me: but this Gentleman here contradicts this clame, and tells
us this title is null, and could not be made by any of our predecessors in
relation to us.

Secondly, Upon what ground do the said Commons challenge to be the sole
supreme power, without a King or house of Lords, in way of a Commonwealth or
Free State? if it could be said that in former times the people have placed
such a power in the House of Commons, that will be of none effect, according to
this principle, which denies that the people may conclude their posterity in
such an act. If it be said the present people in electing these Commons
invested them with such a power, my simplicity cannot comprehend it, at the
last elections of Parliament Members, the people (for ought I have ever heard)
neither resolved on, nor so much as deliberated, or moved a word of making over
any new power, they only elected them according to former custom, and trust
which was (as I understand) to sit in the House of Commons, and to act in
consociation with the King and the House of Peers, about the public affairs of
the Kingdom. ^o that the upshot is, this Gentleman by giving the people the
privilege is violably to chose their own government, personally and not by
their predecessors, has utterly overturned the present power.

4thly. But to defend this his position, he instructs us in the last place
thus. This Privilege the welfare of the people is so mainely concerned in, as
that without it a people are given up, and sold to ruin. 1. Are not the Laws
which must regulate both, the rulers, and the ruler of as great a concernment,
as the choice of the rulers to the people, and yet the people by their Laws, do
conclude their posterity, which are therefore called every man's birthright?
Again, is not a man's estate of Lands and goods of as great a concernment to his
Issue being their earthly subsistence, as is their share in the Election of the
public Magistracy? yet a man may involve his posterity (undenyably) in any
act concerning his estate. Yea is not Religion and Covenanting with God, a far
greater concernment, then this of government? yet men may represent and act for
their issue in settling religion, and entering into Covenant with God as is clear
in the example of Israel. Deuteronomy. 29 10.11.14.15. Joshua 24.15.


2. This reason would make us believe the welfare of the Nation of Israel was
mainly prejudiced, and that they were given up and sold to ruin, when there
was an hereditary kingdom settled over them, as there was by the Lord himself
in David and his seed. Nay we are rather to believe because he set such a
government over his own people, therefore it was the better way.

I have done answering this paper, and for a conclusion have only one word to
the author of it. Seeing he has undertaken to deal in the removal of men's
doubts concerning their solemn engagements unto their Governors, I would
propound to him a Quaery, and that of a necessary and seasonable importance,
and which is occasioned by what he has in this paper delivered being conferred
with what at this time is publicly imposed. It is only this, what may
conscientiously be resolved upon in relation to the lately enacted Engagement
from the principles and premises laid down by him in prosecution of his first
position?

He therein avers that an oath of allegiance must be 1. Conditiall not
absolute, or whether the governor rule well, or not. 2. It must be mutual, or
taken both by rulers, and ruled (so as the ruler be bound to the Subject to
rule well, and administer Justice rightly, as well as the subject is bound to
him) and not single or taken only by the ruled. 3. It must not be to those whom
no man knows how they will prove, whither they will be wise or fools, just or
tyrannical 4. It must not be to any one kind of government to uphold and
continue it in a constant way without changing of it, and that if it
transgress in any of these qualifications, it is unrighteous, sinful, and
unlawful.

I will not Query whether or no, but assume it as undoubted and clear, if an
oath to persons in authority must be thus regulated a Promise, Covenant, or
whatever engagement of that nature must be so also; and if his reasons, or any
other that can be brought conclude an oath failing in any of those rules to be
unlawful, they will as strongly infer the sinfulnes of an Engagement in that
matter, if it be dissonant in any particular from them.

Next, I will not doubt to say, the abovenamed Engagement is as far discrepant
from these Limitations in every point as is the oath of Allegiance if not
further, 1. It is absolute or without any proviso of their ruling well, that
are, or may be in power, 2. It is single, or without the rulers Engaging to the
subject to rule well and justly. 3. It is to those of whom we may be as
unsatisfyed how they will prove hereafter, as we can be of an heir, 4. It is
to one kind of Government called the Commonwealth, as it is now established,
and that described with contradistinctions from, and exclusion of King and
Lords. It is also to uphold and continue it in a constant way, for it is a
Covenant de futuro, binding to be true and faithful to the government for
future time in those words [I will be true and faithfull] and binding to it, as
established, and therefore is for some continuance and constancy, which being
left indefinite and illimited is more extensible in duration then is the Oath
of allegiance, which determines with the Kings race, and it is without
changing: the continuance how long soever it is to which it engages (which
must needs be some, it being as I said a tie for future) must of necessity
exclude changing, for so long as it lasts. It will easily (I hope) be
yielded, he that binds himself to be true and faithful to this Government as
it is now established, is bound out from attempting a change of it, while the
Term of the same obligation endures.

I demand therefore how he will both stand to these principles, and justify
the engagement? and whether he has not, as to himself and all those who hold
with his said premises, damned it; and so far as his reasons in that position
can prevail, persuaded all others that they ought not to take it, but are in
conscience bound to reject it.

FJNJS

