A SERMON OF THE Saints judging the World.

Preached at the Assizes holden in Huntingdon, March 13. 1648.

By John Gaul, Minister of the Word in Great STAVGHTON.

1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? and if the
world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Recte judicatur hic mundus in nobis, si opus perfidorum hominum non inveniatur
in nobis. Ambros. loc. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at
his shop at the Sign of the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-^^^^. 1649.

To all the SAINTS.
THe best Books have been dedicated to you, and to you only, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor.
1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.2. But shall I call them
Dedications, or Directions? For He wrote (the Apostle I mean) to his Pupils,
not his Patrons. And (to speak betwixt such us you, and such as my self) He
dedicates nothing to you, that directs you not, how you should direct your
selves to Him, to whom you are dedicated: Or (returning to the Apostle) shall I
say they were his Salutations, or pious Apprecations? (Grace be unto you and
Peace, etc.) So let them be esteemed: So let this of mine be accepted. God
grant you his Grace; God send you his Peace. It is my daily prayer for you all;
who am

Less then the least of all Saints, JOHN GAUL.

Of the SAINTS judging the World.
1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world? and if the
world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
THE Text (to my apprehension) sets forth the twofold Assizes; the General,
and the Particular, or rather, the Eternal, and the Temporal. The general,
and Eternal, are of the Saints judging the world: The Temporal, and
Particular, are about their judging in smaller matters. For a further light
into the discussions, and issues of both these; we are now to scanne the
Apostles words more exactly. And therein to consider these two parts of speech:
1. The form of his Interrogating; Do ye not know, etc. 2. The form of his
Inferring; And if the world shall, etc.

1. The form or manner of his Interrogating; which is with a vehement
indignation at their ignorance or unmindfulnesse. For always, negative
Interrogations in matters necessary, serve to convince and reprove with more
vehemence: Convincing, that so it is; and reproving, because it ought to be
otherwise. But why should the Apostle so eagerly indigne this their not
knowing, since it is in a point of so much depth, and difficulty, as that a
well enlightened Saint might be (in a great part) innocently ignorant of it?
Indeed, had the question been about the (...) the exact cause, and precise
form of the Saints judging the worl^; their ignorance had not only been
pardonable, but their modest acquiescence in it commendable. But for as much as
he enquires only upon the simple (...); intimating that such a truth is, and
ought to be believed by all Saints and Faithful; there was their ignorance
culpable, yea and the rather worthy of vehement and severe reprehension, for
these following reasons. 1. Because it is not to be doubted but that they had
heard the universal promise in this point ( viz. that in Matthew 19.28.) Now,
to be ignorant of an universal promise (having the means to understand it) is
affected ignorance, or ignorance out of negligence; and therefore deserving the
sharper increpation. 2. Because he had but lately intimated such a thing unto
them, even in his rectifying of their rash judgings ( chap. 4. ver. ^.) Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, etc. For when he comes, then
shall be the time for you to judge with infallible discerning in your selves;
and according to the palpable deserts of other men. 3. Because he had already
declared unto them, a special privilege of theirs, in such a case; which they
notwithstanding had misprized, or neglected. As Chap. 2. ver. 15. He that is
spiritual judges all things; All things necessarily pertaining to a natural
life, to a civil conversation, to a spiritual profession, and to eternal
salvation. Y^^ he himself is judged of no man; that is, he himself, for his
person, state, conscience (not but that his life and actions are subject to
others judgment.) Or, judged of no man; that is, not of man's day, or more
humane judgment, opinion, censure, etc. but by the Law, and Word of God. Or,
of no man; that is, of no man rightly, that is not spiritual, like himself.
For it is impossible that a natural (...) carnal man should discern of a
spiritual man's gifts and graces: because it is not the naked observation of
sense, nor the barren apprehens^on of the mind; but the conformable inclination
of the will and affections, whereby all sanctifying graces are truly and
perfectly discerned. Or lastly, the spiritual man (as purely and entirely
spiritual) is judged (or justly accused) by no man, whether carnal, or other.
For to judge or argue him (on that part which neither erres, nor offends) is to
judge not him; but the Spirit of God in him. Pause here a little, and take
notice, how ignorance of this privilege made them misprize it, and derogate
from it which also makes many others both to arrogate it, and to overprize
themselves in it. 4. Because he had but immediately before evinced (from their
Ecclesiasticke, yea or domesticke use and authority) that it properly belonged
to them, to judge them that are within; though not them that are without, Chap.
5.12. How much less then did it appertain to them that are without, to judge
them that are within? Nevertheless, they (ignorant, or negligent in all these)
had (by wilful provocation, or appeal) betrayed their truth, to error; their
promise, to unbelief; their privilege, to invasion; and their peculiar
jurisdiction, to common usurpation. And not only so, but their causes to
corruption, their persons to contempt, their infirmities to derision, their
vocation to calumny, and the whole Church of Christ (or Christian profession)
to scandal and offense. Was there not then just cause for the Apostles more
vehement indignation, in reproving such their careless and peevish error?

Were we to examine the like causes, with their like effects now adays; it
were enough to raise or urge an endigning and increpating commotion in us,
beyond the Apostles, because of the more excessive errors and exorbitances:
Yea (set aside all other) the blindness, and abuses, (even in this particular)
were sufficient to provoke it. For, as touching Saints, and Saints judging, men
were never more ignorant; and yet never more arrogant. But (though I intend to
follow the Apostle in his form of interrogating) yet (persuaded of better
things in you) I shall (as it behooves me) abate somewhat of his vehemence: and
ask only in a moderation, and so calmely, as with some concession to your
judgment in the truth.

1. Do ye know, who the Saints are, that shall judge the world? It Is a
question, and not well answered by all; and therefore not well known to all.
The Papists are tying up the Saints here, either to those of their own making,
or else to those of their own marring. The judging Saints (after their
judgment) are the Patriarks, Prophets. Apostles (say they no more but so? yes)
the blessed Virgin by her self; and yet, their whole order of Virgins,
Apostolical men, their Doctors, Confessors, Martyrs; their contemplative men,
perfect men, men of voluntary poverty. And for these they are framing special
Aureola's; not only to prefer them in their glorious state, but in this
judiciary act. And yet more precisely for the men of voluntary poverty. And all
because upon Peter's saying, Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee;
Christ says, Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes, etc.
Mat. 19.27, 28. But (by their leave) our Savior directs not his speech to
Peter only, but to all the rest. Neither does he now reply to their forsaking,
and following (for to that he speaks precisely in the subsequent verse) but to
all them, that have followed him in the regeneration, viz. in the doctrine of
it, and so are come unto the state of it; are regenerate, or are Saints. Even
theirs (one, as well as another) is this privilege, this preferment. It is
worth the noting (how they) all of them, consent to contradict themselves; even
in the very earnestness of their contention about this pre-eminence. And
herein they follow their own Master (the Master of Sentences) who though he
would feign determine it to some such as before spoken of; yet he is forced to
conclude; that by those fitting on the twelve Thrones, is to be understood an
universitas judicantium: and so, by the twelve Tribes an universitas
judicandorum. For which we are to thank the Fathers; and neither him, nor
them. I may as aptly (and without all contradiction) apply it to this Text, as
he to that. As by the world here, we understand a collective, or an
universallity of those that shall be judged: so by the Saints, a collective
also, or an universallity of those that shall judge them. Nevertheless, we
deny not a pre-eminence to some certain Saints, even in this very act. For we
hold it not against the rules of Reason, or Faith either, to believe, That
those Saints which are more eminent in grace, and so judging the world here,
shall also be more eminent in glory, and so judging the world hereafter. Only,
though we are taught to prefer them, for their several measures; yet we are
not let to understand, why we should there prefer one Saint before another,
for their several orders only. Our Savior Christ spoke it to all kind of
Saints, ye which have followed me in the regeneration: and then more precisely
to his Disciples; Ye also shall sit, etc. yet is their pre-eminence no bar to
the privilege of all other. The Lord comes, not with his twelve only, but
with the ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, etc. Jude.
14.15. Yea, as touching the executing upon them the judgment written (be it
temporal, as some Rabbines would, or spiritual and eternal, as Christians
understand it) yet it follows, this honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149.9.
Thus we see who the Saints are in the general; enough for exposition: yet it
remains to say, who, or what a Saint is in particular; but that shall be in
the conclusion.

2. Do you know what the World is, that shall be judged by the Saints? The
vulgar translation, though it be redundant to the text, yet it seems to be
deficient to the truth: For it thus construes it (of this World) as if it were
but this present World; and but a part also, or some appurtenance of it. But
the text says the World emphatically; and means the whole (present, and
future,) both persons, and actions. I could take up old terms, and tell you
of a twofold world; a mundus perditionis, and a mundus salvationis; a world of
damned ones, and a world of saved ones; and both of them to be judged; The one
by Christ alone, and the other, by Christ, and all his Saints. And these say as
much in effect, as the latter received distinction, ^f a judgment of
Absolution; for so Christ himself shall judge the Saints: and of a judgment
of Condemnation; for so Christ, and his Saints shall judge the world. But I am
to speak of that world which the Saints shall judge: and so I may say, the
Saints are competent judges of a threefold world; the Natural, the Civil, and
the Sinful. 1. The Saints are apt and proper judges of the Natural world, the
world of Creatures. And that by their true and certain knowledge of their
christian liberty, in the lawful use, and subordinate disposition of them. For
where true christian liberty is in any thing, there God has left a man to be
his own judge; and he that rightly uses it, rightly judges over those things
he has a power to use. But he that abuses it, makes the creatures to groan
against him: and now are they his judges, and not he theirs. ^. The Saints are
apt and proper judges over the Civil world, or the world of men. And indeed,
more apt than other men; Because of their more light of universal truth, more
rectitude of reason, more discretion of circumstances, more tenderness of
conscience, more innocence of heart and hand, more abnegated passions and
affections, more zeal to justice, more love of mercy, more reputation with
good men, and more deputation from God himself; as bearing his Image (both in
their persons and places) above the rest. 3. The Saints are the apt and proper
judges against the sinful world, the world of wicked men, and reprobates; as
having first judged sin in themselves, as having long judged them by their
works and examples, as having the gift of the discerning of spirits, as
laboring to judge exactly after the perpetual law of God, as being witnesses
of their wretched lives, as having suffered at their unjust hands, and as
minding nothing more than the glory of the supreme Judge himself. Well, as the
Saints are the judges, so the world is always the guilty party, or worthy to
be judged: and therefore seeing they are the Saints that shall judge the world,
let the world take heed how it takes upon it to judge the Saints: For the more
presumptuously or perversely the world shall judge the Saints (by wise
permission) here, in this present life; the more adversely and severely shall
the Saints (by just commission) judge the world in the world to come. But
caution is not for the world, but correction; let the Saints therefore see to
it, that they go not now beyond their commission, judging the world uprightly
however; and in no case, rashly one another.

3. Do ye know what this act of the Saints judging is? Something of it is to
be learned from the original word, twice varied in the Text ((...)) both in
voice and tense. 1. Varied in the voice; one active, the other passive: and
active, as from the Saints; passive, as upon the world: Whence I observe by the
way, that the Saints shall be active only, and the world passive only in
judgment. 2. Varied again from the tense, or time; one a word of the future,
the other (though translations note it not) a word of the present: whereupon I
observe again, that the Saints shall not only judge the world hereafter, but
the world is already judged by them even in this present life. And verily, this
ought to be regarded; for be that is not such a Saint as to judge the world
here, shall never be such a Saint as to judge the world hereafter: I mean if
the world be not judged by him now, in his faith and profession, in his heart
and conscience, in his life and example, there is little hope that he should be
one elected to judge the world (by his vote and suffrage) at that great day.
Furthermore, for this act of judging, Some (both Papists and Protestants) are
scrupled at the preciseness of the act, and would have the Saints judging the
world, the Angels, the twelve tribes, the ungodly, etc. to be rather an
hyperbolicall expression, than to signify any such precisely real action; or
that this their judging should import only a kind of superlative, and
indefinite pre-eminence of their state in general; and not any positive and
determinate sentence of such an act in special. And the reason for such their
opinion appears to be this, lest otherwise, they might seem to derogate, or
detract from the judiciary act and office of Christ. But (with their peace) I
must prove it from my Text, that if the Saints judging of the world be but
allegorical; so likewise is their judging in the smallest matters. But if the
judging in the smallest matters be to be understood as a specifique and precise
act of judicature; so likewise is the judging of the world, or else the
Apostles inference, a simili, or a majori, (confer^ing here the one with the
other, and preferring the one before the other) is not only incongruous, or
unapt, but n^l, and of no force at all. For in arguments of imparity, there
must be some sunilitude of the kind, wherein both are consentaneous: or else
there can be no inequality of degree, wherein the one is to be supposed to
exceed the other. And as to their reason; the sole property of judging, the
authority, power, glory, these being Christ's confessed: and the Saints only the
assession, assent, vote suffrage, comprobation, acclamation, etc. Surely, this
can no more derogate from Christ's act or office, than the session of the
Justices, does from the authority of the Judge in chief. Christ is pleased to
make them his assessors and assistants (co-operators, though not co-adjutors)
in that peculiar act, both for the more setting forth of his own majesty, and
glory; for their more dignity, and comfort; and for the others more terror, and
conviction. This truth (with all these reasons) appears plain from these
places, Mat. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2. 2 These. 1.9, 10. Jude 14.15. To which I may
add, Psalm. 149.9. Zach. 14.5.

So then, that the Saints shall judge together with Christ, is necessary and
easy to believe: but how they shall do it, there is the difficulty to
conceive; and peradventure not much necessary for us, as now. For of this
there is deep silence in the Scriptures; or else obscurity deeper than silence
it self. The most curious inquisitors here, are driven to confess, that the
manner of this their precise acting is not to be learnt, but by divine
revelation. I may say further (with some of them also) that it shall not be
directly known, ere it be seen, and done, or (at least wise) cannot be
perfectly apprehended, but in the very acting of it: Yet since the boldness of
men's broaching their conceptions (in this case) is already begun, (And that
not without confidence even of erroneous assertions, and impositions) Let me
therefore be bold also to set forth some conceptions; leaving you to your
liberty of judging, which of them may be more orthodox, and which of them the
most genuine.

1. One is, That the Saints shall then judge, by presenting their persons; or
rather, by a presentation of their actions; comparing their good examples, with
the evil of the world, thereby to convince, and condemn them. This I conceive
to be a truth: For so much is to be collected out of Mat. 19.28. and 25.35, 42.
Romans 2.5, 6. and 14.10. 1 Cor. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.10. Jude 14, 15. yet surely, this
is not all. For if it be no more but a manifestation, or comparison of their
works; thus shall the world judge it self, and the wicked of it work to
condemn one another. For, as the worse examples of the more wicked, are said
to justify the ill actions of the less wicked, Ezekiel. 16.51. so the less ill
actions of the less wicked, shall then judge the worse examples of the more
wicked, Mat. 12.27, 41, 42. and 11.22, 24. And although there be great
difference between the works and examples of the Saints, and others; and so
between their comparisons: yet shall they all agree to judge. This singular act
therefore of the Saints judging must needs be something more than so.

2. Another is, That the Saints shall judge by way of assession, assent, vote,
suffrage, comprobation, acclamation, and the like subordinate, and conformable
acts. Mat. 19.28. Psalm. 119.137. Revel. 16.7. and 19.1, 2. This also is a
truth, and commonly so received: yet neither is this all. For not only the
Saints are saved; but even the Devils, and the Damned, shall then be convinced,
and constrained to acknowledge the justice and equity of Gods judgments. At
that time (says Christ, Romans 14.11. Every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. All powers, persons, nations, languages,
consciences (good and bad) shall not only be brought into a subjection to the
power, but to the confession of the justice of it. And albeit Angels, and
Saints, shall do it directly, and voluntarily; and adore, admire, and praise,
2 Thessalonians. 1.10. yet the Devils, and the Damned, shall not be able to detract any
thing from it; And therefore shall do it; although it be but involuntarily,
and indirectly: so that both their acts are thus also tending to judgment; and
therefore that of the Saiuts must yet be somewhat else.

3. Another is, That the Saints, though they shall not pronounce the sentence
together with Christ; yet they shall repeat it after him, or relate, and tell
it unto others. This is the fond opinion, expressed and pressed so by the Papists
(and by the wisest of them, their Schoolmen, Summists, Casuists) But if it be
not frivolous, let them answer us. To whom (for Gods sake) should they tell it?
To their fellow Saints, and Angels? why, they all were acquainted with it, as
well as themselves; understanding it at once, by a primary and immediate
revelation: and therefore need no mediate, or secondary information of theirs,
by parts and degrees. Or to the Devils, and the Damned? what need that either,
after an immediate, and total conviction of all consciences? And since (as
themselves are more inclined to believe) it shall be exercised mentally (a
proper act of divine Power) to what purpose then should there be a vocal
pronuntiation, or repetition? And if the Saints have any other way to insinuate
themselves into one another; which way else should they do it to the world? Or
what needs any further patefaction of the divine justice to any, than that
proportionable to every ones witness within himself?

4. Another is, That the Saints shall judge in a petitionary way, requiring,
provoking, rather invoking, or praying justice against the world. I dare not
deny, but that there may be very truth in this, As Revel. 6.9, 10. But yet in
as much as this is an act of the Saints, or Souls under the Altar; yea, and of
the Saints upon the footstool too, Luke 18.7, 8. Me thinks the precise act of
the Saints upon the throne, should be something moreover to that.

5. Another is, That the Saints shall judge the world, as it were by way of
inditing, impleading, accusing, witnessing, etc. And (I conceive) it may be
thus. The Saints of the law, more especially accusing the breakers of the law,
by the law, Ioh. 5.45. Romans 2.12. And the Saints of the Gospel, more
especially judging the profaners of the Gospel, by the Gospel, Romans 2.16. But
forasmuch as these are the rules, and forms, whereby they accuse them here
(and accordingly have done it in all ages) something assuredly it is, that they
shall more formally act hereafter.

6. Another is, That the Saints shall then judge after the manner of
exultation; glorying, rejoicing to see the vengeance, Psalm. 58.10. And that out
of a perfect zeal of justice, void of the least desire of revenge. But
nevertheless, this their exulting being a constant and perpetual act (here
inchoate, there consummate, not for time, but integrity) me thinks still the
present or precise act should yet be somewhat more.

7. The last (and I conceive, the aptest) is, That the Saints shall judge in
Christ; and Christ in the Saints. He in them, by those infallible principles of
divine justice which are impressed in them; they in him, by those inseparable
bonds of union, whereby they wholly relate to him: Or he, and they together, as
Head, and Members. The act of the Head imputed to the Members, and the act of
the Members acknowledged by the Head. His judiciary act (especially as from his
Mediatorship, and Manhood) having a peculiar influence upon them: and so their
act (in a perfect conformity, though not absolute proportion) having a peculiar
reference to him. And in this conception I am not alone (others as orthodox,
and more learned, speak with me to this effect.) Nor are we in it without the
Scriptures, Mat. 19.28. Inde 14, 15. which (saving to each their property)
speaks there of it, as one joint act. And therefore I believe, when Christ's act
shall be perfectly apprehended and understood, then shall this of the Saints
also, and not before.

Only suffer me to conclude the point in a few distinctive terms. 1.
Causaliter, and auctoritative, as principal Cause, and through absolute
Authority; so shall Christ judge alone, and neither Saints nor Angels with him.
2. Exemplariter, and comparative, by comparing their actions and examples; so
shall not only good men judge bad men, but bad men one another. 3. Assistenter,
and interpretative, as assessors, adherers, approvers, admirers, applauders,
etc. So shall the Saints judge the world. 4. Ministerialiter, and executive,
ministerially, and in a powerful executing of the judgment, both upon the
world, and the Devils; so shall the Angels also judge together with him, at
that day.

II. The form or manner of the Apostles inferring: And if the world shall be
judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? And he inferres
with an interrogation upon a supposition: indigning still, that any man should
not easily see into the force of the consequence, upon such a Concession. Yet
all the weight of his inference is not so particularly to be apprehended from
any Translation, as from the original words themselves. According to their
native Emphasis therefore we observe how strongly he inferres:

1. A majori, (...). And thus are they enforcing or affirming validly from the
greater to the less. If the Collective, the univerfall world shall be judged
by you, how much more then may you be Judges of the distributive, or a few
particulars? If in things eternal, how much more in things temporal? If in
Causes betwixt God and man, how much more in matters betwixt man and man? If in
those the greatest, how much more in these the smallest matters?

2. Ab interiori, (...). We miss the rise of this Argument in many
translations, and in most expositions. Because it is usual (excepting the
Greek Interpreters) to translate, and expound this in you, by you.
Notwithstanding (under correction as touching the frequent enallage or change
of certain Particles) let me say; that where the original expression is
clear sense, and notably serving to a deduction of sound doctrine, there it is
safest always to retain the words in their own idiome. Now to me it
signifies very emphatically, to read it thus; If the world be judged in your
rather than thus, If the world shall be judged by you. For it notes a
fundamental, and intrinsecall act of judging; which excels any isntrumental
and extrinsecall act whatsoever. And to judge externally, in form, and word
and sentence, is nothing so essential to judicial truth, as to judge
internally, in heart, in mind, and conscience. Besides, the original phrase
reserved, more properly respects either kind of Judicature. For the eternal
judgment (as it is generally conceived, and upon more probability) shall be
mental, (in the execution) rather than vocal; consisting in Revelation and
conviction from within, more than in any kind of examination or discussion from
without: Therefore is it more proper to say of the Saints there, the world
shall be judged in you, than by you. And as for temporal Judicature, who
apprehends it not to be more in a rational and conscientious verity, than in
any verbal or sentencing formallity? And that this (even in all the exactnes)
is but a formal injustice without that? Therefore even here also, the world is
rather to be judged in you, than by you. And therefore I could wish that we
were not so strict in forms of judging by: and yet more strict in grounds of
judging in. For (believe it) if another be only judged by us, then are we
judged in our selves. But I pursue the Apostles Argument; If the world be
judged in you, which is the greatest matter, then may it the better be judged
by you, in these the smallest matters. And you all (Christians and Saints) know
this for a truth. He that so judges not the world within himself, as to
renounce it here, shall never be counted worthy for to judge it, as to denounce
against it hereafter.

8. A minori, (...) Some Authors make hard sense, in making the Apostle to
assert this in the affirmative, rather than interrogare it in the negative. But
it is clear, he argues from some diminu^ion of their esteem; whether
proceeding from themselves or others. Do ye think your selves unworthy to
judge these smaller matters, whom God has thought worthy to judge the world?
That's an humility or modesty reprehensible (both for dejectedness, and
pusillanimitie, as also for accidie and floathfulnesse) that shall lessen it
self to Gods gifts and graces, or to the Saints privileges and Prerogatives;
so as to make it self as if it were unmeet to do him service either in Church
or Commonwealth. Or else, do others think that your holiness from God
diminishes your honor among men? Or that your spiritual piety is enough to
sequester you from having any hand in secular power? Or that your conscience
debarres your reason? Or that your faith should blind and corrupt your sense?
Or that the Communion of Saints forbids to discern and order things in the
common society of men? Can they once imagine that profane men and Infidels can
be more wise and just (in any matter) then Christians and Saints? Or yet, that
a guilty experience is better able to give perfect judgment in business, then
an innocent simplicity. I tell you, let a man be experienced or practiced in a
thousand Cases, or Causes; yet if his Conscience be guilty or polluted in them,
a sincere enlightened soul (who never perhaps heard of the Case before) is
better able to judge (though not peradventure so exactly of the formallity) yet
of the very truth and integrity, then is he.

4. Ab exteriori, (...). This word (in Scripture use) signifies properly the
Judgment Seat. Whereupon he thus inferres, Shall ye sit upon Thrones above;
and must you be thought unworthy to sit upon Benches here below? But (in the
larger acceptance) (...) designs their things; The Sense, or faculty of
judging; the Seat, or place of Judicature; and the Cause, or matter to be
adjudged. I gather them all into this one observation; That Causes are not to
be adjudged, but by men of faculty and skill in judgment: nor are they to
exercise or execute those faculties, but in just Callings, or proper places of
Judicature.

5. Ab inferiori, (...); the smallest matters. That signification is not small
enough. For it may well be rendered the most base, vile, poor, contemptible,
infamous, etc. But let us expound it in construction with the former word
(...), and so we observe briefly these generals: That the skill or faculty of
judging here on earth, is a poor rude blindness, and blundering; in
comparison of that perfect and infallible illumination, and discretion that
shall be hereafter: That the stateliest Seats of Judicature, are inferior, nay
infamous (footstooles, nay but as dunghils) to those huge and glorious Thrones.
That the matters to be handled now on man's day, are vile and base (the best of
them) in comparison of those important affairs that shall be exactly adjudged
and firmly settled at that day, when Christ shall come with all his Saints. In
a word, that if any of these be abused (by intrusion, ignorance, rashness,
partiallity, or other corruption) then are they smaller then the smallest, yea
viler then the vilest, and no otherwise accounted of in the esteem of God and
good men, 1 Cor. 4.3. Wherefore I shall draw all of it to this twofold use. 1.
One to the men of the Law. The matters of your business (that I may stretch it
no further) what be they, but (...)? You apprehend (I suppose) the true
signification. Take heed therefore that you neither over-prize them, nor
over-pride your selves in them. 2. And then to you Lawing men, What are the
things you are given so greatly to contend about? The smallest matters. They
are your paultry pence, for which you so (without all patience) take your
Fellow Servants by the throat, not once remembering what compassion your great
Lord and Master has long shown to you, as touching those many thousand
talents, whereof you have lived, and (without remission) are likely to dye in
the arreares. They are your petty Trespasses, for which you regard not to
forfeit both the Petition, and the Promise, Mat. 6.12, 14. For your carnals you
altogether neglect the spirituals; and the things pertaining to this life, you
wholly set before the things of a better. There Is such eagerness in contending
for the earth, which was given to the children of men, that there is little
earnestness in contending for the faith, which was once delivered to the
Saints of God. And we that are the Saints, or would, or should be, all our
judging is (in stead of the world) of one another: and that not in the smallest
only, but (woe, and alas!) even in the greatest matters.

Having thus absolved the words and parts of my Text, I come now to my intended
point: A point of truth, and of such pertinence to all, as may justly require a
serious Tractate, and not to be taken up by the way, in the latter end of a
Sermon only. Had you the patience and I the permission to begin again, all
that were not sufficient to delineate it in all the numbers of it; yet because
I have already proposed to discover who the Saints are in particular* And
because if we err and be mistaken in this, all else that has, or can here be
spoken, is but arrogated, usurped, and delusively presumed. Therefore I shall
endeavor in the description both ways, viz. Negatively, and Positively,
praying you to be content at this time in stead of a Syntagme, with a Synopsis
only.

I. Negatively, to show who they are not; for falsehood must be removed, ere
truth can be planted. Therefore there are to be raced out of the Catalogue of
Saints; or rather, not to be there enrolled.

1. Not they, that are not in Christ, Phil. 1.1. -- The Saints in Christ Jesus,
sc. chosen in him, called by him, perfected through him, intended for him, 1
Cor. 1.2. -- Them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. Can
any man be called to the state and being of a Saint, before he be sanctified by
Christ's Blood, Baptism, Gospel, Grace, Merits? unless this foundation be
laid, it is impossible to raise any such like superstructure; not only for
those sayings, but for these reasons. 1. Because Christ therefore made himself
a Saint, to the end he might so make us Saints in himself, John 17.19. For
their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through
the truth (which indeed is my self.) He sanctified himself in the assumption
of his humane nature; to sanctify our nature, in a reconciliation of it to
God: He sanctified himself to the office of his mediation, that so he might
sanctify us to the office of our profession: He sanctified or prepared
himself to his passion, to the end he might sanctify or purge us from our
sins: He sanctified himself to a perfection of obedience, to the intent he
might sanctify us to a conformity in our lives. 2. Because we were Saints in
Christ before we were Saints, nay while we were yet corrupt in our selves. The
lump, or mass, profane it self, is notwithstanding holy in the first fruits:
The Branches wild in themselves, are holy nevertheless in their root, Romans
11.16, 17. Our children that are unclean in themselves, yet now are they holy,
1 Cor. 7.14. and all through the Covenant made with us and our seed 3. Because
now that we are Saints in our selves, we are yet more Saints in Christ then we
are in our selves. It Is not all our inspired or present, but his presenting
holiness that makes us so purely and perfectly holy, Ephesians. 5.27. Gol. 1.22. And
therefore we count not our Saintship to consist so much in our active and
infused, as in our passive and imputed sanctity: For by the one we can be but
holy, as we are capable of in our selves; but by the other we are found to be
holy, as he is holy.

2. Not they, that have not the spirit. We attribute it in peculiar manner to
the Holy Ghost, to be our Sanctifier (which is as much as a Saint-maker.) And
shall any man think to be so made without his Maker? In Romans 1.4. 2 These.
2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. There are these convertible terms or Propositions; the
Spirit of sanctification, and the sanctification of the Spirit. To note both
ways, that neither can that Cause be without this effect, nor this effect
without that Cause. As no Spirit without sanctification, so no sanctification
without the Spirit. Persons of Saints, actions of Saints, communion of Saints,
all are sanctified or sainted by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of our God; Romans
15.16. 1 Cor. 6.11. 2 Pet. 1.21.

3. Not they, that are not sanctified by the Word. It is the Word that
sanctifies the common creature, even to saintly uses, 1 Timothy 4.5. It is the
Word that sanctifies the Person to his saintly Duties, John 17.17. Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Exceeding well limited by our
Savior himself; that no man might presume of other, or further sanctity, or
Saintship, then the Word it self sets forth: Or, that there should be a truth
of any thing, necessary to be known or done (by sanctified men or Saints)
either besides or beyond it. It is by the Word (and by the Sacraments too) that
the Church (or Congregation of Saints) is sanctified, both in her mysterious
relations, and religious offices, Ephesians. 5.26. Let the Saints of the Church then
see to it, that neither means of sanctification or Saintship be neglected.

4. Not they, that would be Saints in name only, and in nothing else. We read
of the called Saints indeed, Romans 1.7. 1 Corin. 1.2. But who expounds that of
the Nominall, and not of the real Calling? In the Old Testament, the word
Saint is so indefinite in signification, that (in many places) we are left to
interpret it indifferently, either of a holy man, or of a holy thing. And there
(in many places again) the Saints, or holy persons, are expressed by sanctity,
or holiness it self: yea and Christ himself is not only called the Holy One,
but the Holy thing, Luke 1.39. All is to teach us, not to glory in the name
without the thing: not to bea^^ of, Saints in the concrete, without sanctity
in the abstract. What? shall we be as profane as Papists are superstitious, in
calling painted Pictures and livelesse Images, Saints? The word was abused of
old (whether arrogantly or ironically, I know not) by calling whoremongers and
hariets by the same, or the like name with Saints, Genesis 38.21. Deuteronomy. 23.17. 2
Kings 23.7. Hos. 4.14. I am ashamed to say, how it is so and so abused even now
adays.

5. Not they, who (out of an opinion of their own sanctity) despise all
others; as if there were no Saints but themselves. Of this sect were some old
Jews, Isa 65.5. and after them the Pharisees, Luke 7.39. and 18.9. As he
cannot be simply a Saint, that is a Saint only in comparison (comparing
himself with others, whom he takes to be worse, or not so good as himself;)
so neither is he, (who comparing himself with himself,) presumes himself for
a Saint alone, or above all other Saints whomsoever. Contrary to such a
Pharisaicall conceit, was St Paul's humble apprehension and confession of
himself, Ephesians. 3.8. Who am less thou the least of all Saints. But how do they
make themselves better then the least of Saints? who think it no sacrilege to
reb Peter and Paul of the name of Saints, and yet no superstition to assume it
to themselves: Who presume that their righteousness then exceeds the
Pharisees, when they exceed them only in Pharascisme: Who not only contemn
others, as the Reshagaim, the wicked; and deride the Thaddikim, the just in a
conformity to the Moral Law; but not contented to be accounted the Chesidim,
righteous above the Law, in their Traditions; they will be (that I may add so
much to the old distinction) even the Kedoshim, holy above the Gospel, in
their own delusions.

6. Not they, who make all to be Saints alike, Numb. 16.3. All the Congregation
are holy every one of them. Oh the arrogance of confusion I There will be a
separation. The Lord will show who are his, and who are holy, or Saints. Mean
while bring every man his Censor, his conscience, and stand in the door of the
Congregation, the Church of God; and be you before the Lord in presenting your
conscience to be informed by his Word; and then the glory of the Lord (his
graces) will appear. Think not to fetch Saints (all at once, or one like
another) out of the earth; for that were utterly against the old Etymology of a
Saint, ((...)) and it is to be feared, the carth will swallow up such Saints
again. But look up to the heavens, (whence all Saints have their original)
and you shall soon perceive the difference, not only bet wixt stars and Comets,
but even betwixt stars, and stars. For they differ in grace as well as
glory, 1 Cor. 15.41.

7. Not they, which make war with the Saints, Dan. 7.21. Revel. 3.7. Not
they, which give the flesh of his Saints unto the beasts of the earth, Psalm.
79.2. Not they, which are drunken with the blood of the Saints, Revel. 17.6.
You know, the places are expounded of Atheists, Idolaters, Prophaners,
Hypocrites, Heretics, Schismatics, Persecutors, etc. and of their cruelties,
treacheries, seducements, etc. I read of one (and but of one) of whom it was
said, He had done much evil to the Saints, Acts 9.13. yet he afterward became
a Saint; and (as a Saint) suffered more himself, than he had done to all
others before: and yet (for what he had dome) accounted himself the least of
all Saints ever after.

II. Positively, now to show who they are. And I shall as shortly describe them
from their Properties, their Exercises, their Privileges, and their Services.

1. From their gracious Properties. Were I to define a Saint, I would do it
thus: A Saint is the subject of grace; Neither do I take a Saint to be any
other thing, than grace in the concrete; or indeed the collective of all
graces. His gracious Properties are they which constitute him in himself,
difference him from others, and declare him to all the world. And they are,

1. Innocence. This is much used in the definition of a Saint, or description.
And vulgarly, a Saint and an Innocent, are taken for Synonyma's. It is said of
Christ, our High Priest, that he was holy, and harmless, Hebr. 7.26. and such
an one became us, both to believe, and imitate. And it is the great act of his
Office, not only to make us holy, and unblameable; but to preserve, and
present us so, Ephesians. 1.4. and 5.27. Col 1.22. 1 These. 2.9. and 3.13. The places
give us to note plainly, That he that is a Saint, or holy in his person, must
also be an Innocent, or unblamable in his actions; and not only so, but in his
affections also, unblamable, or unreprovable, both as from his own boars and
conscience, and in the sight of God; and by the report and witness of godly
and faithful men. Neither willingly giving occasion (as the several words
import) for private scandal to complain, nor for public justice to call in
question.

2. Fear of God. A private fear, or that of conscience: O fear the Lord ye
his Saints, Psalm. 34.9. A public fear, or that of service. God is greatly to
be feared in the assembly of the Saints, Psalm 89.7. Between this and that, is
the whole work of our Christian, or Saintly proficiency; Perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. For holiness without fear, soon grows
sloathfull in srcurity: and fear without holiness, grows as sloathfull in
despair. Both these therefore having had their perfect work, there wants not
their reward, neither temporal, Psalm. 34.9. nor eternal. Rev. 11.18.

3. Faith. The Saints and the Faithful are inseparable companions, Ephesians. 1.1.
Colos. 1.2. And though some distinguish them by their Callings and Degrees, yet
I cannot well discern which is one, which another; which is first, which last:
saving that he is the one more properly, as justified by Christ; and the other,
as sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Only (because many pretend to faith, without
holiness) I would that the faith of the Saints were discerned by the zeal of
profession, Jude 3. By the virtue of obedience, Rev. 14.12. by the communion of
Charity, Col. 1.2. and by the patience of expectation, Rev. 13.10.

4. Love. It either respects God and man, or man and man. Betwixt God and man,
it is either that love whereby God loved them first, and so it is the cause or
ground of their Saintship, Romans 1.7. Beloved of God, called to be Saints: Or
else it is that love where with they love God again; and so it is the effect,
or sign of their Saintship, Psalm 31.23. O love the Lord all ye his Saints.
Betwixt man and man, their love is defective to none, Ephesians. 1.4. -- Holy and
without blame in love: But excessive and abounding to those of their like. --
Your love unto all the Saints. Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4.

5. Wisdom. And that of extraordinary revelation, as touching particular
promises, Psalm. 89.19. Thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, etc. Of
ordinary illumination, in the perpetual truth, Col. 1.26. The mystery which
has been laid from ages, and from generations, is now made manifest to his
Saints. The Saints of old exceeded us in legal visions; but we transcend them
in Evangelicall illuminations: Our mysterious way comparatively hidden to them;
their miraculous way superlatively hidden to us. How great delusion is it then
for us to dote after their mists, and Moonshine, in the midst of our own
Sunshine, and perfect day? Item, of a discreet apprehension, in matters of
prudent and conscientious Piety, Prove. 9.10.) The knowledge of the holy (or of
the Saints) is understanding: None like to theirs for piety and policy, both at
once. That of others, is but the shadow; this of theirs, is the substance of
all wisdom. But where is it to be found? In few, or none: For what he once
said in modesty, Prove. 30.3. every man almost may say with shame; I have
neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy, or of the Saints.
Item, of perfect comprehension, Ephesians. 3.18. -- may comprehend with all Saints,
etc. Namely, the love of God in Christ, to be comprehended (in all the
dimensions of it) by the Saints in heaven. Both the breadth, how it extends to
all, Saints, and Angels; and the length, how it was from everlasting, to
everlasting; and the depth, how it had no cause, but that rooted within it
self; and the height, how it has brought them to glory in the highest Heavens.

6. Purity. Both of body and mind. For he that is no pure Saint in his body
(believe it) can be no true Saint in his soul. One that is a right Saint,
must be holy both in body and spirit, 1 Cor. 7.34. Nor can there be any
perfecting of holiness, till a man have cleansed himself from all filthiness
of the flesh, and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Wherefore, Yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.19. And present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, etc. Romans 12.1. For this is the will of God, even your
Sanctification, -- that every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor 1 These. 4.1, 2. Take heed then (as ye
would be accounted Saints) not only of actual pollution, through
uncleanness of commission, but even of verbal infection, through corrupt
communication. But Fornication, and all uncleanness, and covetousness, let it
not once be named amongst you, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3.

7. Patience. In Daniel, and the Revelations, (Dan. 7.21, 25. and 8.24. Rev.
13.7, 10. and 14.12. and 16.6. and 17.6.) much is expressed concerning the
patience of the Saints: And much more might be thence affirmed, both as
touching their patience of perpession, and of expectation; of sufferance, and
of perseverance. And (besides the kinds) the causes also (Gods justice, and
man's injustice) as likewise faith and obedience, the express conditions
thereof. But I forbear, because I know not, whether even your patience will
bear it, and whether my words, (if they be many) may not tire it in the very
hearing: or (if these words should be weighty) might not (as to the hearing,
and bearing) weary it, with imposing yet further upon it.

8. Humility. Which is an humble or lowly apprehension of our own graces, and
Saintship. Both because of all defects in comparison of God, Who put no trust,
or found no steadfastness in his Saints, Job 15.15. That they should stand of
themselves, or without him, or should be of consistency like to him, or once
offer to contend with him: And likewise, because of manifold both defects, and
exorbitances; in relation not only to themselves, but others also: Enough (if
well laid to heart) to make the best Saint say ingeniously of himself, I am
less than the least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3.8. And think it honor enough, to
wash the Saints feet, 1 Timothy 5.10.

2. From their gracious Exercises. For what barren and empty notions are those
we have of gifts and graces unexercised? I say, barren, and empty notions; if
not bare and aerie pretensions. How were the good and faithful servants to be
differenced from that wicked and sloathfull one, but by the employment, and
improvement of their Talents? He had his Talent, but he hid it in the earth, or
laid it up in a Napkin; whereas they traded with theirs, and gained double to
them. The true Saint then is to be distinguished, and declared by his
exercises: which are,

1. To endeavor in the discerning, or putting a difference between holy and
unholy, Levit. 10.10. Ezekiel. 44.23. Namely, both men, and things. For he who
studies not to discern betwixt holy and unholy things, shall never be able to
discern trueby betwixt holy and unholy men. Neither are we to consider the
thing by the man, but the man by the thing: For the trees are known by their
fruit, and not the fruit by their trees. And without this discretion (in some
measure) neither can a duty be done aright by any man; nor judged rightly of,
when done by another.

2. To labor diligently in universal obedience to Gods commandments. For
certainly, no obedience, no Saint: Because this is the express condition of
the Saints initiating, Exodus 19.5, 6. his avouching, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. his
establishing, Deuteronomy. 28.9. and his consummating, Rev. 15.12, 13.

3. To imitate God, and Christ, especially in holiness, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.
Because it is written, be ye holy; for I am holy. God is essentially,
independantly, and infinitely holy; and in all these ways his holiness is to
us unimitable: He gives us here a command to be holy, and that binds us only
to be so, but helps us not. He likewise sets forth to us his own being holy
(yet as a proposed motive, not a proportioned model) and that urges us
moreover, but nevertheless assists us not. But he also here gives us our Call
to be holy; and the Call invites graciously, as well as the command justly
obliges. For here he gives us a pattern, as well as there a rule; proposing
him that has called us, for our example, stretching it not beyond our own
conversation, and capacity, although enlarging it to the utmost of it self. And
so we have the grace and power, aid and encouragement, rule and guide, means and
way for our imitation.

4. To labor in, and after Communion; The Communion of Saints, as it is of the
Members with their head, so it is among the Privileges: but as it is of the
Members each with other, so it is amongst the exercises of Saints. This we
glory in, as a Privilege; but we fail of it, as an exercise. Therefore is it
necessary to say, first, how it is erred in; next how it ought to be
endeavored after. 1. The errors are, that men are over-speculative, and not
practical enough in this point. They think that they have satisfied this truth
to assent unto it, or profess it as an Article of their Creed, though they
never endeavor it in the practice of their conversations. Whereas indeed, no
man can rightly believe, that there is a Communion of Saints, much less that
himself is one of that Communion, unless he be duly exercised therein: That
some men stretch it too high, and far, and wide, and so make it a commixion,
or indeed a confusion, rather than a Communion: That some tie it up too
straight, and would seem to purge it so precisely, as that (instead of any
thing like to society) they make it the same with a separation, a singularity,
or very solitude it self: That some will be admitting such as are no Saints;
and some again will not admit of very Saints into their Communions: That some
make it to consist in a community of goods, more than in a communication of
graces; and in a Congregation of bodies, not in a conjunction of souls; and a
conspiracy of rude members, not harmony of holy powers; and a communication of
tongues and faces, more than any co-union of hearts and minds: That some will
be intruding themselves into a particular, and familiar Communion, even with
the Saints in heaven; and some are shye of other, than a general and called
communion with the Saints on earth. 2. The endeavors here ought to be
according to these regulations of it. Not simply to have communion one with
another; but with special relation to our union with Christ, and his Spirit,
the causes and foundation of all our Saintly communion, 1 John 1.3.7. 1 Cor.
6.17. and 12.13. 2 Cor. 13.14. Not to abandon utterly all external communion
with wicked men and hypocrites; and yet not to admit them into the internal
neither, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 13. 1 Timothy 5.22. Not to break off all communion with a
Brother, for every infirmity or offense; and yet not to communicate with the
sins of any, 2 These. 3.14, 15. 1 Cor. 5.11. Not to have respect of persons in
Christian Communion, as touching Nation, Sex, Age, Degree, Condition, etc. and
yet even there also to prefer one before another, for their measures, and
eminences sake, James 2.1, 2, 3. Gal. 3.28. and 2.9. Not to think that our
communion (either with the Head or Members) can be perfected all at once; but
to labor in the completion of it by times and degrees, Ephesians. 4.15, and Col.
2.19. Plainly, and in few; to labor after this communion, by the means of the
Word, Sacraments and Prayer, etc. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Cor. 12.13. and 10.16, 17.
Phil. 1.4, 5. To labor in this communion, by communicating our gifts and
graces, Romans 1.11. Philem. 5, 6. By teaching and exhorting both by Word and
Example, 1 John 1.3. Gal. 6.6. By communicating to one another outward
necessities, Romans 12.13. 2 Cor. 8.4. Phil. 4.15. By conforming our selves to
Christ in our own sufferings; and compassionating others in theirs, 1 Pet.
4.13. Phil. 4.14. 2 Cor. 1.7.

5. To have the divine Ordinances in due observation. I pass by those that
were particular, and temporary, Exo. 22.30, 31. Lev. 21.6. Numb. 6.5. I speak
only of two Ordinances, which are universal, and perpetual throughout the
Church of Christ. That is to say, the Magistracy, and the Ministry: both
which all the Saints (as Saints) are bound to observe, because ordained of God,
and for their good. 1. The Magistracy; All his Saints are in thy hands, they
sat down at thy feet, every one shall receive of thy words. Deuteronomy. 33.3. They
are the words either of God, approving Moses his authority to his People; or of
Moses commending the Peoples observance; or else of the People, acknowledging
him, and themselves in both these: and that as touching both their Protection,
Subjection, and Direction. 2. The Ministry; He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teathers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. There is this one end of all kind
of Ministers Institution; the Saints perfection. How can the Saints then be
perfect without them? The original word there imports how laxate, or
loose-joynted they are, if these be wanting to confirm them; worthy therefore
they are to be observed by all such, and if it be but for their works sake,
as it especially concerns themselves.

6. To apply earnestly unto Prayer. A prime exercise of Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. So
soon as called to be Saints, immediately calling upon the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ. This I say therefore, no praying people, no Saints; yet say I
not, that every one is a Saint that prays. No, not any one, unless he pray,
1. In, and by the Spirit. He makes intercession for the Saints, Romans 8.27. 2.
As vold of superstition, in every place; so void of singularity: remembering
that Christ is others Lord, as well as his own, 1 Cor. 1.2. 3. Upon other
Saints, or holy men's occasion and example, Psalm. 32.6. 4 In the harmony or
consent of all faculties, with the clearness of understanding, and zeal of
affections. All noted by the Harps, golden vialls, and odours; which are said
to be the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. 5. In the name of Christ, who is the
Angel offering up the prayers of the Saints, in the golden Censer of his own
merits and mediation, Rev. 8.3, 4.

7. To give hearty thanks and praise to God, viz. publicly, privately; for all
his gracious acts, and according to all his gracious attributes: Out of a
bounden duty, a ready mind, a cheerful voice, a comely order, and a ^it
opportunity, Psalm. 30.4. and 52.9. and 89.5. and 145.10.149.1.

8. To desire, and endeavor in a proficiency of all holy duties. Both by a
vigilant circumspection against temptations and relapses. He will speak peace
unto his people, and to his Saints; but let them not turn agains to folly,
Psalm 85.8. As also in a continual augmentation, and procession, both of
graces, and duties. He that is holy, let him be holy still, Rev. 22.11.

III. From their Privileges. Whereof some are to set forth their dignity, and
advancement, in honorable Titles: Some their advantage, or utility, in
inestimable benefits.

1. Those of their advancement in Dignity: Besides that, they are usually
styled a holy people, chosen, special, peculiar, redeemed, purchased, sought
out, beloved, etc. God has promised to make them high above all other, in
praise, in name, and in honor, Deuteronomy. 26.19. That is, for goodness, power and
esteem. And God is as good as his word; He exalts the horn of his people,
the praise of all his Saints, Psalm 148.14. sc. makes them the praise and
admiration of all people; that they may praise and adore him the more. More
particularly, He has made them to be Kings and Priests, or a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 1.6. A Royal Priesthood, in assimilation to
Christ; the Priest of the Royal, not the rigid Law. A Kingdom wherein is a
Priesthood; for service and holiness: and a Priesthood, wherein is a Kingdom;
for authority and order: Kings, in the justice of Civil government: Priests,
in the mercy of Ecclesiastical government: Kings, to subdue carnal
corruptions: Priests, to offer spiritual sacrifices: Kings, against the
adversaries of the Church: Priests, toward the Sons of the Church: Priests
to serve here, and Kings to reign hereafter. I add (because of the occasion)
Judges, and Counselors: Judges, both against the enemies of God and Christ in
general, Jude 14, 15. and against their own enemies and persecuters in
particular, Dan. 7.21, 22. Counselors, to which we may turn. Job 5.1. He
means not to dead Saints, by way of Invocation; but to living Saints, for
Patronage, and Advocateship; for counsel, and advice; for information, and
instruction; for instance, and example. And hereupon, let me not add to say;
no Saints, no Judges; no Saints, no Counselors.

2. Those of their advantage, or benefit; which be, 1. To be specially
protected, both in body and soul; against evils both internal, and external.
The Lord forsakes not his Saints, they are preserved for ever, Psalm 37.28.
He preserves the souls of his Saints, Psalm 97.10. He will keep the feet of
his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. 2. To be peaceably comforted, both against the
conscience of sin: He will speak peace to his Saints, etc. Psalm 85.8. As
also in the tranquillity of a good conscience; Let the Saints be joyful in
glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds, Psalm 149.5. And that, in the
comforts and cheerfulness, both of graces and duties, 2 Chr. 6.41. Psalm
132.9, 10. 3. To be eternally saved. It is verified not of our Savior only,
but of every Saint; Thou will not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption, Psalm
16.10. The Saints possessed the Kingdom, Dan. 7.22. There Is their enjoying of
it. The riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18.
There Is Christ enjoying of them; Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, Col. 1.12. There Is their enjoying of one another in him.

4. From their Services: I mean such as are due unto them, not only from one
another, but some of them from all other. And (in brief) they are, 1. The
praying for one another, Ephesians. 6.18. 2. The visiting or saluting one another,
Acts 9.32. Romans 16.15. 1 Cor. 13.13. Phil. 4.21, 22. 3. The loving, and
reverencing one another Persons, Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4. Mark 6.20. 1 Timothy 5.10.
4. The delighting in one another company, and communion, Psalm 16.3. and
Psalm 18.26. Hos. 11.12. Ephesians. 2.19. 5. The administering to one another
necessities, Psalm 16.2, 3. Romans 12.13. and 15.25, 26, 31. and 16.2. 1 Cor.
16.1, 15. 2 Cor. 8.4. and 9.1. Phile. 7. Hebr. 6.10. Should I insist to
explain all these services, as they are laid forth (for our rules and
examples) in the aforesaid places; and (in particular) examine how they are
performed by one, or other, I should bring in the world (I fear) to judge the
Saints in these neglects. And for all these (with many more that might be
applied from the whole discovery) there be many, who though they presume
themselves for Saints, and such as shall judge the world; yet shall they find
themselves (I am afraid) judged amongst the worst of the world, at the great
day of God.

Now the good God of Heaven do away the vayles, and more then menstruous rags
of simulated sanctity, and cloth us with the fine linen (the perfection of
Jesus Christ) which is the righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 19.8. And abate
the arrogance and temerity of judging before the time: And make us so to judge
our selves, that we may not be judged. And so to judge the world now, in the
sincerity of grace, that we may judge it hereafter in the authority of glory.
And when we are judged here, we may be so chastened of the Lord: And when we
are judged hereafter, we may be so absolved by him, as that we may justly
condemn, and never be justly condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32.

FINIS.

