A PETITION For the Vindication of the Public use of the Book of
COMMON PRAYER, From some foul, but undeserved aspersions lately cast upon it.
And for the asserting of the Public use of Set-Forms of PRAYER, and
dispensing the holy SACRAMENTS.

Occasioned by the late Ordinance for the ejecting of scandalous, ignorant, and
insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters.

As also thirty seven Quaeres concerning the said Ordinance, and the
particulars thereof.

Humbly presented to the most Honorable and Highest Court of PARLIAMENT, now
convened at Westminster, Anno 1654.

WITH A true Account rendered in an Epistle prefixed, and an Appendix subjoyned,
both of the Printing and Presenting the same.

By Lionel Gatford, Batchelour in Divinity.

2 CHR^^. 13. v. 9. DEUTERONOMY. 33. v. 8.10, 11.

London, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in Saint Paul's Churchyard*
1655.

TO THE MOST HONORABLE and Highest Court of PARLIAMENT, now assembled at
Westminster,
Lionel Gatford, Batchelour in Divinity, wishes all Wisdom, Courage, and Fear
of the Lord, with all other graces necessary for this life, and all comforts
and joys reserved for a better.
Most Honorable, and truly honored,
BE pleased ( I most humbly beseech you) to receive by the hands of another,
what my present infirmities of body, and poverty of condition, will not permit
me to present unto your Honors by mine own. The following Petition, and
certain Quaeres annexed thereto; both occasioned by the late Ordinance for the
ejecting of scandalous, ignorant, and insufficient Ministers and
Schoolmasters. An Ordinance deserving your strictest examination, as being
suggested to his Highness by some grand, but close underminers of the
Protestant Religion, for the utter extirpation of the Ministry thereof out of
this Nation, and therefore already taken (as I am informed) into your most
pious consideration, as a work most beseeming you and your known zeal and
affection to the said Religion. And if the said Petition, and Quaers may
contribute ought, though never so little to that great and glorious work, I
shall give God all the glory of it; as I shall never cease to supplicate him
for his assisting you therein, and crowning your endeavors with an happy and
honorable success. I have caused both the Petition and Quaeres to be Printed,
and taken the best order I could, at this distance with the Stationer, to whose
care I committed the Printing of them, that your Honors might have each of you
a perfect Copy, to the intent that you might by your selves in your
retirements, as well as jointly in your Assembly (if you see cause) peruse and
scan every part and clause thereof. And if after such a perusal, your Honors
shall find (as I trust you will) nothing therein either repugnant or
prejudicial to truth, and the zealous and prudential propugning thereof, or
unbeseeming the propugner, or unworthy of your Honors appearing for; I humbly
beg your further recommending them (if you shall think fit to a more public
view, either of his Highness (...) any other, with what advantage your better
Judgments, and more inflamed zeal to Gods glory, and the true Reformed
Religion shall prompt you to. But if they obtain no other favor but the being
read by you, I shall repute it no small recompense, as well as honor to have
such witnesses of my being really studious, and co^dially desirous to defend
and maintain, to the utmost of my weak power and ability, the said true
Reformed Protestant Religion established in the Church of England, against all
the enemies and oppugners thereof; as also against whatsoever scandalls,
reproaches, or aspersions they can cast on it. And that as readily and
willingly now in these times of frenzy and madness on the one hand, as
heretofore in those of imprudence and incogitancy on the other. And perhaps the
known adversaries of our Religion (whose heads have been and still are very
busy in all the designs and contrivances against it, though they have and do
make use of others hands to act by) may lose a great part of their present
design, if they be not wholly frustrated, by this single appearance of one
poor stripling of the Church of England; it being known to them and to the
world, that (notwithstanding the fall of so many thousand able and eminent
professors and repugners of the same Religion, by their Jesuitical treacheries
and conspiracies) there are yet whole Armies left of the same faith and
courag^, though they have not so publicly dec^ared themselves, nor indeed
might without ^^curring some censure, which they are desirous to avoid.
Howsoever, if that stripling be but encouraged with your approbation (as he
has reason from former mercies and deliverances to hope for Gods assistance)
he shall willingly hazard himself in the defense of his Religion; and, upon
reasonable warning, will be ready with his Shepherds Scrip, and Pastoral
Instruments, (though he be sequestered from his flock) to encounter with any
Philistine, to whom your Honors shall send or call forth.

Your most devoted servant

TO THE MOST HONORABLE and Highest Court of PARLIAMENT, Now Convened at
Westminster, for England, Scotland, and Ireland,
The Humble Petition of Lionel Gatford, B.D.
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas it pleased his Highness, the Lord Protector, (upon the subtle and
malicious suggestions of close, pernicious enemies to the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, as your Petitioner in honor of his Highness and Council
is bound to conceive) by his Letters to the Judge of the Assizes the last
Spring, to require the Justices of Peace to be more particularly careful of
the suppressing of Alehouses and the Book of Common Prayer; And again since
that, by an Ordinance entitled, An O^dinance for the ejecting of Scandalous
^gnorant, and insufficient Ministers, etc.(...) conjoin the public and
frequent reading or using the said Book, with the horrid crimes of holding or
maintaining blasphemous and Atheistical opinions, of being guilty of Cursing,
Swearing, Perjury, subornation of Perjury, Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness,
and other abominable crimes mentioned in the said Ordinance; As also thereby to
adjudge the so reading the said Book to be a crime so scandalous, as that he,
that should be guilty thereof, (how thoroughly Orthodox or faithfully
laborious, how devoutly pious, and eminently religious soever he otherwise be)
should be ejected and displaced from his Cure of Souls, Benefice, or other
place or charge, to his own and poor wife and childrens ruin, if not to the
extreme damage or hazard of those Souls committed to his Charge, and
acknowledged to have been much benefited by his Ministry.

Your humble Petitioner, in his zeal to Gods glory, and the honor of the true
Reformed Protestant Religion (of both which, the said Book has been
instrumentally none of the least promoter and advancer) most humbly craveth
leave to offer these few particulars to your most serious and pious
consideration.

First, Whether the joining of the Book of Common Prayer, and Alehouses in
their suppressing, and the reputing and accounting the public reading or
using it amongst such horrid crimes before mentioned, and the adjudging him
that so reads or uses it, to be therefore so scandalous, as to deserve to be
ejected out of his Cure or Charge, be not (to say the least of it) very
injurious and prejudicial to the true Reformed Protestant Religion it self, and
highly dishonorable both to it and to the true Professors thereof, as also much
advantageous to the enemies of both, as well in their now more then ordinarily
endeavored, and more then wontedly prevailing seducements and temptations, for
the perverting and corrupting many weak brethren, as otherwise, when it cannot
be denied, but that the said Book was at first composed by most pious, and
religious, as well as Learned and Orthodox men, eminent for their wisdom and
prudence in assis^ing the Reformation of Religion, and renowned for their
fidelity and c^^^tancy in sealing their profession with their blood: And has
been since revised, and farther approved and established by all our pious
Protestant Princes, with the advice and consent of their most Judicious and
Religious Parliaments; And contains in it the form and matter of the public
worship of God by Prayer, and the form and manner of the public dispensing
the holy Sacraments, and other necessary public observances, constantly
practiced and observed by the Protestants here in England, ever since the
Reformation, and no ways repugnant in any essential part thereof to the
public form of Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, used in other
Reformed Churches: So that, if that way and manner of the public worship of
God by Prayer, and of the public dispensing or administering the Sacraments,
which has bin the only constant and approved way here in the Church of
England, be such as deserves not only utterly to be abolished and suppressed,
but to be joined in the abolishing and suppressing it, with those sinks of sin,
and nurseries of vice, common Alehouses, and to have the using that way and
manner reputed amongst such horrid crimes as by the said Ordinance it is
reputed, and to be adjudged so scandalous, as that they who use it ought to be
deemed and censured as unfit and unworthy to officiate in the Church; and for
that cause alone to be ejected and displaced: It will thereupon easily be
inferred and concluded, that the Church of England (the acknowledged Bulwark
and Fortress, as well as asyle and refuge of all the Protestants in
Christendom) has hitherto foully and grossly, yea, criminously and
scandalously erred in two main Fundamentals of Religion, and discriminating
notes of a true Church, viz. the true worshipping of God, and the right and
lawful administration of the Sacraments. And whether the granting or supposing
this, be not very injurious and prejudicial to the true Reformed Protestant
Religion it self, and highly dishonorable both to it and to the true
Professors thereof, etc. as is before alleged, is humbly submitted to your
Judgments.

Secondly, for the vindicating of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and
the professors thereof, from this foul, but most unjust scandal and aspersion,
and from the injury, prejudice and damage, that it and they may suffer
thereby; Your humble Petitioner further prays, that his Highness the Lord
Protector, may be so fairly and observantly treated with, and advised by your
Honors, his now greatest Council, concerning that particular, that without the
least reflection of diminution upon his Honor and Wisdom, (so far as is
possible) his own opinion, or rather sudden conception upon others suggestions,
concerning the Book of Common Prayer, may be taken off, and changed into
better thoughts; and so the honor of that Book (so far at least, as concerns
the honor of God, himself, and the true Reformed Protestant Religion) be
preserved, which is no more then the Apostles themselves did in the abolishing
of Jewish Rites and Ceremonies, how inconsistent soever with the Christian
Profession, and practice, and may much more be indulged to the reverend and
religious worship of many thousands and ten thousands eminently renowned
Christians.

And for the same ends, your Petitioner in the third place, offers to your
Honors this humble motion and earnest supplication, That you would be pleased
(with the consent of his Highness first obtained) to publish a decree or
command, That all persons of what religion or profession soever, that have
ought to object or except against set forms of public Prayer, and
administration of the Sacraments in general, or against the Book of
Common Prayer in particular, do (by some few of their own religion and
profession, chosen by them for that purpose, for the avoidng of tumults and
confusion) within such a time give in to your Honors, either written or
printed, all or the chief of the reasons and grounds of those their objections
and exceptions. And that your Petitioner, (though very weak and unworthy to
appear in so great a cause) together with some few other of those many that are
of his judgment, may, upon sufficient notice thereof given to them, and some
small charges, by reason of his and their known poverty, allowed them, be
admitted to return answer to those objections and exceptions; and then have
some further time assigned them to clear and make good to his Highness and to
your Honors, these three Assertions.

I. That Set Forms of public Prayer, and dispensing of the Saeraments, are
more agreeable to and consistent with the precepts and rules of Prayer, and
dispensing the Sacraments contained in sacred Scripture, then ex tempore
Prayers and Arbitrary modes of dispensing these Ordinances are.

II. That it is requisite and necessary for every settled Church in every
Nation to have (as anciently and lately they had) known Set-Forms both of
public Prayers, and of public dispensation of the Sacraments, that so
errors in both may be the better avoided, and the uncharitable judging of each
other prevented, and peace and truth preserved.

III. That the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments
formerly established and used here in England, is absolutely the best Form and
freest from all just exceptions in all essential points and practices of
Religion, that ever yet saw light in the Christian world, and none of the
weakest Forts, that the Church of England had against Popery, and other errors,
and heresies. And therefore may by your Honors mediation to his Highness, and
with his and your joint approbation and confirmation, be still continued in
this Church (at least in those Congregations that shall accept and desire it)
without the scandal of any, or prejudice to those that shall use it.

And for this your justice, and zeal for the honor of God, and the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, your Petitioner with many thousands shall
faithfully and devoutly pray, etc.
CERTAIN QUAERIES Concerning the Ordinance for ejecting of Scandalous,
Ignorant, and Insufficient Ministers and Schoolmasters.
Humbly presented to the Highest Court of PARLIAMENT now convened at
Westminster.
By L.G. B.D.
Quaer. 1.
WHether the Ordinance it self be not contrary to the known Laws, and other
just claims of the Subjects of this Nation,) as Magna Charta and the Petition
of Right) for the preservation of themselves, their rights, and proprieties:
For that by them (as we are informed) no Subject ought or can be ejected out of
his possession or livelihood, unless such an ejection, or dispossession be
first legally procured by virtue and power of some established Law or Act of
Parliament, constituted and consented unto by the Supreme Governor, and the
representative of the Subjects, the Parliament.

Quaer. 2.
Whether, if an Ordinance made by the Protector and his Council, for the
ejecting of Ministers out of their Livings and and lively-hoods, be owned since
submitted unto, as authority sufficient for the so doing, The late King and his
Council be not thereby superabundantly justified against all those late
Complaints of the pretended illegallities of their Acts, decrees or orders made
by them at the Council board, in far inferior cases to this of possession and
livelihood, and instanced in by the late Parliament, as grand grievances of the
Subjects, and an introduction of arbitrary power, at least an endeavoring to
bring Westminster Hall to Whitehall.

Quaer. 3.
Whether by the same authority, an Ordinance may not be made, for the ejecting
or sequestring of any other Subjects of England, (even the Commissioners,
authorized by this Ordinance themselves, as well as any) that shall, by other
Commissioners nominated for that purpose, be found guilty of some of the same,
or of any other crimes, that by such an Ordinance shall be reputed crimes.

Quaer. 4.
Whether the same Powers that made this Ordinance, when they have judged such
and such crimes in Ministers to deserve the ejection of those that are guilty
of them out of their Lively-hoods, ought not in equity and conscience as in a
true sincere detestation of those sins, in whomsoever they find them, to
constitute and appoint also some Commissioners in each County to censure
severely and punish sharply all the same, much more far greater crimes in
others, besides Ministers. For surely, though the same crimes be greater, when
found in Ministers, then in others: yet sins of that high nature, as to
deserve to be punished with no less then ejection, when found in Ministers,
cannot but be so great in themselves, as to deserve some proportionable
punishment, when they are found in others, especially in magistrates, and men
of place and authority.

Quaer. 5.
Whether the Lord Protector's Successor may not with as much equity make
another Ordinance for the ejecting of all those, both Clergy and Laymen, out
of their estates and livelyhoods, who have been active in this Commission of
ejecting Ministers, or otherwise guilty of any other crimes, which shall by him
and his Council be judged crimes and worthy of ejection? And whether this
present Ordinance may not prove an unhappy president to that purpose, not to be
spoken or whispered against by any that submits to this.

Quaer. 6.
Whether his Highness, by imparting so much power to any five Commissioners in
every County, as is by this Ordinance imparted, without admitting of any appeal
from their Judgment either to himself, or to his Council, or to his Judges of
Assizes, or to any of his Courts in Westminster, may not thereby, ere he is
aware have all or the most of the Livings and Cures in in every County, voyded
and emptied of such Ministers, as are at the least contented to submit to his
Government, and to live quietly and patiently under it, without attempting
ought against him or it, And instead of such, to have them filled again with
such Pro-ministers, as will neither be contented with his government, nor with
any other? And what consequents or effects may soon follow thereupon in this
factious and divided Nation, wherein (besides Jesuitick Papists, who are
enemies to all Governors, but those of their own leaven) such multitudes of
Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Heretics, that are enemies to all Government,
are lately crept up to a considerable strength, may be too soon felt, and to
late thought on. His Highness cannot but remember, what a dangerous design it
was not long since thought by wise men, for some Commissioners to have power to
buy in Impropriations, and to recommend Ministers to them, or to enlarge their
Livings by them, (though admitted by Bishops) only, for that it was conceived
that those Commissioners would thereby obliege the Ministers in such cures too
much to them.

Quaer. 7.
Whether in all penal Acts or Ordinances for the punishment of any Crimes or
offenses, it has not been the constant practice of the Lawgivers of this
Nation, and so ought in Conscience ever to be. That no such Act or Ordinance
should commence or begin to be of any force, till there had been first some
fair warning given to all the Subjects of the Nation, to beware for the future,
after such or such a time, of committing such or such a crime or offense: And
for that cause, the tenor of such penal Laws did constantly run in these
or the like terms. Be it enacted and constituted, etc. That if any man shall,
after such a day in such a year, do thus or thus, then he shall suffer so and
so: In Gods own account (who hates sin with an infinite hatred, above what any
man can do) where there is no Law, there is no transgression, for sin is a
transgression of the Law, and where there is no transgression there ought to be
no punishment: and although the transgressing of Gods Law by any crime or
offense, be a fault meriting punishment from that Power, which is ordained by
God to be a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, yet it is worth
the questioning, whether any such Power may or ought to punish any
transgression of Gods Law with any punishment, till he have given the people
under his power warning thereof. and then too, it is much more disputable,
whether he may, by any Law, punish any transgression of Gods Law with any
punishment, that God has not prescribed in his Law, before he have given them
warning of such a punishment, or rather it is not to be questioned at all, it
being clear that he ought not, there being no Law of God or man, that can in
equity be of any force to punish till it be a Law, and therefore may not punish
for what was done before it had a being with a punishment, to which it self
only gave the force of being a punishment to that offense or transgression.

Quaer. 8.
Whether the making of an Ordinance by any Power for the punishment of crimes
committed before that Ordinance was made, and that where no such penalty was
ever before by any Law in force inflicted, Be not a rendering of every Subject
unsecure in his estate, body and life it self, be he never so obedient to all
Laws, and punctually careful to observe them; When as, for ought any man
knows, that which he did, sometime since, or now does, and had then, and has
now, no penalty at all inflicted upon the doing it, or but a light one, may,
within a little time after, be reputed and adjudged by the supreme power a
crime worthy of the forfeiture of his estate, or the imprisonment or other
torture or torment of his body, or the loss of his life it self, and
accordingly he may suffer either in one or all of them.

Quaer. 9.
Whether the Commissioners appointed by the Ordinance to hear and determine
concerning the ejection of Ministers and the charges and accusations brought
against them, Be such as in Law and right reason ought to be authorized for
that purpose.

First, because they are all secular or Laymen; (for the clergy Commissioners
that are nominated are but Ciphers, and have no power by the Ordinance to
meddle in any thing, save in the inquiring and judging in part who are ignorant
and insufficient.) For although we Ministers of the Reformed Religion of the
Church of England do acknowledge our selves subject to the secular power, yet
we have ever, till these times of our deep sufferings, had so much Privilege
and immunity granted us by our Religious Princes and Parliaments, as that we
have perpettually had our Ecclesiastical Judges to hear and de ermine all, or
the most Ecclesiastical causes and affairs as weas our temporal judges in
all civil. And when well were judged by temporal Judges, they were such learned
and approved prudent and upright men, or at least thought to be such, when they
were chosen to that weighty and honorable employment, as that they were
entrusted with hearing and determining all matters of Civil Judicature
throughout the whole Realm, and least interested in those several Counties
and Circui^s wherein they were assigned Judges.

Secondly, because they are, many of them, such Laymen, as have abundantly
declared themselves very great dislikers of, if not enemies to those Clergy men
of whom they are made Judges; and some of them have given too much occasion to
be reputed Antiministers, and such as do not either love or allow the very
office and function of Ministers.

Thirdly, because some of them, and they of the Best rank from whom Ministers
might hope and expect to receive the most justice and legal favor, may be
feared to be put into Commission, not so much for acting there in themselves,
or to restrain and moderate others over-activenesse and violence, as for the
countenancing those other Commissioners that are most inferior, and known to
be very active and violent against Ministers. For that some of them are made
Commissioners, whose places and offices require their constant attendance on
his Highness, or nere him in some of his Courts at Westminster: And others are
made Commissioners for several Counties, in all which it is impossible for them
to exercise that power, or but very seldom. And some also of those
Commissioners in some Counties, if not in the most, will be very unwilling to
act in such an employment, being yoaked with such inferior and otherwise
generally distasted coassessors, as they know some of them to be. And so for
these and some other reasons, the whole power and authority, at least the
principal if not the sole exercise thereof, for the ejecting of Ministers will
be devolved into the hands of some few in every County, whose justice and
moderation, the best of Ministers have reason to suspect.

Fourthly, because too many of such a numerous Synedrion of Commissioners may
have children, kindred, or friends, whose want of a Living, or desire of a
better, may too much byas those Commissioners in their Judgments, especially
against such Ministers as have good Livings.

Fifthly, because diverse of those reputed scandalous crimes, whereof those
Commissioners are to judge, are not properly within their Cognizance, nor
indeed within the sphere of many of their understandings. As what is cursing
and swearing, properly so termed, and what is not, what is Drunkenness rightly
so called, and what is not; what is a profanation of the Lords day, and what
is not, what is the true profession of Religion and godliness, and what is
not, and who are the strict professors thereof and who are not, what it is to
scoff at or revile the profession of Religion or the strict Professors
thereof, and what is not, what are such licentious practices (besides
Whitson-Ales, Wakes, Morris Dances, May-poles, and Stage Plays) as do
encourage men in a loose and profane conversation, and what are not. For often
experience tells us, that some account bare assertions so and so framed to be
oaths, and others think those that are oaths to be none: some repute the
drinking more than quenches thirst to be drunkenness, (and here in Norfolk
has been already oath made by a man of no inferior quality, that a Minister
was drunk, because he smelt of drink, and his tongue did falter: by which it is
clear that he neither knew what it is to be drunk, nor what it is to swear one
so to be) and others say a man is not drunk, till he be wholly deprived by his
excessive drinking of his reason and understanding in the use and exercise of
it: and the most learned Judges in the Law have differed very much in their
Judgments about it, as well as the Casuists in Divinity. And for the
profanation of the Lords Day, Some, and they not a few have accounted the
dressing of any meat, or the doing of any other ordinary work, or the using any
common talk on that Day, to be a profanation of the Day: Others, that would
not like it well to be thought profane, have to their power maintained both by
their practice and otherwise, that the working on their trades, or the buying
and selling in public markets on that Day (especially if it be not in the
hour) of public prayer and preaching) is no profanation of the Day. But for
the scoffing at, or reviling the strict profession or professors of Religion or
Godliness. There are so many several factions, that claim the profession of
Religion and Godliness to themselves, and to those only of their faction, that
the true Reformed Protestant Religion (which is the most sound, sincere, true
Religion in the world) is by them not vouchsafed the name of Religion, but made
the scorn and contempt of them and theirs; and the true professors thereof are
become the chiefly persecuted men of the times. So that now, if any zealous
Elijah shall but use any holy Sarcasme against any one of these numerous
factions, much more reprove any of them for their folly and frenzy, he may be
accounted by some of his Judges a scoffer at, or a reviler of the strict
profession, or professors of Religion or Godliness, as we in this County have
already a sufficient example thereof, where a very grave, prudent,
conscientious Minister (as he is generally voyced) has been convented for
scoffing at the professors of Religion, because he spoke against hypocrites,
understanding by them (as the witness upon oath said he believed,) the Godly
and religious. Then for other licentious practices, besides Whitson-Ales, Wakes
etc. by which men are encouraged in a loose and profane conversation, They may
(for ought is known to the contrary) be extended and interpreted by some five
Commissioners, as comprehending all games, sports or recreations of youth, how
innocent soever: And that Minister that will not join with or assist some
indiscreet ignorant Sectaries in their interdicting or disturbing the youth of
his Parish, in any such game, sport, or recreation (though he can or do allege
more reasons for it, then they or any of their sect can answer) may be judged
an incourager or countenancer of men in loose and profane conversation.

Sixthly, because it is as irregular and improper (if not more) for Laymen to
be Commissioners in Ecclesiastical causes and affairs, as for Clergymen to be
commissioners in Civil. And it may, without any derogation to any on the one
part, or ostentation of any on the other, be very well presumed, that there may
be found in every County diverse Clergy men every way as fit and able to be
Commissioners of peace, as many Laymen named in the Ordinance, are to be
Commissioners in the present Commission.

Quar. 10.
Whether the joining of so many Ministers with the Lay-Commissioners, and
giving them no authority at all to act, unless it be in declaring and
adjudging in part, who are ignorant and insufficient (which is as nothing, such
Ministers being more secure then the most knowing and able; unless we could
imagine, that some of the Clergy-Commissioners themselves will be brought to
the test and trial) Does not, even by that, as well as by other mediums,
apparently discover to all seeing eyes, that the design of those, that first
suggested this Ordinance to his Highness, is utterly to ruin and extirpate
the whole Protestant Ministry of England, the long labored design of the
Jesuits, but never so much to be feared as now. And for the full accomplishment
thereof with the more security of Ministers and the less suspicion of others
that love them; they thought it requisite to have so many Ministers in each
County named in the Ordinance as Commissioners, that so it might be presumed,
that seeing there were so many Ministers in Commission, they would not suffer
any of their own tribe or calling to be ejected, but such as highly deserved
it, and of whom there should be little or no hope of reclaiming. But then those
Ministers so nominated must have no power at all allowed them, more then to
tickle them, and blind others, with the empty title of Commissioners, (though
they had known too many of them to have been active enough formerly in the
ruining of others of their Brethren) for fear least some even of those active
ones, having seen the sad effect of that their former activenesse, and had some
remorse of conscience for it; (which is my constant prayer, that they may have,
if they have not) and being thereupon become of more bowels and compassion
toward the rest of their Brethren, as well as more sensible of their own
approaching ruin (for they that persecute Ministers, though it be at the first
by the assistance of Ministers, will not willingly leave any Ministers
unpersecuted, no not those, that have so assisted them) should now begin to
consider better what they do; and not consent or yield, that any Minister of
any goodness and worth (though unhappily guilty of too many infirmities, as
who is not?) should be ejected or displaced, and so undone and ruined, whom
they could deliver from the malice and power of their persecutors, the perfect
haters of all Ministers.

Quaer. 11.
Whether the careful joining of five Commissioners of the Laity, at the
least, with five or more Commissioners of the Clergy, in the case of ignorance,
and insufficiency, (the only case wherein the Commissioners of the Clergy,
have ought to do) or rather the giving of the five Comissioners of the Laity
the chief power in that case also, and making the Clergy Commissioners only
their assistants therein, may not be suspected to have been contrived in favor
to those justly ignorant, insufficient Mechanics and other illiterate Laics,
that have lately either crept in or been thrust into several Livings or cures
of Souls, and for the preserving them from Being ejected for their gross
ignorance and insufficiency. For otherwise, if whomsoever the Clergy
Commissioners, though five, or ten, or more, should judge to be ignorant and
insufficient, ought to be reputed so upon their so judging, it might have been
feared, that the most of those Idol Shepherds must have returned to their old
trades again; and many more, that are gaping for other Ministers Livings, would
not adventure the so filling their unhallowed mouths, least an after
examination should force them to throw them up again, ere they had well
swallowed them: And so the people of such Parishes should murmur and complain
for want of Ministers, or some things instead of them. Whereas now, if any such
should be judged never so ignorant and insufficient by the
Clergy-Commissioners, they have not much cause to fear, but that their brethren
of the Laity, being some as ignorant as themselves, will be more favorable to
them, and preserve them from ejection rather then any, as being fittest to
converse and comply with them, or to be servants and slaves to them, without
any gainsaying or contradicting whatsoever they say or do.

Quaer. 12.
Whether it be not against both the Laws of God and man, that the Oath of one
witness with other concurrent evidence of the charge etc. (as is by this
Ordinance constituted) should be received as a sufficient testimony for the
ejecting of a Minister out of his Living or Cure of souls? whereas an
accusation ought not to be received against an Elder, under two or three
witnesses. 1 Timoth, 5.19. And one witness is by Gods express command
forbidden to rife up against any man, for any iniquity or for any sin, or but
at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses the matter is
to be established. Deuteronomy. 19.15.

Quaer. 13.
Whether that Law of God recorded, Deuteronomy. 19. from ver. 16. to the end, (namely,
That if a false witness did rise up against any man to testify against him
that which is wrong, and the Judges upon inquisition (which they by that Law
were bound to make) did find that the witness was a false witness, and had
testified falsely against his brother; They should then do to him as he had
thought to have done unto his brother. And so (not otherwise) they should put
away evil from among them, etc.) close not in the equity of it, if not in the
very precept, (as far as it may possibly be observed) oblige us Christians to
this day: And whether that Law ought not to be more especially observed and put
in execution in case of a false witness rising up against a Minister; and
above all, in this particular case; wherein the testimony of one witness is to
be received against a Minister, for the ejecting him out of his Living. For if
a false witness were so to be punished, when the testimony of one false
witness could do no man any hurt, unless another or two more did conspire with
him in the fame testimony much more then now in this case, when the testimony
of one such witness may ruin a man. And if a false witness, of what rank
soever he were, was to be so severely dealt with, when he rose up against any
man, though never so much inferior to him, and testified falsely aganst him;
though perhaps only that man, against whom he so testified, were injured
thereby, or some few others; How much more then should the extremity of that
punishment be inflicted now; when any base inferior fellow may, by rising up
and bearing false witness against a Minister of the Gospel, utterly ruin,
not only that Minister, but his whole Family, and do no small wrong to his
whole Parish or cure of souls, and to the souls of many others besides.

Quaer. 14.
Whether, If the testimony of any one man, with somewhat else, which five
Commissioners shall judge to be concurrent evidence, be sufficient to eject any
Minister, It may not be evidently and visibly foreseen; That now such a door of
hope to ruin Ministers is opened, and such an easy way chalked out for the
accomplishing it, there will suddenly be very few ministers left in England to
exercise their ministry; especially considering the professed distaste and
hatred that has of late been openly proclaimed and published by several
numerous factions, and heretical and schismatic combinations, against the
ordination, order, office, and settled maintenance of Ministers. As, that all
that have been ordained by Bishops, are Antichristian; That the orders and
degrees of Ministers, and the power and authority, that they pretend to have
over others of their Brethren the people of God, is a mere usurpation: That
their office and function is needless and superfluous; And, which has the
most abettors, That their Tithes and settled maintenance, which God and the
Laws have given and confirmed to them, are Jewish, Popish, and unjust.

Quae. 15.
Whether, if such testimony, and such concurrence of Evidence, as was instanced
in by the last Quaere, be sufficient to eject any Minister, either a man's own
Minister, or any other, The most pious, orthodox, laborious, conscienscious
Ministers, that are, which do most stoutly oppose Heretics and Schismatics,
most severely reprove sin, most powerfully incite to holiness, and most
religiously conform their own lives to their doctrines, be not therefore
(considering the Devils and wicked men's malice against such) more subject to
have some criminous accusation or other brought against them, then other
Ministers, that are more obnoxious themselves, but withal less earnest
against the vices of others? And so whether this Ordinance which is pretended
to be constituted for the more effectual propagating the Gospel and the
settlement of a painful Ministry in this Nation, will not in probability,
prove a grand hinderance of the liberty of the Gospel, and a strong temptation
to the Ministers thereof, to forbear their crying aloud, and not sparing to
tell the people their sins and their transgressions, and to choose rather to
preach only smooth things unto them, that may humor and please them, And so
both Ministers and people to perish together in their iniquity.

Quaer. 16
Whether that clause, To proceed to the examination of witnesses upon Oath (if
the cause require) as well for and on the behalf of the person accused etc. as
for proof of the said Charge, Articles etc. Does not leave it to five
Commissioners will and pleasure, whether they shall think it fit to examine any
witnesses, either on the Ministers, or on the accusers part, upon oath, or no.
And if so; whether such an arbitrary, unlimited power and Commission was ever
granted by any Christian to be exercised over Christians, or by any sober
Heathen, over Heathen or Christians.

Quaer. 17.
Whether that close couched proviso, of allowing all necessary charges incident
to the ejecting, sequestring, or removing of Ministets, Be not too great an
encouragement, as well as temptation, to the enemies and adversaries of those
of that sacred function, to rise up against them, and to appear either accusers
of them, or witnesses of such accusations, how unjust soever? When our Savior
Christ, in sending forth his disciples did forewarn and forearm them, and in
them all other dispensers of his Gospel, against revilings, persecutions, and
false accusations, amongst other arguments that he used, he told them, that so
the world persecuted the Prophets, so that, his Prophets, his Apostles, his
Ministers, in all Ages, have been and shall be reviled, persecuted, and falsely
accused; And needs must they be so in this age above other, if a reward be
allowed them that shall do it, and they, who should keep off the Ministers (as
much as in them lies) from being so injuriously charged, shall allow them
their Charges, that deal so with them. The Ministers of the Gospel are sent
forth, as Lambs into the midst of Wolves: and if those shepherds of the
people, that should defend those Lambs from such Wolves, shall allow such
wolves some of those Lambs bloods for worrying them; it is the infinite mercy
and providence of that great Shepherd, that all those his Lambs are not
devoured; for it is not their serpentine wisdom, nor done like innocence that
can protect them.

Quaer. 18.
Whether if we consider the pronenesse of man in general both to swear and
swear falsely, when it may either satisfy their malice, or otherwise conduce to
the obtaining their base ends; as also the great and horrid violation of oaths
and covenants, that this our Nation in particular is guilty of; together with
the desperate Atheism, and damnable practice of common swearing, that abounds
in all parts thereof; and all these added to the other arguments before hinted,
It be not much to be feared, That this ordinance for the ejecting of Ministers
for perjury and subordination of perjury, will, by its admitting of such
witnesses against Ministers, as it admits and incourages, instead of finding
and punishing one Minister guilty of those abominable crimes, occasion many
hundreds, yea thousands of other men, whose souls ought to be more regarded,
wittingly and frequently to run into those souldestroying abominations? And who
shall answer for them?

Quaer. 19.
Whether, all those things deemed and reputed by this Ordinance to be crimes,
and such crimes as are so scandalous, that every Minister, that is guilty
thereof, must be ejected, be any crimes at all, or so much as sins, or not. As
first, those often disputed and diversely determined games of Cards and Dice;
provided that they be only for recreation, and for no wager or sponsion, or
for no other, then what is neither prejudicial to the looser in his estate,
nor detrimentall to any that he is bound to provide for, and that there be no
provoking of either gamester to intemperancy of language or disturbance of
passion, Secondly, that long continued, universally approved, and often
subscribed to use of the Common prayer book of which I have elsewhere in my
Petition to the Parliament, humbly declared my Judgment, and for the
vindicating whereof, I shall willingly undertake what shall be required of me.

Quaer. 20.
Whether those crimes which are justly so reputed, but are already punishable
by other Laws, or by such Acts, as are for the present reputed Laws, with very
much severity (as, amongst other named or referred to by the Ordinance, that
crime of Adultery, which is by a late Act to be punished with death, as well in
Ministers as in others) have not a sufficient punishment already set or
provided for the Committers of them, I before this Ordinance of ejection came
forth?

Quaer. 21.
Whether the making Adultery in a Minister to be punished with ejection shall
free him from suffering the other punishment of death inflicted by a former
Act: or must a Minister be punished with both: or, because the Act for
punishing Adultery with death was so cautelously and warily framed with such
restrictions and proviso's, as that it is a question, whether it will make men
more fearful or more secure in the commiting it, by reason of the extreme
difficulties of proving any guilty of it so as that Act requires: As there was
good reason it should, because it concerned the lives of men, and those
especially, men of other rancks and degrees, and of other Callings and
Professions, more than Ministers. And therefore there must be some other course
taken for the finding Ministers guilty of Adultery with much more case and
facility; or else it would be in vain to mention that crime. And to that
purpose it is by this Ordinance constituted, That if but one witness,
whosoever he be, will but swear that any Minister did commit Adultery, and
something else be produced that five commissioners shall judge to be concurrent
evidence, the poor Minister must be reputed guilty of Adultery and so ejected.
But then from hence arises another small question, whether such a Minister
that is so judged to be guilty of Adultery, be indeed gnilty or not? For if he
be not, why is he ejected? And if he be, why is his life spared? Or why may not
the Act take away, what the Ordinance leaves him? And so indeed the poor
Ministers themselves may be speedily provided for, when they are so ejected
though their wives and children may starve out a while upon some poor pittance,
that the Commissioners shall perhaps allow them, though there be no provision
made for them in case of their husbands or fathers deaths.

Quaer. 22
Whether the Committing any one of those crimes, truly so adjudged by the
Ordinance, some years before; and after true unfeigned repentance since the
Committing it, so that the Person guilty of that crime has not only the guilt
pardoned by God, but Gods promise also, that it shall not be mentioned unto
him, Ought notwithstanding to be punished with ejection of the same person out
of all his Livelihood.

Quaer. 23
Whether the being guilty of any one or more of these crimes be a ground
sufficient to deprive a Minister of exercising his Ministerial function and
those abilities which God has given him, and which he is bound to exercise,
with no less then a dreadful woe denounced against him, if he do not. And
upon whom shall that woe light, if the Minister be forcibly debarred or hindered
from the exercise of them?

Quaer. 24
Whether a Minister, guilty of one or more of these crimes, may not
(notwithstanding his guiltines thereof) do God good service by his preaching
and dispensing the Sacrament to those that are willing and desirous, for all
that, to partake of those Ordinances dispensed by him. Or whether the virtue
and efficacy of those ordinances do so depend upon the goodness and badnesse
of the dispensers thereof, as to be efficacious or not efficacious, according
as the dispensers are Godly or wicked?

Quaer. 25.
Whether, If a Minister be guilty of one or more of those crimes, he ought not
first to be told thereof, and gently and meekly admonished by some or other in
private, without discovering such a father's nakedness to others: And if he
fall into the same Sin or sins again, then to be admonished thereof before
others: And if he then amend not, to be severely corrected and chastised by
some in public authority, before he be quite cut off and rejected from the
exercising his function for ever? And what grounds are there in sacred writ for
such an ejection of Ministers, as the Ordinance adjudgeth?

Quaer. 26.
Whether there are not in some Ministers other crimes of as high a nature and
as deep guilt, as diverse of those named in the Ordinance, and as much, if not
more prejudicial to the Glory of God, and to the benefit of those people that
are committed to their charge, that are left unpunished by that Ordinance: As
Pride, Covetousness, malice, false-accusation of brethren, treachery,
Apostasy from the truth, Heresy, instability of doctrine, being of one
opinion one day, and condemning all that are not of the same, and deserting
that opinion the next day if the wind turn, the having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, the running greedily after the error of Balaam
for reward, the partaking in the gainsaying of Core, the prophesying or
preaching lies, the neglect, if not contempt of Gods ordinances, especially the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the violation of oaths and covenants etc. And
whether those that are Judges of others should not do better first to Judge
themselves.

Quaer, 27.
Whether that clause of the Ordinance which adjudgeth such Ministers to be
ejected as have, or shall declare their disaffection to the present Government
without excepting any, no not those that either have changed, or shall
hereafter change their thoughts and affections into a better esteem and liking
of it, will not, in probability rather confirm those that have been or shall be
disaffected in that their disaffection for ever, then induce or persuade any of
them to approve of, or comply with that Government, being excluded from all
favor or mercy if they do, having been once guilty of disaffection toward it.

Quaer. 29.
Whether the omitting of public Catechizing on the Lords day for many years
together, and the neglecting to administer the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper for as many are not crishes of an higher nature, and more meriting the
ejection of those Ministers, that are guilty of them, then the omitting for one
Lords Day or two or ten, the public praying or preaching on that day. Whenas
public Catechizing has been acknowledged by our adversaries to have been the
prime way of instruction, wherein we of the Reformed Religion have so much
out-stript them, and gotten so much ground of them. And the often celebrating
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is our only way of commemorating Christ's
death and passion, that Christ himself has prescribed us, and the prime means
of sealing and assuring to us all the benefit thereof, even whatsoever Christ
has in his Gospel promised.

Quaer. 30.
Whether the act expressing how often omission of public praying and preaching
upon the Lords Day, either in a year, or in a man's life time, shall be reputed
such negligence as that the Minister guilty thereof shall be ejected, as also
how long absence from his cure, and at what distance, shall be accounted non
Residence, Does not expose all Ministers to strange and inavoidable hazzards of
loosing their Livings or cures, according as five several Commissioners,
shall, at several times, upon several occasions, in their several judgments
alterable every day, please to determine?

Quaer. 31.
Whether it had not been requisite and necessary, for the preventing of malice
and revenge in the party or parties accusing, and for the preserving of
innocence and uprightness in the party accused, and for the avoiding of perjury
and subornation of perjury in the Witnesses on the behalf of both, as also for
the clearing and justifying of the proceedings and determinations of the
commissioners and the through satisfaction of their consciences therein, That
there should have been some time limited and prescribed for every accuser of
any Minister, concerning any of the crimes mentioned or referred to in the
Ordinance to bring in his charge or accusation into the open court of the
Commissioners, and then to present it to them, which in so many days or weeks
after any of those crimes, whereof he ^^useth him, were committed; or else that
his charge or accusation should not be received or reputed of any validity.

Quaer. 32.
Whether upon the rendering of Ministers thus liable to whatsoever men and
devils can in the height of malice and depth of conspiracy contrive or conspire
against them. All sober and discreet men will not avoid the bre^^ing up their
children for that holy calling, which is of it self so perilous to the most
able and faithful, and is now, by this Ordinance exposed to so much scorn, and
contempt, and persecution by all the enemies thereof. And so the Ministry of
England must needs be soon worn out that way and the people be left without
any Shepherd or have only blind guides, and those of the lowest of the people
to go in and out before them.

Quaer. 33.
Whether, upon the ejection of so many Ministers, as it is visible will be
ejected by this Ordinance, There will not be very many poor souls, even whole
congregations of them, in all parts of this Nation, suddenly left destitute of
any Pastor or Teacher to feed and instruct them; or else one Pastor or Teacher
must be interested with a tot quot of cures, as some, not fit to officiate in
any cure (witness that there was vanity and iniquity of boasting that they
should have so many) have already bragged that they shall ere long have five or
six a piece. And besides it is to be feared (or rather it cannot be avoided)
That notorious Heretics, close Romanists, and mad Mechanics will creep into
cures of souls, as well as into pulpits in a multitude of Parishes, as they
have done already in some, and so devour many poor souls for whom Christ shed
his blood. For what shall keep such out? when if they have but so much
impudency and hypocrisy, as to tell two or three holy lies of the same and
manner of their conversion (though they never were so wicked then when they so
belyed God and themselves, by faigning themselves to have been so converted
from their wickedness) and then whine or snivel three or four time-serving
principles, and answer, or admire at, four or five strange mungrel questions,
which some of the propounders themselves understood not, and those that have
any ingenuity amongst them can scarce forbear laughing at and for the
palliating their ignorance disclaim human learning as savouring too much of
the two universities Rome and Babylon; and at the last, If these rare gifts
take not with all the Examiners, be but furnished with one good gift or two
more in their hands to open some of the others mouths to speak a few good words
in private on their behalf, and to say how they are affected and what opinion
they are of, though their judgments never so small or weak, (all which any
Heretic, Romanist, and illiterate mechanic may easily do) who shall dare to
appear against them, unless they did hazard the loss of their own Livings for
the opposing such that steal men in their stealing into other.

Quaer. 34.
Whether the ejecting of so many Ministers by this Ordinance, as are likely to
be ejected, if the Ordinance it self be not repealed by his Highness with your
Honors advice, will not bring a greater scandal upon the Reformed Protestant
Religion here in this Nation (and that not without some reflection of dishonor
upon other Reformed Churches in other Nations) throughout Christendom and
elsewhere, then all those Ministers that shall be ejected thereby, could ever
have brought upon it, had they been all really guilty of all the scandalous
crimes whereof they are or shall be maliciously and falsely accused.

Quaer. 35.
Whether it be not more then probable. That, as since the former ejecting,
sequestring or removing, that is, one word depriving (for all or the most
cicetions, sequestrations, or removes of Clergymen, have proved utter
deprivations) of so many Ministers by the late Parliament, so many
Atheistical, heretical, blasphemous and execrable opinions, derogatory to the
honor of God and destructive to humane society, have sprung up amongst us, and
so many Popish points of doctrine have been maintained and propagated in all
parts of this Nation, even by some that do pretend to abhor the name of
Popery, as well as by others. So likewise now, after that so many Ministers
more shall be ejected by this Ordinance, The number of the foresaid horrid
opinions and dangerous points of Doctrine will be very much augmented and
increased in every Corner, nay in every open street, besides many other
mischiefs that will grow apace upon us, that are not yet so evidently
discernable; and of which his Highness himself, when it is too late, may be as
sensible as any other? For they, who thus strike at the Ministry, will be as
ready and as adventurous upon the least advantage they can find or make, to
knock down the Magistracy.

Quaer. 36.
Whether, all these things considered, unless this Ordinance be repealed, the
strange proceedings, and unparaleld sentences of each such Commission-Court in
every County, together with the many sad effects and consequents, that will
undoubtedly follow thereupon, will not very much justify all, even all the
exprobitances, illegalities, and cruelties, so much complained of and cried out
against by the late Parliament, both in the High Commission Court of each
Province, and in all Ecclesiastical Courts in every Diocese: and what the sense
thereof may in time produce, let the dreadful issues of those former cries
against those Courts, warn all that may be concerned.

Quaer. 37.
Whether, in case this Ordinance (notwithstanding all this) should for the sins
and iniquites both of the Ministers and People of this Nation be still
continued in force: (which the Lord of his mercy forbid, and rather take it
into his own hands, then deliver us into the hands of such men) or if any other
Commission should be established by any other Ordinance or Act (if the Laws
already established have not provided sufficient punishment for such offenders)
for the admonishing, punishing, and (if neither of them will amend them) for
the ejecting of scandalous, ignorant and insufficient Ministers and
Schoolmasters which ought to be done, and we pray it may be done (if God see it
fit and requisite to be done,) with infinite caution, wisdom prudence and
impartiality, It be not then very necessary, That all the allegations,
accusations or charges of all and every of the accusers and prosecutors of
Ministers, and all the Answers and pleas of the said Ministers in defense of
themselses and their innocence, together with all the testimonies and
depositions of witnessesses on both parts, As also all the proceedings,
adjudications, or determinations of the Commissioners thereupon, with the
grounds and reasons thereof. Be exactly and punctually registered and recorded,
and all the particulars thereof, preceding sentence be openly and distinctly
read in Court immediately before any sentence or judgment be passed; that all
the persons in their several relations forenamed and concerned therein, may
hear, and be assured, whether each particular be, as he or they delivered and
understood it, or not: and if not, then to have liberty to correct or amend
whatsoever he or they were mistaken or misunderstood in. And then, when
sentence is so passed; That the said Sentence it self and the grounds thereof
be also read in open Court, and the Commissioners hands that passed it, set
thereto. To the intent, that both the accusers and prosecutors may be the more
wary and just in their said allegations, accusations, or charges, and the
Accused the more watchful and discreet in their answers and pleas, and the
witnesses on both parts the more cautelous aed conscientious in their
testimonies and depositions, and the Commissioners the more circumspect and
impartial in their sentences and determinations: as also, that all, that
desire to be informed of the full truth of any, or all those transactions, may
be the better satisfied; and which is not the least, That his Highness, in all
complaints or appeals of injustice or grievance, may the more easily and
accurately judge thereof.

These Quaeries I have laid at your Honors feet, most humbly beseeching you to
take them up and to peruse them, only so long as till, upon through examination
of them and consultation about them, you shall find whither they may do you,
and the distressed Church of God here in England, any service or not in that
great and weighty business, which is reported to be taken into your care,
Namely, the inquiring into the particulars of the Ordinance for the ejecting of
Ministers. And if not, that you would lay them there again, and trample on
them, and on him that presents them (if he can be more trampled on then he is)
for disturbing your more serious consultations with such fruitless questions.
But yet, if they can no other way serve you or advantage that pious work of
yours in scarching into the dangerous clauses and desperate consequents of that
Minister destroying Ordinance, they may serve to show my sensiblenesse of the
enemies of the true Reformed Religion's endeavors to bring us all to
confusion; as well as my desire to do my utmost to prevent it; And (which I
cannot smother) my real compassion and truly Sympathising affection to my
poor persecuted brethren of the Ministry: though too many of them (the Lord
lay it not their charge) have shown little compassion or affection to me and
others of their Brethren when we were eiected, His Highness who gave life to
this ordinance, will not, I hope, think the worse of me for my thus
presumptuous meddling with it: when I profess solnmely, that I cannot but in
Charity believe, that although it had his fiat when it was contrived, yet it
had nothing of his contrivement in it, more then that Scandalous, ignorant, and
insufficent Ministers and Schoolmasters should be eiected: but surely, it was
never his intention, that eiection should be so far extended, and such men
empowered to execute it, as that the best of Ministers, yea the whole Ministry
of England should be destroyed; or at least made liable so to be, when the
enemies thereof should find their long desired opportunity. No this design
certainly came from the Ignatian Conclave, and from the Convents of some
Aritiministeriall Heretics; the former aiming at the ruin of the Reformed
Ministry of this Nation, the latter at the destruction of all Ministers
whatsoever. And such a design, especially when it was covered over with those
specious pretenses of further Reformation and of the Gospels propagation, might
easily escape his Highness discerning having such a cloud of high concerning
affairs incompassing him. But if his Highness, who knows me well) should take
this ill from me, when I intend him not the least ill by it; He knows
likewise, that, as I desire not to displease men by my speaking, so I dare not
much more displease God by my silence. And therefore, when the glory of God and
the safety of his Church is so nearly concerned, should my tongue now cleave to
my mouth, I should fear, either the being struck quite dumb here, or the
being made to open it in vain cries and unregarded complaints hereafter. And
for your Honors, and all others of honor and honesty, I have cause to believe
you will the sooner and the more attend to what I say, because many of you know
me to be wholly unconcerned and uninterested, as to mine own particular, in any
thing, that this Ordinance takes notice of or openly declares against. For the
desires of my soul are for a more effectual propagation of the Gospel, and for
the settlement of a more painful Ministry: And (to the praise and glory of
Gods grace be it wholly spoken) there are none, no not the worst of mine
enemies, that can charge me with any crime, or ought, that is indeed
scandalous, or with any of those things which this Ordinance adjudged to be
scandalous, further then I am able to justify both my self and them from giving
any just occasion to be so adjudged. And (which I am neither ashamed nor
afraid to acknowledge nor may acknowledge without blessing God for his calling
me and others to bear it patiently and cheerfully) I am one of those despised
sequestered, that is, ejected Ministers, that were long since cast out of our
Livings, not for any scandal, ignorance, or negligence, but (which is our
glory and comfort) for discharging our Loyalty and fidelity to our then
Sovereign, and for our love and constancy to the established doctrine and
discipline of the Church of England, or, (which is their shame, I would I could
add, sorrow) for the satisfying of some of our convetous, ambitious, malious
Brethren's thirsting after our possessions and lively-hoods. And therefore
being neither guilty of any of those living depriving crimes, nor having any
living to fear the being deprived of, I may be heard the more freely and
unsuspectedly in what I plead for others, and those too, many of them, such, as
never so much as opened their mouths in the behalf of me or any of my
fellow-sufferrers, either in pleading for us when we were to be ejected, or in
commiserating our distressed condition since, but either compl^yed with our
enemies, or moved neither tongue nor pen against them. If I had been of their
temper, or of some others judgment better then my self, I might with much
pretense of reason, and perhaps Religion, not only have forborne to appear in
this cause, but have thought it my duty rather to be silent, and to admire at
Gods Justice in this signal progress of his judgments, in bringing them now
upon them, who, if they (did not too many of them) help to bring them upon
others, were too silent and insensible, when so many thousands of us first
groaned under them, and a multitude perished by them. But I have long since
forgiven them and all others, so far as concerns my self; and I beseech the
Lord to give them yet, if he have not already, such sense of, and sorrow for,
both that and all other their sins, that they may receive comfort and assurance
from him of the pardon of them so far as concerns all others, and to grant
both to them and to us all, that are of the Ministry, so much grace, that we
may speedily and most strictly search and try our own hearts and ways, and by
that search find what those things are whereby we have provoked him to so much
wrath and indignation against us, his erst while highly honored, contemned
but now basely continued Dispensers of his Gospel, and upon our finding what
those things are, to direct and enable us so to pour out our souls in the
humble confessing and unfeigned repenting of them, that we returning to him the
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, He may in mercy return to us the despised
Shepherds and Bishops of his Sheep and restore us to our wonted honor and
esteem again, (if it be his will) or howsoever to the liberty and happiness of
exercising our function with freedom success, and comfort, to his Glory, to
the benefit of his Church to the comfort of our own souls, and to the
conversion, or confusion of his, his Churches and our otherwise implacable,
Enemies. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

