STELLA NOVA, A NEW STAR, Leading wisemen unto CHRIST. OR, A SERMON Preached
before the learned Society of ASTROLOGERS, AUGUST 1. 1649. In the Church of S.
Mary Alder-Mary, London.

By ROBERT GELL D.D. Minister of the Word there.

Sol and Luna, post Deum, omnium viventium vita sunt. Herm. Trism.

(...). Philo Jud. de mundi Opif. Astrologia perscrutanda est ad cognoscendum
proprietates istorum syderum, u^ hunc locum intelligere possimus. Aug. (...).
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 66. Chaldaei ^xitium, quod imminebat, praevidere non
potuerunt, utpote quod ex naturali astrorum cursu non emanaret, sed ex arcano
Dei consilio. Calvin. Cert um est, multas in elementis mutationes ab astris
oriri, and in crasi humanorum corporum, and ingeniorum inclinationibus, lumen
coeleste magnam vim habere. Phil. Melanch. LONDON: Printed for Samuel
Satterthwaite; and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Sun on
Garlick-Hill. 1649.

To the Learned SOCIETY OF Artists, or Students IN ASTROLOGY.
Gentlemen,
THat I was not easily persuaded to speak in public of the ensuing argument,
some of your selves, who importuned me thereunto, can testify. But how much
more averse I ever have been from exposing my thoughts in print to the common
view and censure of all men, many other very well know. Among other reasons,
these especially moved me. The world is overcharged with an insupportable
number of books; and Bookwrights daily add unto the burden: Scribimus indocti
doctique. -- I have observed also much precious truth already extant;
exceedingly neglected, especially because it presents it self in simple and
plain language, even as the Scripture, for the same reason, is slighted, which
makes for the further condemnation of those, who, by reason of the plainness,
cannot but know it, yet obey it not. And truly I never affected any elaborate
expression, or high language, but content my self with a plain and low style,
condescending as much as I can, to the capacity of all.

Also I have learned by the experience of some others, who having published
their present conceivings, have lived to correct them, and wished, but too
late, that they were recalled. Dies diem docet. By which means, they have cast
themselves into this dangerous Dilemma; That either they must stiffly maintain
what they had rashly adventured to divulge, as commonly men do, (few being so
ingennous as to write their Retractations;) or else they must hazard their
credit among too many, who think it laudable to be constant (or rather
obstinate) in defense, though of gross errors, if they be their Principalls,
as they call them, which they have taken up upon trust; and conceive it a great
disparagement unto themselves to change their opinions, though for the Truth it
self; and think it a great folly to be wiser than they were.

I know also how impatient many are, that any one should differ from them in
judgment in the least, if in divine matters; though in them, by reason of their
hidden nature, and our corruption and blindness, there be the greatest
darkness; so that men ought not therein too suddenly to be resolved.

Notwithstanding these, and many other reasons which might be named, I held my
self engaged, upon occasion of this subject, to speak something concerning that
concealed truth of Gods governing the world by the influence of the Stars and
Angels, which I believe, makes much for the glory of God, because thereby his
mighty power is made known, both in restraining the ordinary power of nature,
as he often does; and limiting the Devils power and malice; which some
professing your Art, have attempted to make use of, to the destruction of Gods
people.

Flectere quod nequeant Superos, Acheronta movebunt. But in vain. The great God
powerfully protects his people, as he did from Balaam, so that there is no
enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel, Numb. 23.23. Yea he
imparts such power, especially to wise, faithful and obedient men, that they
are able to give check to the influences of Heaven.

If any thing delivered, cross the received Tenants of some men, they ought
not much to take offense, or be impatient, that I or any other man should
differ in judgment from them, if they remember, that the National Covenant
binds all those who have taken it, to endeavor Reformation in Doctrine
first, then in Discipline and Government. And if Reformation must be made in
Doctrine, it is evidently supposed, that in received Tenants of Doctrine, there
must be somewhat amiss; how else can there be Reformation made in Doctrine?

And whereas Reformation in Discipline and Government is much pressed, though
there be not one word of any special Government in the Covenant, ought not men
to be more earnest for Reformation in Doctrine, which is essential and
principal, than for Discipline and Government which is accidental only and
implied? And therefore, under the favor of those who think otherwise, there is
some necessity, that all differences in judgment should be made known, yea
though some of them be very erroneous; in which respect, there must be
heresies, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. And therefore prove all things, and hold
fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1. For how can
we prove all things, unless we have some knowledge of them? how can we try the
Spirits, except we know, there are such such Spirits?

There is yet another reason, which truly in it self, is not so prevalent with
me, as the importunity of some friends makes it; namely, the obloquy and
reproach that some men have cast upon this Sermon, and the Preacher of it. That
it had neither head nor tail. That in it I had defended Conjurers and Juglers.
That I held the influences of the stars so powerful, that they enforced a
man to sin. That I had delivered many notorious FALSE TRUTHS. That Phrase of
implicit contradiction plainly speaks the men, of what judgment they are.

And therefore I had altogether neglected their reproaches, having endeavored
now for many years to approve my self a servant of Christ, by honor and
dishonor, by good report and evil report. Howbeit understanding that some
were hired to take notes, by one or other, of whom I could promise my self no
great good, having had experience of such indirect dealing, least the truth it
self should suffer by me, (even that -- grandavus Alethes, that old Truth,
which I endeavored to draw out of the pit,) I chose rather to expose my rude
meditations unto the world in their own homespun dress, than suffer them to
be presented naked on the stage (according to the misapprehensions and evil
intentions of some) to be hissed off again, if I could thus prevent it.

Thus Gentlemen, I have given you my reasons both of my backwardness, and yet
also of my forwardness to serve you. Excuse, I pray you, all defects, as for
other reasons, so by my short warning, a fortnight only, wherein my weekly
business, as much as other men's, has not been omitted, though I know the
guise of men, minuunt de labor ut addant ingenio; yet what I say, ye know to
be true.

I beseech ye, heed well, what in special I speak to you, toward the end of
this discourse: which the rather I hope ye will do, because ye made choice of
me, not only as being one of your judgment touching your Art, but as one, of
whom ye might hear Truth impartially concerning your due practice of your Art,
willing to please all men, but only for their good unto edification, having no
man's person in admiration for advantage sake.

As therefore ye and your Art are servants unto the God of Heaven, so far forth
I profess and subscribe my self,

Sirs, Your servant in the Lord, R. Gell.

A SERMON Preached before the learned Society of ASTROLOGERS.
MATTHEW. 2.2. Where is He that is borne King of the Jews? for we have seen his
Star in the East, and are come to worship him.


AMong the Grecians they had their common Assemblies of their own and other
Nations every fifth year, says Herodotus; and at those meetings, their
Panegyrical Orations, whose maine scope was (...), the profit and wealth of
Greece. And among us, most Professions and Societies of men have their
Conventions and Assemblies; and their end commonly differs little from that of
Greece; it is (...), their Wealth, the advancement and increase of Trade. And
although there be some pretense of amity and love, yet all being busied about
the same commodity wherein every one has equal interest, if some notable
gain, like a Bone, be cast among them, (...) covetousness and envy soon
ravils all their friendship.

As for you, the learned Society of Artists, with whom now properly my
business is, your anniversary meeting is, I hope, for more noble ends, the
common good and benefit of Mankind; the nourishing and strengthening of true,
mutual, Christian love; the owning of the great God, whose name is Love, (1
John 4.8.16.) in His works of Nature and Government of the World by STARS and
ANGELS, neglected by almost all other men. And as your Studies are about the
Heavens and heavenly Bodies, their orderly Motions and powerful influences
upon this inferior World; so the end of your coming together, is to glorify
the GOD of Heavens, who made that wonderful frame, and maintains that
constant order and powerful efficacy of the celestial Bodies, and by them
leads us to the knowledge, contemplation and admiration of Himself. Yea,
whereas the ^ime is now come, and that fulfilled, which our Lord foretold, Mat.
24.23. that men should say, Lo here is Christ, or there. The end of your
meeting is like that of the Magi, the Wisemen; who soon after our Lords birth,
came from the East to Jerusalem, saying, Where is He that is borne King of the
Jews? for we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship Him.

That Is the argument I shall entertain your patience withal, and treat on at
this time.

Mat. 2.^. (...), etc. Where is He that is borne, etc. Take the Text with the
words preceding; Non when Jesus was borne in Bethlehem, etc. Behold, there came
Wisemen from the East to Jerusalem, saying, Where is He, etc.

All they say, is contained in these two Parts:

(...), a Question, Where is he that is borne King of the Jews?

(...), a Reason rendered of the Question, and that both from the impulsive
cause, and the end why they made their journey, and moved this Question; For we
have seen, etc.

In the Question we have:

(...), datum, the supposition; and that they took for (...), granted, That
the King of the Jews was borne.

That which they put to the Question upon this supposition, Where is He that is
borne, etc.

To the unfolding both of the Supposition and Question thereupon; its necessary
that we know who these Questionists were. The verse before my Text tells us they
were Magi-which we turn Wisemen: which word, because its very ams biguous, we
may know that anciently there were two sort of W^sd^mes, and so of Wisemen.
The former Wisdom truly so called, begins with the fear of God, and is the
knowledge of Divine and Human things: Divine, as of the Providence of God,
his general government of the World by Stars and Angels; his special
government of his Church by his Word and Spirit.

Human, as the knowledge of Nature, and the mysteries and wonders therein
contained, far greater than our natural Philosophy now in use and reputation
will reach unto; also practical Philosophy in Morality and Civility.

The latter sort of Wisdom, falsely so called, begins with the ignorance of
God, neglect and contempt of his Nature, Will, Word, Ways and Works, and is
the knowledge of Diabolical curiosities, as Witchcraft, Necromancy,
confederacy with unclean Spirits; (...), a subtle way of deceiving a man's
self and others, by the names of God and Angels, when the Devil intends
nothing less. Of this kind also is that sort of Juggling whereby the Fancy is
corrupted, and works truly wrong it beyond the power of Nature by compact with
the Devil.

The former kind of Wisdom is called (...), Natural Magic, and tends
altogether to the honor of God, and to the preservation of Mankind.

The latter is called (...), Magic Diabolical, and tends wholly to the
dishonor of God, and to the ruin and destruction of Mankind.

This is that (...), Wisdom and Wisemen falsely so called; which God in
Scripture so often by his Prophets and Apostl^s inveighes against. Such were
Pharaohs Southsayers, of whom Saint Paul mentions two, Jannes and Jambres; such
was Simon Magus, such was Elymas the Sorcerer, and sun dry the like.

These two kinds of Wisdom and Wisemen, he who confounds, and takes for the
same, either out of ignorance, or malice, or both (for such there are) he too
much wrongs and abases the servants of God, and too much honors the vassals of
the Devil.

He who thinks I attribute too much to the former kind of Wisdom and
Wisemen, let him inquire what the Gymnosophists in Ethiopia were, and the
Brachmanni in India; what the Babilonian and Perfian Magi were, and he will
think I have been too sparing in their commendation. Those were four
Schools of Wisemen famous throughout the World; and of them were these
Wisemen, who move the question in my Text. Those Wisemen of the East, as they
exceeded all the World beside in other wisdom and knowledge, so in Astronomy
and Astrology; whence they are thought by some to be called Magi of Magog, one
of ths seven Cities of note in Asia, famous for that Science. And therefore
Magog is thought to have the name in the Ebrew, because from the House-tops (so
(...) signifies) which of old were made plain and flat, they were wont to
contemplate and behold the Stars and Motions of the Heavens, and thence to
praise God in his Works. Of this Profession, though not of this City, were
those Magi in my Text. Such Wisemen they were as knew God, and the invisible
things of God, being clearly seen and understood from the Creation of the
World, by the things that are made; as his eternal power and Godhead. And
thus knowing God they glorified him as God, Romans 1. Such as were not hearers of
the Law, but doers of it: such as having not the Law, were a Law unto
themselves, showing the work of the Law written in their hearts, Romans 2.14,
15. Such as were faithful in little; and therefore God imparted more unto
them; according to that general and never failing rule, Habenti dabitue, To
him that has, that is, uses what knowledge, grace and strength he has, shall
more be given. Yea, to such a Plerophory and full persuasion of Divine truth
they had attained, that they made not any question, whether Christ were borne
the King of the Jews, or no, that they took for granted, but asked, where he
was borne; Where is He that is borne, etc.

But how came they so confident? They saw His Star in the East: there is their
first Reason, from the impulsive cause. But is it satisfactory? For explication
of this Reason, it is necessary we satisfy these Questions.

1. How knew they the King of the Jews? 2. How was this Star His? 3. How
knew they this Star to be His? 4. From what part of the East came they, where
they saw His Star?
1. How knew they Him? Who was their Teacher, Tutor, or Counselor?

They had two sorts of Counselors or Teachers; one inward, that was God the
Father: They kept his Law, and his Law was their Schoolmaster unto Christ,
Gal. 3.24.

2. It Is probable they had outward Teachers, Tutours and Counselors, both
Balaams Prophecy, who came out of the East, Number. 23.7. out of Chaldea, and his
Prophecy was well known there, a most ancient Prophecy of Christ, and the
Star in my Text, Number. 24.17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a
septer shall rise out of Jsrael, the word is (...), which in the first
acception signifies a young tender plant, even that which Es. 11.1. calls (...),
and Jer. 23.5. and 33.15. (...) which we turn a Branch, a Branch from his
roots, and a Branch of Righteousness, though neither word properly signifies a
Branch; for a Branch grows not up from the root of the tree, but a tender
Plant, a sucker, a shoot, a springet. But for more proof, the 70. turn the word
(...), and the Vulgor Latin, Homo, even the man Christ Jesus, He should rise
out of Israel, and ver. 19. out of Jacob shall come he that shall have
dominion, Dan. 7.14. This Prophecy of Balaam it is probable, they knew, and the
man that should have Dominion, even he that should be born King of the Jews.

This was one of their Tutors or Counselors. Another kind of Counselors
probably they had, the Sibyls (though some learned men undervalue their
authority) and their oracles: And the very word Sibylla signifies (...), the
counsel of God. Ten of these were famous throughout the world; all of them
Magae or Prophetesses, and the most of them Prophesied most plainly of Christ,
as the Cumana Sibylla in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, whose maine Prophesy
was of these times.

Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo;
Jam redit and virgo; redeum Saturnia regna,
Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.
But more maniesstly the Sibylla Erythraea to this effect that in the last days
God should be humbled; the Son of God made man; the Deity united to the
humanity; and should be brought forth and nourished by a Virgin. This Sibyll
and her Prophesies 't^s likely were well known in the Estern parts of the
world, whence these Wise men came.

2. But how was this his Star? not as if the other Stars were not also his,
but as John the Baptist was his Angel, and sent for this purpose, to give
testimony unto Christ, and to prepare his way; and having so done, be finished
his course, and was taken away: so this new Star gave notice of the new man
coming into the world, and guided the Wise men to him, and so vanished away;
and in that respect its said to be His.

3. But how knew these wise men that this was his Sarre? there is a tradition
said to be owned by some of the Fathers (Saint Chrysostom is named) That in the
East in a City called Sheth near the Ocean, a society of men, 12. in number,
Students in Astronomy, learning out of Balaams Prophecy, that such a Star was
to appear, they set themselves to observe the heavens, and wait for the
appearing of it, and that when any of the Society died, others we^e chosen in
their room; this number of Students so continued in their observation for many
ages, until at length the Star appeared unto them.

Now that this Star appeared not in a corner, Chalcidius a Platonies Philos,
pher who lived at the time when our Lord was made manifest in the flesh, he
writing upon Plato's Timaeus, concerning diverse Stars and their direful
effects, as Plagues and Wars, has these or the like words; There is, says
he, a more holy and Divine History, which reports, that, by the appearing of a
certain extraordinary Star, not diseases and death was foreshown, but the
venerable descent of God for man's salvation; which Star was observed by the
Chaldeans, who worshipped God newborn and become man, and offered him gifts.
So he. There remains yet one Question to be answered.

4. From what part of the East came they?

Here I find a difference. Some say from Persia, because that is full Ea^^
^r^m Jerusalem. And the Persian Kings were wont (says Plato in his Alcibiades)
to train up their Sons, who should succeed them in the Kingdom, in Natural
Magic. But not only in Persia, but also in other parts of the East and in
Egypt, they had their Magi; and out of their Magi or Wisemen, were chosen their
Priests, and out of their Priests their Kings, as the name of (...) imports.

It seems to me most probable that these Wisemen came out of Arabia Pelix,
for the Chaldeans and Arabians were much given to the study of Astrology
before the Persians were, and more famous for it. Such Magi were Job and his
friends, says Clemens Alex. Job being reported to be a man perfect and
upright, fearing God and eschewing evil, and the greatest of all the men in
the East, and neighbors they were to the Sabeans and Chaldeans, as the
Arabians are.

Besides, the Prophecy is well known Psalm 72.10. The Kings of Tarshish and
the Isles, the Kings of Sheba and Saba shall being gifts. Where the Kings of
Tarshish, being the Kings of the North, the Isles Importing the Kings of the
West, Saba implying the Kings of the South, there is none left for the Kings of
the East, but Sheba which is rendered Arabia.

But the gifts which they bring, discover whence they came; it was the custom
of the East to bring Presents to those whom they acknowledged their Kings, as
might be shown at large. And presents were wont to be such as the Land
afforded. Take for the man, says Jacob, of the best Fruits of the Land, in
your vessels, and carry him down a Present, Genesis 43.11. That part of Arabia so
abounded with mines of Gold and Silver, and the chief of Spices, as appears
Ezech. 27.22. that from thence it was called Arabia Faelix. But because other
Countries also might afford many of these, yet in that they brought
Frakincense, it is plain, they came out of Arabia: Thura, praeter Arabiam
nullis; no Country yields it but Arabia, says Pliny. And that special part
of Arabia, says Virgil -- Solies est thurea virga Sabaeis; whence that part of
the Country is called Arabia sacra, Arabia the holy, because it yielded
Frankincense wont to be burned in their Temples, whence by Arabici odores,
Frankincense is understood in Pomponius Laetus.

Lastly, that we may prove this, and give light to that which has been spoken,
these were the successors or posterity of the Sons of Abraham by Ketura, whom
he sent Eastward into the East Country, Genesis 25.6. And therefore Sheba is
joined with Midian and Ephah children of Abraham, to whom the Promises were
made; who, as God foretold, would teach his children, Genesis 18. and it is
prophesied by Esaias. 60.6. of those or better times of the Gospel; That the
Dromedaries of Midian and Ephab, all they from Sheba shall come, they shall
bring Gold and Incense, and they shall show forth the Praises of the Lord.
Hitherto we have heard the History of the Text.

The Mystery of it belongs as well to us as to those Wisemen: and wise men
indeed we shall prove our selves to be, if we do as they did.

The same question belongs to us: Where is He that is born King of the Jews?
And the same reason we have to move it. In the Question, we have the same
(...), the same thing supposed and granted, and the same (...), the same thing
put to the question.

1. The same (...), or thing granted, that the King of the Jews is born.

Whence we may take notice how far nature helped by art, and tradition, may
go. It cannot be denied, but that these Magi knew: first, that there was a
child born: secondly, that He was a male child: thirdly, that He was to be a
King; fourthly, that particularly He was to be a King of the Jews, why Art
should be excluded wholly from the cognizance of Nativities, or of Kings and
States, I cannot see, since Predictions according to precepts of Art, for many
ages known and approved, have been found so true.

Indeed the object here and the means also were extraordinary, a new Star:
yet was that a natural help; and seems to evict thus much; that the well
grounded Scholars of Nature and Art, especially being wise, honest, and
virtuous persons, and faithful according to what they know, (as probably these
might know somewhat by tradition, as has been shown) such may understand many
things out of the face of heaven, when the aspect is ordinary: For so the Stars
are made not only for Seasons, but also for Signs, Genesis 1.14. which if they
signify not, how are they Signs? yet hence I would infer no more then the
Text will bear. Also when the Aspect is extraordinary and new, such as this
Star was. And the reason is; That, it being the Creators end, that such his
extraordinary creatures should portend and signify some good or evil to the
world, that extraordinary work of God should be in vain, and that end of God
which he aims at, frustrate, especially unto those who want His Word, if none
among them should understand what is thereby signified and foretold.

2. The light of Nature and Art being further illustrated, and helped by grace,
may discern spiritual things out of the book of Nature; as these Magi did
discern from this Star, by the help of Gods gracious illumination; That not an
outward and civil, but a spiritual King, a Messiah, and Savior was now born
to the Jews. Which the rather I observe, and commend unto them to think of,
who would exclude all the Heathen from salvation, because they have not the
ordinary means, the outward Preaching of the Word to gvide them; as if the
only wise, and gracious God were limited, and bound to instruct and save that
way only. Says not the Apostle expressly, that when the Gentiles, who have not
the Law, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the
Law, are a Law unto themselves? where (...), Nature is not opposed to (...)
Grace, but to (...) the Law, and written Word of God. Not but that we ought
exceedingly to praise our God, and highly to esteem of his special goodness
unto us, in affording us his written word, for which blessing holy David in
special manner praises God, and exhorts us so to do, Psalm. 147.19, 20. But
with all, it becomes us also to acknowledge the riches of his mercy, even unto
those who want the outward word and ministry thereof. But that the outward word
and preaching of it, is not the only outward means leading to salvation, the
Apostle teaches evidently, 1 Peter 3.1. If any obey not the word, they also
may without the Word, be won by the conversation of the wives. So powerful is
life, which therefore (...), is called the light of men, Joh. 1.

Yea, it is undeniable, that these men had attained unto a greater measure of
knowledge, touching some divine Mysteries than the Apostles themselves, even
after the day of Pentecost. These primitiae Gentium, the first fruits of the
Gentiles, knew now their own calling, which St. Peter Act. 10.34, 35. then
began to know, when he had seen a vision from heaven. And St. Paul very highly
esteems the revelation of this mystery made known unto him, Ephesians. 3.2.9.

Hitherto we have seen how the (...), or thing granted in the question
concerns us. The (...), or thing put to the question, as nearly concerns us
also. They say, Where is He that is born the King of the Jews? where we may
take notice:

1. These Magi, these wise men inquiring, where Christ was born, they were not
of the Vbiquitaries faith, they belived not that Christ's body could be every
where; for they ask, where is he.

2. Our God would have the fame of his Sons incarnation spread not only at
Bethlehem, but at Jerusalem the mother City, and all Judea.

3. At Jerusalem they ask this question: Of whom? wise men propound questions
unto men fit and able to answer them, who were here the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and the wise and learned of them. Whence we may note, that the wise
in every kind are persons meet to be advised withal, in doubts of all sorts,
and the spiritual wise in spiritual difficulties. It is Gods Ordinance, Isaiah
2.1.2.

4. Both Nature and Art may be at a stand in spiritual things, especially
concerning Christ; which, as the Apostle witnesses, are very mysterious, Ephesians.
3.4. 1 Timothy 3.16.

5. When Nature and Art are at a loss, they must be helped by Grace. And
therefore the Wise men hoping well of the Jews, as Gods peculiar people, go
to Jerusalem, now corrupted, and consult with them. Who yet give us example,
and teach us to advise with men holy and wise in the Lord; especially to
travel to the City of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and enter into the
Sanctuary, Psalm. 27.4. and 73.16, 17. and 122.4.

6. When Gods Priests, Prophets and Teachers are asleep, strangers come and
awake them.

7. Nature and Art may be good handmaids unto Grace, and do Jerusalem good
service.

8. Here is the accomplishment of Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49. When the Scepter
was departed from Judah, and a Lawgiver or Ruler from between his feet, then
must Shilo come, and not till then; And thus it was now with Israel: They had
no King. Herod was a stranger, an Edomite, an earthly one; And therefore the
Star showed as well as the Prophecy, that their spiritual Messiah was come.

9. When God takes away the outward honor, power, Kingdom and dignity from his
people, it is because He would bestow an inward and spiritual in the room of
it. They had now no outward Prince of their own; now therefore the Lord makes
known unto them Messiah, the Prince, the true King of the Jews, the King of
Israel.

10. Nature and Art though illustrated by grace in some measure, may yet be at
a loss, as these Magi were, concerning the place of Christ's Nativity and
present abode.

11 Many know, that Christ is somewhere born, but where and among what people,
they know not.

12. The ignorance of something, as where Christ is born, must not discourage
us or make us slothful, but stir us up the rather to inquire.

And let us, I beseech you, make yet a more strict and narrow search; where,
Where shall we find Him that is born King of the Jews? It extreme nearly
concerns us all.

For, hereby we know the Spirit of God: Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God: And every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God; but this is the Spirit
of Aniichrist, 1 Ioh. 4.2, 3. And know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. But if Christ be in you, the body is dead, because
of sin, and the Spirit is life because of righteousness, Romans 8.

Now, if Christ be born in us, He is borne in us at least as a child. And what
is most notable in a child? is not innocence, simplicity, and humility? If
therefore Christ be a child born in us, where is his innocence? If
uncleanness, fornication, adultery, or adulterous thoughts be in us, innocence
is not in us, we are then become not the members of Christ, but of an Harlot,
and he who touches her shall not be innocent, Prove. 6.29. If covetousness be
borne in us, Christ's innocence is not in us, he that makes have to be rich,
shall not be innocent, Prove. 28.20.

If rebellion or sedition be born in us, Barabbas may be born in us, Christ's
innocence is not born in us, so Daniel reasoned, Dan. 6.22.

2. If Christ as a child be borne in us, where is his simplicity? If subtilty,
deceit, and fraud go not out of our streets, if we circumvent, and go beyond
our brother in bargaining, so far we are for having Christ's simplicity born in
us, that we know not the Father who is the avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5,
6. If so, the Serpent has beguiled us and corrupted our minds from the
simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3.

Thirdly, if Christ be a child born in us, where is his humility? If our heart
be lifted up in us, if we be proud of wealth, or honor, or knowledge, or what
ever else, where is Christ's humility? Therefore the blessed Virgin when she
magnifies the Lord for Christ born in her, He has regard, says she, the
lowliness of his handmayden, Luke 1. If neither the innocence, nor simplicity,
nor humility of the Child Christ be born in us, how is Christ born in us so
much as a child?

True it is, these are but weak, where Christ is new born.

But let them consider this, who think they ought always to be so weak, and
place their strength and power of Religion in complaining of their weakness.
Does the child continue always a child? or does he grow up to greater age and
strength? Ephesians. 4.14, 15.

Let them also consider this, who although they want the innocence, simplicity,
and humility of the Child Christ, yet presume themselves able and well grown
Christians, yea, such are grown up to the Old age of Christ. Why? because they
find the flesh rebel against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh;
which they take for a sign of a perfect regenerate man. He who thus judges of
himself, as I fear too many do, let him know, that he is but yet a child, a
little child, if so much in Christianity. And for proof of this, compare, I
beseech ye Gal. 4.19. with cap. 5.17.

But though Christ be born as a Child, yet is He then a King. Is the child
Christ born a King in thee? Where Christ is born a King, there He must reign,
Isaiah 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, etc. and the Government is upon his
shoulder, etc. Does this King reign, bear rule, and govern thee and me? Where
He reigns, the wild passions, the brutish and savage affections; as hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, etc. they are tamed and brought into
subjection under the Child that is born a King, Isaiah 11.6. In the days of
Christ, (so it is in the Chaldy Paraphrast) The Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf and the young
Lion, and the fatling together, and a little Child shall lead and govern them,
Proverb. 20.8.

And therefore Christ is called the King of the Jews. What is that to us? The
true Jews are they who praise and glorify their God, Genests 29.35. He is not
a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in
the flesh, but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the
heart and Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of
God, Romans 2.28, 29. Of such Jews, Jesus is the King.

Ye perceive (Beloved) how nearly the Wise men's Question concerns us. So do
their Reasons.

First, they saw His Star. Whence we may:

First, observe the method of our God, in bringing men unto Christ: He takes
men at their work. The Shepherds were feeding of their flocks by night, and the
Angel of the Lord brought them the first glad tidings of Christ coming in the
flesh, Luke 2. The Apostles were at their trade a fishing, and Christ called
them. These Wise men were beholding the Stars, and giving glory unto God, and
God, by a Star leads them unto Christ.

Secondly, take notice of Gods gracious condescent unto Mankind: He takes men
by their work and by their profession, Psalm. 78.70. He chose David his
servant, and took him from the Sheepfolds, from following the Ewes great with
young; He brought Him to feed (or to rule) Jacob his People, and Israel his
inheritance. He took the Apostles being Fishermen, and made them Fishers of
men, Luke 5.10. Thus Dionysius the Areopagite was first brought on his way
toward Christ, the Son of righteousness, by the beholding that supernatural
Ecllpse of the Sun at the Passion of Christ; as He brought these Astronomers by
a Star. And this I take to be one principal reason, why Christ himself, his
Kingdom, his Word, the Ministers of it, and all means of Salvation are
represented unto us by so many Metaphors; God graciously condescending to come
home unto us, to take us at our trades, at our callings, at our several
professions, and all, to bring us, as He brought the Wise men here by a Star
unto Christ.

Thirdly, God calls not men per saltum, nor all at once, and extempore; but by
degrres. The Shepherds had an Angel to preach the Gospel unto them, the
immediate outward means of salvation: these Wisemen had a Star; a means
also, but more remote. The Shepherds lived in the Church, were well prepared;
the Wisemen were strangers to it; yet utraque lingua de coelo erat and stellae
and Angelorum, as one of the Ancients speaks, God taught from heaven both by
Star and Angels.

Fourthly, these had a Star, and but a Star; and they came to worship Him.
That Is the second reason of these Wisemen. O the sloathfulnesse of most men in
these days! we have not only the book of Nature open to us, as these
Wisemen had, but the Grace of God also has appeared, and the Gospel, and
glad tidings of Christ has been preached unto us now all our days; yet how
few, alas, how few obey the Gospel of Christ? God gives us his Word, and great
is the company of those who publish it; and a great deal of Preaching we have,
and a great deal of hearing, and a great deal of talking; yet how few, alas,
how few come unto Christ, as these Wife. men did, to whom God gave neither
Preacher nor Word. Only it is probable, a tradition they had, and but
probable; they thention it not, only they saw a Star, and came along journey
to worship Christ.

Beloved! I blame not now our want of diligence in coming to Church, nor in
seeking Christ any other way abroad, and without us. These things we may do,
and good means they are in their kind and degree: yet may we use them all, and
that diligently, and yet it is possible we may not come unto Christ. Mark, I
pray, what our Savior says to the Jews, John 5.39, 40. Ye search the
Scriptures (so the Greek word (...) is rather Indicatively then Imparatively
there to be understood, as the Text will appear to any judicious man, who
shall well consider it;) Ye search, says he, the Seriptures, for in them ye
think to have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me; and ye
will not come unto me, that ye might have life. To come unto Him, is to
believe on Him, John 6.35. to conform themselves unto his death, that as
Christ lives, they might live also. This is (...) a faithful saying, if we dye
with Him, we shall live with Him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. even that life of God
from which we are estranged, Ephesians. 4. Thus the Jews came not unto Christ,
nor, I fear, many of us.

These Wisemen came unto Christ by the guidance of a Star, and their example
may justly blame the unwise, who ascribe their not coming unto Christ, to
fatal necessity or influences of the Stars: As Tertullian reports of ignorant
men, Deonerant seipsos, and malae mentis impetus vel fato vel Astris imputant:
They excuse themselves and lay the blame of their evil minds upon fatal
necessity, or upon the Stars.

As for fatal necessity, let them answer and satisfy these complaints, who
are ignorant of Gods Government, of the world by Stars and Angels; and
therefore of all other men, most oppose Astrology. These are they who faigne a
compendious and peremptory decree of God, without consideration of sin
voluntarily committed, to save a few, and damn all the world beside. Let these,
if they can, satisfy those who complain of fate and destiny.

I shall rather endeavor to satisfy their cavil, who lay the blame of their
not coming unto Christ, upon the Stars and their influences; yea, and upon
Astrologicall judgments of their effects.

True it is, Astrology is that Art or Science, which enables and teaches men
to judge and foretell natural effects, and changes to come, in the Elements
and Elementary bodies, by their motions, configurations, and influences of the
Signs, Stars and Planets; yet neither are the influences, merell less the
judgments and predictions of their effects, the causes of finne, or any
hindrances why we may not come unto Christ, as these wise men did.

It cannot be denied, but influences there are of the heavenly bodies benign,
and comfortable to the inseriour creatures, as those of the Pleiades, Job.
38.31. Those of the San and Moon, Deuteronomy. 33.14. Yea, of the whole Heaven, Hos.
2.21. There are influences destructive unto wicked men, Judge. 5.20. The Stars
in their courses sunght against Sisera. And all these influences are conveyed
unto this lower world acted by them. Whence the Cabalists say, that there is
Grater superior, an heavenly Vessel, which empties it self in craterem
inferiorem into the lower Vessel, even all the elementary world, which
receives what is emptied from heaven unto it; that Omnes res inferiores
representativae suntisuperiorum, that, as every herb has it is visible
signature, which discovers it useful for one or other part of the body; so
has every one an influence from it is proper Star, and Angel governing it;
yea, Omneores animdto habet a caelo stellam ad se instuneem; yea, that there is
neither herb, nor plant nor stone, nor mineral, nor man, nor beast which
receive not the influences from the Stars.

Now though there be such powerful influences, yet do not these hinder our
coming unto Christ. For howsoever by our fall, according to the first Adam,
our nature is depraved, and that primative Symmetry and harmony between heaven
and earth, dissolved and lost, whence the creature is subject to vanity, yet as
we recover our selves out of the fall through the power of faith in the second
Adam, all those destructive and noxious influences loose their power upon us.
Meantime they cannot truly be said to be the cause of finne unto us.

For neither Sun, nor Moon, nor other Planet, nor Stars, nor Constellations,
nor Angels acting them, can do any thing in this Elementary world, otherwise
then a Lute, or other Mustcall instrument can be said to make harmony of it
self alone, without the touch of the skillful Lutanist. And such instruments
also are all these, whose harmonicall motions wholly depend on him; who does
according to his will, both in the army of Heaven, and the inhabitants of the
Earth, Dan. 4, 35. So that if we blame the Stars, we must lay the change
higher, as either upon God himself, or upon the Angels His immediate
instruments, who act by the Stars. We cannot justly lay the blame on God: For
let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, etc. Jam. 1.13. No,
say not he has caused me to err. Ecclesi. 15.12. For he has no need of the
sinful man. So contrary is this to their assertion, that God in great wisdom
contrived a way to bring sin into the world, that hereby he might glorify
his justice. Abne simus tam satui adulatores Dei.; says St. Hierom, Gods
justice has no need of our lies. Nor can our sin be imputed to the Angels,
whose property it is to do his Commadement, and harken to the voice of his
Word, Psalm. 103.20.21. When men are driven from thief vain refuges, they
commonly lay the blame upon the Devil. The Devil, they say ought them a
spite. True it is, the Prince of the Air rules in the Sons of disobedience,
but the Sons of disobedience first yield up the rule of themselves to the
Prince of the Air. The Devil rules in them, but first lust rules in their
members. The Devil takes them, captive at his will, but first they yield
themselves captive of their own will. And therefore our Savior who attributes
the lusts of wicked men unto the Devil; He attributes withal the lusts of the
Devil unto wicked men, when they freely and willingly commit them. Ye are,
says He, of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do.
The words in our English are obscure: The Greek words are, (...). The lusts of
your Father ye will, ye have a lust to do, Joh. 8.44. So true is that of St.
Austin; Falso de natura sua aut stellarum influxu conqueruntur mortales, quod
peccatum adeo voluntarium est, quod si non voluntarium, non est peccatum. The
Apostle referrs all to the true Original, Romans 6.19. Ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity.

Yea, justly we may lay all the blame of the Stars malignant influence upon
our selves, and our own perverse will We our selves furnish the Astrologers,
the Chiromantes, and Physiognomers with matter of prognostication and
prediction. For although the Stars incline, and be apt to raise vicious
passions, and affections, in one sadness and melancholique thoughts; in
another wrath, in another wanton love, which the Astrologer well knows, in the
nature of those influences, we readily yield unto those influences, though
there be in us the power of God through faith to lay those turbulent Spirits,
and break their force and vigor. And by this cowardly yiedling, we make the
Astrologer speak truth, who otherwise, by our resisting the temptation and
suggestion unto sin, would easily be deceived. So true is that, -- sapiens
dominabitur astris. A wise man overrules the influences of the Stars.

And this truly to me is an argument, that the present generation of men, in
this I and is, and has been extremely brutish, corrupt and sensual; and
withal, that the principles of Astrology are sirme and good, in that their
predictions and prognostications touching this present'age, have proved so
true, which never could have come to pass; had men acted according to the
principle of christian faith and right reason, and not secundum id bruti,
according to their brutish and corrupt nature in them.

To conclude all, suffer, I beseech ye the word of exhortation, yea, especially
who profess yourselves followers of these magi, these wise men in the Text: Do
ye as they did; Be ye guided by the Stars unto Jesus Christ, seek ye him who
made the seven Stars, and Orton, Amos, 5.8. And as it is a lawful, yea, and
honorable science, which ye profess, so use it lawfully, use it to the honor
of God, and the good of mankinds.

All laws prescribe bounds and limits, ultra quos, citraque nequit consis^ere
rectum. Laws of God, and Laws of men keep us within due bounds; and we ought
to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lord sake. Transgress not
therefore the due bounds of your Art, by any undue practice of it. make not the
planets and constellations the immediate necessary causes of humane actions.
Search not too far into particular acts of men, with their events. Make no
undue use of your Art to self interests, to covetousness, pride or vain
glory. Give not fourth your predictions as oracles, which possibly, ye know,
may prove untrue. The highest God can, and does often cross the course of
nature; yea, and oftentimes he produces that, which could not be foretold by
the observation of the Stars Esaias, 47.11.12, 13.

Desire not converse, nor conference with the Genii. The evil Angels are ready
to transform themselves into Angels of light, and obtrude themselves as
helpers, that in the end they may deceive and destroy. If thus or any like way,
ye go beyond your bounds, ye will give offense to the weak adyersaries of
Astrology; who, though ignorant of your Art, yet many of them, I doubt not,
are good meaning men. Yea, ye will give advantage to the common enemy of
mankind, That evil Spirit, who has his name from fearching (...), and (...)
from knowing, he having beguild our first parents with that specious promise,
which he never could perform, That they should be as Gods knowing good and
evil, he pursues their posterity, in whom he finds the like desire, when they
do not (...), but will be prying into events beyond the Sphere of natural
influences; and because cretainly to foretell contingent good or evil, is the
property of God himself, Esa. 41.23. Here, here especially he will be like
unto God; and to satisfy your curiosity, will pretend skill toforetell things
purely contingent. Nunc specimen specitur, nunc certamen cernitur sitis nec ne
ut esse oportet, boni mali cujuslibet. Here no doubt ye walk in the midst of
snares, and upon the battlements of the house, as the wise man speaks. Some
falling by the ill practice of your lawful Art, have become of magi,
magitians, and of wise men, Wizards. But I hope, yea I know better things of
some of you, and have good ground to hope the like of all. I understand, that
of Suidas, which he speaks of the Magi of old in Persia, is true of ye all;
That ye are (...), lovers of wisdom, and lovers of God. And that the noble
science of Astrology, by you, is now to be restored unto it is ancient luster
and glory.

Lastly, be we all exhorted to follow the Magi, the wise men in the Text, to
seek the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of the Jews; and if we follow these wise
men in the Text, they no doubt will lead us to him.

I shall use no other method then they did; We must heed the Law, that is our
Schoolmaster unto Christ; Thus no man c^mes to him, except the Father draws
him, Job. 6. And heed the propeticall word, which as a light shines in a dark
place until the day dawn, and the day star (or the Sun, as it is in the
Syriac) arise in our hearts. For this purpose we must make use of the least
helps that God has given us: use our senses and our understandings to the
fearching of him out in the creature. The heavens declare his glory, and the
firmament show his handy work. Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba de^^. When
we seek him thus with all our heart, God the Father reveals the like Star
unto us, that he did unto these wise men, even the illumination of faith; so
St. Anselm, Rhabanus and others understand this Star: For faith is the evidence
of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. By the guidance of this faith, this Star, we
must leave our Country, as the wise men did, And as their and our Father
Abraham did, Genesis 12. Who followed this Star, says the Apostle Heb. 11.8. By
faith, Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place, which he should
afterward receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and went out not knowing whither
he went. Out of our selves we must go, whither soever we go, otherwise
there is no coming unto Christ. And walk we must in the sleps of that faith of
our Father Abraham, Romans 4.12. The covetous man must forsake his covetousness,
that is his Country; the unclean person his lasciviousness and uncleanness,
that his Country, he lives in it; the Drunkard, angry, envious, contentious
persons must depart out of their drunkenness; their wrath, their envy, their
strife; they are their Countries wherein they live.

But we must not follow these wife men too close; They went up to Jerusalem,
out of their humane judgment and good hopes they had of the Jews. They
thought it was most likely, they should find the King of the Jews in the royal
City; that they should learn where he was of the learned Scribes; But humanum
s^agitantes consilium, divinum amisere ducatum, says St. Bernard. while they
sought the counsel of men, they lost the guidance of God, Thus did Samuel; but
it was while he was but a child. God called him, and he came to Eli the doting
Priest. But when God revealed his Son in me says St. Paul, I conferred not
with flesh and blood. Gal. 1. Nor must we. Not but that there are learned
scribes, and they taught unto the Kingdom of God, (...) is a duall, there are
good and bad together.

The Scribes tell the wise men, that the King of the Jews is borne in
Bethlehem, the House of Bread. Very fitly was the Bread of life, born in the
house of Bread, whear the Bread of life is broken. Do we thus seek him? or
seek we him rather for our own advantage, as some sought him for the loaves,
John 6. This is to seek Christ in Bethlehem, the house of bread, not in
Betulehem Judah, but in Bethlebem in the tribe of Zabulon, Josh. 19.15. that is,
they seek Him for the loaves in their own habitation; that's Zabulon; as the
Scribes who told the Wise men that Christ should be born in Bethlehem, yet they
themselves went not out of their own Town to seek Him. Thus without doubt the
greatest part of men seek Christ; they will not go out of themselves to find
him; they would have Him come to them in their sins, in their Country; they
will not go to Him. This is the reason of so much sighing and and groaning,
wherein many men place a great part of their religion; they would find Christ,
and not depart from their covetousness their envy, their pride, their hatred,
etc. their own Countries: it is impossible. While we are yet in our own
Country, this bread in hidden Manna. Therefore Bethlehem signifies also the
house of War, implying thus much unto us, that we cannot feed of the bread of
life, unless we strive or fight for it: Labor for that meat that endures unto
the everlasting life. The Inhabitants of the Island Baleares gave not their
children meat, unless by slinging they first struck it down from some high
place, where it was lodged. He who will not labor, shall not eat the bread of
life. To these the Lord promises refreshment out of the true Bethlehem. To him
that overcomes, there is Bethlehem, the house of War, to him I will give to
eat of the hidden Manna; there is Bethlehem, thr house of bread, Revel. 2.17.

But Bethlehem was the place where Christ was born in the flesh. Christ in
these last days is to be born in the Spirit, when Christ was born in the
flesh, He was bounded within a certain place: The Wise men must take a long
journey to come and seek Him. When he is born in the Spirit, He is not bounded
to this or that place, Matthew 24.23.26, 27. not here or there, for as the
lightning, etc. The wind or Spirit blows where it lists, John 3.8. But if
Christ be so born, how, and where shall we find Him? Wisdom she is easily seen
of those that love her, and found of those that seek her, etc. Wisdom 6.12, 13,
14. Yea, there will be no need of curious searching; they who are born of the
Spirit, He seeks them, John 4.23, 24. Yea, when he is thus born according to
the Spirit, His presence will be so illustrious, he will need no farther
demonstration. They in whom He is so born, shall find his birth in themselves
yea others also shall acknowledge it in them. Esaias, 61.9.

But Christ's first coming in the flesh was honored and declared by a new
Star; and would not our good God vouchsafe to honor Christ's second coming and
that more gloriously in the spirit, with a star also?

Doubtless (beloved) our good Lord has not been wanting unto us herein,
though herein I fear, we have been and are extremely wanting to our selves.

In the year of our Lord. 1572. There appeared in Casslopeia, a star of the
greatest magnitude, and far greater then any of that constellation. It was
observed by the most skillful and famous Astronomers of that time, to hold the
same Aspect in all places of Christendom, to run the same course, to keep the
same proportion, distance and situation every where, and in every point, with
the fixed Stars, by the space, say some, of 15. Months, others of two whole
years. Peucerus in his Chronology, an eye witness of it as many thousands
more were, he writes thus of it: fulget sub aster ^s^o Cassiop^iae novam sidus
cujus simile nulla vidit ^tas came magnitudine, quantum, ad visum stella^ omnes
tam errantes quam fixas superet. Haerer immobile in to coeli loco quod primum
effulsit et a nobis conspectum est. Many of that time delivered their opinions
of it, what it might portend, Beza wrote verses on it; it was held by all, and
called by Tychobrahe, stella mirabilis, a wonderful Star. And well might it be
so called, for that wonderful Star pointed at the great wonder in Heaven,
Revel. 12.1. Christ born the second time in these last days according to the
Spirit. The woman the Church clothed with the sun, Mal. 4.2. With Christ the
sun of r^ghteousnesse, the Moon the changeable world under her feet. Thus some
of the Ancients understood Jericho which has the name from the Moon, a kind of
Luneburg, the City of the Moon, the changeable world. That was trodden under the
feet of Iosuah and the Church with him, the spiritual and true Joshuah the
Lord Jesus. He has the same name (...), and he clothes the woman the Church,
who through Him treads the mutable world the spiritual Jericho under her feet.
(...) At this wonderful birth in these last days, that glorious and
wonderful Star pointed, and yet points all truly wise men. Not like that other
Star, which doubtless was not higher than the lower Region of the air:
Otherwise how could it be said to go before them, as that Numb. 24.17. (...)
incessit, it went and stood over the place where the Child was, Matthew. 2.9. But
this wondefull Star shone over all Christendom, over the whole Spouse of
Christ, of whom Christ is born the second time.

Yea, befides this wonder in Heaven, and this wonderful Star directing to it,
in the same years 1572. and 73.4, 5. etc. brake forth the most glorious and
wonderful light of spiritual and heavenly Doctrine; The everlasting Gospel,
which had an Angel for the Preacher of it, flying in the midst uf Heaven,
Revel. 14.6, 7. And this glorious light of the everlasting Gospel again breaks
forth in these last days; though the Dogs extremely bark a^ it. But we must be
content; If wrathful and envious Dogs bark at the Moon the lesser light, no
marveil though they bark at the Sun the greater light, and the woman clothed
with it. But the time shall come which ye read in Joshua, 10.21. That none
shall move their tongue at the Children of Israel.

Now as the Lord called the Heaven to witness the Spiritual birth of Christ;
and an Angel flying in the midst of Heaven to give testimony to the
everlasting Gospel: So in the year 1575. when the light of it brake forth into
this Island, the Lord called also the earth to witness the same truth. Master
Camden in his Britannia tells us, in the Description of Herefordshire, that
Prope confluentes [Lugi and Vagae] Collis quem Marcley-hill vocant, anns
salutis 1575. quasi somne solutus consutrexit and triduum se in immanissimam
molem propellens horrenao reboans mugitu, and obvia quaeque prosternens in
superiorem locum, magna cum admiratione se promovit, eo terrae motus genere, ut
judico, quod Physici Brasmatiam vocant.

Master Speed, in his Description of the same County, gives us the History more
fully; only there is in him a mistake of of the year, unless it were only
the Printers fault, as I believe.

Marcley-hill in the East of this Shire, rowsed it self out of a dead sleep,
with a roaring noise removed from the place where it stood, and for three days
together traveled from the first site, to the great amazement and fear of the
beholders. It began to journey upon the seventh day of Febr. being Saturday at
fix a clock at night, and by seven the next morning, had gone forty paces,
carrying with it Sheep in their coats, hedge rows and trees, whereof some
were over-turned, and some that stood upon the Plain, are firmly growing upon
the Hill, those that were East, were turned West, and those in the West were
set in the East. In which remove, it overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and turned
two Highways near one hundred yards from their usual Paths formerly trod:
The ground thus traveling near about six and twenty Acres, which opening it
self with Rocks and all bare the earth before it for four hundred yards space
without any stay, leaving that which was Pasturage, in the place of Tillage,
and the Tillage over spread with Pasturage. Lastly, overwhelming her lower
parts, mounted to an Hill of twelve fathoms high, and there rested her self
after three days travel, r^maining His mark that so laid His hand upon this
rock, whose power has poysed the Hill in His balance, Job 28 9. Esaias 40.12.

This, although we may refer unto its second causes, as Master Camden does;
yet if we consider the great manifestation of that Divine light, by the
publishing of the everlasting Gospel that very year unto this Nation, we
cannot but apply that of the Psalmist; What ayled ye, ye Mountains that ye
shipped like Rams, and ye little. Hills like young Sheep? Tremble thou Earth at
the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Iacoh, Psalm. 114.

The Lord then made manifest His presence by the moving of the Earth; and this
is not uncouth: For thus when the Lord is said to have bowed the Heavens, and
come down, the foundations of the Hills were shaken, Psalm. 18.7, 8, 9. And
Psalm. 68. Wherein some of the Fathers tell us, decantari Mysteria utriusque
Testamenti, that the Mysteries of both Testaments are reported, and chanted out
by the sweet singer of Israel, v^rse 7.8. This came to pass in the Letter, when
God gave his Law, Exodus 19. and 20. Hoc ideo, ut cum illa quae legis sunt,
gessit, in his quoque ea quae Evangeliorum sunt praeformasse sciretur. This the
Lord did, that in delivering the Law, He might be known to prefigure those
things which belong unto the Gospel. Hilar. So that the Lord therein testified
of another trembling, another moving of the Earth when the Gospel should be
revealed, which accordingly came to pass when the Wise men in my Text came to
Jerusalem, and in quired, where is He that is born King of the Jews? When
Herod the King heard these things, he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him,
Matthew 2.2.3. Herod was an Idumean, an Edomite, a figure of the earthly man,
that must needs be moved, and troubled at the presence of the heavenly. For the
Edomite, the earthly man bears rule in us, and is a King in us, as Herod the
Edomite was; and the Image of the earthly we bear, until the Image of the
heavenly appears. And therefore as we have borne the Image of the (both
natural and corrupt) earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly, 1
Cor. 15.49. No marvel then if the earth be moved at the presence of the Lord,
that the earthly man tremble, when he hears the news that he must part with
his Dominion, and Sovereignty in us, according to the decree of God, The elder
shall serve the younger, Genesis 25. This is no Gospel, no glad tidings unto him.
This cannot come to pass without a great deal of struggling, not only that
within us, in our hearts like that in the womb of Rebecca, but also without us
in the world. The strong man is not easily bound, nor by any other than the
stronger one, Luke 11. Herod that Mountain of glory or honor, as his n^me
signifies, must needs tremble and be moved, when he hears news of one who
turns the Earth upside down, Isaiah 24.1. And brings into contempt all the
honorable of the Earth, Isaiah 23.9. It was true what the Accusers of our Lord
gave-in against Him, though not in their sense, Luke 23.2. that He did (...),
vulg. Lat. subvertere Gentem turn the Nation upside down. And as true was that,
though he meaning otherwise, whereof the zeloticall Jews accused Paul and
Silas, Arts 17.6. saying, they were (...), that they had turned the world
upside down; for so no doubt where ever the Preaching of the Gospel takes
effect, so that Christ as King comes to reign, He turns the world upside
down, what was above before, He then brings under (...), that which is high in
men (even the tumor of their proud and lofty thoughts) it is abominable in the
sight of God. Luke 16.14. He puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts
the lowly and meek, Luke 1.52. Esaias 25.2.12. and 26.5.6. And this though a
great change to both, yet both (and well they may) rejoice and glory in it.
Iam. 1.9.

Yea, what the Lord did at the giving of the Law, prefigured what should be
done at the publishing of the everlasting universal Gospel. And therefore
when the Preacher of it, Revel. 14.6. had published it, presently comes forth
another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, etc. even that threefold
Babel, out of which the three Frogs proceed, even the spirits of Devils, which
now a long time have gone forth unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty, Revel.
16.13, 14. And then the greatest changes must be made. For He who went before
conquering, went to conquer, (...) Rev. 6.2. For in this most holy estate, when
transgression is to be finished, and an end made of sin, and reconciliation
for iniquity, and the everlasting righteousness brought in, and the most holy
anointed the Lord does not then speak on earth, as Ebr. 2.3. but from heaven
Ebr. 12.25. Then not only the earth is to be moved but also heaven, Ebr. 12,
26. not only the sinful earthly thoughts, minds and affections of the corrupt
Adam; nor only the spiritual wickedness in heavenly things, but also those
things, which in comparison of legal administrations, were accounted heavenly,
even they in regard of the new heaven and the new earth that now appears, even
they must be shaken, as already they are in some measure: of this estate the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17.

But if the first Star designed and pointed at the very City, and House where
Christ was borne according to the flesh; and this wonderful Star point to
none; Christ's coming in the flesh, in that respect, will be more glorions than
His coming in the Spirit, and so the latter House shall not be more glorious
than the former, which yet has a Promise that it shall be, Haggi 2.9.

Know we therefore, that this wonderful Star directs unto (...), Revelations
20.9. It points to Bethlehem, as the other did, Luke 2.4. the City of David,
that is, (...) the Beloved City, beloved of God, where the Lord promised the
blessing, Psalm. 133. where God, who is the love it self, dwe's: therefore the
Name of that Mystical City is (...) Ez^k. 48.35.

This is that City, where the Citizens love God, their neighbor, and their
enemy, the true Philadelphia.

This beloved City is that which is set on an Hill, Mat. 5.14. wherein they of
Gods household dwell, Ephesians. 2.19. Therefore when the Psalmist has spoken of
the shaking of the earth at the giving of the Law, Psa. 68.8. whereby was
figured also the changes at the giving of the Gospel, as I showed before; he
tells us of the gracious rain, which falls not like that Mat. 5. upon the evil
and the good; the Word Preached drops on all: but its a figure of the holy
Spirit, which the world cannot receive, says our Lord: this therefore falls on
Gods inheritance only, ver. 9. even the Hill of the Lords house, ver. 15. Mons
Dei mons pinguis, fat with the unction of the Spirit, which is imparted unto
all truly called Christians. This Hill like that I told you of out of Master
Camden and Master Speed, keeps the Sheep safe in their coats, and all the
trees of righteousness growing upon it; only it turns those West which were
East, and the East West. They that were first become last, and the last first.
It over turns all mere ceremonial outside worship; and changes the beaten
great rodes, even that broad way of open known sinners, and that kind of
narrow way, which is indeed cut out of the same broad way, consisting in an
affected kind of strictness, in regard of some bodily exercises; which
neglect of the true narrow way of mortification which leads unto the
everlasting life. And as that Hill mounted it self on the top of another, and
there rested; so this Hill of the Lord must raise it self above all the little
Hills, even all particular Churches divided in judgments and opinions: for why
leap ye, ye Hills? why strive ye for superiority, yea supremacy one above
another? This is the Hill which God desires to dwell in, yea the Lord will
dwell in it for ever. For that of the Prophet must have its fulfilling in these
last days, Esaias 2.2. that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, and be exalted above the hills, and
that shall not be shaken but remain, Heb. 12.27.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

But alas! may many a poor soul say; I have vicious inclinations; and the Stars
have their destructive influences on me: And how shall I follow this wonderful
new Star into this glorious City? Let us therefore know, that as there are
influences from the Stars, which move and incline us unto evil, by reason of
our depraved nature, so are there also influences of grace and truth, which
proceed from the Son of righteousness, with which the woman is clothed, who
has put on Christ, and from the bright morning Star, John 1. Revel. 22.

These influences are received by a living and powerful faith, which has the
virtues not only of some one Star, or some one Asterisme, or Constellation,
but even of all the Stars, all the Constellations of the heavens. And therefore
the Church moves and shines like the starry heaven, which the Apostle delights
to see, Col. 2.5. I am with you in Spirit, joying and beholding (...), the
orderly Motion, and firmamentum fidei, Vulg. Lat: the Firmament of your Faith,
by this Word the LXX turn (...) Genesis 1.7. (...). By the power of this Faith,
this firmament of Faith; all the temptations of the Devil and his Angels are
extinct, and frustrate, 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steafast in the Faith, Jam.
4.7. Resist him, and he will fly from you. By virtue of this Faith, we quench
all the fiery darts of the Devil. By virtue of this Faith, all the influences
inclining to evil, may not only be frustrate of their effect, but also turned
to good. Have thou received an impression of sadness? set it on the right
object, thy sin; and remember, Blessed are they that mourn, etc. Art thou moved
by another Influence to covet, and heap up wealth? Lay up thy treasure in
Heaven, etc. Does another Influence incline thee to wanton love? Advance it to
the love of thy God, thy neighbor, and thine enemy. Art thou yet by another
Influence inclined to wrath? Be angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4.26. That is, so be
angry with thy self, that thou may not sin.

If such Philadelphians we shall be, if such Citizens of the Beloved City, the
City of David, Prove. 3.20. By walking after, and with these Wisemen we also
shall be wise; and as they found the Lord Jesus, so shall we find Him also,
John 14.21. We shall become true Magi, truly Wisemen; And we shall become
Guides to others, and win their souls unto the Lord Jesus, and so become more
wise, Prove. 11.13. And shine as the Firmament: yea, We shall become Stars, and
shine as lights in the world, Dan. 12.3. They who are wise shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament, and they who turn many into Righteousness as the
Stars for ever and ever.

FINIS.

