A DEFENSE OF A TREATISE AGAINST SVPERSTITIOVS IESV-WORSHIP, Falsely called
Scandalous, against the truly Scandalous Answer of the Parson of Westminston
in Sussex. Wherein also the whole Structure of his ANTITEIISA, so far as it
concerns the point in controversy is overthrown, the truth more fully
cleared, and the iniquity of that Superstition more thoroughly detected.

BY M. G. the Author of the former Treatise, published Anno Dom. 1642.

1 TIMOTHY 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions, and
strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings.
Printed at London for Daniel Friar, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
sign of the red Bull in Little-Britaine, 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS And Burgesses of the House of Commons,
Assembled in Parliament.
MOst Noble Senators, having had a necessary occasion to publish a Treatise
against Superstitious Iesu-Worship, I dedicated the same to a worthy Member of
your House. Now finding it encountered in two volumes by Master Barton, who
after dedication of his first Book to the Kings Majesty, seems next to
dedicate the same to you, I have therefore taken boldness to dedicate this my
Reply to you also, (being indeed an encounter with both his Books) which
otherwise I should not have done nor presumed to soar so high. This man is
very confident in his cause, he tells you he has hit the Mark* at which he
aimed, but I am confident it will appear for all his boasting, that he has
took his level with a false deceitful eye. He first flatters you and tells
you, that your Honor advances truth, and nothing more, and presently after
complains, that the ^lose followers of truth and peace are pursued, (he
means himself, and his faction) and so the two sacred Sisters are forced by
humorists. Upon whom this will reflect, I leave to your wisdoms to consider.
He is not ignorant that you have broken the neck of this superstition, and
favor not the followers of it. Against me he complains to the Kings Majesty
that I have crucified Christ in his name, and have shamefully handled the
Church: heavy charges if I cannot avoid them; For the first, I appeal to what
I have written; for the second, I am not guilty, unless affirming it to be
unlawful to give a Church authority over Gods word, do make me to be so. For
this opinion I know it to be one of the maine props, and pillars of Antichrist,
and it lives and dies with him, and blessed be God both are hastening to their
end, but if I should hold my peace at this time I should betray truth, which I
abhor to do. There be many Malignant Spirits fit for a Malignant opinion that
do yet plead for it. And some I know do greatly cry up this Man's book; I
have labored to strippe this superstition stark naked, that the ugly
deformity of it may appear, and what I have done herein I humbly submit my
self to your Honors grave censure, and humbly crave of you pardon for my
boldness. The Lord watch over you for good, be a wall of fire round about you,
and the glory in the midst of you, keep you safe under his wings from the
desperate plots of wicked and unreasonable men, (as, his Name be eternally
praised, hitherto he has done) till Babylon be laid in the dust, and the King
of glory appear on Mount Sion in perfect beauty; Thus prays

The unworthiest of your Servants, MASCAL GYLES.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, I received in January last this Answer to my Treatise, and I
presently addressed my self to a Reply, which I finished (notwithstanding
other business) in the space of a month, as some of Mr. Bartons acquaintance
can testify; and presently took care for the Printing, but being certified
that his Book was little regarded but kept Shop at London diligently, and
seldom went abroad, I was the more careless of setting it forth. But
perceiving that Mr. Bartons admirers took advantage by my neglect, boasting
that I was not able to make any answer; to the end that truth may not be
foiled, and error wax proud, I have here presented it to thy view.

It is the manner of Erroneous Teachers, what they cannot do by Reason, to
endeavor by railing to trample truth under their feet. Thus does this
Answerer, then whom a more scoffing Ismaelite, or a more railing Rabshakeh, I
deem never came in Print; If to call me Arian, Socinian, Triformian,
Anabaptist, and I know not what besides, will carry the cause at his side, he
will surely win the victory. This is one of his fetches to endeavor by
barbarous slighting of my Person to discredit my book. Another of his policies
is to encounter me with a great volume, and a great show of learning. It is
possible he may thus prevail with ignorants, that understand him not, and with
such as are carried with prejudice, but I am confident that he will never
please any that are truly learned and pious; one Pearl with them, though it
go in a narrow room, will be more precious than a Cartload of straw or
stubble. I question not his learning; learning indeed is exceeding commendable
if holy men have the use of it, otherwise nothing more pestiferous. The most
pestilent errors have been broa^^ed by the abuse of learning. He is a wise
man indeed that uses knowledge aright, Prove. 14. 1. As for his opinion, which
he makes a Answer to a Treatise, p 43.
necessary point of Faith and Salvation, and denounces (...). p. 59. and 65.
Anathema on those that will not practice it, as he can do no less upon his
grounds; the only learning to prove it is to be had from the Scriptures which
are not for him, but against him, and which he has miserably perverted for his
own ends, as I shall demonstrate. If ever man did set himself to oppose
truth, which clearly shines in his face, he has done it: never any in this
point has so far exceeded in absurdity as he has done, in so much, that in
Part 1. Sect. 4. and 8.
two Sections he has overthrown his whole two books, and utterly broken the
neck of his cause, never any more to be defended, as I shall prove* In his
Preface he discovers a great deal of malignitie, for he justifies the
opinion of those that ground is upon the Text by his own Reasons, and yet make
it a thing indifferent only warranted, but not commanded by the Text, but ye^
commanded by the Canon, which they will lay down if the Canon he overthrown;
my confutation of this monstrous error he has not answered but by a bold
impudent denial. I would feign know of him how a necessary point of Faith and
Salvation, which will be damnation to them that will not practice it, as he
says, (and all must say so too that ground it upon the Text) can be
indifferent, and ever to be laid down by the fall of a Canon: If Mr. Barton
had been ingenuous, he would have equally contested with them as with me,
being as great antagonists to him, as to me, but see how suddenly be
contradicts himself; for though he plead for those that hold it principally by
humane constitution, yet presently after ^e makes it an error to make the Text
inferior by the Canon: an irreconciliable contradiction. As touching the order
of the House of Commons against this ceremony, Mr. Barton denies it to be so,
for fear belike lest he should be seen to involve them in his anathema. As
for his reverend and orthodox Divine, whom he here basely flatters, and yet
(...). p. 52. 59. etc.
damnes him, and his opinion to hell in his book, because he stirs not, I
will not publicly note, yet there is nothing that I have set down, but I can
prove it from his own hand, and from sufficient able witnesses; and I am so
far to have any cause of recanting what I have written of him, that he has
more cause of public rec^ntation for seducing the people into superstition,
who if he had been ^esse superstitious would have been now more famous, and
if he compare those, from whom he has lost, with those that now cry him up, it
will add nothing to his comfort. As for his parishioner, whom he would not
admit to the conference, he is of my opinion in the point, and one whom he laid
to my charge, that I had seduced, therefore if he had been so strong and I so
weak, it had been for his purpose to have admitted him, for it might have
been judged a means to have revoked him from my opinion, and inclined him to
his. As for Mr. Bartons opinion, which he maintains in his book, but waves in
his preface, I did in the sincerity of my heart prefer before the other, for
I could never perceive, (nor I think Mr. Barton himself, when he is serious)
how any can maintain this opinion from the Text, upon his reasons, and yet
ever judge it lawful to lay it down; therefore I did not intend to rub his
back, I suppose if it lack rubbing, himself has made a devise to allay the
itch of it. That I had good cause to publish my book, I have showed
sufficiently. That I received a senseless railing answer to my four arguments
from him, I have to show from his own hand; for he did but only take my
propositions, contradicting my assumptions, and gave me not one word of reason,
notwithstanding accusing me of blasphemy, contradictions, inconsequences, and
more then Semi-Arrian Socinianisme. If this be not unreasonable railing I
refer my self to any to judge: As for his answer, near the one half is
impertinent stuff, and mere barbarous scurrilitie, which I have passed by,
and have resolved not to return reviling for reviling. But if my spirit be
moved in behalf of those three worthies, whose innocent sufferings he scoffs
at Page 2. I trust the Reader will not blame me. There be sundry things in my
book which are most material, that he has not so much as touched with one of
his fingers; for my part I have labored in this my Reply for brevitie to the
utmost of my power, yet I know not any thing fit to be answered that I have
passed by. Those his conceited strong holds in his (...). and some other things
urged, though when first mentioned, they are not answered in every place, yet
they are answered in other places more convenient as thou shall find. Those
tales which he lays to my charge that I should speak, are all false, where I
answer nothing. If there be any, that are so wedded to the learned opinion of
Master Barton, that they affect it and own it, and will not be persuaded to
the contrary, for my part I leave them to all the comfort that this opinion
will afford them; but withal, I wish them to put it in practice, for I know
some that hug his book that do not observe his rule, these show themselves
horrible dissemblers before God and Man: I must tell them, if they do not
practice it, we be to them. Never any served an harder master then Master
Barton, if he be not obeyed, his correction is no less then eternal
damnation. Thus, Christian Reader I leave thee to the perusal of this Reply.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, MASCALL GYLES.

Christian Reader, the Title following in the ensuing Page was set down
without my direction: My Title is this.

A Defense of a Treatise against Superstitious Jesu-Worship. PART. I. A Reply
to a Counter-scarfe, Written by Master Barton; concerning bowing at the Name of
JESUS, Anno 1642.
MAster Barton in the latter part of his (...) reads a Lecture of humility,
but in his Epistle Dedicatory, before his answer, he begins with a proud
brag, wherein he shows how well he puts in practice his own doctrine. He
says he answered my Treatise in 10. days of August last: Now this is to let
the world understand, that many of my books were in the Country on the 19. of
July, 1642. and I can prove that he had one of them amongst the first, and it
cannot be thought that he would be idle altogether til the busy time of
August; but I wonder that he would take so much time about it, seeing he
boasted after he had sent me that scurrilous answer to my four Arguments in
April before, that he had overthrown my whole Treatise in half an hour: a
strange dull fit came upon him, as it seems to take but half an hour then,
but now ten days. Now to show the impudency of this brag, I will declare the
truth of all: Almost two years agone he being at my house, I read into him my
whole opening of the Text. In the Spring, 1642. meeting him by occasion in the
presence of a Gentleman, and others, he seemed to be very fair with me, and
meekely requested me to send him some of my Arguments, affirming that if he saw
weight in them that he would yield, promising that when he had perused them he
would return them again; and send me the grounds of his opinion. I therefore
sent him those four arguments above specified, at large with their proofs,
which he hitherto keeps by him, and would not return them, neither would
he send his grounds according to promise: Is this equity? nay is it honesty?
but it is such honesty as well becomes Master Barton.

Besides, almost two years ago I sent him another Argument. First and last in
conference, and otherwise, I know not one Argument but he has been acquainted
with: and he knew as long ago as September 1641. that I would set out my
book; and yet this man has the face to say that he answered my whole book
in ten days. To add to this, in one passage of his book he lays to my
charge that my book is a monster of three years hatching; Page 50.
great odds, his brood but ten days in hatching, mine three years; But this
is the truth, finding this gross superstition to take so much in the County
by those superstitious teachers, and some ignorants in my own parish to be
staggard with it, I something more then three years ago delivered as much
against it as amounted to the quantity of an hour and a half at two several
Sermons, and then left it, only being ready to encounter with any of that
opinion, as occasion should serve, and never thought to come in print, till I
had received abuses by these men, and so with as much convenient speed as other
businesses would give me leave, I wrote it out fair, making it ready for the
press; and so I sent it up to a friend at London, where it lay almost half a
year before it came into the Press, till such time as I was careful to look
after it my self. If my book had been made ten years agone, what then? I
may put it out when I please, it is rashness and madness to affirm that
because my book came out three years after I first studied the point, that
therefore I was so long in studying it; by this rule Master Partons (...) is a
monster as well as my book* for I can prove that three years agone, and
better, he began to preach for his opinion, and a special friend of his told
me before my book was in the press, that he had a book of this Question ready
for the Press, which without doubt was this his (...). This I thought good to
make known, lest the reader should be deceived in a passage of his in the
Title of the said book, where he says it was prepared 1642. for if by
preparing he mean inventing or studying, he wrongs his reader and his own
conscience, seeing he preached for his opinion three years before. Thus much
in answer to his proud brag. This Sophister (for so I cannot choose but call
him; for all his answers are but mere sophistry) is offended at the title of
my book, because I call bowing at the name Jesus superstition. One reason is,
because, says he, Jesus is the Genitive case, and cannot be nominall in any
case; which exception shall be answered hereafter. And secondly, because the
term of superstition is an Enthusiasme (as he calls it) of Master Prynne
and Master Burton, whom in scorn he calls Confessor Prynne and Father Burton,
fathered on him and his fellows by me, whom he calls their Pupil. But it was
called superstition by sundry learned, long before they or my self wrote in
the Question: therefore it does not appear to be first brought up by those
worthy men, or if it were, I have no reason to recant for saying so too,
unless he can disprove the truth of it: and whereas he upbraides them with
their forfeitures, and asks me whether I will undergo the same; I answer,
he is a malicious impudent person to cast the sufferings of those excellent
men, with scorn into their teeth, in comparison of whom for true solid
learning, piety and sincerity, he is not worthy of that honor that Job refused
to give to the fathers of those children that mocked him; Job 6. 30. 1. 2.
but himself also has undergone a forfeiture, which if it had been in as
good a quarrel as theirs, it would have been more for his comfort, but he
speaks out, he can be content to help me to their forfeiture, if it lay in
his power, because he says, that contrary to my knowledge (his own saying, he
should have said) I accuse him of syllabicall worship, having often (but it was
never but once as I remember) in the presence of Divines and Gentlemen affirmed
the contrary: In answer to which, I doubt not but this malecontent will do
what he can to the uttermost of his power, to the extremity of forfeiture, his
malice is so implacable not only against me, but against all such as hate his
courses; but he cannot tell what forefeiture he himself may undergo for his
misdemeanors if once a good peace be settled, and I am confident that they that
are thoroughly acquainted with Master Barton, will not accuse me for the crime
of incredulity in not believing him on his bare word; but whether I have
wrongfully charged him with syllabicall worship, the following treatise will
declare.

SECTION I.
Wherein I demonstrate, Name above every Name what it is not.
first, what Name above every Name cannot be; and secondly what it is: and
first I say it is not to be understood of a bare proper name which makes Mr.
Barton very snuff, Whose disease I pray tended to (...) that was among the
Cavaliers, in habit and posture of war as a Cavalier?
and tells me that my disease is Melancholia, and tends to (...), and lays to
my charge ignorantia Elenchi, in saying that they do not divest the name above
every name to bare letters, and syllables, and that they do not take the name
without the sense: but what if himself do utterly mistake the question? for
by a bare name I intend not any name simply debarred of sense, but first a
proper name considered Seorsim and apart by it self. And secondly such a name
that is not answerable in a true relative sense to names subjected to it. My
first reason, Sir, you needed not to have been offended with, for I except it
as you see from a reason infallible, but take it as probable, and as an
introduction to those reasons that are more sure. My second and third Reasons
taken from the analogy of the Scriptures you take to be nothing, and include
them in the former, but you are mistaken, and where can you find these
phrases, A great Name, or Name above another, taken from a proper namein this
sense in any part of Scripture? My fourth reason you frivolously slight, you
deny that if the Name above every Name be a proper Name, the subjected Names
must be proper Names also; this is to deny evident plain reason, for is there
not a manifest relation between a proper Name, and proper Names? But you say,
if I mean a Name in the sense of it, the Name Jesus is above every Name
whatsoever, yea above the Name of God, which is a fearful assertion, for if
you mean the Name of God considered by it self as a name, then because it is
plain by the Text that every Name below this highest Name must bow knees to
that Name, then it will follow, that besides the Names of the Creatures the
Name of God must bow to the Name Jesus: this will be laid to your charge,
avoid it if you can. But if you will not have the Name Jesus referred to names,
then it must be referred to the powers of things subjected, then it will
follow, that excepting not God, God himself must bow to the Name Jesus: impute
not blasphemy to me, it is direct blasphemy in you by your own doctrine, and
because you see it lies upon you, you rage and rail. Now then seeing Name
above every Name cannot be understood of a bare proper Name in the sense above
spoken, therefore it follows that it cannot be understood of the Name Jesus,
because the name in the Text is a name of power and authority, as that
parallel place proves it, Matthew. 28. 18. (...), all power is given me. So
Master Calvin on that place, Quo etiam pertinet illud Pauli, to which pertaines
that of Paul, he emptied himself, wherefore God exalted him, and gave him a
name, which is above every name. Again, the scope of the name proves it, for
Subjection must be given in this name signified by bowing the knee, Authority
and subjection are relatives, there is no Subjection due where there is no
Power or Authority. Now the Name Jesus is a name of Salvation, and not a name
properly denoting Command and Authority.

Secondly, though it should be granted that the Name Jesus is a name of
Authority, yet it is not a name of the highest Authority, Doctor Page your own
witness shall be Judge, whom you judge unreproveable in his judgment, Page
197.
who in his answer to Master Prynnes Reply to Widows; Master Prynne having
brought many places to prove that the name Christ denominates Christ's
Sacraments, his Church, his Apostles, his Ministers, his Saints, his Kingdom;
and therefore a Name especially venerable amongst Christians, does acknowledge
that the name Christ may be of greater Authority and dignity then the Name
Jesus, though not of greater savor and mercy. Now let Doctor Page with all his
learning, and Master Barton with all his Sophistry reconcile this if they can,
how the Name Jesus can be above every name, yet it be possible that any other
name may be of greater dignity and authority than it, seeing Name in the Text
does expressly denote dignity and authority.

Thirdly, thought it should be granted that the Name Jesus is of highest
authority in regard of the Church only, yet in this respect neither can it be
the name above every name in the Text, for this name is of highest authority in
regard of the whole creation, heaven and earth, and therefore without
controversy in respect of Angels, Devils, and all men whatsoever, according to
the forecited place, Matthew. 28. 18. All power is given me in heaven and earth.
Christ in this name commands the whole heaven and earth. Now the Name Jesus
cannot command the Angels, because to them he is not Jesus by redemption, as
the name signifies; much less can it command the Devils; and it cannot
command the whole earth, for many nations have no knowledge of his written Law,
much less the Gospel; therefore neither does he command them as Jesus,
neither can any of these submit and bow to him as Jesus. Therefore here the
Name Jesus stands as a bare name to Angels, devils, reprobates, and many
nations of the earth. And let not Master Barton be angry if I affirm that he
and his fellows adore the bare Name Jesus. For first understanding the Text of
the Name Jesus they appoint the bowing to the Name only, Sect. 5.
and not to the person, as I have proved, and they cannot intend it to the
person except they add to the Text. Secondly, when the person of our Savior
is as fully denominated under his other titles, as Jesus, they move not, but
only at the name Jesus. Thirdly, when they stand or sit to hear the Word, a
gesture allowable by the Word, as soon as the Name Jesus is mentioned they
immediately bow, and when oftentimes the great mercy of God in saving us is
largely and copiously laid open in a Sermon, or when in reading of a Chapter
many excellent sentences are related, wherein the sense of our salvation is
more clearly notified to our understanding then by the Name Jesus, yet there
is no stir, no adoration, but only at the Name Jesus, no not at the title
Savior, which is the very sense of the name Jesus, and better understood of
all. Fourthly, it is ordinary with these men, when they be upon their knees at
the prayers to God and Christ, then to make a special incurvation of the body
at the sound of Jesus, a plain argument that these men are guilty of
Syllabicall worship, and worship the bare name more then God or Christ
himself. That I alone do not so charge them, Master On Phil 2. 9.
Calvin and Master Exposition of the Creed.
Babington do both of them lay syllable worship to their charge. Therefore I
return Master Bartons scoffs upon himself, and I would feign see, how not
poor silly flies, but such mighty Elephants, as this Saphister is, can escape
out of these nets: and therefore his Crambe so often Cocta cast upon me is more
then ridiculous, viz. Name above every name as a bare name cannot be understood
of the Name Jesus, as a bare name, and this shall serve to answer it every
where when it is brought. To the second part, viz. If it should be understood
of a proper name, yet may it not be understood of the Name Jesus; my first
reason is, because the word Jesus does no where denote the name Jesus, but
only Matthew. 1. 21. and Luke 2. 21. where it must needs so signify; but he
will have my meaning to be this, that the word Jesus does not signify the word
Jesus, which is a Crotchet of his own devising: I say the word Jesus does not
signify the name, not the word, your instance of (...) to signify Jehovah in
the old Testament is nothing to the purpose; for I speak here of Jesus;
neither is the Parallel brought right, for you should have produced where the
word Jehovah is taken for the Name Jehovah, and if you did, it is besides the
Question, which is only there concerning the Name Jesus. But you can prove,
you say, that name is often used for Jesus, and instance in one place, which if
true, it is not for your turn, for you must prove that Jesus is taken for the
Name Jesus, but that place of Acts 5. 41. is not for you; does the Apostle
speak there barely of the name or appellation Jesus? you thought belike you
should never be answered; these be the words, they rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his name: what is name taken for the name
Jesus here properly? did the Appellation Jesus offend the Apostles enemies? did
not they call him Jesus as well as the Apostles. This is that offended them,
for preaching that Jesus: not the name but person was the Christ; no quarrel
at all about the name Jesus: Would it be thought that one that professes
himself such a Scholar as Master Barton is should run into such an
absurdity? To my second reason, viz. that (...) is never taken for the name
Jesus, you object that I take the word without the sense; but Sir you must not
take the sense without the name: the question is about the name Jesus as a
name, and though you take the sense with it, yet you cannot bring any Scripture
for this interpretation: but because you cannot answer this reason, therefore
you put it off with a scoff. In the next place you affirm that in this phrase
(...) is the genitive case, and not the dative, and so you will have it read
not in or at the name Jesus; but name of Jesus: therefore it pleases you Sect.
5. Page 36. in your learned scurrilous language to call me a Jugler, a Thief,
a beguiler of the people, and that I have put the theft impudently on the
Church, for turning the Genitive case into the case of the Nonne; but what Sir,
if I prove you to be the Jugler, and the thief? for if you will have it read
in or at the name of Jesus, then I agree with you; you know I am content to
understand it so too; but here now will be a great doubt, what is meant by the
Name of Jesus. If by the word Jesus you do understand the person, Name is
general, and many senses may be made, then my sense of the Name of power and
glory will come in fairly, then any other name of Christ may come in to be
the name as well as Jesus, as Christ, Emmanuel, Mediator, which are all names
of Jesus, as well as Jesus* yea in better congruity of speech, these may be
called name of Jesus, then the name Jesus, But if by the word Jesus you mean
the name Jesus, and yet will not have it be in apposition with (...), then the
sense will be thus, at the name of the name Jesus, which will be very
senseless; therefore by these words, in the name of Jesus you must read name
Jesus, or else no body understands you: yea your own friends read it so, as
Learn to live, Chap. 14. Page 217.
Sutton; yea you quote (...). page 36.
Origin to call it so, yea (...). page 22.
you your self do call it so: let the world judge now, who is the deceiver or
Jugler, you or I.

To my third reason that Jesus was a communicable name, therefore not the name
above every name, your answer is extremely scurrilous. First you say, I am
near to Atheism for questioning such learned men as Bishop Andrews and
Doctor Page, but how you can make it good unless you put them in the place of
God I know not. I hope Sir, truth is not confined to a Bishops Rotchet nor a
Doctors Chair, but you by your own reason are as near Atheism as my self
for questioning Bellarmine with whom you cannot compare for learning. An^^. p.
3.
This I say, that whereas your two friends affirm that sundry men were called
Christ's, therefore Christ is a communicable name, I answered: These were no
more called Christ's then others were called Saviors, Nehe. 9. 27. And though
you reply, that none of these were called Saviors as Jesus was a Savior; so I
say that none of these were called Christ's as Jesus was Christ. So here I have
taken off your two friends, and your self, and in this we areeven. But here I
have the better of you. Some were called Jesus either by special providence,
or general allowance, as by an ordinary Name to be called by, but none might
be called Christ in an ordinary Name to be called by, without horrible
blasphemy. And whereas you deny this, and seem to affirm that some are called
Christ's without offense, by an ordinary Name to be called by, as you instance
in Christopher and Christian, it is ridiculous; what, is Christopher Christ? it
is no more Christ, then Mary the mother of our Lord is the Lord himself: and
if you think you are called Christ when called Christian, I tell you plainly
you are a very Antichrist. My quotation of Vrsin is ad idem, for I cite him
only to this end, to show that Joshuah had his name given him by a special
providence; and if Moses gave him the name, is does the more confirm it.

To my fourth reason, viz. because the Name Jesus was given to Christ in the
beginning of his humiliation; therefore it cannot be the Name above every Name
in the Text, which was given him at his exaltation; you answer nothing, but
refer me to your (...), Page 13, 14, 15. and what do I find there? that
two or three do say that Christ's Name was manifested after the resurrection,
but not any to apply it to the Name Jesus. This Name needs no manifestation,
because he was all along so called; as God indeed his Name was manifested, but
as man the Name was then given him; Name here is the highest glorification of
the humane nature as generally the best expositors do understand the Text.

But if you can produce any place to prove that (...) does signify to manifest
or declare, I will the sooner incline to your opinion; and according to your
own reason, a literall-sense, admitting no absurdity, and expressing a clear
truth, is to be preferred before a mystical. Now you scoffing at our
figurative interpretation of some clauses, though warranted by Scripture, do
make a mystical sense here no where warranted. Now that give is to be taken
here properly, the Analogy of the Text, and the order of the words will
evidence; for the Name given here is Gods free rewarding of Christ after his
obedience and sufferings as is plain by the Text; which if it were only by
the manifestation of his former Name, it is not so proper, as by giving him
that glory which he had not before; Secondly, the words are (...), there being
no article before (...) it is plain it has no relation to any proper Name
then called by. Again it being (...) not (...), he gave a name to him, not
his Name, it is evident it is a gift not before had. I do not deny it to be
understood of some Name or Names that Christ as God had before, as God Jehovah,
Son of God, for so they may after a sort be called a gift, for these names
being laid down in his humiliation, restoring is a kind of giving; much more
as the glory of these Names are given to the humane nature. For whereas he was
before called by these glorious names, as God only, now he is so called as
God, and Man. And therefore though Zanchius do understand it of the name of
God manifested, On Phil. 2. 9. 10.
yet he affirms it to be a real gift, viz. as the humane nature is honored
thereby; but in no sense can it be understood of the declaration of the Name
Jesus, which Name was never denied him: therefore says Zanchius, alii pro
nomine Jesu, sed minus comm^de; others understand it, says he, for the name
Jesus, but less fitly, because before the resurrection he was called Jesus by
all. To have the name Jesus declared after the resurrection is not properly an
advancement of Christ Your self say, that the declaration of a thing is not
more worthy then the thing, Part. 2. Sect. 4.
. Therefore is it not the name above every Name. If you Mr. Barton, should
present one of your Books to your Godfather, and he to gratify you, should
give to you your Name Thomas, or declare your name Thomas, which he gave you
before, I think you would not think your self to receive much honor by such
a gift or declaration. Certainly if the Name above every Name be but the
declaration of the name Jesus, he should have more given him at his
Circumcision then at his exaltation; for a gift is more then the declaration of
it. If any thing were now added to the name Jesus, then was not his name
perfect at the first; and you may as well say that Christ had not a perfect
office, (...) page 15.
or that he did not offer up a perfect sacrifice, as that the Name Jesus was
not perfect. You say your self, as the Names of things are, so should their
virtues be esteemed: I pray, Sir, wherein does the eminency of the Name Jesus
appear after the resurrection? in all your treatise I do not see but you make
it to consist in this, that it signifies a Savior, but so it signified
before, and so it signified after he had wrought salvation for us by his death;
to what purpose then was the sense of the name given him, when the nature of
the name, especially after the work was finished, declares it of it self? if
then the advancement of Christ's Name after the resurrection be no more then
the declaring of the Name Jesus, God should but mock his Son, and indeed
give him no more honor, or not so much as he gave him before.

To my fifth reason, that Jesus cannot be the Name above overy Name, because
Jesus was advanced after his resurrection to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36.
you have nothing to say to it, but accuse me of Arianisme, as if say you Jesus
was not the same before, that he was declared to be after the resurrection,
Lord, and Christ. I answer, though Jesus were so before, yet he was not
honored so before in respect of the humane nature, for so he was advanced to
that honor. If Jesus were the highest Name; how could Jesus come to be more
highly advanced in becoming Lord and Christ? Part 2. Sect. 4.
And here I must put you in mind of an horrible absurdity of your opinion; you
affirm that the name Christ is the Name only of the humanity, the Name Jesus
the essential Name of God; then by this your doctrine, according to this Text,
Christ God in the time of his humiliation should be exalted in being made man,
when he was advanced after his resurrection. That which I noted as
considerable, is still as considerable as it was: he was most commonly called
Jesus in the time of his humiliation, but after his Resurrection, and
Ascension, he was most commonly called Christ; and when called Jesus, more
commonly with the addition of Lord, and Christ, then Jesus only. I have run
over the whole new Testament, and I find to the utmost of my search, Jesus
alone named before the ascension 490. times.

Christ alone but 40. times. Lord Jesus but once. Jesus Christ, six times. Lord
Jesus Christ not at all.
After the Ascension.
Christ alone is used 238. times. Jesus alone but 45. times. Lord Jesus. 32.
times. Jesus Christ or Christ Jesus 125. times. Lord Jesus Christ 95. times.
Well then hence I argue that it is impossible that the Name Jesus should be
the proper Name of the Deity, and Christ of he humanity; for then should he
be most commonly called God in the time of his humiliation, when his Godhead
was veyled, when Christ called himself the Son of man, and most commonly
called Man in the time of his exaltation, after that he had mightily declared
himself to be the son of God; which were utterly senseless to imagine.

But before I leave this, I will note a contradiction in Doctor Page, your
infallible witness, who in his answer to Mr. Prynnes Appendix *, Page 55.
makes Jesus to be the name of the Deity, Christ of the humanity; Page 197.
yet in his answer to his Reply *, he affirms, as I noted before, that Christ
is a name of greater dignity and authority then Jesus: hence it will follow
that our Savior is of greater dignity and authority as man then as God; let
this be reconciled if it can.

Your answer to my fixed reason is nothing but senseless scurrility. Whereas I
say, God in advancing his Son above all excepted himself, and no where is
Christ's Name said to be advanced above divine Names, but created only; I
overthrow here no gracious dispensation that you can prove from the word, for
though the high advancement of the Son be to the glory of every Person, yet
has he not a Name or glory above them. And if you can prove it otherwise by
Scripture, why do you speak of Scripture, and allege none?

Seeing Name above every Name cannot be understood of the name Jesus, Name
above every Name, what it is.
I understand it of the supereminent glory of Christ, upon these reasons. To
let alone your scoff at my transition, for you can do nothing else, take the
sense and the Name together if you will, I deny it not. First I say it is no
way contrary to the Analogy of faith, so to understand it, for Name is
commonly taken for glory in Scripture. To this, your exception is nothing; for
from hence I gather that this exposition is agreeable to the Scripture.

Secondly, Name of God does usually in Scripture denote the power and glory of
God either implicitly of expressly: hence also I gather that my exposition is
acoording to the Scripture; But you will have this make as much for you as me,
but you cannot, For whether (...) or (...) be (...) the Lord, or no, is nothing
to the purpose, our question is about a Name, not Person. This I can tell you,
Sir, you cannot find Name prefixed before any of the titles of God; as Name of
God, or Lord, or Jesus, etc. to denote the name God or Lord; therefore are the
Scriptures against your exposition, though plain for me.

To my third reason, you have more cause to blush for your frivolous exception,
than I for affirming that it is more agreeable to Scripture to understand name
for the supereminent power and glory of Christ, then otherwise; for you see I
answer on by degrees in my reasons. My first and second, as a great Name, and
Name above another; are two distinct phrases, and do every where signify not
a proper Name, but only glory: but you will have this to be against me, for,
say you, if a great Name do signify the great glory of the person, then it is
not the glory, for signum is not signatum. I reply sign, and the thing
signified are the same materially, and though when they stand in opposition
they differ; yet otherwise the sign does often denote the thing signified; and
they are the same.

To my fourth reason, that it must be understood of Power and Glory here, and
not of the Name Jesus; for so it fits the words of the Text agreeable to other
Scriptures, for name being here the gift which God gave him, other
correspondent Scriptures do show that power and glory was that gift, as Matthew.
28. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 21. You answer here nothing at all to those Scriptures; but
only cavil against my reason. If, say you, the gift be power and glory, the
Apostle should idem per idem agere. No Sir, I have proved Sect. 12. that these
words, God gave him a name, are but an amplification of Christ's advancement,
and the Apostle does no more idem per idem agere, then he does Ephesians. 12. 1. 1
Pet. 1. 21. where it is said God raised Christ from the dead, and gave him
glory, where the first clause expresses one maine degree of his exaltation,
the second is an amplification of it. Next you think to encounter me with a
Dilemma. If Name be power and glory, then say you, it must be created or
increated. Created it cannot be say you, and be the name above every name; if
increate, then you say it is Arianisme to affirm that it was then given him;
your Dilemma is nothing. It is first created power and glory, and so it is
above all created glories, though not increated. Secondly, it is created,
though not given to the essence of God, but to the humane nature to enjoy, and
so also it is only above all created glories. Your argument in the conclusion,
is but a mere begging of the question without proof, and there is an
equivocation in the minor, you must tell me what name you mean by the Name of
Jesus, seeing you will not have it read the Name Jesus.

To my fifth reason, taken from the scope and coherence of the Text, viz. that
the conjunction (...) declares a correspendence of Christ's exaltation according
to the distinct branches of his humiliation, which answers directly to Christ's
glory and dignity, which he departed from, but nothing at all to the name
Jesus; there being nothing spoken in the Text of a bare title, but of the
person of our Savior. First you question me for observing (...) and not (...);
On Phil. 2. 9.
but so does your own Author Zanchy as well as I: it is but a frivolous catch.
This (...) does demonstrate say you, what I care not to see, that he whose
person was so aviled, and his name, you mean the Name Jesus, put out by an
accursed death, was superexalted in both. Sir, I care to see any thing that is
in the Text, but not the fantasies of your brain. Next you challenge me for
saying that Christ departed from his glory: but what do I say more then the
Apostle, He emptied himself; or more then Zanchy, De natura Dei ^. 1. c. 17.
Nomen Dei deposuit, cum deposuit gloriam, laying down being a kind of leaving
wherein I do not mean as this malecontent seems to challenge me, as if
Christ ever ceased to be God, but only that he was not so honored by the world
in regard of the veil of his humanity: And this shall serve to answer this
exception, where ever it is mentioned: next when you cannot fa^ten any reason
for your opinion upon the Text, nor answer my reason drawn thence, you go
about to fumble up a reason by asking a question, by which you say you will
condemn me out of my own mouth, which is this; A person is humbled; and who
is that person? I must answer the Son of God: and what is his Name? I must
answer say you, Phil. 2. 9. 10. his name is Jesus: (but soft Sir, there is
nothing spoken there of a bare name, but person) then Jesus say you was the
name so humbled, and consequently the name so advanced. Is not this fine
learned stuff? If the Name Jesus suffered as the person suffered, then it will
follow that the name Jesus died, rose again, and now sits at the right hand of
God; and then where will you have it to bow to? if it must needs be that the
Name fares as the person fares, because it is so and so with the person,
therefore it must be so, and so with the name. Then I wonder that Thomas Barton
being afraid that himself should be punished for his demerits, that he was not
afraid left his Name Thomas should be punished, and why then did he bring his
Name Thomas to open light when himself was afraid to appear? It is no
mervaile that those that set themselves to resist the truth should run into
such ridiculous nonsense. This argument of yours drawn from the suffering of
the Name Jesus is the best you have; yet is it a senseless one, not so much as
intimated in the Text, or any other Scripture, nor agreeable to reason. Let the
reader judge, whether your comparison in the beginning of the Sieve holding the
course, and letting go the fine, which you impute to my Section, do not
befall your answer to it. But as you have answered this Section, so have you
done all the rest.

SECT. II.
Whereas I do not so well approve of the opinion of those Expositors that
refer the subjected Names to rational creatures only, but rather refer them to
all things and creatures whatsoever; showing proof for my opinion, yet
referring my self to better information if I can have it; you take advantage
at this, and tax me that I oppose them with all my might by whom I pretend to
be guided: but I hope Sir I may show reason for my opinion, and make it as
strong as I can; and I must tell you, my opinion is as it was: you have
answered nothing to purpose to any of the Scriptures I alleged. The maine
proof of my reason, that Christ's Kingdom in this Text is not only of
Mediatorship, but natural, you deny, and understand it only of the Kingdom
of Mediatorship: Phil. 2. 9. 10.
but your own Author Zanchy understands it of both: yea you your self
understand it of both: (...). page 88.
And some Texts by me alleged here, parallel to that of Phil. 2. you apply to
both; why not then this Text? Next* because I say that Christ according to his
humane nature is advanced to the glory of the natural kingdom, and that he is
exalted to be partaker of the glory of the divine nature in the inheriting of
all things; you maliciously lay Eutychisme to my charge, as if I meant that the
humane nature is absorpt by the divine nature, If you had dealt fairly you
should have set down my words as they were corrected and not as they were
misprinted.
uncharitably construing this Phrase [according to the humane nature] contrary
to my meaning. As if I meant it as a cause. Christ according to his humane
nature is only this, Christ man, or Christ in the humanity; and so V^sin,
Catech. p. 308. l. 31.
understands the very same phrase, and to the very same purpose, as I do
here: neither do I say that Christ man is partaker of the divine Essence, but
only of the glory of it, in the inheriting of all things; neither do I
confound the two kingdoms, as you lay to my charge, but only distinguish
them: therefore you show your self a most malicious person in charging me thus
falsely as you do; which to compass, you care not how absurdly you contradict
your self. Next when you are empty in substantial exceptions, you come upon
me for a dash or point; affirming as if I had set down a Comma for a Colon,
but show me not where; and I profess I cannot find where it is in the whole
Section, as you lay to my charge. Wherever it is I did nothing purposely; a
dash may miscarry in the writing or in the Press. Therefore T. B. is lame and
not I, in making such lame exceptions. Here yet for all your strouting you
stand to answer to those parallel Scriptures, where is showed the Subjection of
every creature to the Kingdom of Christ, for hitherto you have not answered
them nor those Authors, which I have brought for it. Your Syllogism is not
right. This you say, that name above which there is no name of God, is the name
above every name. But so is the Name of Jesus. In your mayor you desert your
opinion, for you should have said, that name which is above every name of God,
for that is your opinion. In your minor there is an equivocation, for you do
not show what name you mean by the name of Jesus, seeing you will not have it
called the Name Jesus.

SECT. III.
Wherein I show, that bowing of the Knee in this Text is not to be taken
literally and expressly, for the bowing of that member of the body, which we
call the knee. My first reason is because bowing in the Scripture is taken
figuratively, therefore may otherwise be understood, Ezekiel 7. 17. Isay 35. 3.
Psalm. 44. 25. Hab. 3. 6. And so secondly, are knees taken metaphorically. Here
Mr. Barton says that these two reasons hold nothing: but Sir, I pray you take
all my reasons together, and so they prove sufficiently what I intend, as it is
said, out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be
established: one does it not alone, but two or three united: You see, I except
my two first from evidently proving, they show only that this exposition is
agreeable to the Scriptures, my maine strength lies in my third Reason,
confirmed by the other: where I prove that because Angels, Devils, souls of
men must bow; besides sensitive, and insensitive creatures; which have no
proper knees: therefore proper knees are not commanded. For if such knees were
properly commanded, it would be injustice in God to require such knees where
they are not: as in a King if he should command such a sum of money to be
paid by his subjects, which he knows they are not able to pay. That which you
answer to this is to no purpose; For it is absurd to say, because some
creatures have knees, they are bound to bow proper knees expressly, and those
creatures that have no knees, are bound to bow analogically: for the same
bowing is enjoined to all, if the Text did make a difference it were something;
but there is no difference in the Text. But you will prove that Angels have
knees as well as Tongues, 1 Cor. 13. 1. and faces, Rev. 7. 11. and they are
said to stand, to fall down, which insinuate knees; and this you say is enough
to those that will be satisfied with reason; Sir this reason will not satisfy
any one that knows the Scriptures: for because faces, tongues and bodily
postures are ascribed to Angels, it will not follow that they have them
properly, no more then because hands, face, ears, backparts, and postures of
descending and marching on are ascribed to God in Scripture, that God has
these properly.

Now because you except things insensitive from this bowing, I will overthrow
you by your own infallible witness Doctor Page, Instit of bowing, p. 48.
who cites sundry authors to show that this Text is to be understood of the
subjection of all, both friends and enemies, to Christ, alleging for proof
that place of 1 Cor. 15. 25. We must reign till he has put all his enemies
under his feet; in the next verse it is subjoyned, the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death: whereby it is expressly showed that death also being an
enemy must bow and fulfill the Text. I would feign know now what bodily knees
has Death: Death does in part bow already; because it is in part subdued: but
how will you have Death bow at the mention of the Name Jesus? except you think
the knee bones of the dead rattle in the graves, when you name Jesus in the
Church over them; but you must make their hearts to understand, and the Sculles
to hear too, else it is past any understanding, to conceive how it can be
done. But I must tell you Sir, how ever you will wrangle it out, that your
friends and your self too understand this Text figuratively. For Instit. of
bowing, p. 87.
Doctor Page from Origin, and Ant. p. 44.
you your self from that Author do understand it of the knees of the soul as
well as of the body; so does Learn to live, Chap. 14.
Sutten. Now what proper knees have souls? then what proper knees have Angels?
which are purer Spirits then souls: So that understanding it thus, you must
needs understand it of the whole strength of the creature, for what proper
knees have souls more then other parts of the body? yea, they come nearer to
proper knees then the soul; being corporeal as the proper knee is, which
souls are not. Therefore you expounding the Text of soul-knees, you cannot in
any sense exclude the other parts of the body, besides the proper knee, and
therefore whether you will or no, you must yield to me here; If you understand
the Text of express corporeal knees, then are no other knees commanded, then
are not Angels and Devils to bow because they have no such knees, and so it
will be will worship in you to give any part besides the knee, and then you
sin, when you put of your hat, and bow your body at the name; when in so
doing you do rather stiffen your knees, then bow them. If the proper knee be
expressly commanded, that part only must be given and nothing else in stead
of it, then you cannot understand it of soule-knees; for soule-knees are no
proper knees. Therefore you must with me here (yea you do if you could see)
understand by bowing every knee, the subjection of the whole creature to
Christ. That (...) and (...) are properly taken for such a bowing, as yields an
outward expression, is nothing to the purpose, for such words as are taken
properly are sometimes used improperly, as (...) which properly signifies to
go forth or walk on, is improperly applied to God, Psalm. 68. 7. So does the
word used Genesis 18. 21. properly signify to go down, which is yet ascribed to
God who properly cannot descend. So that in that I have said, You do not here
answer the parallel of kissing Christ, Psalm. 2. 12. by which subjection is
signified as well as by bowing, but you say, Sect. 18. bowing and the kiss
hold not; because we have the name to bow to, nor the person to kiss, but at
the day of judgment he will appear; belike then you will be so bold as to
kiss Christ at that day, if once you be made Lord Bishop.
I do not deny the knee; but I affirm that it is no more commanded then the
soul; or other parts of the body. For the second part of this Section, viz.
the confession of the tongue; you do extremely triffle with me; for you
speak falsely in saying, that I exclude the tongue of the body properly so
called, you see I mention it; but I understand it not of the said tongue
expressly, and particularly, but in a general sense, all tongues must speak
as well as this tongue, soul tongues, and all bodily tongues, the vertures of
the whole creature, yea as David says, all my bones shall say, Lord who is
like to thee? Psalm. 35. 10. even as the insensitive creatures, that have no
tongues, are said to speak the praise of Christ Rev. 5. 13. Psalm 19. 1, 2, 3.
Psalm. 148.
. Yea you plainly agree with me here, for you say no more then I, and I as
much as you, you say the heart, and tongue, soul and body must be subject; and
so confess. Your acknowledging that irrational creatures confess Christ does
evidently overthrow your Tenet of the not bowing of those creatures; for all
that in the Text confess, do also blow the knee, seeing then these confess
they must needs bow; so that you and I do not greatly fall out in this Section
if you could see it: but you do not see it as appears by your syllogism,
the minor whereof I deny, and have disproved.

SECT. IV.
HEre I affirm, that to understand this phrase in the Name of Jesus to be at
the mention of the Name Jesus cannot be paralleld in the exposition of the said
phrase by any Scripture. In the name prefixed before any title of God; yea I
now say before any name whatsoever, can no where bear this sense; first, you
deny that you bow at the bare Name Jesus, but of that before, and you give me
barbarous language in that I say you understand it at the mention of the Name
Jesus: But if you stood not in need of Hellebore (as you say I do) you would
not be so outrageous in outfacing the plain truth; you say (forsooth) at the
mention of Jesus, but not at the name Jesus. Who understands you now? if you
bow at the mention of Jesus, it must be done as well at the mention of any
other title of Jesus, by which he is denominated. If not at the mention of the
name Jesus, why do you keep such a stir about this name? all the world sees
that you bow at the mention of this name, and no other; and if you mean it not
at the time when this name is mentioned, why do you it immediately, and not
let it alone till some other time? you your self say otherwise in this Section
(...) is all one (...) when Jesus is named; Yea you yield at length, and
forsooth you say you will overcome me with my own weapons, as when I say,
Psalm. 118. 10. all nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord I
will destroy them: would it not be a wild sense, say I, to understand it thus,
at the naming of the Lord I will destroy them? You here ask me if I were well
when I printed this; for say you, can there be any more intended by In the name
of the Lord, then the bringing the Lord into the midst between him and his
enemies? and is there any other way to do that then by the faithful mention
of his name? Sir, I was better when I printed this clause then you, when you
answered; it but do you expound this Text as you do, Phil. 2. 9, 10? does In
there signify time, as you expound it in Phil. 2. and match it with Genesis 1. 1?
In here indeed notes the cause, but not time. So that the meaning is this, In
the name of the Lord, i.e. by the power and assistance of the Lord I will
destroy them: but if you will parallel this place with Phil. 2. 10. as you
understand it, you must make the sense to be this. All nations compassed me
about; but when the Lord is mentioned, that is, at the instant time thereof, I
will destroy them, as at the very time, when Jesus is mentioned you bow; if
this be the meaning of the Psalmist, I see no reason but you must have a Sword,
or a Pistol, or such like with you at the Church, and when the Lord is
mentioned, you must fall to killing your enemies; and then when the people say
good Lord deliver us, if you have any enemies there, they deliver up themselves
into your hands, to be killed, and so you will not be of David's mind; for he
when his adversaries were against him, gave himself to prayers, but when your
enemies pray you will kill them. My next Scripture is, Act. 9. 29. Saul spoke
boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, I say it would be infinitely absurd to
say he spoke boldly at the naming of the Lord Jesus; you cry out against me
and say is this absurd? and infinitely too? we all know that Paul was a zealous
professor, and might not he be stout at the mention or naming of Jesus? he is
stoutly preached, whom we fear to name. Now you cry out where is this great
challenger? were I Anteus I should never rise again: but stay Sir, I am on my
legs yet, to buckle with you once, and again; What, does In signify time
here, as you will have it signify at Phil. 2. 9? Nomen capitur pro professione:
Name is taken for profession. So the sense is this, Paul valiantly defended the
cause of Christ; but if you will have In signify the present time there, then
the sense will be this; Saul preached or spoke boldly when Jesus was named,
that is, as soon as ever the Name was named, as accordingly you bow. Then it
will follow that whenever you hear Jesus named you must fall to preaching,
and then as soon as you come in the Common Book of Prayer to the absolution,
Jesus being named you must fall to preaching, and then you must curtaile almost
all the Divine Service, and run into that which you judge a great fault in
others, go to your Sermon before you have said the Lords Prayer, or Canonical
prayer; and though you should make but a short Sermon and return to your
absolution, at the conclusion of it Jesus is named again, and once more you
must go to preaching before you come to the Lords Prayer; and if you preach
every time Jesus is named in the divine service, you will preach oftener in a
day then any of those you call Puritans, in a quarter of a year at least; and
if often preaching be as you deem, a note of a Puritan, you will be the
rankest Puritan in the world; yea in the absolution Jesus and Lord being both
mentioned together, you must preach and kill, all at one time, and this I
think will be the maddest Sermon that ever was made. In the next place as if
my own weapons were not enough to strike me dead, you will strike me with
your own, and what are they? First, you bring the third Commandment, but this
phrase in the name is not there. Next you come to Joh. 16. 23. whatsoever you
shall ask the Father in my name; that is, say you by faith mentioning me as
mediator. And then you argue, Act. 5. 40. not to speak in the name of Jesus,
either by preaching, say you, or otherwise to his glory, at our invocation over
the name of Jesus is a fruitful naming, or mentioning of him; not inwardly
always, but by heart and tongue also always unto God, Ephesians. 5. 20. To what
purpose is this brought? what frivolous stuff is here? And yet you having had
me down before in your conceit, now you gall me terribly. But we will examine
these places: as for Act. 5. 40. it is answered before in Act. 9. 29. being a
parallel place, but I add this further to it, Were the Apostles forbidden to
mention the name Jesus? did not their enemies mention Jesus as well as they?

But you add [to his glory]. But you will have your people bow when you
mention Jesus in the Church, but you will not have them question whether you
do it to his glory or no; As for Job. 16. 23. we are bidden there to pray to
the Father in the name of Christ, that is, in and by Christ himself, as other
places demonstrate: but I pray Sir, does In here signify time? If you
understand this place as you do Phil. 2. the sense will be this, whatsoever
you ask of my Father, when Jesus is named; then it will follow that whenever
you hear Jesus named, you must fall to Prayer. And as before this sense of
Act. 9. 29. will drive you to preaching in the time of prayer: So here it will
drive you to prayer in the time of preaching, if at any time you name Jesus in
it; * Sect. 5. You make the mentioning of Jesus to be a sign how to know when
to bow, by this reason you must make it also a sign how to know when to preach
and pray.
and what a confusion will this be also?

But to return again to these two places, Act. 9. and Ioh. 16. If Master
Barton bring Phil. 2. 9. to the meaning of these two places as he understands
them, he cannot but know that preaching and praying is begun, and continued
before and after Jesus is named, and not then begun only at the instant time
of naming of it, for Jesus is named but now and then; then according to this
you must continue all along your Gesture of bowing, throughout preaching and
praying, though the name Jesus be seldom mentioned; and then you must neither
kneel nor stand, but have your body bowed all the time half way to the
ground, and then there shall not be any visible appearance of bowing at the
name Jesus more then ordinary, then at any other name whatsoever, which may be
named in preaching or prayer: and if any should see you in this posture,
continuing half bowed to the ground, they would think you to be disposed to
another kind of business then preaching or prayer. I appeal here to all the
world whether you have not here given your self such a shameful foil as you
will never be able to recover. My exposition of Psalm. 63. 4. you mislike not;
but yet it cannot bear your sense of Phil. 2. 9. for though the Saints have
used to lift up the hands in prayer, yet I think they are not precisely bound
to it; and if they were, it is senseless to gather from this or any other
place, that they are bound to a new act of lifting up the hands every time the
name of God sounds, which sense you must put upon it, if you match it with
Phil. 2. 9. you have not proved yet that In the name signifies any where at
the time of mentioning the name, neither can you; here then one maine pillar of
your cause is shaken down.

SECT. V.
TO my gathering up my sense together you wrong me, for saying that I do not
keep the Analogy of the advancing Christ's glory above all glories; for I name
dignities, which is all one. And Doctor Page says that the name Jesus was made
a name beneath all names, and how do I then offend in saying that Christ
received a name beneath all names in his humiliation; Instit. of bowing, p. 41.
though we differ in the sense of the word name? And Sir let the wind be in
what quarter it will, I trust I shall always stand for outward worship: but
not for this your superstitious worship: And I must tell you Sir, that better
scholars then your self, that are farther from Arianisme, then you from
Antichristianisme, do understand Name here for power and glory, as generally
all our modern Divines Zanchy your own witness so understands it.
And when I say, Christ shall be manifested to be Lord, etc. I do not mean,
given is manifested, but that he shall fully manifest himself to the Lord by
his glorious power, * Dedit illi nomen quod est supranomen, sensui est,
Christum, qua etiam homo, propter suam obedientiam and humilitatem supra omnia
fuisse a patre exaltatum, ut nulla sit vel in coelis, vel in terris par
dignitas, Da 369. Elohim, l. 3. c. 2. p. 430.
especially at the day of judgment, when also all tongues shall acknowledge
him so to be. For your exposition of the Text, as I lay to your charge, it must
be so, for the Text limits no time to us more then to any other creature, if we
are bound to bow at the Name Jesus: but at preaching, and prayer, at public
and private devotion, especially on the Lords day; then the Devils and damned
are no more bound: then you must have preaching and prayer in hell; and Devils
and damned to observe the Lords day, and to have public and private devotion:
and what I have said against this crotchet of yours in Sect. 10, 11. neither
Dr. Page here, nor your self there have taken off, for you say nothing to the
purpose.

But you will have the exposition of the Text to be this: the Lord Jesus by the
union, and for our salvation was humbled: wherefore God exalted him, and set up
the name Jesus above every name; that for the union, and our salvation, every
rational creature should bow at the nameof Jesus; which you will have to be at
the mention of Jesus.

Now whereas you esteem my interpretation to be short, hard, doubtful; I
appeal to all the world whether I have added or detracted any thing, or have
not made good every clause from the Scriptures. And that your interpretation is
not according to the Scriptures I have proved; and besides you add to the
Text: for these words (for the union, and for our salvation) are not in the
Text.

In my notation of the absurdities of your opinion, I say again, to understand
Name for glory, the name is known what is given Christ: but to understand name
for a proper name; it is not showed what name it is in this clause, (God gave
him a name above every name) and whereas you bid me look for it in the 10.
verse, I refer my self to this clause, and in verse 10. you contradict your
self; for you still fall out with me for calling it the Name Jesus: You do
not then show what Name it is; the rest of your answer is but railing and very
babbling and is sufficiently answered already.

In my second note I say again that in your exposition you do not denote the
person properly, to whom the bowing shall be done, but only set down a time
when the bowing shall be done, neither have you answered it; for the Name
Jesus, as you mean it, is distinct from the person. But you say, how shall we
know when to bow if it be not signified by some sign? I reply, by what sign
shall we know how to honor the Father? you will not obey without signs.
Those famous Churches that abominate your bowing, know how and when to honor
Christ better then your self.

Thirdly, I say again that in this your exposition you apply no honor at all
to the name, if you make In to signify time, but only make it a watchword
when to bow, you set not down to whom. And if you understand In for To, as
Bishop Andrews does understand it also, then you give the name the whole
bowing of the regard, and honor also, call it what you will, and none at all
to the person: but referring it to both you add to the Text, and either way
you make it Idolatry; in the first sense it is evidently plain, and in the
second Bishop Babington parallels it with Idolatry, Exposition of the Creed.
you know it well enough though you will take no notice of it. And you are an
impudent person to say that Bishop Babington in that place says nothing
against your sense; for he neither understands Name to be Jesus, but power,
and glory, neither does he understand bowing literally, but for subjection, and
he calls your worship syllable worship, and says such worshippers are given up
to delusions: As for Dr. Whitakers, he is as full as any against your sense,
though he might hold it indifferent, so bowing be at other names also; but
sole bowing at the name Jesus he holds unlawful, and utterly damnes your
exposition; not only in that place which I have quoted, but in his answer to
William Regnolds Page 398.
; your Argument in the end is but a mere begging of the Question without
proof, and so I leave it. As for Sir Edward Deering, he is no expositour of
Scripture: I cannot judge of him, because I have not seen him.

SECT. VI.
HEre I show that the said exposition of this Text is not confirmed by any
correspondent Scripture speaking of the same thing, and there be some words and
phrases so expounded here, as the like words, and phrases will not bear that
sense in any Scripture, as I have fully proved in the premises (this I say, and
this is my meaning though you be willing to wrest me) therefore this is a
false exposition. The consequence I prove from Romans 12. 6. and 2 Pet. 1. 20.
you say the meaning of these Scriptures is that all interpretations must be
made according to the Axioms of the Christian faith. But granting this it
makes against you; for the Axioms of our faith must be proved by the
Scriptures. Your answer to my testimonies of Augustine and Zanchy is nothing at
all, but this; is Augustine; is Zanchy for you? which is frivolous. To your
curse in the conclusion, I oppose that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 109.
Psalm. 109. He loved cursing, therefore it shall happen to him.

SECT. VII.
FOr the Argument is this Section, there is nothing to any purpose said to it,
but impertinent trifling more then has been answered before, and shall be
answered afterward. Therefore for brevities sake I pretermit it. Only this I
tell you Sir, that though all men in some degree of Subjection do now fulfill
the Text, will they, nill they, Christ being Lord of all, yet all cannot bow,
yea are not bound to bow at the Name Jesus, as Infants and deaf men, and those
Nations that never heard of Jesus, and in whose hearts the sense of the name is
not written. And though Chrysostom do understand (...) of all nations, it
makes against you, for the name Jesus does not concern all in all nations; yet
other Interpreters do understand (...) of all things.

SECT. VIII.
IN this Section I must be large, for upon this the whole Question depends;
and we shall see whether or no it runs out of it veins, as you charge me, or,
you in your answer have not run out of your self and from the truth. To let
pass impertinent things, and railings, and your false charging of me, that I
depart from the sense of the Oeconomicall kingdom; I come presently to the
Argument, See Sect. 2.
which is briefly this. Bowing at the mention of the name Jesus is not the
bowing to be performed at the day of judgment, therefore it is not now
commanded in the Text: The consequent you grant, but you deny the antecedent
and affirm that this bowing shall be at the day of judgment.

your charging me with a contradiction is but mere sophistry: the true bowing
shall be there in degree, and at the day of judgment perfectly, but not your
bowing; but what is your reason for it? none of any antiquity wrote against it.
A pretty reason; how could they write against it when they never heard of it?
by this reason any Heretic may bring up a new heresy and plead for himself,
none before spoke against it. But how do you answer my Reasons against it?
First I say there is no Scripture for it, and it is impossible if it were so,
that so many clear Scriptures speaking so fully of the day of judgment should
say nothing of this; but you say you have more clear Scriptures for it, than I
have against it, else you will give up the cause.

Sir, you have need indeed to be well advised what you deliver, for you make it
so necessary a point of faith, that whosoever will not believe it, shall miss
eternal life, and that whosoever will not now practice it shall be damned for
ever. For points of Faith and necessary worship I must have certain rules from
Scripture, (...). p. 59. and p. 65.
Psalm. 8. 20. Micah 6. 8. Faith in an evidence, Heb. 1. 11. I must be so sure
of it, that if an Angel from heaven should teach otherwise to hold him
accursed; you must then bring such sure Scriptures that there must be cast no
just cause of doubt, else you will bring sin upon all that practice it, Romans
14. 23. you must so confirm it by Scriptures, as to leave all without excuse,
that will not believe it, and practice it, if you can do this you carry all,
if not, you overthrow all; for this Section is the hinge of the Question. Now
we will peruse your Scriptures: First, you urge that of Phil. 2. 9. on which
lies the question, most ridiculous; The next place is 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 12. but
for the tenth Verse no name is mentioned at all. And for the twelfth verse, the
words are these, That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in
you, and you in him. I answer, that very good authors, as Calvin and Marlorate
do understand it of Christ being glorified by us in an holy life. Thus says
Calvin, Revocat nos, etc. He calls us back to the chief end of our life,
that we should serve the Lord of glory; it is chiefly to be noted that they
shall again be glorified in Christ, who have set forth the glory of Christ.
This agrees with the precedent verse as Marlorate on that place well observes.
And to this does Zanchy agree, and though he do also allow the other, and
apply it to the day of judgment; yet does he not understand it of any literal
name, but of the person of Christ, for thus he says. The sum of these words
is this, that Christ shall be glorified in us as the head in the members, when
he endueth us with that glory wherewith himself is glorified. I have proved
Section 1. First, that this phrase, Name of Jesus, or Name of God, or Lord,
does usually denote the power and glory of God; or Jesus either implicitly or
expressly: And it does never any where denote any bare title. Now here is your
Argument, the Lord Jesus shall be glorified in the Saints at the day of
judgment. Ergo, all rational creatures shall bow corporal knees at the name
Jesus at that day: a very senseless inconsequent: I am very confident that you
cannot bring any orthodox interpreter to understand that Text of the literal
Name Jesus. If it could be proved, Jesus is no more mentioned there, then Lord
and Christ; and there is no mention of bowing at any name. Those Texts of Isay
45. 23. and Romans 14. 11. though they be to be understood of the judgment, make
nothing for the purpose. Thus we see how trimly Master Barton has answered my
first reason.

My second reason is this; To what end shall the Name Jesus be named at that
day, that all should bow at the mention of it, when Christ shall appear in his
most glorious name of power and glory; when he shall not come as a Jesus to the
most that shall then bow; but a Lord to all, and so shall all call him? Here
you are very snuff; as it is usual with you when your answers are most weak,
there to be most outrageous: you tell me it is a demand, rather then a
disproofe: but disproofes by questions as ordinarily most vehement; but you
here fearfully wrest my words; for I have not said that the name Jesus shall
not be mentioned at all at that day, but that it shall not be mentioned that
all shall bow at it, but if I should have denied that the name Jesus shall be
then mentioned, it is more then you can prove by any clear Scriptures; Because
then you refer me to your (...). we will examine the Scriptures you there
mention.

First, you bring 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. where it is said that in that day the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed: but this is spoken of the person, not of the literal
Name: it is no more but this; Christ himself shall appear in judgment; and
here the emphasis is in the word Lord, being the title of his honor, rather
then in Jesus. Your second instance is 2 Thessalonians. 1. 12. but that is answered
already. The third place is 2 Cor. 1. 14. where the day of judgment is called
the day of the Lord Jesus, this is all one with the first instance; upon this
you descant, shall he have a day, and shall he not be mentioned? But it will
not follow that because the said day is called the day of the Lord Jesus, that
therefore the Name Jesus shall be mentioned, because there is nothing spoken of
the bare literal name, but person. Your next place is Phil. 2. 10. Every
tongue shall confess Jesus Christ to be Lord: you then fall very furiously on
them that shall question the Name Jesus to be then mentioned, in this manner?
If they be Scholars, can they be thus ignorant? if Divines, be they not
infatuated? if both, are they not in contempt? But soft Sir, better Scholars,
better Divines, and worthier men than your self cannot necessarily make your
conclusion from this place.

The Apostle speaking here in the third person shows what shall be at the day
of judgment, and therefore might well speak of Christ in his proper name, yet
it will not follow thence that the name Jesus shall be then mentioned, when
they that shall then appear shall not speak in the third person; but shall
speak to Christ in the second person before his face. But I pray Sir tell me,
if the Name Jesus be to be then sounded out, who shall sound it out? you did
once tell me, that the Trumpe should do it, but that is ridiculous. Shall
Christ himself sound it out? there is no proof of that. Shall those that
shall appear before him sound it out? there is no proof of that; there be
sundry Scriptures that they shall call him Lord, but not one that they shall
call him Jesus at that day: So then the Apostle might well say speaking of
Christ in the third person, before the day of judgment, that every tongue shall
confess Jesus to be Lord at that day, for in calling him Lord they call Jesus
Lord, though they do not Name the word Jesus; As when any Sir to your face
shall call you Priest, it may be justly said, when you are spoken of in the
third person, that they called Thomas Barton Priest, though they named not
Thomas when they so called you. So then he that doubts this say you, doubts
all, this may justly be doubted, and so all may be doubted. But if you could
prove this to be true, as for my part I will not peremptorily deny it, though
there is no clear Scripture for it, yet what can you get by this proof? will
it therefore follow, that all shall bow at the mention of the Name Jesus? This
is your Argument or it is nothing at all, but it is a mad inconsequence. This
consequence, if good, will make certainly for bowing at the Name Lord, which
shall then be mentioned by confession. Christ indeed shall be bowed to by all
as Lord, but not at the Name Lord, Christ shall be confessed to be Lord,
therefore to him as Lord shall the bowing be performed, if the Text had said,
that every tongue shall confess the Lord Christ to be Jesus, then had Jesus
been the Name to be confessed, but seeing that they shall confess Jesus Christ
to be Lord, it is plain, that Lord is the Name, as being said, that all the
Subjects in England do confess Charles to be King, they do not properly now
confess the King to be Charles, but Charles to be King. And whereas you
return me to your (...). Tract. 7. I appeal to the judicious, whether there
be any thing to the purpose, or whether that I have here set down do not
overthrow all there spoken. But whereas you say that the confession of Jesus is
the utmost end in regard of our selves, Act. 4 12
because there is no other name wherein we shall be saved: This is nothing to
the Text: For Angels, Devils and Reprobates, that must bow as well as we,
cannot have this end, for it is not a Name to them for salvation. Again you
wrest the said Text pitifully for your own ends, for what orthodox expositour
can you produce to make Name there the literal Name Jesus? that it is meant of
the person of our Savior, the precedent words are plain. Calvin in Locum.
Explicatio est proximae sententiae, etc. It is the explication of the next
sentence, in Christ alone is salvation, for by name he understands the cause or
mean. In part 2. Sect. 1. you say I slander the Church for giving my judgment
concerning the translation of Phil. 2. 9. but here your self alter the
translation for your own ends.
Again you translate (...) cunningly, and purposely to hide your craft.
Wherein is as much as whereby, and so our last translation reads it, (...) has
the force of a Causall, and if you mean so too, then understanding Name for
the literal Name Jesus, it cannot be avoided but you must make the Name Jesus
our Savior, which is flat Idolatry.

Next you fall foul upon my Argument, and tell me that it is very false to
say, that Christ shall come as a Lord to all, and not as Jesus, and that the
simple people are abused by my misapplying the Text, Matthew. 25. 37. 44. But
that I have neither abused the Text, nor the people, I have made good
sufficiently; but that you have done both it is evident to your shame. But you
have not set down my words right, for I say thus, He shall not come as a Jesus
to all that shall bow. But by two reasons you will prove that I have misapplyed
the Text. The first is by a Question: Who is Lord, say you, but Jesus? Here you
absurdly confound these two Names, making them all one. I deny not that Jesus
the person is Lord, but I deny that the Name Jesus is the Name Lord. Your
second reason is, because Jesus being the Savior of us, is the confounding
Jesus of his, and our enemies: this is your Argument; to whom he is not a
saving Jesus, he is a confounding Jesus, so one way he is a Jesus to all. But
Sir the name Jesus is a saving, not a confounding Name, and it was given not
for Angels, Devils and Reprobates, but for his people only, and that for
salvation, not for destruction, all this is plain from Matthew. 1. 21. Seeing
then you affirm that the bowing in the Text must be done in the sense of this
Name, the Angels cannot bow in the sense of this Name, except you will make
them sinners; for Jesus is a Savior from sin: much less can Devils and
Reprobates bow to him in that sense, except you will have them to be saved.
Again it is utterly against the Scripture to hold, that Jesus as Jesus is a
confounder, for all the while that he was most commonly called by this Name and
was in the state of saving us, Act. 10.
He was meek, mild; Luke 9. 56.
went about doing good, would not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax. When his Disciples requested of him to command fire from heaven
to destroy those that would not receive him, he rebukes them saying, The Son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them; mark the reason,
he would not destroy, Joh. 12. 47.
because he came to save. So again, If any hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not; consider the reason, for says he, I came not to judge the
world, but to save the world. You see then, he cannot judge or destroy as
Jesus; salvation and destruction are contrary.

If any object, that this was in the time of his humiliation, but he shall come
otherwise to judgment; I answer, the sense of the Name can never be altered,
God cannot deny his word; If at any time salvation be opposed to destruction or
judgment it is ever so. The name Jesus therefore being an humble, and lowly
name (as you confess) and a saving name, cannot be the Name in which he shall
come as universal Judge; but that must be a Name of power and authority over
all as I have proved.

But might I grant, as I will not, that Jesus is a confounding Name to some,
yet it cannot be a confounding Name to those nations that never knew him, for
these never offended him in this name; His Spirit of illumination, they never
resisted, His Gospel they never rejected, His precious blood they never trod
under their feet. Christ is an upright Judge, and shall come to recompense
every one according to his works: Romans 26.
Now therefore it would be injustice in Christ, (which were blasphemy once to
think) if he should destroy them as Jesus, against whom as Jesus they never
offended. This is contrary to Romans 2. 12. They that sin without Law, shall
perish without Law, Christ shall judge them indeed as Jehovah, for the breach
of the Law of nature, which he has written in their hearts, but not as Jesus,
for so they never offended him. De 369. Elohim, l. c. 3. 3 p. 437.
I will bring your own witness Zanchy against you, Causa Vnica; The only
cause why the creature boweth knees to God is not because he is Judge, or
Mediator, but only because he is Jehovah, which he proves from, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Isa. 45. 23. Romans 14. 11. Now let us briefly sum up all: you have not proved
by any clear Scriptures, that Jesus shall be named at the day of judgment; if
you could, it would not follow thence, that bowing shall be at the mention of
that name. You cannot prove that In the name does any where signify at the
mention of the Name. Sundry Scriptures you have wickedly falsified for it, as I
have proved Sect. 4. If you could prove it from some Scriptures, yet seeing
this phrase is often used, and has other meaning in other Scriptures, yet
there will be a just doubt, whether it be so meant in this place or no. Then
those that shall stand to be judged at that day, whom you damn to hell for
not performing it now, shall have just cause to plead against Christ in this
manner; Lord in all thy other Commandments thou deliveredst thy will plainly
unto me, but here in this Text thou have delivered it in such words as are not
agreeable in sense to any part of thy word elsewhere; or so as I could not
understand thy meaning, whether it were according to thy will, or no; so that
because I might justly doubt it, I could not practice it without sinning
against thee; and how derogatory will this be to Christ's honor that the judged
shall have just cause of exception against the Judge? Again, it is against the
Scripture to hold that he shall confound any in the sense of the name Jesus. It
signifies a Savior, and so Angels, Devils, and Reprobates cannot bow to him;
It is against the Scriptures to hold that he shall confound any as Jesus,
against whom as Jesus they never sinned.

Therefore Master Barton you have showed your self a Master Schismatique in
delivering an opinion that was never known in the Christian world, till you
uttered it, making it a necessary point of faith, threatening the neglect of the
practice of it with eternal damnation, which you cannot prove by the
Scriptures, but is contrary to the Scriptures. Therefore you make your self a
very Antichrist in creating new points of faith, and making Laws to bind the
conscience; Matthew. 23. 8. 10.
and therefore without repentance, Jam. 4 1.
your self are liable to damnation. It follows then expressly that all the
gay learned stuff in your Arn. as touching the Question is overthrown, and
falls down upon your head; your wound is incurable, it cannot be healed, and
if any shall follow your doctrine and practice, of necessity we shall have a
new sect of Bartonists.

But you hold another Crotchet as ridiculous as this, (...) p. 62. 63.
viz. that the name Jesus shall to all eternity be bowed to after the day of
judgment. This you would feign prove from, Rev. 22. 4. where it is said, that
the Saints shall see Christ's face, and his name written on their foreheads, and
then you say, we shall see it always, hear it always; but I pray what show
of Text can you bring that it shall be always heard? it seems now you make it
indifferent to bow to the name scene as well as heard, but you are besides the
Text. The best expositors hold that it does not concern heaven. Thus says
Master Brightman on that place, they shall enjoy a clearer vision than before,
Zach. 14. ^^.
yet far from that which they shall enjoy in heaven; and he applies the
prophecy of Zachary to these times.

But grant that it should be referred to heaven, yet first, It cannot concern
the state of glory after the day of judgment, but before; for Christ's coming
is mentioned after in the 12. Verse of this Chapter. Secondly, it is absurd to
take it literally: If it should be so, it denotes the name Jesus no more than
any other name, and there is nothing consequent that any bowing shall be to it:
but it is not so. Thus says Master Brightman on that parallel place, Rev. 1.
14. You may observe that this is no sensible signing. Bowing is subjection, and
Jesus is the name of our Mediator: this Doctrine will make Christ Mediator for
ever, contrary to 1 Cor. 15. 24. for if we must bow to him in heaven by the
name of his Mediatorship, we must bow also by the virtue of his Mediatorship:
and so the Saints shall never be in perfect bliss, nor the enemies perfectly
destroyed. And I pray how shall the devils and damned bow after the day of
judgment at this name, (for if the Saints must, they must also) except you
will grant that the name Jesus shall be also written upon their foreheads? None
ever in this point exceeded so far in blasphemy and absurdity as you have
done.

You gave a childish answer to my third Reason, for if it be no more than
corporal bowing at a Name, a child can perform the like to his father; and
so Christ should have a weak kingdom. As for Bishop Andrews, I am not the
first that have so taken him, as I have set down, and he is plainly so to be
taken, (otherwise there will be no sense in the words) and so being taken, the
consequences that I have noted will directly follow.

Though names be metaphorical Images, yet they represent the Person to our
understanding as well as true Images, and I suppose that if a Jew should see
you bow to the Name Jehovah written upon a wall (for writing you make all one
with mentioning, as before, and there is no cause why you should do otherwise
by your interpretation) that he would fling a stone in your face; and I
persuade me, that if a subject should bow to the Kings Name or picture before
his face, he would defy him; and though we are bound to confess Christ
according to his word, yet are we no where commanded to adore a bare Name;
which to do before Christ's face, I say again, is worse then Idolatry.

For the two Arguments in the conclusion; for the first of them, the minor
which you except against, has been proved, and till that you explain how the
Marginall note fails in your accusation you are answered.

For the second Argument; The denied Major has been sufficiently proved, and
so does Calvin testify for me, where he says expressly that all things are
now in subjection, On Phil. 2. 9.
though the Subjection shall not be perfect till the day of judgment.

SECT. IX.
I Say here that this exposition makes disparitie of worship between the
persons of the Trinity, contrary to John 5. 23. therefore it is false: you say
it does not make disparitie: the maine evasion you have here is your conceit,
that the Name Jesus is in it self the essential name of God; but made proper
to the Son by dispensation. But if you could prove that God in his essence
was ever called Jesus (which you cannot prove) there might be some show for
you; but yet this is nothing, for whether it be proper to the Son in it
self, or by dispensation, or (...), pertaines not to the question, but whether
it be proper or no; that it is proper, you cannot deny. Then it will follow
that to perform a duty to a name properly denoting the Son, and not doing
the like to the Fathers proper name, is honoring the Son above the Father:
It is a monstrous error to say that Jesus is the essential name of God. Hence
it will follow, that God had his essence because of man's sin; and that if man
had not sinned God had not been: a most Blasphemous, and yet inevitable
consequence. Therefore Sir, prove this, or all that you say in this Section is
but babbling: for by this conceit you answer all.

I have not slandered you in saying that by the word (...) you understood a
trueness of worship, and not every way an equal correspondencie: you have
affirmed it sundry times, and once at a table, when our maine dispute was about
the word (...). In my reply I have not changed the principle, but you have
run your self into a contradiction; for whereas you hold it indifferent to
bow at any name of the Trinity if we please; then you presently say that our
not bowing at the name of the Father, nor at the name of the Son, nor at the
Name of the Holy Ghost, but at the name of Jesus, shows that they being three
one to another, but one in themselves, and that our salvation was wrought
equally by them three, only terminated in the Son; for by giving toleration
above specified you overthrow this demonstrative end which you set down, and
this reason is but a Fantasy of your brain without proof.

Whereas in my reply to the second answer, I affirm that you cannot personally
bow to all the persons at the name Jesus: because the distinct names of any one
person do not personally denominate the other persons; and therefore if you
say, that you bow personally to every person at the Name Jesus, you confound
the persons. You tell me that a father is a father only in respect of his
son, and so is a son in respect of the father: but yet though a father has
reference to the son, and a son to the father, yet is not one the other,
and what is done to the one, is not done personally to the other; as if you bow
to the King you do not by the same act bow to the Prince. And when I say, I
believe in God the Father, I profess my faith in the Son essentially, and so
I do in the Father, when I say I believe in God the Son. In that you say
that I am a Triformian, for affirming that every person is in one Divine
essence, Catech. p. 155.
is but one of Thomas Bartons bald Crotchets, for hereby I acknowledge but one
divine essence to all the Persons. Divines do ordinarily say so. As Vrsinus,
In una dei Essentia; De Trinitate l. 8. c. 6. p. 3 58.
in one essence of God three persons do subsist. Zanchy also shall witness
against you, Tres personae una and eadem constant essentia See Aretius loco 7.
de Deo, and Bucanus, loco 1. de Trinitate.
. And I must tell you Sir, in that you say that every person is honored alike
personally, at the name Jesus you overthrow the Text of Phil. 2. 9. for as the
Name there above every Name (as it is evident) is proper only to the second
person, because he is only Mediator and solely incarnate, so the bowing in
the Text is due to him alone distinctly, and personally; for by the same reason
if we must bow to the Son together with the Father, and the Holy Ghost
personally by this Text, it will follow that they were incarnate, and
mediators, and shall come to judgment as well as the second person. To
conclude, this answer does fully overthrow that place of Joh. 5. 23. for out of
question our Savior intends there a distinction of persons, and so a
distinction of the Sons honor, else he should have spoken obscurely and to
no purpose: for if there be not a distinction of worship there required, but
that the Person of the Father must be necessarily honored in the person of the
Son without distinction; then there can be no comparison made between the
honor of the one and the other, and so our Savior should confound his own
rule; for it could not be known whether the Son be honored as the Father is
honored, or no.

For my two Arguments in the end, which you call Syllogismes (though I note
neither major, minor, nor conclusion, neither is any bound to reason always
from direct Syllogismes) the one is drawn from the Premises, in which you say
there are 4. Termini (whereby you wrong me, but indeed your Syllogismes are
nothing else, but equivocatious and sophistry) indeed I make two opposite
inferences in the same for brevities sake, which none but Cavaliers will blame.
The last argument is taken from the essence, which to please you shall be this
Syllogism.

Every honor of the Son equal to the honor of the Father, is so to honor
the Son in the Father as the Father is honored in the Son.

But to honor the Father by bowing at the name of the Son, and not to honor
the Son by bowing at the name of the Father, is not so to honor the Son in the
Father, as the Father is honored in the Son. Ergo, This honor is not an
equal honor.

SECT. X.
NO marvel if you be not pleased with my Argument, seeing you are not pleased
with your own Syllogism which you put in stead of mine. My argument would
have served a reasonable man, seeing you desire full Syllogismes, I will not be
beholding to you, but will reduce the arguments into two Syllogismes, seeing it
cannot be so well contained in one.

No unjust or cruel command is Gods command. But to command all creatures to
bow at the name Jesus is a cruel and unjust command. Ergo, this command is not
Gods.

The minor is thus proved.

Every command that enjoynes that to be done by any that have no created power
to perform it, is a cruel and unjust command. But to command bowing at the
Name Jesus injoyneth that to be done by many of the creatures, that have no
created power to perform it. Ergo this is a cruel command, and so not Gods.

No reasonable man that compares your Answer to the Argument cannot but say but
that your Answer is extremely frivolous. First, you make an objection which I
told you I meant to prevent, God indeed may require where he gives no special
grace, but not if he had given no created power.

Many things here babled have been answered before, which I now pretermit for
brevities sake.

To my question, how devils, and damned souls shall bow at the name Jesus, you
shuffle in your answer most pitifully, first you say, Devils shall bow, as
they confess: Though they called him Jesus, yet you prove not that they then
made a courtsie. I acknowledge the Devils shall tremble; yet that trembling is
not that kind of bowing you understand here; for you make it an act of
Religion, or at least a religious ceremony. But you say they shall tremble most
of all at the Name Jesus, wherein they are conquered: but what mean you by
wherein here? if you mean whereby as a cause, as you must so mean, else it is
nonsense, then you make the literal name to conquer them, which is Blasphemy,
and Idolatry. No marvel if such as you be, put all Religion in bowing at the
name Jesus, seeing you think to conquer the Devils by it. Sir, you call this
name an honey name, an humble name, a poor name, Page 2. Sect. 2. how shall
they tremble rather at this sweet name, this humble name, then at the powerful
and terrible Name Jehovah? It cannot sink into the brains of them that have
but common reason to conceive it. And surely the Devils be fools as long as
they have liberty to walk too, and fro, if ever they come to Church; for in
thinking to confound others they confound themselves; for if once they hear
Jesus named they must fall flat upon their faces for fear, as you say, which
confusion they might avoid if they come not at devotions; for if they do, then
woe be to them. And then they might always avoid trembling; for themselves
need not name Jesus except they will at any time. How should they be forced to
name it? If their naming Jesus be their torment, they are mad, if they torment
themselves when they may choose For my instance in damned souls, how they
should bow at the Name Jesus in Hell, seeing there is no divine service in
Hell; and these men hold that it is not necessary for any of us, but at such a
time; we may say they, if we will, bow at other times, but then we must,
because the Church commands it; and seeing there is nothing in hell but
blasphemy, and these hold that when men swear by Jesus, which is nothing so
bad as the Damned blaspheming; it is no season to bow, you here cannot tell how
to answer, but are entangled in the briars; and therefore cry out of blasphemy:
but Sir, it is plain blasphemy in you, as will be proved: but at length you
say that bowing and blaspheming will consist. They shall blaspheme, say you,
because they cannot choose but bow; what preposterous foppery is here? On earth
you bow, because you mention Jesus; in hell they shall blaspheme, because they
shall bow: so it seems that bowing shall cause the blasphemy; but I wot, Sir,
that they shall blaspheme by the name; they must first then blaspheme, how else
shall they bow? Their bowing you make to be their horror, and trembling, in
lying flat on their faces, and crouching down under the name Jesus, as you do
the Devils: if this be so, then surely they may escape torment if they will.
If the name Jesus torment them, it must be by mentioning, for so you
understand the Text: but what need they mention it? If they do not mention it
always, which were absurdity to grant, then are they not tormented always;
and if they be not compelled to mention it always, they be never compelled to
do it; if they be not compelled to it, what need they do it? and if they
need not do it, what need they be tormented; seeing they be tormented at the
Name, as these men say? Yea if they should mention the name never so often by
blasphemy, in hell, how should they fulfill the Text, seeing these men hold it
not necessary for us to fulfill the Text, but at public devotion on the Lords
days, though we may, say they, at other devotions? Seeing then the damned are
not bound to Lords days, and have no public devotions, how shall they fulfill
the Text, and then how shall they be damned, seeing their fulfilling the Text
is by their damnation? Happy damned, if this Doctrine were true: The Pope was
wont to deliver the souls out of purgatory for money, but these will deliver
the damned out of hell for nothing.

SECT. XI.
Wherein I show that this exposition will bring the service of God into
bondage, in making us to perform it at every man's will, therefore it is a
false exposition; the consequent I prove from Gal. 5. 1. but you will have that
place understood of the Doctrine of Justification by the Law; which though it
be one thing, yet to observe ceremonies for conscience sake is another, as
appears from Gal. 4. 10. You observe days, and months, and times, and
years; and this is your case that are an observer of times, making the

time of naming Jesus especially holy for adoration. The Text is against all
bondage in worship: if we be free from the bondage of the ceremonial commanded
worship, much less should we come into bondage by any new traditions. Your
answer is as much to the purpose as snow for harvest.

It is not worth a reply, it comes not near the matter; you have answered
nothing to the instance; that every command in Scripture limited to a time
binds ordinarily to that time; you cannot produce any exception; and then if
this be a command to bow at the Name of Jesus, it must be a command to bind
whenever it sounds: and it is not in the Power of all the world to alter,
diminish, or limit any of Gods unlimited commands; therefore I say that your
rule of affirmative precepts cannot hold in this place. And this here is not
answered, Sect. 5. as you say. Doctor Page his instance of Prayer, 1 These. 5.
is taken indefinitely, Pray continually, i. e. every day, or at every occasion:
but as you understand this Text, the determinate time present is set down when
to bow, but you say it is to be done at times of confessing, which is in time
of Divine Service. But I hope Sir, that Devils and damned in hell do not
observe times of confession, nor divine service, which bow as well as we. But
Sir, as you expound the Text, confession does not regulate the time of bowing,
for the name Jesus does that, and also the time of confession, for bowing and
confession are connected by a conjunction copulative, and the season of bowing
and confession both are set down to be at the mentioning of the Name Jesus, so
that it will follow if this interpretation be true, whenever Jesus is named,
you must both bow and confess, and so Jesus being named at every confession
will call for bowing, and confession for ever. Therefore this expasition
drawing with it such an unavoydable absurdity, cannot be Gods command. I
cannot choose but smile to see you who before understood this bowing, of the
express corporal knees, now being caught in the Briars here, to unstand it of
the Tongue. When men abuse the Name, say you, then the Text is fulfilled by
reproving or avoiding the company.

The damned would thank you, if when they hear their fellows blaspheme, you
could show them a way how to avoid their company. And seeing the Text concerns
all, by this means you make the Devils to reprove sin, and the damned
rebuke their fellows when they blaspheme. But how do you answer my instance
of the third Commmandement? for that binds to inward reverence at all times and
places, when we mention any of Gods titles: If external reverence at the Name
Jesus be also Gods command, why should it not do the like? This is your
answer, in the very performance of this one duty (mark this in the very
performance, that is, (ipso facto) is expressed our performance of the first
Table, our faithful acknowledgement of the true God, and humble worshipping of
him: a reverend usage of his holy name, and sanctifying his Sabbath in due
obedience; but you might as well have put in the second Table too, and then it
would have been Catholic obedience indeed; but I believe the first Table was
observed before this foppery was devised, and I know that for the most part,
the strictest observers of this ceremony are as profane persons, as any alive.
And then surely the Devils and damned do perform the first Table too, for
they must perform the same injuction.

To my last instance, that this exposition will draw out bowing, and confession
to all perpetuity, that they shall never be ended. You answer me by Master
Pryn, whom in scorn you call my confessor, that makes uncovering the head a
duty in the first of Cor. 11. 4. which will not captivate us: no more does
this (say you) but there is great difference between reverence in Gods house
and bowing the knees every time Jesus is named, from this Text: for this will
breed an unavoidable slavery; which cannot tend to the Glory but dishonor of
God: What is objected besides is answered already.

SECT. XII.
MY Argument here is this, that this exposition does eclipse the glory of
Christ's kingdom, therefore it is false: The antecedent I prove diverse ways.
First, the true exposition amplifieth Christ's honor in these words, God gave
him a name, as I instance in that parallel place, Ephesians. 1. 21. and as it is
alluded to by the Type, Dan. 2. 48. but the other exposition does rather
diminish Christ Glory, for it attributes to him a Name distinct from power and
Authority. First, you deny that Ephesians. 1. 21. is a parallel place, but so you
deny the judgment of the best expositours who do parallel them together; and
that Dan. 2. 48. in the type is also parallel to this place and Text, I appeal
to any that are judicious, and you have not disproved it but by your denial.
Because I expound Name for universal dominion, you tell me, that nothing takes
me but dominion and dignity, but it is a name of mercy that God most
delights in, if we will have salvation, say you. Power must be powered forth
in mercy; But what is all this to this Text? any thing shall take me agreeable
with it, but the fantasy of your brain shall not take me: you calling Name in
this Text a name of mercy, you apply it to the elect only; but the name here
concerns the Devils and reprobates also, your self being Judge. Therefore, if
you will have this name in it self to be a Name of mercy, you must make
Christ to show mercy to Devils and Reprobates, or else you must deny that they
bow. This I say, the Name in the Text is a name of supreme authority over
all, denoting Christ to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; but you affirm
that the Name Jesus does include these and all other glorious titles. See how
wayward you be; before, all the stir was about signification, and now you
talk of inclusion: but I deny that the name Jesus as a Name, being as you call
it, a Name of poverty and humility, and communicated to others, does properly
include in it the name King of Kings; why according to my stating the question,
which I have proved to be according to the Text, and other correspondent
Scriptures, you should lay to my charge, that I go about to make the world
believe that Christ redeemed us by a powerful hand, but not by price, and that
Christ's sufferings were to confirm his Doctrine, and not to sanctify us by
his blood, I know not, except you mean this Text concerns Christ's redeeming
us by his blood, and then, as I said, you must make Christ to redeem the
Devils, and then by your Doctrine, you must make Christ to suffer again, and
redeem us when he comes in his most glorious kingdom: and so whereas you say
I look like a Socinian, certain I am you look more like an Antichristian. To
my second reason you confess Christ Lord of every creature: and thus you
contradict your self: for so the subjection must be of every creature, here
employed by bowing the knee. Seeing then many creatures cannot do their duty
as you understand the Text, in this sense he cannot be Lord of every creature.
The residue is answered abundantly before.

To my third reason I have showed at large, Sect. 3. that you understanding the
Text literally cannot understand it figuratively: For my part I deny not the
knee, but I grant it not in a literal way, and shall yield it according to the
true meaning of the Text, but not according to your fancy; but here you
contradict your self, for you will have knees and hearts bow together,
therefore you understand the Text figuratively: And seeing you join them
together at the Name Jesus, why did you sever them in conference with me,
whether you gave the heart or no I cannot tell, sure I am, you did not give the
knee; if you did give the heart, by your doctrine you should have given the
knee, if the inward bowing were then necessary, why not the outward? Dr. Page
making this bowing a ceremony distinct from a substantial duty, I affirm
makes it but a poor honor, and advancement to Christ after his great
sufferings; and if it be a ceremony to us, it is a ceremony to all other
creatures, which you deny, the same being enjoined to all. And if, as you say,
many creatures come not within compass of Religious worship, it is plain
Religious worship is not simply here enjoined; But if you give the ceremonies,
and not the substance, it is not properly Religious worship; And so this bowing
is but a mocking of Christ; and if it be ceremony to us and not to other
creatures, as you affirmed; I pray, what is it to Devils and Reprobates? if it
be not a ceremony to them it is substantial, it must be one of them, and what
will follow hence? Those to whom Christ is a destroyer must perform the
substance; and you that say you bow, because of salvation, give but a ceremony.
You be thankful pieces indeed for such a great mercy, that the Devils shall
do more for Damnation, then you for salvation.

To my fourth reason, whereas I say, the Text truly understood enjoins the
bowing to all times and places, continually, but the other makes it to be done
but one day of the week ordinarily; and then also but now and then. In your
answer there is a manifest contradiction, for first you say, The Text enjoynes
it not to all times and places, which indeed is no better then blasphemy, and
then you presently say the whole man ought ever to submit to Christ: how can
this agree together? For if this continual submission be grounded upon the
Text, then I pray, how do you limit it the mention of the name Jesus, when
also no mention of the Name does bind you to bow, but on Lords days? I would
feign know of you whether Devils by the Text be not always subject to Christ,
or only then when Jesus is named. If their subjection be always to be done;
then it is false to tie it to the name only. If at the name only, as it must
be so, seeing you apply it so to us, see then what will necessarily follow. If
the Devils be not always subject to Christ by this Text, then has not Christ
Authority and power over them continually; for Christ's authority, and the
Creatures subjection are relatives. It will follow then that so long as they be
not subject, they be Lords. There is but one Lord, and Christ is he; but
Satan strives to be Lord, and certainly, if Christ should ever cease to be
Lord, Satan gains it; and as long as he is not in subjection he is Lord: he
must be Lord or in subjection, he cannot be nothing at all, and in no relation;
see then the whole consequence of this Doctrine; the Devil shall be Lord all
the week, and he shall not need to bow but the Lords days, for then only we
are bound to bow say they, (except they will have the devils to do more
service then we) but we need not then till Jesus be named. So it follows
that Satan shall be Lord all our time, and Christ shall be Lord but two or three
minutes in a week, is not this sound Doctrine? and then the Devils must be tied
to come to Church; for if they be not tied they are fools to come thither; to
be subject with horror, when they might be at their own liberty; or else
they must set up a Church of their own, and choose a Priest to say Service; or
else upon these men's grounds how shall they ever be subject at all? For if the
duty of the Text, as these men say, be not seasonable but in times of
devotion, then are not Devils capable of subjection at all, except they will
make them religious and devout; well then, if the Devils must bow, but when
these men do; it will follow that when Satan is not overruled he will rule;
when he is not in subjection, he will command; no marvel then if these men
generally live such scandalous lives, for would not you have their lives agree
with their doctrine? They teach it, they make Satan Lord over them, to rule
them all the week; but Christ shall be their Lord but two or three minutes on
the Lords day; yea they teach this doctrine in respect of themselves, for if
the ^owing of the knee, let them take soule-knees too if they will, be limited
to the naming of Jesus, then by this Text they are not bound to bow either body
or soul at any other time besides. Christ indeed should be a proper King by
this Doctrine to have command of his subjects a fit or two on the Lords day,
and all their time else to be at their own command, and at the command of his
utter enemy.

To my fifth proof, when I say, this doctrine depriveth Christ of his true
subjects, and forces upon him the members of Antichrist, you answer how can
this be? can any pluck his out of his hands? No Sir, it cannot be, but you
teach it, for seeing you damn all to hell, that will not observe your command;
by this means you damn to hell the French Churches, the Scottish, the
Netherland Churches, and all other Churches and Persons whatsoever that obey
you not: and I hope Sir, Churches that must be damned are not true Churches;
and helhounds are not Christ's faithful subjects: yea you will have none to be
saved but your own faction: But I suppose that if some Pagan should converse a
while in England, and should see the deportment of these Cringers, that pretend
they practice it for conscience sake, and should compare them with those that
for conscience sake refuse it, that like the American savage, whom a Friar came
to instruct at his death, if he should be told that these cringers go to
heaven, and the other to hell, would choose to go to hell with these, then to
heaven with those cringers.

That none should write against your opinion till T. C. I suppose you mean Mr.
Cartright, is extremely false.

That ancient and modern Divines agree with you it becomes none but Mr.
Barton, and such as he is, to affirm: You cannot bring any one Orthodox Father
so to understand the Text. And for Modern Divines, generally all Expositors
that are Protestants write against you: Bishop Andrews was the first
Protestant Divine that ever made it a duty of the text, and the best learned
and pious in England have been and are generally against it. And though
perhaps some very learned men might through the iniquity of the times yield to
the practice of it, yet I suppose few in their judgment held it by the Text.

To my last reason, that it depriveth Christ of his Glory at the day of
judgment; seeing, first, it puts no difference between Christ's kingdom
inchoate, and made perfect. And secondly, because it will make the full
subjection of every creature to consist only in a ceremony distinct from a
substantial duty as Doctor Page calls it, and to be the sole performance at
that day, when Christ shall come to be fully glorified by all his creatures;
You say nothing to it but what you say elsewhere, and I say again, so to hold
is flat blasphemy, therefore you have more cause to recant for delivering such
doctrine, then I for censuring it, as it justly deserves; I was never against
external reverence, but not limited at the Name Jesus.

SECT. XIII.
HEre I say that it is not probable that it is a duty of the Text, seeing it
is not typified or prophesied in the old Testament; You have not disproved my
Antecedent: to say that a truth may be in analogy though not typified, or
prophesied, is nothing to the Question, except you mean signified to come to
pass by the analogy. Those places, Act. 3. 3. 8. and Act. 10. 43. speak of
what should come to pass in Christ; that of Matthew. 5. 18. speaks of jots and
tittles, and I showed you, that small matters were foretold in Christ: This
should have been much more, if it had been the honor of Christ's Kingdom.
But at length you will find it in Type and prophecy, but that in Genesis 37. 9.
is nothing to your purpose, except you could prove that Joseph's brethren bowed
to their Brothers name: neither that of Exodus 17. 11. except you can prove that
Moses bowed to the Name Joshuah. Tertullian does not speak of the bare
literal Name. Those Scriptures which you bring, as Exodus 3. 15. Psalm. 75. 1.
Psalm. 111. 9. Isay 45. 23. are to no purpose, for because Gods name is Jehovah,
his name is near, his name is holy, all knees must bow to Jehovah, that is, to
God himself, therefore that all knees must bow at or to the Name Jesus is a
ridiculous inconsequent.

EECT. XIIII.
HEre I say that if this bowing were a necessary command of God, it is probable
that there would be some examples for it, but there are none. Those places that
I have brought for my consequent are weighty; for they concern examples of
faith, and the effects and fruits thereof in obedience; there be examples
enough in Scripture of all necessary duties; and though there is no example
precisely of putting off the hat, yet there is of external reverence in Gods
house, which you have sufficiently proved to my hand, and you and your friends
hold any external reverence sufficient at the Name Jesus, as putting off the
hat, bowing down the body in stead of the knee, but you cannot bring any
example of any external reverence whatsoever, given at the mention of the Name
Jesus. That of Matthew. 17. 6. though it concern not the Question was no worship
properly, Calvin in loc.
but an infirmity of fear. That which you speak of the sense of the Name
makes not for you; for our Question is about the name, and I am sure you never
bow to the sense without the Name. It is strange that if this were a duty by
this Text never before practiced, that it should have no example, or show of
example to confirm it.

I have done with the chief Arguments, and now I shall labor to be brief.

SECT. XV.
AS for your proud scorn, I think I have made better use of my reading than
your self, who wrest it to the destruction of your self and others. The
Fathers generally understand Name here for the Name of God, or the only
begotten Son of God, by your own confession, therefore they are against you.
But you sophistically confound these names with the Name Jesus, as if they were
all one; if so, why do you prefer the Name Jesus above God? Dr. Page his
Query is answered in Sect. 8.

Zanchy understands not Name here for Jesus; therefore you produce him subtly
to deceive the Reader.

Of all the Ancients within the first 700. years, none but Origin, who is no
Orthodox Father understands Name above every Name for the Name Jesus, See
Willet on Romans 14 Contro. 9.
yet you produce him not, to prefer it above Divine Names, yet he on Romans 14.
11. does overthrow your literal bowing. Because I say from Hierome, that the
Church fulfils this Text, by praying to the Father in the Name of Christ: you
say I must infer that all creatures must do so too, but you trifle, for the
material bowing is subjection, which is the same to all, but the form and
manner of it differs according to the different state of the creature. I do
not understand the material bowing so, as you absurdly understand it of a
religious ceremony. You have not made good what I desired, those Fathers which
you bring in your (...). do but set down the words of the Text, none speaks
of coroporall bowing at the Name Jesus mentioned.

SECT. XVI.
YOu have such a faculty in striving against the truth, that you care not what
you say in defense of error. Your self, and all your friends understand the
Text of the sole bowing at the Name Jesus, which ordinary practice confirms,
therefore no other Names may be bowed to, without profaning the name Jesus, for
if all names may be indifferently bowed to, to what purpose was this Text? for
then God should mock his Son, in advancing him to an honor which he had
before. This in effect I said, upon which the whole Section depends; Therefore
till you answer this, (which you have not done) whatsoever you babble in this
Section vanishes.

SECT. XVII.
THe Bishops generally did not give it in charge in Visitation-Articles, before
this Archbishops time, how then could the Churchwardens present it? and in my
time it was generally neglected in the Universitie; worthy men in our Church
wrote against it in their printed allowed works, what sincerity was this to
let these things alone, if it be a duty of the Text, and to press the other
ceremonies? The tale you lay to my charge is not so.

SECT. XVIII.
I Wrong not Doctor Page, for as he states the question uncertainly, though he
ground it on the Text, Justific. of bowing, page 18. and alibi.
so I appeal to any reader that shall diligently peruse him, whether he be
not content that it be held a thing indifferent. As for my self, I confess
that in former times I held it indifferent, so other divine names may have a
like respect, but I never held it any way from the Text.

PART II.
The first Section is cleared in Part 1. Section 4. and 8.
SECT. II.
HEre I will not spend Paper, for though you profess to discuss the truth
uprightly, yet the intelligent Reader cannot but mistrust that you have gone
mainely both against your science and conscience, you prove nothing from
Scripture, nor answer the Scriptures I have brought, but depart not only from
the judgment of your own Authors in the Antecedent, as Zanchy, etc. but also
from the Question; for you confound the Name Jesus with the Person: and whereas
I reason a dicto secundum quid, speaking of names considered in Christ; you
reason ad dictum simpliciter, to those names considered in themselves; the
difference between you and me here is this, whether Christ suffered most in
his name Jesus, by which he was commonly called, or his glorious titles, God,
Son of God, etc. which were concealed, and decryed. You say in the name
Jesus, I say in the other Names, because in respect of these he suffered poenam
damni, and sensus, which in respect of the Name Jesus he did not. I will
illustrate this by this familiar instance. Thomas Barton for his demerits is
now decryed Parson of Westminston, yet the Parson of Westminston in simplici
termino suffers not, but I fear me the Parson of Westminston considered in
Master Barton suffers: I would feign know of you Master Barton, where you
complain most, of your Name Thomas, or of being decryed Parson of Westminston;
I believe it would more cheer you to be cried up again Parson of Westminston,
than to have your name declared Thomas, which was never denied you: Let the
judicious Reader apply this.

SECT. III.
HEre I say that this reason, that we must bow at the Name Jesus, because it
signifies a Savior, is not grounded on the Text. You answer you are sorry
that obedience will not be, except a reason be given. Sir, I desire to give
obedience to any certain command, though I have no reason, but if any shall
affirm that God commands upon a reason, I desire a proof of this reason from
the word. But you refer me to your (...). p. 18. where you say it is at large,
that the Name Jesus is above all names, to God, to us, which you have from
Bishop Andrews: and then you add of your own, that it is above all in it
self.

It is above all to God you say, because no other Name had us men, and our
salvation in it. But I hope Sir, that our Salvation is not in the literal
name: but what is this to the Text; when name there is of larger extent, then
concerning us men only? I pray Sir, is Jesus more to God than Jehovah, which
denotes his glorious excellency in himself, his life, and essence? is our
Salvation more to God than these? Christ indeed laid down for us the life of
man in becoming our Savior, but not the life of God. The life of God restored
the life of man.

To us you say it is above all, because of the great work of salvation wrought
for us; but it is false, for Gods glory, and life should be dearer to us than
our own benefit. You be like an unnatural child, that so he can have the
inheritance he cares not so much for his fathers life. But what made Christ a
Savior, and his death so meritorious, but because he was Jehovah? What draws
out our salvation to all eternity, but because he is Jehovah? If God should
cease to be Jehovah, our Salvation would come to an end. Quicquid efficit tale,
idest magis tale.
Here I will bring your own witness, De natura dei c. 13. p. 40.
Zanchy, against you. Quid hoc nominis (...) usu praestantius, etc. what is
more excellent than this use of the Name Jehovah? what can be imagined, or
invented more available for our salvation, and the comfort of our souls?

In that you say that Jesus in it self is above the Name of God, If the Name
be above God, then surely the person must be above God.
because you prove nothing from Scripture, but exceed in blasphemy all that
ever wrote before you, I will not defile my self with such stuff: only this
I say, that it is infinitely absurd to hold, that any work of God, yea take
all his works together, can be greater than Gods life; for if he should
demolish all his works, he could work again, but if he should cease to be,
he can work no more. Therefore to affirm that to profane the Name Jesus is
a greater sin than to profane the Name God, is but a blasphemous assertion
of a Popish Author owned by his Pupil Barton.

As for my Argument, if the Name Jesus be above every Name of God, it will make
the second Person above the other Persons, because his maine answer is his
conceit without proof that Jesus is the essential name of God, and made
proper by dispensation, it being disproved Part 1. Sect. 9. I leave it, only
this I will I say of it, if the other Persons have made the name of the essence
proper* it will follow that they have made the essence it self proper, then
none should be God, but the second Person only; for as Names are, (...). p. 15.
says he, so are the virtues to be esteemed.

As for Bishop Andrews as he is to be understood, he plainly contradicts
himself, Sermon Phil. 2.
and I pray how can he affirm, that the Person of Christ is gone from us;
when in the same place he says, that Christ's body and soul, and those not
without his Deity, are really present in the Sacrament? The person of Christ
may be said to live, and dwell among his Saints though not personally, yet in
and through his Spirit, per (...).

Last of all, because I thus reply to the answer of those which say that Jesus
is the Name of the three Persons, and so by bowing at this Name they honor all
alike; that if Jesus be the Name of the three Persons, then cannot it be the
Name above every Name in the Text as they say, because that name is only
proper to the second Person; because he only was incarnate, and Mediator, and
God gave him that name after his humiliation. You not knowing how to shuffle up
a fair answer, in a scurrilous way, lay Arianisme to my charge, and tell me
that I am put to a shift, and that pitifully, because say you by this reply I
shake down my own pillar, Part 1. Sect. 1. for so I must deny (you say) what
I there affirmed, that supereminent power and glory is the Name above every
Name, because the three Persons have supereminent power and glory, or else I
must affirm that the Name Jesus is proper to the second Person by
dispensation, as also in my own Tenet, supereminent power and glory. But Sir
it is you that shift and not I, for supereminent power and glory, which is
essential and so common to every person in Trinity, is not here the Name above
every Name, but that supereminent power and glory, which is the advancement,
and honor of Christ Mediator, God and Man. It is impossible that the
essential Name of God can be made proper, unless the essence it self be made
proper. Therefore your conceit of a propriety by dispensation is frivolous. If
the Name Jesus be (as you say) essential, it cannot be proper to the second
Person; and if proper, it cannot be essential. The Name above every Name,
which I have proved is supereminent power and glory, is given to Christ as
Mediator, and therefore it is not essential in him as a Person of the
Trinity; therefore my pillar stands as firm as ever it did, and you show your
self but a trifler in this Reply.

SECT. IV.
HEre you do uncharitably wrest my words, for I do not say, that no Name has
any excellency for signification sake, or that the Name Jesus has no
pre-eminence at all for the sense of it, but that it is not above every Name in
the Text: and therefore to be bowed to because it signifies a Savior.

I say it again, disprove it if you can. By this reason I said we should
rather bow at the Name Christ, which does more particularly, and expressly
denote our salvation than the Name Jesus, as Vrsin declares; denoting his three
offices by which he saves us; You answer Christ is not a Name but title of
honor, but if it be not a Name I know not how to judge of things, he being
more often called by that Name since the Ascension than Jesus. But being a
title of honor, titles of honor are more excellent than proper Names. But see
how this Sophister immediately forgets himself, for presently he calls it the
Name of Christ's humanity; then belike the title of the humanity is a title of
honor, and Jesus the title of the Deity, This is Bishop Andrews his reason.
a poor and humble name, as he elsewhere calls ^. But what is his reason that
Christ is the name of the humanity? viz. because it signifies anointed, and
God cannot be anointed; true, God in his essence simply considered cannot be
anointed. But Christ God and Man was anointed to be our Mediator, as
anointing signifies his designation to that office; This I said, that if the
sense of our salvation should make us bow, the sense of it, and the manner how
it is wrought is more clearly set out to us in the Name Christ than Jesus,
which Name I affirm does also more fully set out the Person: for Jesus denotes
only a Savior, but Christ shows who and what he is, viz. the promised
Messiah, a Priest, a Prophet, and King: Yea it does more properly denote the
Person, for it denotes none but he, but Jesus may denote some body else.

SECT. V.
What is said here, is sufficiently answered in Part 1. Sect. 1. and 8. Here
he wresteth my words, for when I say the Name Jesus concerns the elect only,
he says I say the bowing concerns the Elect only.

Doctor Page his answer is nothing to the purpose, for if the Devils bow only
because Jesus is a Savior to others, then do they not bow by a reason proper
to themselves, which is contrary to the Text, for the reason there is common to
all, viz. because Christ has dominion and power over all, which is so plain
that you are impudent to deny it.

Though all shall not fare alike at the day of judgment, yet shall all appear
alike: so the subjection materially is the same to all, though formally it
differ.

SECT. VI.
HEre I say, to bow at the Name Jesus only, which Name signifies our Savior,
and not at Jehovah, which signifies Gods essential glory, is a preferring our
salvation above Gods glory, therefore it is a wicked Tenet. You first deny the
Antecedent, and say your bowing is specified to be to the glory of the Father,
but you must first prove it from the Text. Then you say we are Simonians,
Saturnians, if we think to serve God for nothing: O horrible blasphemy is
Jesus all, and Jehovah nothing? Is God to us something, and God in his glorious
nature nothing? is it all to serve God for our selves, and nothing to serve him
for himself? When I allege Deuteronomy. 28. 58. to prove that Jehovah is Gods
glorious name, you absurdly wrest me contrary to my meaning, that I should say
we must serve God more for fear than love, which is nothing agreeable to my
words.

Again you impudently wrong me, in laying to my charge that I make Jesus and
Jehovah not the same God, it is your self that do it, in making Jesus greater
than Jehovah, I only distinguish the names, (which you here confound for your
own ends) and show that Jesus shows what God is to us; Jehovah, what he is
in himself; therefore to worship him as Jesus, and not as Jehovah, See Sect. 3.
is abominable. There is nothing else worth replying to, being cleared
elsewhere; only I think good to vindicate my self from one clamorous
imputation.

When I say, if we must bow only in respect of salvation, Devils, and
Reprobates should be more sincere in their service then we, who must bow to
Christ as he is their Lord, but we only by the opinion of these men as he is
our Savior; here he blesses himself as if some spirit appeared before him.
But we will see, whether we can allay this spirit, or lay him in his right
place. He and his friends understand the proper duty of the Text in it self
considered to be a Religious ceremony to be performed in holy times, (...). p.
53, 54.
and places. And himself holds that all Angels and men, just and unjust, are
bound to perform voluntary obedience to glory. If the Devils there be so
bound, if they perform religious acts, and observe holy times (for the bowing
materially is the same for all) gratis, when they can look for nothing but
damnation; to require good for evil being a note of perfection, much more to
requite good for so great an evil as utter destruction: they should attain to
an unmatchable perfection. Therefore Sir weep not for me, but for your self,
it is your own doctrine, I would your hand might tremble in mercy, and your
eyes drop for the monstrous blasphemies which you have let fall in your book.

SECT. VII.
HEre I say that Doctor Page his reason is not good, that we should bow at the
Name Jesus, because above all other Names it minds us of Christ's death. First,
I denied the antecedent, affirming that many called God their Savior in the
old Testament, yet few supposed that God should die, but you say very few,
which I say not, I deny not that it was known, but it was not commonly and
clearly known, as appears by Christ's Disciples, who though they called him
Jesus, yet would hardly be persuaded that redemption should be by his blood,
though they were often told of it, Joh. 20. 9. Therefore Jesus is not the
chiefest name signifying death; but the Name Christ is rather, because it
denotes him to be a Priest, and such a Priest, that did also shed his own
blood, and therefore I say again, God could have been a Jesus if he had
would, without becoming a Priest, he could not indeed, because he would not,
but he never could have been a Priest unless he had been a Jesus. You have
not overthrown the consequent, for first, how have you proved by the
Scriptures that the Name of Christ's death is the Name of his Glory? Secondly, I
go not against the order of the Text, when I say the Name above every Name
leads us to Christ's glory, and not to his sufferings. I deny not that God in
the Text proceeds from humility to glory, yet is it absurd to confound Christ's
humiliation with his exaltation; and the Name of the one with the Name of the
other; The Name Jesus looks to hell says Doctor Page, but we must look for
Christ in heaven. Thirdly, neither have I changed the Question, but it is you
rather; for do you bow only to the Name, because you say (but prove it not)
that it is a suffering Name? do you not bow also to the sense of the Name,
because it signifies salvation by dying? This you stand upon continually,
therefore the ignorantia elenchi is in your self. Quicquid convenit tali
quatenus tali, convenit omni tali.
My marginall note stands firm against you; for seeing you say you bow in the
sense of the Name Jesus, the sense of the Name is as well conveyed to the
understanding by sight as by hearing: your self make it all one as I have
noted, Part 1. Sect. 8.

SECT. VIII.
HEre I affirm, that it is no good reason to bow at the Name Jesus because the
fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, Col. 2. 9. That which you
reply to the denial of the consequence is nothing, but what has been
sufficiently cleared before. And that which you allege from Tertullian is
against you. For if the Names Jesus and Christ do one of them imply the other,
why do you make such a difference? though it be your direct opinion by the
humanity to climb up to the glorious Trinity, which I deny not; yet this will
not prove the consequence: and I verily believe, that God will accept our
worship in, and by the Name Christ, as well as Jesus; I say it is no Reason to
affirm that we should bow at the Name Jesus rather than Christ, because some
say, that Jesus is the Name of the Person, Christ of the office, because Christ
by his office brings us the Father.

Jesus does denote his office as well as his Person, though more summarily his
office; Christ denotes his Person as well as his office, though more clearly
his office then the Name Jesus does; yea it denotes his person more properly
and certainly then the name Jesus, which denotes some body else, but Christ
none but he. There is nothing else worth answering, only this I stand still to
justify, that upon the foregoing reason if we must bow to the Father at the
mention of the Name Jesus only, we must as well pray to the Father by
mentioning of that Name only; neither have you disproved it, for though Prayer
be one duty and bowing another, yet are they both parts of worship, and
lip-prayer is no more substantial than outward bowing, the excellency of both
is in the heart.

For the conclusive Argument, the heads are but barely denied without proof,
and what I affirmed is sufficiently justified in the premises, and confirmed in
this reply, and so I leave it. But Sir I must tell you, that whereas you lay to
my charge that I had others assistance in my book; It is false, I am not
beholding to any for two words, either in informing or reforming otherwise than
what light I have demonstrated to have received from such Authors as I have
read, neither have I desired any assistance in this reply; Therefore none of my
brethren are to share with me in any infirmity whatsoever in either Tract.

An Advertisement to Master Barton.
IF Master Barton do ever intend to make another answer, I desire thus much of
him; that he reconcile those contradictions that I have noted in his
infallible witness Doctor Page, and in himself, and especially he must
clear Section 4. Part 1. where he has shamefully wrested Scriptures to
maintain his error; he must bring plain Scriptures* to show that In the
name does any where signify at the mention of the Name in that sense as he
takes it in Phil. 2. 9. viz. to be a sign how to know when to do something,
or to perform some worship. And above all he must clear the eighth Section
of the first part, and prove by evident Scriptures (for those Scriptures which
he has brought he has fearfully abused) so far forth as to leave it
without doubt, (seeing he makes it a point of Faith and Salvation,) that
bowing at the Name Jesus is the bowing to be performed at the day of Judgment
by all rational creatures, and to be done by the Saints to all perpetuity
after the day of judgment, and answer my Reasons, and Scriptures to the
contrary. When he has done this I will write again, and show what my opinion
is; If this be not done, all that he has written first and last in the
question by his own confession is nothing worth; and I resolve never to
trouble my more necessary studies with any more replies; for I acknowledge all
that is besides Gods word, be there never so much show of learning, to be no
better then chafe and stubble, dung and excrements. And if he or any one else
for him shall truly perform what I here require of him, I will promise him a
privilege beyond other men, he shall be fed with Pheasants milk.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. l. 26 in the Margin blot out 6. p. 5. l. 16. read scope of the Text,
p. 6. l. 36 r. Bishop Babington, p. 7. l. 17. r here, p. 9. l. 7 r. Christ, l.
21. r. two or three Authors, p. 10. l. 3. r. commonly called by, l. 27 and 26
r. declaration of the Name Jesus as you affirm, p. 12. l. 35. r. or
expressly, p 13. l 26. put out (but) l. 28. r. Ephesians. 1. 21. l. 37. r.
increated, p. 19. l. 9 r. virtues, p. 21. l. 5. r. Nomen capitur pro
professione says Calvin on that place, l. 33. r. you produce, p. 23. l. 34. in
the Margin r. de tribus, p. 25. l. 8. r. though perhaps he might, hold it
indifferent at the time, p. 26. l 10. r. (...), in Heb. 1. 2. p. 26. l. 28. r.
here in degree, p. 27. l. 10. r. Isay 8. 20 and Heb. 11. 1. p. 27. l. 36. put
out (first) p. 33. 33. r. Rev 14. 1. l. 36. r. for ever in heaven, p. 35. l 28.
r. are but one, p. 36. l. 14* in the Margin r. loco 1. de Deo, p. 37. l 2. r.
cavillers, l. 16. r argument, p. 41. l. 23. r. 1 Cor. 11. 4 p. 43. l. 23. r.
ceremony, l 26 r affirm, p 46. l 19. r. Act. 3. 18.

In Part 1 Section 5. p. 24. l. 18. supply this, what I have said of power and
glory see Part 1 Sect. 1. p. 13. and part 2 Sect. 3. p. 54. And it is you, and
not I, that deny him to be Jesus, till the resurrection, for by your exposition
you say the Name was then given him, then it will follow expressly that the
office was then given him.


