Noah's Flood Returning: OR, A SERMON Preached August the 7th. 1655. before the
Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Major of the Honorable City of
London, And the Right Worshipful, the Company of DRAPERS.

By R. Gell, D. D. and Rector of the Parish of Mary Alder-Mary, London.

1 Thessalonians. 5.3. For when they shall say, Peace and security: then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall
not escape.

Jude 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them are set forth
for an example.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the
Black-spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1655.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Major of the Honorable City
of London,
My Lord,
AFTER Experience of Gods great Goodness and Mercy toward my Self, and my
Neighbors in this City; in delivering us from the Imminent peril of Fire Ian.
the seventeenth, 1654. I was emboldened humbly to offer to Your Lordship, an
Expedient for the prevention of the like dangers among us: And upon mine humble
addresses to Your Honor, I found such a favorable Reception, and Your Self so
sensible of what I submitted unto your serious consideration, that I have often
wished an opportunity to acknowledge it:

Now since Divine Providence has so ordered it, that I was chosen by Lot to
preach before Your Honor and the Worshipful society of Drapers; and having
been much importuned by many of that Worshipful Company to print and publish
my Sermon, such as it was: Upon which motion, weighing in my self the Argument
of the Text, and the prosecution of it, (as I conceive) so needful and
seasonable for these our times; Also observing your great wisdom, and
vigilance over this populous Mother-City of our Nation; and that you might be
the more excited through Gods assistance, to embrace and use all Occasions
offered to prevent (through the mercy of God, the Judgments, and miseries
which are impending and ready to fall upon us, and this whole nation for ought
we know) by reason of our loud crying, and high provoking sins: Against which I
desire to bear witness and express to this sinful world, my zeal to be a
Preacher of Righteousness, which as the Wiseman says, in the day of wrath,
delivers from death, Prove. 11.4.

Upon these considerations Right Honble. I presume to publish and dedicate the
said Sermon to your Lordship; being also more then confident, that what is
sincerely and uprightly intended, will be favorably and candidely accepted by
your Honor, and your Worshipful Society; Which is all the Return desired, and
hoped for by him who is,

My Lord, Your humbly devoted Orator to serve You and his Generation, In the
Lord Jesus, Robert Gell.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THe Persons before whom this Sermon was preached, are specified in the Front
of it; and the Occasion of Preaching it, in the Authors Dedicatorie
Application: but it is intentended by the Author for more public good,
because every Bonum Utile, the Maxime-holdeth quo communius eo melius;
Therefore to this end was resolved the Printing of it. And that None might
snatch an occasion to cavil the Author, he has been most careful, as his
Inch of time would permit; (For he was necessitated to go out of Town, within
two days after his Preaching) to set down in due order, what before he
publicly delivered, and did commit the Inspection of All, to One that was
willing and ready to see it done, as he knew the Authors mind; and therefore
we hope it will come forth, both for matter form and intent, without just
exception to any.

But yet if any Supercilious Critic shall read, the (...), and the (...), and
then disdainfully subscribe, (...). I shall presume (In the Authors behalf) to
reply thus: it is easily believed, even that the probability of his first Act,
(For its Object, is in plain English) that he was (...), If he savor Heavenly
Truth, and be skilled in Divine Logic.

W. P.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable, CHRISTOPHER PACK, Lord Major of
the City of London; AND Before the Right Worshipful the Society of DRAPERS.
Matthew. 24.37, 38, 39. 37 But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be.

38 For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into
the Ark:

39 And knew not, until the flood came and took them all away: So shall also
the coming of the Son of man be.


IF this Text seem not fit for the occasion of this grave and solemn Assembly,
I doubt not but we shall find it, ere we leave it, suitable enough, and proper
for the time. However, there is the same warrant both for the Preacher and his
Text: The choice of both is to be referred unto the same Original.

The words contain a Prophetical parallel touching the sudden and unexpected
coming of Christ to judgment, which is delivered: 1. Succinctly, and briefly,
verse 37. 2. More fully and largely, v. 38, 39.


1. Succinctly and briefly: And so we have in the words these particulars; 1.
Noah and the Son of man are parallel. 2. Noah had his days. 3. The Son of man
has his coming, or his days, as Luke 17.26. 4. The days of Noah, and the
days or coming of the Son of Man, are paralleld.


I shall not spend time in these; but only explain who this Son of Man is; and
what his coming is. For all these and other parallels, will meet us in the
second part of this Text.

1. The Lord Jesus very often styles himself the Son of Man, Matthew. 8.20. and
9.6. and 16.20. besides many other places. And the reason is given by some;
that thereby he might signify his humane nature, which he took upon him for
man's sake, Heb. 2. For what is the Son of Man, but Man? as David explains one
by the other, Psalm. 8.4.

Or, when he calls himself the Son of Man, he intimates, that he lives in mean
repute, and a contemptible estate among men.

Or, he gave himself that name, by which he would be more familiarly known and
called.

And this is all Interpreters make of this, when our Lord calls himself the Son
of Man.

But I believe our Lord had greater reason than these, why he called himself
the Son of Man. Nor do I doubt but he had reference unto Daniel, who was most
punctual in his observation touching the Messiah, and the time of his
appearing in the flesh, and his coming to judgment, He is called, Dan. 7.13.
The Son of Man.

Object. But the words there are (...), as the Son of Man.

Answer, But here (...) is not similitudinis, but certitudinis, as (...), Phil.
2.8. As a man, not in similitude only, but also certainly. As when St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 16.13. Quit your selves like men, be strong, etc. For whereas
Revel. 1.13. and 14.14. ye read of one like the Son of Man, no man questions
but Christ is there to be understood. Our Lord therefore, hence implied that he
was That Son of Man who was to appear, and to be born in Man, according to Gal.
4.19. Of whom I travel in birth, until Christ be formed in you: which is the
same that he meant, when he says, He that does the will of my Father which is
in Heaven, he is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

Whence, He is said to be the Judge of Man, because he is That Son of man who
is to judge the quick and the dead, Acts 17.31. John 5.27. compared with Dan.
7.13. and of this Son of Man so judgeing the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 96.13.

2. As for the coming of That Son of Man, the word here used is (...), which
signifies also presence and being, which is more proper unto spiritual things.
This coming may be many ways understood; but I shall consider it here only as
in regard of Persons, or particular Churches, or generally in respect of all.

In regard of Persons, so Jacob waited for him, Genesis 49.18. And St. John
tarried until he came, John 21.22. for he was in that day, Revel. 1.10. whose
day Abraham rejoiced to see; he saw it and was glad, John 8.56.

2. In regard of particular Churches, as that of the Corinthians, waiting for
the coming of our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.5, 6, 7. and 4.5. and 1 Thessalonians, 5.23. I
pray God your spirits may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

3. In regard of all, When every eye shall see him, Revel. 1.10.

Of this last, this last coming, I understand our Lord here to speak: And this
is parallel unto the days of Noah; In what respects, we shall understand from
the more full and large explication of it.

Wherein may be observed many parallels between the days before the flood, and
the coming of the Son of Man. I shall content my self with these following.

1. In the days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marying, and
giving in marriage. And in these days, before the coming of the Son of Man,
there is the like eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage.

2. They were so doing, until Noah entered into the Ark. And these will be
doing the same until the coming of the Son of Man to take them away.

3. There was a flood prepared in the days of Noah to take those away, who
were eating and drinking, etc. And there is a like flood of Calamities, a new
deluge, an overflowing scourge prepared in the days of the coming of the Son
of Man, to take these away.

4. Those of the old world knew not, until the flood came and took them all
away.

And these of this later world so doing, will not know (until the coming of
the Son of Man) a like flood of calamities and judgments which shall take them
all away.

5. There was an Ark for the preservation of Noah, and his household, into which
Noah entered.

And there is a Spiritual Ark of Regeneration for the preservation of the
Spiritual Noah's house, into which he leads them.

Before I speak of these particular parallels, I shall desire you to observe
one general Truth, viz. That what was done in the Letter, and is recorded in
the History of the Old Testament, the same is here acted over again in the New
Testament and days of the Spirit. The former being the time of promise and
threatening, according to the Letter: The latter being the fulfilling of what is
promised and threatened, according to the Spirit: Which may serve as a clue to
lead us into the light of many like Scriptures.

I shall but name some, viz. first, the Story of the Creation, which is
allegorized by the Prophets and Apostles. In the Beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth. The Thargum of Jerusalem turns it, (...) in wisdom,
which is all one with what ye read, Psalm. 104.24. In wisdom have thou made
them all; and 136.5, 6. Which wisdom is the Son of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. By whom
all things were made, John 1.3. Col. 1.16. And therefore he is called (...),
The Beginning of the Creation of God, Revel. 3.14.

The Earth was without form and void, (...), Genesis 1. The Prophet has the very
same words importing man's unregenerate estate, Jer 4.22, 23. The Lord said Let
there be light, Genesis 1. And God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, 2. Cor. 4.6. Thus we read of the new
creatures, the new heavens, and the new earth, and the new making of them; That
I may plant the heavens and lay the foundation of the earth, and say unto Zion,
Thou art my people, Esaias 51.16. The first Adam was a type of the second, Romans
5. And all things belonging to the first, were as it were cast in a mould of
the animal life figurative of the spiritual; or as a picture rudely drawn
with lead or a coal, is a preparation for more orient and glorious colors to
be laid on in the Spiritual life.

The more notable histories also have, and are to have their spiritual
fulfillngs; Such were the Lords deliverances of his people from Pharaoh King of
Egypt, and from Og King of Bashan, Exodus 14.22. Number. 21. And the Lord promises
the fulfilling of the same; again, Psalm 68.22. And I will bring again from
Bashan, I will bring again from the depth of the Sea, Esaias 11.15, 16. and
51.10, 11. Zach. 10.10, 11.

This promise is fulfilled after a more eminent and excellent manner, Mich.
7.15. According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt, will I
show unto him mavelous things; what were they? the Prophet tells us from v.
19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea.

That promise of Christ to be born, Esaias 7.14. was not accomplished only in the
fullness of time, Gal. 4. but also to be fulfilled afterward in the Spirit
among the Gentiles, Revel. 12. The promise that the ten tribes should return,
Jer. 31. is said to be fulfilled, Matthew. 2.18.

The promise of the Spirit to be poured out, Joel 2. had a fulfilling, Act. 2.
yet is it continually fulfilled, and fulfilling so often as there are vessels
to receive it, Act. 2.39. And thus the Prophets and Apostles allegorize the Old
Testament.

And all the Fathers, in this very way of teaching, have imitated the Prophets
and Apostles; And therefore I do not believe, that it is dishonorable to the
Children, Patrizare, to be followers of their Fathers herein; much less to be
followers of Christ, who does here expressly give the allegory of what was
figured in the history of Noah's flood.

Come we now to the first of these parallels: in the days of Noah, they were
eating, and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; and in these days
before the coming of the Son of man; they will be eating, and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage.

Those customary manners and practices of the old world, are expressed to
resemble the lik usages of this latter world, and both aggravated by the time,
in the days of Noah, and in the days of the coming of the Son of man;

Which are laid down in 2. pair of natural actions.

1. Eating and Drinking. 2. Marrying and Giving in marriage.
Which as in nature, so in Scripture they go together.

Unto this example of Noah's days, Saint Luke adds the like of Lots days,
they did eat, they drunk, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded.

And what does our Lord blame in the first pair of the worlds actions, eating
and drinking? 2 For they proceed from natural desires implanted in us by the
God of nature, and without which, the person of the man cannot be naturally
preserved.

The Lord blames not these actions, but their carnal security: who did eat and
drink

2. Yea, their immoderate and inordinate eating and drinking; They were toti in
his, they were wholly taken up in actions of this nature. And the Holy Ghost
expresses it in the phrase here used, signifying an imperfect time, some past
and some present, (...); they were eating and drinking, and the agents those
who spent and were spending their time thus, so a doing that they were yet
about to do what they now did; they made it their business, and they went
every day conscienciously about the doing of i^.

The reason is, Though our calling be an high and heavenly calling, yet by
reason of our earthly being, the present seeming good draws forcibly downward,
which the Wiseman has well observed, Wis. 9.15. That the corruptible body
presses down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind that
museth on many things. And whereas the man stands, as Hercules is fabled in
bivio, with wisdom traceing on the right hand, and folly on the left: we read
of Samlah (one of Edoms posterity) that he was of Masrekah; Samlah is the left
hand, and Masrekah the drawing of vanity, Genesis 36.36.

Now the stream of the thoughts, wills and affections can run insensibly but
one way at once; For we cannot serve God and Mammon; God and the world, God and
our belly.

2. They neglected the Preachers of righteousness: Venture non habet aures. And
Quos perdere vult Deus dementat.

Observe. Our Lord says not, that they were gluttons and drunkards, but that
they were eating and drinking. Even natural and lawful actions may be
dangerous in regard of sin, which may cleave to them: or dangerous temptations
unto sin, or in regard of some penal evil or true punishment. For Esau did
eat and drink, and rose up, and despised his birthright; and is therefore
called a profane person, Heb. 12. So, The people sat down to eat, and to drink,
and rose up to play, Exodus 32.6. and the Sichemites did eat, and drink and
cursed Abimelech: therefore whereas Jobs Children had a custom of feasting at
one another houses, Job 1.4. their father feared lest they might curse God in
their hearts, and therefore he offered sacrifice in behalf of them continually,
or all the days of their feasting. Matthew. 22. our Lord says not, that he who
was called and afterward excluded from the supper, went to plow iniquity, but
that he went to his farm; an honest though now a poor calling.

Nor does he tell us that the Merchant handled the balance of deceit, but only
that he went to his Merchandise, a warrantable good profession.

Thus in the days of Lot, Luke 17.26. it is said, They bought, they sold, they
planted, they builded; Our Lord says not that they sinned simply in so doing;
but he implies, that some dangerous temptation usually adheres unto these and
such like actions, as to buying and selling. Many, says the Wiseman, have
sinned for a small matter, and he that seeks for abundance and will be rich,
will turn his eyes away, he is avidus. As a nail sticks close between the
joining of the stones, so does sin stick fast between buying and selling,
Eccle. 27.1, 2. Thus we have had the former pair of natural actions: come we
now to the latter, which our Savior adds to them by reason that the former
pair of natural actions have such an influence upon the later; for eating and
drinking dispose the body for marrying and giving in marriage. Yea, excessive
eating and drinking incline men to the sins of uncleanness; First surfeting
and drunkenness, then chambering and wantonness, Romans 13. Therefore says
Solomon, Look not on the wine when it is red; or Proverbs 23.31. Thine eyes
shall behold strange women.

Now as they before the flood eagerly pursued the former desires, so did they
as violently pursue these later; and so or worse do the men of the present
generation. For we have such marrying and giving in marriage, as never was in
the Christian world before these late times, proclaiming that great mystery, as
the Apostle calls it in Ephesians. 5. in the marketplace among the profane
multitude.

But what special reason is there for this? There is an inbred desire of
perpetuating our being and name, which because it cannot be obtained in ones
own person, the natural desire is, (...), to propagate it by posterity. And
herein is placed the naturalls man's hope of immortality, Genesis 4.17, 19. And as
without eating and drinking the person of a man cannot by nature possibly be
preserved; so neither without marrying and giving in marriage, can mankind be
orderly continued.

But if the natural desire be not in due subordination unto the spiritual,
that earthly marriage be not in order unto the heavenly, they who marry and are
given in marriage are accounted no better then the children of this world, Luk
20.34. And he that married a wife, and therefore said he could not come, must
not be admitted to the marriage Supper of the Lamb, Luke 14. And therefore the
Apostle tells us, that marriage must be only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39.

But what reason is there that our Lord should name only these two kinds of
excesses, eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage. Had not all
the world corrupted its way before the flood? Genesis 6. And before the
overflowing scourge, our Lord foretells, that iniquity should abound; and all
of us can witness the truth of it.

All manner of iniquity abounds, in high, in low, in rich, in poor, universal
iniquity, contrary to the universal righteousness of God. But the Spirit of
God names only that kind of iniquity which was then, and I believe, is now
most rife and common among all men, intemperancy, incontinency, luxury,
lasciviousness, all manner of uncleanness.

As for the other sins I doubt not but they are common also, yet it is to be
observed, that they are more properly and usually found among some sorts of
men; as pride commonly follows high places, and men in authority, especially,
such as never were in authority before, Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in
altum.

Covetousness, how ever it be too general, so that Mammon is one of the great
City Gods, yet it is thought to be most rife among Officers, who very often are
(...) bribetakers, Mich. 7.3. Envy though it be a sin now Epidemicall, and most
what hides it self under the name of zeal, yet its usually found among men of
Sciences and faculties; according to the Fable, that Envy being once missing
in Hell, and sought for, it was found in Monasteries and Colleges, and so it
is Academicall; I wish it were not so in our Pulpits. As Saint Paul complaind
that it was of his time, some preach Christ of envy and strife; so extortion
and oppression, however at this day very common, yet it usually harbors among
Citizens, Ier 6.6. Simony is between Micha and his Levite, the Patron and his
Clerk; Hypocrisy and the Art of seeming extreme rife at this day, is found
among religious men. Deceit, fraud, circumvention among Merchants, Hos. 12.7.

But as for intemperancy, incontinency, looseness of life, voluptuousness and
sensuality, etc. These are common to all men, to the Subject as well as to the
Prince, the learned as the ignorant, the poor as the rich, the wise as the
foolish; and these bring the flood upon the world of the ungodly.

2. They were so doing, until Noah entered into the Ark: And they will be so
doing, until the coming of the Son of Man.

Would ye know the ground of this? Whoredom, wine and new wine take away the
heart, Hos. 4 11. For as in nature all diseases, everberate and weaken the man,
whence the affection must needs continue: So in this State, sin the disease
of the soul weakens it, as Ezekiel intimates, 17.30. How weak is thine heart,
since thou do all these things, even the works of an imperious whorish woman.

How dangerous therefore is it to adventure upon the beginning of sin, since
having begun, it is so hard to relinquish it. Which Solomon certainly intended,
when he said, In the transgression of an evil man, there is a snare, Prove.
29.6. whereby he is wound in the more fast, the longer he acts his
transgression. The Prophet Jeremy speaks more plainly; Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also do good, which are
accustomed to do evil.

Therefore let us take Solomon's advice which he gives, Prove. 17.14. In regard
of strife and contention, leave it off before it be meddled with: So may we say
of every sin, leave it off before it be meddled with. For this reason is common
to all sin, which he applies unto strife: That the beginning thereof, is as
when one lets out water: we soon will swell to an inundation of sin; and that
brings with it a flood of vengeance which is the third parallel.

There was a flood prepared in the days of Noah to take all those away who
were eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage.

And there is a like flood of Calamities, a new deluge, an overflowing scourge
prepared in the days of the coming of the Son of Man to take the like
offenders away.

The word in the text is (...), which answers to (...) a word used only to
signify Neah's Flood Genesis 6. verse 7. Psalm 29.10. It is derived either from
(...) to fall, importing the great fall of waters; or from (...) to confound,
and so it notes that universal confusion of all things wrought by the Flood.

Such a like flood there must be, even a flood of fire, is that proper? surely
it is suitable to Saint John's expression who tells us of a burning Lake, and a
Lake of fire, Revel. 19.20. and 20.10 etc. For thus the Lord in both floods,
holds proportion with the sins of both worlds.

The old world was overwhelmed with voluptuousness and sensuality, carnal
sins, sins of the Concupiscible: and the Lord overwhelmed them with a flood of
waters. But the greater sins of the later world, are spiritual, as great pride,
(whereof 2. Esd. 8.50. Hypocrisy, Envy, Ignorance, Bloody zeal, Wrath made
holiness, etc. Therefore the overwhelming scourge must be proportionable unto
these spiritual sins, and sins of the Irascible even fire, war and bloodshed.
For behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots, like a
whirlewind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire;
For by fire and by his Sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, Esaias 66.15.16.

But whence came either Flood? came it by chance? Or came it by an unavoidable
fate and destiny?

Surely, Judgment follows transgression; the deluge of water supposes a
deluge of sin, the overflowing scourge supposes the overflowing and abundance
of iniquity.

And therefore Saint Peter tells us, that the Lord brought in the flood upon
the world of the ungodly, 2. Pet. 2.5. It was first an ungodly world, and then
the Lord brought in the flood upon it: whence it is called in the Dutch a
Sin-flood.

Again, the Lord is (...), Genesis 17.1, he has sufficiency of that wherewith he
punishes; he has a treasury of wrath, 1. King. 8.46. and he brings out of his
treasury (...), Esaias 13.6. The fire and the sword, the famine, and the
Pestilence.

Whence appears the vain assertion of Berosus, and Annius, that God had from
the beginning determined a flood, which might be, and was foreseen in the
stars and constellation of heaven. But that rule of Divines is most true;
Praescientia Dei non imponit rebus necessitatem, though God foresaw both the
sin and the sin-flood, yet his foresight imposed no necessity upon either. And
therefore Calvin says well, that the Chaldeans could not foresee the
destruction which was imminent; because it proceeded not from the natural
course of the stars, but from the secret counsel of God, to bring the flood
upon the world of the ungodly.

And how did, or shall it take them away?

And how knew they not?

1. The word (...) answers to the Hebrew (...), Genesis 7.23. which we turn to
destroy; but the word properly signifies to blot out, according to the analogy
of waters, the flood may be said to sweep them away as filth, Proverbs 28.3. as
a sweeping rain, as in the time of the overflowing scourge, the hail sweeps
away the refuge of lies, and vain confidences of ungodly men, Esa. 18.17.

2. But knew they not? How was that possible? for they had eight preachers of
righteousness, whereof Enoch was the first, who began to preach in the Name of
the Lord.

Those of the old world knew not until the flood came and took them away; And
these of this later world so doing will not know, until the coming of the Son
of man, like a flood of calamities, and judgments which will take them all
away: Genesis 4.26. for so the words should be rendered.

And Saint Peter calls Noah (...), 2. Pet. 2.5. And these had warned them
successively from the flood, that from Enoch, above 1000. years, that from
Noah's first preaching 120. years, and have they not known? The word (...)
answers to (...), which signifies not only to know, but to consider and heed
what we know; and therefore the LXX. turn it often by (...), Thus Eccles. 5.2.
They consider not, that they do evil, Hebr. 3.10. They have not known my
ways, so Paul may be understood, Act. 23.5. I knew not, Brethren, that he was
the high Priest, i* e. he considered not.

Thus Saint Luke 21.31. opposes the carnal security, that should be at the
coming of the Son of man, with this word, (...), Take heed that your heart be
not overcharged, etc. To know therefore is to take heed, which these did not,
and therefore knew not: And so omnis peccans est ignorans.

The reason why the men of that age knew not, that is, considered not until
the flood came, and why the men of this age likewise heed not the coming of the
Son of man.

1. The men of the former and later world are insensible and hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin, Hebr. 3.

2. Being so hardened they sit down in the scorners chair and deride and mock
those who warn them of the judgment to come: impius cum pervenerit in profundum
peccatorum, deridet, Aquin.

As for those of the old world, there are ancient monuments extant of their
derision and mocking the holy men of God who exhorted them, and were examples
of repentance unto the old world. Sem and Seth were in great honor among men,
Ecclus 49.6. whom the men of that age endeavored by all means to dishonor.
As for Seth, he opposed Cain in stead of Abel whom Cain slew, he opposed the
way of Cain who for his eminency of life was called (...) and accounted a kind
of God among good men, says Theodoret, deificatus homo, a deified man; and for
that reason, he was opposed by the ungodly of his generation, who made his name
a by word to posterity; and so they dealt with Sem, who opposed the growing of
Idolatry. And therefore the wicked of that age abused him also; so Plutarch
tells us, that (...). They called Typhon, i. e. whatsoever is destructive and
hurtful) Seth or Smu, inserting Sems name, those two great assertors of Divine
worship and adversaries of idolatry; Seth the Father of Enoch the first
preacher of righteousness, and Sem the Son of Noah the eighth and last
preacher of righteousness immediately before the flood.

These were the mockers in the days before the flood,

And the Apostle tells us, that there shall be mockers and scoffers in these
last days, the days before the overflowing scourge, 2. Pet. 3.34. Jud. verse
18. according to the Psalm. 42.3. and Psalm, 89.51. Who slander the footsteps
of Gods Anointed, and say where is the promise of his coming?

The Prophet Esaias having foretold the overflowing scourge, he forewarns the men
of this generation, Isaiah 28.22. Be not mockers, lest your bonds be made
strong.

3: A third reason may therefore be from the equity of the great Judge to bring
the flood upon the hardened and deriding world; according to which equity, he
proceeds, 2. Chron. 36.18. They mocked the Messengers of God and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, till there was no remedy; therefore he brought upon them the King of
the Chaldeans.

Whence we may observe, that if the exorbitances and excesses of natural
desires, eating and drinking, etc. such as God himself has implanted in our
natures be thus destructive, and bring the flood upon the world of the ungodly;
how much more shall these excesses, and exorbitances become destructive which
the devil himself has sown in our nature. If the good seed be thus abused as
to prove degenerate, which the good man sowed in the field, what shall become
of tares, which the wicked man sowed in it? such are envy, and pride, and
coveteousnesse, and wrath, and false righteousness. Yet said the perverse
judgment of the foolish world: every one can point at a great Eater, and
reeling drunkard, and a poor letcher and indeed they are most infamous and
shameful names; But the envious person gets credit by the worst of sins, being
accounted zealous. Carnalia peccata plus habent infamiae, Spiritualia plus de
natura peccati; says Greg.

In the days before the flood, they did eat, and drink, they married and were
given in marriage, and the flood came, etc. But in these days before the
overflowing scourge, which shall now come upon the world: there are, who spend
their precious time in surfeting, and drunkenness, in chambering and
wantonness, in gaming, in carding, in dicing, Caute sine Cast, which by woeful
experience many decaying, and ruined families can witness.

They of the old world were chaste, and honest in comparison of many in this
present lascivious generation, they made use of the means ordained by God, and
Nature for the satisfaction of their natural desires; They married wives and
gave in marriage.

But as for many of this later world they bound not their unruly appetites with
the lawful use of marriage, but break all bonds of God and nature, and glory as
if they had attained unto some notable degree of perfection in the flesh; all
women are to them alike, they are of a new world, who neither marry nor are
given in marriage, but are as the Angels, videl. such Angels as kept not
their first estate or principality: such as walk according to their ungodly
lusts. And therefore St. Luke in the parallel place to my text, Chap 17.26.
relates our Lords words thus, They did eat and drink, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded; there is no mention made of marrying and giving in
marriage. They of Sodom prefigured the men of this unclean generation; and must
not we expect a like judgment unto that of Sodom? If not a greater, when
according to the Prophet, they justified the old world in all the abominations
which they have done, Ezech. 16.51.

These are most deceitful lusts, and would persuade us to security in them; but
let no man deceive you with vain words, For because of these things comes the
wrath of God, Ephesians 5.

Beloved in the Lord! The men of the old world had a time of repentance and
humiliation granted them, before the flood, even 120. years; but the men of
that age knew not their time, and neglected the eighth Preacher of
righteousness, and while they were eating and drinking, etc. while they were
yet in their carnal security, they knew not, and the flood came, and took them
all away.

And has not the like time of humiliation and repentance been granted unto us
before the overflowing scourge? has not the Angel flying in the middst of
heaven, preached unto them that dwell on the earth, saying with a loud voice;
Fear God and give glory unto him: for the hour of his judgment is come, Revel.
14.6, 7. And shall we not know our time, our precious time?

Shall we abuse it as they did, or worse then they did? shall it be said of us,
as it was of the stupid Jews, Jer. 8.7. The stork in the heaven knows her
appointed times, and the turtle and the crane, and the swallow observe the time
of their coming; but my people know not the Judgment of the Lord. Shall we not
know as they knew not, and shall the overflowing scourge surprise us in our
like carnal security?

Beloved! If we were well assured, that the coming of the Lord were near at
hand, we would be awakenned out of our lethargy, our drowzy security, and look
about us, that it might not take us at unawares.

Now Beloved! The coming of the Lord to Judgment is near, even at the doors.
Remember, I beseech ye the paralells which ye have heard. Our Lord tells us,
that the coming of the Son of man to Judgment, should be like the Lords coming
in the days of Noah. The like riotous eating and drinking, marrying and giving
in marriage.

The like, yea the same wicked men, For Enoch the seventh from Adam (...) he
prophesied to the same men.

Therefore the wisdom of God has so expressed the sins of the old world as
past and gone, that under the same form of words is foretold the sin of this
later world, Genesis 6.11, 12, (...), The earth was corrupt before God, and the
earth was filled with violence. Which words signify as well, The earth shall
be corrupt and the earth shall be filled with violence. And who sees not that
the words are as true of this later, as of the former world? The same decree of
the Judgment reaches as well to this later as to the former world, 2 Pet. 3.7.

Yea the signs preceding our Lords coming have all, or most of them had their
accomplishments. Impostors and deceivers coming in the name of Christ, have
deceived many Wars for religion with their effects. Persecutions of the
Saints. The abounding of iniquity, and decay of love. The preaching of the
Gospel in all the world. The discovery of the abomination of desolation. A woe
to them that preach the Gospel. The darkning of the Luminaries and the old
Heavens. The sign of the Son of man in heaven even Christ on the Cross with
his wounds in his hands and his feet, and the Angels round about him, has
appeared in Frankenland in Germany about two years since, in the view of
thousands, three hours together at midday, if there be any belief to be given
to the constant testimony of many witnesses.


Besides all these comparisons between the days of Noah, and the coming of the
Son of man, I shall add one more touching the time. I conceive it worth your
observation; That just so many years were from the first Adam to the flood of
Noah, 1656. and somewhat more as will be run out, from the second Adam, or
Christ in the flesh, the very next year, 1656. toward the end.

It is true; The Lord has put the times and seasons in his own power, Nor dare
I to determine the set time. Nor has the Lord himself revealed it.

But many believe that the next year will bring with it a notable change in the
world, yea; yea, many place the end of the world in that year; And find the
same Chronographical number of years, 1657. in these words MVnDI ConfLagratIo.
See Alsted in his Chronology. Surely these Synchronismes and periods of time
are not to be neglected. And I believe there is no wise man, who observes
Tempora, and mores, the times and manners of men of this present generation,
but he will confess that we are ripe, through ripe for Judgment, and all things
at home and abroad look fatally that way. What think we of the many great fires
in foreign parts, and in this nation, and in this Mother-city? what else bode
they, but the beginnings of Judgment, that must be managed by fire? All other
parts of this nation have suffered their share of the vvarres. Look into the
Word of God, and see whether the Metropolis or mother-City be not always
threatened; as of Moab; Rabbath of the Ammonites, and many the like, yea
Jerusalem in Judaea, according to Jer. 6.6. It Is said, this City is to be
visited, and for the reason following etc.

Here the fire was first kindled which has burnt in all the neighbor nations.
Hither all the spoils have bin brought. Many of our next neighbor nations
have bin sent into foreign Countries. Are there no nations left to send us
also? O utinam ego in hisce falsus Chalchas essem! Would God I were deceived in
all these! The Lord avert this overflowing scourge from us! But Beloved, The
time of grace yet lasts.

Wherefore if we be wife, while we have time, let us do as Noah did; Being
moved with fear, he built an Ark.

And that is,

The fifth and last parallel, There was an Ark for the preservation of Noah and
his house, into which Neah entered. And there was, and is a spiritual Ark of
Regeneration for the prefervation of the spiritual Noah's house, into which he
leads them.

And what is that Ark spiritually but the Church? says St. Austin Expressly,
Nulli nostrum dubium est, Arcam Noe, salva rerum gestarum side, Ecclesiam
fuisse figuratam. This, says he, some might think to be an invention of man,
unless the Apostle himself had averred as much, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. The
longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the Ark was preparing
wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.

1. They were saved in the Ark, figuring the proportion of Christ's dead body.
Diverse of the Ancients have their mystrcall understanding of the Ark; One more
bodily. The dimensions or measures of the Ark have the same proportion with
those of a man's body, lying flat upon the back; whose depth from the back to
the breast, is the tenth part of its length, as 30. is to 300. and the breadth
from side to side is the sixth part of the length, as 50. is to 300. Which is
the proportion of the Ark.

2. Another they have more spiritual. The three stories in the Ark, and regions
in the body answer to the three degrees of Baptism in the name of the Father
Son and the holy Spirit, Matthew. 28. Accordingly St. Peter applies it unto
Baptism, 1 Pet. 3. In reference unto this and representation of it, the bodies
of the dead were wont to be washed, Act. 9.37. Hebrews 10.22.

2: They were saved in the Ark by water, which imports the washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. and therefore St. Peter presently adds, The like
figure hereunto even Baptism does now save us. By which water we are to
understand the word which ordinarily is joined to Baptism, Heb. 6.2. The
doctrine of Baptismes, Ephesians. 5.26. the washing of water by the Word. and
therefore Philo Judeus says, that the saving of Noah and his house by water,
was an image and figure (...) of Regeneration or being born again from the
dead, which the Apostle himself affirms, 1 Pet. 3.21. the same which ye read,
Col. 2.12. buried with him by Baptism etc.

This is called Regeneration, or being born again, or the second birth, because
it has a former birth, a first birth presupposed. But that first birth is not
the natural generation, or birth according to nature, but the new birth, the
first and new creation of which St. James speaks, Jam. 1.17, 18. Of his own
will he begat us that we should be a kind of first fruits etc. Of such a good
will are the obedient children who are not fashioned according to their
former lusts in their ignorance, 1 Pet. 1.14. Such are the new born babes,
cap. 2.2. Romans 7. Gal. 4.19. and 5.17. the Regeneration is yet a further
degree, as being of those who are conformed unto the death of Christ by dying
unto sin, and to his life by conformity unto his Resurrection. Such Regenerated
Ones are they who are born from the dead with Christ, and so become children of
the Resurrection.

But says the poor Soul, if there be no escaping of the flood, no salvation
but in such a spiritual Ark, What shall become of me? Alas! mine iniquities
come about me like water, and the floods of ungodliness make me afraid.
Hearken what the true Noah thy Comforter says unto thee, Let not thy heart be
troubled, Joh. 14.1. Not troubled? Here Is a distinction that is threatened unto
all the earth an overflowing scourge, a consumption determined upon the whole
earth: And how then can I, but I must be troubled? there is indeed a degree of
faith which may consist with fear and doubting. Peter had that little faith,
and was afraid and doubted, Matthew. 14.30, 31. That little says cannot support
to hinder the soul from sinking; Thou believe in God the father, believe also
in Christ, Joh. 14.1. that faith upholds the soul from sinking into despair.
Therefore the Ark, Genesis 7.18. which is said to have gone upon the waters. (...)
according to divine artifice may as well be turned, the Ark shall go upon the
waters: whence Jesus Christ is said to be our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. And therefore
till Christ comes, the children are all their life time subject to bondage and
fear, Hebr. 2.15. This is the true Noah who redeemes us from the curse, that
the blessing may come upon us through Faith, Gal. 3. The blessed God begets
thee again to a lively hope by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ's 1 Pet. 1.3.
Though now for a season thou be in manifold temptations, verse 5. these are as
the waters of Noah Esaias 54.8. But alas, the waters come unto my soul, Psalm.
69.1. The Title of the Psalm is Pro iis qui commutabuntur: (...), for those
who are converted, changed, renewed, begotten again. In behalf of these the
Lord is upon many waters, Psalm 29.3. yea, verse 10. The Lord sits (...) upon
Noah's flood, (so the word is properly used) and steers and guids thy Vessel to
the Haven of life and peace. But when the overflowing scourge overwhelmeth the
world, how shall I escape? Thou know not how; nor did Noah, when he spared
not the old world, but saved Noah; nor did Lot know, when the Lord turned the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes and delivered just Let. The Lord
knows (though we know not) How to deliver the Godly out of temptations, and to
reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.

Beloved! Let me now act the part of a Preacher of Righteousness. Let us all be
exhorted to enter into this Ark of Regeneration. The Jews have a proverbiall
speech; When the Lord opens Din, then let Israel betake themselves unto their
houses. The Lord has now for many years opened Din, even the treasury of his
judgments upon us: But withal he has set the door of the Ark, even the
straight gate of Mortification, open unto us. And the Preachers of
Righteousness, they exhort us daily to enter in. But as when the eight persons
had preached for many years, how few alas! how few were persuaded to enter into
the Ark? We read but of eight souls that were saved. Lord, says the
Disciples, Are there few that shall be saved? Our Lord answers, Strive to enter
in at the strait gate, Luke 13.23.24.

When Noah was entered into the Ark, the floodgates of heaven were opened. It
was then too late to enter; the flood came and took them all away. O let us now
strive to enter in at the strait gate; For the time will come, yea come it will
when many shall strive to enter in, and shall not be able; when once the Master
of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door etc.

O beloved! let us seek the Lord while he may be found, let us call upon him
while he is near, Isa. 55.6, 7. in the great water-floods they shall not come
nigh him, Psalm. 32.6.

But we are professors of the godly party; such as hear the Word, receive the
Sacrament; we are sure of our salvation, though we have our infirmities etc.

Beloved! In Noah's time, and before, Cains posterity were great pretenders to
Religion. Enoch Cains eldest son a man dedicated unto God. His grandchild
Mehujael, Annuntians Deum, a preacher, one who spoke much of God. Another of of
his race Lamech, an humble man. And do we not see, especially now Religion is
in fashion, that many who walk in the way of Cain, and walk after their own
lusts, yet make great profession of religion? They tell the spiritual Noah that
they eat and drink at his table, and he has taught in their streets; yet the
door will be shut even against these, and they shall hear their doom. I know ye
not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. But we are Beloved of God; elected
before the foundation of the world; so that whatsoever our infirmities are, we
are sure of our salvation.

Our Lord will say to such in the Judgment; Thou thoughtest wickedly that I was
even such a One as thy self, but I will reprove thee etc. Psalm 50. And has not
God chosen all his Elect in Christ before the foundation of the world, that
they should be holy and without blame before him in love? Ephesians. 1. These men
consider not that salvation is deliverance from sin, Matthew. 1. And can they be
sure of salvation from sin, while yet they willingly live in their sin? Or do
they think, that God loves his own righteousness, which is himself, or them
better? The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. Little children
let no man deceive you: He that does Righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous: He that commits sin is of the devil, 1 John 3.7. If any man call
his customary sins infirmities (as commonly they do who walk in the way of
Cain) let him know that such infirmities they are, as exclude those who do
them, out of the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.21.

Let us therefore enquire what manner of men they were, who perished in the
flood.

2. What manner of men the most are, who live in this present age before the
overflowing scourge.

3. What wanner of men we ought to be, who may hope to escape the overflowing
scourge.

As to the first query, the answer is in the text, They were eating, and
drinking, marrying etc.

As for the second, the men of this generation are like to those as our Savior
foretold, but far exceeding them in the same and many other sins: such are
unfaithfulness toward God and men, for when the Son of Man comes shall He
find faith on the earth? Luke 18. Abundance of iniquity, want of love to God
and men, Matthew 24.12. But the Apostle foretells what a deluge of iniquity
should flow into these later days even the dreggs of time, 2 Timothy 3.1.5. This
know that in the later days perilous times shall be: for men shall be lovers
of themselves. And who sees not this Prophecy fulfilled?

3. What manner of men ought we to be, who may hope to escape the overflowing
scourge? who may with confidence and comfort expect the coming of the Son of
Man? Saint Paul gives Timothy great charge to keep the Commandment without
spot, until the approaching of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6.15. And Saint
Peter having warned us of the day of the Lord, It shall come as a thief in the
night, 2 Pet. 3.10.11. at the 14. verse, Wherefore beloved, seeing we look for
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, and without
spot, and blameless.

O let us not be Curvae in terras animae, A crooked Generation; Ventri
obedientes, grovelling on the Earth, bowed to the earth and earthly things,
whose belly cleaves to the ground; but let us remember our Lords Exhortation,
Luke 21, 28. minding his Disciples of his coming (...), Look up, and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.

Let us avoid all known sin; Let us remove anger from our heart, and evil, the
concupiscible from thy flesh, Eccles. 11. suspect and fear the danger of
lawful actions.

The Table may be made a snare, Psalm 60.22. When our Lord was an hungered, and
not till then, the tempter came unto him, Matthew 4.2, 3. Eat and drink we, our
loins girt, Gird your loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to to the end,
for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 1.13. For he who has this hope, purifies himself as God is pure, 1 John
3.3.

Believe the threatenings of God as well as the promises. Noah believed not
only the promises of God, but the threatenings also; so that being moved with
fear, he built an Ark. The Ninivites believed God, when Jonah threatened them.

We, that we may be able to do, the grace of God that brings salvation to
all men, has appeared; teaching us to deny ungodlyness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, looking for the
blessed hope of the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ.

FINIS.

