THE TRUMPET IN SION, SOUNDING A General Alarm IN THE NATION. By J. G. G.

Blow the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an Alarm in my holy Mountain: Let all the
Inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh
at hand, Joel 2.1. LONDON, Printed: And are to be sold by Dan. Brown at the
Black-Swan and Bible without Temple Bar. 1700.

TO THE READER,
AMongst great, many, and frequent Dangers, it is a Blessing to have Warning
given, and to take it; for by these means, Evil may be prevented. This World is
like a Wilderness, full of fiery Serpents, and other hurtful things, which on
all Sides, we are compassed about, and can one go upon hot Coals, and his Feet
not be burnt? Which should put us in mind of the Prophet's Question, Who can or
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Which in Hell shall be a Punishment for
Sins committed here, if not pardoned in the way to Salvation. We have Enemies
within and without: Our Heart is false, Corruptions strong, the World wicked,
Temptations common and powerful, the Devil is subtle, and Sin deceitful, which
all to resist, we must Repent, Believe and Pray for converting, confirming and
restraining Grace. This, Reader, is my advice and warning to you: You shall
know more after the perusal of the following Sheets. Remember that without
Repentance, no remission of Sins, and as without Faith it is impossible to
please God, so without Holiness, no Man shall see the Lord.

ERRATA
THey are very few, whereof the First and Fourth are material, which the Reader
may be pleased to Correct with a Pen.

In Page 5. line 8. instead of care not, read take care, Page 11. line 21. read
plaster, for plaistering, Page 56. line 2. friendly for friend, Page 64. last
line as soon for also, Page 79. line 17. for War, read Warrant, Page 104. line
9. for earth read land.

THE TRUMPET IN SION.
CRY aloud, spare not, Isai. 58.1.
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people their Transgressions, and
the house of Jacob their Sins: These are the Words of Eternal and Almighty God
to a great Prophet, who was considerable not so much for his extraordinary
Parts and Royal Extraction (for he was the Son of Amos, Brother to Azariah King
of Judah) as for the Excellency of the signal Visions and Revelations, which
the Lord was pleased to honor him with; and he being dead yet speaks to us.
Seeing all God's Actions are so wise, and so just, we must conceive such an
express and positive Order not to be given without a weighty Cause, for God
never in vain employs his Servants, nor indeed none of his Creatures, which are
all his Servants. Ps. 119.91.


The Occasion of this Commission and Command to the Prophet, was at that time a
Complication of Sins among the People, whereof Hypocrisy and want of Charity
were some of the chief: but though by their shows of Piety, as seeking God
daily, drawing near unto him, Fasting, etc. they imposed upon Men, yet could
not do so upon God, who will have his Prophet with diligence and severity to
reprove Sinners for their Sins, though for some, more sharply than for others.
As for me, tho I be no Prophet, nor Son of a Prophet, yet I thank God, Prophets
are no strangers to me, for I daily am conversant with Prophets and with
Apostles too, out of whose Writings, after several worthy Persons, whose heart
God has stirred up to appear against the great and many Sins of the Times, as
it is every one's Duty in his station to do, I hope I may give in my Evidence:
It Is a great Work that requires many hands, Multorum manibus, grande levatur
onus. Sometimes God makes use of several instruments, inconsiderable in
themselves, in different ways to carry on his works, tho all be tending to the
same end; and although through the perverseness of Men's hearts, the Effect does
not always answer the Design, Ezekiel. 2.5.
yet they shall know, that there has been, if not a Prophet among them, yet an
Admonisher who has given warning. May the Lord be pleased to bless with
success, the weak Endeavors of all that are desirous to promote his honor and
service with the good of Souls, and to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, in a time
when we see the Sins of all Ages, of all Nations and in all kinds, more and
more discovered and practiced among us; Isai 1.6.
From the sole of the Foot unto the head, as the same Prophet complains of,
here the Disease is become Epidemical, and its Fits very frequent, if not
continual.

The house of Israel wanted being told of their Sins, so does England, tho told
often, but who can tell the number, diversity, and frequency of them? However,
I by the grace of God, shall endeavor to run over the most palpable and
conspicuous: I shall speak first of the Sins, after of the Punishments,
according to God's threatening, due and inflicted for them. The Sins are of two
general Kinds, some in Doctrine, others in Practice, otherwise called Error and
Vice. Errors in Judgment are usually followed by those in Practice.

As Sin is extended over every Faculty of the Soul and Member of the Body, so
there are Sins seated in the Mind as well as there are in the Heart, as indeed
without a sound Mind, the Heart can hardly be Sound: When the Soul's Eye is
blind, how great must her darkness be? The mistakes of the Understanding, which
commonly from the Latin word are named Error, are by the Greeks called Heresy,
relating to Religious Matters, which is a division in the Church caused by some
erroneous Opinion against the Fundamentals of Religion: And tho all such be bad
enough, yet some there are worse then others, according as they more or less
strike at the Root of Christian Religion: Those Paul calls perverse things, and
Doctrines of Devils, and Peter, Damnable Heresies. Acts (...). 30. 1 Timothy 4.1.
2 Pet. 2.1.
Now there is in England, too many of those as strike at the very Foundation of
our Holy Religion.

First, Here are Atheists, not that properly speaking any can be such, for
there is no Man in the World, but at one time or other, has within himself
convictions that there is a God, for such a degree of Knowledge is naturally in
Men: Hence it is that there was never in the World so Barbarian and Ignorant a
Nation, but owned and worshipped some Divinity or other; for it is only the fool
that says in his heart there is no God, Ps. 14.1.
yet he is not such a Fool as to publish it, for he dares not for shame, but
says it in his Heart, where against the Light of Nature and Testimony of
Conscience, he would smother the sense of a Godhead, because he wishes it. But
the Atheists I mean, are those who speak and live as if there was no God, and
these I may well call worse then David's Fool, for they blunder out Atheistical
words, indirectly hinting that there is no God: Giddily, Impiously, Profanely
and Blasphemously striking if not at the Being, yet at his Attributes, Works,
Word and Providence, express it in their Discourses and Coversation, and some
in their Writings, whereby they seduce and corrupt the Judgment of some,
influence the Weak, and give a great Scandal to those who fear God and have an
awful reverence for his Holy Name, when they happen to hear them in their
Atheistical fits. This is a presumptuous and defying Sin, which among us too
many are guilty of; such teach the way to Hell, and were taught in the School
of Vanninus and of such abominable Wretches; for he who owns not the true God,
and has not the right Notion of and due Reverence for him, is as if he
believed no God. This is so odious and shameful, that Men take it as a great
Injury to be called Atheists, and tho the thing be really in them, yet hate to
be called by its Name; and we have cause to remember, how because the Title of
a Bill was against Atheism, etc. great exceptions were taken against it, as of
a great stain upon the Nation, that we thereby should declare to Foreign
Countries how we have Atheists among us, which is too true, tho some, whom
there is cause to suspect to be such, would not have it said: But I would have
such to answer me one question, Which of these two brings a greater Scandal and
Reproach to England, either not to forbear saying we have Atheists when we
have, and not to punish them, or else to own the Truth, that we have some, but
care not to restrain and punish them? David declares, Ps. 53.1.
that where abominable Iniquity is committed and no regard had to Virtue or
Vice, there is no God.

Next we have the Deists, whose Religion consists only in acknowledging one
God, and think that is enough to be Saved: Who tho they own a God, yet fancy
him to be other then he is, and to act otherwise then he does; they are for a
Natural Religion without and against Revealed, they think all Religions to be
equal, and that any one is at liberty to choose which he pleases, and that he
may be saved in any.

Idolatry is another Sin of the Nation; I mean not only the Spiritual one of
those whose God is their Riches, Honor, Pleasures, and their Belly, but gross
and material Idolatry of those who believe Religious Worship to be due to the
Creature, and actually render it, and in too many Places there are too many
Books that justify it. I thank God, Protestants here are not of that Opinion,
but Papist, are, own and practice it; and that Abomination is in the sight of
all still committed in the Land, which is thereby defiled. Priests, contrary to
Laws, do every where, even out of Foreign Parts swarm as much as ever, Papists
are as free as can be, whilst poor Protestants against the Laws of their
Country, are barbarously Persecuted in Popish Dominions; yet one would think we
might somewhat better their Condition with threatening here Papists with the
like Usage, I shall not say as to Liberties and Lives, (for our Religion, like
theirs, does not bind us to be Sanguinary) but as to Estates and Fortunes; with
our Neglecting to take the same care to Defend our Religion, as they do to
Promote theirs, we seem to intimate that theirs is better than ours; but if we,
whosoever we are, under the Notion that we are not Persecutors, be ashamed of
Christ and of his Cause, in his due time he will be ashamed of and disown us; I
may say, I remember the time when here it was not so. Is it not the height of
impudence for Popish Priests to go (as of late they have done) to dying Men, To
Doctor Connor.
after they by Protestant Ministers had been prepared for Death, to disquiet
them, and not give over till they had made them do what upon such occasions is
usual for Papists; yet this has been winked at, no inquiry made, no
examination taken against those who so notoriously break the Laws of the Land.
The following Paper in French was on a Lord's Day, April 24. School. posted up
over the French Chapel door in St. James's, and other Places, in these words,
Hereby notice is given, that in case any French Refugee, be willing to go back
into France, there to abjure Heresy, he may address himself to the French
Ambassador, and according to his Quality he shall be rewarded: By this
beginning we may see what we must expect from his being here; one would think
such things should not belong to his Instructions or Commission; but what would
they say if our Ambassador in Paris had attempted any thing of the like nature.
Never till of late any Foreign Minister was allowed two Popish Chapels, one
Private for Himself and Family, which no Man will question, and to the great
grief of many, another Public one, for all that have a mind to come to it, with
Four or Five Priests belonging to it; and neither Legislarive nor Executive
Powers would take any notice of it; but God will in his due time, and may be
punish us by such Snakes as we keep in our Bosom.

For these many years together, we have had very near this City a Nunnery
hitherto undisturbed; and one more, near about the same distance, but another
way, is a forming, or rather already formed. Another Mass-Chapel in Town, is as
much frequented by hundreds at this time, as it was when in the hands of
Benedictine Friars. And now Priests to seduce People, as much as ever do
transform themselves into all shapes, and too often do prevail upon Servants,
Prentices, and Masters too: Yet by the Laws it is Treason to entice any one to
be reconciled to the Romish Church, as well as to be reconciled to it. But as
yet it does not appear that any effectual care has been taken to hinder that
great Evil, and to prevent this Venom of Popish Idolatry from spreading
farther, to the Ruin and Destruction of precious Souls, the Scandal of
Religion, and Shame of the Nation.

Blasphemy, unhappily we have here: Socinians who would be called Unitarians,
and others, have in every possible way taken great care to infect the Nation,
and spread among us their Blasphemous Opinions against the most Holy Trinity;
they are so well known by their impious Doctrines and unwarrantable Practices
to propagate them, that there is no need any longer to mention them here in
this Place. It Is pity they have not been taken notice of in the way of
Punishment, as in their presumptuous Offenses against God's Cause. Another sort
of Blasphemers as execrable as can be, do impiously in their Discourses
ridicule the adorable Mystery of the Incarnation, our Savior's Birth of a
Virgin, the Holy Scripture, and the whole Christian Religion, which they call
Priestcraft, a Forgery of Melancholic Brains, and such other abominable
things, as makes one's Hair stand on end.

Libertinism is here promoted by a Sect called Antinomians, who Believe, as if
Men might go to Heaven in the way to Hell, without Faith, Repentance, and new
Obedience; thus no necessity of good Works; and all this because we are said to
be Saved thorough Grace, which is most True, and indeed excludes Good Works
from being the meritorious Cause of Salvation, but not from being means and way
to it; for he who created us without us, will not Save us without us.

Here is also a kind of Free-willers, who directly strike at God's free Grace
in Christ, and I dare say, are as much against it, as Socinians are against his
Person. Sins against God's Justice, his Truth and other Attributes are great,
but I look upon Sin against his Grace, as one of the greatest and less
pardonable.

Here we have a Monstrous Sect called Quakers; Monstrous I call it, for its
Doctrine is a Rhapsody of Errors in several kinds; they have troubled the World
with a number of idle Pamphlets, containing a confused heap of Spiritual and
Natural Ignorance; full of Nonsense, Presumption, wresting and misapplying of
Holy Scripture, and a mere racking of good Sense and sound Reason, which is
able to disgust any Rational Man from Reading them, as I confess, I soon was;
but some who made it their Business to go thoroughly with them, have therein
found several Pernicious, Impious and Blasphemous Tenets, drawn out of their
Writings, which they have Published and set their Names to it. This I may say of
Quakers, that to themselves they assume the Name of Christians, but in my
Opinion, without True grounds: For they own no other Christ, but him whom they
say to be within them, whom they make speak any thing they please; then they
are not Baptized in the Name of Christ, whose Ordinances they Reject and
Despise, for they own no Sacraments, deny Ministry by way of Office in the
Church, which is the House of the God of Order; yet all Order therein, but what
is of their own making, they would destroy, and condemn All that are not of
their own Persuasion, usurping only to themselves the name of God's People;
withal, in their Worldly Concerns they are Cunning and Crafty, Busy and
Active, Thriving and Multiplying, meddling with many Things, with a Stock of
ready Money to supply their Occasions, and carry on their common Interest in
the World: The Government has thought fit to give them a Toleration; I wish
they do not prove a Snake in its Bosom, for they are as dangerous to the State
as to the Church. Certainly it is a great Sin to suffer them to Dishonor God
through their Blasphemies, as it is in them to do it.

Several other Heresies and Errors in Doctrine we have here, whereof some are
more, and others less known, Who can tell them all? But all, tho in different
Degrees, are contrary to Gospel Truths; and tho winked at, are to be reckoned
among the sinful Opinions and Doctrines in the Nation.

But as the Nation is infected with many Sins in the Mind, so it is full of
others seated in the Heart, wherein is the Spring of all sinful Practices, For,
Matthew. 15.19.
says our Blessed Savior, out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, or desires,
murders, adulteries fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. This
leads us to the Second Branch of the great and many Sins of the Nation which
consist in Practice; and upon this Head, with David I may say, tho very short
of what the thing deserves, Rivers of water run down mine eyes, Ps. 119.136.
because they keep not thy Law.

The Sins properly lodged in the Heart, are First Hypocrisy, a damnable Sin in
this World, and accordingly to be rewarded in that which is to come; Matt.
24.51.
for, there is a portion for hypocrites, who indeed can sometimes dissemble
with and impose upon Men, but not so with God: The Hypocrite is Squint-eyed,
and tho he looks one way yet like the Waterman Row's toward a quite contrary.
It is bad upon all accounts; but in Matters of Religion, abominable, like the
Pharisees, as our Savior with many a Woe tells them, they are like unto whited
Sepulchers, Matthew. 23.23, 24, 25. etc.
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones;
and of all uncleanness; an outward show of Piety and Virtue, but in reality are
nothing less: They strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel. and outwardly appear
righteous unto Men, but within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. The Roman
Poet could say of such, Qui Curios simulant sed Bacchanalia vivunt. In some
things of the least moment they would seem to be Pious and Conscientious; they
pay tithe of Mint, of Anise, and Cumin, but omit the weightier matters of the
Law; like the Jews, who upon the preparation day of the passover, John 18.28.
would not go into the Judgment-Hall, lest they should be defiled, but made no
Conscience to shed innocent Blood, and to cry out Crucify, Crucify.

Pride and Vanity is another Sin of the Heart, Mark. 7.22.
or it proceeds out of it; of it I make but one Sin, for a Proud Man is a
Vain Man; Pride is the Sin of the Devil, and of our First Parents, now too
natural with many among us, who look very big upon others, as if they were not
Flesh, Blood and Corruption, as well as other Men, yet they are not made of a
Matter of a different nature of what others are; they came into the World like
other Men, shall Die and be a Pasture for Worms as well as others. Some are
proud of their Riches, which, as Solomon says, Prove. 23.5.
certainly they make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle; others are
proud of their Honors, which in a short time are laid in the Dust; others of
their Pleasures, for they have all that Heart can wish, so had Belshazzar in
the great Feast he made to a Thousand of his Lords, to his Wives and
Concubines; Dan. 5.5.6.
but in the same Hour came forth fingers of a Man's hand, and wrote over
against the Candlestick upon the plaistering of the Wall of the King's Palace.
Then the King's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another,
and in that night was the King slain. v. 30. 1 Cor. 3.1.
Others are proud of their Parts, as Wit, Learning, etc. for knowledge puffs
up; for want of knowing themselves, those parts they profane, and make a wrong
use of: Others are proud of their Strength, Comeliness, Beauty, and such Bodily
Endowments; but to all such, the Apostle says, What have thou that thou did
not receive? Chapter 4.7.
now if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not
received it? Be thankful for what thou have received, and Glory not in thy
self, or in thine own Shame, but glory in the Lord. Chapter 1 31.
Pride is a Sin odious to God and Man, which none was ever the better, Prove.
8.13.
but many have been the worse for. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride
and arrogance, etc. Says the Son of God, under the name of Wisdom; Chapter 11.2.
Chapter 16.18 Chad. 3.
and when Pride comes then comes Shame; it also goes before destruction.
Therefore says the Prophet, The pride of thine heart has deceived thee, not
only to Moab, but also to every one that is proud; for God, Psalm. 31.23.
who is Just, plentifully rewards the proud doer. And we have the testimony
of Two Apostles for this Truth, Jam. 4.6. and 5. 1 Pet. 5.5.
that God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. Certainly that
Sin shall not go unpunished.

Vanity does constantly attend Pride: Proud People are vain, and sometimes
extravagant in their Food, Apparel, Discourses, Expenses, and whole Carriage;
it is a Fume which from the Heart flies up into the Head, and makes those who
therewith are affected, Giddy, Odious, and Ridiculous to a stander by: and as
this is their weak part, so by the discovery they make of it, they lie open to
the Attempts of all that to humor them, will flatter them in their Vanity.
Hezekiah's vain Glory in showing the King of Babylon's Ambassador all his
Treasures, Isai. 39.67.
was most severely punished, and by the grievousness of the punishment (for all
those things were afterward carried to Babylon) it is demonstrated how much God
does Hate and Detest Pride and vain Glory.

From Pride and Vanity flows Idleness, the Mother of Vices, for Oria dant
vitia. A proud and vain Man thinks it to be below himself to do any thing,
scorneth to set his hand about any Work; which he would look upon as a
disparagement unto himself; rather Steal, Rob, Cheat, and Starve than to Work,
being intoxicated with a Chimerical Opinion of Abilities, Merits, Birth, and
Quality: Hence it is, that often we see several to miscarry in what they
undertake, because they take it to be beneath them. Pride and Idleness we find
reckoned among the Sins of abominable Sodom, for, Behold, Ezekiel. 16.49.
this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Pride, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of Idleness was in her, and in her Daughters. Her terrible punishment
should make every one tremble that is partaker of her Sins.

Under this Head of Idleness, some things I may reduce, which being not evil in
themselves, and moderately used, may well enough be allowed, chiefly when there
is with it a Bodily Exercise; but when abused, become evil by accident, as when
there is too much Cost and Time bestowed upon it: Such are Play Houses when too
often frequented; (suppose the Stages were Chaste and Pure, as they are not)
What Excess is it to give so much Money to a French Dancer, to an Italian
Singer, who when they are full of Money, will go home and Laugh at us for it: I
can never forget what once I heard Harlequin (give me leave to name him,) say
upon the Stage, having said something which made all People Laugh; he added,
Who has cause to Laugh, you, who part with your Money, or I who get it? Such
also are so many Lotteries, which afford occasion of much Cheating and
Tricking, whereby greediness of Getting, and something of Infatuation, squeeze
out of Peoples Purses that Money which might be better bestowed upon their
necessary occasions. Such are also Races, upon which some lose sometimes
Hundreds, nay Thousands of Pounds, besides Charges they are at in keeping their
Horses, when they will deny a poor Person One Penny asked for God's and for
Christ's sake, to keep them from Starving; and a Creditor One Shiling, toward
Payment of Debt. Is not this a Sin, and a great One too? I shall but name
Hunting, Hawking, Coursing, etc. which, tho indifferent and tolerable enough in
themselves, yet when too much time, which might better be bestowed, is spent
upon it, become sinful: Actaeon's Fable suggests that when that Sport goes
beyond the bounds of a Bodily Exercise, and of a necessary Recreation, and
becomes a violent and unsatiable Passion, he that is possessed with it, is
sometimes ruined, and eaten up by his Dogs, which Sport leads him to see naked
Nymphs, which hasten his Destruction: And to speak the best of it, I wish Men
to consider how Diana the Hunting Queen was Chaste, but Barren, so produced
nothing,

Covetousness well called Idolatry in Scripture, Coloss. 3.5.
for Riches are the Covetous Man's Idol God, and also the root of all evil; 1 Timothy 6.10.
for the love of Money puts Men and Women upon all wicked Designs and Attempts:
Hence spring Injustice, not to pay Debts, and give every one their own,
Violence, Oppression, Extortion, Cheats; in few words, it is the breach of the
whole Law: The Covetous like the Swine, does much harm, but no body good till
he be dead; he is the wicked and unprofitable Servant, who burieth the Talent,
and with it does others no good nor himself neither, for as he deprives them of
their due, so he denies himself not only Conveniences, but also Necessaries.
We have some who accumulate Sins, for they are both Proud and Covetous:
Sometimes Men will bear with ones Pride if he be liberal; and with his
Covetousness if he be Civil and Meek: But he who is both Proud and Covetous, is
hated of all.

The Vice opposite to that, namely Prodigality, is also seated in the Heart,
which might seem a Paradox, as is to have contrary things lodged in one and the
same Subject, were it not that in the Heart are so many places, several
windings and turnings. This Sin I look upon as a branch or effect of Pride and
Vanity, for out of this Principle, and for the end of being seen and applauded
by Men, some are profuse, and unnecessarily bestow Costs upon their Lusts, etc.
Many more Sins there are in the Heart, as all inordinate Affections which come
under what Philosophers call Appetites, either irascible or concupiscible,
which I shall omit speaking of, that I may come to Sins in practice, which the
Nation is so much Affected Infected, and Overgrown with, to the Dishonor of
God, wrong and prejudice of the Neighbors, Shame and Infamy of the Guilty:
Hinc dolor hinc lachrymae: Where shall I begin, and how shall I make an end?
there being such a number and variety of them.

About Sins in Practice, I shall begin with those which directly are levelled
against GOD; so shall follow with those that also are (but indirectly) against
GOD; for one way or other, every Sin is against GOD, but immediately against
Men, and destructive to Human Society: But as this would prove a long Task, I
shall mention only the most Common and Notorious. And First, We have too many
of those who would ridicule Grace, and, thinking it to be a piece of Wit,
Impiously and Profanely to carp at God's Word and Works, and in their
Discourses, as well as in their Lives, to make a mock at Sin. But who are
those? not the Wise, except it be in their own Conceit; but Fools, for long
ago, by Solomon's Pen, God has proclaimed them for such, when he said Fools
make a mock at Sin; Prove. 14.9
now in Solomon's and David's style, the Fool is the Wicked Man, who at the
latter end, shall appear to be the greatest Fool of all: No jesting with Holy
Things, nor with God, who will not be mocked; and Men who believe otherwise are
much deceived; and if their Conscience tells them not before, shall at last
find they were so.

Sabbath-breaking is one of the Chief and Epidemical Sins of the Nation: Every
one that can read Scripture may know how strict and severe God was against
Sabbath Breakers; by his immediate command they were Numb. 15.32, 35.
stoned to death. The holy Observation of that day, was what he mostly required
of that People, not only now and then, here and there, but he made it the
Fourth Commandment of the first Table of the Law; greatly complained of the
breach thereof, and severely punished it upon Persons, and the whole Nation.
There is the same reason for the Christian Sabbath, in Scripture called the
Rev. 1.10.
Lord's Day; and several breakers thereof, God has in the Christian Church
made Examples of his Judgments. A great one we had in this Nation, of that
Prince, who at several times, having with Stage Plays polluted the Lord's Day,
and by means of a Book of Sports, allowed and encouraged others to do so, was
out of the same Place where he had seen them acted, brought upon the Scaffold,
where he lost his Life. I do not pretend to dive into the secret Causes of
God's Judgments, but I must take notice how the Circumstance of the Place is
very remarkable, and we may be allowed to say how upon that Ground, as well as
upon others, Ps. 76.12.
God is terrible to the Kings of the Earth. This is Matter of Fact: Tho in his
Son's Reign Piety was little regarded, yet then we saw Acts of Parliament for
the better Observation of the Lord's Day, to come out; but now it is thought not
to be worth looking after: in That of 29 Chapter II. 1677.
one of those Acts, the Sale of any Wares, Merchandises, Fruits, Herbs, Goods
or Chattels whatsoever, upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, was
forbidden, upon pain that every Person so offending, shall forfeit the same
Goods so cried, or showed forth, or exposed to sale. Sabbaths were never more
profaned then of late and now: The generality of People make Play and Sport
Days of them, On that day we see Markets set up in many Places, Children
publicly at play; Taverns, Alehouses, Coffee and Chocolate-Houses doors open
and full of People: and those Beasts, which in the 4th Precept God had a regard
to, must not rest upon that day, though upon every other in the Week, they
labor with all imaginable hardness, which is a Cruelty, for Prove. 12.10.
a righteous man regards the life of his beast. Yet these must be for the
Service of many Sabbath Breakers: When the Drunkard is so fuddled that he
without Reeling and Staggering cannot go, he must have a Coach to carry him
home. We have but one true Christian Holy Day, which ought to be employed only
for Holy uses. He who makes no Conscience to break the Lord's Holiday, will
make no Scruple of breaking any of the Ten Commandments; and he who delights to
observe it, will the use Authority to make others observe it too, It Is strange,
yet true, that some who in the Church have been and still are most fond after
the reading of every Commandment, of the fourth as well as of every one else,
to say. Lord have merey upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law, such
as Pocklington, Heylin, and the Highest Churchmen, in their Writings, Sermons,
and Discourses, declared much against the Morality of the Sabbath or
Lord's Day, how then can they pray to God to incline their Heart to keep a Law
which they believe and profess to be abrogated? But if herein one was to
consult with Man's Opinion, besides the Judgment of several Divines, that of
the good Pious and Learned James Usher Primate of Ireland, is with me of
greater weight then the Authority of all Anti-Sabbatharians, and all know how
much in his judgment and practice, he was for the strict observation of the
Lord's Day. One thing more, though by the by, and not to my present purpose, I
shall observe out of the Words, Incline our Hearts to keep this Law, it appears
how the Opinion of those who compiled the Common Prayer Book and appointed
these words to be said after every Precept, was, that Men cannot incline their
Hearts to keep God's Law, but must pray to God to do it, and consequently that
to believe and obey, does not depend upon Man's Will, but upon God's working
upon and inclining it.

There is another crying Sin in the Nation, which has several branches, as
Lying, Swearing, Cursing, and Perjury. We have a sort of People who in this
kind offend in the least Degree, yet thereby contract a Guilt upon themselves;
out of an ill Habit and Custom, upon most or any trivial account, saying, O
Lord, O God, which is to take that Holy Name in vain, and a Breach of the Third
Commandment: But others worse, impiously take the Lord by his Blood, Wounds,
etc. and swear by the Creatures; it is abominable sometimes to hear in the
Streets, Children of Eight and Ten years old and upwards, to Curse and Damn
themselves and others, which ought to be the Care of Parents to prevent; a
horrid Sin; God has given us a Tongue to Bless not to Curse him, nor our
Neighbor, or our selves, yet some, as soon as they are able to speak, rap out
Oaths. A Curse in God's Name never falls without an Effect either against the
Curser or Cursed. That abominable Sin of Perjury, and Swearing falsely in God's
Name is too common. Forswearing, Covenant Breaking and Burning, are so grievous
a Sin, as that in every judgment we undergo, we may therein see a Grain of it,
as the Jews did in theirs, in relation to the Golden Calf.

The Sin of Uncleanness is Loud and Epidemical in its several branches of
Fornication and Adultery; and there is too much cause to name Incest and
Sodomy, for which the Earth affords no sufficient Punishment; therefore, in
Fire and Brimstone, God, as it were, rained down Hell from Heaven upon Sodom
and Gomorrah. Uncleanness is among People of all Conditions, Ages, and Kinds,
now as common, frequent, and public, as between Dogs and Bitches, without Curb
and Restraint put upon it, so that Whoredom is certainly one of the Master Sins
of the Nation: Bawdy-Houses are tolerated, and, even in high Places, want no
Advocates to speak for them; at any time, specially toward the Evening, one
can hardly go up and down the Street but he meets with Inticements and
Temptations: Sometimes an honest Woman, who goes about her necessary business,
can hardly pass safely and undisturbed through the Streets; and some of that
Sex that prostitute themselves, in some times of the Night walk in their
Meeting-places, and wander up and down the Streets, when Bridewell should be
filled with them. But we must leave this filthy Subject, which defiles
Thoughts. Tongue, and Pen, and as well as Swearing and Perjury, have of late in
some (...).
Tracts been set out in their own Colors and only give a Hint of an idle
Vanity of some Men and Women, who in order to please others, to excite Lust,
and satisfy their Corrupt Inclinations, do stand or sit whole Hours before a
Looking-Glass, there to admire themselves, like so many Narcissus's in love
with their Faces. I cannot blame Men or Women for seeing every thing about them
to be well, decently, and cleanly, but far from this necessary Care are the
foppish and vain Attire and mere Trinkets, as Patches, Painting, etc. too much
used by some for ill ends.

Concerning this Head, before I leave it off, I must farther take notice, how
there are too many kinds of Houses subservient to this Sin, as first
Bawdy-Houses, kept up merely for that purpose, or Stews, by Henry VIII. for
ever forbidden in England. It Is a great shame that in a Christian State
Reformed, or pretending, from the abuses of the Romish Church, in Doctrine and
Practices, such Places should be known and suffered: We Protestants say, and
it is very true, that the Pope and those under him in Rome, receive Money for
tolerating such Wickednesses, under the pretense, that it is to avoid a more
horrid Sin, as if God had allowed to choose and exchange Sins, and so dispensed
Men from the strict Observation of his Law: And I am afraid, here we have some
who against their Duty and Oath, take Fees not to disturb those Infamous
Places. Here also are some Places which we may call Game-Houses, where are
played more than one sort of Game, to the Ruin of the Souls of some, Young and
Old, and Lavishing the Estates of others, and this by such Persons, as the Land
should vomit out into their own: Also there are Chocolate-Houses with Private
Rooms, which though frequented by some Persons of Honor and Virtue, yet are
looked upon as meeting Places for Vice, Idleness, Corrupt Discourses, and other
sinful Practices. And we hear, of late are sprung out of Hell, Houses for the
execrable Seed of Sodom and Gomorrah; who could have believed it?

Drunkenness is a great and common Sin, which deprives Men of the use of
Reason, and makes them, I shall not say like unto, but worse then Beasts,
which, do what you can, you are never able to make to drink, if they be not
thirsty: The use of Liquor is to quench one's Thirst, but when it is abused,
through God's Judgment, it causes a contrary Effect, for it inflames and makes
one drier and drier. The Lacedaemonians, to make that Vice odious to their
Children, made their Slaves Drunk, and then exposed them to their sight: And
Lyeurgus being asked, why in his Laws he had appointed no punishment for
Drunkards? said, Drunkenness carries its punishment along with it; the
Head-ake, the Pain in the Stomach, violent Vomiting, Inflammation of the Blood,
with many other Symptoms that attend it, do sufficiently demonstrate its
Malignity: And if a Drunken Man could but well see his dull or wandering Eyes,
the redness or paleness of his Face, his wry Mouth, Crabbed Looks, smell the
Stink of what comes up out of his Stomach, as out of a Dog's, and hear the
Stammerings and Stutterings of his Tongue, perceive his Reeling and
Staggerings, in a word, how much he looks like a stinking and a silly Fool, he
would be ashamed of himself and of his Vice; besides the danger of Breaking his
Neck, or some Limb, when he is Drunk, or doing himself and others some Mischief
when his Drink turns into Fury and Madness, as we daily have a sad Experience
of it, and it is too usual with some; or else being tumbled into a Fever or
some such violent Distemper, or at last being besotted, for continual Drinking
drowns what good natural Parts a Man may happen to have either by Nature or
acquired by Labor and Industry. Prove. 23.29, 30, 31, 32.
Who has woe? Who has sorrow? says the Wise man, Who has contention? who
has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes: He
answers, They that tarry long at the Wine; They that go to seek mixed wine. His
advice follows, Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it gives
its color in the cup, when it moves it self aright; ar the last it biteth
like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. These are the Effects of
Drunkenness, yet some are so infatuated as to delight in fuddling themselves
and others: Against such the Prophet pronounces a Hab. 2.15.
Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put his bottle to him,
and make him drunken also. There must be a Venom in the Fruit, when abused,
which we may perceive in the Tree that produces it, which is good for nothing
else but to be burnt, for God says so by the Prophet. Ezekiel. 15.2, 3, 4.
Son of man, what is the Vine tree more then any tree? Shall wood be taken
thereof to do any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel
thereon. Behold it is cast into the fire for fuel, the fire devoureth both the
ends of it, and the middle of it is burnt: is it meet for any work? No; and
Experience shows, it is of no use, only for the fire. Now Drunkenness is a
Mother-sin, for it causes many others, and indeed can produce any other, as
Noah and Lot can witness. We read of one who when he was Sober, being asked
which of these three things he would choose, either to be Drunken, to Lie with
his Mother, or to Kill his Father; he rejected the two last as unnatural and
abominable, and made choice of the first; but once he being Drunk, laid with
his Mother when she was asleep, and killed his Father upbraiding him for it.
Is. 28.1.
Woe to the drunkards of Ephraim, says the Prophet, and others too, as well as
to them. This Excess of some, and abuse of the Creature, which God made to be
used with Sobriety and Thanksgiving, makes it Romans 8.21, 22.
groan and travail in pain till it be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
which in their way Drunkards keep it under.

These are the most beastly and grossest Sins in the Land; but there are of
another kind more subtle and refined, which stick to the Soul more than to the
Body. We read how in our Savior's days, the Bodies of many were possessed of
the Devil, but now when he has a greater Experience, he is, to Man's greater
harm, gone farther, and possesses the Souls as much as ever he did the Bodies:
Too many have Learned under that cunning and dangerous Master, and are become
great Proficients in his Art, and as Scripture calls it his 2 Cor. 2.11.
Devices and his Rev. 2.24.
Depths. Some of these I shall give a hint of.

Certainly Injustice is one of the loudest and most crying Sins in the Nation,
the Evil and Wickedness whereof we may unquestionably know, by its being
directly opposed to one of God's Essential Attributes, for God is essentially
Righteous and Just: And according to our power and measure we ought to
endeavor to be such, for as we must be Holy because God is Holy, so we must be
Just because he is Just; that is, as near as we can we ought to conform to God.
Nothing in Scripture is more often and earnestly commanded and commended than
to be Just, as nothing more strictly forbidden then Injustice, especially to
those whom God has appointed to administer it. There are three sorts of
Justice, the Distributive, Commutative, and Legal. The first consists in the
distribution of Rewards and Pains, and has respect to the Dignity of Persons,
according to the Geometrical Proportion: It composes the whole with the part;
that is the common Goods of the Republic, bestowing them upon those who
deserve it best. The second allows every Man his own, the Workman his Hire, the
Servant his Wages, Soldiers their Pay: and it depends much upon agreements;
thus a Nobleman is to pay the price of a Horse as well as an ordinary Man, and
it is according to the Numerical Proportion: It also does compose one part with
another, making one Citizen equal with another. The third is, that Justice
which is according to Right and Law; it does compose and fit the Part for the
whole, making every particular Man contribute to the Common Good, and Private
Interests, subservient to the Public and Great one.

Now it is too true that in all these, there are wants and abuses, and I leave
it for those who are concerned, to examine themselves about it. As to the
first, There should be Rewards and Punishments adequate to the Good and Evil
done by Men; and I wish all Princes would but consider some of the last words
of a great and good King, David I mean, who said with a great Emphasis, 2 Samuel
23.3.
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Reward and Punish well, and God
will be pleased, and you well served, but to let some who deserved well to Want
and Starve, whilst others that were very unworthy Men, receive abundantly to
supply their Lust, this I say is a great breach of Distributive Justice. As to
the Commutative, how many and great Abuses about it there is in this our World:
Some have forgotten, or mind not what our Blessed Savior said in his Sermon
upon the Mount, Matthew. 7.12.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even
so to them: And the more to persuade them to it, he adds, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. If when Men wrong others, they would but say to themselves,
Would thou be content to be so used? Their Conscience would fly into their
Faces, Why then will not they give every one their own? Several in the Kingdom,
against Justice, Honor, and all Rules of Honesty, make no Conscience to take
other Men's Goods, and not to pay for them, tho they have plentiful Estates,
yet will not pay one Sixpence of Debts; rather bestow it upon their own Lust,
Whoring, Gaming, Drinking, etc. to the Starving and Undoing of many Persons,
and whole Families, yet think themselves Privileged to do so. Do such People
think there is no God in Heaven to hear Jam. 5.4.
the cry of the hire of the Laborers which have reaped down their Fields. Of
those who sold them their Wares and Goods, but cannot get one Farthing from
them that always are ready to Buy, but never care to Pay; Certainly says the
Apostle, such Genesis 18.21.
cries are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. God hears the Cries
of the sins of the wicked, to punish them for it; thus Genesis 18.21.
the cry of those of Sodom went up to God. He also hears the Exodus 2.24.
groaning and cry of the Afflicted and oppressed, as he did that of his People
in Egypt. For says the Lord to Moses Chapter 3.9.
The cry of the children of Israel is come unto me; thus David's Psalm. 18.6.
cry came before him, even into his ears: for indeed, 1 (h) Psalm. 34.15.
the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry, to avenge and deliver them. The Wicked and Oppressor is but a fool for his
pains, to Psalm. 10.13.14.
say in his heart, thou will not require it, for thou have seen it, says the
Psalmist, for thou beholdest mischief and spite to requite it with thy hand,
the poor commits himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the
fatherless. The helpless Man upon Earth has a God in Heaven to go to.

There are high degrees of this sort of Injustice, called Oppression and
Extortion. Oppression is a vexation and tormenting a weaker or inferior Person
by Violence and Authority; this is the sin of Superior Powers and Rulers: thus
Tyrants oppress God's People, laying so heavy burdens of several sorts upon
them, as they are not able to bear, but are thereby pressed down, and must ly
under; in this God is highly concerned, it being an abominable Abuse of that
Power and Authority which he has committed to some over others, this, in
David's words is Psalm. 94.20.
To frame mischief by a Law. Now this odious Sin God has taken special care to
deterr Men from, Lavit. 25.14, 17
Ye shall not oppress one another. The Quality of the Oppressed is an
aggravation to the Sin, as to oppress the Afflicted, Prove. 22.22.
Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the
gate: which instead of Comfort is to add Affliction to the Afflicted; so it is
to oppress the Widow and the Fatherless, which by name, as well as the Poor,
the Zach. 7.10.
Lord has forbidden to do; among the several Characters which God gives of a
wicked Man, this is one, Ezekiel. 18.12.
he has oppressed the poor and needy. God, who is a Just Judge, has solemnly
Declared that he will punish several sorts of Sinners; Oppressors are among the
black List Mal. 3.5.
I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
Sorcerers, the Adulterers, false Swearers, and against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless.

Extortion is when Men lay hold upon the Straits and Necessities of others, to
extort and squeeze out of them, more than they ought or can give; and in their
urgent occasions, to relieve them upon hard and unreasonable terms, as to lend
Money upon great and unconscionable Interest, or else refuse to do it, which is
a Cruelty: It Is also a wresting by force, Threatenings or Authority, that which
is not his due, or more than it is; as when an Officer does exact more than he
ought, or than his Fees come to. I am afraid we had of late, and now have too
many of these Unjust and Merciless Men: But let them know, that if the Law, in
a way of punishment takes no notice of their Crime, at one time or other, God,
if they continue and Repent not, will visit them for it.

Another kind of Injustice is called Illegal, without, or against Law, and this
directly regards the Courts of Judicature: I confess it is sad that Law and
Equity do not always agree; and that sometimes a Just and Conscientious Judge,
who, as in the Presence of God, would discharge the Duty of his Place, is not
always free in a Cause to follow the Dictates of his own Judgment, but must be
drawn away with certain Formalities of the Law: tho in his mind he be satisfied
a Witness Swears Falsely, yet he must Judge and Act according to Allegata and
Probata, and not according to his own Judgment; but this being not directly to
our present purpose, I omit, and come to that which is.

The Courts of Judicature are the Seat of Justice, the Oracles and Interpreters
of the Laws, which in the Administration of Justice, are there Righted or
Wronged. Tho I speak not of Persons but of Things, I gladly own that upon the
Benches sit some Persons of known Abilities, and Integrity, yet that Profession
is not free from Flaws; it has its Sins, and grievous ones too: is often a
Remedy which proves worse than the Disease; and for the Truth of this, I appeal
to those therein concerned, that are sincere, and make Conscience of their
ways, therefore Abuses therein should be Reformed, Things Regulated. and those
Springs when Corrupt, Purged: to delay Doing Justice, to Deny. and Pervert it,
makes many times the Law to be a Grievance, and are Three abominable, tho
different Degrees of Injustice. Long and tedious Proceedings at Law are
Vexatious, Chargeable, and make one unnecessarily lose abundance of time; Why
should one put off till to Morrow that which he ought and can do to Day? May
be, God will take away that Power and thy Life too; It Is an unhappy Inclination
of some Men of Business, out of a Humor, Custom, Pride. Neglect, Prejudice of
some other corrupt Motive or Design to prolong time to do things which require
Speed: So that sometimes it would be better to have to deal with a Bashaw, who,
before Men go out of his Sight, will decide a difference; and tho sometimes he
does one wrong, yet on the other side he does a Kindness, with saying Charges,
Time and Trouble: For what mean the Long, Tedious, and Chargeable Suits at Law,
which become endless, to the ruin of Persons and Families, and the Oppression
of the Poor by the Rich, who with strength of Money, tire and disable them from
holding out, the Law, say some, is ever open to all, that is, for the Rich to
Ruin the Poor; thus the Remedy is turned into Poison, which ever keeps things
unsettled and at uncertainties, and affords continual occasions for one to
disquiet and wrong another; and sometimes both are served like the two that
Quarreled about an Oyster they had found, one saying he had seen it first, the
other, that he had taken it up; for he whom they referred the business to, did
open and eat up the Oister, and gave each of them a Shell. The Emperor Instit.
l. 4. Tit. 16. de Paena temere litigantium.
Justinian appointed punishment against those who went to Law without a just
Cause.

To Deny Justice when due and sued for, is another degree of Injustice: We know
a competent time to Examine and Inquire into the Matter, must be allowed; but
after that, one may well expect to see it done: I cannot believe any Man in
that station can so far forget himself, as positively to say, I will not do you
Justice, but not to do it is by a side-Wind in effect the same: Besides the
unnecessary Trouble a Plaintiff's put to, and made to lose his other Occasions;
bis dat qui cito dat is with me a good Rule; soon to do Justice or a Kindness
lays a double Obligation. The Judge spoken of in the Parable, did not tell the
Widow, You shall have no Justice from me, only Luke 18.4.
he would not for a while; at last he did, nor for Justice sake, but out of a
Selfish Motive, that is to be no longer troubled with her Importunities, and in
the place, for this reason, our Savior calls him v. 6.
The unjust Judge. After he had passed this Sentence upon himself, That be
feared not God, nor regarded Man.

But to pervert Justice is the highest Degree of Injustice, as is to Condemn
the Just, and Justify the Wicked, which Prove. 17.15.
Both are abomination to the Lord. Or to give one that which belongs to
another; this happens when out of the corruption of the Heart, Judges,
through Bribery, Favor, or other perverse Motives, suffer themselves to be
biased: when once any one has been noted for it, he ought for ever to be
branded with Infamy, as being a Scandal to the Law, and a Shame to the Bench;
the Injustices of Subordinate Judges cry loud for Vengeance to God the Supreme
Judge of all: Would to God there was not so much cause as there is to Complain
of it; no Court, either Ecclesiastical, Politic or Civil, is free from Abuses
and Sins, in relation to this last, I must give a hint of another Abuse, which
is, When Lawyers undertake for Money to Patronize any Cause whatsoever, tho in
their Judgment they be convinced it is bad: Indeed in dubious Causes, for a Fee
they may make the best they can of it, but to encourage Clients in a wrong way,
with telling they are in the Right, is certainly a Sin; for it is to betray the
Truth, to engage them in an Ill Cause, put them to unnecessary Charges, and
Trouble, and make them run the hazard of being Cast, and Losers at the end.

But a great piece of Injustice very common, and Hurtful is among Tradesmen,
who make a great part of the Nation: I do not say every one for some make
Conscience of their ways, but too many, when you come into their Shop, then out
with their Lies; it is, say they, the best in the kind, cost so much, and the
like, to wheedle one to Buy, which the Apostle has forewarned of and
forbidden, when he says, (Ephesians. 4.25.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man truth with his neighbor. But
the worst is, that in such Shops and Houses are kept False Weights, and False
Measures, contrary to what God so often, and so strictly Commanded his People:
Lev. 19.36.
Just Balances, Just Weights, a Just Ephah, and a Just Hin shall ye have.
Elsewhere repeated, Deuteronomy. 25.15.
But tbou shall have a Perfect and Just weight; Prove. 11.1.
a Perfect and Just Measure shall thou have. Chapter 20.23.
The contrary God abhors; For a false balance is abomination to the Lord,
but a just weight is his delight. Again, Diverse weights are an abomination unto
the Lord, and a false balance is not good. Some have different Weights, one to
Buy, another to Sell by. As to Measures, would to God there was less cause than
we have to complain of it. I shall give an Instance which is obvious; and tho
in some respect, the Thing be not of great Moment, yet the Sin is not the less;
rather, because it reaches many, chiefly the poor People, it is the greater. In
many Alehouses where an ordinary Man goes for a Quart of Drink, out comes a
False Measure, a Black Pot, or the like, holding less than it should; This for
the Master, but the Drawer to have his share, does not fill it up but gives
Froth instead of Drink; so that one has at least half a Pint wanting of his
measure, and sometimes but a whole Pint instead of a Quart; with some this
Observation will seem mean: But for all that, I would have them to know that it
is a great Sin, and no Sin may be called a mean Sin: And seeing I am upon this
Subject, I farther shall take notice of the Injustice of Brewers, who, for
Instance, under pretense of a Shilling Excize given the Government, because
there is no Assize (which upon these Occasions should ever be to prevent
Abuses) they take, may be. Two for themselves, and so make the Drink small,
raise the Price, and lessen the Measure. The like may be said of Bakers, who
make their Bread Lighter than it should be, or raise the Price of it. As
Butchers do of their Meat. Chandlers of their Candles; so do other sorts of
Tradesmen, even as they please, without any curb put upon them; Thus the
generality are left to the mercy of unreasonable Men: And for they to plead The
Liberty of the Subject, is an aggravation, to pretend to, or desire a Liberty
to do wrong and injury. Here I speak for the poorest sort, who by such dealings
are the greatest Sufferers. One of the chief grounds of Policy in matters of
Government, is to Prevent or Remedy Abuses put upon the People, about necessary
Provisions for Life; nothing more apt to cause Tumults and Insurrections, than
to want Food and Raiment, or Money to buy it: One thing more I shall observe
upon this Head, How in common Dealings, even without distinction of the Quality
of Persons, in their Bargains, according to their several ways, there is
abundance of False Dealing, Tricking, Cheating, and Overreaching; and the
worst is, that when Men have gained their Point, they Laugh at it, and Brag of
it; when the Tradesman Sells his Commodities with False Weights, and False
Measures, and not satisfied with a moderate Gain, at unreasonable Rates; Does
he wonder after, if he be ill paid, or not at all? tho I will neither excuse
nor justify the Buyer; but I say, it is Just with God to Retaliate him; so
others are unjust to him, because he has been so to them. So our trivial
Saving is very True, Honesty is the best Policy.

There are Sins also which attend the Profession of Physicians, as are
sometimes to prolong the Cure of their Patients, especially when they are Rich,
to have many Fees, and the more to squeeze Money out of their Purse; and also
when they begin to recover strength, to prescribe strong Remedies, to weaken
them again. At other times they, without a due regard to the good of the
Patient try Experiments upon them to the hazard of Life: And withal, tho no
sort of Men, more than they, have occasion to observe the finger of God in the
Works of Nature, wherein his Power and Wisdom are so evident; yet none more apt
to attibute to Second Causes, that which is due to the First and Supreme one:
We know God has appointed means to be used, and has tied us to them, which we
ought not to neglect, but Men must not be so unjust as to give them the Praise
and Glory which belongs to God, who prescribed, and whose Blessing made them
effectual, for when God calls for our Life, all Remedies are in vain, Contra
vim mortis non est medicamen in hortis. The recovery of Hezekiah was not so
much to be attributed to the Virtue of the King. 20.7.
Lump of dry Figs, tho the Remedy was very proper for the Disease, which was a
Boil, and the dry Fig a great Drawer, as it was to God's Blessing, who, by the
Prophet Isaiah appointed it. In this same predicament of Profession we include
Apothecaries, who to put off their Old Drugs, which having lost their Virtue,
can indeed stir Humors, but want strength to carry them out, and so are rather
Poison than Physic in the Body, keep the best, and thereby do Patients more
harm than good; they sometimes also lessen the Dose, yet will be paid for the
whole: Besides that, often their Bills are unreasonable and unjust, and so a
Sin in them. Under this Classis, for at the first, in the days of Hippocrates,
Dioscorides, Avicenna, Galenus, etc. One and the same Man professed Physic,
Apothecarie, (if I may so call that Art) and Surgery: I leave for
Surgeons to examine, and leave off Sins attending their Profession.

It Is a saying of Augustine, that Sin, amidst the Disorders it has caused in
the World, has left Man's Goods and Estates in the hands of Lawyers, his Body
in that of Physicians, and his Soul to the Care of Divines: This is a great
Charge indeed, and tho every one be bound to look to his own Soul, yet God has
been pleased to appoint a sort of Men, whose Office is to be Pastors, Teachers,
Overseers, Watchmen, to Warn, Guide, and Direct others in the way to Salvation:
The Care of Souls is a great and difficult Task, and a high Trust, attended
with a world of Lets, Hindrances, and Oppositions, from the Devil, the Flesh,
the World, and from Sin: Therefore without God's especial Grace, which such Men
ought constantly to pray for, are liable to great and many Sins of the highest
Consequence; for sometimes the Eternal Felicity or Misery of Souls, does, as to
means, depend thereupon, and 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things?

The Clergy, or Ministers of the Gospel, which use has made to be the meaning
of the Word, are called 1 Cor. 4. and v. 1.2.
Stewards of the Mysteries of God The Apostle in the same place says,
Moreover, it is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful, and
blameless, for, Tit. 1.7.
A Bishop, under which name is understood every Pastor and Minister, as
Overseer of his Flock, must be blameless as the Steward of God, not self
willed, not soon Angry, not given to wine no striker, not given to filthy
lucre, but a lover of hospitality a lover of good Men, Sober, just, holy,
temperate: The like charge to this is by another Apostle given the Elders,
which is the same Office; 1 Pet. 9.1, 2.3.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as
being lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock; examples of
Pretty, (...)
Charity, Temperance. Sobriety, Humility, and of every other Christian and
Moral Virtues, Learning of Christ, for Matthew. 11.29.
he is meek and lowly in heart, who John 13.15.
has given an example or Humility: After the example of the Sovereign Lord and
Master Ministers ought also to follow that of the Apostles, as Paul gives
himself for one Phil. 3.17.
but be together followers of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have us
for an example. For his Design was 2 These. 3.9.
to make himself an example unto others to follow him. Another Apostle exhorted
those whom he wrote to, in some particulars, Jam. 5.10.
to take the prophets who have spoken in the name of the lord for an example: I
have a great Respect for the high Character of the Ministers of Christ, and of
the Stewards of the Mysteries of God; and I know we have some who, as much as
Human frailty can allow, perform the Duty of that Holy Office; but to others
whose number is too great, and who do not walk worthy of Christ, what Paul upon
another account says, upon this I say, 1 Cor. 7.28.
I spare you; for the Offices sake, I spare the Persons unworthy of it, leaving
them to examine themselves by the Rules and Examples I mentioned a little
before, Whether they have not prevaricated, but taken due care of Souls, fed
them with the sincere Milk of the Word, given good Counsel and good Examples,
or a Scandal that made the weak of the Flock to stumble, and the enemies of God
to Blaspheme? I know, no perfection can be attained to, in this world, nothing
without spots and stains, Deuteronomy 32.5.
but I doubt their spot is not the spot of God's children the corruption of the
best things is the worst of all; and where more of Christ's Image in Holiness,
Purity, and of every Christian Grace is required, the more conspicuous, and
odious are Sins and Things contrary to it. 2 Cor. 12.20.
I fear, (to speak somewhat like in Paul's words) Lest there be among them
debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings swellings,
tumults, and that many have not repented of the uncleanness, Drunkenness and
other sins, which they have committed.

One fault more I shall but name, which some of the best are sometimes guilty
of, and that is In Preaching or Praying, to be inconsiderate (when in the
Pulpit) in their Expressions, for they should use none but such as become the
Majesty of the Great God, whose Ambassadors they are, and whose Holy Word they
Preach, which ought to be done with an awful Reverence, and in a serious and
grave manner; Graciously God allows them to be free in Preaching and Prayer,
but not to be Saucy or Careless with him. There is besides a worse and greater
Fault, and of very ill consequence, which out of Covetousness they often
commit, for to have Money, they in Privileged places, as called, Favor
Clandestine Marriages, and without examining about the Qualification of
Persons, Consent of Parents, other Abuses or Inconveniences, which to prevent
they should be better informed and satisfied about, yet they Declare the
Parties to be Husband and Wife.

One of the greatest Causes of Miscarriages of Clergymen, is the Ignorance and
Inconsiderateness of Parents, who Devote their Sons to the Ministry, without
inquiring whether they be well Inclined, Fit, and have the necessary
Qualifications and Dispositions for that Holy Office, which they look upon as a
Trade, and to get a livelihood, whereby is caused a great Profanation of God's
Service? In consequence of this, a young Man does not examine himself to know,
whether he has a Call to, and be Gifted for it; but when once he is engaged
in it, does indeed make a Trade of is, not so much minding the Duty, as the
Profit of the place, and is striving from a Good to get into a Better Benefice;
not to do good to the Souls of his Flock, but to have larger Profits, and more
Income: Hence it is that sometimes I have been ashamed, and then moved with
some Indignation, instead of good Pious and Profitable Discourse, when Three or
Four Parsons are got together, to hear them talk after the rate of Farmers at
Market, how such a Benefice is worth so much, such another more; one has
gotten a good one, and another has a prospect of a better: For my part I could
wish all Merchants and Changers of Money and Benefices, were driven out of
God's House, their Tables overthrown, and such unsavory Discourses laid aside,
till there be a necessary occasion, for they smell too much of Simony: Would to
God there was no more than the Smell, but there is too much of the Body of it.
And now I am upon this Point, I cannot forbear taking notice of a commendable
Care by a neighbor Nation, lately taken to revent Simony; by By the States of
Holland and West Fr. Dated Hague, April 18 School.
a Proclamation, which tho it does not concern us, yet the thing it is about,
does, and it is no harm nor disparagement to learn good from others: Therefore
out of it I shall take notice only of this, That-all, Candidates for the
Ministry in the Church, after the preparatory Examination is over, when they
are called to any Benefice to take care of Souls, ought upon Oath to Declare,
that they have neither promised nor given any Gifts, nor caused to be given;
nor directly or indirectly promised to any person for their being called; and
know not that any has done it in their behalf: The Controvenors thereof to
lose their places, and to pay Forfeiture amounting to four times as much as in
Gift: Besides the usual Penalty inflicted for Perjury. This may work upon any
that makes Conscience of an Oath: But here the abuse of Patronage is very
great; the Presentation, tho to take away the appearance of Simony, some
unworthy Tricks and Prerences are made use of, is sometimes actually bargained
for and bought; thus a Minister is intruded upon a Congregation who dislike
him, which is as bad as to force a Husband upon a Woman whether she will or not.

One thing more relating to the Clergy I shall observe, how to the grief of
sound and Orthodox Men, a due and necessary Care has by some not been taken to
curb and restrain the damnable Heresies of Socinianism, which of late have been
and still are too much abroad: I know, a late worthy Prelate, and others to
their immortal Praise, have, as it becomes them, bestirred themselves for this
Cause; but in others there has been a great Lukewarmness; I say not to Write,
but to make use of the Authority which the Laws give them against such things
Besides others, in the Anno 29. Caroli 2d. in 1677.
Act for taking away the Writ De haeretico comburendo, it is provided that
nothing in that Act shall extend or be construed to take away or abridge the
Jurisdiction of Pretestant Archbishops or Bishops, or any other Judges of
Ecclesiastical Courts, in Cases of Atheism, Blasphemy or Heresy, and other
damnable Doctrine and Opinions, so that still they may prosecute the Of
fenders. This is still in Force and Unrepealed, but certainly it has not been
made use of as it might and ought to have been. I am afraid that those who in
things of that nature have been so remiss, would, if they had by the late Act,
been allowed, have been more severe about Formalities and Ceremonial things;
for tho Thanks be to God, Persecution about indifferent things be ceased; yet
in many remains the persecuting Spirit, and it is often found that those who
Matthew. 23.24.
Swallow a Camel will strain at a Gnat.

It is a great Mercy of God when he is pleased to raise up and send those who
give Men warning of the Danger, and of their Duty: Such are the forerunners of
a Blessing, as the Lord mentions it by a Prophet, Isai. 62.6.
I have set watchmen over thy walls O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their
peace day nor night. These are the faithful Servants which never grow remiss or
weary, but are continually doing their Work, standing upon their Guards, giving
warning where there is any danger or approach of an Enemy; and how great must
the Guilt be of those, who when the Enemy is at the Gate, and the Isaia 56.10.
Wolves amidst the Flock, are as unconcerned as Dumb dogs and Idol Shepherds:
then in such a case, even those who are not Christ's Ministers by way of
Office, ought to speak out; for which, out of that same place of the Prophet,
they have God's Warrant, ye that make mention of the name of the Lord, keep not
silence. When the Watchman does not give warning, then any Member of the
Society may give it for the Public Good. And upon this occasion this is my
Warrant, and the ground of this Acting of mine.

Another kind of Sins which the Nation abounds in, is called Sins of Age, for
every part of Man's life has some Sins, which that Age does particularly
incline him to. And First, The Sins of Youth, as are Rashness chiefly, Lust and
Pleasures Zech. 11.17.
of Sin, which heat of Blood in that Age draws them into: These David could not
forget, but Repented of, Psalm. 25.7.
and Prayed to God to forget and forgive, Remember not the sins of my youth.
Ambition, is one of the proper Sins of Men of ripe years, and Covetousness, of
Old Age; it is very strange to see Men, the nearer they draw to the journey's
end, the more sollicitous to be to make provision for it, and God knows how
many unlawful ways are by Men made use of to attain to their ends: The Nation
is full of them; and tho we cannot tell all the Works of Darkness subservient
to their evil Designs, there is enough of it known to grieve the Heart, of all
that love. God and hate Sin.

There are also Sins of Relations, as are between Husband and Wife, how many
daily miscarriages are there of one of those Relations against the other? Want
of Union, want of Love, full of Wranglings, Divisions, Quarrels hard Usage, and
Abuses, by one put upon the other: And no wonder, for God's Blessing goes not
along with the breakers of so Sacred a Bond as is Marriage, of God's own
immediate Institution, at the very beginning of the World. There has been a
mutual Contract, a reciprocal Agreement, a solemn Promise in the Presence of
God, and in the face of the Church; but is the Husband Faithful to his Wife? Is
the Wife True to the Husband? Far from that, in too many Families, the Husband
to maintain his Whore or to satisfy his Drunkenness, or some other Lusts, does
almost starve his Wife and Children; and too often an ill Wife, to please her
Vanity, and others, more than her Husband, instead of looking to her Family,
and doing her self and others some good, misspends her precious time with
standing idle before her Looking-Glass, Dressing, Patching, like Jezebel,
Painting, and sometimes in gaudy Clothes, Gaming, Gossiping, and the like
pernicious courses, does often Beggar her Husband. Thus Isai. 3.16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
the Daughters of Zion were haughty, and walked with stretched out necks, and
wanton eyes; walking and mincing as they went, and making a tinkling with their
feet: But what does God say to all this? Therefore the Lord will smite with a
scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the lord will discover
their secret parts in that day; the Lord will take away the bravery of their
tinkling ornaments, and their cauls, and their round tire like the Moon, the
chains and the bracelets, and the mufflers, the bonnets, and ornaments of the
legs, and the head bands and the tablets, and the earrings and nose-jewels,
the changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the pimples, and the
crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linen, and the woods, and the vails;
and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there shall be stink,
and instead of a girdle there shall be a rent, and instead of a well set hair,
baldnesi, and instead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth, and burning
instead of beauty. Many of those vanities our present times do not want, which
they seem to have borrowed of them; so we may expect the like punishment. Some
of these vanities continued in the days of the Apostles, therefore they would
Reform it, and give the Sex the example of Holy Women in the Old times, for,
says he, 1 Pet. 3.5, 6.
after this manner in the old time; the hold women also who trusted in God,
adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands; and in the
next verse he names what old time he means, namely of Abraham, for he adds,
even as Sara obeyed Abraham calling him lord, whose daughters ye are as long as
ye do well; and to instruct them well in this matter; he tells first
Negatively, what this vain Apparel must not be, whose adorning let it be not
that outward one v. 3.
of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel.
Then Positively, what kind it ought to be v. 4.
but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible,
even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price. But the more to confirm this Truth, another witness joins with
this. 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
I Will -- that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shame fac'dness
and sobriety, not with broidered hair or gold, or pearl, or costly array; but
(which becomes women professing godliness) with good works. All Women that
have some regard to God's words, will mind this,

Many sins are committed in another kind of relation, between Parents and
Children: often when Men want Children they desire to have some, and when they
have, they look, or ought to look upon it as a Blessing of God, for thereby they
afford Church and State some Members; but do they afterward answer God's end,
in giving them Children? Do they take due care to breed them in the fear of
God, and put them in a capacity to serve their Maker, and their Country?
Sometimes they be very careful to gather an Estate for them, but not to
qualify them how to manage it well. If they have a sine Horse, they look out
for a good and skilful Groom to Break and Order him, but often neglect the
means to improve the Souls of their Children: What they do for them, is
sometimes not with judgment, and often it does them more harm than good: They
ought to give them good Counsel, and good Example, not to fright, but to entice
them to good things, bear with some Humane Frailties, especially those which
attend the Age, but to make use of their Authority to curb and restrain them
from evil things, show themselves enemies to every vicious course, as much as
may be; infuse into them a love for Piety, Virtue and Honor, with a Hatred to
all that is contrary to it; they ought to study their Tempers and Inclinations,
Reform what is Bad, and improve what is Good in them. When this foundation is
laid, and there are in a Family several Children it is Prudence in Parents not
to show themselves too partial for some, more than for others, for such
carriage has caused great mischief in some Families: Yet it is fit Parents
should show their Approbation of those Children that do well, and are
virtuously inclined, and wisely, a dislike of those whose Dispositions are
vicious, Coloss. 3.21.
yet do not provoke them, but elsewhere I have abundantly written upon this
Subject. Farther, it is the Duty of Parents, according to their Abilities and
Quality to provide for Children, and dispose of them in the World. This
Scripture presses upon them 2 Cor. 12.14.
The children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the Parents for the
children: And 1 Timothy 5.8.
If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house; he
has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.

On the other side, How many Undutiful, Disobedient, and Rebellious Children in
the World? Some Psalm. 58.3.
are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born: This is a
most wicked and unnatural frame of Spirit, abhorred by all Nations, and by
God's immediate Command the Offender was Deuteronomy. 21.20.
punished with death. By a natural Right all Men are equal, but only in this
case, there is by nature a subjection of one to another: Children ought to
Love, Honor, Obey, and Help their Parents, But how many now adays, who
instead of being the Joy, Help, Comfort, and Support, are the cause of their
Grief and of Trouble in many ways; and instead of a staff in their Old Age,
especially to support it, do rather serve to knock them down; but God will
judge for such wickednesses.

I shall now insist upon the sins here committed in another relation, between
Masters and Servants: There are so many notorious examples, as any one may see
them; on the Master's side are Hardness, Injustice, contrary to Scripture; not
only Threatenings, which the Apostle exhorts to forbear, but also Blows and
Violence, not considering that Coloss. 4.1.
their master also is in heaven. On the other side, Servants are Unfaithful,
Careless, Vicious, Despisers, when they are Commanded Ephesians. 6.9.
to be obedient to their masters according to the flesh, v. 56. and Coloss.
3.22.
with fear and trembling in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, not with
eye-service, as menpleasers, but in singleness of heart as fearing God. And
they ought to 1 Timothy 6.1.
count their masters worthy of all honor: It Is a common guilt with many
Servants when their Masters find fault with them, to Reply, which they are
expressly forbidden to do (...). 2.9.
not answering again.

Another Relation there is, between Rulers and the People, which has its Sins
great and pernicious: this being a slippery step, one must be nice and wary
upon it; howsoever it being of the highest concernment, must not go untouched:
For suppose we should speak of the Throne, but with a due Respect; yet those
who Sit upon it, are but Men subject to like Infirmities with us. Humane Nature
is in them attended with Frailties and imperfections, for being Kings they
cease not to be Men: then sometimes happen such Conjunctures as Cross, and are
Lets in the way of the Government, which yet I say, not to excuse those who
might do better, but only those that cannot help it: Besides that in all things
we must observe a Governing and Overruling Hand of God. It Is too usual and
common for Authority to mind its own Honor more than the Glory of God; and
also, not John 5.44.
to seek the honor that comes from God only, but that which comes from men:
It was as truly as wisely said, Prove. 20.8.
A king that sits in the throne of judgment, scatters away all evil with
his eyes; that is. ought to do so, and look upon Evil with a design to disperse
it as the Sun does the Clouds: Nay, it is sin him Wisdom to do so, these are the
words of a Wise King, and not mine, v. 26.
A wise king scatters the wicked. and brings the wheel over them: it is not
only his Duty, but his Interest so to do; for Chapter 16.12.
the throne is established by righteousness: which he gives as a reason of what
he said in the beginning of the Verse Chapter 16.12.
It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness; they should mind Christ's
Interest preferably before their own in this world, which in effect is to
promote their own, if it be not contrary to the Lord's, whereby they ought to
begin, Mh 6.33.
Psalm. 103.13.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. After that, they must procure the good of their
People, whom they ought to Love, and upon some occasions, in imitation of God,
to pity, as a father pitieth his children; the good Prince is like the true (q)
2 Kin. 3.26.
Mother of the Child, who had rather lose her Right, than to see him torn and
out in pieces. Tyrants are otherwise minded, divide and impera, is their Motto.
again, Authority must be kept within lawful bounds, for in the world ought to
be no unlimited Power, only God's: even giving just grounds of fear, ought in
prudence to be avoided. Punish and Reward well those who deserve it, or else
the neglect, or misapplying these, can at last pull up by the root any
Government, give those who deserve and want, and not undeserving Men to bestow
it upon their evil and vicious courses: It is a shame that Palaces should be
turned into a Den of Thieves, and be made a Sanctuary for some Brokers, Cheats,
and the like, who there would shelter themselves from the hands of Justice,
whilst other such places as were before, have justly been taken away.
Sollicitors of Pardons for Rapes are abominable, especially when attended with
such circumstances as highly aggravate the Crime: who without a just
Indignation can hear of it? No doubt for Money, or such other Considerations,
they will become Advocates for Murderers. Robbers, Sodomites, and Villains in
any kind, God, who is the Supreme Judge of all, has committed some in High
Places, and these others under them, to execute Justice for him, in the World,
and woe be to them if they neglect it.

The People being a collective Body, which consists of so many different and
contrary Humors it is not easy to specify all their Sins; only generally
speaking of the middle and lower sort, in relation to Governments, when any way
pinched, they are apt to fall in Discontents, Grumblings. Tumults, and the
like, chiefly when they see themselves wronged and oppressed, and finding no
redress from the Government, they will make Reflections against it; for by
reason of their yielding Obedience, paying Taxes, and undergoing other
Burdens, they think they have cause to expect Safety and Protection from Wrong
and Injuries, but most of all when they want necessaries, either by reason of
Scarcity, unreasonableness of the Price, or want of Money to Buy: It Is the
Prudence, and ought to be the Care of the Ruling Power, with removing the
Cause, to prevent their doing themselves Justice; for then they go beyond all
Bounds, and so fall into Violence, Rage, Injustice and Cruelty, which has
given occasion to the saying, a furore populi libera nos. Lord deliver us from
the fury of the People; I know it is too usual with them to repine at any thing
that is amiss, and to complain of the least inconveniency, not considering that
there happen sometimes such conjunctures and accidents, when miscarriages are
unavoidable, not so much through the fault of the Government as the concurrence
and contingency of Causes that have ill influences; as sometimes we see a good
Watch to be out of Order, not by any defect in the Workmanship, but by reason
of the injury of the weather, or other accidents, which arises not out of the
Watch itself, and herein, and when such things happen, I could wish the
Government to pity those whose ignorance of such things make them incapable of
that necessary Observation, and deal with them accordingly. The Head must be
the Seat of Wisdom, but if it suffers Grievances to accumulate, and takes no
care to prevent or redress with punishing the Guilty, and relieving the
Sufferers, then not only the Ignorant but also the Wise part of the Subject
will suspect some ill Design, whereof the bad consequences are obvious; Fear is
a great distemper in the Spirits of Men, which by all means State-Physicians
ought without delay, go about to Cure, else that Distemper is of such a nature,
as can soon make it increase; wherefore when the Patient calls for Remedy, let
it soon be applied, or else there is danger, the Disease shall turn into a
Delirium and Madness, which some Tempers are more apt than others to fall into,
which should make Rulers well to study how to understand the Constitution of
the Government, and the Temper of their People. He who denies another a just
thing, does thereby provoke him to ask for things that are unjust, and if he
has strength along with him, that will make him the more dangerous. Let
Rehoboam be an example for all Rulers, who being influenced by evil Counsel,
denied, and that in a smart way, to ease the People of unjust and heavy
Burdens: It Is true, in that case it is expressly said, 1 King. 12.24.
That thing was from the lord, so it is in every other, for sometimes when
Princes Rebel against God, in his Just Judgment, their Subjects Rebel against
them.

Great Men, though placed in a higher Orb, yet come within the predicament of
Subjects, and have Sins proper to their station; some of them out of Pride,
Ambition, or Covetousness, make use of the Power which God has put into their
hands, to wrong and oppress their Inferiors, and consider not their Authority,
as means they are entrusted with to do much Good and not much Evil; for like
Stewards they shall give God an account thereof; those Abuses of theirs are
taken notice of in Scripture, Jam. 2.6, 7.
Do not rich men oppress you and draw you before the judgment seats? Do not
they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called? If with Power God
had given them Grace and Wisdom, they would consider that their being Seated in
High Places, lays them the more open to the eyes of others, and that their
failings and false steps are more taken notice of, and exposed to the censure
of Men; they must not make Ciphers of themselves, nor be like the fiery Vapors
in the middle Region of the Air, which are taken notice of only by their fall;
Great Men God has placed within their Sphere, to give Light unto those of an
inferior Orb, but too often they are conspicuous only for their bad examples
and the ill Influences they have upon others: They think themselves to be above
all Rules and Quod libet, licet, they may do what they please, which in them is
a great mistake; therefore often, God to make them know themselves, does lay
their Honor and Power in the Dust, as of late years we have seen examples,
even of Crowned Heads. That King of Egypt, who hearing Alexander to be called
the Great, said, He is not Greater except he be better than I, he spoke well.

There are other sins and of a very dangerous consequence, the more because so
Epidemical, and these, committed by Men of several Sorts and Tempers; whereof
some suffer their Judgment to be imposed upon, others out of partiality, or for
some Worldly Considerations, to their own Loss, let their Heart to be Bribed in
the choice they make of some Men whom they entrust with their Concerns, who
neither fear God nor love their Country, Atheists, Epicures, who oppose any
thing that tends to promote Piety and Virtue, or to discourage Vice and
Immorality, who having sold their Soul to the Devil to do his Drudgery; make no
scruple to sell themselves to Men to do all their Will and Pleasure: Therefore
no wonder if Men so ill qualified, do for Self-Interest betray their Trust: He
who is not True to God will be False to Man, tho in different ways; some
above-board, others under, and indirectly; some by openly opposing their
Friend's Interest, others with neglecting, withdrawing, and upon occasion
deserting the Service, These indeed are loud and crying sins, which yet cannot
excuse the Folly of those who Entrusted them with what is near and dear: As no
Prudent Man will Trust a Bloody Man with his Life, So none that is Wise, will
lay his Estate in the hands of one who is needy and greedy: But the Silliness
of some, and Dishonesty of others, do prepare matter for a Judgment to come.

Tho I already have given some hints against Bribery, yet the matter is of too
high a concernment to be lightly passed over; the more, because now more than
ever, like a mighty Stream it has overflown all beyond bounds and measure: One
can neither look nor go any where, but it is to be seen and met with; it has
poisoned our very Springs. Oh! the abominable wickedness. Thus at first, the
Devil, under a specious pretense, blinded the understanding of our first
Parents, corrupted their Heart, and seduced them to Rebellion against, and
Disobedience to their Maker. To go about Bribing Men, is to do the Devils work,
and tempt them to commit evil, to turn Rogues and Knaves, to betray their
Judgment, Conscience, Truth, Trust, Good Name, Friends, Relations, Country,
with whatsoever ought to be near and dear, even God himself as much as ever;
for Money Judas betrayed his Lord and Master, and if they could, would deliver
him too, and to Damn their own Souls. I would be for cutting off a Hand that
offers a Bag of Gold, sooner than that which takes it; for if there was no
Giver there would be no Receiver, and none would be Tempted if there was no
Tempter, who is the Devil's Tool: And to Tempt and Seduce is a damnable Office,
which in Men argues a mean, a base, and a wretched Soul: A generous Spirit will
scorn to take any advantage of the Frailty, Corruption, and Wants of another;
or to lay Snares and a Stumbling Block before the Weak, which is so contrary to
a Christian Frame. This is not Policy but Knavery, for True Policy is grounded
upon Justice and Honor, guided by Prudence, Wisdom, and Experience; and
through reasonable means tend to good ends. Knavery is an effect of a dark
Understanding, whereof Cheating, Tricking, Deceiving, with overreaching, are
the Ingredients. When any Person and Party are reduced to such miserable
Shifts, which banish Honesty out of the World, and makes way for themselves to
be served, as they cause others to be, it is a clear sign that they are at their
Wits end, and despair of the Goodness and Success of their Cause, seeing they
would promote it by unlawful means. Sometimes they would make specious
pretenses, and even God's Holy Name subservient to their pernicious ends, who
to them will say as formerly he did to his People, Thou have made me to serve
with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine Iniquities. Isai. 43.24.
And having for a while winked at, and suffered them to go on in their unworthy
courses of Bribing, Suborning, Corrupting, Seducing, and taking Advantage of
the Weakness, Blindness of Mind, or Falseness of Heart of others, will at last
send a blast upon all their contrivances, and as in a moment overthrow what
through sinful means they had been building for bad ends, and to them say as be
does to the Sea, Job: 2.11.
Hitherto shall thou come and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. And as Chapter 5.12, 13.
he disappointeth the devices of the crafty, and takes the wise in their own
craftiness, may be, when they least think on it; God, to confound all their
great contrivances, will send Death with this Errand, come to give an account
of thy self. By what is said against the Bribers, I intend not to excuse the
Bribed in any station or capacity whatsoever, no more than shall be those who
yield to the Devil's Temptations; for both Tempter and Tempted are guilty. It
availed Adam nothing to cast the fault upon another, that is, his Wife, nor Eve
to say The Serpent beguiled me. For God passed Sentence of Condemnation upon
all Three. Is it not a great Crime? Is it not a great folly in one to sell his
Soul for Money, or other worldly Advantage? Yet there are those Men in the
World, who to do an ill thing, will, as soon, and as often take a Bribe, as a
Lawyer will take a Fee to speak for a Client.

To Beg is become a Trade full of Abuses, which daily may be seen in the
Streets: it is a Seminary of Idleness, Lewdness, etc. I know some are fit
Objects of Charity, but others use it as a Cloak to their evil Designs, which
ought to be enquired into: Remember the Apostles Rule 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
That if any will not work, when he can, neither should he eat: Here we have a
parcel of Boys, known by the name of the Black Guard, who by a loose manner of
Life, inure themselves to all kinds of Vice: So there are many young Girls who
under the notion of Begging, are seen up and down the Streets, to drive on the
Trade of Pick-Pockets, and Whoring: As to the Men, when they grow older they
become wandering and sturdy Beggars, and at last Highway Men, which if timely
minded and remedied, might be prevented, and consequently their being condemned
to the Gallows.

Here I cannot forbear taking notice of a thing, which tho, it may be, is not
properly and in it self a Sin, yet with Humble Submission to those whom it may
concern, I say it may become a Sin in its Adjuncts and Consequences, for it
affords occasion enough of Sin in those uncharitable Sermons, which our
Boanerges do upon the Anniversary Day, fulminate against the Dead and the
Living, and thereby show they know not what a Christian Spirit is: This is too
much like the Antichristian Practice of Popes, who every Year on a certain day,
cause a Bull full of Curses to be read. One would think that after Fifty years
time, there should be a Prescription for such things, and 'twould be well to
forget and forgive that which keeps up Divisions, and intails hatred and
Revengefulness upon us and our Posterity; as if of late we had not Breaches
enough, but we must still continue the old ones, and Superstitiously keep an
Anniversary for the Ashes of a Man; and with such Religious Circumstances, as
make the thing much the worse, which upon another occasion God grievously
complained against, That Ezekiel. 43.8.
by setting man's threshold by his thresholds, and their post by his posts,
they profaned his Temple, and defiled his Worship, therefore he commanded them
to put away the Carcasses of their kings far from him, v. 9.
whereby Men are stained with a kind of Idolatry, and a downright
Superstition, a good and proper Instruction, for this Case and these Times. A
thing is sometimes a Sin, and sometimes a Punishment for Sin. Heb. 3.12.
Take heed brethren, says the Apostle, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God,: here to depart is a Sin,
in another place it is a Punishment Matt. 7.23.
Depart from me ye that work iniquity: So the thing I now speak about, may be
both a Sin and a Pain for it.

Besides all these Public Sins, there are in the Nation Secret Sins, so called
upon several Accounts, either because they are the dear darling and bosom Sins
in the Heart, so beloved, that the Sinner is content to part with God, with
Christ, and with every thing else, rather than with them; such Dalilas they
cannot and will not leave, tho their Life lay at stake: O these profane Esaus,
who Genesis 25.33.
Sell their birthright for pottage! O the Fools who prefer Heb. 11.25.
to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Psalm. 16.11.
before the fullness of joy in God's Presence, and the pleasures for evermore
that are at his right hand! Else they be called Secret, because committed in
secret; for, Shame, which from the beginning of the World, as we see in our
First Parents, followed Sin, makes the Sinner hide himself as they did. Also
they are called Secret, because sometimes the Offenders see them not, and are
ignorant of, either by reason that they are too many, or else not minded, which
made David pray for Pardon, and say, Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his error? Cleanse thou me from secret faults: which
sometimes are above the rest of so shameful a nature, as make the Apostle say,
Ephesians. 5.12.
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in
secret. These are the works of darkness, which he would have us to cast off,
and instead of them to Romans 13.12.
put on the Armor of light. These must be left to God, and to the Conscience
of Sinners, 1 Cor. 4.5.
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart. For, says Truth it
self Luke 8.17.
Nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest, neither any thing hid that
shall not be known and come abroad. What Men have done in secret and in dark
corners out of Man's sight, God has seen, and shall be published upon the
House tops, Some of these Sins appear and are great in God's Sight, for every
Sin is the Transgression of the Law of an Infinite, Eternal, and Almighty God,
so upon that Account no Sin may be called Small, only comparatively; as there
shall be degrees of Pains, so there are degrees of Sins which deserved those
Pains: Yet these secret Sins are upon some Accounts, not so bad as presumptuous
and public Sins, which cause God's Enemies to Blaspheme, give ill examples,
and stir up the corruption in Men's Hearts to do the like.

Here are not only Isai. 1.18.
Crimson Sins of notorious Sinners, but also those of them who struggle against
Sin, for God's People have their spots too, of many kinds, Jam. 3.2.
for in many things we offend all, 1 King. 8.46.
there is no man that sins not: It Is a Lesson Taught by the Light of Nature,
for says a Wise: Heathen Nemo sine crimine vivit. But it is most proper to
leave these to their own Consciences. These Sins are fitter to be spoken of in
a Pulpit, than here insisted upon: Besides, they are not the crying sins of the
Nation; and tho sometimes, God, like a Father, gently chastises his Children
for them. Jerem. 30.11.
I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished;
yet never overthrows Nations, for the same, he gives them Repentance of, and
they mourn fro them in secret.

As there are sins of Omission, and those damnable too, as well as of
Commission; so it is a Sin not only to commit any I named, as not to punish
them; but also not to use means to reclaim the Sinners. It Is a Christian Duty
in a Friend in a proper and charitable manner, to warn his Brother, and
endeavor to bring him off his Sin; but if that cannot do it, then other ways
ought to be tried, and one must go for help where it may be had. In another
Case we have Directions which may be useful in this: When a Man who has
offended another, will not hear him, then he must take one or two more and go
to him, but if he refuses to hearken, then he is to go farther, and where is
some Authority, and Matthew. 18.
tell it unto the Church. Thus in this Case, if a Man does Curse, Swear, or in
any other notorious way, break the Laws of God and of the Land, he that hears
him is bound to go to the Magistrate, in whose hand lies the executive power,
and inform against such a one. I know some presently will cry our against an
Informer, which indeed has been a very odious Name, when gotten, for Unjust,
Odious, and Unlawful things; as to take away a Man's Good Name, Fortune,
Liberty or Life, to serve ill purposes, whether of private Men, or of a bad
Government; but the Case is much otherwise, when the Honor and Service of God
are concerned, which any wise to be instrumental to Defend and Assert, is in a
Man very Honorable: And because the Magistrate, in whose Hand God has put the
Sword to be Romans 13.4.
an avenger, and to execute wrath upon him that does evil, cannot be every
where to see and know, therefore he stands in need of being informed, so there
must be those who can and will do it. Let the wicked World do what it can to
revile, and ridicule so good an Office; I will not mind what is against it, no
more than the Experienced Pilot does the roaring and tumbling of the Waves, or
the cross and side Winds, but still steers toward his Point: As long as we
have a sure word of prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19.
we do well that we take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place; Our
Warrant for this is out of God's Word. and we must Obey God, and not fear Man,
Levit. 19.17.
thou shall in any wise, or plainly, rebuke thy neighbor; the words in any
wise go far, by all means, if you cannot directly: do it indirectly; if not of
thy self do it by others, if thou want Power, do it by those that are in
Authority; what is added is considerable, and not suffer sin upon him.
Endeavor to get it removed, either by good and brotherly Counsel, and if those
cannot serve, by Punishment. This is a Rule under the Gospel, as well as under
the Law, represented as a most important Service, attended with a great Reward.
Jam. 5 19, 20
Brethren, if any one of you do err from the truth, and one converteth him, let
him know that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his ways, shall
save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. Then it is a
Christian Duty in one's station to use means to make a Sinner leave his sins,
if not out of Love yet out of Fear, which not to do, draws God's Censure upon
the best of Men: The Son of God having highly commended the Angel of the Church
of Thyatira for his Charity, Service, Faith, Patience and Works, yet finds
fault with him, which is of the same nature with that we now are upon. Rev.
2.20.
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, and what are these? Because
thou suffer that woman Jezebel to teach and to seduce my servants, to make
them commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. This
Indulgence and Toleration of evil Practices and Doctrines, is condemned, so
that no Man ought to suffer, but to the utmost of his Power, within his
station, to hinder with Accusing, Condemning and Punishing public sins. He
which declares not Treasonable Words and Designs, which he knows, deserve's to
be severely punished? So does he who hearing Blasphemy, Impiety, and Wickedness
spoken, and committed against God, conceals it, which is no small Guilt: It Is a
kind of Rebellion against the most High, Eternal and Almighty God, and Treason
in the Highest degree; therefore every Pious Man, for all the talk and frowns
of the World, is in his capacity, but without self ends, bound to appear,
either as a Witness to convince, or a Judge to Condemn; and upon this account
God says, Isai. 51.7.
Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

Another Sin very common I must not forget, it is Want of Charity, which tho
expressed in Negative terms, yet contains a positive Evil in the bottom, for it
usually arises out of a principle of Envy and Malice, or at least of
Imprudence; when some Men wrest, and give a misconstruction to the Words and
Actions of others, and like Spiders turn all into poison: they take pleasure to
hear their Neighbor ill spoken of and slandered, which they promote and
encourage. Love or Charity, which in Greek, the Language of the New Testament,
is one and the same, is the fulfilling of the Law, for, Romans 13.8.
He that loves another has fulfilled the Law, so the want of it is the breach
of the whole Law, which is by our Savior reduced to these two Heads, to love
God with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our Mind, and our
Neighbor as our selves: Now if we do not perform this last, which cannot be
when we are uncharitable to him, we will never do the first, for, 1 John (...).
He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has nos seen: Charity is what God requires of us; for, 1 Timothy 1.5.
The end of the Commandment is Charity. And we are exhorted Coloss. 3.14.
above all things to put on Charity. which as another Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.8.
Shall cover a multitude of sins. And without it every thing else is
insignificant, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
Tho I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and all
Knowledge, and tho I have all Faith -- and have no Charity, I am nothing, says
the great Apostle of the Gentiles: v. 3,
And tho I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to be burned,
and have no Charity, it profitteth me nothing Charity not only does no evil,
but also thinks no evil. There are Men in the World who measure and judge of
others by themselves, and so think evil of others, because they do evil
themselves; such should remember what says our Blessed Lord, Matt. 7.1, 2.
Judge not that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged. Romans 14.4.
and Who art thou that judge another Man's servants? to his own Master he
stands or falls: The Advice which the Rabbis say Moses gave the children
of Israel, at his coming down from the Mountain, before the reading of the Law
to them, would in these uncharitable times be very necessary, be quick to hear,
slow to speak, slower to anger, and slowest of all to judge.

The Duty of every Christian is, not hastily to judge, or rashly condemn one
another, but rather out of a principle of promoting his Neighbor's good,
friendly and gently in private to Advise and Admonish him, not with Authority,
and Magisterially, which does more harm than good, and commonly produces,
rather a bad than a good Effect; but with a Christian Prudence, by all means
avoiding to expose his good Name: For if he be not tender of his good Name,
it is in vain he will pretend to be his friend, or to do it for his good; and any
one, tho indifferently clear-sighted, shall easily perceive Malice, and some
ill Design in the bottom of it: I say that gentle ways ought to be used, though
the Party was in fault, and deserved to be reproved for it, according to the
Apostles Rule, Gal. 6.1.
Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such an one in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest also thou be
tempted. Those Sons of Thunder who would bring down fire from Heaven and
destroy all, know not what Spirit they are of, sure I am it is not the Spirit of
Christ. This must also be done in a fit and proper time; thus Abigail finding 1 Samuel 25 36.
Nabal in drink, told him nothing more or less of his folly against David,
until the Morning light: It Is the Character of a good Man to be discreet in the
management of his Concerns, either in relation to himself or neighbor. Psalm.
112.5.
A good man will guide his Affairs with discretion. He who cares not how he
treads upon his Neighbor's Reputation, does thereby discover Venom in the
Heart, let his pretenses be never so plausible and specious. In this World
every Man has Two general Parts to act, which tho in some things opposite, yet
may well agree, being brought under a due Subordination, and in relation to
their respective Objects: I mean that of a Christian, and of the Rank and
Quality which God has placed him in the World, and he may well satisfy both,
and with Prudence perform his Duty to God, and what his station requires of
him: and as primarily he ought to mind the Glory of God, and Good of his Soul
therein included; So Secondarily he ought to take care of his Honor in the
World, when it crosses neither Piety nor Virtue; and by all lawful means defend
it, when maliciously and violently assaulted by bad Men. And this, those that
set themselves for Censors of other Men's Actions, ought to take notice of,
especially when they know them to be no Despisers of good Advice, when duly
given.

But the abominable Disease of Calumny being now so Epidemical, the danger of
suffering it so visible and great, and the harm thereby done so frequent, it
requires the greater Care to prevent and suppress it: Nothing more destructive
to Society, and nothing brings more confusion into the World, than does
speaking ill one of another: Whence do often arise Quarrels, Fightings, Duels,
Bruises, Wounds, and Death, but from words Mis-spoken, Mis-reported, and
Mis-understood? O the Tongue that cannot be governed, tho Jam. 3.5, 6.
A little member, how great a matter a little fire kindles? it sets on fire
the course of nature. More mischief proceeds from the Organ of Speech, than
from all the other Members of the Body, as we may see in what the Apostle says
about it, Romans 3.13, 14.
With their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of asps is under their
lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. What in English we call
Slanderers, or False Accusers, is in Greek called Devils, for the Devil is
their Father; who as our Savior says, was a liar and a murderer from the
beginning. How many children in that kind has he in the World, Prove. 10.18.
tho in some different degrees and ways. But, He that hides hatred with lying
lips, and he that utters slander is a fool.

Some out of Malice, Revengefulness, or the like sinful Principle, do either
invent Lies with out any ground, against others, or misinterpret their Words
and Actions, and are glad of any pretense to Blacken their Neighbor with false
Aspersions and malicious Insinuations. And these Men have another fortunder
them, who publish the Lies and Slanders which the others forged, and so become
partakers of other men's sins: Both he who steals the Money, and he who puts it
into the Bag are guilty; so he who spreads abroad the Slander, is as guilty as
he who invented it; tho herein sometimes there is a difference, for some
publish it out of Imprudence, others out of a sinful Compliance, and others out
of Malice, Nay, there are some, who out of their own natural Corruption, take
pleasure to hear others ill spoken of, and tho in their mind they be convinced
the things are not true, yet in their Heart are glad of it; and contrary to the
Rules of Charity and Prudence, will rather believe Evil than Good; tho in
doubtful Cases, the least they should do is to suspend their Judgment, till
they see a just cause, and not presently to proclaim it abroad and thus fall
into the snare, for this is a direct breach of the Ninth Commandment, Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor; whether his Goods, Good
Name, or Life be concerned. Spreading ill Reports upon uncertainties and
hearsay, is a base thing, and odious before God, and a nice point in the sight
of Men, who being pinched in so sensible a part as Reputation, will kick
against such as thus lash them behind: Neither do I think that the Laws of God
and Men require in a Man the Stoician (...), or Insensibility, as if he was a
Stock or a Stone, but rather do allow him in lawful ways, to vindicate his good
Name, as to defend his Life. One Case excepted, when it is plainly for the Cause
of the Lord Jesus, then suffer all things gladly from those that have Authority
and Power over you: The Spaniards have a saying, Por tu honra pon la vida, y,
pon los dos por tu Dios. Hazard thy Life for thy Honor, But venture both for
thy God. It Is fit for the good of Human Society, that a strong Curb should be
be put upon Authors and Promoters of Slanders' to take away from the Sufferers
all just cause from doing themselves justice, when wronged in this case; and by
these means shall Peace be kept, and it will strike Terror upon Offenders in
this kind; or else this will bring in Trouble and Confusion: for there are some
Men in the World who are as ready to venture all they have to vindicate their
Reputation, when unjustly assaulted, as to defend their Life. This is spoken as
to Men.

But in relation to God, there are more pressing Motives, not only against him
who raises false Reports against another, but also against him that takes it
up, Believes and Propagates it: God's word we have for it, for he that does so,
shall not abide in God's Tabernacle, nor dwell in his Holy Hill; for David puts
the Question to God, Psalm. 15.1, 3.
Lord, who shall abide, etc. which he Answers, He that takes not up a reproach
against his Neighbor. What is to take up a reproach? the Old Translation has
it very plain, not to receive a false report against his neighbor, He who
desires to be in God's Favor, and be admitted into his House, must not
hearken to, encourage or support a false Report against another, but say, I
will not be concerned, and so let it fall. The meaning of the place is of a
large extent; some explain the words takes not up a reproach, by does not lift
up ignominy and scandal upon his Tongue, and with it lays no snares to others,
either with forming false things, or wresting those that be true: Who will not
hear, speak, or believe a Reproach or false Report against his Neighbor,
thereby to keep innocent his Ear, Tongue and Heart. I say further, that in some
cases, Truth it self, as to matters of Fact, when prejudicial to some body,
ought not to be published without necessity, and a lawful Call, as when a Man
is upon Oath, summoned to bear Evidence in a Court of Justice to preserve a
Man's Right; but when by such Reports some body receives harm, and no body no
good, tho they were True, ought to be suppressed and buried: Doeg's report to
Saul of what had happened between David and Abimelech was True, Psalm 53.
yet David for it cursed him; it is not always well and fit to speak the Truth:
A Son's Saying, My Father is a Thief and a Drunkard, may be True, but it is ill
of him to say it; so it is, when against the Rules of Charity.

Several other kinds of Sins we have here, which to mention would prove an
endless Task, and indeed, who can number them all? Whether of Inclination and
Temper, of Relations, Professions, Conditions, Ages, of both Sexes, Family,
Personal and National Sins; and there is too much cause to complain, that
England is become a sink of evil in all sorts, not only the iniquities of the
Country, but also those of others. How great Sinners from him that sits upon
the Throne to the Beggar upon the Dunghill, must we all be, since the Man,
according to God's own Heart so heavily complained. Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy
for me. And elsewhere, Psalm. 40.12.
Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold
upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more than the hairs of mine
head, therefore mine heart fails me. O that we could every one of us speak of
our Sins so feelingly and penitently, as He did of His; and that God would
appoint over us Refiners and Purifiers; some Hezekiah and Josiah, who also as
they begun to Reign showed their zeal for God, and against Sin.

I hitherto have spoken of our Sins, I must now say something of the
punishment: With Paul, I say to my self, and to all Sinners, Gal. 6.7, 8.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he
also reap: For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
But he that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap everlasting life.
Here is Good and Evil, a Gracious Reward, and a just punishment offered, let us
choose well It Is of God's Truth and Justice that Punishment should follow Sin,
he rewards both Good and Evil, we are told how 1 Cor. 3.8.
every man shall receive his own reward, and ever it was so, Heb. 2.2.
for every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward.
There is a Reward for the Righteous, so says our Savior. Matthew. 5.12.
Great is your reward in heaven. Long before, he had by David said, that the
Obedience to God's Laws was the way to it. Psalm. 19.11.
In the keeping of them there is a great reward; and as there is a recompense
for the good, so there is for the wicked Psalm. 91.8.
With thine eyes shall thou see and behold the reward of the wicked. We for our
Sins have felt, and still feel Judgments of several sorts, for I must come
home. First, the Honor of the Nation is low in the world, which does hit in a
sensible part: Foreign Countries at this time want the Value and Esteem which
once they had for England. Time was, and it is not long since, when our
Neighbors were in fear of, and had us in Reverence, but now it is otherwise,
the reason is plain; 1 Samuel 2.30.
Them that honor me I will honor. and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed; that is, shall be honored by Men, as they are of God, as we have it
in the examples of David at the latter end of his Life, of 2 Chro 17.10.
Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Chap. 32, 23, 27.
and their People under them, but now God has smitten, us in that very tender
part, Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Also
Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil.

The strength of the Nation is much weakened, now it cannot do what formerly it
could, and what remains of it, is through certain ways and means made
useless. The Comeliness is gone, Psalm. 39.11.
For when thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his
beauty to consume away like a moth: For God is a consuming fire, and we are as
stubble before him: There is now a concurrence of Sins committed, of Judgments
inflicted, and of others threatened, so that not only we feel, but also have
cause to fear; for God's Mercies, we by our sins, have made our selves unworthy
of, and deserved his most severe Judgments, We seem in our carriage ashamed to
Confess and Repent of our Sins, tho not to commit them; so that it is a wonder
that having so often sinned against Grace and the Gospel, we have not quite
sinned it away, it threateneth to to leave us to go to others who will value it
more than now many do among us.

Also the Riches are lessened, Poverty is come on apace upon many, I know those
who formerly Fared plentifully, now to want the Conveniences, even the
Necessaries for Life: Trade once Flourishing, is now much decayed, the Mastery
of the Sea questioned, and a Blast laid almost upon every thing we undertake.
We have felt the great Scourges, Plague, Fire, War, Unseasonable weather, one
after another, and Dearth; yet are not returned to God; we are troubled with
Partialities, Factions, Hatred, and Animosities: The Nation is Divided,
Subdivided, Undersubdivided, yet we will not return to God, but walk contrary
to him; so no wonder if he walks contrary to us, and I am afraid it may at last
be in fury. For as, we have been unthankful under Mercies, so we are become
uncorrigible under Judgments; besides, we have God's word for it, to be
seriously read in the Texts Lev. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Joel 1. and 2. Amos 4 2 Chronicles.
7.19, 20, 21, 22.
quoted in the Margin, which contain terrible Judgments, but the worst are the
Blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart, which many are punished with, who
mind not, and care not for the Dispensations of God's Providence, and are Romans
1.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
Given up to vile Affections, and to a reprobate mind, to do those things which
are not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness, Fornication,
Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit,
Malignity, Whisperers, Backbiters, Haters of God, Despiteful, Proud, Boasters,
Inventers of Evil things, Disobedient to Parents, without Understanding,
Covenant-breakers, without natural Affection, Implacable, Unmerciful; This is
all now written for us as once it was for the Romans, for those Sins are among
us as they were among them, and I look upon them not only as Sins, but also as
Punishment for Sins: For when God leaves Men to themselves, from one Sin, they
by his just Judgment fall into another; for these Spiritual and Temporal
Punishments are only Warning pieces; What then will the Murdering ones be? Do
we wait and stay till some destroying Angel come upon us? Well may we cry out
with the Prophet, Lam. 3.22.
It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not.

We read, how once upon an unseasonable weather of Rain and Thunder, in
Wheat-Harvest time, 1 Samuel 12.18.
the people greatly feared, and cried out they had sinned: And in another place
it is said, that Ezra 10.9.
All the men of Judah and Benjamin trembled, because of their sin and for the
great rain, which they looked upon as a Punishment for it: So should we, who of
late, almost every Summer about Harvest time, have had such Rains as prejudiced
the Corn, and other Fruits of the Earth, upon the like case as now ours is,
Micah 6.9.
The Lord's voice cries unto the City, and Country too, and what does the Lord
say? v. 10, 11, 12.
hear ye the rod and who has appointed it, and for what cause. There the
Prophet makes an enumeration of several sins, the same as now we are guilty of,
namely, Treasures of wickdness in the house of the wicked; Scant Measure,
wicked Balance and Weights, Violence, Oppression, a lying and deceitful Tongue;
but mind the punishment: v. 13.
Therefore will I make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
because of thy sins. 14, 15, 16.
And so proceeds to the several kinds of sensible punishments which shall be
inflicted upon them. These things were written for our instruction, that we
might mend and be the better for it. Therefore before it be too late, let us
hear the voice of the Rod, which says, that according to God's Truth and
Justice Psalm. 137.17.
Fools, because of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities are
afflicted. Which in David's and Solomon's style is the sinner, this ought to
stop our mouth, and the consideration that we deserve much more at the hand of
God, removes all ground of complaint Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore does a living man complain for the punishment of his sins? Seeing
God does not in the least proportion reward us according to our Sins, nor
punish us after our Iniquities.

The voice of God, and of the Rod are but one, (with this only difference, that
one is of Precept, the other of Providence) and say the same thing, how, Ephesians.
5.6.
Because of those things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. That is, the things he named before, Fornication, uncleanness,
covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting; which with many more, are
now the Sins of the Nation. The same voice says to Whormongers, Thieves,
Drunkards, and every other sinner, remember that God sees thee, that thou must
Die, yet know not the time when, then thou must 2 Cor. 5.10.
come to judgment before Christ, that every one may receive things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Then will God
set all thy Sins Psalm. 50.21.
in order before thine eyes, as it were in order of Battle to fight against
thee. If Men would seriously mind this, and with David, say in Truth. Psalm.
16.8.
I have set the lord always before me; and in whatsoever we do to eye him as
present. I am persuaded it might be a great preservative to keep many from
Offending. No Servant will willingly do before his Lord and Master that which
he knows will displease him: but hides from him as much as he can: but with God
no Man can, he is every where, sees, knows, and rewards all things, and when he
punishes for Sin with Paul, we may say, Romans 2.2.
We are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which
commit such things.

Now when I am upon this punishment for Sin, before I proceed to another, I
must out of Scripture bring such examples of God's Judgments upon it, as should
make all Kings and People to tremble. Joash King of Judah, I shall begin with:
during the Life of Jehojadah he did well, but after the Princes made obeisance
to, courted and flattered the King who hearkened unto them, and fell a sinning
against God, who to reclaim him and them 2 Chro. 24.17.
Sent prophets to bring them again v. 19.
unto the lord, but they would not give ear; and killed one of them, which
highly aggravated the Sins, and hastened the Punishment v. 23.
For at the end of that year the Army of the Syrians came against Judah and
Jerusalem, and destroyed all the Princes of the People, from a among the
People, who had been the evil Counselors; and that which is remarkable, God
delivered a very great Army into the hands of a handful of Men; for the Syrians
were but few, and the reason is given v. 24.
Because they had forsaken the Lord, so they executed Judgment against Joash.
v. 25
But this is not all, His own servants conspired against him, and killed him on
his bed.

Abijah said of Rehoboam his Father, 2 Chro. 13.7.
That he was young, when he came to the Throne; yet it is recorded that he was
Chapter 12.13.
One and forty years old when he began to Reign. At that Age no Man may be
called young; therefore it is to be understood, in relation to the ill
management of his Concerns to the Succession of the Kingdom over all Israel,
wherein indeed he acted the part of a young Man. But I go farther, and find
that v. 14.
he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord, so that he
was a raw Man, no wiser in matters of Religion than in those of State, For it is
farther said in the beginning of that Chapter, that he forsook the law of the
lord, v. 1,2.
and all Israel with him, therefore God punished them, for Shishak came up
against Jerusalem, after he had taken the fenced Cities of Judah, and took away
the Treasure of the Lord's House, and of the King's House, and the reason was,
2 King. 15.29.
Because they had transgressed against the lord. For in God's name a Prophet
said to them, 2 Chro. 12.6.
Ye have forsaken me, and therefore also have I left you in the hand of
Shishak. Here is a punishment for Sin, for Solomen's Idolatry, and his Son's
and People's Apostasy, whereby the Glory of the Kingdom already reduced within
a narrow compass, was Eclypsed, and its Riches carried away: Which yet was a
lighter punishment than that which afterward was inflicted upon Manasseh, whom
the Assyrians took and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon. So
that God spares neither People nor Princes, nor Crowned Heads, when provoked
by their Sins. This in these times we cannot pretend Ignorance of, therefore
ought to take warning by.

In the Kingdom of Israel, after the rending of the Ten Tribes, by reason of
their Sins, nothing but destruction, and killing one another, this among
themselves; also God brought Foreigners among them, for he stirred up
Tiglath-Pileser King of Assyria, who took several places, 2 King. 15.29.
and all the Land of Naphtali, and carried them captives to Assyria. Chapter 17.6.
And in the next Reign of Hoshea who had killed his Predecessor Pekah, came up
(r) Shalmaneser, who carried away captive the Ten Tribes, and put an end to the
kingdom of Israel: And the Spirit of God has left upon Record the cause of it,
namely their Sins, whereof in that Chapter is an enumeration from ver. 7. till
the 19th. So of the Kingdom of Judah, when the measure of the Sins of their
Kings, 2 Chronicles. 36.
and of the People was filled up, God sent up Nebuchadnezzar, who took
Jerusalem, ruined and destroyed the Temple, bound Zedekiah in Chains, killed
his Children before him, put out his Eyes, and carried him with the People
captive into Babylon: Wherefore this terrible Judgment? for their Sins, the
King's Perjury named for one. v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Moreover, all the chief of the priests and the people transgressed very much,
and the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers rising up
betimes and sending, because he had compassion on his People: But they mocked
the Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until
the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. In
many things this suits with our case, our Sins are many and great, if God move
the Heart of some to speak about it, we have too many of those who will despise
and ridicule them for it; Let us not hold out until God's Anger comes upon us,
and till there be no remedy. O England, Rulers and People pray mind this before
it be too late. I could upon this Head take notice how all signal Judgments in
the World have been inflicted for Sin, which brought the Flood upon the first
World, Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah; utter destruction upon the
Seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, which God, by Moses commanded the children
of Israel to do. Josh. 9.24.
The Lord commanded his Servant Moses to give you all the Land, and to destroy
all the inhahitants of the land from before you. But time would fail me, if I
would insist upon all the Instances of God's Judgments for Sins, Recorded in
Scripture. I pray God we be not made the next Example. For out of this we may
see how God does shoot his Warning-pieces, before he does the Murdering ones.
We have warnings enough, both at home and abroad; whence it comes nearer and
nearer to us, but if we kick against the pricks, grow stiff-necked, and harden
our hearts as Pharaoh did his, then let us hear what God says, Levit. 20, 21,
22. etc,
But if ye walk contrary to me, and will not hearken unto me, I will bring
seven times more plagues upon you, according to your sins. Again, And if ye
will not be Reformed by me by these things, that is, by the Plagues he
threateneth them with, then I will yet punish you seven times more for your
sins. And in that Chapter the Seven times is often multiplied, wherefore to
avoid it, let us prepare our Heart to seek the Lord, or rather pray to God to
do it for us; let us Repent, Mend our Lives, Reform our Manners, leave off our
Sins, cease to do evil, and learn to do good. Job 15.16.
Man which drinks iniquity like water is abominable and filthy. Therefore
compared to the Dog that returns to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Seeing then punishment is tied to the tail of Sin; and that in the Nation, we,
tho in different degrees, are all Sinners, what else can we look but for
punishment? According to God's Truth and Justice, Sins must either be Pardoned
or Punished, and is there no remedy for this? No other way to Pardon, but to
Repent and Believe; or else nothing Heb. 10, 27.
But a certain fearful looking for, of judgment and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the adversaries of God. To make Punishment hold a proportion with
Sins against an infinite Majesty. There can be no other way but Eternal
Torments, besides those inflicted in this life: What Remedy have we for this?
As we showed the Distemper, Sin, and its due Reward, Punishment, for the wages
of Sin is Death, whether natural, of Afflictions, Spiritual, or Eternal, we
must now speak of the Remedy: Be converted from Sin to God, and our Sins shall
be forgiven. God has appointed Repentance, consisting, First In a contrition
of Heart, or sorrow for Sin. Secondly, In a confession of Mouth, or owning our
Faults, thereby giving God the Glory; as upon the like occasion did Dan. 9.
from v. 5. to 20.
Daniel Ezra 9.5, 6, 7, etc.
Ezra Nehem. ^. 5, 6, 7, etc. chiefly in Chapter 9.
Nehemiah, etc. Thirdly, In a satisfaction given those whom after God we have
offended and wronged. And Fourthly, In taking, as far as we are able, a full
resolution to forsake Sin, and follow after Holiness and Righteousness. Then
when the Cause is removed, the Effect will cease, and through God's Blessing
the Remedy will produce a Cure of the Disease: Through a deep and Universal
Repentance, Nineveh prevented the ruin which within 40 Days, she was threatened
with. Days of Fasting and Humiliation should be kept, but not such as God
condemns, as Isai. 58.5, 6, 7.
a day for a man to afflict his Soul, to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to
spread sackcloth and ashes under him Such an outward and superficial Fast God
has not chosen, but to loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free. To deal thy bread to the hungry, to
bring the poor cast out, to thy house, etc, Exercise Justice and Charity as
well as Piety. This another Prophet call's to Joel 2.13. Ezekiel. 18.30.
Rent your hearts and not your garments, God says, Repent and turn from all
your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

When once Men are really touched with a sense of their Sins, and pricked in
their Hearts, they, with the new Converts will say, Acts 2.37.
men and brethren what shall we do? and with the Jailer to Paul and Silas Chap.
16, 30.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Long before a Prophet had answered a
Question about a Man's Duty: Micah. 6.8.
He, God has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly before thy
God. To this answers the Excellent Lesson of the Grace of God, Tit. 2.12.
by the Apostle mentioned first Negatively. Teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts. Here we must begin, then we should live soberly
Here is our Duty to our selves, Righteously. This toward our Neighbor, and
godly. This in relation to God, In this present world. Which Three words
contain the whole Duty of Man: So Men may not pretend ignorance of what we must
know and do. This is every Man's Duty, tho of some more than of others,
according to their station, and every one ought to know it: Now Luke 12.47.
the servant which knew his lord's Will and did not according to it, shall be
beaten with many stripes, which to avoid, let every one with David say, Psalm.
38.18.
I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Not barely out of
the Mouth, which sometimes the most wicked can do: Pharaoh said, Exodus 9.27.
I have sinned this time, the lord is righteous, and I and my people are
wicked, So could Balaam to the Angel, Numb. 22.34.
I have sinned. So Saul to Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.24.
I have sinned, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice. Let all
Princes have a care not to fear Men more than God. So said Judas. Matthew. 27.4.
I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent Blood. This Confession of
Sin must not merely come out of the mouth, but from the bottom of the Heart,
with Grief and Sorrow, attended with a real and sincere desire hereafter, to do
so no more, to be able to say with David Psalm. 18.23.
I kept my self from mine iniquity. If God was pleased to make us all sensible
of our sins, and send us to Peter for Counsel; the Answer is, Acts. 2.38.
Repent: but that Counsel must be asked, to that effect by the Angel's
direction, Cornelius sent for him. And Paul when the voice from Heaven came to
him, said, Lord, Chapter 9.6.
what will thou have me to do? No other remedy for Sin but Repentance, and to
make it acceptable, nothing else but the Blood of Christ: But how can those who
impiously profane it, as too many among us do, hope to have any benefit by it?
chiefly those who like the Jews, one day cry out Marth. 21.9.
Hosanna, and few days after, and few days after, Luke 23.1.
Crucific, Crucify him; as the People of Lystra who to Paul and Barnabas,
Acts. 14.13, 19.
would have done Sacrifice, but soon after stoned him. To show how apt on a
sudden, some Men are to change for the worse; or rather to appear really to be
contrary to what they were but seemingly before.

The Trumpet, says (And who knows but that this may be the last Sound. Romans
13.13, 12, 13.
It is high time to awake out of sleep-the night's far spent, the day is at
hand; let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light; let us walk honestly as in the day not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. If
not, I boldly denounce God's Judgments against impenitent Sinners, not as of my
self, Psalm. 68.21.
but after the Royal Prophet: God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. Wounds in the
Head tho not Mortal, are known to be dangerous. We have daily examples of some
who die suddenly, and of an unusual death, there being in God's Quiver such a
number and variety of deadly Arrows: And will Sinners take no warning? Then in
the name of the just God of Truth, I declare that those who die by means of
extraordinary Accidents, are not always greater Sinners than we who are left
behind, no more then were the Luke 13.1.
Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, or those upon
whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, above all that dwelt in
Jerusalem. I tell you nay, but except we repent we shall all likewise perish.
Time to repent allowed us is a mercy, if we have the Grace to consider it, or
else the slower vengeance is a coming on, the harder it will strike: And
because Men must not be afraid or ashamed to speak for God's Cause; for such
was Elias, such John Baptist, and it is said of Apollos, that Acts 18.25.
he was fervent in the Spirit; after such examples, without any pretense to
immediate Inspirations, only according to the rule of the revealed Will of God.
I think I may be more plain and free in delivering God's Message, which tends
to a speedy and sincere Reformation in Doctrines and Practices, in Head and
Members, which when compared one with another, admit of a difference; but in
relation to God are all equal, being considered in themselves, Every Man's
Breath is in his Nostrils, some have Death in the Head, others in the Lungs,
Blood, Stomach, Bowels; therefore all equally concerned to prepare for it, and
finish the Task given them to do, before they die. I think no Man in Authority,
if asked, will deny it to be his Duty to raise and erect Monuments for the
Honor and Service of God; but he who has a mind to Build, must clear the
ground, and remove all rubbish out of the way. The building of God's House is
an Honorable Work, committed chiefly to the care of Princes, but when they
mind their own more then God's, they give him just ground of complaint, which
is followed with his Judgment. It Is likely David had not kept that good
Resolution of his, Psalm. 101.
of the good Orders he said he would keep in his House and Kingdom, with
punishing, correcting, and rooting out Wickedness; encouraging and favoring
Piety, Virtue, and Godly Persons; But he was sensible that he was to begin at
home in his own Heart, therefore he said, as all Princes, who as well as
ordinary Men meet with Crosses and Troubles ought to do; Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. In consequence of
this he would not see or suffer wicked Men in his Presence, which made him say,
Psalm. 6.8.
Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; and there he gives this reason, for
the lord has heard the voice of my weeping, implying that he would not hear
him if he continued to keep such. This is an example for all Kings to follow,
who often have wicked Men about their Persons, who Humor, Flatter, and for
Self Ends do what they can to please them; thus they insinuate themselves into
their Hearts and Affections; Such consider themselves more than their Master,
and what they do is to promote their Designs, which, as they arise out of an
evil Principle, so they tend to a bad end. It Is the Duty and Interest of every
Prince who has such Men about him, to remove them from his Presence. If Rulers
go about to Reform, they ought thoroughly to know the Disease, and well apply
the Remedy, or else like Job's Friends, Job. 13.4.
they shall prove Physicians of no value. Then they ought first to begin at
home, and in their own Houses; Hence may flow a National Reformation, whereof
the necessity has with the Method well been An Account of the Societies for
Reformation.
demonstrated: of late God has been pleased to stir up the Hearts of some, as
much as within their station they are able, to encourage Piety and Virtue, and
get impiety and Vice discouraged and punished: And if the Superior Powers were
pleased to lend a helping hand, it might (through God's Blessing be hoped, in
some good degree to see it effectually done. Indeed it is very sad and a shame
that notwithstanding Presentiments of Grand Juries, Acts of Parliament, and
King's Proclamations, for want of a due execution, Heretical Doctrines and
Sinful Practices go on barefaced, which should convince Men of a necessity to
Reform such Abuses; and upon a good warrant I may say, that except we speedily
go upon a personal Family, and National Reformation, God will work it for us
with a witness: His word I have for it, Levit. 26.23, 24.
And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, the Judgments
beforementioned, but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk
contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins. That
whole Chapter is to be read with great attention, for it contains a great
number and variety of Judgments which God threateneth his People with, for
their disobedience to his Holy Law and Commandments, which concern not only
them, but us also. Romans 15.4.
For whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning.
With the Psalmist we must say, A good understanding have all they that do his
Commandments. Psalm. 111.10. Psalm. 85.8.
Now God will speak peace unto his People, and to his Saints, but let them not
turn again to folly.

what I said, I speak not without God's War^^^^

Yet I know some hate the very name of Reformation, and Laugh at it, but if
those who want it, as more or less every one does, do not work it, then God for
their neglect and contempt, will Laugh at them, as under the name of Wisdom,
his Eternal Son, Declares it; Prove. 1.24, 25, 26.
Because I called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand in mercy and in
judgment, and no man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproofs; I also will laugh at your calamity. I will mock when
your fear comes. For this very thing an aversion to be Reformed, God in
another place threateneth to Reprove, and set before the wicked, (for such are
all that despise God's Word;) his Sins like so many Enemies, in order against
him: Psalm. 50.16, 17.21.
Seeing thou hate to be Reformed, as it is in the Old Translation, and castest
my words behind thee, I will reprove thee and set them, thy Sins, in order
before thine eyes. The word Reformation is also known in the New Testament, so
that he who hates Name and Thing, must be an enemy to God's word, for there
has been Heb. 9.10.
a time of Reformation, of Legal Ceremonies, or carnal Ordinances, as the
Apostle calls them: Much more ought there to be a time of Reformation from
sinful Practices, for the former were once commanded and appointed by God, but
the last were ever forbidden, Besides that, as we constantly Sin, so we must
continually Repent. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19.


It is in the work of Reformation as it was in rebuilding the Walls of
Jerusalem, for we read (as a brand set upon some) Nehem. 3.5.
That the Nobles of the Tekoites, put not their necks to the work of their
Lord, So the Great Men, the Rich and Mighty refuse to lend a helping hand to
repair the breaches in God's Church, and to set up and promote his Service, and
Honor. And of others, the chief and greatest Men, we read how not only they
would not help, but opposed the work of God's House, and caused Ezra 4.6, 7, 8,
9.
the work of the house of God at Jerusalem to cease. One Nehem. 6.1.
Samballat or other do what they can to stop the Lord's work from going on, yet
in spite of their Teeth it proceeds on, a Man's Eye cannot perceive it, no more
can it see water run through pipes under ground; for God has his secret ways
of Providence: Romans 8.28.
We know, says Paul, that all things work together for good to them that love
God: Pharaoh's cruelty hastened the deliverance of God's People, and it is
observed that Exodus 1.12.
the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew, and this was
the ground of the saying among the Jews, when the burdens are increased, then
Moses is at hand, that is, to deliver: I wish it was here not so true as it is,
that some who should set the wheel of Reformation a going, either directly or
indirectly do what they can to clog and stop it: Tho some under hand, yet
others in defiance, and with a high Hand, like so many Pharaohs, Chap. 5.2.
Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? And let my sins go. I know not
the Lord, neither will I part with my Sins, nor with my Lying, Cursing,
Swearing, Forsearing Psalm. 12.4.
who have said with our tongue, we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is
Lord over us; nor with their Pleasures; but for the momentary Pleasures of Sin
in this Life, slight those which are Psalm. 16.11.
at God's right hand for evermore. Nor with their Covetousness, which to
satisfy they care not how they oppress others. As 'twas in Nehemiah's days, so
it is now, in many particulars a like great oppression of the Poor by the Rich
and Mighty, which as then, so now, it causes Neh. 5.1, 2, 3.4.
a great cry of the people, who are forced to Mortgage, to Sell, and upon
unreasonable and unmerciful terms to borrow Money to pay Taxes, buy Bread, and
to serve other necessary occasions,

Now I say that these and other wickednesses, are such as when committed and
not punished, draw God's heaviest Judgment, upon a Land: And those Men whose
Duty, and in whose Power it is to suppress Sin, if they neglect it, become
thereby accessory to, and guilty of Sins by others committed, and shall for it
answer to God; I think every Man has Sins enough of his own to give an account
for, without bringing upon himself the burden of those of others: Indulgence
gives an encouragement to Sin, and carries along with it a kind of a silent
approbation, when I call Indulgence a not punishing, I think to call things by
their right name; now this is a great aggravation, for after the enumeration
made by Paul of wickednesses in several kinds; he adds, Romans 1.32.
not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them: They are not
content to commit it themselves but approve it in others. I am persuaded there
is a great guilt contracted upon us, for we now do our selves what before we
condemned in others, whom we have seen God's judgments executed upon; which
should make us afraid or the like, therefore should take contrary courses Do
but keep out Sin, and ye shall keep our Judgment: But that which most of all is
aborninable, it is that we have such presumptuous sinners as boast and glory in
their own shame; may be they never read, or else have forgotten what God says
by the Prophet, Jer. 9.24.
Let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me:
that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and righteousness
in the Earth; for in these things I delight says the Lord, and not in Sin,
which I abhor.

Once there were great outcry's against the Sins of the late Reigns, and there
was cause for it, as God's Judgments which are always just, declared: But are
we now better in the least? On the contrary, we can observe those same Sins to
increase, and daily grow stronger and more frequent upon us. Have any of the
guilty, and offenders against God and the Country, been punished for their
notorious Offenses? How can the Effect cease, if we remove not the Cause, and
what signifies to find fault, except we mend? I look upon it only as an
aggravation: We know, yet act not according to knowledge, neither do we improve
the means and opportunities which God had put into our hands, to assert his
Honor and his Truth, to reform Abuses, redress Grievances, promote the good of
the Nation, prevent, Evil, restrain Sin, punish Sinners, and with greparing our
Hearts unto God, to fit ourselves for further Mercies. Rather with continuing,
as we do in our Sins, and through our unthankfulness, we provoke the Lord, and
are in a way to draw his vengeance upon us. The most notorious Sins of the late
Reigns were Whoredom and Adultery, taking other Men's Wives, and without Shame,
living with them in the sight of the Sun: Also downright and open Idolatry, yet
such were Prayed for, as our Religious Kings, and Defenders of the Faith; when
they were, about destroying it. So was Hypocrisy, in pretending to be
Protestants, though actually Papists; yet 'twas made Treason to say the King was
a Papist, or Popishly affected; which I say, to show how any Society or
Assembly of Men, chiefly when guided by Interest and Passion, is apt to Err and
be mistaken; and thereby Men were made guilty of Death for telling the Truth.
Well, these Sins and many more in Church and State, were under the late Reigns
the cause of our Complaints, and have been the grounds for our Deliverance: But
what are we the better for it? Though God Ezekiel. 16.50
has taken away some of the Sinnners, as he saw good, if the same Sins, in the
same degree, nay in a higher, do still continue among us, and are become our
master Sins, is not there Cause to put this Question, after God has so
graciously and wonderfully wrought for us, are these Distempers remedied, and
all the great Abuses we complained of, Reformed, nay are we so much as in
earnest about to do it? Though we may say, some few are in a small degree, yet
far from it as to others; for, specially those relating to God' Honor and
Service, are increased, and without restraint daily multiplied. We have bad
Examples whence we expected good ones. How careful are Men to promote their
worldly selfish Interest, and how neglectful of God's, as if it was not worth
minding? Hence it is that we see obscene, blasphemous and impious Books
publicly exposed to Sale in Shops, Auctions etc. without any Curb; and when
there has been other Books in opposition to those; how much unfaithfulness,
tricking and unfair dealings have been used to smother or mangle them about the
time of the coming out; nay after that, for Love nor Money one could not get
them put into the Gazzetts, among the Advertisements, though desired more than
once. So that Diana's Interest wants no Demetrius of several kinds among us.

Some think they may be of no Religion, others of any, and profess what they
please; some do vent and publish their Opinions, whilst others cheat and revile
their Neighbors, and wrong them in their good Name, Fortune, Liberty, and
sometimes in their Life, without little or no Curb at all, which is a bringing
in a-pace of Confusion and Anarchy; and all this, some would call the Liberty
of the Subject, which is with Impunity to abuse one another, and to run into
all manner of Licentiousness: Some think themselves Privileged to Defraud
others of their own, nay others go further to Strike those Persons whose
Character ought to be Respected, and that in such Places as require a special
Punishment, and upon such occasions as deserve Thanks and not Blows: Thus in
one kind or other, Judge. 17.6.
Every one does that which is Right in his own Eyes, as we read it was when
there was no King in Israel.

Thus God in his wise Providence suffers Abuses to Creep in, and sometimes to
Prevail (of which we may say, what our Blessed Savior speaks of Offenses, Luke
17.4.
It is impossible but that Offenses will come; but Woe unto him through whom
they come; (by Right it should be so with those who commit Abuses.) but also,
he from time to time raises Instruments in his hand for his People's good; and
makes them as Paul would have us to be, Romans 12.11. Acts 17.16.
Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord. As we read how his Spirit was stirred in
him in Athens, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. Not Lukewarm in
his Service, for such Rev. 3.16.
He speweth out of his Mouth. Nor such as Jer. 48.10.
Do his Work deceitfully: For such are Cursed: But for his Honor and the
benefit of his People, he makes use of such as Love, Fear, and Serve him with
their Heart; such a one was Moses to deliver Israel out of Egypt, and Joshua
to bring them into the promised Land: After the Babylonian Captivity, God chose
Zerubbabel to carry them home, Ezra to reform their Manners, settle Religion,
and build the Temple, then Nehemiah to build up the Walls of Jerusalem: So he
never wants Instruments to do his Work, and if some Men ly as Blocks in his
way, he knows well how to Remove them: Happy those whom he is pleased to make
use of for so good a Work: But as Rules backed with Examples, make a greater
impression, so I shall mention some, whom Scripture has proposed as Patterns
in matters of Religion, for after Ages to follow.

Asa, I begin with; for after the falling off of the Ten Tribes, he was the
first Reformer of the Kings of Judah: To his commendation it is Recorded of him
that 1 King. 15.11.14.
He did that which was Right in the Eyes of the Lord, as did David his Father,
and that his Heart was perfect with the Lord all his days. Whereof Instances
are given to show how he minded the true Worship of God, and removed Abuses
therein Committed. It Is with every collective Body, whether Ecclesiastical,
Civil or Politic, as with the Natural; in this, ill humors and destructive
are sometimes Bred and Formed, which it is necessary to Purge away: Thus often
Corruptions which cause Distempers, do creep into the sore-named Bodies, which,
to preserve the whole, ought to be taken away and Remedied. This good King
began his Reign with minding things of Religion; it is just that God should be
served first: The Right way for a Prince to get nis House Established, is to
take care of God's; he is that good Master who provideth for those Servants of
his, who approve themselves to be Faithful in his Service: But when they are
more Solicitous for their own Concerns than for his, he then leaves them to
shift for themselves; but former and later Experience show how ill they speed
that do so. Now let us see what that King did which was Right in the Eyes of
the Lord: v. 12.
He took away the Sodomites out of the Land; that abominable and unnatural Sin,
which God has so highly declared against, he punished; but stopped not there,
he set himself against Idolatry too, for, v. 13.
He removed all the Idols that his Father had made, and went farther, for he
spared not his Mother, and also Maachah his Mother, even her he Removed from
being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove; and Asa destroyed her
Idol and burnt it by the Brook Kidron. No Relation nor Quality should be
regarded, when it causes the Dishonor of God through Idolatry, Blasphemy or
otherwise. It Is a great Brand put upon Rehoboam's Reign, and a high aggravation
to his other Sins, Chap. 14.24.
There were also Sodomites in the Land, which to his praise, Asa his Grandson
took away, and removed the Monuments of Idolatry; for 2 Chro. 14.3, 4, 5.
He took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high Places, and broke
down the Images and cut down the Groves. Yet he went farther, for he commanded
Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and the
Commandments: Also he took away out of all the Cities of Judah the high Places,
and the Images. All this is by the Spirit of God called v. 2.
that which was good and right in the Eyes of the Lord his God. Pious Kings not
only serve God themselves, but also take care to see their Subjects do so: And
we find that when in Judah there was a good King, the People was also good, or
at least restrained from doing evil; so much were People influenced by Commands
and Examples from the Throne. Asa did not serve God in vain, but found the
fruits and effects of his Zeal, for it is added, v. 5.
Therefore the Kingdom was quiet before him. Whereby it is declared that the
Rest and Quietness of Kingdoms depends upon abolishing Idolatry, setting up the
true Worship of God, and suppressing all that is contrary to Piety; it is
further said of him, v. 6.
He had no Wars in those Years because the Lord had given him hest: And by the
Prophet Agariah. God told him and all fu^^ah the cause of it. Chap. 15.2.
The Lord is with you would you be with him: But if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. Thus the just and gracious God rewards those Princes who make
use of the Authority he has given them, to promote his Honor and Glory. This
King went on further, for after a great Victory, v. 9.10. etc.
He gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and they entered into a Covenant to seek
the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their Heart and with all their Soul;
that whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death,
whether small or great, whether Man or Woman. Whereupon they took an Oath, for
they swear unto the Lord, etc. and all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had
Sworn withal their Hearts, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was
found of them, and the Lord gave them Rest round about: after great disorders
in matters of Religion; what a happy Union of King and People toward a blessed
Reformation? O that we might Here see the like in Parliament, where the King
meets with his People in their Representatives. Here among other great Sinners,
we have execrable Sodomites and Idolaters, not only those who adore Riches,
Honors and Pleasures, and in their hearts and practices make them their Gods,
but also Idolaters, those who adore a piece of Bread, as they do God, and are
not minded, tho contrary to Divine Laws, and to those of the Land.

Asa's Son, Jehoshaphat, continued the Reformation, and carried it further on;
for 1 Kin. 22.46.
The Remnant of the Sodomites which remained in the days of his Father Asa, he
took out of the Land: also 2 Chr. 19.3.4.
He took away the Groves out of the Land, and prepared his Heart to seek God:
Also He went out again thorough the People, from Beersheba to Mount Ephraim,
and brought them back unto the God of their Fathers: He not only would serve
God, but also took great care that others should do so; and it is written of
him, Chap. 17.7, 8, 9.
He sent Men to teach in the Cities of Judah: For he knew it to be in vain to
profess Religion, except such were appointed who would instruct the People in
the same, and had power to remove all that is contrary to Piety, that is Men
good in themthemselves, and able to do others good. I wish all Princes would by
the Example of Jehoshaphat take notice how plentifully God rewards those who
serve him in Truth and Sincerity: Thus they might see how much it consists even
with their worldly Interest to perform their Duty toward God; this Character
Scripture gives of him, that v. 4.5.
He sought the Lord God of his Father, and walked in his Commandments;
therefore the Lord Established the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
to Jehoshaphat Presents, and he had Riches and Honor in abundance:
Furthermore, v. 10.
the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round
about Judah, so they made no War against Jehoshaphat: The Reason is given, and
it is this, v. 3.
And the Lord was with Jehoshophat; and why was God with him? it is in the same
Verse, because he walked in the First ways of his Father David. So, is any
Prince desirous to be at Peace at home and abroad, to have Riches and Honor in
abundance? Let him like Jehoshaphat walk in God's Commandments, promote his
Service, and enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, who is King of kings, Lord of
lords, and by whom Kings Reign.

But as nothing is perfect in this World, so those two Kings wanted not their
flaws, for not to speak fo their particular ones, as that of Asa for relying on
the King of Syria, for which Hanani reproved and said to him, 2. Chr. 16.7, 8,
9.
Herein thou have done foolishly, therefore from henceforth thou shall have
Wars as a Punishment, and also because, v. 12.
In his Disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians: That of
Jehoshophat was for Chap. 18.1.
joining Affinity with Ahab, and for helping him, which by a Prophet he was
rebuked for, who went to meet the King, and said to him, Chap. 19.2.
should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? There was
besides a common fault in both, worse than the others which were personal, and
hindered not God's Work from going on; for tho they had done much for God's
Service in the way of Reformation, yet they did not enough, not so much as they
ought and might have done; for both their Reigns are branded with this, Chap.
15.17.
But the high Places were not taken away out of Israel. This as to Asa; as to
his Son, Chap. 20.33.
howbeit, the high Places were not taken away; which might partly be through
want of a full Zeal in them, partly through the neglect of their Officers, and
partly through the Superstition of the People; because it is said, for as yet
the People had not prepared their hearts unto the. God of their Fathers:
However those good Kings may not be deprived of a due commendation, for that
only thing excepted, they went through the work of Reformation. O that we might
but see here actually some Attempts and Steps toward it.

Hezekiah has in Scripture the Character of a Chap. 32.32.
good King: He began his Reign with taking care of Religion, for he reformed
the great and many abuses crept into it during the several bad Reigns, between
Jehoshophat's and his. It Is said, Chap. 29.2, 3.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that
David his Father had done. It Is observed that he in the First year of his
Reign, in the First Month, without delay, the First thing he did, opened the
Doors of the House of the Lord and repaired them; which is a remarkable Example
for all Princes; first of all to settle the true Religion, and to procure that
God may be well served. But this good King stopped not there, he restored the
true Worship according to God's Institution, Advised, Exhorted and Commanded
the Levites and Priests to do their Duty about it: his own Diligence and giving
good Example is mentioned, for it is said, v. 20.
He rose early and gathered the Rulers of the City, and went up to the House of
the Lord, and what they went upon, was heartily, cheerfully, and speedily
performed, for it is observed that v. 36.
the thing was done suddenly; the Reason is given, For God had prepared the
People. Whereat both King and People rejoiced. O that now Here God were pleased
to prepare King's and People's hearts to seek unto and serve him.: But I fear
all our Minds and Hearts are so crowded and affected with worldly thoughts and
affections, that there is hardly room left for heavenly concerns, except out of
his infinite goodness, God be graciously pleased to make it. But let us hear
what that pious and zealous King did; and I wish all Kings of the Earth, were
like him: He went on further in the work of Reformation than his good
Predecessors had done, for he removed all Monuments of Idolatry, and every Idol
of Jealousy; even the high Places which others before him had not meddled
with, for of him it is Recorded how 2 Kings 18.4.
he removed the high Places, and the Images, and cut down the Groves, and brake
in pieces the brazen Serpent that Moses had made; for unto those days the
Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he called it Nehushtan, that is
a piece of Brass, in contempt, because it had been made a Tool of Idolatry; tho
at first it had by God's immediate and special Command been erected in the
Wilderness, and Miracles had been wrought by it: This he did, and for this
special Zeal of his in every thing, obtained this Character, that v. 5.6.
after him, was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were
before him: And to show that all this was acted in Sincerity and from his
Heart, it is said, he trusted in the Lord God of Israel and he clave unto the
Lord, and departed not from following him, but kept his Commandments. He was
not content to show his zeal in Judah, within his Kingdom, but also invited
others to do the like: To that purpose, 2 Chr. 30.1.
He sent Letters to all Israel and Judah, and wrote Letters also to Ephraim and
Manasseh, that they should come up to Jerusalem to keep the Passover; which v.
18.24.
many out of the other Tribes did. And the King, as also his Princes, gave the
Congregation thousands of Bullocks and Sheep; which liberality shows how Kings,
Princes, and others whom God has given means to, ought readily to bestow it
upon his Service, and to enable others to do the like: But to perfect what had
been so well begun, for in Religion there must be no trimming, nor doing things
only by halves; it is Recorded, Chap. 31.1.
Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present, went out to the
Cities of Judah, and brake the Images in pieces, and cut down the Groves, and
threw down the high Places out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. They began in Jerusaiem,
and followed all the Country over. This Head I shall conclude with this remark,
how God is graciously pleased, plentifully to reward not only in the World to
come, but also in this, a sincere zeal for his Honor and Service, as he did to
Hezekiah, for it is said, 2 Kings 18.7, 8.
and the Lord was with him, and he prospered whithersoever he went forth.
Furthermore, 2 Chr. 32.27. 28, 29.
Hezekiah had exceeding much Riches and Honor, and he made himself Treasuries
for Silver and for Gold, and for precious Stones, and for Spices, and for
shields, and for all manner of pleasant Jewels. etc. Let all Men take notice
how there are Rewards for those who promote God's Interest; and within their
Station procure others to do so, also Punishments for those who do not.

In the Person of Josiah, we have a pattern of a complete Reformer: There are
such extraordinary circumstances relating to him, as make us look on him with
admiration; for by 1 King. 13.1.2.
a Prophet, his Birth was foretold, his Name mentioned, and his zeal prophesied
of, about 300 years before he was Born: Then he was but Eight years old when he
began to Reign; and those tender years of his, were in a high degree seasoned
with Grace, for then 2 Chr. 34.1. etc.
He began to seek the God of his Father David, and declined neither to the
right hand nor to the left. Happy is the Country where such Kings are Born and
Reign, who as soon as they. Sit upon the Throne, take care of Religion, and to
suppress Sin. The zeal of this good King, Scripture sets forth as an example to
others, to teach what God requires of them: When he was but Sixteen years old,
he showed himself very zealous for the Glory of God, and when he was Twenty, he
abolished Idolatry, and restored true Religion in Jerusalem and in Judah, and
so continued to do in the v. 6.
Cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, Simeon and Naphtali, which belonged not to his
Kingdom; and because he would not trust others to do it without him, this great
Work, he would see it done with his own Eyes: For it is said, v. 4.
They brake down the Altars of Baalim in his presence, and the Images that were
on high above them, he cut down, and the Groves, and the carved Images, and
molten Images he broke in pieces, and made dust of of them, and strowed it upon
the Graves of those that had sacrificed unto them. The Altar in Bethel which
Jeroboam had built, and the high places he brake down, he defiled Tophet, put
down the Chemarims or Idolatrous Priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordained
to burn Incense in the high Places: He brake down the Houses of the Sodomites,
and so we may think he did of Baudy Houses, if there were any, for he aimed at
a general Reformation, whereof we 2 King. Chap. 22. and 23.
read the particulars: How much grieved was he when he heard the Words of the
Law, seeing he thereupon rent his Clothes! This his tenderness of heart, as of
having humbled himself, the Lord took notice off by the mouth of 2 Chr. 34.27.
Huldah the Prophetess. Now judge of the happiness of having pious Kings, by
the good effects and consequences thereof, for not only they do good, but by
their example influence others to do so: Often the good King makes his Subjects
good, Regis ad exemplum, many times the People follows the King's Example;
hence it is that in Scripture we read that when the Kings were good or bad, the
Subjects were commonly such as they, so like Prince like People, Because Chap.
35.7, 8, 9.
Josiah gave to the People of the Flock, Lambs and Kids, all for the
Passover-offerings, to the number of Thirty thousand, and Three thousand
Bullocks, and it is expressed, these were out of the King's Substance: So in the
next verse we read how that good example was followed, and his Princes gave
willingly unto the People, to the Priests and to the Levites: And to their
immortal Praise, not only their gifts are specified, but also the givers Names
are upon Record: Josiah's Princes were acted by the same Zeal, and they not
only worshipped God, but helped others to do so.

These examples are insisted upon, in hopes that at this present Time, and in
this Conjuncture when Sins overflow, and there is a necessity of a speedy
Remedy, it will not be in vain: Neither can any just exceptions be taken
against what I say; for it is not I that speak, but God; all is out of his holy
Word. The Trumpet of Sion must Speak or Sound in the Language of Sion: Happy
those who can understand the Language of Canaan; it is a gracious promise as a
Blessing to the Gentiles, Isai. 19.18.
In that day shall Five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of
Canaan and Swear to the Lord of Hosts. I write as a Christian, for Christians
about the things of Christ; therefore I lay aside human Reason, Wisdom,
Considerations and Style, to express my self in Christ's, that is Scriptural
Phrase, to please God and not Men; Gal. 1.10.
for if I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ: But my design
is, if possible after Romans 10.19.
God's Example, without distinction of Persons to move Men to Emulation and
Godly jealousy to outdo one another; and upon this, as upon every other
occasion to practice the Apostles exhortation, 2 Cor. 14.31.
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Chiefly Rulers, who are public
Springs, whence the People draw, whose carriage the Subjects Eyes are fixed
upon; and when the Princes heart is affected with zeal for God's Honor and
Service, it commonly passes upon and influenceth the People whose Head he is.
Therefore he should be careful of the way he leads them by, either into
Salvation or Destruction.

In the Christian Church also, after many Persecutions, Heresies and wicked
practices, God raised Instruments to do his Work, suppress Errors, defend his
People, and purge his Church of notorious Vices. Such were the Constantines,
the Theodosius's, and other Christian Emperors whom God made Nursing Fathers to
the Church: So in the last Age, at the beginning of, and since the Reformation
from the abominations of the Romish Church, some pious Princes in Germany, and
other Northern Countries, and in some Southerly parts of Europe, whose Names
are to their high Commendation Recorded in History: And here, Pious young King
Edward VI. never to be mentioned without Elogy, who for Zeal in his tender
years, might have been compared to Josiah, if God had been pleased to have
allowed him a longer Life; he upon all occasions expressed his Piety and
Abhorrency of Popish Idolatry; besides that, Providence made this Conformity
between those Two good Kings, both died young, One by the Sword, the other (as
strongly suspected) by Poison. Josiah not long before the Destruction of
Jerusalem and the Babylonian Captivity: And Edward, just before the Judgment
and violent Persecution under Bloody Queen Mary,

Commonly such matters as these, admit of necessary Cautions; thus when I was
upon the point of Slander, (to which what I intend now to say, has some
affinity) I spoke of some who under specious pretenses, as that they hate not
the Person, but the Hypocrisy, or such other thing which they invent, do put
abuses upon others, and thus to satisfy their Hatred, Malice, Revengefulness,
or some other disordinate Passion, would bring in their false accusations under
the Name of the cause of God, and by these means impose upon imprudent and
credulous Men, or easily persuaded those that are as ill disposed as
themselves, whom Solomon sets this brand upon: A wicked doer gives heed to
false lips, Prove. 17.4.
and a liar gives ear to a naughty tongue, for similis simili gaudet: Now in
this place I must enter a Caveat which is this, That about the great Work of
Reformation of Life, Manners and other Abuses, the Magistrates in the Execution
of the Laws, must be very Cautious how they receive Accusations and
Informations from private Men against their Neighbor, specially when the
accused are for one quality or other Eminent above the Vulgar sort; thus the
Apostle charges his disciple, against an Elder receive not an Accusation, 1 Timothy 5.19.
but before two or three Witnesses. They ought not to believe every thing they
hear, but must first endeavor to know who the accuser is, and whether he is
biassed; for in such Cases, sometimes, Gal. 2.4.
(to speak in the Apostles Words) false Brethren creep in privily to spy out
occasions of doing mischief, and avenging their grudges and quarrels; selfish
Men who would make God's Holy Name and Cause subservient to their own ends: And
if through their base way of Calumniating, they gain their Point; they are
pleased with, and applaud themselves in it; and as the Prophet says, they
rejoice and are glad, Habak 1.15.16.
therefore they Sacrifice unto their Net, and burn Incense unto their Drag: And
like the Assyrian boast of the Mischief which through the Credulousness of
others they have done; and say, by the strength of my hand I have done it, and
by my wisdom, for I am prudent: Therefore when you are about suppressing one
evil, have a great care not to make way for another. Hot headed and fiery Men
are not proper Instruments for the work of Reformation; they are fitter to
Destroy than to Build up, and commonly they will use means not conducing to the
true End. But the manner of doing things is that which Men should be very
Cautions in; it is not enough to do a good thing, but it must be well done, in a
due manner, the saying is true,

Prosunt verba parum, prosunt adverbia multum.
Non bona tam pensat, quam been facta Deus.
Will you get rid of Slanderers, then frown upon them, for an angry Countenance
drives away a backbiting tongue, or else who can be safe? Si accusare sat est,
quis erit innocens? A zeal for God's Glory is with some nothing but a pretense
when it breaks the rules of Charity, without which no true Piety: It Is highly
Commendable when sincere and real, but withal it must not be inconsiderate,
rather according to knowledge, and managed with meekness and Christian
prudence, for Prove. 25.23.
the Servant of the Lord must be gentle to all Men. What such Men call Zeal is
only an Effect of the violence and imperuosity of their Temper, and not a real
desire of God's Honor; it is more to please their passion than to serve God. 1
King 19.11.12, 13.
When God appeared to Elijah, he was not in the 2 Timothy 2.24.
great and strong Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the Fire, but in the
still small Voice. God does so when he comes in the way of Mercy; if otherwise,
it is in Judgment; and as God is Merciful and Just, Men are commanded to be so
one to another.

-- Peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit. --
Says a Latin Poet; which is true, therefore gentle and fair means must be
tried before you come to hard and rough ones, for they effectually work upon
some Tempers when the contrary do not: For this Reason I would have private Men
that are willing to promote the work of Reformation, the more to gain upon the
Spirits of Men, to make use only of persuasion, and leave the way of compulsion
for the Magistrates, whose Office is to see the Laws executed against hardened
and refractory Offenders; but ever to avoid base and false ways. But when all
is said, Reformation is properly God's work, who turns the hearts, disposes
things and Persons, and blesses means in order to it.

But now to our Times, for we are more nearly concerned: The Nation is wholly
overgrown with Sin in Soul and Body, we are quite overspread with that
Spiritual leprosy, so that with the Leper we may well cry out, Levit. 13.45.
unclean, unclean: And out of God's holy Word, the experience of all Ages, and
of our own, with a witness we may know the sad effects and consequences of Sin,
not only on the low Shrubs but also upon the talest Cedars. I can remember, (so
may many more) how within this half Century, God's Thunderbolt has, tho in
some different degrees, lighted upon the Heads of several Countries; I can name
Six, nay Seven, whereof Charles I.
one lost his life, and James II.
his Son, his Kingdom, Frederic III. K. of Denmark.
another for a while lost his Kingdom, and was a long time besieged in his
Capital City; Christina Q. of Sweden, died in Rome.
Two others left their Crowns and Country, not so willingly as they would have
had John Casimir K. of Poland, died Abbot of St. Germain in Paris.
seemed to be, and went to Travel and died in Foreign parts; Alfonso K. of
Portugal.
a Sixth one, was Transported out of his Kingdom, confined in a Prison and his
Brother raised upon his Throne: All these were Christians, tho of different
Persuasions; the Seventh Mahomet IV. the present Sultan's Father.
Emperor of the Turks, Dethroned and his Brother made his Successor. God forbid
I should pretend to dive into God's Secrets, and assign the particular Causes
of these Judgments; but I may boldly say, Sin was the general One; for except
they had been Sinners, they should have been no Sufferers; but let this make us
all adore and tremble at those Effects of God's wise and just Providence. The
great Psalm. 76.12.
God is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, as well as to other Men: When it
seems good unto him, he can drive Dan. 4.
Nebuchadnezzar from his Throne, and make his dwelling among the Beasts of the
Field, till he had humbled himself before him, for the most High Rules in the
Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; herein the Psalmist
concurs with the Prophet when he says, Psalm. 75.7.
God is the Judge, he pulls down one and sets up another. He has Angels
whereof 2 King. 19.35.
one can in one Night destroy an Hundred fourscore and five thousand Men of
Sennacharib's Army, and send him home to be killed by his Sons. The same God
who then did, does now Govern the World, and his Hand is not shortened, but that
he can still reach his Churches Enemies, yea, such ones as in Cruelty and
Falsness have outdone all the Nebuchadnezzars and Sennacheribs in the World;
and some wait to see what in God's due time, will be the end of such Pharaohs
and Oppressors as now are alive. When God chastises Men, and his Arrows are
fast in them, they may and must own themselves to be the Cause of it; and and
with King David say, Psalm. 38.18.
I will declare mine iniquity, and will be sorry for my Sin. It were well to
say and do so before the Judgment has overtaken us; to prevent it therefore,
bring forth Fruits worthy of Repentance: We know the Doom of the fig Tree that
bare no fruit, Luke 13.7.
cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? For Three years he had been looking
for fruit, but found none. God has been waiting for fruit from some of us, not
only Three but Thirty years and more, yet we are barren still; at the desire of
the dresser of the Vineyard, there is a reprieve granted for a year longer,
lord let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it and dung it, and if
it bear not fruit, then after that thou shall cut it down. As this is the Case
of many a particular Man, so it has been, and is in general that of the World:
Thus it happened with the first World, God for several years waited for fruit,
but finding none, at last his patience being tired out, he brought the Flood
upon them and tho they had been forewarned a Hundred and twenty years before;
yet, it took them unawares, for they were cating and drinking, Matt. 24.38, 39.
marrying and giving in marriage, and knew not until the Flood came and took
them all away: And just before the destruction of Sodom, two Angels advised Lot
to bring his Relations out of the Town, not to be involved in its Ruin: But
when Lot spoke unto his Sons in Law, they would take no warning, but Lot seemed
as one that mocked unto his Sons in Law; Genesis 19.14.
but they were soon hurried away in that terrible Judgment. As for us does not
our Savior say, that the coming of the Son of Man shall be as it was in the
days of Noah, unexpectedly shall surprise this World, as the other was; for we
are come to the Fourth year, the last of the trial; the First was from the
Creation to the Flood, the Second from the Flood till Moses and the Law,
wherein Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboim and all the Plains were overthrown, the
Third year from Moses or the Law, wherein the Seven Nations were destroyed by
the Children of Israel, till the coming of Christ, the Fourth from his first to
his second coming, when utter Ruin shall befall the impenitent and unbelievers;
let all Sinners mind this and tremble.

And now O Sinner, I speak without any distinction of Persons; I will try, and
then try rhy self whether thou art one of those who Romans 2.5.
after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up to thy self wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God:
Whether thou have Ephesians. 4.18, 19.
thine understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in thee, because of the blindness of thine heart, who being
past feeling, has given thy self over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness? Or whether there be in thee any thing of good Nature, or rather of
Grace, and something left of humanity? This may be known if thou will be
serious upon the meditation of the Love of (...). 3.19.
Christ which passes knowledge: Consider well how out of the motive of that
tree Love of his to thee and to me; he for a time parted with an infinite,
unspeakable and incomprehensible Glory, John 17.5.
which he had in Heaven together with the Father, before the World was:
Attended by Millions of Millions of Angels waiting for his Commands, and who 1 Timothy 6.16.
dwelt in the Light which no Man can approach unto; all this he was content to
leave, and Philip. 2.6, 7.
being in the Form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, yet
made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant; nay,
became Psalm. 22.6.
a Worm and no Man, the reproach of Men, despised of the People. Our human
Nature he took upon him with all her infirmities, only Sin excepted; for he was
hungry, thirsty, weary, sorrowful, and he wept. He often was Matt. 9.24. Mark
5.^0 Luke 8.53.
laughed to scorn, contemned and hated by Men, not for any fault of his, for he
had none; but for thy Sins and mine, which were the Judas that betrayed him,
the Jews that that accused, the Pilate that Condemned, and the Soldiers that
Crucified him, the thorns which fetched Blood out of his Sacred Head, the nails
that fixed him to the Cross, pierced his Hands and Feet, and the Spear which
pierced his Side. O Sinner, O wretched sinner, O wicked and abominable sinner,
I may say, can thou look upon Jesus in his Agony, sweating great drops of
Blood, his Soul sorrowful even unto death, and under such circumstances as was
necessary for an Angel to come down from Heaven to comfort and strengthen him;
can thou see and be unconcerned at all this? Thou see him upon the Cross
praying for thee leaning down his Head to Kiss, and stretching out his Arms to
Embrace thee, and shall not this work upon thine heart? He came down to save
thee, and will thou damn thy self? He came to destroy the work of the Devil,
that is Sin, and will thou in thine heart and bosom receive, entertain, cherish
and prefer before him that Enemy of his and of thine; so that thou had rather
part with Christ than with thy Sin. O stupendous blindness and madness; by his
Death and Passion he has delivered thee from the Curse of the Law, and of
God's wrath to come, he has subdued all thine Enemies, Death, the Grave and
the Devil; for as Christ was visibly Crucified, so Satan was invisibly; he has
through his precious Blood rescued thee from the Bondage and power of Sin; and
will thou still continue in it? Where is thy thankfulness to him who has done
and suffered so much for thee? If thou will not come to thy self from thine
heart to give him thanks and Honor, thou art as bad as the Devil, and worse
than all other Creatures; for when he was upon the Cross, the whole work of
Creation was out of order, there was a great Earthquake, the Graves were
opened, the vail of the Temple was rent in the midst, whole Nature put on a
mourning Garment, the Sun was darkened, no light of the Moon or of the Stars,
for there was a darkness over all the Earth, which made a Heathen say,
Apollnius Tyaneus.
aut Deus naturae patitur, aut Mundi Machina dissolvitur. Either the God of
Nature does suffer, which was true, or this World is come to an end: And thou
can look upon a bleeding Jesus upon the Cross, as unconcerned and with a
heart harder than the very Rocks, which upon that occasion rent: Then prepare
for Hell as thine own home and proper place, Job. 31.3.
for destruction is to the wicked. One look of his upon Peter, having made him
remember only one of his Sins, did work so much upon him, as that thereupon he
went out and wept bitterly; the Centurion and they that were with him, when
they saw the things that were done, feared greatly, and all the People that
were come together to see that sight, smote their Breast; and can thou be the
only spectator of the Sufferings he underwent for thy Sins, and not shed for
grief and sorrow Tears of Repentance, and part with thy Sins? Then thou art a
Monster in Nature. Know that thou can not keep both Sin and Christ, Christ is
in Heaven, where is no Sin; Sin shall for ever be in Hell, but Christ not,
except it be in his Justice.

But a thing which deserves our whole attention, thankfulness and admiration,
and which adds an infinite value and merit to our blessed Saviors Actings and
Sufferings is this, that they were the Actings and Sufferings, not of a mere
Man but of a God, tho not of the Godhead. If he had been a bare Man, the
obligation had been much inferior to what it is; but the same Person was God
as well as Man, which makes all Transcendently more precious than otherwise it
had been. God the Father did for our sins deliver his only begotten to death,
and that only Son voluntarily gave himself for us: O the exceeding riches of
God's Grace in his kindness toward us; The whole World can afford nothing to
parallel with this; indeed the examples of Abraham and Isaac were Types of, but
nothing to it; for what a comparison can there be between Eternal, Almighty and
infinite God, with a poor worm of the Earth, but dust and ashes, as he said of
himself? And what was Isaac, Abraham's Son to the Lord Jesus, God's Son? For he
is simply, properly and absolutely such; which fundamental Truth to be
confirmed in, I desire the Reader to take the following Scripture Evidences
wherein he is so called, for I will omit no occasion to assert it.

The first sort are immediately from Heaven; upon this account the Angel
Gabriel before our Saviout was conceived, said of him to the Virgin, he shall
be called the Son of the Highest, Luke 1.32. v. 35.
and the Son of God. But at his Baptism in an Authentic way, God the Father
declared him such from Heaven when this voice came thence, Chap. 3.22.
Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. It is spoken in the Second
Person, which applies what we read of, Matt. 3.17. where it is in the Third,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Confirmed in the
Transfiguration, Chap. 17.5.

Another kind of Evidences, tho from Heaven were upon Earth, John Baptist said
of the Jesus, John 1.34. Chap. 5.33.34. etc.
and I saw and bare Record that this is the Son of God; this Testimony our
Lord, tho he receives not testimony from man, as he said, yet to condescend to
the Jews unbelief, he appealed to, but chiefly to his Father's Nathaniess words
are another Evidence, Chap. 1.49.
Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel; Observe how the
Title King of Israel, absolutely taken is the same as God of Israel. To this
add Peter's Confession in his Name, and of the other Apostles, Chap. 6 69.
We believe and (observe) are sure, that thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God. Our blessed Savior, whose right and prerogative is to bear Record
of himself, as he told the Jews, for Chap. 8.14.
he knew whence he came and whither he went; in several places, as John 8.42,
and 10. I said I am the Son of God. Martha said, Chap. 11.27.
I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God. The end of St John's
writing his Gospel is, Chap. 20.31.
Acts 8.37.
that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. Upon this Faith
the Eunuch was Baptized by Philip. Chap. 9.26.
I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: And by this fundamental Truth
Paul after his Conversion began to Preach the Gospel, Luke 4.41.
that he, Christ is the Son of God; other places I omit, these being sufficient
to confirm this fundamental and essential Truth of the Gospel, that Jesus is
the Son of God, in a true and proper Sense.

We might bring in a third sort of Evidence, for not only Heaven and Earth, but
Hell also has owned that Truth; for Luke 4.41.
the Devils themselves cried out and said, thou art Christ the Son of God. The
very Heathens said no less, for the Centurion and they that were with him,
watching Jesus at his death, said, Matt. 27.54.
truly this was the Son of God: A Truth which no Christian, no Child of God
will deny, after so many clear Proofs.

This short digression I have been put upon, after the perusal of a most
damnable Socinian Pamphlet, of two whole Sheets, which is fallen into my hands
since this was under the Press, it has two Titles, the first, A Dialogue by
way of Questions and Answers concerning the Deity: The last, A brief, but clear
Confutation of the Doctrine of the Trinity, stuffed with the quintessence of
diabolical and most abominable Impieties and Blasphemies usual with that sort
of Men, with Texts of Scripture wrested and misapplied, with several
impertinent Objections, which again and again have been See Gailhard against
the blasphemous Socinian Heresy.
answered and exploded. That wicked Spirit is restless; neither Authority of
Scripture, true Reason, nor Acts of Parliament are able to quiet them, but they
will vent their venom, spiritual ignorance, and the gall of bitterness which is
in them, against the most Holy Trinity, and the Persons of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost. Foolish and cracked Men may be pitied, but when the humor turns
into Rage and Fury, then mad Men should be Chained up, to prevent their doing
others mischief. How often in this last part does that hellish Instrument
profane and take God's Name in vain, with saying good God, when he spits in
his Face, and curses him in his heart? But how much reason have we to cry out,
good God, that such horrid Blasphemies which make Christians hair stand on end,
should come abroad, and the Author go unpunished?

Poor England, within thy Bowels thou have the two most cursed things that are
or can be, and the most abominable to God, Blasphemy and Idolatry, wrapped up in
Socinianism and Popery: The one denies the Lord that bought them, to be God as
he is; the other, every day Crucifies him, and with attributing to the
Creature, that which belongs only to the Creator, namely Divine worship, and to
forgive Sins, has matched and concentered Blasphemy with Idolatry; that
Society under the notion of probability, does admit of any, tho never so
abominable Doctrine, and under pretense of directing the Intention, receives
all execrable practices; yet this is known, seen and suffered; but tho Men do,
God will not. But as punishment is tied to the tail of Sin, God in his due time
will make us smart for it: Are we thus rescued from Popery, when by a
detestable tolleration or winking at, against the Laws of God, of the Land, and
the Rules of true Policy, we are more than overgrown with it: I wish God does
not lay it to the charge of the Government; is it possible for Protestants to
forget the cruel Canons of the Councils of Lateran and of Constance, and the
Congregation in Rome, for the Propagation of their Faith, and the Extirpation
of Heretics, or can England forget bloody Mary's Reign, the barbarous Irish
Masfacre, which is still a bleeding, and what of late, James would have been
at, to have destroyed the Northern Heresy, as Colman in his Letters called the
Protestant Religion: This is fresh in every ones memory; and there are upon
Record the Injustice and Cruelties practiced in Bohemia, Silesia, and Hungary;
what bloody persecutions have formerly been, and now are acted in France, and
in the Palatinate? Are we quite infatuated? Have we forfeited common Sense and
Reason, that we leave a back Door open for Rome, to pour in her Emissaries
upon, and to blow the Fire of Division among us? The Inland and Foreign
Priests, who come over with all freedom, say as many Masses, and may be more
than are Sermons every day preached in the City, and use all possible means to
undermine our Holy Religion and the Government too, tho it be not minded, which
is a great Sin, and may happen to be soon followed with a heavy punishment: But
I must return to my main design, which tends to persuade Men to leave Sin and
all, to gain Christ, to Love, Fear, Honor and Obey him.

Out of these Considerations, let us all for God's sake and our own good, in
our several Stations, do something for him, who has done so much for us: Leave
off, punish and discourage Sin. Christ died for us, therefore for his sake,
Colos. 3.5.
Let us mortify our Members which are upon Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, etc. He was Crucified for us; then
let our old Man and his deeds be Crucified with him, never preferring to please
one Member, one Sense, one Passion before him, who is altogether lovely, ought
to be the desire of our Souls, as Haggai 2.7.
He is the desire of all Nations, and Isai. 63.1.
mighty to save that Strong One, out of whom came forth Sweeness, called, Rev.
5.5.
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whom in the New Testament we read of is
transformed into a Lamb, and so all along after represented by a Lamb, as it
had been slain, of whom may well be said what we read of Sampson, one of his
Types, Judge. 16.30.
the dead which he slew at his death, were more than they which he slew in his
life. O that I could so indear this blessed Savior to the Souls of Men as to
prevail with the proud for his meekness sake, to part with his Pride; with the
unclean, for his holiness sake, with his uncleanness; and so with every sinner
else, to part with his Sins in all kinds, or else resolve to lose Christ for
ever; for Christ has no Concord with Belial; be not mistaken, God will be
sanctified either by, or on us all.

The Song touching the Vineyard must be minded; Isai. 5.
it was planted in a very fruitful Hill, fenced, the Stones gathered out of it,
planted with the choicest Vine, a Tower built in the midst of it, and nothing
wanting that labor and industry could afford to improve it; yet after all this
Care, instead of bringing forth Grapes, that ungrateful Vineyard brought forth
wild Grapes: This is the literal Sense of the Parable, but there the Prophet
declares the moral Sense of it; how the house of Israel is the Vineyard of the
Lord of Hosts, to whose Judgment he refers the Case, betwixt him and his
Vineyard, so just and so plain it is against it, and thereby sets before their
Eyes their ingratitude and God's mercy. Now what the Apostle says, in another
Case, may well be applied to this, Romans 4.23, 24.
it was not written for his sake alone, but for us also. Thus I may say,
England, thou art the Vineyard, God has planted thee in a pleasant and
plentiful Country, thou have enjoyed the light and warmth of the Sun, the
former and the latter Rain, the upper and the nether Springs, and all Blessings
from Heaven; yet how barren of late, and now more than ever, are we under those
means of Grace? instead of Grapes and Figs, bitter and sour Fruits; the Olive,
Vine and Fig Trees are turned into Thorns, Briars and Brambles: How plainly,
abundantly and gloriously has God's Word been Preached here, I dare say, more,
at least as much as in any other Country since the coming of Christ; but what
fruits of Repentance, Faith, Charity, Holiness, and Justice have we brought
forth? Now the generality is quite degenerated, and God has as much cause to
say to us, as he did to the House of Israel, Isai. 5.7.
I looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression, for Righteousness, but behold a
Cry: Most, if not all follow the imagination of their evil Heart, we are over
head and ears in Sin; and what the Apostle says of John 5.19.
the whole World, we may say the most part of the Nation lies, and is suffered
to lie in wickedness: This should make us afraid of the Vineyards doom, Isai,
5.5.
I will tell you what I will do to my Vineyard, I will take away the Hedge
thereof, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the Wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down, and I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned, nor
dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns; I will also command the
Clouds that they Rain not upon it. That is, he will withdraw his Graces. The
Navy is England's Hedge and Wall, which of late has been Tottering, and has
not appeared with that Glory, Vigor and Strength as it did formerly; whereby
we lie more than ever open to an Enemy; and the fear and danger of it is upon
many: So there are Dangers, Fears, and Judgments, and we should remember the
Flood, how, of so many Millions in the old World, only Eight Persons escaped
drowning; and of Sodom, Gomorrah, and the other wicked Towns, only Lot and his
Two Daughters were saved from that signal Judgment. And if God was pleased
after the War, to send Plague, Famine, and other grievous Judgments upon us,
besides that of Sin, which we are overflown with, and we should say, Jer. 5.19.
wherefore does the Lord our God all these things unto us? Then shall thou
answer, like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange Gods in your Land, so
shall ye serve strangers in a Land that is not yours: As if he had said, as you
have done against me, so shall it be against you, and your punishment shall be
of the same nature as your Sin has been; wherein the Prophet foretells their
Captivity; and have not many of us instead of God, served the Idols of their
ambition, pleasures and riches, and forsaken Piety, Virtue and true Honor? Are
we not guilty of the like Sins as was the House of Israel, which the Prophet
mentions, with a Isai. 5.11.
Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning that they may follow strong
Drink that continue until Night, till the Wine inflame them, and v. 22.
that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle strong Drink: Is
not this the Case here? is not drunkenness an Epidemical Sin, again, v. 20.
who call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness; bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; that are wise in their own
Eyes, and prudent in their own sight; which justify the wicked for Reward, and
take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. Does not every thing
here reach some of us? But in the same Chapter the Prophet adds, the Harp and
the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts; but mark what
follows, as a mighty aggravation, but they regard not the work of the Lord,
neither consider the operation of his hands; an effect whereof is, therefore my
People are gone into Captivity: But that which is worse and damnable, therefore
Hell has enlarged her self and opened her mouth without measure. If it were
but the Grave, it were enough to terrify Men from such things, and in v. 24,
25.26. we read of further Judgments very terrible, with a therefore, to show
they are the fruits of their Sins; which should make us all fear and tremble.
They are God's own Words to the same People, to us as well as to Israel. Jer.
5.22.
Fear ye not me says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my Presence? If ye do
not, I will make you before I have done: For all these Judgments which ye feel,
my anger is not turned away, but my hand is stretched out still.

Not long before his death, Josh. 24.
Joshua gathered the People to put them in mind of what God had done for them,
to represent unto them their Duty, and gave them a strict charge about it, in a
remarkable circumstance, v. 26.27.
he took a great Stone and set it up there, and said behold this Stone shall be
a Witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord. God uever
wants Witnesses, and rather than fail, the very Stones shall speak: However,
he often is pleased to make use of weak Instruments, whose Testimony is not to
be rejected when they speak in his Name, and out of his own Word: As for me who
am come to an Age wherein I have little to hope for, desire, or fear from Men,
and though I had, I would always. Fear God rather than Men; therefore being
instructed by some experience, which my God has given me of his gracious and
wise Providence, do now upon this nice and important conjuncture, give in my
Evidence for God, and a serious warning to all Sinners in the Land; I begin
with, and speak to my self first, as the chief of Sinners, then to King,
Parliaments, Judges, Magistrates, Clergymen, and others, of all Conditions,
Ages, Relations and Professions whatsoever, as at the last and terrible day we
shall answer to God, every one within our respective Stations, as much as in us
lies, to encourage and promote Piety, and Virtue, to discountenance, punish
and suppress Error and Vice, and let every one begin with himself in his own
Person, or else, I denounce God's terrible and infallible Judgments upon you
and upon me, and these lines of mine shall upon occasion, if we neglect our
Duty, be Evidences against you and against me; this is neither time nor thing
to flatter, or to dally with, for Number. 16.46.
there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun; therefore, hear
that faithful Servant of God, Moses, as speaking to you, Deuteronomy. 30.35.
see, I have this day set before thee, life and death, good and evil, light and
darkness, Heaven and Hell, Christ and Sin, choose well, and be wise unto
Salvation: I have brought and laid a looking Glass before all, wherein every
one may see himself; therefore make a right use of it; as much as I could, I
made what I said to reach all: I hope none that is good will take ill what I
write; as for the bad, and impenitent, I neither intend nor care to please
them, truth does offend some, who thereupon harden themselves, others are
better for hearing it, and mend? these will thank God for the occasion he
affords them to learn by being told, to the other in Paul's words, I say, Gal.
4.16.
am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth; but know, I
will not betray it for any Man's sake.

Our Sins are many, great and frequent, and God's hand is lifred up against us,
therefore let every one, Prince and Subject, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Man
and Woman, Young and Old, mend and repent, and in his place do his duty, or
else, Amos 4.12.
prepare to meet thy God O Israel, If not in the way of Repentance, in that of
his Judgments, which I am afraid are hanging over our heads, at least we have
cause to think so; therefore hear ye the sound of the Trumpet, and know the
meaning of it; learn and be wise, for thereby God does invite us all to repent,
and to mind his work and Service, which is Honorable, Glorious and Profitable:
But if blowing the Trumpet in Sion cannot do with, but be neglected by Men,
then Joel 3.16.
the Lord also shall roar out of Sion, nay, has already roared, and if Amos
3.8.
the Lion has roared, who will not fear? It Is a terrible voice which
denounces Judgments, and thundereth Threatenings, and if yet by this, Men will
not be awaked from their Sins, then, at that Joel 2.31.
great, and very terrible day of the Lord, at last they shall come out of their
Graves, to suffer the punishment due to their impenitence and unbelief, when 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God.

May the great God, our most gracious Father, be pleased to prevent us with
Temporal blessings, to continue with Spiritual, and to end with Eternal, by the
merits and mediation of his only begotten Son, our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, through the powerful working of the Holy Ghost, in one most
simple and undivided Godhead, three Persons, Co-essential in Nature, Coeternal
in Time, and Coequal in Power, to whom be, by every Creature rendered as most
due, all Honor, Glory, Power, Majesty and Dominion, now, and for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan and Bible, without
Temple Bar.
FOur Tracts; 1. A shore Discourse about Divorce and its Causes, Fornication
and Adultery. 2. A Charge to Judges, Juries, and Witnesses concerning Oaths. 3.
About Infant Baptism. 4. A Letter to a Lady who has forsaken the Protestant
Religion for the Romish, The 2. Edition

Free Thoughts, in Defense of a Future State as discoverable by natural Reason,
and stripped of all Superstitious appendages. Demonstrating against the nominal
Deists, that the consideration of Future Advantages is a just motive to Virtue,
of Future loss and misery, a powerful and becoming restraint of Vice.

With occasional Remarks on a Book Entitled, an enquiry concerning Virtue, and
a Refutation of the revived Hylyzoicism of Democritus and Leucippus.

A complete History or Survey of all the dispensations and methods of Religion
from the beginning of the World to the consummation of all things, as
represented in the Old and New Testament, showing the several Reasons and
Designs of those different Administrations, and the wisdom and goodness of God
in the Government of his Church, through all the Ages of it, in which also the
Opinion of Dr. Spencer concerning the Jewish Rights and Sacrifices is examined,
and the certainty of the Christian Religion demonstrated, the Cavils of the
Deists, etc. By John Edwards. C. D.


