VVil: Bagnal's Ghost.

Or the MERRY DEVIL Of GADMVNTON.

In his perambulation of the Prisons of LONDON.

By E. GAYTON, Esquire;.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Thomas Johnson at the Golden-Key in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND Mr. GIFFORD, The Meriting Master of the Counter in the
Poultry.
Worthy Sir,
(Unto whom being gone from you I am still a Prisoner, and obliged in grateful
bands:) Suffer I pray si this escaped Bird out of your Cage (for there it was
hatched and fledged) to return (like a Robin in the Winter) to warm it self,
at your house, that is, to have the Protection of your Acceptance. I know the
Proverb will bite me, and say I am an ill Bird (for defiling or rather
publishing some undecencies of my late nest,) it is not Sir, with any intention
to increase the dung, but cleanse the Augean Stable wherein your Herculean hands
have labored, and daily do, to the very great applause even of those who are
not otherwise so well pleased with their Captivity. Nothing herein reflects
upon any one personally, and not in the least thought upon your self; The
passages are true, the mirth innocent, the Author is as he shall always
acknowledge himself to be Sir,

Your grateful Servant E. G.

Counter-VVork.
NO more (will Bagnall) let thy tale
Be read, of blades, who in their Ale,
Did spew, and fight, and shite, and stale,
In The scuffle.
Whether in Wood-street it befell,
Or in the Poultry, or in Hell,
The places are alike, and smell,
oth' ruffle.
It was our chance to be in one,
Wherein I wrote thy name in stone,
It is the monument alone
There Written.
And stands upon the two penny side,
One pair of stairs, 'bove them that 'bide
In The hole; by which a place is spied
To shite in.
Now ( Will) thy name, and so thy verse,
Deserves not to make Bumpkins terse,
Although of Paper there is scarce.
(For clensing.)
Yet as they did on Top of Paul's,
In thousand leaden scrible scrowles,
I must be writing like those Owls
Non-sense-In.
And having nothing in that place
Of Wit, snapt up (by a One W. Sergeant at Woodstreet.
hard face
Had little silver but his Mace,)
'Twas Copper.
Toth' very end of his red nose,
I did my self in thee repose,
And spent my time in verse and prose
Most proper.
But who shall ever find a night
Like thine for Tipple, and for fight?
Or who shall ever, so well write,
Or fancy?
When will Concenter such a crew?
Of Captain, Parson, and of Lu --
Ellis, and Lockwood that back flew
White Tansey.
No men will so resolved meet,
To lose their own to make thy feet
Famous through London and Fleetstreet
And upward.s
Beyond the Devil, or the place
Where once the Salutation was,
And (now in Salts) old Charing-Crosse
On Cupp-boards.
Where such a Lawyer as durst speak
Both broken Latin, French or Greek)
And thought himself in Law not weak,
To Ellis.
Ellis for Arms and fisticuffs
Beyond our Hectors, or the Buffs
That vapor in their Ale at Huff's
And tell lies.
Where shall we find such men or meat,
Which did themselves, and food defeat,
And yet had stomachs left to eat
The fragments?
Which to a wonder did abound
The pots and dishes too run roun
And men in meat, and drink were found,
It augments
The Bill of fare of the whole Feast,
Forbeards, and butter were then dressed,
Mustard and bands which in earnest
Are licked.
Two are at dinner with a face,
Hidd in thick Ling and wry mouth Plaise,
Which they without all fear and grace
Had kicked.
When that I fortuned to come in, September. 22. 1655.

Nothing was on the merry pin,
The Hole was likest to begin
The frolique.
But such a dismal night, as that
Without one Mouse, and but one Ratt,
Made all as glumme, as any Catt
With colic.
Nor shall our fancy here supply,
Where matter does it self Deny,
We will with what we find comply,
And write on
The Subjects as they loosely fell, The Hole.

And first of him, that from the Cell
Did through the yard (O foul to tell!)
So she on.
That from the hole toth' two penny ward,
He had bedighted all the yard,
And those that came ith dark were marred
In Plaster.
But not of Paris, unless that
Of the Bears homely Garden Platt,
But straight complaints were brought of that
Toth' Master.
For all the Wards from two to six,
In English mortar fowly sticks, A poor crazed prisoner.

These were old Braziers filthy tricks,
Who thinking,
To set their feet at liberty,
(For up all heels full swift did fly)
Left all his squitterd company,
Most stinking.
The Master as his place required,
The reason of the fault desired,
(For he saw all his guests bemir'd.)
They snifted,
And gave the Answer through the nose,
Which made him straight the man suppose,
Especially when One his clothes
Up lifted.
O villain Brasier (said the Master,)
Art thou foul cause of this disaster?
That no man can his foot set fast-here,
But slideth
As if the stones were all of Ice,
And all this from a nasty slice-
I Will mew you (sirrah) for this vice,
So 'biddeth
Loose Brasier fast, and in the stocks,
Repents with both legs under locks,
But his foul'd friends with wipes and mockes
Do fit him.
For they the nasty fool did jeere,
And on him do their Breeches clear,
As he does sit in the woeful chair,
All shitten.
Brasier himself thus painted seeing,
Not able to endure his being
(And finding well there was no flying,)
The fellow
Shook off the stuff, and wide it threw,
And well dispersed it amongst the crew;
For he did ding it, white and blew
And yellow.
So did Sir Simius, A Jack an Apes.
when he
Had laid himself full craftily,
(For Apes are full of Policy)
In The close-stoole.
In the new minted close-stoole-pan,
Where that her Ladyship and Nan
Her waiting Maid did now and than
There os-coole.
But while that he in knavery
Lay in the stool, full hastily
Came Nanny to her privacy
And sliced
So swiftly on Sir Simius,
All his new coat was pickled thus,
In stuff they call Merd-urinus,
Which hoysed
Sir Simius to such a mount,
He leapt from out the nasty Fount,
And called Nann's monky to account
For Dashing
His very fine coat and filthy Face,
Nanny affrighted left the place
And ran where that her Sister was
A washing.
But Sim (like Brasier) before said
His shitten pranks vbique played,
And fowld himself, foul others made,
He tripped,
Bedabled so into the hall,
Where gallants were a playing all
At dice and cards, the beastly squall,
All sipid,
Dances in's livery over the boards,
(And made foul play, but yet no words)
The gallants all in Nannyes curds
Were painted.
Had Jack A long tayld Monkey been,
H' had drawn it all along each chinn,
For want of that, things were but thinn,
It scanted.
So that the fewer were the stains,
Yet those spoyld all the Ladies trains,
And to the Butler went the gains
Oth' Table.
Which were full great, for left behind
Were Counters rich of every kind,
Which made the Butlers not much mind
The Dable.
But went away with Snift up snout,
And cast this pretty Proverb out,
Money is sweet, in shitten clout,
And thanked
The Gentlemen for their large vailes,
And for the shattering of the tails
Of Jack and Nan, and wiped his nails
In's blancket.
Now though the first Scene of our Story
Is in foul paper brought before ye,
(For which old Brasier now is sorry.)
A cleaner,
And neater tale, shall next ensue,
(Which will perfume the sprinkled crew)
And does hold forth a man of new
Demeanor.
One was too gross, and this too nice,
This swear the Prison smelt of lice,
Of urine, and of seige and mioe
And rats-turds.
The Man was not so much in the wrong,
(It Was true he said,) but for his Tongue,
Not one amongst the' inthralled throng
A hatt stird.
Used to those Aires, and not to his
They misled at his vanities,
And damn Rose water, under piss,
And vouched
Tantaublint Fumes, and those of Dungus,
(Which are for ever smelt among us)
With Celler stinks* and those oth' long-house
Nere crouched,
Nor ever should to Benjamin
Or Storax, or to Powder thin
Which cockscombes on their hair blow in
With puffins:
With which they do all floor their capes,
And look like mealed Shack an Apes,
All which their Ladies (often Time shapes)
Do snuff in.
Not in the Exchange, nor grand-le Martin,
(Wherein nor Major, nor yet comes cart in)
Affords such wholesome smells and certain,
As Play now
About our noses (Sir Milk soppe,)
So chucks the fellow under chopp*)
And straight one letts from his foul shop
Hary cane.
That is, a constant wind that plays,
From lower Ano, nights and days,
And never in one quarter stays,
But ranges
From coast to coast, from side to side,
And the whole compass through had tryde,
And Nose nore-east, nore-west does ride
In's Changes.
So compassed every snout, until
Tunnells and Nostrills had their fill; One belonging to the Law.

And my spruce Clerk too (will he nill)
Had's share on it.
Which made him reach and spit so fast,
(That all his stomach ran at wast)
And those that were about him placed,
Did stare on it.
But knowing he belonged to the Law,
They durst not quarrel with his maw,
For fear of querks, or some new Flaw
Or quillets.
The clerk did utter all his mind,
(But not a word let fall behind)
Though naught in's belly was but wind,
To Fill it.
Which made him move unto his chamber,
Not now so strong of's musk, and amber)
And up three stories he did clamber
To a lodging:
Which when he saw, in scorn he cried,
Go bring me to the Masters side,
It Is not a place for to be tide
A dog in
Blany the Steward said he must
Lie there, or in the hole in the dust,
For all the house that night was thrust
So Fully,
That he did verily presume,
There was no place nor empty room,
But what he made, since in he come,
In's gully.
The huffy puffy Stewards words,
Were to our Clerk like any swords,
He sighed and said the Lane affords
(Called Fetter)
Both better sheets and braver beds,
And pottage for our Totty-heads:
Where dine for three pence the Law reds,
Far better.
Then did he think to walk all night,
(But Candles are a precious light)
A penny two, with which you might
See nothing
Of Stools or Forms, but cobwebs thick
Which were both Canopy, and Ticke:
But to save charges he was quick
Uncloathing.
And there he lay all night, and shook,
(As if next Term had been mistook,)
And until Candlemasse must look
For incombes.
Then mumbling somewhat in his bed
He softly said, no more (poor Ned)
Do so again, this is the thread
From sin comes.
Ply thine own business Ned, nor let
Or Shoo^, or Fetter lane, more get
Or Rutting Alley, what we swett
At nose for.
In writing Brevlates in frost nights
By Dwindling twinkling small rush lights,
And fear no Devils, nor no Sprights
That goes for
The Fenchers not for us, unless
We spend our half crowns on brown Besse,
Which is the cause I do profess
Most justly.
I am thus mean imprisoned,
And 'cause I late so highly fed,
In such a hellish nasty bed
I must lie.
And drink my drink, as in some places,
They eat their porridge, with their faces;
(For here is no cupps, nor canns, nor glasses)
And liquor
If that you took it from the shore,
Where men do piss, and somewhat more,
It cannot be (I will be swore)
Much thicker.
O hard misfortune of just fate!
O Oxford John's O Oxford Kates!
Would I were now at any Rates,
A licking-
The dishes, where I, and my Trollups,
Did use to feast it in Scotch Collups,
Which I last night did vomit all up,
None sticking-
(Not by the way) so that the relish
Of all your dishes rare embellish
Is changed to maukish taste and hellish:
I am choked
With base Tobacco stinks, and Salt
That looks as black as sootie Malt,
With every thing I find just fault,
(Provoked.)
And now I must to Sermon too; Sunday morning. 23. September.

Which I must hear, for I cannot do
To pass the time (while he is in the pew)
As others.
Who both in Hopkins, and King-Psalmes,
Have never any Conscience qualmes*
But have their Pots and pipes in Palms
and Smother.
What ever honest Harry read, Your Pastor for that day.

(For he his Reading showed indeed)
And to the walls indoctrined
Profoundly.
And for his Auditors did look
About the house (and then on's book)
But they their smoke, no Preachment took,
Most soundly.
Only the Raven, A tame Raven in the Prison.
they call Ralph,
Sat under Pulpitt, to made me laugh
To see the Sermon-taking-chaugh
So pious.
But Ralph it seems was once complained
Of, that the Sabbath he profaned,
And was by Harry's means ordained
Toth' dry house. The Hole.

And why not Ravens to the hole,
Their filthy cawing to condole,
(Though Birds we know, have nere a Soul)
The Civil
Law does permit transgressing Birds
As well as Wefts, and strayes oth' herds,
May be impounded afterward
For the evil.
It Is on record a Country Widgeon
In law contending with a rich one, Ploddells case.

Without Replevy kept his Pigeons
(For eating)
His grain from off the common field
Ith pound, (nor were the pigeons seil'd)
And made the owner to him yield,
By treating.
The Raven, the aforesaid Ralph,
Of all the Prison is most safe,
For meat and drink he never pays
One farthing.
And can without (good Robin) go
Unto the Rose, A waiter for that purpose.
and to and fro,
Which for the rest, I tell you so,
S' a hard thing.
But there is Jack the boy, The Celler Boy.
more raving,
Then Ralph unfed, and always craving,
Or else no quietness you have in
The Prison.
Who pays, is all h'has learned yet
And how to carry, and to fett,
And on your money first to set
His eyes on.
But Jack and Ralph differ in notes,
Jack has' the sweeter, (though sharp notes)
For he does sing away our groates
All day long:
And Ralph is taught to cry Score, Score,
(But never Ralph said any more)
Nor Dunns us at out chamber door
For failing.
Touch pott touch penny, so that I
Had rather hear the Raven cry,
Then Jack should sing so sorrily,
It grateth
To pay ones money, before we drink,
And draw (as soon drawn as our chinck,)
My soul abhorrs it, and I think
It hates.
But patience (my friends) perforce,
Pray heaven it be not yet far worse!
And Jack and Ralph the lesser curse
Be counted.
Unless his Highness please by's power^
To open yet the Prison doors,
And let us pay our Creditors,
Once mounted.
Set us but free, and try if we
Shall not do more at liberty
Both for our Country, and for Thee
Redeeming;
Then if in Soot, and Smoke, and damps,
Eat up with lice, shrivelled with cramps,
For want of common Air, and vamps,
Dead seeming.
Bring but one smoaky Regiment,
From Woodstreet and the Poultry tents,
Let them be to Jamacha sent
And try it,
If a Mulatto, or a black,
Or Devil himself do fright them back
If once (they Mexico will Sack)
Come nigh it.
FINIS.
Dignissimo Armigero, pluribus (quam suo, and tamen suo) nominibus, Colendo;
Ephaestioni fidissimo, Compatri Secundo: Cruribus apud Meridionalem Fossam
habitanti, tum Salutem, tum Libertatem. Op. Vov.
Honored Sir,
BY more Titles then those in the Front known and esteemed, this South-Work of
your Operator in all the points of the Compass, desires to be in all
gratitudes presented to your large and noble hands. It was made in a Cyclops
shop for noise, in a Fair for variety of transient Objects, in a Cloister for
restraint. This (Sir) may come abroad at a cheaper rate, then his Master (being
Terme-time) yet it desires you to make a Vacation for it ( durante Termino) I
have styled the Poem Eurydice. I dare not warrant the Music Orphean: It had
been penned higher, but that you know it is agreeable with our place.

Ptelephus and Peleus cum pauper et exul uterque

Reijcit Ampullas and Sesquipedalia verba. Hor. de Ar. Poet.


Utile and dulce are the best dimension for one in the Rules.

Who if it were in the Tullianum of his Bastill, would without the leave of
Molop's make his Irons Clinck to the exhilarating of your noble heart: The
enlargment whereof in your honored Persons liberty is the prayer -- Sir,

Of your most obsequious God-son, D' Alta Speciosa Villa.

South-Work.
Eurydice, or a Droll upon his remove from the Counter to the Upper-Bench so
called.
WHen Orpheus did Eurydice remove,
And played his Mistress to this world above:
From her warm quarters (by his Harp or
Lute,
It Is hard to say, and therefore let us be mute)
Charon said not a word, Sir Cerberus
Did hang his ears. -- No doubt 'twas only thus
Upon his Instrument; how could he choose?
Dogs ears are always hanging, and so Jews.
But this digression, or Parenthesis
Pardoned, we say again, as first it is.
When Orpheus had done so, know if this wife
Were worth the dancing to a second life;
And if she were ('t may be) whether, or no
She got, by coming from her friends below.
The latter of the Queries I shall press,
Eurydice's exchange and worstednesse.
For she like that Salt Dame in mickel sorrow,
Enjoyed her pass from Sodom to Gomorrah.
And by the way, the patterns being alike,
Perchance the stories on one string do strike:
For some Divines do think, the place of Hell
Is, where that first blew burning brimstone fell.
Then for Eurydice, and Madam Lot,
For causes like, they both went to the Pot.
Perchance both salt alive and dead, but that
Strikes at the root, and is not yet so pat.
Our Master of the string (I don't say Creature,
For fear of being to a Wit a debtor)
That tamed had all the Monsters of the Forest,
Himself of all, had been the sad and sorry'st.)
If when all beasts the power of Music knew,
He could not fiddle so, to tame a Shrew.
Perchance 'twas so, and in some rainy day,
Pouting, and fasting she even dropped away.
But why then should our doting Minstrell follow
A Shrew so low, into a place so hollow?
Whence 'twas a thousand pound to a penny
That he had ere come back, or ever any.
But sure Eurydice by all this stir,
Was worth the fetching from the Stygian Curre:
Or Orpheus else (played he as well as Pan)
I Will swear he was but but such another man.
Supposing then, not granting she was chaste,
Not as they say from girdle to the wast,
But otherwise, that is downward: why was she
Translated to the place of Mummery,
That is to Hell? where silence is inflicted
For scolds as have at Hicks-Hall bin indicted:
Their Curtain-Lectures, and their Morning Peales,
Are all revenged with lower Commonweals;
Where Vixens sit like honest Nab in the Play,
Gagged up with Ginger-bread both night and day.
Others for canting, drabbing, and for guzzle,
Like to fierce Curres are always in a Muzzle.
Sisters of Billinsgate there sit upright,
Speechless, to the very roots untongued quit;
And that same fiery instrument, as 'twell
Deserves, is boiling still in hell,
Never to cool, or to be ever dryer,
For 'twont be heat by everlasting fire.
Eurydice, if in amongst this crew
Had been penned up in a perpetual mew,
For though the muzled Sisters, and o'th gag;
Of those their lesser judgments do not brag,
Yet when they cannot speak (though ones mouth's open)
That yet they may at last, it is their hope.
But all in vain. O therefore Women learn
This dreadful tale, whom ere it may concern!
For sure Eurydice mistook her way,
And had returned without old Orphens play,
And Grissil never came there, O learn of Grissil!
While yet you may, that you never come to this ill.
Status questionis.
EUrydice's concluded was a wife,
A man desires but one such in his life.
For had she had but one ill quality,
She Would never returned unto mortality.
"Perchance tho Orpheus that now sings not plays,
"Has met with such a one in his sad days,
"The Music of his life, not Instrument,
"Who tames the Beast in him, they call Content.
"If that Eurydice depart from hence,
No Music here, nor Music for her thence.
Question.
NOw to the latter Quaerie, where is the profit
Of her remove to Terra Firm from Tophet.
A scurvy doubt as ever was propounded,
And never yet by any scrupler sounded:
'Twas easily answered, had it been thus stated,
And for resolves you should not long have waited.
Whether from Egypt, or from Canaan,
From Onyons strong, and Leeks to cream o'th pann,
From clouted shoes, the brown loaf, and the last,
From a perpetual Lent, and constant Fast,
To be translated into Boots and feasts,
To be made Lord of men, and so of beasts:
It would be in the affirmative, I Will warr'nt you,
No, not one, no, that is nomine negante.
But it is not so (beloved Ephaestion)
This is the meaning of the doubtful question;
Whether that Hell, the Grave, or honest Mors,
Be not far better then a pass to worse.
From frying pan to fire. Eurydice
May shift her place but not her Misery.
And so Comparatis Comparandis
Whether the Sea-Slave better then the Land is?
Or plavner yet, whether an old shoo prove
Not full as good, as is a bad remove.
Answer.
WHat were the Counter rarities you have seen,
And these of Southwark instantly begin;
Wherein be pleased to follow Metaphor,
And let our Hell be still at Counter-dore,
From which we are removed unto that shore,
Where Is noise enough (and that is not hell therefore)
One Boat does serve to Hell, and that is Charons,
Hither a thousand ply, and they are fair ones:
In this like Charon too, or much thereafter,
He, and our Oars do only Cross the water;
And his is Stygian, and our pool is Stix,
Whence only Hanon got with all his tricks.
We are in aw, as one in Grammar Schools,
And ever learning* yet never out o'th Rules.
Lilly cannot save us, Lilly the Caldee cannot,
Lilly, whom longing Ladies, and Fools haunt.
Lilly, who erring on th 'Eclyps o'th Sun,
Turned Man in the Moon (had even his wits outrun)
This Master of the Ephemerides,
May cast his heart out soon as one of these
Out of an Execution, though to be
So, on the other side is to be free.
He has paid all, that holes at Tiburn. It Is
All that I know o'th Tripod Liberties.
But here is Torment above Gaol to us,
The Creatures pass as fruit to Tantalus.
The World moves by us, and before our eyes,
And we never stir. Copernicus was wise,
Who found the Earth did move, the Heavens we will
The upper Bench call, from our standing still.
From the Prison gates we see all droves of Kent and Surry.
Oves et Boves, all parts by our eyes,
(As if the Ark had dropped out of the skies
Like Argo) and did ply at old Trigs stairs,
So pass the Beasts in couples to the Fairs:
And Kentish Apples like Tantaleon fruit,
Glide by in Dossars, and we come not to it.
What mean the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing
Of greater Cattle thus? O Lord* they are going,
Would we were so, but we are in those brambles,
We shall not get out, though it were unto the Shambles.
O for an Hebrew An Instrument to hear.
Hotacousticon!
As the Creation goes Procession
In constant bleats, and bellowings to know,
Like Adams self, what every beast did low:
By learned Pococks help, it may be known,
He understands, the whole Creation groans.
Low on our fellow feelers in the flesh,
That drover there that made that deadly gash
In thy pricked flank (it was a Counter-goad)
Suppose a Sergeant of the Counter-Road.
The Grasiers that do set these men at work
Are Creditors enraged, that is a Turk:
Who has no longer confidence or Faith,
Then his submissive debtor money pay'th.
But to the rest oth' tortures of the place,
The Furies of the night I now will trace.
It Is now as you must guess, the noon of night,
That Is twelve a clock, if I do tell it right.
When roused by dismal lights, and hideous noise,
(Such as Megaera, and her Tribes enjoyes)
And intermingled wheels of swift Caroches,
I broke off sleep, that is my Bonus-nochius.
Now when I saw so many flaming lincks,
My fancy like to Rumots, straightly princks,
And I imagine it, a Coarse Encounter,
Such as that doughty Don did once affront there.
Some Kent Committee-man, or one of Surrey,
Whom these Caroches to the Devil do hurry;
Dead of a surfeit of Debentors bought,
Of cheated Soldiers of a thing of naught.
(The purchase of Church Lands) and now this man
Of Bishops state is come but to a spanne:
It is his last desire to be interred
In some small Alley that to Paul's adhered,
Which by its new found name most fitly may,
Be all all such purchasers last Golgotha.
But O the error of my whimzied brain!
Nor so, nor so, and then I looked again,
And saw some dozen link-men spitting ptrough,
And smoke and froth from their chafed chapps do blow.
Drove of Surrey Hoggs.
What think you, did they push so with strong breath?
The ancient Burgers of Genesareth,
Some thousand Swine, who coming nearer whin'd,
As if the Devil were in um, or behind
Elpenor changed, was not a goodlyer pigge,
Nor oould with these our Surry Porkers swig.
I wondered at their lights, and pomp, me thinks
It should not be alive, when dead their Cut into sawsages.
Links
Upon no other cause, I guess the Certain Jews which had a Congregation in
Southwarke
Jews
Their Temple amongst us did of late refuse,
Because of these profane and unclean guests,
Which made them change their ceremonial nest.
Near to black Madges in the Paris Garden,
Bears are more clean then Swine, and so's Kate-Arden.
The Hoggs and Jews are past, these to the Banck-
Side, those to them who try u'm in the Flanck.
And thus deluded in my first conceit,
I went to bed again, covered my feet,
And started this same Query, whe're or no,
There Is any happiness in our Bur-rough? A noble friend of the Authors.

And truly honored friend, and guest o'th leg,
I must conclude it absolute in the Neg.
And further then the South, as said the wise one,
There Is none, dear friend, not under the Horizon.
Wherefore we change the cure indeed, not state,
And our condition is, as 'twas of late.
Therefore Removers that intend, beware ye,
You will not mend your selves in our Trans-mare.
FINIS.
Hanons Escapes and Pranks.
WE have heard of Jupiters escapes,
How often he shifted Forms, and shapes,
To bring about his lustful rapes;
So Hanon,
As if begott of Hanon Jove,
Did all his brains, and man's lights prove,
To get so many a Remove,
As any one.
Yet did he never go or trudge,
For Habeas Corpus to a Judge,
He knew they owed him an old Grudge,
Which made him
Rather to firemen to apply,
And Locksmiths his best ingenie
(Yet feared most things that he came nigh,
Betrayed him.)
Jove to get Laeda swomme a swanne
And loving Mutton put Wool on,
For he was but a Whoring man,
And rutted
Through all his Cretan Provinces,
To Vitiate his Princesses,
At any thing of comeliness
He butted.
But Hanon was not for Love stealths,
But Robbing states, and Commonwealths,
For picking purse in drinking healths,
Or blowing
Up Locks, or Bars, or prison gates,
He could not be contrould by the Fates,
If he came to the bars, he sete
Them going.
As by Experience we know well,
At Newgate what of late befell,
Where he did show such tricks, as hell
Cannot fellow.
For he in Prison close was laid,
And heavy Irons his legs made
(As his bedfellow often said)
All yellow.
So that he did full sore complain
Unto his Copesmate of his pain;
And told the man that he could gain
His freedom,
For all those Irons, if that he
Would vow a friendly secrecy,
And swear that he should instantly
It see done.
The fellow was of nature kind,
(For he before in's heart could find
To have two wives, as some now blind
Maintain good.
And that we may as Turks use do
Keep wives as many as we know,
Our 'states will serve for to allow
Drink and food.
This courteous soul connived long,
And Hanon with his Water strong,
Not Aqua vitae, did unthong
His Irons.
And every night going to bed,
He laid his cloggs under his head,
Which in the morn he fastened,
TO admire ones;
And what he did to's Iron vamps
He did toth' door, and them unclamps,
For he for those had screwes, and cramps,
And Augurs.
And so released himself one night,
From off the place far out of sight,
All watches guards, spies in despit
And Maugre.
This was a queint device, but he
From the upper Bench had made him free;
Before this piece of knavery,
And feigned
Himself to be most highly loose,
Which got him freedom of the house,
And for few days his back door sluice
Maintained --
With mellow Ale, and loosening Oil,
Which in his body kept such Coile,
That he was suffered often to soil
In open
Air, (as they say) he would cry, I run,
And made as though his buttocks spunne,
But then he had a way begun
To gropen
In the back side, and the next run
He ran indeed out of Prison
And stayed no more, but scourd his gunne,
And Farewell
Toth' Upper Bench and lower too,
He Will come no more toth' stool to you,
But hopes to hear, how all you do,
And are well.
As he at leaving of his load,
Which he desires may there abode,
Until he take again that rode:
Which never
Was in his thoughts to come into,
H'has Business now else where to do,
In what he left undone, do you
Perse-ver.
Thus Hanon now is free again,
And right secure, never to be ta'n;
He straight is making for the main,
And sorts him
Among the Merchants for a waft.
But now for all his cunning craft,
He^s like to have but a poor draught,
Which a-mor^s him:
For as at dinner he was frolic,
He had almost the worst of all luck,
Which put him to a fit oth' Colic,
At Table.
Was one had seen him in the Prison,
And ever kept on him his eyes on,
Which made our Hanon to advise on
A Fable,
Of passing men unto Barbados,
He hired a vessel with much a-doe
And fooled the fellow with Bravadoes,
And high-words.
But he did act his matters so,
That Hanon should him think no foe
(Although he seemed his face to know)
By slie-words.
Then made as if he were mistook
(One man may like another look)
And so his leave abruptly took
Oth' Gallows.
And left him in his languages,
But in a trice to the Mayor betrays
This nimble Scourer of the ways,
And follows
With Officers unto his lodging:
This crafty Squ^re that now is dodging
Into the Water like a Gudgeon,
And took him,
And in the County guards him brought,
'Most to the place where once he wrought
His late escape, which never he thought
To look in.
And now his noddle he does ply,
His moneys to the guarders fly,
Newgate is even in his eye,
If once in,
He shall be ti'd both neck and heels,
They will no longer trust his wiles,
By which he every one beguiles,
They Will trounce him:
They paid full deer for his last trick,
Brisco and Turnkeys still are sick
Oth' qualmes, that this Escaper quick
Then raised.
Besides the Widows of his friend,
That for his sake came to his end,
Thither have vowed Hanon to send,
Amazed.
At apprehension of these things,
(Fear lent him sure and ready wings)
So from his bribed guard he flings
Most nimbly,
And into diverse holes conveighs
Himself, and unknown ways,
And leaves the Bumkins at a gaze
Most trimly.
He knows forewarned to have a care
Of coming out in common air,
Although the coast be never so fair;
But whither
Can Hanon go? what place has he
Not cousen'd by his roguery?
Nor France, nor Spain, nor States are free:
For thither
His theevish arts have carried him.
From Holland he did lately swim,
And did a Boor of's money skimme
Most neatly.
The story I shall now afford,
As I have heard it word forword:
'Twas done, and is upon record,
There let't^y.
And Hanon now my Lord appears,
Good clothes as any Lord he wears,
And as a Lord he rants and swears,
And topeth.
And at a Boores of good estate
He lodges, has his servants wait,
Two rogues that highly of him prate*
Which mopeth
The silly Butter box, that he
Believed every History,
And thought him a man of dignity,
And manners.
Nothing he talked at meat or play,
But of Besse of Bohemia,
And of the French, and Spains array,
And Banners.
So that his Lordship all commands,
The Froken waited on his hands,
And with the basin humbly stands,
And towells,
To wipe his Lordship after wash,
For which he gave the Froken cash,
And promised her beside a lash
O'th bowels.
He gave to her in charge a Whelpe,
Which he had stole from one at Delph:
'Twas very neat, but wanted help.
His Hoastesse
Must feed the puppy with a spoon,
For he intended it a Boon,
Unto the Queen. And thus in Town
He boasts.
The Whelp with all the care is fed,
A pillow for his shocked head,
And lig upon his Lordships bed
Most roundly:
For she did fill it still so full,
And hushed it in her German Lull,
And made it sleep (the doting Trull)
Profoundly.
If that his Lordship went abroad
The Puppy did with her abode,
And was not an unwelcome load
Upon her:
For she would have it in her lap,
And give it milk, and childrens pappe,
And put it in her husbands cap
For honor.
When that his Lordship did come in,
The Whelp was called for, must be seen,
The servants said that it had been
In The Chamber
With his good Landlady, for which
My Lord did instantly beseech
She would his Lordships eye enrich,
To clamber
Up to her quarters, which were high,
And very full of Huswifry;
And there did Hogens Treasure lie:
He spied u'm,
Upon a nail a bunch of keys,
Which he into his Poke conveighs,
And with good words the Froe betraies,
And tries u'm,
There took he Gelt, Argent and Or,
My Lord next day, the Court was for,
And said he would send for's Whelp the Mor-
Row morning.
She washed the Curre, and trimmed the shock,
From his round crown unto his dock,
There wanted not a vacant lock
Adorning:
Because the good Queen of Boheme
Must have it as the fool did dream,
The Puppy looked like clouted cream,
So white it is.
But my Lord Hanon came no more
To see the whelpe, or the gul'd Boore,
Nor came not near the Frokens lower
Meph^t^s.
So for all the household vailes,
She had her own and Puppy's tails
As a kind Foy, while Hanon sails
With His purchase.
But like a Slave, he would robbed the Queen
Of Casket, and the Plate wherein
She washed her feet, and left her in
A poor case.
Thus fleshed in Royal spoils, the gull in
Less then two weeks arrived at Colen,
And there pretended to be sullen,
Or rather
Sick with a Pox, but from those sot's
He stole the Plate, and drinking potts,
Of him the Covenanting Scots
Call Father
Of their poor Country, and so comes
Along the land of Drumms and Gunns,
And lists himself among the Thrums
In Flanders.
There on the Conquering side awhile
He served the French, and did beguile
The Monsieurs of their pay (that is spoil)
And manders
They do not Antwerp take, and all,
And leave the Spaniards not a wall,
Nor yet an Ox, nor Ass, nor stall
To lie in.
Thus does he vapor, and next day,
The Rogue to Leopold runs away,
And for the King D' Hispagnia,
Is crying.
These voices straight do mount him up,
With the Austrian Duke he dares to sup;
And to the Catholic King a Cup
He swallows
Of rich Canary, and does vow
The death of Thurene, that kill-Cow:
And as he drinks, he knits his brow
In fallows.
The Dons entreat this gallant blade
Unto their Quarters, and there made
Him welcome, for the words he had
Protested.
But in the night, he, and his Rogues
The Spanish pockets dis-imbogues,
And out of the house himself collogues,
And rested
Not, till he came to the English shore,
Where he was at it as before;
He thought to have robbed the world all over,
But mist it.
And if he had not made this pass,
He had been hanged up for an Ass,
Upon the tree near old Pan-crasse,
And twisted.
FINIS.
A Letter of Hanon from Duynkyrke.
MY friends of Newgate (late so called)
Whither I have been often halled,
And ever by my own wits bayled.
I do salute you my Signiors
( Custodes of my Prison doors)
More kind to Hanon, then you Boores.
For they unto my tricks consented,
The bolts did yield, and bars relented:
And not like you have yet repented.
Much trouble has possessed my heart,
About my late unknown depart,
Indeed I went out like a Fart,
Never to return unto that place
We Are scapes alike, nor of like pace,
For those do ply about your face,
Which I must not: For if Bris-co
Should smell me out, he straight would go
Unto your Justice for a Quo --
Warrant, (as they call it) which
Would bring me forthwith, where my breech
Would be a cold, in Proverb speech.
Who would return into your Land,
To wear at last a hempen band?
Better to die on Callice-Sand.
I know some paper has been lost
Since my arrival to this coast;
But the poor Ballad-makers most
Have suffered, 'cause I suffered not,
Those may supply my escaped lot,
To Paper, or to Hang, is all to the Pot.
I would have wished my friend of wives
(More then the English Law connives)
Had saved his own with their two lives.
Hab, nab, the fool did simply choose
Two such (as brought him to a nooze)
Both which a man might gladly lose.
'Twas true, the man did love the wast,
But otherwise was vengeance chaste;
No more words ont (the worst is past.)
He was no apprehensive Scholar;
Had he but been my follower,
He Would slipped his neck out of the Collar.
He was too easy to confess,
How I did use my self to undresse;
I knew 'twould never come to less
Then swinging for it. What ever you do
In breaking the commands, or so,
Never my friends break Proverbs too.
My Breech is now on Spanish plat,
It scarce has done its pit a patt,
It shook like any hunted Wat.
But got to shelter at Duynk^rk;
In that small Sanct'ary I will lurk,
And be as merry as a Turk.
Hither if you do please to send;
The charges of my Vicar friend,
Who was my proxy to the end
I shall defray, and for the blacks
That both his Wives had on their backs,
Or if that place any blews lacks;
If in new Prison they chance ly,
Or in Bridewell the beetle ply,
I will discharge all willingly.
It Is my last asking, let them speak,
If he alone had that same Freak.
Have not they changes every week?
No doubt they have, the man was wild
To take two persons so defiled,
To save them, cannot he get with child.
Wherefore my Banquers of mol-Friths
I charge my accounts in Faggots with
A noble for the field called Smiths;
In which these Widows of small praise
(For heating others all their days)
May have their most deserved blaze.
And thus defying every whore,
All Prisons, and the English shore.
Vrv' Roy D' Hispagne, lets loudly roar.
Postcript.
Farewell, without behang'd.

Your most slippery-friend. HANON.
Duynkirk 31 September. Still. novo. 1655.


CHARACTERS.
The Preface. Lectori Libero.
NOne are better Geographers then such, who trusting to their own Observations,
write what themselves (not Ptolomy) have discovered. Upon that reason Francis
Lord Verulam is accounted amongst many a greater Philosopher than Aristotle,
and by all then Pl^ny Senior, because he wrote by experience and costly trial,
more than by Books. Belief is good in a beginner. A sucking Mathematician may
lap in Sands, Helyn, Drake, Forbisher, and the rest, but it is not manlik
always to be fed with a spoon; they must get Quadrants, Cycles, Epycicles, and
rules of their own, if they will be good Carpenters; or if there be an
obstacle, or prohibition in subjecto, that is at home, (disability) then let
them get as good a Master as Aristotle had, and use his purse, as Sir Francis
Bacon did his own. For the right forming this Character of a Prison, and some
others depending thereupon, it has been my misfortune to be upon the place
(blown thither by an ill wind, and kept in by a worse) so that I have some
advantage of those* who perchance have adventured on this subject (by the ear.)
That Pencill-man who will draw to the life, must have the Lady present; a copy
of her countenance is not so good. Having therefore given you to understand,
that the Decipherer took the lines in full view, you may (if you find fault)
say, his Organs were near his Object, and so wanted a convenient distance, that
is, a remove to the Rose, or a surveigh to the three Crane Taverns. Or else,
that there is some malignity, or vehemence in the object, which may not be
altogehter denied (for the party desired to be further off) or else there is
some defect in the Organ it self, or a gutta serena on the Optic Nerve, or
else Caput malum, which is Caput malorum. In plain, that his brains were ill
situate; that is, in a Calves head, or else the time of the Moon (as indeed it
was not beneficial, being upon his restraint in the Wane) did not serve for
the augmentation of that higher Ventricle; and so (as in the decrease it is
evidently to be seen) his Rabbets brains perchance, were shrivel'd up for want
of the Full assistance of that supplying Planet.

Be it how it will, we must to our work, there is no living in a Mill without
grinding, and a blind horse must starve, if he cannot turn round. Take
therefore free Reader (and in that most free, that you may chose whether you
will or no) these short solaces of him, who labored to make his Prison of
Force, his retiring house of choice, his Tullianum, his Tusculanum. It will be
of little or unconsiderable cost to thee, which cost the composer hot water, as
they say, and burnt Wine too (thanks to the Donors) for aquae merae potoribus
nihil scribitur, as says the Gentleman of Rome, and a Poet too, who had as
good Sack in his own Cellar, as my friend at the half Moon. And so I conclude
this Preface, which if it walk abroad before its Master, let the Preface have
this for his frontispice;

Hei mih^ quod Domino, etc. The Character of a Prison.
OMne simile non est idem. That is, for fear of misunderstanding, every Collar
is not a Devil: or by way of inference, therefore a Prison is not Hell, though
there is devilish doings in it. I do rather believe (though no no red letter
man, for mine is a nigrum Theta) that a Prison is Purgatory, for in it are the
several L^mb^, Patrum Fratrum, Minorum, et Ma^orum, Virorum, Foemi^arum, and
infantum. To be short, here are Cells (that is Wards) for all ages, sexes and
provisions; and though a child cannot legally be committed* yet a child being
Committed for in Prison, may be justly kept there (during the Mothers
detention.) From the Soldier to the Monk, here are places of Discipline; a
hard bed for the man of the Cowle, and hard board for the man of the Sword. The
Prison yet (that we may not quite be at loss with Hell) is in some
descriptions of it very much the same; as especially, from whence there is
(without Herculean Friends) never like to be any redemption. It is Purgatory to
its qualifications and intentions, for it cleanses your silver from your
dross, by a segregating virtue of extracting your money from your bodies. In
this it differs from Hell, because hell gates are always open. In this also it
agrees with Purgatory, that you may go in and out for your money. It is cantoned
like this last, into Limbos, viz. the Masters side, the three-penny, two-penny
Wards, the hole Masculine and Faeminine (if those make two.) There is Locus in
Ca^cere, which Sir Thomas Moor, when Erasmus drank Sack in his Cellar called by
the denomination of whole-Hel: and let it go so for the Cellar with us. For
here are evident signs of that old Tophet. In the midst of day are horrid
lights* but not of the Sun, which to one coming out of it, makes the place as
dismal, as a candle burning in a horses head, Sceleton in a dark night. The
Incense of the place is worse to the Lungs, then that of Brimstone in the
other. Cottidian Tobacco horrifying the twilight of the Cell, and making each
man look like a Devil to a visiting friend, yet hiding our own durtinesse in
his proper velope of obscurity, and natural vizard of hot mist. The friendly
Offices this Virginian plant (for since the late Imbargos, we take no Spanish
nor before) affords the constant plyars of it, are its Salves and remedy
against the damps of the Cellar, where fire and water are part of the
tormentors, especially when they come to be paid for. As about Bloomsbury, and
the utmost parts of Westminster, they cry and sing water up and down the
streets; so here, beer and smoke are sung in to the pitiful receivers, who
must drop a tear before they taste, either the silver of the eye, which procures
forbearance, or else the very gold and blood of the heart, which is ready John.
Here (strange to tell) we drink fire, that is, smoke, handsomer then water: for
our beer is by word of mouth to one another but our fire is never out of our
own mouth, nor to be participated but when we never care what becomes of it, or
whither it goes. As in Hell, it is thought the Devils are the less
tormentors; so here, our fellow Prisoners lie heaviest upon us, and are to a
new commer, worse then new flies to a sore leg. The Fees of your brethren, and
their expectations, or rather dependancies, being greater then the Jaylors. The
first step to your exhausting is your Garnish, which if your pocket have not,
the outward furniture of your body (be it Hat or Cloak) must supply. After this
loss you may chance (by being acquainted) get somewhat, which I presume Hell
is free of, it being Clibanus Maximus, that is, the fiery Oven, and it is
supposed that lice do not like so hot a quarter. The several Wards are (as it
is in the place forenamed) in order of sub, and supra, that is subjection. As
in the one, Murder may not have the same fiery Chair with mansslaughter;
buggery not the same stool with Fornication, (if this be not rather a purgatory
guest) nor may pocket-picking be in the nethermost pit with Sacrilege. So
neither with us do the debts of the lower Form presume to mingle with those of
the higher. Round O. S. or half Moons, or long Megs, must not take place of
Cart-wheeles, and the greater Orbs of of chalk, that is for illustration; a
prisoner of forty shillings head must not piss by one of five pound. And so
respectively unto the Hole, where the Senior Collier or Brasier has the
precedence, and lies upon the Table, That being the Upper Bench, on this side
the Water. Something in the hole (for it is filthy coming in, and worse
getting out) is like the custom of Conjurers and Witches, who are near of
blood to the Devil. For as Necromancers are safe in their circles from the
Spirits they raise up: so these sons of blackness and darkness chalk out
every night the dimension of their undisquieted lodgings, and lie in white
enclosures, with never a rag over or under, which they undenyably sleep in; and
that chalk is as dangerously wiped out, as that in the Cellar. Soly in these
Ivory beds our Knights of the Inner hole, as conspicuous, if you could see
them, as the Knights Templars within their Iron Palisadoes in monumentall
stone. And to say the truth, I know not which bodies are harder. If I were to
choose a Perdue-man for my life, I would take him forth from these Probationers.
And if he lie not a nocte in noctem, as close as a Spaniell, or a Setting-Dogg,
let him live on nothing but the quick provisions of his body, without the
relief of the AlmesBasket for ever.

The whole place may be aptly called, a diminutive Babel, where are all Tongues
spoken by persons in as great a confusion; every one is a builder, and every
one ruined; lime, sand, and stone, in these words are every day called for,
viz. the Interest, the Principle, and Security: these are spoken, not
understood and replied to. Here the Spaniard and the French lie lovingly
together, and (whatever they do abroad) without the Popes interpositions, are
very well agreed. The Dutch and English tipple stoutly, and not a word here of
Amboyna. Butter and Bacon being the great loss on the German side, and twelve
shillings a Barrel with excise the joint grief of them both. Want of measure,
and a scanted Summer, makes Van Helmont look, as if Duked' Alva were rose from
a jugg pot to torment the Netherlands again. Methinks when I see this Petite
barrel of Hidleberge draining the Cellar of all its inundations, it puts me in
mind, that the Contractors for the Fens in Lincolnshire, are in a possibility
of more curses then ever; that is, that the work may go on. So then, the
Epitome of the Universe is a Prison. It is the All-Nation Office without a
mistake. It is the Babel, not of dispersion, but collection, and from all
corners of the earth we meet in the hole. It is an Ark of men, not of beasts: a
Cage, not of birds, unless of Tom Browns, and yet all these are taken. It is
(to conclude) a net, but not of fish, unless some sharks may nominate the
whole. The Characteristicall Counsel for this place is taken from a Grammar
example.

Redime te captum, quam queas minimo. Spend little, either in foolish words, or
vain expenses, and you will have the more for your creditors in the latter
direction, and he will have the less against you in the first. So farewell to
the Character of the place, I would I could say so to the place it self.

A Sergeant.
A Sergeant is in one respect a Gentleman, for he wears a Man, or rather a
Yeoman, a creature of a Spaniell kind, who is at a rate to fetch and carry,
when he has found, he spits in his mouth at the charge of the creditor, and
damage of his prey, which he mumbles more roughly, then a water-Dogge a Duck.
They are men-setting-doggs, and are as often beaten as rewarded. The two Counters
are their Asylum and refuge* where the Sheriff is their Romulus: For those
walls like his, must not be leapt over. In his own life he is a Libertine, and
denies it to all others: six days in the week are for his own use, but the
seventh he hates, because of his own resting, and not arresting: Nothing on
that day is a more deadly sight to him, than a prey, that he in vain waited for
on Saturday: He curses no Acts but one (and that was the most noble) of
spoiling his sport on Sundaies. Howsoever he may seem to the public
Government, for you may mark him back and breast like a City Coach, he is an
hypocrite, for he has two faces, that is, his Yeoman, and his own; then he
has two carriages, one in his mouth, and another in his hand; he arrests you
in the name of O. P. and out of hand with the mace of C. R. His Coat is party
quartered, with the Harp and Cross on the outside, and the Lion, and Luces in
the inside, without a Christo auspice to this, or Honi Soit, or God with us to
the other. His station is much like that of Wisdoms (in the Proverbs) in the
corners of the streets, where if he catch his prey, he is straightway upon the
top of the house. His first device, after his arrest, is his prisoners credit,
which for a while he will smother, in some smoaky house near his Counter, which
is all a Prison, but the name, and for the nature of it more unmercifull.
Having housed you (for then he has a hundred businesses) he leaves you to his
man leech (the Yeoman) who is to suck you till the blood comes, and pumpe each
side of you, to know what waters your pockets draw, if he find your silver
sucker out of case, and that you have no metal men to mend it (that is a
friend at Maw) he is in such have to go to his Sergeant, as if the Devil drove
him. In short, they will after a five shillings draining of Sack, be in plain
terms with you, and for seven shillings a day, give you leave to lodge a spit
and a stride of the Counter, which is the cheaper lodging of the two, and the
less offensive, by the want of their society. In what Schools of inhumanity
they have been bred, I know not, but I conceive u'm to be in tuition to the
fallen Angels, who with their own integrity, have put off all love to mankind.
Their Ambuscadoes and blind stairs are no less incentives to cruelty, being
commonly sculking holes about the Butchers at all the bars, or in
Beast-markets, where with their brother Drovers, they drink till their own
markets call them away. He is only qualified in Rose-Wine not water, and love
the miter for the Sacks sake: souc'd perchance in a chargeable pickle, you
shall have him more man, and reasonable when he is dead drunk, and out of his
senses. Then, and then only, the Yeoman is Master, by the politic distance of
his place, kept sober against his will: But for the unmercifull usage of the
next man, it were good to make man like Master, and so adventure an escape (if
you could) into Prison, and leave them for the reckoning: It would confound
them in their hair-brained search more, then if they met the creditor that feed
u'm, who with two brethren of their own coat, will bring them (if they have
good fortune) at once to the prison, and their bail their own Prisoners To
conclude the men are of Gods making, and their own marring, their Office
permissive for a time till Doomsday, which they love, for the reason abovesaid,
alike with Sunday, because it puts an end to all arrests; then perchance they
may find the mercy of the Superior Jayle, and the kind Officers thereof, who
will put them into the hole (if it will hold u'm) where they shall feed upon
the fragments and almes-basket of old Nick, and have hot diet for their old
charity in s^cula seculorum.

A Character of a true Friend.
AMicus certus in rein certa cernitur. Is a ^^re friend to a fast friend In one
who visits you in prison, and labors to help you out: spends more money then
sighs, is sorry for your misfortune, but more sorry for his own, that he
should not alone be able to do all for you. Hates super faetation in Courtesies
as in conceptions: which makes him a Pythagorean to the story of your
mischance, for fear of the danger of Scoggins wifes tale, which made a secret
the fable of the whole Towns.

He does untie his purse for you, and bind himself. He gives Physic of two
natures, Opening as to your person which by his security he unlocks. And
Lenitives and Domulsives to your Creditors. He is his friends Icon Antopsicon,
the m r. h r and looking less whereby he dresses himself, and makes addresses
to others, nay, his eyes too, whereby he looks abroad. He is the Clubbe and
the Hercules, his rescuer and defender his Lions skin to inwrapp him, and the
Pillars to prop him. He is a Crown* not of Thorns, to his Dear head. The
Oil, not Vinegar to his wound. He is more practice then Counsel, more
Samaritan then Levite, more learning then Scribe. He is in his person a
Physician, in his practice a Christian. The second Edition of Religio Medici,
and the first of Practice of Piety. He is true beyond the Oath of Hippocrates,
and takes not only care for the Been esse, or state of your body, but your
personal state. He is a Civilian in Galens capp, a Littleton with an Urinall.
He gives a Glyster to the Law, when it is too costive, and he lets it blood
before the Calenture of an Execution. He is Galenus, as to his dat opem and dat
opes, which is all one with him, he gives both Dose and Fee. He is Justinian
in his civil respect and honor of you. He is of all you but bones, which he
will take off, though he shackle himself.

His Originals are e familia Redemptionis: and his rise and procedure of the
house of Medices.

Uivas ut per te alii vivant,
vt ego valeam vale.
Scr^ptum in personaunius ad plurimos magni (licet hic nullius) nominis Medicos.
A Friend in a Corner, or helpless Friend.
IS one of a just and true Sympathy, yet wants the Powder, who feels the wound
he cannot search, he does not make scurvy faces, and worse shruggs, and say he
is under a vow, (that is, to do no good for any man) but inwardly mourns, and
condemns that condition* which himself cannot help to those that can: He
prays for all prisoners and captives, but has not so done with them. Most men
will turn them over to God, but he does not leave u'm till by Gods stewards
he have recommendation from heaven. He is too pitiful to censure, and so let
his judgments devour his mercy: he looks upon the misery, not the means,
how it came about, upon the wounded man, and does not condemn him for riding
without a sword, or losing his way or his company He is afraid in that, of
being a greater robber then the Thiefs, to take away reputation is higher
felony then to steal clothes, or pick a purse: He is a friend in a corner in
earnest, for he dare not show his head in the Street: he dare fight the whole
Serjeantry and yeomanry in the open ^ield, but is afraid to meet a man of these
in the City. He is a Sunday visiter and prays all the week, he is indeed
(except the place) your fellow prisoner for six days, and only bayl'd on the
first day of the week. He is heartily sorry for you, and in fear for himself,
that that one day (wherein he may serve you) may be taken from him. He is the
goad of the fatt Bulls of our Basan, and the whipp to the D^ll friendship of
the Age, which he drives only upon that day, when all other markets are not
suffered. He is in a corner too really of his friends heart, whence it is a
impossible to remove him, as for the other to remove his affection. So that
imprisoned to each other (more then for another) they are mutually bound to
another, though not for, and stand engaged Soul for Soul, though not body for
body.

Farewell till we come to light.

Certain Quaeries, very useful in their resolve^, and Antidoticall to those
in Prison.
WHether Joseph, Paul and other holy men before or after their Imprisonments
might owe any money or no?

Aff. For Joseph, it is very probable he did, or else he was shrewd put to it,
for his Brethren took away his Coat from off his back, and those who would do
so, would not leave him one penny in his purse; then they sold him to the
Ishmaelites for money, but it is not expressed that they gave him one farthing
of the purchase, so that it is plain, that he was in a borrowing condition.
Now the son of a Patriarch would not steal, nor should the seed of the
faithful beg their bread; quid medium? then he must needs borrow and if
borrow, owe, and ( rebus sic stantibus) is not able to pay.

Secondly he was a Divine, which is a vates originally, and to this very day
that Tribe has little or no chink.

Thirdly, Questionless the Butler and Baker both lent him money, for he would
not sell Gods gift of Divination as some do, and make a Trade of Nativities,
(a gift not of the same Doner.) Then by the event of that exposition of their
Dreams. He desired the Butler to remember him when the effects of his augury
made him great, which remembrance was not for nothing.

4. All Commentators do conclude, that the afflictions of Joseph, that is the
Church, and adherents to it, are many, but want of money a chief one.

5. Jeremiah was in such want, that he had not bread to put in his head. And
El^ah was so put to it for sustenance, that a Raven, was sent to feed him: it
falls out contrary with me, whom two black-Coats endeavor to starve.

6. Paul was in debt, and for a Brother bound body for body ( vide locum) and
paid the money, and sued not the Counter-bond.

7. Peter confessed openly, Silver and Gold have I none. Now it is a Catholic
and Primitive quality (ever before Usury came into the Church, and the power of
lending) to want money.

Now first may be replied, it is just to lend, and as just to have ones own
again* The merciful man lends, that is, freely (Brother) not with interest.
The wicked borrows, and pays not again (a hard piece of Psalm that.)

Answer* to pay, is either punctual and precise, which is called in Scriveners
phrase, Keep touch, that is, to a day; Or it is large, and at long run (a word
now obsolet, and out of the Notaries understanding, especially good liking) it
was in the Primitive times, When God shall enable me, as fast as industry, and
ingenious ways shall accommodate him. In this latter and more liberal sense,
every one must pay his debts, or else he is an Infidel; but for the
circumstance of the day, vide Rob. Randall, in Epigram de Aere alieno. Vid.
Censuram Imperat. Justin. de Imposs.
Nec Caesari, nec Alexandro licebit numerare
Pecuniam, ante receperint ( haec sufficient.)


Quaerie the second.
Whether one Christian may arrest another, as is usual in New and Old England.
Aff. As to my self, there is evidentia facti, it is done, nor will I dispute
the fieri debuit of it. Let the Creditors examine their own and my necessities,
and judge of the equality.

First, I say, (and yet it is not observed) that in Turkey, under an
Antichristian Prince, it is contra-Apostolick counsel to do so.

Now we are all Christians, (God be thanked) and fellow sufferers (God be
praised) and may sue one another to the end of the Chapter.

But all general rules have some exception. Therefore in case thy Brother be
not worth a groat, throw no more money away upon him.

2. If he desire mercy, show as little as you can, because as you mete, so it
shall be measured to you.

3. Take heed of your supposed friend, the Gaol, lest that which you imagine is
your politic compulsory for the debt, do not poison the debtor, and so actio
moritur cum persona. that is a habeas Corpus that will exanimate a creditor.
But to prevent such a Ghostlinesse in mine, I removed to better air, that I
might so preserve my self to be their fast friend: Wherefore in such a case
take somewhat, and work not for a dead horse.

4. In New England, if your estate will reach to it, you must pay as far as it
will go, take what you can find after eight years sequestration, there is
scarce a sweep left for a Kite.

5. In old England they make over their Estates to defraud their Creditors. The
Estate I had was an Office ( durante vita) would he were whipped that made it
over.

6. I but your wife may have something (God forbid else) but there is a reason
for that, before this of Creditors, the provisons of so near a relation (not
being counted cheats) but Law, and Joyntures, and Matrimonial settlements
(even in his duris temporibus) have escaped others-gate clutches, then
Creditors. In fine, all Casuists count it lawful, under the arrest of two
friends, to be his Wives Almes-man, his Creditors day-labourer; that is, to
keep your self from stirring in the first place: and in the next to discharge
a good conscience to others. So I do arrest this question, and for the present
lay it up with me in Superiori (ut loquuntur) Banco.

Querie the third.
WWhether it is more proper or convenient to a Prisoner to sing Psalms, or
drink Sack? Ad parts.

I say first, the Query was ill put, and it was ill done to put any difference
betwixt Sack and Psalms, the two great cordialls and consolatories of human
necessities should be kept in inviolable friendship, they are like man and
wife, not to be separated under a curse (nay not in Prison these) This indeed
(beyond Saint Paul's dispensation) does without mutual consent, restrain, and
interpose betwixt those enclosed pairs: But by Psalms they sing themselves
together, and by Sack keep up the tune. Now whether the Hymn should precede, or
the Hymenaeal, there is the point. Wherefore to reconcile these two seeming
different Sisters, like the two Universities, I will say only this. Distingue
tempora et summus eris, etc. as the School says, In sensu diviso, non
composito.

As for example. Before the Sermon, even in a Prison, and so after, a Psalm is
most proper, though Sack to the Minister (for spiritual Corroboration) is very
comfortable, both before and after, if it exceed not the Churchwardens pint.

But if the Prisoner came lately from his obdurate Creditor, or be in the
Collar, or at his short commons, then to call the Psalm of All people, were
the next way to leave the poor man never a bit. Therefore I do most
peremptorily conclude, that a Psalm is not any way needful at such a time, or
a very long Grace, for fear of a neighbor thief with a shorter. Sack then (if
you had it) is most proper, and according to the rules of Physic, very
disgestive: but we prescribe rules, not money, you must recipe of that Q. S.
even where you please. And for your Apothecary, we come in again, go to the
Miter, the half Moon, Sun, or the Devil, if it be not too chargeable with a
waiter to go so far.

According to the practice of that admirable Physician, Doctor Butler, and
prime Grobian of that faculty, and the Sectaries of that opinion, there is
hardly any room for Psalms, at any time of the day: For ter in Die (that is
quotidie) Sack is prescribed, that is, ante caenam (which we render according
to our English way of eating) before dinner: Then in ipso prandio, that is in
the moment of dinner, though not in the moment of eating, unless you eat, more
Senatorio, like an Alderman, and then you may put Sack into Custards and mince
Pies; or else more bonorum soc. and so put Claret into your Surloyn of Beef,
and so the case varies. Then thirdly, which is the sum of all the business,
and (unto which few Prisoners can arrive) it is allowed, and perpetual
probatum upon it, that Sack (without Falstaffs discovery of Lime in it) is to
be taken post prandium likewise, without limitation; it is Putlers case, and I
will not contend in Sack with so eminent a Doctor.

I shall not make any long and tedious decision of this scruple (having at this
time a cold) which makes me incapable of balling or singing either, and
requires more appositely some buttered Sack. But notwithstanding I shall not be
swayed in deteriorem partem in my conclusion, by any personal partiality, and
bodily inclinations. I say therefore, as it was answered to me, scrupling,
whether he should best call the Lords day (for that name did not relish him)
Sabbath or Sabbath? friend, you may Say-both. So as for Sack and Psalms, sing
not the 119 Psalm, for that is too long a conscience, unless thou art arrested
for the Hebrew Alphabet. Nor drink a Runlet of Sack, unless thy grief be so
big, that thou must venture to break thy belly, or thy heart will break.

The wisest of Kings allowed Sack to a sad heart, even to a very plentiful
dose, for he advises to drink until a man forget his sorrow, which will hardly
be done by a half pint.

A little wine is prescribed in the person of Timothy to the whole Clergy, so
that wine taken in a moderate way (not so uberiously as to quarrels, talking
of Divinity beyond our capacity, or going into the houses of the women in the
streets) is Canonical.

Psalms are as authentic by the practice of Paul and Silas, who by that rare
Church Music (for they knew not Hopkins and Sternhold) sung themselves out of
the Prison, and the Prison into a Church, which the singing Psalms of our
days do not bring about. But this younger Sister of single vows has sung out
that elder of Instruments. So that to sing Psalms with Paul and his Brother
S^las is not permitted to any Prisoners now, those extraordinary gifts ceasing
with their persons, and but for a time residing on themselves, for the time
came when Paul under the persecution of Nero sung his own Dirge, and so to
execution.

To conclude to my Fellow Prisoners, of Psalms you may have plenty, use more
of them, of Sack you seldom have enough, use less; but of every lift of the
hand to the head, have an I lift my heart to thee, and it is well enough: When
you are in the midst of your mirth, forget not that you must return to sit down
by the waters of Babylon; and if you would have less of Meribah, drink less
of the Merum: But drink some, something proportionable to the allay of your
condition, for fear your turning wholly Rechabites (refusers of the
Creature-comfort) should lapse into Ichabods, and die the sons of desperate
sorrow and disconsolation: which Deus avertat, and so I put an end to these
Queries, would I could as soon to your Ceremonies.

FINIS.

