A LETTER SENT To a worthy Member of the House OF COMMONS, Concerning The Lord
Shandois Coming to CISSETER To Execute the COMMISSION OF ARRAY.

REad in the House of Commons, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for Edward Husbands and John Franck, and
are to be sold at their shops in the middle Temple, and the King's Head in
Fleetstreet. August 22. 1642.

A LETTER Sent To a Worthy Member of the House OF COMMONS.
Worthy SIR,
We are bold to present you with the passage of business, yesterday at
Cisseter in our County of Gloucester, my Lord Shandois having last week sent
several Letters to diverse of the principal of the Gentlemen of our County to
give him a meeting then and there, our Countrymen and the Volunteers got
notice of it, and apprehending that he came to execute the Commission of Array,
there came at least a thousand Armed men to assist the Townsmen, who had with
posts and chains fortified the Town to keep out horse, and they did all purpose
to keep my Lord out of the Town, if he did not promise and protest that he did
not come to execu^e the Commission of Array, which he solemnly did to diverse
Gentlemen that met him upon Randcomb-down, and to some of the Townsmen, who
observing that he came not with above thirty persons, and those no weapons but
swords, brought notice of it to the Town, and so he was admitted in, and after
dinner the Justices of Peace and other Gentlemen being in conference with my
Lord, the Soldiers and Armed men came and beset the house where they were, and
demanded of my Lord, wherefore, and for what he came thither? he Answered that
it was only to confer with the Gentlemen for the peace of the County.

Then they required him to deliver up his Commission of Array unto them, or
otherwise they would bring him to the Parliament, at length upon meditation and
entreat of the Gentlemen, the Soldiers were content to depart; if my Lord
would put it under his hand that he would never execute the said Commission,
nor any others for him in any part of this County, but would oppose and hinder
it to his power, and that he would maintain the Power and Privilege of
Parliament, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subjects, with his Life and
Fortune, all which, being in extreme fear, he condiscended unto, and a note
being drawn to that purpose, My Lord, Sir Robert Tracy, and some others put
their hands to it, which did in some sort pacify the Soldiers, yet a great
many not herewith content, did protest they would bring my Lord to the
Parliament, and would not otherwise be satisfied a great while, yet with very
much entreaty, about eleven of the clock at night they departed to their
lodgings, intending to speak with my Lord again this morning, but he being
still in great fear, was conveyed away on foot very privately by Sir William
Masters and other Gentlemen thorough his house, let out a back way and so
departed, the Soldiers coming to look for him this morning, and finding him
gone, were extremely enraged, and had like to have pulled down the house, took
his Coach and drew it themselves into the Marketplace, cut it and tore it all
in pieces; the Gentry and Commons of this County do generally declare
themselves against the said Commission.

Believe me this is a true relation, I was an eye and ear witness of it, and
the main body of our County resolve to keep their Protestation; not having else
at present, I remain

Your obliged to serve you, John Giffard.
Cisseter, the 16th of August. 1642.
FINIS.
20. Augusti, 1642.
Read in the House of Commons, and ordered to be forthwith Printed.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


