THE DOWNFALL OF ANTICHRIST: OR, THE POWER OF PREACHJNG, to pull down POPERY.

In a brief Treatise on 2. Thessal. 2 8.

And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.

BY JOHN GEREE, Pastor of Tewkesbury, in Gloucestershire.

London, Printed for Thomas Underhill, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL JOHN WHITE, Esquire, and to the rest of that
Honorable Committee for RELIGION.
Most worthy Sir,
MAny years ago, a Parliament sitting, I began this Treatise, thereby to have
added my coal from the Word, which is as fire to have kindled Zeal, where
there was power for the promoting of Preaching, which Parliament miscarrying,
made this birth then abortive: But when the fame of this Honorable Committee
in this happy Parliament came abroad, I was again encouraged to consummate
that, which before was inchoate: and now most worthy Sir, to you I send it, if
it may any whit encourage you to go on with your glorious design, who have
encouraged me to go on with this mean piece; what greater encouragement to any
work, then evidence when it is finished it will be of worth to answer the
labor? This Treatise will demonstrate, that if you set up Preaching, you give
Popery her most deadly and uncurable wound: and what can be a more glorious
work? did you know with what joy, and prayers to God, the designment of your
Committee for this purpose, did every where provoke, you would easily
conjecture what exultation and Hallelujahs the effecting of it would produce,
and that would be no small spur to you: as no Committee has a more
acceptable object, so I believe none has more, or more powerful Prayers, then
this of yours, which I doubt not but will procure good success: this as it is
the Confidence, so the daily Prayers of

Your Worships Servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, JOHN GEREE.

THE DOWNFALL OF ANTICHRIST.
2 THESE 2.8. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the Spirit of his Mouth.


THis Prophecy is now fulfilled, and so cleared: Prophesies cease to be
Mysteries, when by accomplishment they become Histories.

While this wicked one was obscured, so was this Text, but when his person was
revealed, this Text was unvayled: hence the difference between Divines,
ancient and mod^rne, about this wicked one; they could not see him because he
was hid, so some of them mistook the Cloth for the picture, the let for him
that should have been revealed, supposing Nero to have been that wicked one.
Others of the Ancients, though in the Questions quid, and qualis sit
Anti-christus, what, and what-like Antichrist should be, they spoke
appositely, yet in the question quis sit, who should be this wicked on^, they
having only mystical Visions, not performances, there they were misled, and
mistook.

But the later Divines looked on after the Let was removed, and this wicked one
revealed, and so to them it was as easy to know him, as it was difficult to
the other, as a riddle is easy after it is read, as a Mathematical conclusion
plain, after it is demonstrated.

And here by the way we see a sound reason suggested, why though in other
things we give a pre-eminence to antiquity; yet in this, touching the person of
Antichrist, we attribute more to ages near us. For the ancient Fathers looked
on this wicked one, not only through a mist, but at a great distance, both
impediments to sight: But our Divines saw him, both with clearer light, and
nearer, they saw him coram, face to face as it were, not through a Mystery,
darkely, and therefore might give more sure information; according to that of
Austine, Prophesies are sooner fulfilled then understood.

John the Baptist was in many things equal to the greatest, yet in one thing,
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven was greater then he, to wit, in unfolding
the mysteries of the Messiah, because they saw all things accomplished
concerning him: So men, far inferior to the Fathers in Learning, and other
indowments, may be greater than they in this point touching Antichrist,
because what the former studied in the Revelation, these saw in the exhibition
of this man of Sin.

Now later Divines generally (save such as have received the mark of the beast
in their hands or foreheads) as they understand by this man of sin, the
Antichrist: so by the Antichrist, the succession of the Popes of Rome, who
once revealed, must not endure ever, that is the property and prerogative of
Christ's Kingdom, not of Antichristian Tyranny. But he shall be consumed, of
whom? the Lord: by what? The spirit of his mouth: and what is that in the
judgment of the best interpretours, but the Preaching of the Gospel?

Antichrists Revelation could not be hindered, because God had decreed it nor
shall his consumption be prevented, because God will work it. God works by
means, happy is he whom God vouchsafes the honor to be an instrument of this
desired ruin.

Whosoever loves holiness, must wish and endeavor the ruin of Ant Christ's
Kingdom, because he is (...); the lawless. Whosoever loves the Lord Christ
(as all do who are not accursed) must oppose this man of sin, because he is
(...) the Antichrist: but he that opposes Antichrist, must labor to use the
right means, lest he builds up while he intends to destroy. And what the right
means is, this text discovers, holding forth to us this spiritual truth.



Rev. 14, 6. No sooner was one Angel seen in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth: but presently
there followed another Angel saying. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great
City etc. plainly showing that the preaching of the Gospel ushers in the
ruin of the Seat, and so of Antichrist himself. Many arguments may be
gathered to confirm this spiritual truth: as,



Contraries, and contrariorum contraria sunt praedicata. Now what is the
essential pillar of Christ's Kingdom? what begins it, upholds it, increases
it, but the preaching of the Gospel? By this the Apostl^s planted Churches,
and succeeding Pastors watered and cherisht them. When David, and the house of
Saul had both Thrones in one Kingdom, what strengthened the one, eadem opera,
weakened the other: So it is between the Kingdom of Christ and Antichrist,
Generatio unius est corruption alterius: The ones raising, is the others ruin.

contraries have contrary praedicates: so have they contrary effects also, one
contrary destroying what another brings forth. Now what begat or brought Popery
to its height, but ignorance and suppressing of the word of God? this
superstition reigning and domineering then most, when preaching of the word was
least? Therefore what ignorance of the word begat viz. this monster so sin, the
light and plain setting up of the word, must needs be fittest to consume.

Corpus non agit in animam nisi indirecte, Antichristianisme is a spiritual
evil, and so spiritual means should be most operative against it: Now this
spirit of Gods mouth, is not a carnal, but a spiritual weapon. 2. Cor.
10.4.5. and mighty through God to throw down strong holds, even the spiritual
holds of Antichrists, and the Devils Kingdom.

esse dat nomen, his name is from his nature, sin gives him being, as well as
denomination, but by the word sin is destroyed. By the Law comes the knowledge
of sin, and knowledge of sin is a good degree to the cure. For penitus seisse
est penitus odisse, and odium is affectus aversationis, one cannot rightly know
it, but will truly hate it, and one cannot practice what they hate. Ioh. 17.17.
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth. To sanctify is nothing, but to
cleanse from sin.



Wickliffe, Hus, Hierome of Prague, and Martin Luther, that, which first
wounded the Kingdom of Antichrist? and in this Kingdom has not Antichrist
most footing, where preaching has least? Papists swarming most in those
Shires, and parts of them, where dumb and Idol Ministers are most rife. But
where the Gospel has been for any long time preached, there like Owls with
the morning light, Papists vanish, being either cnoverted to the truth, or
averted to other places, where they may be quiet. D^es of darkness need little
other confutation but light, a candle will do more to them than a staff, and
the Gospel is spiritual light, discountenancing Popery while it discovers it.
This is the power, this is the excellency of the spirit of Gods mouth!

But here it is to be observed, A good Note.
that it is the Spirit of Gods, not of man's mouth, which consumes this man of
sin. Human preaching, though it have never so much of man's wit, wisdom and
eloquence, is too weak for this work, its that plain preaching which is in
the demonstration of Gods spirit and power, that must blast this enemy of God
and goodness.

Gods own ordinance must accomplish his own work, Josh. 6.4.5. If the
Israelites bad blown with brazen, yea with golden trumpets, when God
prescribed Ramshornes the walls of Jericho would never have been overthrown.





every congregation in England, had a learned and godly Pastor, that did
preach the Gospel to them constantly, in the demonstration of the spirit and
power, in a small time Jesuits would need no Proclamations to banish them, nor
Papists any Law to punish them, there would be no Papist in our Israel. But
while the ignorance and negligence of Ministers suffer them to be seduced, and
their lewd conversation harden them in error, Laws and penalties will be of
little avail against them. Which was long since observed by that learned and
renowned light of our Church, Whitaker in his Epistle Dedicatory of his answer
to Duraus, to William Cecill, Lord Burleigh, Lord Treasurer of England, where
he concludes thus: Contra Pontificios parum aut legibus aut libris profici, quo
usque firmum atque id meum ministerium in ecclesiis constitutum fuerit. We
shall prevail little by laws or books against Papists, unless in all
Churches a fit and firm Ministry be appointed.

Here Is then the good old way to destroy Popery, to set up powerful preaching
and godly preachers, who may adorn that Doctrine by their holy lives, which
they deliver in the word of truth? Let them then, that are willing to pull
down Popery, by this word be made wise, walk and war against Popery in this
way, and find success.

It Is not the least sin of the State, that this work has been so much
neglected, and the preaching of the Gospel so little furthered, that scarce
one parish of six is provided of a Minister, that is not either ignorant and
not able to preach, or idle, and not careful to preach, or scandalous and
disgraceth, and makes powerless his preaching of the Gospel, and this after
so many years of peace and plenty, wherein Churches should most of all be
edified, after so many gracious deliverances from Papists, which were so many
engagements to pluck down Popery, after so many Parliaments, which have showed
the height of wisdom and industry, in providing redress for the grieveances
of the Commonwealth. So that we have not wanted opportunity, but hearts to
this work; that this work of Christ should be neglected so long, and with
such circumstances is sure an omission of no small guilt.

How can Christ but be moved with indignation against us, that he is so little
preached among us, who are so much engaged to him! This is then a sin that
cries for redress, not only for it self; but for the consequences of it,
least God deal with us, as with the Jews in Haggaies time, for so long
deferring the building of the Temple, even blast and curse all our
undertakings. But, God be thanked, this is a season wherein direction is called
for, how defect of preachers may be supplied, and therefore excitations may be
the better spared or contracted.

The best direction I can give, is by discovering the lets which must be
removed, before the want of preaching-Ministers can be supplied, and which
being removed, a supply cannot but follow.

Now they will appear to be many, and they such as no remedy seems possible,
or at least probable to be had for them, but by a Parliament! As,

Honores alunt arts, and men are induced in their choice of callings, by hope
of benefit, to be enjoyed in them. Even in rectified elections, tho profit may
not be the chief; yet may it be a secondary encouragement, for every man is to
provide for his own comfortable subsistence. Hence then it is, that many of
parts decline the calling of the Ministry, because Church Livings being rare,
are by that means also hard to be obtained, whereas a man of any other calling
may lightly set up any where.

And whence is it, that so many of the basest of the people are Consecrated to
be Priests (as they call them) but because in many places the stipend is so
base, non that is ingenuously bred, Illam Ecclesiasticorum bonorum
dissipationem cum detestando Sacrilegin conjuncia^ te cum and cum bonis omnibus
deploramus, scelu^ universo terrum orb commune. Beza in respons: ad S^^av^. de
grad: Minist^or. page ult.
or is sensi^le of any gifts in himself, will un^ervalue himself so much, as
to accept so mean a place, so that in such places there must be no Ministers,
or no better. And this is as frequent in places of note, as in inferior
villages. And how comes this wa^^ of means? surely, as I conceive, by
Sacriledg. I have not yet learned to give it any other name, for Tithes are
paid, which at first its most likely, were appointed for the maintenance of
Pastors to feed their souls who fed them: but now they are alienated, and must
not this needs also first be Sacrilege?

For that being granted, that Tithes are not due Iure divino; yet were they
holy, because men had consecrated them to maintain Gods ordinance, tho not
because God had set them apart by any Law, and is it not a snare to devour
holy things?

To withdraw a thing which a man himself has given to God, stands not with
that fidelity, or devotion we owe to God, but to take to our own use what
others have given to God, is a case in the apprehension of grace, or ingenuity
some degrees worse than that; which Nathan put to David. If we had changed with
God, it had been tolerable, especially if we had observed the Law of
redemption, adding a fifth part to the value which we had taken away: but to
take away so much, and leave so little, its hard to say, whether in the first
Actors this Sacrilege, or the neglect of Gods service, the natural effect of
it, be more dishonorable unto God, or more accursed, but both together cannot,
but move God to jealousy against us.

This Sacrilege, at least in the greatest part of it (if I mistake not) had
its rise from Rome. The taking Antichrist upon him this, as one part of his
antichristian dominion, to impropriate Tithes for the maintenance of Abbeys,
thereby providing that the people should have ignorant Pastors, that the blind
might lead the blind, and the better keep them in slavery to him: and the
Abbeys hereby more enriched, he might have creatures of power every where to
uphold his Kingdom.

Now at the dissolution of the Abbeys (an action to be feared not so upright in
the circumstances, as just for the substance of it) not only the
temporalities, superstitiously bequeathed to the hurt of the Land; but the
Tithes given formerly justly and piously, for to maintain an holy ordinance of
God, a parochian Pastor, were all taken away, the evil and danger of that
action being then not so easily espied, by reason of corrupt affection, and
obscurity of those times. And this was confirmed by Act of Parliament, which
infers a necessity of reformation from thence, for that is the highest Court
in this Land, from which no appeal, and therefore no redress of this error,
but by Parliament, save what is voluntary.

Impropriations are now men's legal inheritances, and to some their greatest,
to others their only livelihood; therefore it cannot be desired, that they
should be restored without some satisfaction to the proprietary, which only a
Parliament can provide for.

And me thinks there is a necessity that the same hand should heal, which has
been made accessory to the wound, least this sin^ly, tho not on the particular
members, yet on the house of Parliament, and hinder Gods blessing from it. This
then requires consideration, and in some part redress, lest this Sacrilege by
hindering preaching, foster Popery that begat it, till they together consume
the Land that harbors them.

Nehemiah any be in this a worthy Precedent, who finding the effect of want of
maintenance, neglect of the work of the Lord, Nehemi. 13.10. He did not only
gather the Levites together for the work, but contended with the Nobles, and
made the Tithes be brought for encouragement.

And Hezekiah took the same course before him. 2. Chro. 31.4. He commanded the
people that dwelt in Jerusalem, to give the portion of the Priests and the
Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

Secondly near of kin to the former (which I therefore rank next) is the
dissolving of that good work of buying in Impropriations, by certain Feoffes
in London, for the service of Christ.

By the care pains and fidelity, of which Feoffes, many Churches were endowed
with maintenance, and furnished with godly, faithful, able, and laborious
Pastors, to the conversion and consolation of many Christian Souls. But now
those Feoffes, being disabled, well-affected people are utterly discouraged,
from employing their liberality that way. But if by Parliament those Feoffes
were restored to their former power and right, and if there were in every
County Feosees, enabled to receive the pious charity of well-disposed people,
for that purpose it would, no doubt, much encourage and advance the devotion of
godly men and women that way; and in time draw in the greatest part of
impropriations in this Land, and very much increase the number of faithful
Preachers.



This also is a let to learning and industry, because learning or dexterity in
preaching, conduces little to help a man in obtaining a cure: money must do
the matter, so that is sought after, learning slighted, Laws are already
strict against this corruption; yea so strict, that one would think stricter
superfluous, yet either vox populifallax, or few enter into Church Livings
gratis.

It Is reported the Parliament was once about stricter Laws against this
corruption, which motion deserves applause and renewing. For if our Savior
Christ whipped out buyers and sellers in the Temple; much more should Christians
endued with power make sharpest scourges for buyers and sellers of the Temple,
else I shall never say of them, That the zeal of Gods bouse has eaten them up.

If then Patrons should abjure the taking as well as Incumbents, the giving of
money for any presentation, or some other such like course, which the wisdom
of Parliament may invent to cure this corruption, it might be a great help to
exclude immeritors, and further the well deserving.

But yet all the care that may be, cannot effect in this a perfect cure, for if
Laws be so strait and wisely framed, that wit cannot elude them, an evil
conscience will swallow Camels, and frustrate them, while elections are lest
wholly in the power of one, therefore that as the nurse of Symony, and other
disorders must be confessed to be the next let of good Preachers in many places.

Fourthly corruption in the election of Ministers to beset over congregations,
power being left commonly to one man, and that none of the congregation many
times, and many times no friend, but an enemy to holy preaching, or a Gallio
that cares for none of these things, yea many times this power resides in
Papists themselves, till they be convicted, which (of late) in great ones is
very rare. Now this as it is the maine occasion of Symony, a bargain being
easily made with one, which with many were more difficult, if not impossible;
So also when one is to present, and that to a place where he himself shall
neither have benefit nor inconvenience by the abilities or defects of the
Minister presented, here is a more easy way to be drawn aside by friends, or
other by respects, lightly to regard the good of the place by providing an able
preacher: Nay many times it falling out; that that one party is either an enemy
to preaching or godliness: it cannot be expected that such an one should
provide a preacher, or at least not a godly preacher, and as good never a whit,
as never the better.

An excellent furtherance therefore it were like to be of supply of good
preachers to places vacant, if the people were restored to that interest in
elections, which primitively they possessed; and still seem to have right to.
Or if this seem in our Law an intrenching on some men's rights, and
inheritance, yet might the people have granted them an approving or negative
voice. The Patron proposing diverse that the people may choose whom they best
approve, and reject whom they dislike, yea all if they have just exceptions,
against their life or gifts, till a man be proposed unto them so near Saint
Paul's description, that they may see God has fitted him to be a Minister
somewhere, and they may with good conscience choose him to be theirs. And this
(me thinks) no godly or ingenuous Patron should resist.

For Patronage is matter of trust, which is to be answered with care of the
Church, without regard of selfe-profit, pleasuring friends, or any such mean
respect.

He that intends thus to answer a trust, need not, nor will not think much to
have an help to prevent temptations to betray it, by gifts, solicitation of
friends or such like avocations. If the people had a power negative, on just
reason alleged, this were a sufficient answer to all promotors of immerito's,
and yet no great inconvenience to the Patron, for if he would commend one
worthy, no people would be so ungrateful, but would let the Patrons desire be
over-weight to one worthy against all others whatsoever. And if any have so
little grace, or ingenuity, that they would retain their absolute power to
have better opprotunity to make their markets, tho they have less will, they
have more need of this restraint, and their corrupt desire should not be the
death of this motion, but the birth of a good Law to cure them, for it is an
old and golden Axiom, ex malis moribus ortae sunt bonae leges.

This interest in the choice of their Ministers, the French-Churches enjoy,
none being obtruded on any congregation, before trial of his gifts in the
congregation, and unless he be without just exceptions: yea so tender are they
in this point, that if a congregation be unwilling to receive a Pastor
proposed, tho on grounds not so weighty; yet they will rather reserve that
Pastor wronged for another Church, than impose him on people against consent.
And good reason. For what love can be expected to be between that Pastor and
his people, that comes in by constraint? and if there be not love, can there be
that good done or received, or that reciprocation of duty as ought to be? If
there be not as it were a Marriage between a Pastor and his people? and then
is not consent requisite? can less be left to the people than was granted to
Rebeckah? Genesis 24, 27. We will call the Damsel, and ask at her mouth. They
would not conclude without her consent.

Are not people commanded to hear the true Pastors, avoid the false? and
should not they then have power to refuse a false-one? If an Arminian Prelate,
or Patron may obtrude an Arminian Wolf upon a people, must they not be cast
upon a strait, whether to break Christ's command of not hearing a stranger, or
order in not hearing him that is his Parochial Pastor, and so be subject to
censure and trouble, unless they may have power at first to reject him.

Jeroboam, to cut it off, and destroy it. 1 King. 13.33.34. In most Cathedralls
tradesmen are made Singing-men, and thence step into the Ministry, and many
others are put in the office of Prophets, who never saluted the Schools of the
Prophets, and others, tho better learned, yet that make conscience of little or
no vileness or sin, even notorious for lewdness step in, and keep in.

This craves redress, a law necessary to back Saint Paul's Canons, for
qualification of such as are to be admitted into that sacred and weighty
function, that henceforth under the several censures none be consecrated to
that office, but such as are for their judgments Orthodoxe, for their gifts,
apt to teach, for their conversations unblameable.

Magistrates are not indeed to make Ministers; but they are to punish, and
prevent errors of others in that weighty work, else as they sin greatly that
admit the unworthy: so they that permit unworthy admission, if they have power
to prevent it, have fellowship in that sin. It may be some would bend the brows
at such a law, but it is better men disdain than God be angry. If reformation
should never be attempted till offenders were willing, the Church and
Commonwealth should remain deformed, and (me thinks) no man should be much
against a Law, that means to keep it, and he that thinks much to be tied to
St. Paul's directions, its pity his counsel should be harkened unto, or his
anger regarded. Wise Lawmakers look not what others may do, or should do,
or pretend to do; but what indeed is done, and if it be out of order, provide
a remedy, that they, that of themselves will not, may be bound to that which is
good.

When these unworthy Ministers are made, by one means or other they possess
themselves of charges, and as in the senses, intus existens prohibet alienum,
so these once in, keep out others, to the great hinderance of the preaching of
the Gospel.

Pluralityes and non-residencie, hinder the preaching of the Gospel, for
unless he that has two Benefices had two Persons, or he that lives from his
charge were an Vbiquitary, they cannot preach to their flocks in season and
out of season, nor so watch over them, but the envious man may come and sow
tares. Priests and Jesuits may creep into houses and lead captive silly women.
This calls for redress. To make a Law that such, where they reside not, should
allow competent means, and the people have power to choose their Preachers,
might do well, for the safeguard of the peoples soule^. But to make a Law to
disable all from keeping a Benefice, at which they did not usually reside,
might also provide for the safety of the souls of those careless Sheepheards,
who are so dazzled by Covetousness, or ambition, that they cannot see the
things which concern their own everlasting peace, tho by office they be Seers.

They are in Scripture termed Watchmen, Sheepheards, Bishops, or Overseers,
and do not all these import a necessity of residence? or else they will
neglect their duty, betray their people, and so they become guilty of notable
theft and blood. If a nurse should be well paid for the nursing of a child, and
yet give it no meat, and it consume and dye, is not here both theft and murder,
to be punished by the Judge? And if civil theft and blood of the body suffered,
cry against a Land, will not the blood of souls, and spiritual Theft cry much
more? This therefore needs redress to prevent Gods just indignation, for
suffering so great a sin.

The Trent-fathers, though so dimme-sighted that they could not see Motes to
reform them; yet though Non-residency in Ecclesiastical Persons a fault
unsufferable, and therefore it seems its a beam, not a moate. And if those
children of the Church malignant went so far, how shall a true Christian
Assembly, met together to reform abuses and redress grievances, look Christ
in the face, and not attempt the redress of such enormity? Tho the Law has
already laid a tie on some, yet others are hardened by it. For the Law is a
Patronage to those, whom it tolerates therefore, stricter ties are needful.

But here I might rather be panegyricall than paraeneticall, to praise for care
taken, rather than excite to take care in this particular, the Zeal of the
Parliament having in this, outrun the publishing; though not the contriving of
this small treatise; but in exhorting, I commend. For, that of the Poet, is
well known. Quimonet ut facias etc.

Seaventhly the Canonical subscription, unnecessary Ceremonies stood for, and
pressed with that earnestness, and violence, as tho the very sinews and marrow
of religion consisted in them, though in word they be confessed indifferent.
These, whatsoever their rise and amye be, yet in the effect of them, they much
hinder the preaching of the word, for this is one of those many things, which
divert the studies of many to other employments, which if they were not by
these discouraged, were like to do worthily in the Church: and by this, many,
otherwise qualified without exception, have been either kept out of charges,
or cast out, being deprived, and put, not only from the work of Christ, but
from their own maintenance.

And if those, that do refuse conformity to these, out of mere conscience,
enjoy liberty to preach, yet are they by reason of them obnoxious, to the
taunts and malice of every lewd drunkard, or popish Atheist, who hence take
occasion of unjust, and unholy revenge, when their consciences are touched with
the searching power of Gods word. Therefore let these Ceremonies be what they
will in their original, in the event they prove Antichristian, helping to
keep up Popery by hindering preaching and Preachers.

Besides, the penalties, that are inflicted upon the refusers of subscription,
are without order of Law, and so against Law, for there is no statute, but
Canon only, to ground such proceeding upon, and if it have been counted an
intolerable grievance, that by commissions a man should have part of his goods
demanded or taken away without Law, can it but appear most heinous, that a
Minister for not subscribing, to what by Law he is not bound, or not doing that
for which the Law has appointed no penalty, should not only have part, but
all his revenue taken away, and exposed to the mercy of this unmercifull world?
This in measure must needs exceed the former unless Ministers alone shall be
counted unworthy the privilege of subjects, and be left in the condition of
slaves which how God would take we may judge by that saying of Christ. He that
despises you despises me. Papists shall rise up in judgment against us, who
indowe their Clergy with extraordinary immunities, whilst ours enjoy not the
ordinary protection of Laws.

Suppose Nonconformity to certain be an offense, yet do the penalties far
exceed the quality of it, he is to pay but 12. d. that profanely in oaths
takes Gods name in vain, or absents himself from Church on the Sabbath day,
and does it deserve a greater penalty if a man refuse a Surplice, which God
has not commanded? yet if such a penalty had been appointed, it would have
been borne with patience, and tho it would have punished Preachers, yet would
it not have hindered preaching. Many if they could have had free liberty of the
ministry without check or fear, would have been contented in respect of
outward things, to have lived below their breedings and callings. Oh then these
things call for redress, that the bond for subscription may be cancelled, and
that those ceremonies, that the best maintainers of them can only affirm
innocent, not profitable, and all good Christians see and feel in their fruits
to be noxious, may be cashiered, they may be lost without danger; not so kept,
or if they be not absolutely taken away, yet let each enjoy liberty.

If sudden alterations be pretended to be inconvenient, let them be, as the
Jewish Ceremonies for a time were, Mortuae, so free to be left off to be used.
Nor will this be any prejudice to the government of the Church, who knows not
that unity is better than uniformity? Nay difformity is no deformity.

One man comes to Church with a gown, another with a cloak, another with a
coat, who complains of any deformity? If variety in the same congregation of
the habits of the members of it be no deformity, why should variety in habit of
Ministers in diverse congregations seem so strange, deformed, and undecent?

The Apostle speaking of the habits of men and women in praying and
prophesying, makes no distinction of members or Ministers; but gives one rule
for all. 1. Cor. 11. Nor would variety be properly faction, or schism in the
Church. For schism we know is not in opinion; but affection, not when men
differ in judgment, or practice about Circumstantiall things; but when they
are divided in affection, for this difference in judgment or practice.

hindered. This then calls for redress, care in purging the Fonntaines is most
necessary, most useful, the good or evil of that diffuseth it self over the
Nation.

That bath made the adversary so careful to sow tares, there our Savior sent
the children of light once, to learn wisdom of the children of this world;
so may we now endeavor to promote the Gospel, by purging the Fountains, as
they by corrupting them, thought to stifle it.

Of Preaching.
or the frequency of it, yea and with License print Sermons against Sermons, as
if the frequency of preaching in our times were superfluous, yea dangerous.
This profane petulancy against the Laws of God and our Church, if it were
severely punished, the honor of this Ordinance would be vindicated, and this
ill wind would be restrained, that blasts good desires and forwardness of
many, and no doubt, severity here would be acceptable to Christ; being indeed a
revenging of his quarrels.

To this we may add the disgrace that is cast upon Preachers and preaching. If
any Preach constantly twice a Sabbath, this is enough to make him accounted a
Puritan, to expose him to the envy of the Prelates, and then ordinarily
there is lying in wait for him, and if there be any advantage to be taken, in
truth, or show, then he is convented, browbeaten, it may be chidden, reviled
and used with all disrespects, what ever his worth or parts be, to the great
discouraging of many, and taking off those, whose affection is not the
stronger, to the honor of Christ, and the discharge of his function.

name of a Lecturer with many is Nomen invisum, an hateful or scornful name,
so many places have been left to the sole care of unfaithful and unable
Ministers by these means. Here then is need of redress. An Act to make it
lawful for the people to procure any orthodoxe, peaceable Preacher, to supply
the defect of their dumb Ministers, whether he would consent or no, and to
cashiere all illegal impositions put upon Lecturers, would remove this Let,
and be an excellent and needful help to this Nation, till by Gods providence
it be unburdened of all unable, and unfaithful Ministers,



The last, but not the least Let of Preaching, is the excessive and lawless
power, that Archbishops, Bishops, etc. exercise over the Preachers of the
Gospel, whereby they sometimes prevent them, sometimes limit them, sometimes
suspend them from the preaching of the Gospel: and that sometimes for their
mere pleasure, sometimes by virtue of Canons of their own making, sometimes
for not observing some extraordinary injunctions of their own procuring, by
all which they not only impiously, but unjustly hinder the preaching of the
Gospel.

First, tho a man be made Minister by themselves, and then enjoined to preach,
tho he be inducted into a living, and so his duty to his flock does enforce
diligence in preaching, yet he must not preach (forsooth) after all this
without a license from them, and that many times they will not grant,
especially to Lecturers; but upon their own terms. Secondly, when they are
licenced, yet they take upon them to limit them, that they preach only in the
fore-noone, and forbid them sometimes to Catechize too, in any profitable way.
And if any in conscience of their duty, will preach or so Catechize, as may be
as profitable to the people as a Sermon, they often threaten, sometimes suspend
them. Thirdly, tho they be licensed, and by virtue of that preach on the Lords
Day, and holy days, yet if a man will preach weekly in his own parish, which
is commonly called a Lecture, that they will not suffer without a special
License, at least in word, yea when they have licenced Lectures, or at least
their Predecessors, they take upon them to impose burdens on the Lecturers,
to dishearten them, or else downe-rightly, pro imperio, prohibit them, and put
them down, as some have done throughout their Diocesses. Fourthly, many times
out of mere power they suspend Ministers, that are Pastors of congregations,
for not observing their orders, tho enjoined by no order of Law, or opposing
their practices, tho against Law, or preaching Truths, consonant to Gods word,
and our Churches Doctrine, because contrary to their errors and humors.

Our Laws confirm the morality of the Sabbath, condemn pastimes upon it, yet
many for not reading a Book that counts the strict observation of the Lords
Day Jewish, and licenceth, and incourageth to dancing, and other light
recreations, have been suspended, their charges left destitute, some
excommunicated, and the benefit of appealing, One because he will not read a
civil Proclamation, another because he will not read an illegal prayer,
another because he will not givemony when they required tho illeg^lly.
denied them.

Our Laws forbid the bringing in of any new Ceremonies, other than by Law are
established: yet some for preaching against the bringing in of Altars, and
bowing to them, some for opposing, or preaching against Jesus-worship, have
been suspended or inhibited, from the work of the Ministry.

Some have been suspended likewise, for not Catechizing out of the
Common Prayer Book, tho their charges have been in great Towns, that have
exceeded the ordinary pitch of hearers.

Some for preaching against Arminianisme, some for preaching against Images,
some for preaching against dancing, some for preaching at the burial of a
child, dying before Baptism, and many other things when the humors of
Prelates are crossed.

At admittance, they enter them with an Oath of Canonical obedience, and upon
that think their word shall be a Law, and if not, suspend them for neglect of
Canonical obedience, and what ever the cause is, when they have past the
censure, its in vain for a poor Minister to struggle. If he would appeal,
they have provided a Canon, unless he subscribe, his appeal shall not be
admitted, nor then neither many times. But if it be, what hope of redress?
when they from whom he appeals, or their fellows must be his Judges, who
count it a pernicious example, that a Prelate should be thought to err in any
of his censures, or be put to the worse by an unruly Minister, (as all must be
thought who submit not to them) This is it that has made so many precious able
Ministers leave our Church, to our great wound and disgrace, to go into other
Countries, preferring the meanest condition with freedom from this yoke,
above the sweetest under this grievous bondage.

Unless therefore care be taken, to curb this exorbitant power, in vain will
all care be for providing good Ministers; for the Prelates, if they dance not
after their Pipe, after the impression of a Parliament is a little over, will
quickly cast them out at pleasure, not will any other care to restrain this
pernicious power be a sufficient cure, but only abolition of it. If it be
never so near cropped, yet the influence of some superior orb will make it
sprout, and ill weeds grow apace.

Experience it self may teach, how weak a security from the evil of this
power, the restraining of it is, if it have any root left. In our near Sister
Church of Scotland, when Bishops had scarce any thing, but a mere name at
first, were mere titular, could do nothing without the Presbyteries, and not
only their power, but persons were under them, yet in time by little and
little they grew to that height as not only to overtop the Presbyteries, but
to degrade them as it were, and make them as ciphers, and having gotten this
power, they did as busily employ it in stopping the mouths of the faithful
Ministers. As Prelates went up, preaching went down, and they never left
aspiring till not only they did with Rome, Magnitudine laborare, but like
force without counsel, Mole rue^e sua.

And in our own experience, we see them still aspiring, and inhauncing their
power. Heretofore they were content to confess kinds of government arbitrary,
and so to hold their office from the King, who might appoint that, or any other
government, but of late they assume to be Iure divino. Heretofore they were
glad of the protection of laws, but of late they have be^ne bold to trample on
them, disdaining, and not enduring prohibitions, bringing in new Ceremonies and
Canons at pleasure. If therefore they should now be taken down, and cropped
only; but have a root or being left, they would in time find means to renew
their strength, and this affront would increase their stomach, and it is to be
feared their attempts against the preaching of the Gospel would be (tho the
more subtle) yet never the less earnest, and much more malicious.

Neither can it be expected to be otherwise, for when any thing exceeds the
bounds which God has set, how should they know any other limits? now God sure
has never advanced any Ministers to that power over their brethren, to silence
and censure, at pleasure. Christ censured affectation of superiority in his
Apostles, not ordained it, he forbade Monarchical power amongst them as
unsuitable to their function, in this to be unlike the civil powers that were
among the Gentiles, and therefore in exercising this sole power of
excommunicating and depriving, they keep not the limits he has appointed: and
in his steps tread his Apostles, Saint Peter forbids Lordlinesse in Elders.
Saint John notes Diotrephes for loving pre-eminence, and excommunicating those
that crossed his humor, to obey the Apostles.

The Church of Christ is not to be without Governors, and government, but if
we search the Scriptures we shall find that governing is not the chiefest
operation in the Church, nor are Governors the highest officers. Romans
12.6.7.8. The holy Ghost sets Pastors and teachers above rulers. So
likewise 1. Cor. 12.28. Governments be in an inferior place, and where
governing is conjoined with Preaching, preaching is esteemed the more
honorable work ^. Tim. 5.17. and 1. Cor. 1.16. Preaching is so advanced by
the Apostles, as tho other ministerial acts were nothing, in comparison, for
Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach. Such Prelates then as being
advanced to governing, neglect preaching, or because they are admitted to
government, exalt themselves over the Pastors and Teachers in the Church, to
suspend or enlarge at pleasure, undoubtedly transgress the rules and orders in
the word, and then no other limits can confine them, if there be power to
transgress. This therefore shows how unsafe it is by humane laws to think,
to confine that power, which has transgrest divine without abolition, and on
the contrary how safe the abolition of it is, for being it is not of God, but
against him rather, abolition cannot displease God, nor be inconvenient; but
most safe and acceptable. Yet had there never been any experience of this
alteration in Church government, or had the experience of it been
unprosperous, there might be far greater scruple in attempti^g it, but when we
see not only an other government in all other reformed Churches; but also the
success of that government to be much more useful, to the advancement of the
Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, there may be much more confidence in removing
this last and greatest Let of preaching the Gospel.

Thus have I endeavored to lay open the most sovereign preservative against,
and most forcible destructive of Popery, Preaching; and therein I am sure I
have not erred, because the Spirit of Truth is my guide. I have endeavored
also to discover the Lets of preaching, and and to suggest some ways of
redress, wherein I stand in more need of candor, for I may err and need
pardon, I am short and need supply, but if by these or other means, preaching
be advanced, I doubt not but Popery will be subdued daily, and if Protestancy
prevail against Popery, Protestants will undoubtedly prevail against Papists,
when the spiritual holds of Antichrist are thrown down by the word, the
Temporal power of Anti-christians shall not prevail against us, God will
turn his hand against our enemies. But if we suffer preaching to go down,
and Popery to prevail, how just will it be with God, to sell us into the hand
of Papists, which he in his mercy and goodness ever avert. To whom be glory for
ever and ever. AMEN.

As Christ saved the world by writing and t^aching of four Evangelists; so the
Fiend casts to damn the world and Priests; f^^ let^ing to preach the Gospel
by these four. By fained contemplations, by Songs, by Salisbury use, and by
worldly business of Priests. Wickliffe in the Conclusion of his complaint, to
the King and Parliament.

FINIS.

