Imprimatur

Joannes Langley
Jan. 5. 1649.
TO ALL FATHERS OF NOBLE FAMILIES, AND LOVERS OF VIRTUE.
Aug. 4. 1649
SIR BALTHAZAR GERBIER Knight, the Author of the Academy, wherein the honor of
the Nation, the general satisfaction of all Fathers of Families, and the
improvement of all men that are lovers of Languages, Sciences, and all Noble
Exercises is concerned; having during his being conversant with foreign
Nations, and his residency among them, in service of the State, observed both
the advantages which Fathers of Families, and all lovers of virtue, procure to
themselves by public Academies, as also the inconveniences whereunto many of
those that travel, are subject; has also fixed on this most Noble, and most
necessary design (how great and laborious soever it may prove to him and his)
to apply all his time, his cares, labors, faculties, and all possible
industry, as well in his own person, as by those that shall teach the Latin,
Greek, French, Italian, Spanish, German, and Low Dutch, several sorts of Hands
of excellent Writing; both Ancient and Modern Histories, jointly with the
Constitution, and Government of the most famous Empires and States of the
World; besides the true experimental natural Philosophy, as also what is most
necessary and most Noble of the Mathematics, to wit, Arithmetic; the true
method of keeping Books of Account, by Debptor and Creditor, as is practiced
in Italy, and other parts of Europe, Geometry, Geography, Cosmography,
Perspective, and Architecture, as well for Building, as for Magnificent shows,
and secret motions of Scenes, and the like: But above all, what is most
excellent of practical Mathematics, whatsoever belongs to Fortification,
Besieging, and defending of places, Fireworks, ordering of Battalioes, and
Marches of Armies, Music, playing of all sorts of Instruments, Dancing,
Fencing, Ryding the Great Horse, together with the new manner of Fighting on
Horseback, and if there be any lovers of Virtue, who have an inclination to
Drawing, Painting, Limming, and Carving either for their Curiosity, or to
attain unto a greater excellency in several of the forementioned Sciences (
Viz. Architecture, Fortifications, etc.) they may have them as exactly taught,
as any of the other Sciences, and by a short Method, which shall give them a
full insight in the Theoricall part of the said Sciences, and Exercises, at the
selfsame time that they shall be taught in the Foreign Languages; whereunto
shall serve several Treatises held forth by the said SIR BALTHAZAR GERBIER, in
the Foreign Languages aforesaid, the English tongue being joined thereunto,
together with diverse excellent Tables of very great use, for facilitating the
matter, and helping the memory; which Treatises shall be continually at
Mistrisse Allens Shop, at the sign of the Crown in Popes head Alley, near
the Old Exchange, LONDON: The said SIR BALTHAZAR GERBIER, being fully
persuaded, that all such Fathers of Families as mind the improvement of their
Sons, will cheerfully and readily embrace what is now proffered unto them,
and prefer the placing of their Sons in this Academy, to their Traveling
abroad, not only in troubled times, but at any other hereafter; for when all
is done, Parents do spend much for keeping of some of their Sons abroad, when
during that chargable time, they for the most part, do become acquainted only
with Academists, and then return; leaving to those Forraigners, the honor of
their Education; when if they be taught before their Traveling abroad, they
will then in a short time make themselves known among the best of men, in the
Courts of Princes, and there lodge a glorious impression of the Abilities of
the Nation, every whit as able of Body and Mind, as any other can be: They
will also, Traveling in a more mature age, be the more secured against those,
who make it their practice to corrupt young Men, and to infuse into them
destructive Principles, to their native Country, and to their Religion; which
is so generally manifest, as no doubt, both Germains, Polonians, Sweds, Danes,
and Flemmings, will soon resolve to Travel toward these parts, and to this
Academy, which will also redound to a particular glory to the nation both for
the present, and for the future; and make good that the present time favors
what is so noble, and so generally useful and commendable.

All Lovers of Virtue, are therefore invited to this Academy, where they shall
be received, well used, carefully, and diligently Instructed, so they conform
themselves to all fit Academicall Orders; and for the better prospering in
their Studies, observe the fittest hours (as Aurora is said a friend to the
Muses) begin their Studies the Monday morning with Arithmetic, the Key, and
entrance of Mathematics.

Study at nine of the Clock the Languages, until Eleven; and then break up
for their recreation, and at Noone lend their ear to a public Reader, who
shall entertain them with Histories fit for that hour, and being risen from
Table, apply themselves to SIR BALTHAZAR GERBIER (or his Deputy) to hear the
exposition of such particulars as shall have been read unto them; which done,
for one half hour (besides another half hour for their recreation) return
about two of the Clock to Study until four of the Clock, the Elements of
Euclide; until six, Geometry, and Music.

Tuesday morning, Cosmography, Geography, and Languages; in the afternoon,
Fortification, Arithmetic, Fencing, and Vauting.

Wednesday morning, Architecture, Perspective, and Language.

Thursday morning, Drawing, and Language, in the afternoon, Painting, Limming,
and Music.

Friday morning, natural experimental Philosophy, History, and Language, in
the afternoon, Carving, Dancing, Fencing, Vauting.

Saturday morning, Scenes, Fireworks, Marches of Armies, they having been at
the Ryding of the great Horse; in Summer, early in the morning before the heat
of the day. The afternoon Studies are to last until six of the Clock in
Summer, and in Winter until five.

The Wednesday afternoon, they are to recreate themselves; as also the
Saturday afternoon, especially for preparing to the Sabbath; they shall have a
fit vacation on the four seasons of the Year.

The Studious shall be bound to behave themselves peaceably and civilly: they
shall not stir from the public Study, nor from the House, nor Ground, but
with consent: They shall not admit any visits during the time of their Studies.

They shall not repair to any Tavernes, nor any kind of Victualling Houses,
on pretense of entertainments of such Friends as they shall be visited by, but
present them with what is fit within doors, their Chamber, Orchard, or
Gardens; and without any offense, or impediment to the Academy; in which taking
of Tobacco, shall be prohibited.

Swearing absolutely forbidden, the transgressor shall be obliged to pay two
shillings to the Box for the poor: Ten shillings for a blow, so much more for
an injurious word, or affront.

Two shillings at every time the Studious absents himself from the public
attendance, except indisposed in body.

They shall forbear the receiving of any Maiden or Gentlewoman, on what
pretense soever, except the visit of Sisters, or Kindred, and such as shall be
in the company of their Mother, and such grave Persons, as may be admitted.

SIR BALTHAZAR GERBIER, his time to receive, and attend all those that shall be
desirous to treat with him about the placing of Gentlemen in the Academy,
shall be the Wednesdayes and Saturdayes in the afternoon.

This shall be concluded with the saying: Happy is the man that finds
Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding: Prove. 3. Chap. 5. Verse. 13.

And with the Old Pibrac, in his French Verses. Le Sage fills est du Pere la
Joye:
Or si tu veux ce sage fills avoir,
Dresse-le jeune au chemain du devoir;
Mais ton Exemple est la plus court voye.


Englished by Silvester. The Parents comfort, is a prudent Son,
Now, such a Son if thou desire aye,
Direct him young, in Duties race to run,
But, thine Example is the nearest way.


Advertisement.
That however it is truly asserted, that the several Sciences and Exercises
specified, shall be carefully supplied for the use and satisfaction of all that
shall apply themselves in observance or practice: And whilst the said
Constitution shall have drawn together the most exquisite Masters, or
Professors, attainable by any reasonable Sallaries. They shall he engaged to
read weekly, or oftener, Public Lectures, whereunto strangers of civil
Conversation, as well as the Academists shall be freely admitted: And it shall
be in the pleasure of every Scholar in this Academy, to select the prosecution
of any of them in particular, according to his Genius, or affection; and
accordingly lessen, or increase his charge. The Master and Constitution being
chiefly positive, only in the regulation, for preventing idleness, and
consequently vitiousnesse, in life, or manners; hoping that beginning and
ending every Day, with Prayers, and Thanksgiving intended, and filling the rest
of the time with virtuous Exercise and Study, God will so bless their
endeavors, as that He may be the more glorified, and this nation better
served, which is the most humble constant desire of him that is wholly their
Servant to such purpose; and their obliged:

B. G.


