The FIRST LECTURE of an Introduction to COSMOGRAPHIE: BEING A Description of
all the WORLD.

Read Publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbiers ACADEMY.

PSALM. 8. ver. 3. 4. When I consider the Heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained: What is man, that thou art
mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou visitest him? Imprimatur, Hen:
Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1649.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire; SPEAKER Of the most Honorable
Assembly of PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
I Shall not need (as I humbly conceive) to seek far for a just argument that
the Dedication of this Lecture (being an Introduction to Cosmography, read in
the Academy, which I do zealously labor to settle, for the glory of God, the
honor of this Nation, the encouragement and improvement of all Lovers of
Virtue:) belongs to your eminent place of Trust, And from whose determinations,
as from the highest Influences of so many Stars, guide, direct, move, and
preserve the whole Body of this Common wealth.

My Academy-Reader in part to make good my more large intentions, having begun
with Cosmography (as the most noble subject to read on) presents therefore
these his first productions to your honorable hands, as an unquestionable
duty, and with all Submissivenesse, and possible reverence, wishing that the
State may please not only to protect these hopeful beginnings, but likewise to
cherish and promote them.

That all Lovers of Virtue may receive content and profit thereby, and the
Nation glory, that such capable spirits need not to run unto Salamanca in
Spain, to Padua in Italy, no^ to Paris in France, there to seek (with hazard
of their godliness, goodness and Loyalty to their Native Country) that which
they may have at home, with more ease and safety, and with less charge to
themselves.

And if in this case the lawful interest of a particular zealous well-wisher
to the State may be comprehended, I shall with a joyful confidence conclude,
that I have not been ill-perswaded thereunto, nor can I have a greater hope, or
reap a greater contentment, than by putting my hand to so good a work, which
giving me an assured confidence that my endeavors may meet with a favorable
acceptance from Your Honor, unto whom I shall remain as I was long since,

Your Honors most humble and most obedient Servant, Balthazar Gerbier.
From the Academy this 28 of November. 1649.
The First Introduction to COSMOGRAPHY.
COSMOGRAPHY is the description of the celestial and elementary Region.

In the celestial Region, we learn to know Heaven, its matter, its qualities;
The Planets, their motions, and their order, etc.

In the Elementary Region, we see the most admirable construction of the
Elements, the which by their unequal proportioned assemblings, do compose the
several sorts of kinds, of mixed ones, which we see here below.

All this we shall particularly describe with their qualities, properties, and
scituations.

And in that Region which seems for a Center unto the universal world, we
shall see an innumerable number of most remarkable, satisfying and most
necessary things to be observed, viz. The proofs of its circular form:
whether the Earth or Water exceeds the one or the other in quantity: The
scourses or heads of Springs and Floods, the smallness of the terrestrial
globe, not only in comparison of the Heavens, but also of the Sun, and of the
Stars: And how that the said Earth may be measured, both on its superficies,
and on its solidity.

Afterward we shall describe the circles which are to be imagined in the
Heavens, That so we may learn the course of the Planets, and the various
effects which we feel by them.

As the causes of their rising and setting, of the Summer and Winter, of the
long and the short days, So also we must have regard to the Solstices, and
Equinoxes, from whence the different constitutions of the Earth do proceed, and
several other things, the curiosity whereof, as its extreme commendable, so
its familiar incidents prove altogether necessary unto those who are desirous
to pass for men of knowledge and understanding.

And that we may end in our own sphere, we will finish with a Lecture on the
Meteors, wherein all the impressions that are made as well of Fire, as of the
Air, and of the water; both in the high, middle, and low Region of the Air,
shall be clearly showed and set forth unto our view.

That is to say, whence the fiery impressions proceed, and how those
impressions are framed which are seen in the high Region of the Air, viz. Like
unto fiery Darts, Lances, Flying Stars, and Commets, and how it happens that
the Heavens themselves seem to be sometimes al on fire, whence the lightening,
thunder and thunderbolts proceeds: whence the wild fire, glowwormes, and such
like, have their being: And so consequently, we will treat of the impressions
framed in the Air, as the winds, storms, and the whirlewindes: Those of the
Waters, as the Clouds, Rain, Snow, and Hail, which are framed in the
middlemost Region. Then we will proceed to describe other impressions which are
not real ones, as that Crown of resplendant rays, which seems to be about the
Sun, the Rainbow, and the like; from thence we shall descend lower, and
observe from whence all Fogs, Dewes, Mists, Frosts, and Ice proceeds.

Finally, we will end with the three kinds or species contained in the Earth,
as Mineralls, Vegetables, and Animalls; observing in the Mineralls, their
generation in the bowels of the Earth, their qualities, and connexions, and
how they chance to be seven, correspondent to the seven Planets.

Moreover we will treat of all kind of Stones, as also of the sappes conducing
in the Mines, like unto Vitriol, Alum, and such like, which depend of these.

In the ingendering of the vegetables, we are to consider the nature of plants,
their faculties in producing their several effects, and their multiplying by
their seed; after all, we will conclude with the Animalls, the which besides
their vegetating Soul and faculty of budding, and shooting forth, have over
and above the sensitive part, which gives them both feeling and motion, and
these are much esteemed above the Plants, all their organs, and natural parts
being much perfecter then those of the others. But of these these are two
sorts, the rational and irrational, Man and Beast; but we shall leave the
beasts, for to speak of rational creatures, it being more proper in this
place, Let us then say that man, far more worthy then all other things, was
created by God, for that by his word all things were made, fiat lux, Genesis
the second, and the light straight appeared: But when God came to make man, he
formed him, Formavit Dominus Deus Hominem de Lima Terrae: Et inspiravit in
faciem ejus spiraculum vitae, and factus est homo in animam viventem, And both
animated and endowed him (besides the precedent said qualities) with an
intellectual soul, of which both the understanding and will of man depends.

Now let us consider I beseech you, how the Mercy of God has always augmented
some degree of perfection in each Body, for to complete in man a fullness of
the perfection of all his works, and how he has placed him as a King to
command over, and to make use of the aforesaid things, Et praesit piscibus
Maris, and volatilibus Coeli, and bestiis universaque Terra, omnique reptili
quod movetur in Terra. All which are only made for man's use and advantage. For
God was no less before the world then he is now, and has no need of any of
the creatures to be more glorious, we ought therefore to have a great and
deep sense of acknowledgement.

And that our labor be not in vain, we must consider that great Architector
in his wisdom, in his power, in his liberality, and in his bounty, we must
adore him, honor him, and admire him in all his Attributes, and thank him
incessantly, not only for the present means (the vicissitude of which
sufficiently show their vanity) but for the hope of eternal blessings, to
which he has designed us, provided that we prove true by faith, and that we
make good by our works, that we acknowledge him above all things; but alas!
unhappy men as we are, in what an Age do we live? wherein the creature is more
praised then the Creator, the gift is perfected to the giver; and that which we
should but take notice of, as a transitory thing, we do abuse often (Christian
prudence permitting and willing it) by a most horrid blindness, preferring
those things unto the Author of them, which are but created in order according
to Nature. Therefore the most insensible things, and most inanimate ones, both
dictate unto, and convince those with a most horrid shame and confusion, who
dare so boldly and impudently abuse that great Author, Guider and preserver of
all things. But he will not be abused do what thou can, O enraged Atheist,
thou perverse wit, of the most perverse times; for he will make thee confess
thy wilful malice in the day of vengeance, when thou shall not be able to
plead ignorance; since as thy senses condemn thee, so do likewise the
Elements, which at all times seek their proper places, the Fire being light,
ascends; the Air not so light, remains in the lower sphere; the Earth, the
heaviest of the four, keeps to its Center; and the Water less heavy, swims
above it. Now as those things that are mixed, have one of the Elementary
qualities in one eminent degree above the other, so they seek their sphere, and
do not rest til they have attained unto it: For a ston would descend even to
the center of the Earth, if there were an overture in it, as being the most
properest place of its abode, being its altogether terrestrial. We see that
wood swims above the water, and the reason is, that there is more Air and Fire
in its composition, then either in the Water or in the Stone. And let man do
what he will, it shall ever be so, because that God has created them, and
bestowed on them those properties, of lightness and heaviness, which causes
those motions, making the light things to ascend, and the heavy ones to
descend, and since Gods will is inviolable, all things must obey it.

Now let us come to Man, made by God as well as all the other Elements, and
likewise all other things, and to what end made God Man? only to admire his
greatness, and to adore him, which certainly is the sole reason why God made
man according to his own resemblance, and endued him with a rational soul,
and a sensible appetite or desire.

Unto what can man then more fitly apply that sensible appetite or desire, but
to follow in all things, the design and intent of his Maker, from the
beginning to the very end of his life: And this doubtless is the true reason
of man's being, and the true vocation man ought to apply himself unto: And no
more to vary therein, then the Stones change their property of descending, nor
the Fire its course of ascending: God has created thee Oh man to this effect,
and intent, but if thou will not follow his dictates, to what serves thy
intellectuals, thy knowledge, and thy will, save only to harden thy heart
against God, and against his will, far more then all inanimate creatures do,
and hereby to hinder the effect of his graces in thee; wherefore we ought
seriously to meditate hereon, and to rest assured, that if so be we do abuse
the Tallent, which we have received, by rendering more honor unto vice, and
unto our stubborn, lawless senses, than unto God; we shall render our selves
unworthy to be placed even beneath the insensible things, and that instead of
an eternal bliss, for the which we were created, we shall most justly deserve
to endure eternal torments, from which God in his mercy preserve us all, and
grant unto us that true sense of reason, which may preserve his true Image and
workmanship in us, and enable us to destroy our own, void of sensuality.
Dele quod fecisti, ut Deus salvet, quod secit: says Augustine.

Now let us enter into some particulars, concerning the treaty of the several
parts of the Universe, or World; particularly described by this Science of
Cosmography, which may stand us in stead for the present, and so enable us for
the future, that we may be the better disposed, to contemplate the same from
above.

What the Sphere is.
THe Science or understanding of the Sphere, is the knowledge, or the being
acquainted with the particulars of this worlds parts, and properties: The world
is the assembling, and ordering of all that God has created, its the composure
of Heaven, and of Earth, or of the Celestial and Elementary Region, and
therefore it is called the Universe: And to the end that we might have a more
particular insight in this Science, an Artificial Sphere has been framed,
being of a round form, composed of sundry circles, by the which, though
imaginary ones, the motion of the Heavens are described: The reasons of the
several changes in the seasons of the year; that of the difference of days
and nights, according to the several places and scituations or the
terrestrial Globe. Finally by the Sphere, you may observe the whole course of
the world, being it was made according to the worlds resemblance.

What the Heaven is.
AS we are not resolved to build Castles in the Air, nor to entertain our
Auditory with imaginary things, but to give most evident proofs of what we
allege, so it will be necessary to make appear unto you that there is a
Heaven, before we come to distinguish its qualities, and herein we shall meet
with no great difficulties; since that Nature admitting of no emptines, that
space which is between, the Firmament, the Imperial Orb, and the lowermost of
the Planets, to wit, the Moon, must of necessity be filled with some matter;
And this matter is called Heaven, which is both simple, sollide, fixed, shining,
transparent, incorruptible, and exempted from any changes.

Of the qualities of Heaven.
ALL natural things have two principles, first God, secondly Nature, unto
which he has given full power to work by a certain universal spirit, which
he has enclosed in her.

All natural things are corporal essences, which subsist of themselves, and
result from the union of the substance, and of the form: So that Nature then
consisting in these two points, substance, and form, all natural bodies are
engendered by the substance of it, and the form makes them to be what they are.

But the matter being susceptible, of diverse forms, having not so soon
quitted one, but that it receives another: And for as much as it cannot receive
a second, before it be deprived of the precedent, therefore the Philosophers
have established three principles; the substance, form, and privation: Now
there are two sorts of natural bodies, the one simple, the other mixed: The
simple bodies are the Heavens, and the Elements, because that in their creation
they are simple, and never admit of several forms, on the contrary, the mixed
ones, are such as receive their composition from the Elementary qualities, and
are susceptible of diverse forms.

The matter of the Heaven is therefore simple, as likewise solid and fixed.

Because that the Stars, which though they do turn, and have moved since the
beginning of the World, yet they never change nor vary their figures, nor the
distances which they observe betwixt each other: Now this order could never
have been kept, unless some solid matter had constrained them thereunto,
which cannot be by any other thing, then by the solid and fixed matter of the
Heaven: Likewise it is the opinion of the most learnedest ancient Astronomers,
and all those who have written on this subject, besides the most approved
Authorities, That the Stars are of the same matter that Heaven is of, save of a
more dusky and danky substance, which they have adjudged them to be of, by
reason that they stop, and as it were, hinder the light of the Sun; the which
Heaven does not, as we shall show hereafter: Moreover they allege the Stars
are just in Heaven, as knots are in boards; others deem the Stars and Planets
to be in a continued Air like as the birds are: But then there ought to be
many particular properties for to maintain the Stars in so permanent and
immutable an order, against the violent swiftness of so many contrary motions,
which opinion I shall wave, as well as the flight of their Birds.

The matter of the Heaven may be said to be of an abundant luster: since that
the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars are so, all which are comprehended of the
same matter: But to speak more properly, the matter of Heaven is transparent,
and the Sun and the Stars are not. That the Heavens are transparent, is very
easy to prove, since experience sufficiently denotes it unto us: For if the
Heaven of the Moon were dusky, it would hinder us from seeing of the Sun, and
the rest of the Stars which are about it. That the Sun, the Moon and the Stars
are dusky, is apparent by their Eclipses: This matter is also incorruptible,
and consequently exempted from all changes, since that it is simple, and that in
those Scituations, or Regions, generation finds no employment.

Of the Celestial Region.
THe Celestial Region, is the assembling of all the Heavens, and comprehends
them all entirely, the order and course whereof shall be shown in its proper
place.

Their matter or substance as we have proved, is sollide, so is that of the
Stars, and Planets, but more dusky and danky, that is to say, their matter is
more close and compacted, and since they are most pure and polished bodies,
they receive, and cause the light which they borrow from the Sun, to
reverberate, as shall be proved hereafter, but as for the Heaven it is
altogether transparent.

Now in the Celestial Region, there are two sorts of Stars, Fixed, and Errants;
the Fixed are those that never change their figures, but have all one and the
same motion, which is that of the Firmament: The Errant Stars are the Planets,
which have all different motions from that of the Firmament, and they are seven
in number; unto which the Ancients have given the names of their Deities, viz.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Mercury, Venus, and the Moon, which names were
likewise appropriated unto them, because of their powerful influences.

The duskey matter, is that which gives no passage to the sight, as you may
perceive in Wood, and in the Stones.

The solid and fixed matter is that which will not suffer any very easy
penetration, as you may observe in Crystal, or in glass.

But the penetrable matter is that which suffers the peircing with ease, as the
Air does, the Water and the Fire.

The transparent matter is that which gives passage to the light, as Crystal,
and Glass does: And so consequently, we may justly infer, that the Heavenly
Matter or Substance, is both solid, fixed, impenetrable, and transparent

That there are many Heavens.
BY the diversities of the Motions, we prove that there are many Heavens, thus;
since the matter is solid, two Planets having different motions, cannot be in
the same Heaven, or Orb, and by this same reason you may observe, that its not
the Planet which moves, but its Orb, or Heaven; for otherwise they would
penetrate the matter, which is both fixed and solid: But the Sun and the Moon
have different Motions, for that the Sun accomplishes its course in a day,
and the Moon in a Month; then the Sun and the Moon cannot be in one and the
same Orb, or Heaven: And by the same reason, no two of all the seven Planets
having the self-same Motion, there must then of necessity be seven Orbs, or
Heavens, requisite for the seven Planets: since also the matter of Heaven is
fixed, and impenetrable: Against this may be objected, that there might be but
one Heaven of an impenetrable matter, in the which many spaces may be imagined,
and by which the Planets having different Motions, may make their courses. And
let them say what they please, yet it will always come to this period, That of
necessity there must be seven spaces for the seven Planets, to move in, which
must be filled by seven bodies, and these are by Astronomers called the Planets
attributes, and these we call Orbs, joining close the one to the other.

Of the Firmament or eight Heaven.
HAving demonstrated that there are seven Orbs for the seven Planets; it will
be necessary to show how that its requisite that there be also another Heaven,
for all the fixed Stars are differing from the seven others: for the Ancient
Astronomers observing that the Motion of the Stars was very slow, not advancing
above a degree from one hundred to a hundred years, concluded, that it was most
necessary to admit an eight Orb, in the which all the fixed Stars are, and the
which never vary their situation, distance, nor figure, or shape, and this
Heaven is called by them, the Firmament.

How the Astronomers divide the Stars, or whether they be numberless or no.
AS for the fixed Stars we hold them to be numberless, the Holy Scriptures
giving us a testimony thereof, I mean, that besides the great infinite number
that we see, there are yet a far more infinite number of lesserstars which are
by us not seen, as has been observed by certain Prospective Glasses, made in
Italy, and though the Ancients have not marked above 1022. their meaning was
not, that there were no more Stars, but that they had observed none but those,
as being only the chiefest which they had need of; And those thousand twenty
two Stars, are divided into forty eight Constellations, or Figures of Animalls,
which the Ancients have supposed, for to discern the one from the other; and
have separated and disposed of them into three ranks, as Septentrionalls,
Zodiackes, and Meridionalls.

Moreover, the Stars are distinguished by their several Magnitudes, or
Bignesses, which have been found to be six: So that all the great Stars are of
the first Bigness, the lesser of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
magnitude or bigness, in which the least of them all are comprehended.

Whether or no the Stars be translucent of themselves, and transparent.
THe Stars have no proper light of themselves, save in this manner, all the
Stars and Planets are of one and the selfsame Nature. But the Moon has no
other light then what she borrows of the Sun, so no more can any of the
other Stars have any other light but from the Sun.

But suppose it be objected, that the Moon loses not altogether its light,
though she Eclipses in the shadow of the Earth; because that in the Eclipsed
party there appears a redness, and that such a redness for ought we know,
might be her natural light.

I answer, That that rednes cannot be her natural, because that if it were so,
she would never quit that rednes, save when she increases, or that she is in
her first quarter, And then that part of the Moon which is not illuminated by
the Sun, ought to have that redness, which is not so, as we see by experience:
And therefore all redness is not natural to the Moon: Moreover, if it be
demanded from whence that redness proceeds? its from the reflection of the
lig(...) is encountered by the Moon in the shado(...) Earth: For as the Moon
is a polisht body, (...) the shadow of the Earth is never destitute of some
little light, so it is that little light which causes the redness in her.

So that by what is aforesaid, it clearly appears that the Sun is the
Principle of light, it being Gods pleasure to adorn it with such an eminent
quality.

Furthermore, we say that the Stars are not so transparent as the Heaven is,
which may be seen by the Moon and Mercury, when they are interposed, between
our eyes and the Sun, and that they Eclipse her; And so its apparent that the
Stars are both dusky and danky.

That the Heavens are round, and that they move the one within the other, from
the East to the West, their usual course.
AS we have hitherto proved, that there are eight Heavens, so must we prove
that they are round, and that they turn the one within the other, from East to
West, the which may appear unto us most manifestly, for we see that the Sun,
the Planets, and all the other Stars, do rise first in the East, on our
Horizon, then little by little they advance toward the South, and that finally,
they set in the West, so next again they rise all in the East. We will but
instance in the Sun, And say that it must be either the self same Sun, or
another which we daily see to rise, and set, It cannot be any other, for that
then every day would require a new one: And if it be the same Sun, it must
either have past over, within, or underneath the Earth: Over the Earth it
cannot have past, for as much as then there would have been no night, the
presence of the Sun causing the day; neither can it have past within the Earth,
because, as we shall see hereafter, its greater then the Earth, It remains
then, that it must have past underneath the Earth, and that consequently its
Orb, or Heaven turns about the Earth; And since all the Heavens turn, the
one within the other, about the Earth, and that from the East to the West, we
may justly then say that the Heavens are round.

Its also granted that the Heavens are round, because that being they are the
most noble part of the world, and in which all the rest are contained; it is
most necessary, that they should be of a round form, which is the most
capablest and most perfectest of al others. For if the Heavens had any other
Figure or Form, those which are inferior to the others, could not possibly
transport their Planets from the East to the West, because of their Angles, or
else we must grant that they penetrate each other, and so there would chance to
be a penetration in the matter of the Heavens, which would contradict what has
been formerly proved, to wit, that its matter or substance, is both solid and
fixed, etc.

The End of the first Lecture, concerning COSMOGRAPHY.

