Touching the subject of SVPREMACY IN Causes Ecclesiastical.

Diatriba quaedam
Oxoniensis cujusdam.
Tending to Peace and Settling.

BY Showing how the Powers Civil and Ecclesiastical may act in their own
Sphaeres without incroachment on one another.

2 COR. 13.8. We can de nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

1 THESE. 5.21. Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.

Imprimatur

July 12. 1647. JOHN DOWNAME.

Printed by J.F. for Philemon Stephens. 1647.

QUESTION. Where the Supremacy of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction lies?
ANSWER.
1. IT is apparent out of Scripture, That Spiritual Censures, as well as
Preaching and Sacraments, etc. are an Ordinance of God, instituted for the
edification and falvation of the disciples and followers of Jesus Christ, Mat.
16.19. Joh. 20.23. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.

2. It is apparent, That these Censures are formally to be administered only by
Church. Officers, appointed thereto by Jesus Christ. As the Magistrate may not
2 Chro. 26.18, 19, 20.
Preach, administer the Sacraments, etc. so may he not execute Spiritual
Censures; the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were not given to State but
Church Officers, Mat. 16.19. Joh. 20.23.

3. As none can Excommunicate, so none can Absolve formally, but the Officer
that Excommunicateth; he only that binds can loose: So that in this respect
the Supremacy of Power in Spiritual Causes may be said to lie in the
Church Officers, because none can formally undo what they have done.

4. But now we are to observe a true and useful distinction of a Church in
regard of Circumstances. There 1. Merton of the Church, cap. 8. and 9.
are private Churches, such are those who exercise their communion only in
private or secretly, as it falls out in places where the Civil Authority does
not countenance, but oppose and persecute true Religion. Thus it was in the
Apostles times, when the Emperors and chief Governors of States were
heathenish; and thus it is now where the Civil Magistrate is heathenish or
Antichristian, and would not allow, but seeks to exterminate true Religion. 2.
There are public Churches, when those that profess tru^ Religion may and
(with the leave, countenance and protection of the State) do exercise their
Church Communion openly in places allowed, and with other encouragements
indulged by the Magistrate.

5. Where men are forced to hold their communion in private, and so have only
private Churches: There they practice Religion at their own peril, which they
choose to do, to obey God rather then men, and there the Ecclesiastical Power
is supreme in man^^^^ of Censure, there being no other Power to challenge any
thing about it, but what seeks not the regulating but the eradication of the
true Church and Church Power. But public Churches may none set up in any
State without the leave of the Magistrate, whose Office it is to protect, and
so must have power to judge what Assemblies are good, and to be protected, and
what not: for be ought to act in his place rationally, not brutishly, and in
reference to these public Churches we must distinguish or observe,

6 That the Power about Church matters may be considered two ways; 1. Either
primarily and formally, as it is considerable absolutely in it self; (...)
secondarily, as it is to be acted in a public Church, authorized and
protected by the Civil Magistrate of the place or Nation where it is exercised:
In the former sense the Church Officer is subordinace to none but to Jesus
Christ; but in the latter sense there is a Supremacy in the Civil Magistrate,
and to him the Church Officer is Subordinate: For consider,

7. As it is the duty of the Civil Magistrate to ^^^tect and countenance true
Religion (it being the improvement of his Talent, and he is to serve God with
all his might) so it is his Privilege, and indeed Duty too, to do it in an
intelligent way, that is, by judging of that Religion which is held forth to be
protected, whether it be the right or no: For his duty to protect Religion,
ingageth him not to protect any but the true Religion only, which he is first
to discern, and then to countenance.

8. As some Religions are more grossly false, so some parts of a Religion, which
for the general is good, may be corrupt or abused: In which case a Magistrate
is to provide caution against corruption and abuse, as well as inhibite
Religions grossly false. As now for that part of Christian Religion,
Church Censures, as the Civil Magistrate is to see, that Censures, as well as
Word and Sacraments, be dispensed: so likewise is he to take care. That they be
not abused beyond their intention, either to Spiritual prejudice, by too much
rigor or connivance, or to serve the wills and humors of men in acting private
spleen. He may therefore set certain Rules to be observed in the exercise of
these Censures; or appoint certain persons to overfee the carriage of those
Censures, or to receive the Appeals or Complaints of such as shall conceive
themselves unjustly proceeded against: And those that will not accept the
exercise of their Ministry with those cautions, he may choose whether he will
afford them sufferance or protection in public. And for such Censures as are
past in Ecclesiastical Judicatures, contrary to such prescribed Rules and
Cautions, though he cannot make them Null or void, because he has not any
formal Ecclesiastical power to absolve or bind; yet he may require the
revoking of them upon pain of forfeiting his countenance, or toleration in
public manner, or places to execute Church functions: And not to obey either
in revoking the sentence, or relinquishing the use of public
Church-functions, is to affront Magistracy, and to be guilty of Faction or
Sedition; and the reason is plain: As the Magistrate is to protect Religion, so
only that which is good, and so far as it is good, and of that (so far as
concerns the exercise of his own power) he is to be Judge: If he judge amiss,
the fault is his to be answered to God; but we cannot hold what is in the
Magistrates power to grant or deny, viZ. Exercise of our Religion in public
against his leave, without usurpation on him, and faction against him.

9. There Is a twofold obligation, 1. Mortal. 2. Legal, the one in foro dei, the
other in foro humano. When the Church Officer does his Office aright, and yet
observe not the cautions prescribed by the Magistrate: The Magistrate is bound
to ratify, and not to seek to revoke what is done, morally, but not legally,
in the court of Heven, but not in foro humane; that is, the thing being good,
there is a real internal bond upon him to ratify it, and he cannot neglect it
without sin against God: But he is not formally or externally bound in
reference to men, and therefore in that respect he is free to act, with or
against; and the Church Officer is bound to submit to the Magistrate, not the
Magistrate to the Church Officer.

10. There Is a great deal of difference between those things which a Magistrate
does by way of usurpation, beyond the limits of his power, and those which he
does by corruption, abusing his power; that is, in things wherein he has just
power, if he did observe the rules set him of God: in things wherein he has no
power, his commands are Null; a Christian stands not obliged, but where he has
power, but does abuse it, there a Christian is to submit himself by doing or
suffering, and suffering either the loss of such privileges, as are in the
Magistrates power to indulge or deny; or undergoing such pain as the Magistrate
shall inflict.

11. The Church Officer must in this be subject and subordinate to the
Magistrate, or the Magistrate to the Church Officers, or else there must be two
supremacies acting in the same Kingdom. To make the Magistrate subordinate to
the Church Officers, to confirm and act what they decree, is to usurp upon him
and debase him; for though the Church be the more excellent society, or men be
under a more excellent notion as Christians, and Church Members, then as men
and members of a Commonwealth; yet in the world that power which is worldly
has the pre-eminence, and the other being a stranger, needs the protection of
this, and in that respect must yield precedence. Two distinct supremacies in
one Kingdom, cannot be with out clashing and confusion, and continual occasion
of broils, Defensor Pacis, par. 1. cap 17.
as Marsilius Patavinus has proved against the Papists, and God is the God of
peace, not of confusion; and therefore in the aforesaid external respect, the
Church is subordinate to the State, and the Church Officer to the Magistrate.

12. Hence it will follow, that the Civil Magistrate where there is danger of
abuse, may admit a Church Government, though Jure divino, with such cautions
and Limitations, as may be needful to prevent the abuse of it, either to the
Spiritual, or Civil grievance of the people, and may deny public liberty to
those that refuse to submit to their cautions: Only (since the Magistrate, is
responsible to God, though not to the Church; and its no small offense to
interrupt the free lawful use of any Ordinance) great care must be had by the
Magistrate, that his cautions hinder not any needful use, but only restrain
(...) abuse of Church Power; and therefore the ^^^sure of this limiting
Church Power, should not be taken from State-interest, but that which is
Suprem^ Lex, salus populi. And thus Presbytery may be so settled, that those
scarcrows of inconveniences from the tyranny of it, fomented and blown up by
the envious enemies of it, may c^nvincingly appear to be but scarcrows indeed;
and Presbytery may without fear be cheerfully and with profit embraced.

READER,
PErceiving not only deep jealousy, but mutual and (...) of encroachments
between the powers Civil and Eccl^siastical, whereby the settling of the Church,
and so of the State has been much retarded, I thought it the duty of every
good patriot and lover of (...) ^o c^nttibute what they conceive may have any
verture to care this bleading wound; And upon mature deliberation it seemed to
me, that by a right ^^ating of the question, the rights of both estates might
be so a^^e^ted, (...) that the power of the Church Officers in its kind, may
be f^ll^ (...) to reside in them; and yet power of just provisions, be lef^ to
the Magistrate, to prevent the abuse of Ecclesiastical power, by any corrupt
p^^^ciples or affection in the ministers of it, which power the Eccl^ (...) may
and ought to allow to the Civil Magistrate, it being no incr^^^^ment on the
power Ecclesiastique, but a cautious bounding the exercise of it, in that
public way, in which he cannot act without the countenance, protection, or at
least the leave of the Civil Magi^ This exercise I submit to the 1 Cor. 14.32.
judgment of the godly learned, desiring that so far as upon trial it shall be
found consonant to truth, and conducible to peace and mutual concurrence
between the two powers, it may be embraced; or if otherwise, yet that it may
(...) some other of deeper judgment, to hold out a more excellent way of
through settling the state of the Church, by removing that unhappy (...),
jealousy of incroachment, between the two powers.

(...)



FINIS.

