THE Golden Mean: BEING Some serious Considerations, together with some Cases
of Conscience resolved; for a more full, and frequent Administration of, yet
not free Admission unto, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

By Stephen Geree, Minister of God's Word, and Pastor of the Church of Abinger
in the County of Surrey.

Toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quo volumus.

August. contra Donatistas, Cap. 20. Minister Ecclesiae, ubi non viget
excommunicatio, excusatus est, modo non volens det coenam abutentibus, sed
instet monendo, and c^piat cavere abusus. Ursinus. ut est apud Magist. Bowls
in Patore Evang: lib. 3. Cap. 5. page 193. If thou warn the wicked of his way,
to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity,
but thou have delivered thy soul, Ezekiel. 33.9. LONDON, Printed for Joseph
Cranford, and are to be sold at the Kings head in St Paul's Church yard, 1656.

TO THE READER.
WHen I consider that most pathetical Prayer of our dear Savior for all his
Disciples, not long before his death; Joh. 17.20, 21. That they all might be
one, as the Father was in him, and he in the Father; that they also might be
one in them, (and for this canse) that the world might believe, that the Father
had sent him; Intimating that the unity of Christians is an especial means, to
convince the world, that Jesus was the Messiah; and consequently to convert
them unto Christ; It troubles me not a little, to see such strange differences
and divisions among true Christians, whereby the world, that should be won by
our singular love and unity, is utterly distasted, and so disaffected to the
true Religion of Christ.

Little do some of the separation consider, how dishonorable, and
disadvantagious it is to Christ, and his Spouse the Church, to be guilty of
such a great sin, as schism is; otherways, I am persuaded, they would with
both hands endeavor to make up the breaches that they have made in our
Churches, and that especially in regard of the Lord's Supper, a Sacrament of
our Spiritual Union and Communion with Christ, our blessed Savior.

O! that they would at length sadly consider, how little good that reformation
is like to work, which only reforms such, as they suppose already reformed;
accepting none into visible Church Fellowship in this Ordinance, but those whom
they judge really gracious (contrary to the practice of all other reformed
Churches); mean while neglecting, if not despising all the rest, whom they
should rather pity, and not thus provoke; whereby they do either exasperate, or
discourage them, although they judge them to stand in most need of their help.

Neither is the injury small, which in this case some Ministers suffer, in that
they are robbed of some of their choicest children; begotten by their
faithful, 1 Cor. 4.15 1 These, 2.19, 20.
and painful Ministry, who were the crown and comfort of their Spiritual
fathers, while they remained with them, and were as stakes in the hedges of
their several Churches, and might still have been lively patterns to their
other people, had they not been (as the Apostle says) bewitched, with specious
pretenses of a more pure and primitive Communion.

And verily had it been for their own advantage, and spiritual gain, as is
imagined, it would not so much aflict us, and we would have held our peace,
although it would not have countervailed our damage, but when we sadly see,
how by this means many of them get such an itch after novelties, and an humor
of changing, that they are ready to receive any up start opinions, or old
rotten heresy, newly revived, so that they gad from Church to Church, till no
Church is thought good enough for them, and till at last some of them utterly
lose all that Religion that they seemed to have; being elevated, not only above
Ordinances, and Scripture, but above God himself (horresco referens) holding
that there is neither Heaven nor Hell, neither God nor Devil; and so are
become twofold more the children of Hell than those they formerly separated
from. This must needs be a most sad and soulbreaking spectacle!

And whence is the root and rise of all this? chiefly from that licentious
principle, that men have liberty to be of what Congregation they will; and so
after that they have made a rent in their own Church, they think, when they
please, or are displeased, they may make another, and so another, as long as
they list, Mat. 23.15
if their wandering spirit shall but move them; which I wonder some of the wiser
sort of them do not see, and if they see it, do not seek to prevent it; and
cease to gather Churches out of churches. Surely there is far more need to gain
men really unto Christ, than to gather Churches out of Churches, to the great
grief of godly Church-membets; who are not a little troubled at such inordinate
courses.

See, jus divini Ministerii. Aug, p. 47.48.
that we have true Churches; and therefore some that deny it, do shamefully
defile their own nests; by this means making their Mother an whore, and
themselves base-begotten; being first bred and born Christians in our
Congregations.

And if we have true Churches, how can they make such rents among us? and not
be guilty of that great sin of Schism, which now cries louder in God's ears
than formerly, because multiplied beyond measure.

And as for my brethren that suffer with me in this case, and that for fear of
offending them, and others, have abstained from administering the Lord's Supper;
which is acknowledged to be an Ordinance of excellent use; and therefore not
only the abuse, but also the disuse is no small sin; I have with all
tenderness, avoiding all bitterness, endeavored to encourage them, to a more
full and frequent celebration of this holy Supper; having, as I hope, clearly
demonstrated, that there is no such danger in delivering this Sacrament, to
most of our Church Members that are of age and understanding, as many do
imagine; Always provided, that the Ministers instruct and catechize them in the
grounds of Religion, and particularly about the nature of the Sacraments, as
seals of the Covenant of grace, teaching them how to receive worthily, and
telling them the danger of unworthy receiving, persuading them carefully to
renew their Covenant with God, which they made in Baptism, by repenting truly
of their sins; and stirring up their faith to lay faster-hold on Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins; thankfully acknowledging the love of the Lord Jesus
in shedding his blood for the pardon of sin; he likewise consecrating the
elements with holy reverence, and godly simplicity, abandoning all suspicious
ceremonies, and humane inventions. And if after all this they will come in
their sins; and so eat and drink judgment to themselves, their blood shall be
upon their own heads; the Minister has given them sufficient warning, and so
has delivered his own soul. But in case any grossly ignorant, or scandalous,
should (to the offense of others) presume to come to this holy Communion, I
have delivered my opinion to this purpose; That seeing the Word of God is
silent in this particular of the Sacrament, and only speaks of Excommunication,
which is a casting out of all Communion, and not from the Sacrament only; and
we have no settled Church Government, at least owned; and backed by public
authority, to exercise such a severe sentence a, Excommunication is: M^^.
^.^3.^4.
therefore if but two or three sufficient persons of the Congregation, will
testify the scandal or ignorance, the Minister in such a case may openly
examine the ignorant: and if the ignorance appear gross and childish; he is as
well to be refused as one under age. And for the grossly scandalous, they are
openly to be admonished; and if for the present they profess hearty sorrow,
and promise amendment, they may be admitted; and if they do this in hypocrisy,
it is at their own peril only. But if they prove obstinate, and for want of
power cannot be legally excommunicated, Mat. 5.23.24.
the Minister may charge them to forbear; telling them what they deserve, 1
Cor. 5.11.13. 2 These. 3.6.14.
and warn others to withdraw from them; as the Apostle does concerning such,
all which must be done with much meekness of wisdom, and charity. If any
think, that notwithstanding these cautions, too much liberty is given, to let
in so many. I shall answer with these words of Reverend and learned Master
Baxter. I never found (says he) one word in Scripture, where Christ and his
Apostles, denied admittance to any man that desired to be a member of the
Church, though not only professing to repent, and believe; Saints rest part 4
3. page 104.
neither did I ever there sinde, that any but convicted heretics, or
scandalous ones (and that for the most part after due admonition) were to be
avoided, or debarred, our fellowship. And again a little after, he says; Their
being baptized persons (if at age) is sufficient evidence of their interest to
the Supper, till they do by heresy or scandal blot that evidence. Thus M.
Baxter.

And indeed it were a sad thing, vide Blake Cov. sealed page 130.
for Ministers (as M. Hudson has well observed) if they were bound to admit
none, or administer the Lord's Supper to none, but such as were truly godly; or
that they judged in their consciences to be so; or were bound to eject all,
that they judged were not so. Hudson of the univers. visib. Church page 249.

And there is great reason for this that he says, first, because God never
puts us upon the scearching of other men's hearts, but our own; in this
particular: Secondly, because it is more than probable, that this Ordinance does
much conduce to conversion, or regeneration; as is proved in the ensuing
discourse, and more at large by learned M. Blake; which though it seem contrary
to the opinion of many of our orthodox Divines, who speak of this Ordinance, as
being meat to seed, and not seed to beget new life; yet shall we find, that
generally in their practice, they made no scruple to deliver this Sacrament to
all knowing persons, that were not scandalous, neither did they turn any away,
merely because they judged them unregenerate.

If it be further objected, that our Divines require Repentance and Faith in
all that come to this holy Table, therefore they do not count it a converting
Ordinance.

I answer, that the same graces are required to the performance of those
Ordinances, which all confess to be converting, viz. Prayer and hearing Gods
Word, for the Scripture says that unless men pray and hear with Faith,
repenting etc. they pray and hear in vain, see James 1.5, 6, 7. Heb. 4.2. and
yet these two Ordinances are chief means to beget Faith and Repentance, Romans
10.14, 17. Psalm. 66.18. Luke 24.47.
Acts 2.37, 38.

But thne you will say, why should any at all, being of years, be kept back
from this Ordinance, if it be such an help to conversion?

I answer with learned M. Blake: Every Ordinance that is for conversion, is not
meet to be applied to every one in an unconverted condition; he instanceth in
reproof, which is a means to convert; because it is called the reproof of life,
Prove. 6 23. yet reprove not a scorner, says Solomon, least he hate thee, Prove.
9.8. So we may forbid this Sacrament; to some obstinate sinners, that declare
their sins like Sodom, because some other more severe course is best for them,
that may make them ashamed, as I showed before; seeing fair means will not work
on such, but only foul, they must have some corrasives to eat out the proud
flesh. To conclude, I hope, my long-known practice, and principles, against
profaneness, will apologize for me in this particular; that I have not done
any thing (in allowing this liberty) to patronize any sin in the least, seeing
I judge this the most profitable course to keep some more within compass, and
also to keep up Religion, which has much decayed since this Sacrament has
been so much disused. I say no more but commend that which is done to the
blessing of God, whose power is made perfect in man's weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9
Ephesians. 3.20.
and who is able to do exceeding abundantly even above all we can ask, or think.

From my Study July 30. 1656. Stephen Geree.

AN Advertisement to the READER.
READER,
WHile this small ensuing Discourse was at the Press, there came happily to my
hands, that learned and elaborate Treatise of the rarely accomplished and
eminent Divine, Mr Richard Vines, concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, wherein amongst other Questions, he handles this also; Whether the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper be a converting Ordinance? which he determines
on the negative. Now least some should think that this is flat contrary to what
I have wriiten, and so be stumbled at the same. I would have it well
considered, that M. Vines does labor only to prove that this Sacrament is no
Converting Ordinance in the (primary) intent of it, and perse which I do not
deny, affirming only that it does much conduce to the conversion of a knowing
baptized person, that is not scandalous; as it is considered with all necessary
circumstances; being always adjoined, or added unto the Word, according to that
old saying of Austine. Accedat verbum ad elementum and fit Sacramentum; Hence I
conclude that the Word barely preached, without the Sacrament, as a seal to
confirm it; cannot ordinarily be so effectual to beget Faith and Repentance:
as when both are conjoined, as a Bond sealed is of more force, to make a man
believe, he shall have a promised debt, than one that is unsealed, and
therefore I suppose the Sacrament does further conversion, not meeerly ex
accedenti; but rather ex consequenti; and though not directly, yet indirectly;
which is sufficient to my purpose. The primary intent of this Sacrament, is to
keep a memorial of Christ's death, and seal or confirm the Covenant of Grace;
and it does but secondarily confirm our Faith and strenthen other graces, and
why it may not have other secondary effects in some, (who have but common
grace, and yet are bound in conscience to use this Ordinance, having a legal
right unto it) I see not. Seeing it lays an engagement upon all receivers, to
renew their Covenant with God, and labor for those true graces, whereby they
may receive the full benefit of this Ordinance.

Especially considering that this Sacrament teaches the eye, as the Word does
the ear; and is confessed also to be an heartbreaking and heart-melting
Ordinance; when they shall see Christ, as it were, crucified before their eyes,
for the remission of sins.

Besides, it is worthy to be considered, that this learned M. Vines, not long
before his death, and since he preached these Sermons, now newly published, did
prefix an Epistle to Reverend M. Blake his Book, of the Covenant sealed, with
high praises, both of the Author and the Book; commending it to many Ministers,
as a thread to direct them, out of those Labyrinths and perplexities, about
administration of this Sacrament; which have vexed very many. Blakes Covenant
seal page. 189 11. propos. 9.
Now in that Book M. Blake proves and holds, that this Sacrament (no more than
other Ordinances) is not limited to those that have received a new life in
Christ by the Spirit; and that others as they may be admitted without sin, so
they are in a capacity and possibility to receive benefit from it. And again,
he has another Assertion; That the Lord's Supper, with the Word as an
appendant to it, may be serviceable to bring a man of Covenant Interest up to
the terms of the Covenant, page 200. Sect. 13. Propos. 11.

Besides, M. Vines himself page 252. has these very words: If one be a
baptized person, a knowing professor of the Gospel, against whom there lies no
bar of notorious ignorance, or scandal; though it appear not that he is truly
regenerate, yet he has admittance; he claims upon such a right, as the Church
cannot justly disallow, no more than an Israelite circumcised, and clean, could
be debarred the Passover; and page, 254. unto admittance to the outward
Ordinance Regenerated is not necessary. And yet more plainly to this purpose
page 350. If it was known to me (says he) that a man was not regenerate, I
durst give him the Sacrament, yea I must, until he be orderly convict of sin
that may debar him, for the Rule of Gods Word is best reason; and the Rule
establishes an order, If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee a Heathen
and a Publican, until then; and not upon my private knowledge, he is not to be
an Heathen to me. Thus he, Now seeing Christ himself has not injoined his
Church to prehibit all unregenerate persons, yea has injoined her to exhibit
to such, and such, though unregenerate; as this most learned and holy man
holds; hence I gather, that this Sacrament must needs be of some special use to
some such, else God would certainly have prohibited it; especially if it had
been so dangerous to administer it to such, as some suppose it; whereas on the
other side it is very dangerous for any such to neglect this Sacrament; as it
was to them that neglected the Passover. See Numbers 9.13. The man that (is
clean viz. legally which was spoken of before) and is not in a journey and
forbeareth to keep the Passover; even the same soul shall be cut off from his
people; and mark the reason, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in
his appointed season, That man shall bear his sin. What sin then are they like
to bear, that care not to bring this offering of Lord, in that holy Supper in
any season, but neglect it for a long season? And I leave the Treatise to thy
candid consideration, and rest.

Thine in the Lord, Stephen Geree.

SOME Serious Considerations, Together with some Cases of Conscience. RESOLVED:
For a more full and frequent Administration of, yet not free Admission unto the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
HAving for a long time sadly and seriously considered the almost-insupportable
burden that lies upon the backs of Ministers, Onus ipsis Angelis formidandum,
as one has long since termed it; and weighing withal the dangerous
distractions and divisions in our Churches, which are the mystical body of
Christ, and should be like his Garment, seamlesse, and without rent; always
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; I have
esteemed it a most happy and heavenly work, (though hard and difficult,) to
have an hand in composing these controversies, or contributing any thing,
whereby peace and unity may be in some measure procured, and true piety
restored and advanced; which has been so much hindered, and almost utterly
exstinguish'd, in many places and persons, by reason of our scandalous and
distracting differences; and that especially about Discipline.

For hereupon, many not able or not willing, to distinguish between Doctrine
and Discipline, (the former, to wit, Doctrine remaining still the same, sound
and saving; notwithstanding the variety, and seeming contrariety of Discipline)
hereupon I say some are deterred from Religion it self, and others so offended
and staggered, that being in a maze they scarce know which way to steer their
course, so that they become altogether unsettled and irresolute in their
Religion to the great dishonor of God, the disgrace of their religion and their
own damage; as also to the hardening of unholy ones in their wicked ways, and
carnal courses, who hence take occasion to sooth themselves in their supposed
constancy, though indeed it be no better than contumacie, or mere obstinacy
against the clear light of the Gospel of Christ.

For say they, to what end should we be so scrupulous, and precise in matters
of Religion; seeing few or none of the most zealous are well agreed amongst
themselves; one holding forth one way, others another way, and a third differing
from both of them, (to name no more) and all with a great deal of eagerness
and confidence. For these men have forgotten, or rather do not regard to know,
that even in the Apostles days there were the like factions and differences,
when one said, 1 Cor. 15.12.
I am of Paul; another said, I am of Apollo; and a third said, I am of Cephas;
and a fourth renounced all the rest, as it seems, and pretended to be only for
Christ, as some do now amongst us, decrying all Ministers and Ministry of men,
and seem to be only for Christ's immediate teaching by his Spirit; who though
they think they have the fairest pretense, yet I am afraid they will fall upon
the foulest conclusions in the end, as we see by sad experience in some such
already.

Likewise those formerly mentioned, that are so much offended at our present
Divilions (which we see the very Apostles could not prevent) do not consider,
that our main Differences are not so much about the fundamental points and
substantials of Religion; (which are especially Repentance toward God, and
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, which the Apostle makes the sum of all
Religion, Act. 20.20, 21, with ver. 27.) but only about the superstructures
and circumstantials, which do not conduce to the Being, but only to the
Well-being of the Church, and therefore are not absolutely necessary, though
very profitable for the peace and welfare of the same.

Hence I hold it a work well worthy a Consistory, or College of Divines, to
find out some expedient for an happy Union among our selves in these
particulars, that might further the practice of true Piety in these declining,
as well as dividing-times.

And first of all, if we could find out the Basis, or bottom of our Divisions;
I think it would be some good degree to the healing of our Breaches. Est gradus
ad sanitatem novisse morbum, vel morbi causam, It Is one degree to health to
know our disease, and especially the cause of it; and so in this we may happily
see the saying verified; Dimidium facti, qui been coepit habet.
He that has well begun,
has half his business done.


Now amongst many other causes and occasions of our Divisions and Dissentions
we clearly find, that those very things, which were ordained for an holy Union
and Communion, to knit Christians together in an inviolable bond of
Brotherhood, have proved by the subtilty of Satan, and policy or perverseness
of men, the greatest Apples of strise, and bones of contention, as M. Calemie
in his commendatory Epist. before M. Hudson's learned book of the universal
visible Church.
one very justly complains; To wit, the two Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, which are the very badges and cognizances of Christians, whereby
they are differenced and distir guished from Jews, and Barbarians, Turks, and
all other Infidels in the world. Baptism is that sacred Ceremony, whereby we
are admitted members into the Universal Visible Church, as being all members of
the same mystical body, whereof Christ is the Head; baptized therefore into
the Name of the undivided Trinity, or Trinity in Unity. And who can be
ignorant, what Differences and Divisions have formerly, and of late, arisen
about this holy Sacrament? which of it self is not only a great blessing of
God to us, and our children, but should be a firm bond of brotherly love and
concord among all Christians.

And as for the other Sacrament of the Lords supper, That has been the
occasion of greater Discord and Division. how many dear, and precious servants
of God have suffered bands, and imprisonment, yea and have lost, not only their
liberty, but their lives, in fiery flames, and otherwise, and only because
they would not acknoledg the carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the
Alter, as the Apostles call their Lords Supper.

And Divisions about this Sacrament have not only risen between Papists and
Protestants, and Lutherans, as they are called; but even amongst Protestants
themselves, as well as amongst the other two; and that of late especially: to
the great prejudice of true piety, and the power of godliness, and that in the
most eminent places of this Land: insomuch as some have been ready, in this
respect, to unchurch, and undo one another; so that a great part of that time
which should have been spent in God's service, Jud. Epist. verse 20.
in mortifying sin, and building up one another in our most holy Faith: has
been mostly wasted on fruitless controversies in this kind; to the great
detriment and damage of all sides: the scandal of weak brethren, and the
strengthening and stiffening of the hearts and hands of the wicked in their
evil ways; who otherwise might have been reclaimed; but by this means bless
themselves in their cursed confederacy, whereby they are like Simeon and Levi,
brethren in evil, Genesis 49.

Wherefore, seeing the main difference amongst us has been, and still is
concerning the Administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. For which,
as for the divisions of Reuben, there are great thoughts, and swellings of
heart: After long and serious Deliberation, and confideration with my self and
others; and after much waiting and wrestling with God in prayer and
supplication, I have resolved to cast my two mites into the Common Treasury of
the Church, if happily they may conduce, or confer any thing to a comfortable
composure of this great controversy, that so much concerns the Churches among
us.

And herein I must confess, I have been much encouraged, by the endeavors of
some faithful fellow-laborers, as learned M. Jeanes, judicious M. Blake and
others; who have not only confirmed me in many things, but added much to my
clearer understanding of other particulars; so that standing upon their, and
other men's shoulders, I may happily discover something, for the common good of
these our distracted and distressed Churches, which, next to Gods glory, is the
only aim of these endeavors.

Now concerning this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, some administer it not at
all, least for want of power to keep off the unworthy, they should profane
this holy Ordinance: and give offense to others.

Some on the other side administer to all that come, and are of years and
understanding, without any Scruple, or Scruteny; not caring to catechize and
instruct them for that holy Supper. Others there be that administer, These are
Anabaptists.
but exclude all that were baptized only in their infancy, as if they were
without the pale of the Church. Some again allowing Infant Baptism, admit only
those that renounce Communion with our Churches and Ministry, as
Antichristian, and these are rigid Separatists. Others, though they do not
altogether condemn our Churches and Ministry, yet refuse to administer to any,
save such as enter into an explicit Church Covenant, as they call it; and that
are able to give such evidences of grace, as to satisfy the whole
Congregation, or at least the Elders; These go under the name of Independents.

There is also another sort that do administer, who will allow none to receive
this Sacrament; but such as will give an account of their knowledge and faith to
the Elders, and are not proved scandalous, who though they give a greater
latitude than most of the former, and accept of persons upon far easier terms;
yet in most places, few will come under their Test or Trial; so that very few
are admitted in many Congregations. Hence some have devised a new way, whereby
they cull out those few of several Congregations or Parishes, and so imbody
them together, to join in Communion and breaking of bread, and many are as
much, or more offended with this way, than the former, and so grow to distaste
and disrelish their Ministers, that thus combine, because so very many are left
out of Communion, though I fear, that many of them are accessory to their own
exclusion, who either out of pride, or ignorance, or profaneness, refuse to
give an account of that faith and hope that is in them.

Wherefore let me tell such (by the way), that though there be neither precept
nor practice in the holy Scriptures for examination of others; as precedaneous
to the receiving of the Sacrament; yet doubtless it must needs be a pious and
profitable course for most Christians, to be catechized and examined for their
better instruction in the ground of Religion; and consequently for their more
profitable partaking at the Lords Table: the neglect whereof is, and has been,
a main cause of much profaneness, irreligion, and atheism in most parts of
the Nation. And therefore without all question they are guilty of a very great
sin, and have much to answer for, that shall either despise, or refuse their
Pastors pains in this particular, and deny to give him an account, if he think
fit to demand it. The reason is, because Heb. 13.17. they are bound to submit
to them, that watch for their souls, as they that must give an account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for the
people, as the Apostle there tells them.

Wherefore to com now to the main matter intended, I cannot but commend the
great care and pains, that some of my faithful brethren have taken in several
Counties in this Commonwealth; to reform those committed to their charge, and
yet notwithstanding people for the most part wax worse and worse, for want of
an uniform established Government, backed and countenanced with public
Authority; for those that have most need of reformation, will hardly hearken to
any platform that is of private or particular men's managing; that wants the
aforesaid Authority, in these days especially: Wherefore in the mean time,
until the Lord be pleased to stir up the hearts of those in highest places
over us, to settle and promote some godly frame of Church Government among us,
give me leave in all humility to commend a few things unto consideration, in
this present exigent wherein we are.

1 Consid.
First of all, let it be considered, whether the case of many of our Churches
be not such, and so generally corrupted, and distracted, that severe Discipline
upon all sorts of scandalous sinners will not be the way rather to ruin than
reform them, I mean principally in regard of admistring the Lords Suppen, which
is the great stumbling-stone and rock of offense.

Even judicious Calvin himself, who was strict enough in admission to the
Lord's Table, and professed that he would rather suffer his blood to be shed,
than willingly partake in the pollution of Christ blood in the Sacrament; and
thought, that in the delivery thereof; magnopere delectus requiritur, great
choice is required; yet adds, Qui tamen haberi nequit, nisi per Ecclesiae
jurisdictionem, which choice notwithstanding cannot be had, without the
Churches Jurisdiction: Then afterward, in the same Chapter, he censures
immodicam veterum austeritatem, the austerity or rigor of the Ancient Fathers;
Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 12.
but withal excuses some of them whom he thought were necessitated to use such
severity, and therefore brings in Cyprian to this purpose, saying, Certe
Cyprianus declarat quam non sponte fuerit tam rigidus. Patientia inquit, and
facilitas, and humanitas nostra venientibus praesto est, opto omnes in
Ecclesiam redigi, opto commilitones nostros intra Christi Castra and dei Patris
Domicilia concludi. Mark this.
Remitto omnia, multa dissimnlo, studio and voto colligendae fraternitatis,
etiam quae in Deum commissa sunt non pleno ^udicio examino, I hide many things
with desire of gathering together the fraternity, even those things that are
committed against God himself; I do not examine with strict judgment. Delictis
plus quam oportet remittendis pe ne ipse delinquo, I almost offend, in
pardoning offenses more than is meet. Thus much out of Cyprian, that worthy man
and holy Martyr.

Then again, the same Calvin, in the same section, brings in Chrysostom,
Chrysostomus (says he) aliquanto durior, sic tamen loquitur, si Deus tam
benignus est, ut quid Sacerdos ejus austerus vult videri? Chrysostom who was
something harsher than ordinary, speaks notwithstanding on this manner, if God
himself be so favorable, why should his servant seem so austere?

And after these he also brings in learned Augustine, Scimus praeterea qua
facilitate usus est Augustinus erga Donatistas, ut non dubitaverit in
Episcopatum recipere, qui aschismate redierant, idque statim post
resipiscentiam. Then Calvin adde^. verum quia contrariaratio invaluerat, coacti
sunt proprio judicio cedere, ut eam sequerentur, but because a contrary course
prevailed, they were forced to forsake their own judgment to follow that,
whereby we may plainly perceiy, how wise men were compelled, in some cases, for
peace sake, to yield to the current of the times, See learned D. Field of the
Church l. 1. c. 6.18. p. 36. approving the same.
against their own judgment. And moreover in the same Chapter he cites Saint
Austine bringing in an useful saying out of Cyprian, Miserecorditer igitur
corripiat homo, quod potest, quod autem non potest patienter serat, and cum
dilectione gemat, ac lugeat. Words worthy to be written with letters of gold!
approved as you may see both by Austine and Calvin, two men most famous in
their generations. Cyprians words are in English thus. Therefore let man
mercisully convert what he can, and what he cannot amend, let him patiently
bear, and with love lament and bewail with sighs and groans. And furthermore
Calvin declares, how the Donatists in S. Austines time, were like Anabaptists
in his age (even as they are in outs) making a rent and schism in the Church,
because the Bishops would not use such severity in Discipline, as they desired;
herereupon he relates another notable piece out of the same laborious Austine:
Unumistud praecipue commendat (scilicet Augustinus) si contagio peccandi
multitudinem invaserit, Consilia separationis mania sunt, ac perniciosa, ac
sacrilega, quia impia at que superba fiunt: and plus perturbant infirmos bonos,
quam corrigant aninosos malos. i. e. This one thing he especially commends. If
contagion of sinning have invaded the multitude, Counsels of Separation are
vain and pernicious, and sacrilegiou^, because impious and proud, and do more
disturb the good ones that are weak, See much more to this purpose in Master
Balls trial of the grounds tending to Separation. Chap. 10. page 2.13. and
204. who has after the words (Malitiudinem-invaserit) non est illa
excommunicanda, sed Dei correctio expect ari debet: l. 3, contra parm c 12.
than reform the bad ones that are stomacky and stubborn.

Hence the aforesaid Austine, writing to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, thus
complains. Ebrietatem impune grassari in Africa quae adeo graviter in
Scripturis damnatur, suadetque ut coacto Episcoporum concilio remedium
adhibeatur; yet subjoins withal, Non aspere, quantum existimo, non duriter,
non modo imperioso is it a tolluntur, magis docendo quam jubendo; magis monendo
quam minendo. Sic enim agendum est cum multitudine peccantium, Severitas aute^
exercenda est in peccata paucorum. That is, that drunkenness did rage in
Africa without control, which is so much condemned in the Scriptures, and he
counsels him to use some remedy, by calling of a council of Bishops; yet says
he, these things are not taken away, as I suppose, by harshnesse, or by
imperious means, rather by teaching than commanding, rather by admonishing than
by threatening; For so must we deal with a multitude of offenders, and use
severity only against the offenses of a fow.

This is our very case in England, as it was in Africa; the multitude for the
most part is grievously infected with drunkenesse, and other damnable sin^, and
therefore seeing it would be pernicious and impious to separate; (a remedy
worse than the disease) to leave them in such a desperate and deplored
condition, See Doctor Field of the Church Book. 1 c. 17 p. 33.
so can it not be safe to exercise severe Discipline upon them. The reason is,
because that would not bring them to shame, being so many that are guilty; for
they will harden one another. But some more mild and gentle course must be
considered of, to win and work upon them by love, rather than seek to force
them by fear, using all kind instructions, and loving admonitions, rather than
rigid rebukes, and harsh threatings, which will but exasperate, and make them
more obstinate, pertinacious, and peremptory.

And thus you see the concurrent judgment of these three most worthy men, whose
praise is glorious, both for piety and parts, which may be the more easily
assented unto; if we well consider the Lenity, long-suffering, and patience of
our Lord and Savior in the like cases; who when his Disciples in their rash
zeal, would have commanded fire to come down from heaven, Luke 9.53.54.55.56.
to consume the Samaritans, because they would not receive him, he rebuked
them, saying, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of; for says he, The
Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Christ, you
see, was not so harsh, and hard in censuring and judging, as the Disciples
were, but reproved for their rashness, though they pretended the example of
Elias.

It is also generally confessed by all sober men, that the Ancient Fathers were
too rigid in their Discipline; and too severe in their censures; and yet their
case did more require Austerity, as may seem, than ours does. Because they
lived among Heathens, who denied the Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore least
Christianity it self should com into more contempt, and be scandalized by the
bad conversation of professed Christians, the Officers and Governors of the
Church, were forced to use more rigor, for the avoiding of offenses, that so
they might win the Gentiles to the love of the truth.

Wherefore we must consider the nature of the times wherein we live, and like
wise Physicians temper our medicines so, as that they may be most taking;
bitter Pills will not down with some queasie stomachs; we must in most things
observe the temper of our distempered people; and sometimes humor them, as we
do our froward children, lest they should fret themselves too much.

Christianity is now the common profession, and in credit; therefore our chief
endeavor must be to work men to a real practice according to their
profession; and because strict Discipline will not now be endured, as sad
experience tells us, especially in this juncture of time, when every one may be
of what Congregation he will, or of none at all, and of what Religion he will,
that is called Christian, so it be neither Popish, nor Prelaticall, or of no
Religion at all, so that he keep it to himself, and disturb not others.

Consid. 2.
Therefore in the next place I desire, that it may be well considered, whether
it were not necessary, to give some indulgence, at least for a time, because of
the hardness of men's hearts, as Moses did in the matter of divorce, and that
by Gods own permission and appointment, Deuteronomy. 24.1.

And this so much the rather, because nothing is positively determined in
Scripture concerning this particular, to wit; who those are that are to be kept
back from the Lords Supper; but it is left to the wisdom and prudence of those
in authority, both in regard of this, and diverse other parts of Discipline, to
vary according to circumstances of time, place, and person; seeing Christianity
is not now confirmed, (as formerly) to one Nation. Act. 10.34.35.
and country only; but is free for all Nations, Mat. 28.19.

Now disserent countries have different dispositions, and customs; therefore
there could not be the same Discipline in every particular for every people.

Withal let it be observed (which some do not impertinently urge), that the
Apostle never blames the Ministers, or any others, for admitting those
Corinthians to this Sacrament of the Supper, whom he so much condemns for their
unworthy receiving, and upon whom God himself had inflicted such visible
judgments, as weakness, sickness, and death it self; for that very sin of
unworthy receiving: charging them only that were guilty, to examine themselves,
and not the Ministers, either there, or any other where.

Case 1.
But here coms a case of conscience to be resolved: Should all, good and bad be
admitted to this holy Sacrament of the Supper.

Blake Cov. sealed page. 274.275.
we must do what we can, as reverend M. Blake has well determined, adding a
little after; That the Churches edification is first to be considered; but the
peace of the Church by no means neglected.

Case. 2.
But should not people be examined, (by the Minister at least) before they be
admitted to the holy Supper; or should all that are baptized, and of years,
come that will, without any more a do, as some do plead?

I answer, though there be no particular precept for such examination, as there
is for self-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. yet I think that it is necessarily
deducible, from that which is generally granted on all sides.

All take for granted, that Children, Fools, and Madmen are to be prohibited
this Sacrament of the Supper, and yet there is no syllable for this directly in
the Word of God, but only by natural reason, to be deduced thence, because
such are altogether unable to examine themselves, and so to improve this
Sacrament for their spiritual advantage, etc. by reason of their invincible
ignorance. Now there must be therefore of necessity some appointed to judge,
who are fools and madmen, and who are past children, and of years; which
cannot be known without examination; and none so fit to examine ordinarily as
Ministers, who are, or should be, men approved for knowledge, judgment, and
holiness.

And hereupon I argue further thus, If invincible ignorance does make children
and fools unfit to be admitted to this holy Supper, much more will affected
ignorance, which makes them not only incapable but unworthy of admittance,
because by their negligence they are disabled from discerning the Lord's body,
and so must need ^at and drink unworthily 1 Cor. 11.29.

Add hereunto, that the Prelaticall party, who have been most backward in this
business of examination, cannot deny but that confirmation was appointed by
our first reformers, and that none should be confirmed by the Bishop, See the
Rubric about confirmation, and before the communion.
but such as could say the Catechism; and that none should be admitted to the
Communion, until such time as they could say the Catechism, and be confirmed;
and therefore the Minister was appointed to Catechize such as were to be
confirmed; and all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames, should cause their
Children, Servants and Apprentices (which had not learned their Catechism) to
come to the Church, at the time appointed, and obediently to hear and be
ordered by the Curate, until such time as they have learned all that was
appointed for them to learn.

Now this being in many places neglected on all sides, Ministers not
Catechizing, or very few of them, and likewise Parents and Masters, etc. being
backward to bring their Children and Servants to learn the Catechism; and
Bishops as careless as any t^ see it done, and so in a great measure the cause
of the neglect of the other, whom they had power by their Courts to compel,
had they not wanted care and conscience; hence most sorts of people did still
remain very ignorant of the grounds of Religion, being altogether uncatechised.
Wherefore let any man judge, what need there is now of more then ordinary
examination, or catechizing almost of all sorts, in regard of knowledge; so
that a great many that mutter, and make much ado against examination, as if it
were so tyrannical, and much worse than Episcopal Government, do say they know
not what. For though Episcopal Government, in regard of the execution of that
office, fell short in this particular; yet in regard of the right constitution
thereof; the Bishops should have caused as much to have been done, as is of
late required by moderate Presbyterians; and it was their sin and shame, that
they did it not. See the Rubric about confirmation, and before the Communion.

Case: 3.
But shall the scandalous be admitted to this holy Communion? what shall be
done with them?



Secondly, seeing that in most congregations there wants sufficient power for
authoritative excommunication; I think it very difficult, what to determine in
this business; and that because it is hard to judge what is scandal, and also
who are scandalous, learned men being much divided in this particular:
Therefore I conceive it too great a burden to be put upon the Minister alone,
unless he were more infallible than most can possibly be imagined; or unless
there were public Laws to regulate and determine, what shall be accounted a
scandal, and who, and when scandalous.

rebus sic stantibus) for want of fit Officers. If there be any so grossly
scandalous, that there need no examination, or other proof; as in case of
Bastardy, Common-drunkennesse, or the like; if any such should offer to come to
the holy Communion, he is to be admonished; and if he do openly confess his
sin, and profess his hearty sorrow for the same, and promise by the grace of
God to endeavor amendment, I know no reason in all the Word of God, why he
should be put by. But if he will not be admonished, but seek to justify
himself, or excuse the matter, and remain obstinate, he deserves to be
excommunicated, and cast out of the Congregation. But for want of Discipline
whereby this might be legally done, I suppose the Minister (if there be any
that will join with him, to testify the scandal and obstinacy) may in such a
case pass him by, 1 Cor. 5.11 2 These. 3.14. (...). Vid. Pastor. Evangel. l. 3.
c. 5. p. 188. 189. ad 195. Ezekiel. 3.4. and 9.
charging him not to presume to partake at his own peril; warning also the rest
of the Congregation to withdraw from familiar conversing with such an one, more
then natural or necessary civil bonds do tie them, to the intent that he may be
ashamed, as if he were juridically excommunicate.

But now if none will join with the Minister in this case, but leav the
business wholly upon him; I do not think it can be safe for him alone to put
him away, only he may charge him to abstain, till he have given some
fatisfaction to the Congregation, and not to offer the consecrated elements
unto him, and if he will take them of himself, he has had sufficient warning,
his blood shall be upon his own head, and shall not be required at the
Minister's hands.

And as for others that are only suspected, the Minister may not meddle with
them; no, nor a Presbytery; because, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia, only
they may admonish such in private, to carry themselves so, as to take off all
suspicion.

Now though this may seem to some very strange, as favoring of loosnesse and
remissness, yet let me tell you, that it is no more in effect, than what some
of the chief and choice Independents allow, upon the like occasion. For Mr
Thomas Hooker, a man very eminent while he was in Old, Vid. M. Cawdryes Review
of M. Hookers Survey cap. 2. page 94.
and afterward in New England, yet in his Survey of Discipline yields as much.
In declining times (says he) a Church being corrupted, when diseases grow
deadly, there is allowed, and a toleration of necessity must be so far granted,
M. Blake on the Covenant Chapter 47. page 437. See also Mr Gillaspy's his Aarons
Rod book 3. chapter 15. p. 541.
until juridice the evil be examined, the parties convinced, censures applied
for reformation. See M. Cawdrey's Review, p. 94. M. Blake also quotes another
passage to this purpose, out of the same M. Hooker. We see (says he) how much
reverend M. Hooker, speaking the opinion of his party, gives to the Churches
conivence or indulgence. If the Church (says he) either through connivence,
negligence, or indulgence sha tolerate such evils, and evil persons in the
state of Church Membership, they cannot then deny them the privilege of
members; thus far he. Now this is one special privilege of Church Members,
that are of years, to receive this Sacrament, or to be admitted to this holy
Table, therefore he yields full as much, if not more than I have yielded.

Case. 4.
But whether may Ministers lawfully administer this Sacrament to those, in whom
they can see no signs of sound and saving grace? I answer, yes undoub^edly,
and that for these following reasons.

Act. 2.41. etc. and that breaking of bread. ver. 42. is meant of Sacramental
breaking, may appear more plainly, if we well observe, what learned Master Mede
says, concerning the words. They were says he, (...), which the vulgar Latin
turns, Erant autem perseverantes in doctrina Apostolorum, and communicatione
fractionis, panis and orationibus; but the Syriack, Perseverantes erant in
doctrina Apostolorum, and Communicabant in precatione, and fractione
Eucharistiae, hoc est, assidui erant in audiendis Apostolis, and Sacrificio
Christiano celebrando, and withal he adds, who knows no that the Synaxis, of
the ancient Christians consisted of these three parts, of hearing the Word of
God, of prayers, and commemoration of Christ in the Euchrist? And therefore he
says, our translation is not here so right, which refers (...) to (...) and
translates it the fellowship of the Apostles, whereas it is to be referred to
(...) Vide Mede vol. 1. page, 493. 494.

And to proceed, we do not read of any admitted to baptism, but were also
admitted to the Lord's Supper. Hence Act. 20.7. It is said, that upon the first
day of the week the Disciples came together to break bread, and Paul preached
unto them; Mark, he speaks of Disciples in general, without any exception,
that they came together of purpose, to break bread; as a special Sabbath-duty,
as well as hearing the Word etc.

Exodus 12.44. and 47. Every man's servant that is bought with money, when thou
have circumcised him shall eat thereof; all the Congregation of Israel shall
keep it, amongst whom, without question there were many, if not most of them,
uncircumcised in heart, and unregenerate, uncircumcision in heart,
orunregeneracy; was never made a bar to exclude any from the outward Ordinance
(though it may from the blessing of it) because no man can judge the heart.

As for these Numb. 9.6, 7. etc. that were forbidden to keep the Passover, by
reason of uncleanness, being defiled by a dead body of a man, it was such an
uncleanness, as might befall the holiest man among them; besides it was such as
kept them out of the Congregation, and so from other Ordinances as well as
that. Numb. 5.2. Command the Children of Israel, that they put out of the Camp
every Leper, and every one that has an Issue, and whosoever is defiled by the
dead, both male and female, shall ye put out, without the Camp: That they
defile not the Camp. ver. 3. Now out of the Camp, then out of the Congregation,
but mark what followed. Numb. 9.13. The man that is clean, (to wit, legally)
And is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passover, even the same
soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the Offering of
the Lord, in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin: You see
therefore there was great sin, in refusing to keep the Passover, if legally
clean, though unregenerate; for that uncleannes there, cannot be extended to
inward uncleanness, which man cannot possibly know.

through conversion. For here thou must take notice of a twofold conversion,
one is unto the Faith, another is to the Truth of the Gospel; the former is
only outward, consisting in profession and outward practice only; the other
is inward, when the heart receives the love of the truth, and of this letter
we here speak, which is helped by this holy Sacrament, reverently and devoutly
administered, for we suppose all that can lay any claym to the Sacrament have
the former.

to prove that the use of this Sacrament conduces to conversion that is real.
my first Argument is this: Because it is a means to convince men of
sinfullnesse, which is the first work of the spirit in true conversion, Joh
16.8 Now in this Sacrament Christ, is as it were, Crucified before our eyes,
and that for the remission of sins, which could not otherwise be expiated,
but by the shedding of his blood; likewise it serves to convince us of the
haynousnesse, and hatefullnesse of our sin, which could not be done away by any
other means, but by the Blood of the Son of God, as also to convince us of
monstrous ingratitud, if we should presume to come to the Sacrament of Christ
body and blood, and yet to follow flesh and blood, and not labor to be
cleansed by the blood of that Lamb that takes away the sins of the World.
Besides the very breaking of the bread, understandingly looked upon, is a
forcible argument to break our hearts, London Min. vindic of the Presbyteriall
Government, page, 104.
(as the London Ministers have excellently and feelingly observed) Was Jesus
Christ rent and torn for you, and shall it not break your hearts, that you
should sin against him? Was he crucified for you, says they, and will you
crucify him by your sins? And besides, say they, the breaking of the bread
is not only ordained to be a motive unto brokennes of heart for sin, but also
in the right use to effect that which it moves unto. verbum visible is joined
both with prayer, and verbum audibile, a threefold cord is not soon broken.

And the aforesaid London Ministers call it, ubi Supra page 110.
a Visible Sermon; that as Christ in the ministry of the Word preaches to the
ear, and by the ear conveyeth himself into the heart: so in the Sacrament he
preaches to the eye, and by the eye conveieth himself into the heart.
Therefore as the Apostle Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2
That the Wives good conversation may win the Husband, whom the Word will not
win, to wit alone, because deeds are often more forcible then words: So I may
say, that the Sacrament joined with the Word, validior est vox operis quam oris.
may work that, which the Word alone will not effect.

For though the word preached be of greatest weight for Conversion, The
Sacrament is a sign and a seal; as a sign it visibly teaches, and as a seal it
confirms, both which help to beget faith which is saving.
yet the Sacrament being added as a seal to the Word, to confirm the same,
must needs help to work sound and saving faith, and so turre the scale. For as
the Apostle says, Heb. 6.17, 18. God willing more abundantly to show unto the
heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an oath, that
by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have a strong confirmation: So I may well say, that these two immutable things,
God's Word and Seal, must needs make stronger impression upon our hearts, to
work faith, and consequently conversion.

Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. etc. partly by reason of the
Apostles pressing to examination, by expressing the heinousness of the sin,
and greatness of the danger of unworthy receiving, that it makes them guilty
of the body, and blood of Christ, and to eat and drink their own damnation. 1
Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.



Hence many never begin to think seriously of Religion, and a religious,
course, until they are to come to the Sacrament, and then they begin to
bethink themselves, and to turn over a new leaf, and so fall close to savor
and relish Religion, which before they regarded not, Cov. se aled, p. 216. etc.
or at most very slightly considered. Expertus loquor, See more concerning this
matter in M. Blakes Covenant sealed.

For he that believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3.18. As for poisoning
them by this, how can a dead man be poisoned? And besides, Vid. Blake Cov.
sealed, chapter 17. sect. 11. page 190.
I hold it a dangerous error to think, that this Sacrament will prove poison
to all that partake of it, being unregenerate; for had it been so, surely the
Lord would not have appointed the same meat and drink to have been both
Sacramental and necessary food, without which the Israelites had been starved
in the wilderness; and with which most of them, being unregenerate, must have
been poisoned, if that position were true, for they all ate the same spiritual
meat, and all drank the same spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. whence I argue
thus; Seeing the Lord appointed the ordinary food of the Israelites to be
sacramental, and the very same spiritual meat and drink with ours; and seeing
they were all bound to eat, or else they had been self-murtherers; Therefore
there can be no such danger of soul-murthering to all unregenerate, that eat in
obedience to God's Commandment, which must of necessity follow, if the
Sacrament should be poison to all such as were unconverted.

I deny not but there was something extraordinary in that sacramental meat and
drink, in regard that the mixed multitude did both eat and drink of the same;
yet still the argument holds good, in regard of the sacramentality of it, (as I
may say) and that we may rather conclude thence, that those that are no members
of the Church may eat at the Sacrament, than exclude those from it that are
visible members, though unregenerate. Doubtless the unregenerate sin no
otherwise in this, than they do in other commanded duties, which they cannot
possibly perform aright in that condition, and which notwithstanding they
cannot neglect without greater sin; Bowls his Past. Evang. lib. 3. page 193.
Minorem contrahit reatum (says reverend Bowls) qui in officio, quod
praecipitur, deficit in modo praestandi, quam qui prorsus negligit. Peccat ille
ex accidenti, scil. ex defectu fuperveniente; hic vero in substantiam
praecepti, que jubemur Domini mortem usque dum advenerit annunciare. Peccat
ille in unum duntaxat praeceptum; hic in duo, quae prudens sciensque omittit.
And after this manner we were wont to comfort wounded consciences, who were
afraid to perform holy duties, because they found such failings and faithless
distractions in the performance of them, that they thought they sinned more in
doing them, than in leaving them undone; For this we told them, that there was
less sin in the willing performance, though with much weakness, than in the
wilful neglect of them.



Blake has sufficiently answered; M. Blak Cov. sealed c 7. sect. 11. p. 195.
1. By way of Concession: Positive precepts bind not at all, because they are
not given to all; the Gentil nations were not tied to the Law of Ceremonies
given to the Jews, and mere Heathens are not now tied to our Sacraments. 2. For
a positive answer he says; Positive precepts were never given in charge with
any such distinction, as to bind the regenerate, and to exclude men in
unregeneration, Men under sin, and in nature, are bound to the affirmative part
of the second Commandment, to observe every way of worship that shall be
instituted by God, all of which are only of positive right. All Israel were
tied to sacrifice, as well as to hear, and pray; and all Christians are now
under an obligation to the Law of the Sacraments, as they are to other duties.
And a little after he adds; There are texts indeed produced, seemingly taking
off men under sin, from the performance of positive duties, as Mat. 5.23.24.
and as much may be said concerning those that are moral, Ezekiel. 14.2, 3. and
20.23. thus far Mr. Blake.

Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. etc. that presently after, God was said not to be well
pleased with many of them that are that spiritual meat, etc. ver. 5. I answer;
it is true, and this makes much against them, that rest in the deed done, and
think Sacraments will save by the bare outward act, sine bono motu utentis; but
this makes nothing against what I have said; for the Apostle says not, that
God was displeased with them for eating that Spiritual meat, etc. but for
lusting after evil things, as appears ver. 6, 7. etc. In all which, and that
which follows in the next Chap. where he speaks of the Lord's Supper, he
says not one word, against their coming to the Sacrament, which was their
duty, but only against their misbehaviour at it, which was very gross;
whereby it may appear, that many of them were unregenerate, for some of them
were drunk, either at or presently after that Ordinance, which is little
better, they came to it, not as a sacred, but as a civil, or rather uncivil
feast; hence those judgments seized upon them, to wit weakness, sickness, and
death ver. 30. and yet not a word of excluding the parties, but only condemning
their miscarriages.

Case. 5.
But is not administering the Sacrament to such as be unregenerate, Mat. 7.6.
a giving holy things to Dogs, etc. Contrary to Christ's flat command? by M.
Jeanes, and also by M. Blake: yet give me leave to fay something in this
particular, because it works much with a great many. I confess I cannot choose
but wonder to see this place so wrested by wise and worthy men, as if it
afforded Argumentum palmarium, not considering either the absurdity, or
inconsequence of their arguing.

First, the absurdity is evident, because taking it for a general proposition,
as they do, and so including the holy things of the Sacrament among the rest,
it makes full as much, if not more, against preaching to such as they call
Dogs, and Swine, and whom they would exclude, eo nomine, from the Sacrament,
when notwithstanding they preach the holy things of the Gospel to the self-same
Dogs, yea and cast those pearls before those same Swine; especially when they
contend for excommunicate persons, not to be excluded the Congregation.
Therefore the Proposition cannot be general, in their sense of Dogs, but so
as to make flat against themselves. The truth is, preaching, reproving and
admonishing are mostly meant by those holy things and pearls, which our Savior
speaks of; as M. Perkins and many others give the sense of the place.

But now, if you take Dogs and Swine in Christ's own sense (who must needs be
the best expositor of his own meaning) for such as will rent you, and trample
upon those pearls which you give them; see then the inconsequence of their
inference: Those whom they would exclude from these holy things and precious
pearls in this Sacrament, never offer to rent or tear those that administer
them; but the contrary, they are ready to rent those that refuse administering
to them, though not with their teeth, yet with their tongues, as many can
testify. And as for trampling these pearls under their feet, they are so far
from it, as that they prize this above most other Ordinances, and have used to
come more reverently to it, than to any Ordinance whatsoever; carrying
themselves worse by far toward the Word preached, which as yet they are allowed
to enjoy.

Moreover, let them take Dogs for whomsoever they will, provided they have
this quality here mentioned by our Savior, to be ready to rent those that
would give them this holy Supper, and there need be no controversy in this
case; for if they should but offer such an affront for administering these
things unto them, we would not offer to give them; indeed we should not need to
trouble our selves about them in this respect, because they would not come to
this Ordinance at all, as many now sinfully refuse, who hold us and our
Ministry Antichristian, and surely we are not so Popishly affected, as to
carry it to their houses, or carry it about, and call upon them to adore it; as
the Papists do their Host, or Breaden god, which they call the Sacrament of the
Altar.

this Childrens bread, and therefore not to be given to Dogs, according to the
saying of our Savior, Mat. 15.26.

that speech of our Savior? Even all those that are of the Visible Church, in
opposition to those that were not; for this Woman of whom he spoke was a
Gentile, and not a Proselite; and the Jews in those days were only of the
Church, and so Children, how wicked soever; which is likewise manifest by
Christ's foregoing words, ver. 24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: mark, even the lost sheep of the house of Israel, as well as
those that were already found, are reckoned there to be the same with the
Children: And consequently Dogs, according to Christ's meaning, must needs
signify there, such as were not of the Visible Church, or uncircumcised; and
so likewise those are children among us, who are received into the Visible
Church, and Baptized, and have right unto Childrens bread, and cannot be
counted Dogs in our Saviors sense there, but only Infidels and unbaptized
are to be accounted such, and not to receive this Sacrament in statu quo.

Case. 6.
But will not this largeness in Admission give offense to many of God's
people, and cause them to separate from us, and speak evil of us, as if we were
no true Churches.



And as for the truth of our Churches, I verily believe most of them are as
pure and free from corruptions, as most of those Churches of Asia, to whom our
Savior sent several Epistles, and called them all golden Candlesticks, Rev.
1.20.

The Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1. had a name to live, and was dead; and the
Church of Laodicea was neither cold, nor hot, but lukewarm, the worst temper
that could be in a Church, which made Christ so sick of them, that he was
ready to spue them out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16. There was nothing it seems
commendable in them, else surely our Savior would have taken notice of it, as
he did in that of Sardis, saying, That they had a few names, that had not
defiled their garments, Rev. 3.4. But it seems there were none among the
Laodiceans, for if there had, why should not Christ have encouraged them, as
well as others? seeing he passed an impartial censure, doubtless, upon them
all.

And withal let it be observed, that Christ himself does not there make so
much adoabout polluting of the sacrament of the Lords Supper, more than about
other Ordinances, which is now so much insisted on, and was then no doubt, as
much defiled, if not more than among us, considering what gross corruptions
some of them had, and Christ set himself of purpose to correct whatsoever was
most amiss among them, and therein set us a perfect copy, how to reform
deformed Churches, commending the good, and condeming the bad; But we hear
never a word, that they should make a separation, because of the bad; but
rather to rebuke, and so to reform them.

Rev. 2.14. He condemns the Church of Pergamos, because she had them that
held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balaack to cast a stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and
commit fornication, and the like, and thereupon bids them Repent, or else he
will fight against them, with the sword of his mouth, But never commands the
good to separate, although such foul evils were tolerated amongst them.

He also sharply reproves the Church of Thyatyra, for suffering the Woman
Jezabell, who called her self a prophetess, to teach and seduce his servants,
to commit fornication, etc. threatening her heavily. Rev. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Yet
not a word, to the well affected of separation, or any such thing.

Lastly we see plainly, that two many have fallen off to separation, even where
none have been admitted at all, and that partly for fear, least some should
take offense, and so separate.

And as for those that have separated, because they could not enjoy such pure
and unmix't Communions among us, as they supposed, how fearesully have some of
them fallen from one degree of separation to another, till at last they have
separated not only from all Churches, but from all Ordinances, and
consequently from all Religion also: Such is the giddiness of this age, by
reason of the subtilty of some seducers, especially Priests, and Jesuits, that
go under the name of gifted brethren, and teach them to blast all our
Ministers, and Ministry, as usually they do; That being the first thing they
commonly teach!

Now when they have once begun to separate from our Churches, and censure us
and our Ministry, as Antichristian, some of them grow so selfe-conceited, and
censorious, that no Church will hold them; but they soar alost above all
Ordinances, as carnal and low things: Yea the Scripture it self is counted
but a dead letter, whereby some of them at last become worse, than the worst of
those they have so rashly separated from.

Quis talia fando temperet a lacrymis! My very heart does sometimes bleed, to
confider, how our fair hopes, which we had of many, have been by this means
blasted, and poor souls utterly undon, who (I am persuaded) were well-meaning
men and women: and with good intent entered upon that way of separation, But we
may see how dangerous it is, to be wise above that which is written, and more
strict then God's Word will warrant us, which I wish were well considered of
all well-minded Christians, least they rush upon the same Rock.

For the Devil is never more dangerous, Mark this. 2 Cor. 11.
than when he transformes himself into an Angel of light, as he has usually
done in our days, and has gotten great advantage against us by over-doing, as
well as formerly by under-doing, as learned and zealous M. Baxter has well
observed.

This is as clear as the Sun to those that do not wilfully wink, and shut
their eyes. For when Satan saw, that the gross Superstition and Idolatry in
Altar-worship, and the like, brought in by some of the Bishops, was quite
quash't, and become odious, by the late Parliament, about the beginning, and
that a reformation was intended, and endeavored, he than cuningly turned
hands, and would turn Reformer also; But with full intent to deforme and
overturne all, for whatsoever the Parliament began to do, he would be sure to
over-doe, that so he might undo whatsoever they had done.

1. As for example, when the Parliament went about to reform our Churches, and
repair the breacher, he will have them utterly raced down to the ground, as
Antichristian; and rebuilt from the bottom, as if they were no true Churches at
all.

2. And when they sought to reform the Ministry, and cast out those that were
corrudted, being either ignorant or scandalous, he goes higher, and will have
all pulled down, Root and Branch. Not only Archbyshops and Bishops, but all
Ministers made by them whomsover. And when the Parliament proposed, to mend the
Ministers maintenance, least scandalous means should make scandalous Ministers;
he would have them preach gratis, as the Apostls did, and stand to the peoples
courtesy, and work for their living, as the Apostle Paul and some others had
done, and for this purpose raised up Preachers, of his own inspiring end
Ordaining; just as Jerobeam did, of the lowest of the people, which were not of
the suns of Levi. 1 Kings. 12.31. Whosoever would he consecrated hlm, and he
became one of the Priests of the high places. 1 Kings. 13.33. so he resused no
Methanicks, but encouraged them, and cried them up, and not only cried down
all other Preachers, but to this end cried down Tithes also, as Antichristian,
and unjust. Though in the Scriptures the godliest men did first give them, to
wit Abraham the Father of the faithful, and Jacob, of whom came the twelve
Tribes of Israel, Abraham gave Melchizedeck tithes of all, Genesis 14.20. even of
the spoils, Heb. 7 2. and 4. how unlike are those Soldiers unto Abraham that
would spoil us of our Tithes, God allowed them not only Tithes; but
Offerings, and some of the sacrifices, beside 48 Cities, with their Suburbs.
and God himself did afterward in his wisdom settle them, as his own portion
upon his own tribe of Levi, which he chose instead of the firstborn, to do his
special service.

By these means the Devil has done more mischief, then most can imagine; for
he very well knows, that take away maintenance, and you take away Ministry. No
man (says the Apostle) goes to warfare any time at his own charges. 1 Cor.
9.7. Speaking of maintenance for Ministers; Hence our gracious Lord and Master,
gave his own Tribe of Levi very liberal allowance, even under the Law, for
that administration, which was far inferior to ours under the Gospel.

Again the Devil further knows, that take away Ministers, and you ruin the
Churches; as you do an Army by taking away their Commanders: because Ministers
are the Churches (...), Guides or rulers, Captains or Leaders, Heb. 13.7. and
17. the Watchmen and Shepherds that must feed and defend the flock of Christ
from Wolvs, which the Apostle foretold would enter among them, Act. 20.28, 29,
30, 31. And if we have neither Churches, nor Ministers, we shall have in a
while no Ordinances; and hence many came to be above Ordinances, (a most
transcendent evil!) when once they had rejected our Ministry, and our Churches.
For I conceive, that if Satan's young Chaplains could have preached and prayed
as well as other Ministers, they would not for shame have left off Ordinances,
which they kept up for a time, usurping the office of the Ministry, but at
length left that, when they saw their own inabilities that way, and fell to
ascribe all to inward Revelations, and took those Revelations, (which were
doubtless from the Devil) to be divine dictates from the Holy Ghost, and as
good, or rather better than the holy Scriptures, which they found did not make
for them, but rather flat against them; though sometimes they would pretend
Scripture to deceive silly souls.

4. Again, when the Parliament would reform something about the Sacrament of
Baptism, Satan would still go beyond them, and taught by his Emissaries, that
all must be rebaptized that were baptized in their Infancy; neither should
that be administered to any, till they should renounce our Churches and
Ministry, and give a reason of their faith. By this means concluding our poor
Infants to be in a far worse condition, than the Infants of the Israelites, who
were received into the Church by Circumcision, and ours must be left without
for lack of Baptism. And yet he stopped not here neither; but went yet higher
with some, that they should decry all waterbaptisme, that was but a carnal
Ordinance; he will have them have none but spiritual-baptisme, rejecting
water-baptisme as need less for them that had the Holy Ghost, when as the
Apostle Peter, after he saw that the Gentiles had received the Holy Ghost, did
thereupon baptize them, Acts 10.47. Can any man (says he) forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as
we? Do not they then absurdly forbid water-Baptisme?

5, Lastly, when the Parliament intended to reform something in the
Administration of the Lord's Supper, and to keep back the grossly ignorant and
scandalous, that either could not, or would not improve that holy Sacrament to
their spiritual advantage, he labored to go still beyond them, he will have
none admitted, but those that may be judged truly gracious; and herein he
seemed something modest, and therefore he goes a little further, and would not
admit of some, unless they were first dip't, or rather duck'c over head and
ears, as if it had been possible for John Bartist thus to have dealt with
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, who came to his
Baptism, Mat. 3.5, 6. which had been more then an Herculean labor.

Cons. 3
In the next place I desire, that it may be impartially considered, whether or
no the Sacarment of the Lord's Supper, be not in some sense, over highly
esteemed amongst many; I mean, especially in comparison of other Ordinances,
whether there be not a sin on the right band, as well as on the left; that as
some do under-value it, so others do overvalue it. Indeed I have been long
mistaken, if some holy men have not (in a kind) idolized this holy Sacrament. I
suppose that Popish Transubstantiation, or at least their idolatrous adoring of
their Sacrament of the Altar, and also the very Altar whereon it is offered,
did arise from some such overweening conceit, that some of the Ancients, or
others had of this Sacrament. And what a world of wrangling, and sea of blood
has been spent, in our own and other Nations, by reason of these errors that
seem so plausible, and to be done in honor to our Lord Jesus Christ! In like
manner the over high conceit of the other Sacrament of Baptism begat great
inconveniences among the Ancients; who judging that Baptism did actually wash
away all their sins; and if they sinned hainously after Baptism, they could not
so easily obtain remission; and because Baptism was not to be iterated, but
only once to be administered, therefore they stayed from receiving Baptism a
long time, that they might have the brunt of sin over before it, by which it
would be the better taken away, than by any other means. Now this too high
conceit of Baptism, caused some dangerously to defer it, so that some
Christians (of good age) died unbaptized, and either never received the Lords
Supper, or else received it disorderly; for as no uncircumcised person was to
eat the Passover, Exodus 12.48. so by consequence none unbaptized should
receive the Supper.

I have not written this, as if I would that men should have a mean esteem of
this holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper; for I hold it very precious and
sovereign, and to be used with much reverence, Devotion, and thankfulness; and
therefore am very much grieved, that it has been so much disused in many
Congregations; but I conceive, that so highly to prise it above other
Ordinances is very dangerous, producing sad effects, as we have seen. And I
verily be ieve, that this preferring of it so much, as if it were of all others
such a Noli-me-tangere, and as if no other Ordinance could so defile, or be de
filed, has been on maine case of most of our late breaches amongst brethren
in our Churches, when as the Word of God speaks as much, if not more, against
the profaning of other OrdinancesSee, Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear
from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination. and Isa. 1.11, 12.
etc. And what reason can any man give, why a wicked man should more defile
another at this Sacrament then at other parts of God's worship?



See M. Balls Trial of the grounds tending 10 separation, page 200. 201.
Internal and essensuall communion we have with Christ and the faithful only
external with ^he wicked.
Were not all the Coogregation of Israel members of the same visible Church,
and called God's people by God himself, though many among them notoriously
wicked? Psalm. 50.7. Hear O my people and I will speak, O Israel, and I will
testify against thee I am God even thy God, and yet see what some of them were
v. is 16. etc. who then are we, that we should utterly disclaim them, before
they utterly disclaim him, and he has given them a bill of Divorce? Has it
not been sufficiently manifested, that the Kingdom of Heaven. i.e. Christ's
visible Church, is like a Field wherein tares must grow together with the
Wheat, until the harvest, which is the end of the World? Mat. 13.24, 23. etc.
And also, that in the visible Church many are called; But few chosen. Mat.
20.16.22.14.

Cor. 5.6.7.



v. 11. With such a one,



for I may and must do many things with wicked men in God's house, which I need
not do with them in mine own. The Adversaries will grant that I may, yea and
must pray, and hear, and sing with them in God's house, which I am not bound to
do with them in mine own; I am left at liberty in the one, but not in the other.

Case. 7.
But will not this gratify the wicked, who are so much for this liberty, to
come to the Sacrament of the Supper?

we desire he should renew it with us, by renewing his grace and blessings upon
us; otherwise we tell them this Sacrament will but aggravate their sins, and
also their judgments, 1 Cor. 11.30. And therefore as those whom John Baptist
called, generation of vipers, Luke 3.7. he notwitstanding badtized them unto
repentance, Mat. 3.11. i.e. to engage them more thereunto; for he told them
withal, That then the ax was laid to the root of the trees, to hew down every
tree that brought not forth good fruit, and cast it into the fire, ver. 10. so
may we administer the Lord's Supper to men unto repentance, to persuade them
to bring forth fruit accordingly.

Hence I suppose, that those Ministers who neglect to administer this
Sacrament, deprive themselves of a very forcible argument, whereby they might
persuade men and women to sound repentance; least going on in their sin after
this Sacrament, they should crucify Christ afresh, and put him to an open
shame, as those, Heb. 6.6.

In the next place I shall humbly desire my godly and reverend Breathren of the
Ministry, who have a long time desisted from celebrating this holy Supper,
sadly to consider how unjustifiable their practiseis in this particular,
especially if they should still persist in such a course. Many have hinted much
in this particular already, especially learned and laborious M. Blake, whose
books of the Covenant, and also of the Covenant sealed, are of singular use
for most Ministers, that are at a loss in this regard, and the latter book
especially, being as a word spoken on the wheels to such, as judicious M. Vines
has it, in his Epistle before that book.

I wish withal, they would consider, how unlike they are unto the Primitive
practice, which celebrated this Supper every week, and for some time every day
in the week, being so in love with the Lord Jesus, whom they knew in the flesh,
and who had lately laid down his life for them; and because they conceived that
this would be, not only profitable to themselves; but pleasing unto God, to
keep such an holy memorial of Christ's death, and passion, certainly they were
not so scrupulous as many are in these days, about admission.

And if you consult learned and laborious M. Mede. M. Mede vol. 1. page 495.
etc. as also p. 500. etc.
he will assure you, that the ancient Churches in their public meetings, did
so commemorate the sacrifice of Christ in celebrating this Supper, as that they
thought it an especial means to make all other services accepted; and to that
purpose alleges diverse testimonies, of Tertullian, and others, and among the
rest Origin. Hom. 3. on Levit. where treating of the shewbread, which was
continually set before the LORD with incense, for a memorial; that is to put
GOD in mind of them, he makes it in this respect to have been a lively figure
of the Christians Eucharist, for says he, Ista est commemoratio sola, quae
propitium facit Deum hominibus. Thus far, and much more to this purpose, says
M. Mede. Sit fides penes Authorem.

If this be true, as his Authors seem to prove, then judge you what we our
selves, and our Churches have lost, for lack of this Ordinance; and you may
well conceive, that it is no marvail, if God forget to do us so much good for
Christ's sake, as otherwise he would do, and has formerly done, when we
forget, or neglect to put him in mind of that propitiatory sacrifice of his
dear Son, by celebrating his sacred Supper, Ordained for this very end to be a
special memorial of his meritorious death, that he himself might be mindful
of us, and merciful unto us.

Consid. 5.
Furthermore let it be considered, that the main business of the work of the
Ministry, should be the conversion of souls, to bring them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Acts. 26.18. Now by
non-administration of this Sacrament, we greatly distaste a great many, if not
most that are not really converted, whereby our Ministry is made more
contemptible, and odious, than otherwise it would be, and so less effectual,
especially to such as stand in most need of it. And those that administer, and
admit only a few, refusing a great many, they give far greater distaste, and
cause them to harden their hearts against them and their doctrine, and make them
harken to any hedg-priest, that will sow pillows under their armeholes, and
sooth them in their sins, rather then seek to convert them, to the great
prejudice of their poor souls.





Again, Thas is well known to all ancient, and conscientious Ministers.
by hindering so many from coming to this sacrament, we deprive our selves of
a great advantage, that formerly we had of the younger sort, by way of
Chatechizing them befose they come to the Communion. For where Ministers were
conscientious and laborious, the Younger sort especially did usually resort
unto them (not only to pay their Offerings as some object) but chiefly to be
examined and instructed in the grounds of Religion, at least once a year, which
made them more mind their Catechismes, that now are wholly laid aside, by most
of them, so that they know nothing in matters of Salvation, but are like
Heathens.

Moreover by this means we had a fair opportunity to fasten so wholesome
exhortations upon them, for their souls health; to make them consider their
ways, and walk worthy of this holy Sacrament: and therefore to avoid the
common corruptions of the times, as drunkenness, swearing, profaning the
Sabbath: and the like evil courses, and also evil Company, the bane of
thousands.

All which oportunities are now lost, in regard of most, who will not come to
be catechized, because they cannot come to the Sacrament: And we have no power
to compel them.

Case. 8
But will not this harden them in their sins, to receive so many to this
Sacrament; as some imagine?







wild; and grow more careless of all Religion; and on the other side, those
few that are by some admitted, when others are excluded, wax wanton, and some of
them so swel with self-conceit, that they presume to teach their Teachers, and
lead their leaders: Thinking themselves too good, to be under any Officers, and
so have forsaken their own, and all other Churches, and their Teachers, and
turned Mountebanks: and set up themselves above all others whatsoever, which is
two apparent, both in Old and New England; Witness the Seekers, Quakers,
Ranters, and other Rebels against God and man.

Case 9.
But is not this Sacrament (as some say) a privilege that belongs not to Babes,
but to strong men, that are able to digest strong meat, such as this Sacrament
is.

It is indeed a privilege of the Church, and belongs only to Church Members, no
unbaptised may eat thereof, as no uncirumcised might eat of the Passover.
Exodus 12.48. It is also a duty as well as a privilege, which all of years are
bound to perform, that are baptized, as M. Perkins says in his Cases of
Conscience.

And that it is not strong meat, Perk. Cases of Conscience lib. 2. page 95. fol.
but even milk for Babes in Religion, I shall easily evince. My reason is,
because it is one of the most sensible Ordinances which Christians have, as
Baptism is the other; because, (as all Authentic Authors grant) in these
outward visible Ceremonies, God is said more to stoup to our capacityes, and to
help our infirmityes; seeing hereby he teaches us, not only by the ear, but
by other senses; as by seeing, and Tasting; Senses that far more affect the
ignorant, than hearing.

Segnius irritant amimos dimissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus.
Things slower move the mind sent by the ear,
Than those made to the faithful eyes appear.
Case. 6.
In the last place let it be well weighed, how those Ministers can answer it to
God and their own Consciences, for neglecting such an especial part of their
Ministerial Office, as the administration of the Eucharist is,



Now whereas I know, you are afraid of offending others by your administering, I
know also, that it is unavoidable in any duty almost, that we do in this
cryticall age, therefore I pray you consider, how great offense on the other
side, is given by your non-administration, and justly taken, whereas the former
Offense is likely to be taken where none is justly given, and we are charged to
give no offense to any, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God; 1 Cor. 10.32. But for more full satisfaction in this case, what
a sin it is, and how much offense it gives, to neglect this administration, I
refer it to M. See his Book in 8. v. page 11.12. etc.
Jeanes, who has both largely, and learnedly handled this particular. And thus
much shall suffice concerning the considerations, and cases of Conscience. I
will conclude with a few motives, to stir up my self and others to a more
frequent and conscionable celebration of this holy Supper.

a means to preserv us from common calamities, seeing our Sacraments are not
less; but rather more effectual than theirs, and withal considering that this
is an approved way of renewing our Covenant with God, and God's renewing his
Covenant with us, when we keep this, Epulum Foederale: This feast of the
Covenant, or Covenant-feast; where God seals his covenant to us, to be our
God, and to take care of us, as Confederates do one for another.

were sick, and weak, and some dyed; because of the sin of unworthy receiving,
as we see, 1 Cor. 11.30. Their sin and judgments cannot be small, that
altogether omit this holy duty.

For it is a ruled case, that the willing neglect of good duties is a greater
sin, than the weak performance of them. I do verily believe, that many abstain
out of mere conscience, fearing that they should do more hurt than good, but
Conscientia erronea non obli gat.

granted on all sides, that it is a duty necessarily incumbent upon a Minister
of the Gospel, to administer this Sacrament, being a special part of GOD's
public worship; but it is questioned by most, and flatly denied by many, both
learned and godly men; that a single Minister has power of himself to suspend
a scandalous person from the Sacrament. Therefore it must needs be safer for a
Minister to do that, which is his certain duty, than neglect it wholly, and so
in a kind suspend all, good and bad, worthy as well as unworthy.

CHRIST'S Death (as some suppose) and of his Covenant of grace, sealed with his
Sons blood, and also a renewing our Covenant with GOD, as was formerly said,
that he may renew his grace and mercy upon us: Which things are of singular use.

Wherefore let us lament, and lay to heart our former great neglect, and labor
for time to come to be more faithful and frequent in administration of this
holy Supper, as without all Popish superstition, so with all reverence, and
godly simplicity; which I take to be the main defect in those Corinthians, that
received so unworthily.

And as for those that are so apt to Censure in this case, let me commend to
them the Apostles practice, in that 1 Cor. 11. When they had much transgressed
in unworthy receiving, and for which GOD had grievously judged them, he never
blames the Minister for admitting them, but bids every one Examine himself,
and so eat, verse, 28. and tell's them. ver. 31. If they would judge themselves,
they should not be judged of the LORD. This, this is the right way to
reformation, To cease judging others, and fall more closely to judging of our
selves. There was never more judging of others, and less judging of men's
selves. If men would more judge themselves, they would certainly judge others
less, and so sooner escape the just judgments of GOD. Matthew, 7.1. See
Romans, 14.10. Why do thou judge thy brother? We must all stand before the
judgment seat of CHRIST: And verse. 13. Let us not therefore judge one another
any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall in his brothers way: Romans. 15.5.6. Now the GOD of patience
and consolation, grant us to be like minded one toward another, according to
CHRIST Jesus, that we may with one mind, and one mouth glorify GOD, even the
Father of our LORD Jesus CHRIST,

Amen.
FINIS.
printer's device(?)
ERRATA.
In the Title Page, line 17. read. Pastore for Patore, in the Epistle to the
Reader, page 8. line, 17. for Suspicious, r. superstitious, p. 10. l 20. for
these, r. the, p. 11. l. 3. for not, r. but, in the Advertisement, p. 6, l. 4.
and 5. for regenerated, r. regeneration, p. last. l. 3. r. and so I leave. In
the Book it self, page, 2. line, 26. put our there, p. 15. l. 26. for convert,
r. correct. p. 19. l. 10. after reproved, add the word, them. p. 33 l. 12.
after now, add if. p. 34. l. 1. for thou r. jou, p. 35. l. 16. for says, r.
say, p. 4. l. 28. put out, at, p. 46. l. last, put out, as.

BOOKS Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the Kings Head in St. Paul's Church Yard
PANTHEOLOGIA or the Sum of Practical DIVINITY, Practiced in the Wilderness,
and Delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, being Observations on
the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of S. Matthew: to which is
prefixed PROLEGOMENA, or Preface, by way of Dialogue: wherein the perfection
and Perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the Calumnies of
Anabaptists and Papists: By Thomas White, Minister of Gods Word at Anne
Aldersgate. London.

ANIMADVERSIONS, or the Rabinical Talmud of RABBI John Rogers: Wherein is
Examined his Doctrine, as of the. Matter of a Church The duty of Separation.
Form of a Church The subjects of Church power.
etc. By Zach. Crofton, Minister of God's Word at James Garlic Hythe, London.

A VINDICATION of the Answer to M. Brabourn concerning the Civil Magistrates
Power, as to changing Church Government: Wherein the Reverend M. Perkins, and
some Truths of God, are vindicated from the Lies and scurrilcus expressions
cast upon them. By John Collings Minister of Gods Word in Norwich.

The Pattern of Patience, in the Example of Holy Job; a Paraphrase, upon the
whole Book, being an expedient to sweeten the miseries of these (never enough
to be lamented) times.

The Husbands Authority Unvailed, wherein is moderately discussed, whether it
be fit, or lawful, for a goodman to beat his bad Wife.

A Method and instructions for the Art of Divine meditation, with instances of
the several kinds of solemn Meditation. By Thomas White Minister of God's
Word in London.

Enchiridion Medicum: Containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those
diseases, that do chiefly affect the body of man: divided into three Books.
With Alphabetical Tables of such matters as are therein contained. Whereunto is
added a Treatise, De facultatibus medicamentorum compositorum, and dosibus. By
Robert Bayfield, Doctor of Physic in the City of Norwich.

The Crown of Righteousness, by Tho. Watson Minister of Stephen Walbrook
London.

FINIS.

