A Public LECTURE On all the Languages, Arts, Sciences, and Noble Exercises,
which are taught in Sr. Balthazar Gerbiers ACADEMY.

PROVE. 8. ver. 12. Ego sum sapientia, cohaereo astutiae, and scientiam summae
solertiae praesentem habeo.

Wisdom dwells with Prudence, and finds out knowledge of witty Inventions.

Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1650.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of the most famous City
of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
HAving, during my being conversant with Foreign Nations, observed among
sundry of their honorable and most useful establishments that of public
Academies, wherein Lovers of all noble Exercises (as well as of Arts, Sciences,
and Languages) are instructed and improved, without repairing to other parts,
and without giving to other Nations the glory and the advantages of their
Education. I have bin so much the sooner moved to apply my self to the
establishment of such an Academy for the honor and benefit of this Nation, for
that it wanted such an advantage, and that the same proved to be so
prejudicial to Sons of honorable Parents, when they are constrained to travel
toward foreign parts for such improvements, for that they often meet with
wicked persons, who do endeavor to infuse into them most pernicious
principles to their native Country; but the most deplorable case of all is, the
subversion of their Religion to a worse. And whereas on such just
considerations and motives, I have been moved, to advertise the public of
the advantages offered by the said Academicall Exercises, and to cause public
Gratis Lectures to be read, first at the Academies Summer Residency at
Bednall-Green, and for the Winter Months in this place, where not only the
Fathers of Families, but also the Mothers (mutually interessed in the good
educations of their Sons) could be more frequently informed of its method. As
I thought it not strange, that sundry Ladies of Honor, and other Gentlewomen
(though their vocation is not the maintaining of Arguments, and Theses in any
Universities, Academies, or Free-Schooles) would be satisfied by their own
hearing of this Academicall institution; and this moved me also to cause one
Lecture to be read concerning all Languages, Arts, Sciences, and noble
Exercises, which is that now by me presented to you; which may inform you at
full of all what is meant herein by me, as you will soon perceive; that it
does not only concern the glory, and good of the Nation in general, but
particularly that of this great and famous City, which ought not to yield to
any other in the World, and therefore not to be to seek in the possession of
one Academy, when Paris maintains twelve, besides a number of Universities,
and famous Free Schools, and that there should not be any more cause nor
ground for Paris to pretend unto the dignity of a second Athens then London;
since such a Metripolitan of this Land abounds in men of knowledge, and Masters
of Arts; who cannot choose but have one and the selse-same aim and mark; that
which is excellent, honorable, just, necessary, and useful. May all such as
are endued with excellent capasities, join to the promotement of what is so
really meant by me, and may it be so well understood as that Foreigners may
henceforth be moved to come from Salamanca in Spain, from Padua in Italy, and
from Paris in France to this Academy, therein to learn what they have hitherto
wanted in theirs; and that finding themselves also in a State wherein by the
great mercy of God his sacred Word is expounded in godliness and truth; those
that have been misled by spirits of delusion may turn unto the best, turn
unto God I say, and live unto righteousness; and that this may be in your
days, and during your great Government, I shall most fervently pray to God, as
one that is sincerely Right Honorable,

From the Academy this 6 of March. 1649. Your most humble and addicted Servant:
Balthazar Gerbier.

A general Lecture read at Sir Balthazar Gerbiers Academy, on all the
Languages, Arts, Sciences, and Noble Exercises which are taught in the same.
AS all Arts and Sciences do raise Men far above all other Animals, so
according to the Latin saying, Nobilis est ille quem nobilitat sua virtus; and
as knowledge is a good, consisting in two Branches; the First, bearing fruits
pleasing unto God; the Second, beneficial unto men; so that all men being
Vines of Gods own planting, are bound to make good the first by gratitude, the
second in regard of brotherly love, which need not to be edged on either by the
ancient or modern examples of the Learned, wisest, or noblest Persons of the
World; for as virtue in its self, bears its value, so it needs no other
motive: But if so be men are not acquainted with her, there will be then an
absolute necessity to set forth her invisible Dimensions and Latitude.

Which can be no more perceived by external objects, then those inscrutable
Attributes of God, viz. his Justice to punish sinners, his Mercy to pardon, and
his Truth to accomplish his Promises. The invisible qualities of Virtue may be
said to be originally seen by her self, as God knows himself by himself;
and how to love himself, by the knowledge of his eternal goodness: So all
men should love that which is undeniably so, being that which makes men despise
the means of Fortune; and such a despising is an operation of the Souls
greatness and generosity, and indeed true virtue. The only thing that elevates
man, and places him far above all that the world admires, and accounts most
dear.

Now as there are certain degrees, by the which men are introduced and guided
from one knowledge, to a greater perfection of knowledge; even as there are
several steps to attain unto the top of Pyramides, Trojan Colommes, Mausoles,
and Pantheons: so Languages, and Sciences, though they teach not simplicity,
modesty, sobriety, frugality, not clemency, yet they are most necessary, for
that a Lover of knowledge must endeavor to have his Garland adorned with
Leaves and Flowers; which are the fittest ornaments, to accompany the
producement of fruits.

Let it then be far from a well composed mind, to entertain so unworthy a
belief, as certain Heretics have labored to sustain; That the greatest Art
is to know nothing, and who consequently would place Languages, Arts, and
Sciences amongst the number of superfluous things; since in all Ages experience
it self has constantly proved the contrary; and that they never were found
burdensome, less prejudicial.

Troy may be destroyed by fire, nothing of moment saved, nor gotten out; but
that precious burden which a good Son had carried away on his shoulders, to
wit, his Father. The wise and learned man amidst these combustions loses
nothing, leaves nothing behind him; neither does any thing trouble him, for
that he is seen to walk away quietly, saying, Omnia mea mecum porto, I do
carry all with me. And that we may proceed in order, we will declare unto you
what all the Languages, Arts, Sciences, and noble Exercises serve for;

And first concerning Languages.
OF all the chastisements wherewith God has been pleased to satisfy his
Justice, because of the ambition, rebellion, and hardness of the hearts of
men, the confusion of Languages should seem to be one of the greatest, except
that in the inscrutable secret of God, and in his divine providence the
diversity of them was thought necessary even for the good of man, as shall be
discoursed of at large in the next Lecture concerning the Art of Well-speaking,
which will prove to be the most vaste effect of the appetite of man as can be
treated of in this world. And that as speech is a general desire in man, so
Well Speaking is hardest to be obtained, because of the difficulties which it
meets withal, not only in the interior and exterior parts, its Organes, and
most necessary instruments, as Divines likewise well know, that it requires
those sublime qualities which are to be observed in that Element; by the which
the cloven Tongues were represented on the heads of the beloved, and chosen, of
him that was from all eternity equal with the Divine Author of all things.
They will tell you also, that as God breathed in man a living Soul, which came
from him, and was his immediate act, without the addition of any secondary
cause, and not as the creation of his body, for that God took earth for the
making of that part of man (which as all things bend to their offspring, must
return to that from whence it came, the Soul, as Solomon the Wise says,
returning to its great Divine Creator) Language, to be as the Soul of the
Soul, at least its interpreter, and therefore it was that a Philosopher said
to one that affected silence, Speak that I may see thee.

It was as the Scripture tells us, a special, miraculous, and blessed
operation of the Holy Ghost, a miraculous operation indeed; and for the which
the Speakers were not only admired, but the Auditors thereby made the more
knowing.

Now as all virtuous and knowing men have found by an infallible experience of
what excellent and vaste use the Languages are, it may suffice in few words to
say, that whosoever speaks diverse Languages, may first pass through all the
world as a Patriot of it, and never as a Stranger. Call for what he desires,
and, say, all what he would have another man to know by him, without submitting
himself either to the ignorance, or to the malice of any interpreter, freely
expose himself to the presence of the greatest Princes, States, and
Magistrates, and if need be, plead before them his own cause, as the great
Apostle Paul did; when in other things (concerning these of the world)
especially of Traffic between men and men, they may manage their own
Bargains, and keep their own counsel on pain of secrecy.

The experience of the great use of Languages moved a Germane Emperor to cause
an Edict to be published, that all Gentlemen should learn and speak five
Languages at the least, that thereby they might tender themselves the more
capable of the public employment: The which even the greatest Princes, and
the most famous men in all Ages have observed; For that besides the public,
common, and particular interest concerned herein; Its a maine point of honor,
as well as of duty, that the Creature should endeavor as much as in him lies,
to resemble his Maker, who understands all things, and all Languages. All men
have a certain affinity to each other; and is it not a shame, that one brother
should not understand another. A Neopolitan Courssier understands the neighing
of a Frizeland Stallion; and a Constantinopolitan Ass, the braying of an
Italian Mule. And besides the shame of being ignorant, even the usefulness of
speaking several Languages, ought to move all men to confess that there is an
absolute necessity of learning them. And since the knowledge of Languages can
be gotten at home; Is it not requisite to addict ones self to study such an
Art, as may justly move any Traveller to say, not only with the Philosopher,
that he carried all about him; but that he has a Key in his mouth which will
open a passage unto him, which way soever he turns himself?

And this he may do far better, if besides the remembering of the words, he
acquires unto himself the manner they must be delivered in; for that its quite
different to speak unto a Frenchman, as to a Spaniard; unto an Italian, as to
a German; the first will be spoken unto in quick, witty Language; the Italian
in a speech as regular as a paper of Music; the Spaniards in a lofty style,
as unto Caesar's, and the Germans in a grave accent as unto Senators.

Of Civility.
CIvility is as the soul of man, his best ornament; it had its rise in Asia
minor, according unto Cicero's observations; It caused Jacob the Patriach
(though Bedridden by sickness) to raise himself up, at the approach of Joseph
his son, that with more ease Joseph might embrace him: It made Ahashuerus
rise from his Throne, to stretch forth his Scepter unto Queen Hester: It does
magnetically join the hearts and minds of men: It presents affability to
inferiors: It makes equals serviceable one to another; and it causes a
respectfull obedience from Inferiors, to Superiors: Now if this be practiced
by men, before they set forth to travel; they will seldom encounter any
scornful reception, or disdainful look: And therefore the Spaniards (who
cannot endure to be neglected) observe this rule; that least a stranger might
not be acquainted with their quality, they will first put their hand to their
Hat, that they may not fail of a salute.

Of History.
HOw needful the knowledge of History is for to be joined unto these two
foregoing quallities of Languages, and Civil conversation. Times out of mind
tells us, the holy Writ commands it, and both necessity and use requires it:
Both in the first and succeeding Ages, children had it by Tradition, and it was
infused into them, as it were, by public Songs and Poems, thereby to incite
them unto virtuous and generous actions; Thou shall show it, says the
Scripture, unto thy sons, and it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine
hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the Lords Law may be in thy
mouth, Exodus chap. 13. v. 8, 9. And it shall be when thy son asks thee in
time to come, saying, What is this, that thou shall say unto him, by strength
of hand the Lord brought us out of Egypt, from the house of bondage, verse. 14.

As History declares unto all men the mavelous things which God did from time
to time, both his graces, and mercies bestowed on men; as also the
chastisements wherewith he visited the Nations for their Rebellion, and for the
hardness of their hearts. So it makes men to be acquainted with the
establishment of Monarchies; their progresses, their wanes, and utter ruin; as
also with the revolutions of Ages, vicissitudes, and changes of humane
affairs, the very beginning, policy, and government of all Nations; the
diversity of Laws, Manners, and Customs: And as in conversation, History is a
great and fair ornament unto all men; so it is most profitable to all those
whom God has appointed to be Rulers over them; for that it denotes what is
past, what is certain, and what is most profitable, in those things which
concern the Government, the preserving of Amity with Neighbors; the securing
of the State against Invasions, and the means to preserve both credit and
reputation.

Now if so be a Gentleman have Languages, and if he be so fitly instructed,
before he sets forth to travel, he will soon attract unto himself the ears
of all men, and will likewise make a deep impression in their good opinion and
love, especially when he shall have a general knowledge of all the other
qualities requisite in a complete Gentleman.

The use of Arithmeticke.
ARithmeticke does not only teach the proceedings, properties, and the
practical part of Numbers, but also resolves all sorts of questions; not only
concerning Trade, but also touching the most noble and excellent parts of the
Mathematics. And as in the first place, experience tells all Negotiants, how
necessary it is for them to know how to cast their own accounts, and how great
a prejudice it is to those that are to seek therein; so it denotes in the
second place, what mavelous questions are resolved by the same, on matters
which would otherwise require a spirit of Divination to find them out.

Vitravius will tell you how Archimedes by an Arithmeticall conclusion, found
out what quantity of Gold King Hirons Goldsmiths had stolen, of that part
whereof he was to make a Crown for him, having mixed it with as much Silver as
he had taken Gold out of it. And the way how to resolve this task came into
Archimedes mind, as he was entering into his Bathe, and observing that the
water did rise or vent it self by degrees, as his body descended into it; so he
concluded, that the same would probably be effected by putting therein a pure
Golden Ball, another of Silver, and one of a mixed body; and thus he discovered,
that by Arithmeticall rules the question was to be resolved.

And as Solomon the Wise expresses, that God has disposed of all things in a
certain measure, number, and weight; so we must then necessarily conclude,
that such a Science is generally useful, and necessary, like unto a general
Key, for the opening, unfolding, and further proceeding into all the most
necessary, and most noble Sciences; which may suffice, as concerning the use,
and end of Arithmetic.

Concerning the keeping of Books between Debtor, and Creditor.
ALL Negotiants know the necessary use hereof; for that a great number of those
who have not learned the same, have not only suffered thereby extremely in
several respects, but diverse for want of its knowledge have been utterly
ruined, and all their associates, and dependances; so likewise by a great
negligence hereof, diverse Widows and Orphans estates, have been left in a very
disputable and disorderly condition, for the sole want of an orderly and
methodicall manner of keeping of Accounts; the which could not be rectified,
though diverse expert men had employed much time both in the examining, and
redressing of them.

Of Geometry.
PLato's writing on his School, Let none that be ignorant of Geometry enter
here, has often been repeated to you.

Geometry imparts it self, both unto Astronomy, Music, Perspective,
Cosmographie, Geographie, Navigation, and the like.

By this same Art the several ways of measuring all manner of lengths,
heights, distances, and depths are described; as well those which are
accessible, as inaccessible. It serves likewise for the description of any
place, it is necessary in Fortifications, in the conveyance of Mines under
ground; its likewise necessary in the Art of discharging great Ordnance, and in
the discovering of the Ships distances at Sea.

Its requisite for to find out the means, and rules how to measure all sorts
of Plains, Convexes, or concave superficieses; as likewise those which are
compounded either of straight or circular Lines, or mixed with both; it denotes
the disposal of all sorts of Ground-plots, either of Fortresses, Castles,
Towns, Cities, and Palaces. It is necessary for a General of an Army, or any
other Commander; thereby to know how to order a fit stand for his Battalions.

Its likewise useful to divide grounds either before, or after Inundations,
which may have washed away or defaced the bounds, and Land-markes; it describes
the exact measures of solid bodies, whether regular or irregular; for to order
and delineate the several quantities and proportions of all parcels
appertaining to any kind of building.

So likewise without Geometry its impossible to attain to the knowledge or
understanding of the best, and most famous Authors, who have written on the
Mathematics, as Euclide, Archimede, Appolonius, Pergeas, Diophantes, Ptolomie,
and diverse others; neither can any one without the same Art, measure the
superficies, dimensions, solidity, and extent of the Terrestrial, nor
Celestial Globe, for as a necessary compass, it seems to be like unto a
Ladder, for to ascend unto the knowledge of those great heavenly
constillations, the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and the fixed Stars.

Of Cosmography.
WE shall now treat of Cosmography, a Greek word, signifying the description of
the universal world; a study which raises the mind of man from the Earth
unto the Paradise of Angels, that of the blessed, the Throne of the Almighty;
and as on the aspect of those heavenly Creatures, it may be most properly said;
Cum respicio Coelos tuos, opus digitorum tuorum, Lunam and stellas quas
statuisti; quid est mortalis quodmemor sis ejus aut filius hominis quod visites
eum: When I consider the Heavens, the works of thy fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained; what is man that thou art mindful of him, or
the Son of man that thou visitest him, Psalm. 8. ver. 3. and 4. So likewise
may they serve to conclude, Invisibilia enim Dei a creatura mundi per eaquae
facta sunt, intelecta conspiciuntur, sempiterna quoque, and jus, virtus, and
divinitas; The invisible things of his are clearly seen, even from the
creation of the World, being understood by the things that are made, Romans ca.
1. v. 20. And this study leads the minds of men to an admiration; so much
beyond all other things, as the Heavens are above the Earth. It teaches us,
that it is God who has given a Law unto the Stars, and an infallible order,
which does manifest how he moves by secondary causes, which he has ordained,
and established; and how he governs the inferior Orbs, making them subject to
mutations; And that he permits men to be verst in the several aspects of these
Celestial Creatures, that the knowledge hereof may oblige us to seek him
incessantly; chiefly when those aspects do threaten us with his displeasure:
As also to render thanks and praises unto him, when their constellations do
appear favorable and gracious unto us; which is the saving profit that is to
be made by this study, and waving all those fond fancies of men's wits of the
time, who by the new perspective glasses of their besotted imaginations frame a
new world in the Moon, as the other Heriticks of Copernicus his Sect, and such
as seem to believe that the Sun is a fixed Center, and the World to be like a
joint of meat spitted, which turns and winds about it; besides diverse other
speculations, that the number of the Heavens and Stars should not have been
well calculated; questioning the plurality of Heavens, and whether the Stars,
as in a liquid Crystal, do flow, and swiftly slide along; whether the
different motions of the Stars agree with the violence of the Suns beams,
and answer unto its repercussions, rendering them stationaries, or retrogrades,
where withal the emptiness is filled; whether or no, the matter of Heaven can
endure more or less penetration, then the water, the air, or the fire can;
since that all things are either heavy, or light, and that so the Stars
being of a light substance ought to ascend up, or to descend if so be they were
of a heavy matter.

Of Geographie.
AS History represents unto man all the mavelous works which God has done
from time to time; so Geographie is as the eye of man, or as the Looking-glass
of History; for that it does represent unto him in a moment, the most
accomplished Masterpiece of all the mavelous works which God has created:
And certainly the question will not prove impertinent, whether it would not be
an even lay, either to have eyes, and to be unwilling to see the works of
God, or to see them, and to have no mind to consider what they are: And what
shall Lovers of knowledge say of those, who are heirs to fair houses, and
estates, and who have not the curiosity to know their dimensions, distincts,
and extents. What shall Lovers of Virtue and Knowledge say unto those, who
account themselves to be as it were at Gamaliels feet, and remain far more
ignorant then those who never came near him, even such as should take rooms
in the famous Universities of this Land, and near unto the noble Innes of
Court; and would not apply themselves to the Sciences that are professed in them;
shall the rational creature be placed in an earthly Paradise, and not delight
in its observance?

Shall any man endued with reason, run from home to hear strangers tell him,
how his fathers house is built, and how his lands do lie. Geography should be
as familiar to every Inhabitant of the earth, as his chambers Looking-glass
is, in the which he delights to see his own face; and so much the more, since
by the said study, he may attain to the knowledge of all the Inhabitants
possessions of the earth; and that at his first setting forth, he may appear
to be an heir of all the world, and no stranger; but that he can make every
place his own home; and that he can make himself to be as welcome in any part
of Europe, as at his own home, by letting men see, that he has studied what
they are. And as by the said knowledge men attain not only unto the knowledge
of the repertitions, of the earth, of the variety of Nations, Laws and
Customs, of their Maxims, but also of their wealth, and commodities, and how
they must be dealt withal, and also how to take all fit advantages against
them; so every Student in that Art, may without stirring from his Chamber,
travel through all the world, and in his mind converse with all the Princes
in the world, as well as with all the several Nations, and Inhabitants thereof.

He will soon represent unto himself all the principal parts in Asia, those
of Africa, those of Europe, and America; with all the Islands, Seas, and
Rivers; and insensibly beget in himself a general acquaintance of all what
those several parts of the world do possess: If so be he may be justly moved
to procure unto himself as much as possibly he can, all those laudable and
necessary quallities, which all other Nations do value; and for the want of
which, he is by some esteemed no less then a brute. Neither shall we need to
exclude the most eminent persons; nay such Princes as are not verst in them.
When the Grand Signior himself, by the fundamental Law of his Empire, he must
practice not only a Science, but a Trade, and must put his work to sale:
Amongst the Roman Emperors there were those who have publicly acted and sung:
Others, did Draw, Paint, Limne, Ingrave, were Turners, and made Watches: And
who but the noble Egyptians were at first permitted to study Astronomy: They
were Kings, as the Wise men who had seen the Star of the Son of
Righteousness.

Of Music.
HOw Music time out of mind, has been cherished by the great ones of the
Earth we all know, and what is due to that Art; for that it came down from
Heaven to denounce the birth of his only Son, before whose glorious Divine
Majesty, legions of Angels covered their faces; and do sing a perpetual
heavenly Hallelujah; And as in an harmonious Consort, the Singers, and the
Royal Prophet became for that time companions in one Chorus; so the poorest of
this world by singing the praises of our God, will become the companions of
Angels, and Archangels by a general Laudate Dominum.

And in this manner all men may make themselves happy by all the vocations, and
unto whatsoever Art or Science, they may addict themselves, so they can resolve
to do that, in this present time, which the holy Writ foretells, both of an
Age, and of Nations yet to come, in a new world; One day of which shall be as
light, as the light of seven days, and that in those days God shall be
praised by all things whatsoever men shall take in hand.

And then doubtless Arithmeticke will serve unto all men, for to reckon the
number of their days, to apply their hearts unto wisdom: Geometry, for to
know how to leavie unto each man his own: Cosmography, to direct the eyes of
the soul toward the Garden of Angels, and there to delight perpetually in the
admiration of him who has made those great and glorious heavenly creatures:
Geography, to admire the extent and variety of Gods admirable riches bestowed
on the sons of men.

The Art of Perspective, consisting in Points, and Signs, to fix men's
Meditations perpetually on God, by an uneffable assurance, that all the traces
of man's life shall be perfect, so they have God for their Director, and Center.
So likewise all other Arts, Sciences, and Mathematical conclusions, and
expedients, may serve like unto so many steps, for to lead the mind of man into
a condition to love wisdom, which is to be valued above all things.

Even those parts of the Mathematics concerning the Military Art, will induce
a man to what is above said; For that God is the Lord of Hosts, and Battles,
and its he whom the Royal Prophet David sought for to teach his hands to war,
and his fingers to fight.

It was his will that Moses and his own chosen people should hear his voice
amidst the thunder, and lightning, and the mighty sounds of Trumpets, he sent
his Angels before his Host, and conducted the same by a pillar of fire. So that
all Sciences having their warrant and being established by the Almighty, they
are to be searched into, learned, and practiced by all men, that may be capable
of them, and without any exception of persons; for as all Arts and Sciences are
derived from him, who is the sole giver of all good gifts; so they are all
celestial by extraction, honorable, beneficial, and warrantable, their
abuses excluded.

Ingraving, and Drawing, had its first offspring in the person of Bezaleel of
the Tribe of Juda, and Azaliel of the Tribe of Dan, who wrought at the Ark of God; as Hiram of the Tribe of Naphthali, did at the Temple of Solomon: And how
useful it is to any man to have an insight in that Art, experience tells
those, whose occasions require them to leave unto their posterity, to their
native Country, Families, or Houses, most durable tokens, signs, and monuments
of their once being.

Of dancing among the other exercises of the body, the Academy is not desirous
to say any more then what is warranted by the holy Writ, That King David and
Miriam Aarons sister, were moved by a pious zeal to dance before the Lord. And
doubtless their Dances were neither Galliards, nor Sarabandes, Pavans, nor
Coranto's; Yet as their dancing is to be supposed to have been more free from
pride then now adays they are; so it is as likely they were gracefully
performed, with agility and dexterous carriage of body, useful in that regard;
the abuse being severed from it, as drunkenness, and gluttonnes from Feasts.
And that in them the saying be observed, sive editis, sive bibitis, sive quid
facitis, Omnia ad Dei gloriam facite. Which if it could be observed in dancing
in these times, the Academy would with more confidence maintain the practice
thereof, to be more requisite, as a necessary means to prevent those stinging
whisperings, which all the care of Parents cannot save their Daughters from, at
public meetings, where if there be no dancing (which is a recreation by all
men seen.) Young men will be apt to buz in Maidens ears that which cannot be
heard, and that which very often strikes a dangerous sting even to the very heart.

Of natural experimental Philosophy.
THat we may not pass in silence, an Art as profitable, as delightful; to
wit, Natural experimental Philosophy, we will give you a brief touch thereon.

Philosophy, in the first degree, it is in effect the love of wisdom, giving
man an universal knowledge of all things; the sum whereof is, that of a
primary cause; to wit, God.

The second part of Philosophy, affords unto men, several means, serving to
the enriching of noble and profitable Sciences, such as are the preserving and
restoring of man's health, the reducing both of Medicaments, and certain kind
of foods, into a smaller bulk, and into a more pleasant substance, the
diversifying of several plants and flowers; their speedier production, then is
usual in ordinary Gardens.

The mixing of several fruits, by the way of certain graftings, and
inocculatings; and so, as it were producing new kinds of them.

The preserving of diverse kinds of fruits, and flowers, in such seasons, as
they are not usually seen. The improving of barren soyles, and enriching of
lean grounds.

The way to preserve the fruits of the earth from those inconveniences
whereunto they are otherwise subject, and whereby many times, men chance to
lose that in one day, or in one night, which they have been hoping for, and
expecting a whole year, etc.

Now certainly, as the aforementioned Arts and Sciences, are necessary
inducements for to enrich the mind of man; so the exercises of the body, may
be accounted no less just and requisite, the unnecessary abuses being severed
from them, in that they perfect man in his carriage and behavior; even as the
knowledge of Arts and Sciences adorn, and sharpen a man's understanding, making
him the more capable to give directions in all the particulars depending of
them, and the which are derived from them.

Be it, to provide a defense for his own City or particular habitation, either
against a particular or common Enemy; be it, to attach any place with the least
hazard or danger; Fortification affords him necessary rules, and succinct
moddels.

Be it, to meet his Enemy in a single combat, Fencing is the Art, which the
first Law of Man, and Nature, selfe-preservation, commands him to learn
betimes, whether on foot, or on horseback. And in this, the Art of wel-riding,
is altogether necessary, not that Art which consists in the running of so many
miles in an hour, nor to make a horse, as Bucephalus, to know Alexander, or as
the horse Baziart did his valiant Master Cida; but to manage a horse well, to
teach him to turn and wind nimbly, and so a man may take the best advantage
on his Enemy.

And though it should happen, that the occasions of fighting on horseback,
might chance to be taken away; yet the skill of a good Rider shall never be
rejected, since that it always is requisite, for to make that creature (so
necessary, and naturally proper for the use of men) the more manageable to all
commodious and recreative exercises, etc.

And thus we shall finish this Lecture for the present, having briefly treated
on the most inseparablest properties unto all those Sciences and Arts, to be
taught in this Academy, Viz. Languages, Arts, Sciences, and Noble Exercises,
etc.

FINIS.

