KATADYNASTS: MIGHT OVERCOMING RIGHT, OR A CLEAR ANSWER to M. JOHN GOODWIN's
MIGHT and RIGHT well met.

Wherein is cleared, That the Action of the Army in secluding many Parliament
men from the place of their discharge of Trust, and the imprisoning of some of
them, Is neither defensible by the rules of solid Reason, nor Religion.

By John Geree M. A. and Pastor of Faith's under Paul's in LONDON.

Help Lord, for the godly man cease; for the faithful fail from among the
children of men. Psalm. 12.1. Ferenda est magis omnis necessitas, quam
perpetranda est aliqua iniquitas, August. in Psalm. 73. Non enim mihi est vita
mea utilior, quam animi mei talis affectio, neminem ut violem commodi mei
gratia, Cicero. lib. 3. Offic. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock at the King's Head in Paul's Churchyard.
1649.

TO THE Right Honorable LADIES, THE LADY VERE, AND THE LADY FAIRFAX Her
DAUGHTER: GRACE and PEACE.
Right Honorable, and Religious LADIES:
IT is not any acquaintance with your Honors, that imboldens me to this
dedication, for I am a stranger to you; nor yet your deserved fame for your
eminency, and sincerity, in Religion, though that be so illustrious that it
might engage Godly Minister to be ambitious of your Patronage, But that
assurance that I have, that both your Ladyships are affectionately serious
against those irregular ways that I implead, and the service you may do to God
by your interest, in the furthering the acceptance of my poor labors to be
effectual, where they may be of most use: for the Medicine I administer is
somewhat unpleasing, and harsh, and therefore needs the hands of Ladies for the
application. And what Ladies can do it with more acceptance then your
Ladyships; one of which cannot but be greatly respected, because the other,
that first lay in her womb, now lies in the bosom, of the chieftain General
of those, whose actings, this Treatise does concern. Madam (for now I apply my
speech to your Ladyship who has been an ancient mother in our Israel) After
the way that has been called Puritanisme have I served the God of my fathers
for somewhat above 33 years. And yet I believe by the same, that I have heard
of your Ladyship, your Ladyship was spiritually in Christ long before me. And I
may say as S. Paul (with a little alteration) that after the strictest way of
that Religion I lived, and tasted deep for many years together, of such
afflictions as either Chancelours Courts, or high Commisssion, were used to
impose on men of my principles, and yet the days I see, and am like to see
(unless the God of heaven graciously interpose) are far more doleful then any
yet that I have seen, For there is a mourning that is blessed, for it shall end
in comfort, and such was that which then I met with, when my heart was smitten
and withered like grass, and by reason of the voice of my groaning, my bowels
did cleave to my skin, and I was pale with fasting, while mine enemies
reproached me all the day; and there is a laughter, and triumphing, which has
a woe denounced upon it, because it shall end in mourning and weeping. Luke
6.21.25. And such is the joy and triumph in these days in success in
irregular ways. O Madam had such ways as are now in agitation been proposed to
your dearly respected friend old See Bifield on 1 Pet. 2.13. where among other
there is this passage. The Jesuits who maintain that horrid doctrine of
deposing and murrthering Princes, are rather to be confuted with strokes, then
arguments, as men that offend not only against the laws of God, but the laws
of nations, and nature.
Mr. Bifield, with what an eye would he have looked upon them? Or let us suppose
when our ancient worthies such as Cartwright, Traverse, Dod, Bradshaw etc.
being calumniated by the Prelates for disrespect to authority, for not
conforming to unlawful ceremonies, have replied that they did ascribe as much
honor, and teach as much subjection to Magistrates as any in things lawful
and in things unlawful, they showed their respect by patient submission to
suffering: Or when our Godly Polemicall divine, such as Jewel, Reynolds,
Whitaker, etc. have rejected that false pretense of the Papist, that the
Primitive Christians were so subject to the heathen Emperors, quia deerant
vires temporales, because they wanted temporal strength; suppose I say, some
one of the worst of Prelates or Jesuits, should have bespoke them, O ye
hypocrites, or false hearted men, how do you dissemble with us, or let your
hearts deceive you! for if over you be Masters of power, ye will trample under
your feet all above you, that will not comply with you, yea you will imprison,
attaint, murder your King; would our worthies have returned with less
indignation, and acrimony then S. Paul to Elymas? O full of all subtilty, and
mischief, O Children of the Devil, you enemies of righteousness, will you not
cease to pervert the ways of the Lord? Act. 13.10. And yet behold a generation
risen up, who for the most part, have not known the brick-kilnes of Egypt that
if they had so accused our worthies, would by their actions have made them true
Prophets. Oh Madam, let us sit down and weep over our Religion, which these men
have ravished and done her shame, and we whether shall we cause her shame to
go? How shall we now look Papists in the face? whom we have so reviled, and
abhorred for their derogatory doctrine, and damnable practices against Kings,
or any in supreme authority? What shall we do with the Writings of our
Worthies, shall we give over reading, as the manner of some is? or learn
another trick of the Papists, and get an Index Expurgatorius to blot out of
their Writings such passages as cry guilt and shame on our actions? But
affection has almost made me forget the bounds of an Epistle. Therefore
honorable Ladies, go on with assiduity, constancy, and increasing servor to
withdraw him (whom you so dearly respect) from society in actions so contrary
to the honor of God and our Religion. Oh study, that it may never be said,
That any person of Honor, and of the Protestant Religion, had any hand in so
unworthy an action, as the deposing and destroying of a King, whose
preservation they stand bound to endevor by so many sacred Bonds. So shall your
Ladyships do an office pleasing to God, Honorable to your relations, an
ornament to your Religion, and unspeakably useful for your Native Country. And
if as a poor means thereof, you shall present one of these poor Treatises to
his Excellency, written on purpose to dispell those mists that a deceived
Brother has endeavored to cast before his eyes; your Ladyships shall deeply
engage to be your Ladyships daily Orator at the throne of Grace

From my Study in Ivie-lane, Jan. 15. 1648. Madams, Your Ladyships humble
Servant in the LORD JESUS, JOHN GEREE.

KATADYNASTS. Might overcomming Right.
The PREFACE.
THe foulest actions always borrow fair pretenses. If the Devil did not
transform himself into an Angel of light, who would be seduced by him? Hence
those that would overthrow all, or usurp authority themselves, have always
pretended (though seldom or never promoted) public weal or liberty: and dubbed
those Magistrates Tyrants, whom they meant to oppress, to still their own
consciences, (if they be not arrived at past feeling) and to blear the eyes of
those, who bear an awful respect to that ordinance of God, Authority. And
never were there any pretenders so far out of reason, but they had some Lawyers
to justify their proceedings in foro humane, and some Divines to plead their
warrant from holy writ. For amongst multitudes either through want of wit or
honesty, there have always been found abettours to a prevailing faction. Of
all the exorbitances that ever were committed against men in authority, I know
to parallel (all circumstances considered) to that late one of the Army toward
the Members of the House of Commons, violently secluded, or forcibly restrained
by the entrusted power of a few, from discharging their trust committed to
them, by several whole Shires and Burroughes. And yet behold a Divine of note
with much confidence pleading their cause, to be so equitable, as though it
were not to be stumbled at by any not profoundly ignorant, either of the evil
of oppression, or the unquestionable means of shaking it off. But confidence in
a dubious case does argue either great shallowness, or deep prejudice arising
either from doteing affection, or unworthy interest: What has dazeled the eyes
of this Champion of the Army? I know not; But in reading I have observed it
him, what I have often in other controversies in others; That men of strong
reason in maintaining erours, have showed themselves so irrational, that a man
would wonder, that they that are so acute, where they preach, or defend truth,
should discover such weakness in the patronage of error. But he that gives
the gift may well blast it, when he sees it turned against himself. Now that we
may not accuse only (as he has done the Parliament Members) but make good the
error objected, let us take into consideration what he has said to the
controversy in hand.

CHAP. I.
ANd here first of all the question must be rightly stated, or else there can
be no accurate reasoning, but we shall ever and anon fall into the fallacy ex
ignoratione E'lugchi. Now the case I conceive may be thus impartially stated:
This Kingdom having bin long imbroyied in an unnatural consuming war, through
a misunderstanding between the King and Parliament: The King at last fell into
the Parliaments power, all his strength being broken by them. While the King is
in this condition (after many other overtures useless, and experience of the
discontent of the Nation, both for want of settlement; and the sad condition of
their King) There is set on foot a personal Treaty with the King: In which the
Parliament demand of him concession, and confirmation of such privileges, as
from the beginning they thought conducible to render this people free, and
happy, and were the sum of all that had been formerly demanded in any of
their other treaties or proposals, or had been held forth in their
Declarations, as the scope of their undertakings. To this Treaty the far Major
part of the House of Commons agreed and that willingly, yea so far were they
from being forct to it, (as it pretended) by petitions, that neither the
impetuousness of petitions from people, nor fear of soldiers pistols, could
make them relinquish it, for they were satisfied in their consciences, that it
was the fairest, justest, and most probable way to promote and settle the
peace, and weal of a distressed Kingdom; so this Treaty is prosecuted till its
very near an happy conclusion. The Army (raised by, and deriving their
millitary power from the Houses) dislike this Treaty, suppose it would endanger
them, and a godly party in the land (so they style their adherents.) This their
judgment they remostrate to the house of Commons. The house not convinced by
their reasons, nor dismayed at their power, laid aside their Remonstrance, hold
on the Treaty, vote the Kings concessions to contain matter for a well grounded
peace; hereupon the Army beset the passages to the House of Commons, take above
forty of the Members of Parliament into safe custody, and violently keep or
fright a major part out of the House, debarring them liberty of sitting, and
voting there. This action of the Army Mr. John Goodwin undertakes to defend
under the title of garbling the Parliament. And I yet believe, page 2.
that it was a most irregular and scandalous usurpation, destructive to
Parliaments, and so to the welbeing of this Kingdom, if not to the present
ruin of it, unless it be retracted by the actors. And this I here undertake
to make good against Mr. John Goodwin, by making good those arguments, which he
would overthrow, and enlarging them as occasion is offered.

Sect. 2.
The first argument which he incleavours to answer, is; page 3.
From the Armies acting without sufficient authority, and so transgressing that
law which commands every man to keep order and within the compass of his
calling. And this he styles the first born of our strength. And you shall see
that it is indeed like Moses, a goodly child, if you view him in his right and
full proportion, in mood and figure thus.

All exercise of jurisdiction, where neither by God or man we are clothed with
authority, is usurpation, breach of order, injurious, and so greatly sinful.

The Army in inhibiting the Members entrance into their House of Council, and
more grossly in imprisoning their persons, did exercise jurisdiction, where
they were clothed with noe authority from God or man. Therefore

The Army in that force upon the Houses stand guilty of usurpation, breach of
order, and injury to the Members so used, and so sinned greatly.

The Major is undeniable; if men will grant there are such things as
usurpation, disorderly walking and injury, or that those are sinful where ever
they be. For what is usurpation if this be not for men to exercise jurisdiction
over them who are not under their authority, nay to whose authority they are
subject? What is breach of rank and order if this be not, for men that are
under authority to usurp authority without a call? And what is injury if this
be not, to be haled to prison, by those that are neither authoritative judges
of my fact, nor have any superiority over my person, and that only for acting
according to the dictates of my conscience? And are not such abuses grossly
sinful, that do as it were make void the fifth Commandment, and destroy
Government?

And for the Minor, first its clear that the Army did exercise jurisdiction
over the Members: for suspension from office, and commitment are high acts of
jurisdiction. And if the Army were clothed with any authority for this, let
them produce their patents that we may believe them, or else the conclusion is
in force against them, to convict them of usurpation, breach of order and
injury.

Sect. 3.
But now what says Mr. Goodwin to this? page 3.
As our Savior says. The Sabath was not made for man but man for the Sabath.
So certain it is, that callings were made for man, and not man for callings.
Therefore as the law of the Sabath, was to give way to the necessities of men:
so the law of callings etc. therefore unles it can be proved, that there was no
necessity lying on the Army to garble the Parliament; Their exceeding their
callings, will not illegitemate their actions.

Answ. 1. That saying of our Savior, that the Sabath was not made for man etc.
was not uttered by him to show that the action of the Desciples in plucking,
and eating the ears of corn, was warranted by necessity against the command of
the Sabath, but that it was not within the prohibition of works on the Sabath,
which ordinarily is restrained to works of a civil or servile nature, not to
natural refreshment, which is always indulged on the Sabath and so that work
of mercy is not under the prohibition, for the plucking of the ears of corn,
when they were n the field was no more then drawing drink out of a vessel and
of this opinion is learned Chemnitius. Hoc Christus it a defendit, ut simul
ostendat extra casum contempus publici ministerii, et turbationis cultus sabati
propter otium externum Sabati, hominem ne levi quide^ incommodo assiciendum. By
this Christ does so defend his Desciples, as withal he shows that out of the
case of contempt of the public ministry, and disturbance of the worships of
the Sabath, for the external rest of the Sabath, a man is not to undergo the
least damage. So that in his judgment, though the other arguments show, what
is lawful in case of necessity, so a Majori clears the disciples, yet this
argument shows this was not in the prohibition of works on the Sabath.

2. The rest of the Sabath, and keeping within our callings, are duties we owe
to God by virtue of commands of a far different condition: The one by a command
positive, as that of the Sabath, the other by a law natural, as the fifth
commandment, that commands every one to observe their ranks, and duties in
them. Now commandments that are positive, are to give way to duties natural.
Sacrifice, to mercy: The rest of the Sabath, not to the life only, but to the
cheerfulness and welbeing of man; as the instance of the disciples, who were
not in danger of death if they had fasted a little longer, but of
inconvenience. But I hope Mr. Goodwin will not judge, that danger of
inconveniency, should make every man, or party of power, turn controulers of
magistracy. Not only Vzziah, that wantonly 2 Chronicles. 26. but Saul who out of
fear of inconveniencie, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12, 13, 14: yea and Vzzah, who as he
thought was a case of necessity, put his hand without the call to the work of a
Priest, as well, as the former reproved, and smitten, 1 Chronicles. 13.9.20.

And if there be any case wherein necessity amounts to a calling, it must be
where that necessity ingageth to a duty, that ought to take place before this
Commandment for order amongst men, as that for saving life etc. And then the
danger must be apparent, not probable only to some and disputable; for else he
shall run against an undoubted rule, upon an uncertain exception. 2. It must be
imminent, so that no other means is left, or possible in an ordinary way. 3.
And illegal, as when any, whether Magistrate or other, is about to act
mischief to the persons of others without or against law. But if a man's life be
in danger in a legal way, though unjustly, A man may not himself, nor ought
others to resist authority armed with law, for that were to take away all honor
and opportunity of Martyrdom. The servant who has a froward unjust Master, is
according to Christ's example to be patient, though he suffer unjustly
committing his cause to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 2.
though many times the servant has strength enough to bind his exorbitant
Master. And such should be the carriage of private Christians to hard
magistrates executing hard laws. But now that there was no danger, evident,
imminent, and against the laws of the Nation to urge the Army so to force the
Parliament, shall be afterward cleared.

Sect. 4.
But secondly Mr. Goodwin has found out a new fancy, if the former fail him;
but that is such a feeble one, that I question whether he be serious in it; for
he takes the boldness to affirm that the Army did not exceed the bounds of
their calling, in their force upon the Parliament men, and he would seem to
prove it; page 3.
for says he, their calling and commission was to act in the capacity of
soldiers, for the peace, liberty, and safety of the Kingdom etc. But here
first I must mind him that the Army themselves have mand his market: for they
who know better the purport of their own commission then he, and whom he
flatteringly tells in his Epistle dedicatory, that he doubts not but they were
satisfied in the righteousness of their actions from heaven, before they were
in being, roundly confess, (in their answer to the demands of the remnant of
the House touching their Members Jan. 3. 1648.) That their restrayning the
Members was a course in it self Irregular, and UNIUSTIFIABLE, but by honest
intentions, and extraordinany necessity, whereby they plainly disclaim any call
by the tenor of their Commission. But least any in such times as these, when
men many times are imprisoned first, and show of just occasion is gladly laid
hold on afterward, This false plea might be made use of, though it were not at
first thought of, I will examine what he says; he inlargeth himself: nor did
their Commission (I presume) limit or conclude their judgments to any kind of
enemies etc. But I presume their Commission was to bear arms, to remove evil
Councellers from the King, and bring him back to his Parliament, and to
endeavor the subduing of all them that were in arms against the Parliament,
or the welfare of the Kingdom, and (as I am informed) they were still to be
regulated in their proceedings, by the Judgment of both Houses of Parliament;
which any man may easily believe; for that the Parliament should give them a
Commission inabling them to judge of their Counsels, and imprison their
persons, if they answered not their new illuminated fancies (for they must be
judges what grounds are competent to make men enemies) is so far from policy,
reason, or common sense, that I wonder any man of judgment should aver it in
print.

But says he again, Page 4.
If it shall be supposed, that by their Commission they were limited, to judge
only those enemies who were in Arms with the King, and his partakers: Those
Parliament Men whom they have excluded have notoriously discovered themselves
to be men of this engagement, and. But was ever any accusation more unjust or
senseless? Did not they in the Treaty hold the King so hard to it, as to
justify them and the Army in the war, to the vertual condemning of himself and
his? And to grant all, for which they engaged against him and his party? And
can they for this be traduced, as apparently friends and abettors of that
party. But he comes on with a third answer, Page 4, 5.
That if the Parliaments call were warrantable to levy Forces against the King
and his party; then was the Armies call to act in the business under Debat^,
warrantable likewise. But this consequence is very weak, for the Parliament is
the supreme Court, and Council in the Kingdom (and in your apprehension, I
believe, the supreme authority) who were indeed called to that Trust by the
people* but being by their call made members of Parliament, they became clothed
with authority, to consult, and provide m^ans for the safety of themselves and
the Nation, according to the Laws and Constitutions of it. And so issued out
Commissions, etc. but this as private men they could not do. But now the Army
was not by any Commission clothed with any authority over the Parliament. And
therefore they cannot justify their actings against the Parliament, over whom
they had no authority, by what the Parliament did, having so great authority;
yea in the conceit of our new Lords, the greatest authority in the Land. But he
argues further, Page 5, 6.
That if the Parliament Men by being made Parliament Men, had formally and
really power to raise an Army, then that Army has power to act whatsoever lies
within the verge of their Commission, etc. This is not doubted: But the thing
which we doubt and deny is, That the tenor of their Commission should be by
strong hand to suppress all that by rational grounds, they should judge enemies
of the peace of the Kingdom, without dependence on Parliamentary judgment: for
they were as raised, so to be regulated by the Parliament in their proceedings.
The power of judging being reserved in the Parliament; The power of executing
committed to the Army, especially in case of doubt or difference. Never would,
never did, any State raise an Army on other terms, unles they meant to make
them Lords, not Servants. For who is likely to be more skilful in judging what
is conducible to peace and public weal? A Council of War, or a Council of
State? Therefore its clear that the Army in assuming power to judge their
raisers authoritatively, and so using force against them; have exceeded the
bounds of their Commission, falsified trust, and are injurious usurpers on the
Parliament men.

Sect. 5.
But he raises an Objection, That it is not likely that the Parliament would
give Commission to act against themselves. He answers: page 6.
1 That Lawgivers when in their righe minds, may give out Laws against mad
men, which may be put in execution against themselves when they become mad. And
in case any of the Parliament men from whom the Commission issued had turned
Cavaliers, etc. But this is a wild answer: for the excluded Parliament Men are
in the same way, and in the same principles, in which they first gave out
Commissions, that is, to have the King home, separated from his evil
Counselors, that his Throne might be established in righteousness. Therefore
to argue, That because their Commission might have been used against them if
they had left the Body that gave it, and united with the Kings party, that Now
it may be so used when they continue in Parliament; and act on the same
principles, on which they issued out the Commissions, is as poor a come off, as
could be expected from the weakest Sophister.

Nor has his 2 Answer any more strength where he affirms, That what one Traiane
Emperor spoke expressly to an inferior Officer, is said implicitly to al
inferior Officers, by their superiors; to use the power they have for them, if
they rule well; against them, if they rule ill: page 6.7.
for they are also for the punishment of evildoers, and that without
partiality. And S. Peter requires submission not only to the King as supreme,
but unto governors, sent by him for the punishment of evil doers. But first, if
there were nothing peculiar in that saying of Trajane, why is it so often
mentioned of him, as a note of eminency and honor? Again, though inferior
officers should use their power and be respected in the use of it, yet they
must also remember their limits. A Justice of Peace has power, but it is with
limits in regard of place, which if he exceed, though his act be never so just,
he usurps, and is punishable. And so is he limited also in regard of persons.
Subordinate Magistrates are to govern, and to be obeyed by those under them;
but they are to be governed by the powers above them, and not exercise
authority over them, for their Commission extends not so far; Though we are to
be subject to subordinate Magistrates, yet in case of opinion of wrong, we may
appeal from them, as Paul to Caesar; which shows the supreme Magistrate is to
censure their Sentences, not they his.

You might have spared that Scripture which here you too lightly bring in, that
in this Armies Commission there cannot be pretense for that exception which is
in that of Christ. 1 Cor. 15.27. But when he says all things are put under
him, it is manifest that he is exempted that did put all things under him, God
the Father being incapable of sin. For though the superior magistrate is not
exempt from sin, yet is he excepted out of the Commission of the inferior
Magistrate, because his superior in Magistracy; and Par in Parem, much less
inferior in superiorem (in codem genere) non habet potestatem, equal has no
authority over his equal, much less the inferior over the superior in the
same kind, especially where the supreme Magistrate thinks he does well; for
whose judgment shall control? shall the inferiors control the superior?
Neither does Mr. Prinne or any judicious Divine that I know, affirm that any
other inferior Magistrates but the representatives of a Kingdom, shall take
order with the restraining of Tyrants: or if any inferior Magistrate may do
it, yet they and the representatives are to proceed, by taking order with their
ministers which are under the penalties of the law, and within the verge of
authority. And there is no usurpation in this, when penalties are inflicted on
them that are under jurisdiction. But he adds If the Army had not so for mall a
call, as the Parliament, yet had they a call as material, for the one had it
from the persons of the people, and the other from the peoples liberties, yea
and lives, many of their lives being now laid upon the altar etc. what a loud
untruth is here in matter of fact? whose lives were on the alter? Or what
better security could the Parliament devise. Then first to be justified by Act
of Parliament, and secondly to be secured from violence by the command of the
militia? Again what palpable weakness is here in matter of argument, to
compare the calls of men to their votes, with real calls of their miseries,
and these too most in their own fancies for the major part of people apprehend
no such thing, and so their gron^s call not: who knows not, that personal call
by votes clothes with authority, gives jurisdiction, and enables to order
others? But sight of miseries, gives a man no authority to command, only calls
him to put forth that power he has to help,

Lastly he affirms incase of extreme necessity, Aquinas, q. 32. Art. 7.
all things are common, and so callings; for this he cites a Popish writer, a
fit patron for a false position; for if this be true, here is no theft in
extreme need when a man must dye, to feed on another man's store, it is no
theft. But this is against the Scriptures, making a difference indeed between
him that steals presumtuously, and him that steals for need, the one
deserving pity, but is a theif still, and must restore, though it be to all
his substance Prove. 6, 30, 31. So Augustine in Psalm. 73. Pauper mendicus
furtum facit ex macie processit iniquitas.
And Cicero is of the same judgment, that a good man must famish rather then
steal, lib. 3. Off. Nonne igitur sapiens si fame ipse conficiatur abstulerit
cibum alteri ad nullam rem utili? Minime vero; non enim mihi est vita mea
utilior, quam animi mei talis affectus, neminem ut violem commodi mei gratia.
wherein he speaks to the shame of Papists and all that symbolize with them.
To the example of David I have answered already, for what he cites out of
Polanus; That when eclesiasticks are negligent, Laickes may reform, Its just
nothing to his purpose; for who knows not that Polanus and other Protestant
Divines, hold the reformation of the eclesiasticall estate to be within the
verge of a magistrates call? But will Polanus or Mr. Goodwin say, that a
magistrate in case of defect without any other call, may administer the
Sacraments? could necessity excuse Vzzah? Therefore this pretended community in
case of necessity, is a Popish device, and a figleafe too narrow.

He closes his answer with a similitude of his own, which he amplifies out of
Master Prin, Page 9.10.
[Where he supposes the Pilot of a Ship drunk, or mad, and the Ship running
on quicksands, etc. In such a case may not any man or inen Act as a Pilat,
which others stand bound at the peril of their lives in this case to obey.]
But first, similitudes are better for illustrations, then proofs, Secondly,
They prove nothing at all, unless there be parity between the example, and
the thing exemplified. Whereas here is the greatest disparitie. For if this
similitude clear the Army, it must suppose the Parliament Men drunk, or mad,
whereas indeed they that accuse them, labor of somewhat proportionable to
these diseases. But let the case be put thus: The Master of the Ship is,
according to his place ablest to guide the Ship, and he according to his best
skill, directs such a course, and accordingly gives out commands. The Master
Gunner, presumes he can steer a safer course, and thereupon, by the help of
his underofficers, awes, and forcibly seizes the Pilot, and so takes his own
way. Is not the Gunner here guistle of usurpation and disobedience? Just so
stands the case between the Parliament and the Army. The Parliament are best
able to judge, for they are the Council of State, and have most right to guide
the Ship of the commonwealth, for they have the Superior Authority. But the
Soldiers command the Guns, and they propose another way, which though looked
upon, as most dangerous by the skillful Pilots; yet by force, all are secluded,
that will not run their way. Is not this usurpation in the Soldier, and
dangerous, not safe to public weal? In case of difference in judgments,
whose sentence shall control? Shall the sons judgment control the fathers?
or the servants his Masters? no more ought inferiors Magistrate control the
Superiors. The Army therefore should obey, not pr^scribe to the Parliament in
things dubious, especially such as are of Civil, not Martial cognizance. But
because the exception that Master Goodwin all along supposes is, That the
Parliament Members restrained, are drunk or mad civilly, or have turned back
on trust, and there is much depends on this. I will here, once for all, lay
down grounds to clear it; That the Parliament Men restrained, are in
reference to the Soldiery, sober, in their right wits, and true to trust, and
that the contrary errors rest among their oppressors. As first I argue thus:

Sect. 6.
Those that keep to their Principles, Professions and Declarations made, when
they are confessed to be sober, in their right wits, and true to trust, must
needs be judged to be so still. The Parliament men who endeavor the settling of
the King and Kingdom, upon his large Concessions, keep to their principle
Declarations and Professions. Ergo, They are to be judged sober, in their wits,
and faithful to trust. The Major is manifest, for constancy in Principles and
ways, is the greatest evidence of sobriety and faithfulness. A double-minded
man, a drunken man, a frantic man, is unstable in all his ways. The Minor is
undeniable, which may be seen by every one in the Record of their Principles,
Declarations and Professions, in the Book called, The exact collections,
printed long since by the Parliaments appointment, and in other Summaries of
them. And if the Members be soher, in their wits, and true to trust; their
opposites are under the evils, contrary to these virtues; For Contrarioram
contraria sunt praedicata.

Secondly, Those that proceed in a way to which they stand engaged, by diverse
solemn and religious bonds, they are sober, in their wits, and true to trust.
The oppressed Members proceeded in a way to which they stood engaged by many
solemn and religious Bonds, therefore they are sober, etc. The Major is not to
be doubted of, unless we be like Felix, and think much Religion or Learning
makes mad.

The Minor is as evident, for the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy,
Protestation, the National Covenant, are all sacred and solemn Bonds, and all
engage to preserve the Kings Honor, Safety, and Greatness, at least upon such
Concessions as these granted by him. Therefore the conclusion is undeniable,
and the blame must rest on their Oppressors, but the oppressed Members are free.

Thirdly, They that walk in a way suitable to the Religion that they profess,
and after the pattern of the wisest and best professors of (...), they are
sober, etc. The Parliament in according with the King upon his Concessions
walk suitable to the Religion they profess and follow the pattern of the
wisest and best professors of it, therefore they are sober, etc. The Mayor is
evident, and the Minor is clear, if there be any difference, it is from the
Parliaments holding up the King too high, and not in stooping too low. For no
Religion is more for not only accepting, but exalting Governors in legal
ways, then the religion of Protestants in matter of Loyalty, even in case of
difference of Religion, always condemning the Jesuiticall Doctrine of
deposing, or destroying Princes; And for the practice of the best Protestants
you shall hear, Iunius Brutus in his Vindiciae contra Tyranos, a Book that is
Scandalous even to many Protestants, for the great liberty he gives against
Princes; yet in this case, thus he speaks, p. 47. Cum his quoties cunque
optaris praesto est pax desine caedere cedunt, Desine deum, oppugnare, desinent
propugnare. Arma si velis iis e manibus encutere, satis est modo ne percutias.
A Prince says he may have pe ace with protestant Subjects when he will let him
leave beating them, they yield to him; let him leave opposing God, they will
leave their forcible defense; If you would disarne them, its enough that you
strike them not: and a little after Principi portas urbis claudunt, ubi
res^p^erit, and ad se redierit, impertata facere parati. They shut the gat^s of
the City against the Prince; as soon as he shall repent, and come to himself,
they are ready to do his Commands. A little after, no strovero etiam tempore
menivimus eos, qui pro vera religione, adversus impietatem in Germania,
Galliaque pugnarant, quotiescunque dei pure colendi potestas facta est, arma
ultro deposuisse. Also we remember that those in our time have fought for true
Religion against impiety, either in Germany or France, as often as they had
liberty given to serve God purely, lay down Arms. And his conclusion is very
remarkable, Ejusmodi ergo signis possient hi a defectoribus facile distingui.
Therefore by such like signs, those (that maintain legal liberties against
Tyranny by the Sword) may be easily distinguished from Rebels or apostate
Subjects. And thus it is cleared, that the Parliament, in endeavoring peace
upon the Kings Concessions, do walk after the rules and patterns of
Protestants and their Religion; Therefore the conclusion stands good, that they
are sober, in their wits, and true to trust, but then what to think of their
oppressour^ is obvious enough.

Fourthly and lastly, (that I may not exceed in ma^ters so clear; Th^se whose
work and trust is, to provide for the honor, safety, peace, and pr^sperity of
a Nation, who proceed in the most probable way, to promote the honor, safety,
peace and prosperity of that Nation; they are sober, in their wits, and true to
trust. But such was the work, and trust of restrained Members, and they took
the most probable way to promote it; Therefore, they are sober, in their right
wits, and true to trust. The Mayor is manifest; The Minor may be clear thus,
Monarchical Government, is the most honorable Government, when it is
regulated, that it degenerate not into tyranny, and its an honor to people to
be loyal to Governors in good ways. Loyalty is praiseworthy, Treachery
vile, and base; Therefore when by the Kings concessions. Tyranny is prevented
the liberties of the people secured: to preserve the Monarch, in safety and
honor; and the people in loyalty is undoubtly, the glory of a Nation. And this
would be as conducible to peace and safety, for this would have put a present
period to our broils, and set the Parliament in a capacity to preserve peace,
by their command of the forces by Sea and Land, and hereby we should have
recovered reverence from friends, and become terrible to enemies, and what
could in reason be the result of all this, but great prosperity? and this was
the Judgment of the Army, but a little above a year ago, and this discovered
by sundry Declarations and proposals, enforced with solid reasons, and this
they pursued a good while, till self interest, ambition, or I know not what
tentation turned their brains, and though they have laid out all their skill
in their Remonstrance, to show that the King by peace on his Concessions, would
have both opportunity and will, quickly to make himself absolute, and so fall
upon revenge, yet there are fairer probabilities on the other side, that he
would not, if he could or could not, if he would let out his spirit in such a
destructive way of revenge; And that he would not, if he could may appear.
Because he has given so ample testimony of deep wisdom, whereby he is able
fully to foresee the desperate danger of attempting any such change, or
revenge. Secondly, Experience will make him wary; The burnt child dreads the
fire, he has sufficiently felt the misery, acrewing to Princes, by the
alienation of Subjects. And thirdly, Which is most moving with me, his
invincible patience, and tranquillity of Spirit in his sufferings. Noble natures
that can bear adversity without fainting; can enjoy prosperity without
revenging; revenging most haunts base, and cowardly natures; But if he would he
could not break out, because by these concessions his hands are tied; and by
this recommodation, the Parlioment would be reinvested in the peoples
affections, and any attempt of breach on the Kings part, would carry so much ill
in the face of it, that the whole Nation would be ready to rise up, and pluck
in pieces, whosoever should be supposed to be either Counselors or Actors in
such a breach of faith; And the Militia being in the Parliaments hands, such
incendiaries might bs easily crushed. I might add the Kings carriage in his
concessions, where his own honor, or external rights was concerned most
facile; but where his conscience was interested tenacious to the greatest
adventure, what found reason can be given, why the King should be so resolute
in the matters of his conscience, but that he means to keep what he granted;
And therefore would not grant now, what conscience hereafter might enforce him
to break, as being against conscience, and see the engagement to it sinful,
and null. But suppose the danger in peace on these concessions be more then I
apprehend; yet if the danger of deposing or destroying be greater, and more
unavoydable: It is not madness, but sobriety to choose the suffer way, wherein
if we fall, we shall fall with inward peace and honor, having discharged our
consciences in reference to our Oaths, and professions: and to decline another
way more dangerous, wherein if we fall, our fall will be more foul and
uncomfortable. Now let the danger of deposition or destroying the King be
weighed in the balance, either of experience or reason, and I doubt not but it
will weigh down the danger of commodation on such concessions; for that the
Prince of Wales should come in, and submit himself to the deposers or
destroyers of his Father, is not imaginabl. What cause, and mind to revenge he
will have; any man that has a Father, to who^ he is not only linkt in nature,
but associated in cause, may easily apprehend; And his opportunities are as
Evident. What potent Prince will not seek his affinity, having a just and
clear title to such three Kingdoms? And what a partly is he like to have at
home? The whole Peerage of England, distaste rigor against the person of the
King; and I think three parts of four in the House of Commons are in their
mind. The Generality of the people of the Land detest it; The Ministry, that
have not been thought altogether inconsiderable, stand amazed at it, as most
dishonorable to Religion, nor are the affections of Scotland dubious in this
point; nor is all fair weather in Ireland. The party, that had enough to do,
to grapple with the King, when United, is now divided; Peace in Germany will
afford plenty of Mercenaries; What greater probability was there ever for any
Prince, either to attempt or atcheive revenge? And by the same means be in
condition to make his own terms with his people? And if he should fail in
his attempts at first, yet how endlessely they will be renewed, till the
Kingdom be settled on his right basis, is as clear as the Sun in our
experience. After the deposition of Richard the second, and setting up Henry
the fourth, of the younger House, There was no settlement between the House of
York, and Lancaster, for above fourscore years, but ever and anon bloody
Wars, to the inestimable damage of this poor Kingdom; neither was there any
hope of settled Peace, till their titles were United by the marriage of Henry
the seventh, of the House of Lancaster, with the Heyresse of the House of
York. And thus I hope I have cleared it, that the Army was not oney destitute
of any warrantable call, but also of all just occasions, so to oppress the
Members of Parliament, for proceeding to settle the Kingdom by treaty: for its
evident, they therein acted wisely, soberly, faithfully, and suitable to their
former professions, and sacred engagements.

CHAP. 2.
Sect. 1.
Now Mr. Goodwin proceeds to a second objection, from the Armies resisting
lawful authority, or the powers set over them, and therein the Ordinance of
God. View the argument in its full proportion, and I doubt not but it will be
sound Herculean.

THey that resist lawful powers, who they acknowledge lawfully set overthem,
and to whom these should be subject for conscience sake; They defile
themselves, and incur damnation. The Army in their late forcible act on the
Houses, did resist lawful authority, lawfully set over them, to whom they
o^ght to be subject for conscience sake: Therefore the Army by that act did
defile themselves, and make themselves ly able to damnation. The Major is the
Apostles, Romans 13.1.2.34. and now let us see how Mr. Goodwin quits him from the
Minor.

He answers, [That to resist authority imports two things; A denial of
obedience to the just command of authority; page 11.
But this is not all, there is resistance in opposing authority in legal
commands, whether just or unjust; if they be legal, they be obligatory to the
subject, either in regard of doing or patient suffering, or else the advice
were of little use to those that lived in heathnish Commonwealths, and under
Emperors, none of the best, but many times the worst of men; But, says he,
[The House had given out no such Commandment, that none of their Members should
be seized, though Voting never so palpably against their trust; But though they
have not Voted things in such au absurd way, yet have they declared (upon
occasion of the Kings demand of five of their Members,) page 11,
that the arresting of any Member whatsoever, without a legal proceeding
against them, and without the consent of the House, whereof such person is a
Member, is a breach of privilege of Parliament, and the person that shall
arrest any such Member of Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the
Commonwealth, Die Lunae Janu. 17. 1641. And this I hope Mr. Goodwin, and the
Officers of the Army did not then think unreasonable; and so into what
condition the Army have put themselves by that Declaration, is evident, But Mr.
Goodwin would have no act binding, p. 11
unless the justice of it may be sufficiently cleared: It this must be in the
judgment of their opposites (which it must be, or else it will not serve his
turn) sure it is a tenent that destroys all Government.

Sect. 3.
But Secondly, [He says resisting imports an engagement, to take away
authority, but that they did not they declare their approbation and resolution,
to maintain authority Parliamentary, etc.] But what more ridiculous, or
hypocritical apology can be made, then to say, they will maintain authority,
when it is only so much, and so far as it will be ruled by, and suit their
conceits? which is indeed to subdue not to maintain authority, as they
pretend.

But he objects against himself p. 12.
[That if the Army did not in either of his senses resist Authority, yet they
did what was worse, offer violence to persons in Authority, etc. He answers,
Its lawful by violence to wrest a Sword out of a mad man's hand, etc.] An
easy, and ready way to de-throne all Authority, if saying they be mad will
serve the turn, when they are neither in drink, passion, nor under any other
symptom of such unnatural distemper: Besides, I have proved, that the
madness that is lies at the doors of their opposites, and sure else they
would never run on so confidently, as they do, in irregular ways, and yet
pretend to so much conscience.

Sect. 2.
He answers, p. 13.
secondly, [That the King had as legal an investiture into the power of the
Militia, of sitting in Parliament, etc. as also men had in their Parliamentarie
trust, yet did the Parliament upon a discovery, etc. deprive him of this
power.] First, what power the King had in the Militia by Law, is not within my
element to determine. But if that Principle laid down by him be true, for ought
I know, its likelier to draw the Parliament into a community in erring, then
exempt the Army, Beside, The King did at first leave the Parliament, and their
chief overture of War, was to bring him to, not keep him out of Parliament;
And that he has not been readmitted ever now, I think he may chiefly thank
some of your Party.

Sect. 4.
He answers, thirdly, [As a Client may cast off an Advocate, whom he suspects,
or a Pupil his Guardian, etc.] But first, Can a Pupil cast off his Guardian
till he be fourteen years of age, when he is enabled thereto by Law? But to
compare also the Parliament to a mercenarie Advocate, is base and ridicuous.
Besides, if the Parliament be Guardians, it is of the Nation, not of them
only. Who made them Trustees to cast them of for the whole Nation?

Sect. 5.
But he Objects against himself, first, p. 14.
[That the Parliament were Judget lawfully, Constituted of the Kings
Delinquencie. But the Army not so, in regard of the Parliament. He answers,
That if we measure the Parliaments judicature, by the peoples call, the Army
has every whit as lawful a Constitution to judge who are enemies, etc. as the
Parliament; as he has proved.] But the folly of that proof has bin
manifested, for they had no call at all from the people, but from the
Parliament: And that call was not to be Judges, but Actors, according to the
judgment of Parliament: And this they did usually profess, and promised to
the Parliament, as long as the Parliament pleased them. [What he adds of
explicit, and implicit call from the people.] Its nothing for him, for the
Army had neither. The implicit, I have disproved; [explicit he confesses,
they had none, for want of opportunity at the present: Nay, he confesses,
That the generality of p^^ple dis-relish their Act, but they are in a Phrenzie
too.] A short cut to make a man absolute Master of his Actions to dub every one
mad, that opposes him. But it is the most insolent, and mendicant way, that
ever was avowed by a Scholar.

But secondly, p. 15.
He says [The investiture of the Army into the judicature, which they have
exercised, is by a Law of greater Authority, then any the Parliament can
pretend; that is by the Law of nature, necessity, and love to their Country.]
For his Law of nature, and necessity, they are all one in his account. For his
Law of love, they were just acted by it, as Saul when he slew the Gibeonites in
Zeal to the children of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.2. and a like pleasing to God. But
the Army acted against their Personal Oath, Saul only against the oath of
his Ancestors.

Sect 6.
But he Objects against himself, p. 16.
[That the necessity might be pretended, not real. Pretense of necessity is
easy, but not so easy a thing, to design what that necessity is, which is
authorized by God with a suspensive power over humane Laws.] Its very true,
that pretense of necessity is easy, and the difficulty in designing that
Authority, which has no Law, great. And yet it will be a greater difficulty
to prove the Armieunder that necessity, both which lies on you; but let us see
how you proceed.

He answers, p. 16 17.
first, [That every man has power given him in judging of persons, or things,
in respect of themselves, and with relation to what concerns themselves, by
way of duty, to do, or to forbear, etc.]

This is in a right sense true, that man being a Rational creature, and so to
do his actions in judgment, and wisdom. He is to judge of every thing, that
is before him, whether it be good, to be acted, or bad, to be omitted. But this
is as clear a Principle: That he is to judge of things by Rule, and one plain
Rule is, That Public things are to be done by public authority. And in
such matters, the judgments of public persons, using their best skill, ought
to preponderate private judgments, at least to prevent contrarty acting. Or
else we must fall into confusion, and have all authority overthrown, and
Apostolical precepts touching subjection to Principalities, and Powers, quite
enervated. And this clear Principle they walk by, that judge the Army
guilty of gross usurpation in their force upon the Members. And therefore do
not usurp upon them, nor are injurious to them, in such censures, as expose
them to no more dis-repute for this fact, then it deserves.

Sect. 7.
But he proceeds, [To prove the sentence which the Army past on the Members,
as meet to be dispossessed of their Parliamentarie Authority, not to he
erroneous either for want of skill in judgment, or for want of care in putting
forth that skill. And why? Because for some probabilities, to wit, That the
Royal Party, by agreement, p. 18. 19.
would have had and improved opportunity to have taken revenge on those, whose
hands had been heavy upon them to inrage them, and who had showed most
courarge for the Parliament.] But the Parliament it self, upon more probable
grounds (as I formerly showed) have judged their way to be for the Peace and
safety of the Kingdom, in composing differences in such a way, that they
should by Law have established, all that for which they had so long contended
for, and all security they could demand, for the preservation of it. And their
judgment ought to be binding to all under their Authority to acquiese in it,
at least so far, as not to oppose it forcibly.

Sect. 8.
He proceeds, p. 20.
[Its no such difficult matter to judge of such emergent necessities, which is
authorized by God to suspend humane laws. He instances Mat. 12.3, 4, 5. in
hunger.] But here you must note the necessity of hunger, does only suspend a
ceremonial (not a moral) Law, as that about Shewbread; or if you apply it to
the Sabbath, that was only moral by institution, not by nature, and such a
moral differs little from the ceremoniaell, but in perpetuity. Hunger will
not dispense with that natural law, Thou shall not steal, as I have proved
from Prove. 6.30, 31. Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his
soul, when he is hungry. But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold. So
the necessity of hunger makes not theft, no theft. And thus much Mr. Goodwin
in effect confesses: p. 21.
[In his caution, where he says, When we seem to approve of that Principle
of the Jews peril of life drives away all; we intend not to say, That men
may lawfully transgress every precept of God. As for example: Men may not lie,
forswear themselves in such eases.] Wherein he has said enough to confirm my
answer, and ^o cut the throat of that Cause, which he would maintain.

For was not the seizing of the Parliament Men, a manifest breach of that
privilege, which they had Sworn to maintain? What is a privilege of
Parliament, if that be not, that their persons be free from violence, in and
for Voting according to their consciences, upon the probablest grounds that
they can discern? If this necessity do not give a man leave to be forsworn,
as he confesses, it cannot be their discharge in this fact. And undoubtedly,
the law of an oath, is of absolute and indispensable authority, and so judged
hitherto by all but that Antichrist, who for assuming to himself authority to
dispense with oaths, is evinced to be that Man of Sin, who in the Temple of
God, sits as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. Neither let any man deceive himself, by
thinking that necessity does not give leave to be perjured, but by this
necessity the oath was not binding, and so breach of the oath was not
perjurie. For so the Papists say in making it excuse theft, in case of
necessity taking what is another cease to be theft; and yet this Mr. to
Goowin, I suppose likes not, for he says, We may not lie, in case of
necessity, and not to steal, is a command of the same stamp.

It being therefore clear that the act of the Army was both against their Word,
and Oath, and Mr. Goodwin confesses that necessity dispenses not with an
Oath, or a Ly. I need add nothing to what he says concerning humane Laws,
Though I must tell him that many humane Laws, are but the backing of Divine
Laws with civil sanction and penalties, because carnal men are senseles of
sin against God, and fearlesse of his threatenings, and such laws are as
indispensable as the Laws of God themselves, being but the Laws of God, put out
in a Political dress. And such is the Law of man, for private men to be
subject to the Laws, and Votes of those, that are clothed with authority over
them, thus far as not to resist them, or rise up in rebellion against them, for
this is required by a Law, that Commands things morally, intrinsecally good,
and forbids the contrary, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, and so much for
that Objection also.

But he proceeds to another Objection, [That at least many of the Parliament
men, disturbed in their way, were religious, and conscientious men, and voted,
and acted what they did conscienciously judging the course they steered safest,
etc. And is it not contrary to Reason, and Religion, That such men upon so
fair an account, should be used so fowlly? But I would rather frame the
Objection thus, when wise and conscientious men, clothed with authority, do
act conscientiously, and according to their best skill, determine a way for
public weal. No private persons can have place left for the plea of such a
necessity, as may authorize them against the rules of order, to resist them.
For that necessity, that dispenses with Laws, must not be probable only, and
disputable among men of equal parts, and integrity: But apparent and imminent,
which the conscientiousnesse of the Members oppressed proclames to be otherwise,
in the case in hand. But now what says he. 1 After an oblique reflection upon
their Religion in a parenthesis, he answers though they be religious, yet they
be men, and so have not that Divine prerogative James 1.13. to be untemptable
to evil, and then adds an uncharitable, and to men in authority, an arrogant
insinuation. They that are capable of receiving of gifts, or of any inordinacy
in their desires after earthly accommodations, how wise soever, are jubject to
have their eyes blinded. But does he not see how this may be retorted, are the
army above temptations? Above ordinances some may be, and that is to be
overcome of temptations, but above temptations he will not say they are, I
suppose; And do not the Army and their party receive gifts and accommodations?
who equal to them in this Kingdom? many of them from so mean and defective a
condition riseu to such a shining condition? Besides though the Parliament men
be not untemptible, their determinations are uncontrouleable, by inferiors, as
subject to temptations and possessing more advantages by distractions, then
they were like to get (at least most of them) to themselves in particular, by
accommodations.

Secondly, says he, when men are religious only to a mediocrity and withal
servile in their judgments to some principles, with great confidences obtruded
on their consciences, for sacred truths and yet full of enmity to a thorough
dependence on God, they may become twofold more the children of fear, and more
capable of dismal impressions from the World. By which obscure passage, I
confess I know not what he glanceth at. But me thinks he has no great cause
to upbrayd them with fear, who did with that resolution reject the motion of
such an Army, and after a Vote, so highly cross to their design, passed
through them, so in arms, to proceed in their discharge of their trust. Let
Mr. Goodwin please himself and his followers, with his black insinuations, but
all uninteressed men will believe that action shows them above fears, and
that they had not lost, but recovered that noble spirit, that once moved in
Nehemiah, shall such a man as I fly? I might also oppose to his old saw, that
fear is a bad counselor, another as authentic Prudens magis metuit, quam
sperat. The prudent counselor is apt rather to fear then confidence, and
Aristotle gives it as an effect of fear (...) fear makes deliberative, Rhet.
lib. 2. c. 6. But says he secondly, When Religious men sin against the common
liberties of a Nation, and make one purse with the thrice declared enemies of
the Nation; here then the law of nature, and necessity cannot stand to make
inquiry after such a difference, etc. But first how false this supposition is,
in reference to the oppressed Members, I have formerly showed proving the
goodness of the way they were in. And again there cannot be more senseles
boldness, then to call such an agreement, so much to the advantage of one party,
and to the burden of an other, making one purse with them. And lastly, so long
as the necessity is so obscure that so many wise, and good men, apprehend
safety not danger; There can be no necessity so apparent, as to authorize
inferiors, to rise against their superiors, to the violation of that
Ordinance of God wherewith the superiors are clothed.

He adds fourthly That the corruption of the best men is worst, with such
other flourishes in themselves true to dazzle the eyes of his unwary Reader,
wherein he still begs the question, that these men were corrupted, page 26,
and waves the force of the argument, which is, that being the Parliament men
were not only by their places more able to judge, but by their
conscientiousnes, like to put forth their abilities to the best advantage. The
course that such approve cannot be thought so apparently destructive, as to
give just cause to pretend such apparent necessity of danger, as to break Laws
humane and Divine, seen only by men, that can pretend to no more of science, or
conscience, then those whom they reject.

He adds fifthly For any hard measure objected to be used against the
Parliament men, he answers, He knows not bow the Army could walk toward them
with a softer foot. How does affection blind men, could not they have used more
softnes, then leave so many of them in Hell all night, without any
accommodations for rest? And what menaces have bin cast out, against the lives
of some of them, separated from their brethren, into a place of straiter
custody, and of greater terror, but all sufferings are light with some, that
light not on them and theirs. For close of this, because he has cast out some
oblique and some more direct glances, at the Religion, and integrity of the
secluded Members. I will make him this offer. That if the secluded Members, be
not as free from raising advantage during the late troubles, and have not given
as good satisfaction to the World, both of their knowledge, integrity, and
affection to Religion, as so many, choose them where they can, of the same
trust, that approve of their necessity, let them carry the cause among men. But
if not their pretended necessity, is not like to be the genuine issue of a
faithful brain and heart.

CHAP. 3.
Sect. 1.
[Mr. Goodwin proceeds to a third Objection, from the Covenant, he might have
added the Protestation made May, the 5. 1641. which was taken more generally
from which I present the argument, thus formed.

EVery act contrary to any one, or more solemn engagements made to God is
lawful, and impious: the Act of the Army seizing the members of Parliament, is
contrary to one, or more solemn engagements made to God. Therefore that act
was unlawful and impious; The Minor is clear, for in the protestation May,
1641. This is one clause to defend their power, and privilege of Parliament.
Now what more unquestionable privilege of Parliament then this, to have free a
ccesse to the House, and there to vote according to their consciences? page 27.


Mr. Goodwin answer, ["That it is no privilege of Parliament to act in
opposition, to the benefit of the Kingdom. True, but when the qustion is, what
is for the benefit of the Kingdom; it is part of the power of Parliaments
(which is one thing which you have protested to maintain) to be the final
Judges, else broils and confusion must follow; for they shall stand bound,
(together with all of their Judgment,) to maintain, what they judge so
conducible for the Kingdoms wealth, and if their Judgments be not
determining, others may think themselves bound by force to oppose them, and
what can be expected from this, but perpetual broils?

But he answers further, to a supposed reply [" That this is a privilege of
Parliament for the Members to be free from question without the consent of the
House; True says he, when a Parliament is taken in a proper signification,
noting out a company of men not dead to trust; But if these be dead to trust,
then they are not properly a Parliament; As he is not a Jewe that is one
outwardly, etc. But who shall Judge them dead to trust? They are not to be
Judged, authoritatively by private persons, none such can pronouce them dead;
neither have they in what they are accused, given evidence to be dead to trust,
but faithful as I have showed; Again He that was only a Jew outwardly, was
not to be denied the outward privilege of a Jew, by man. Though in Gods
account he was no Jew, that is not holy to, and accepted of God, therefore not
only is the insinuation against the Parliament men, false, but if it were
true, the Army has no authority to pronounce them so, so nor to deal with
them as such; Is not the Parliament the Supreme Judicature, against which lies
no writ of error, or appeal but to God? So it stands good that their act was
against their Oath.

But secondly he says, ["That if such a number of men be a Parliament, p. 28
though dead to trust, etc. he knows no privilege of Parliament due to them,
no more then a dread man has the privileges of a man; and this he sets off
with many flourishes, wherein he keeps this old artifice to play upon a
plausible string, to please his party, that agree with him in the supposition
that those Parliament men are dead to trust; whereas that supposition is
apparently false and scandalous. But his flourishes are but Sophistical
neither, for a dead thing has no privilege, as it is dead, but if it be dead
in one self, and alive in another, it may have privilege in one self, (...)
have none in another; as the carnal seed of Abraham (...) ^ewes to men, and so
had their outward privileges, but not so reputed, of God and so had no
spiritual privileges: so a degenerate Parliament is dead indeed to God, who
is above it, to judge it, it has no honor with, nor shall have any reward
from God. But it is not dead to men, so far as to resist it; for they have no
authority to judge it or resist it: but it is only so far dead to private men,
that they are not to give life to the dead acts of it. If the Army had said the
Parliament is dead, we will not uphold it in dead ways, the charge being true,
it had been noble to have laid down their Commission, and not have supported
them: but to resist was out of their sphere; Let me ask this man what he would
have said of Saul, when the spirit of the Lord departed from him, and an evil
spirit seized on him, 1 Samuel 16.14. Was he dead to trust or no? And yet you see
David was as observant and tender of him, as though he had been good as well as
great. These distinctions therefore be fig leaves, and truly I think such
delusions that men otherwais quicksighted, use to be left to for their want of
integrity to truth.

Sect. 2.
But Master Goodwin adds, that though the Army had stood, p 29.^0.31.
bound to the privileges of Parliament, yet they stood bound also to maintain
the liberties of the Kingdom against all impediments whatsoever, and what they
are not able themselves to suppress etc. And the liberties of the Kingdom he
endeavors to prove to be greater then of the Parliament, and in opposition of
laws or privileges, he greater is to take place etc. But first here is
supposed a Bull, that the liberties of a people and a Parliament of the same
people, may be inconsistent, whereas it can be no true privilege on the one
side, but pretended, if they push oue another. Secondly he must remember the
limitation in the Covenant, that every one is to act in the performance of it
according to their callings; that is not only the Soldier as a Soldier, the
Minister as a Minister, but the private man as a private man: so that a private
man is not to act in a juridicall way, by virtue of his Covenant, but according
to Law or Commission from men in authority; and therefore the Covenant bound
not them in reference to the Kingdom to act juridically in committing the
Parliament men. Again, though the liberties of the Kingdom be in some sense
more then the liberties of the Parliament, yet the privileges of Parliament
are first put, and the bond of it takes hold there; therefore by what is spoken
afterward, the true privileges of Parliament cannot be prejudiced. And indeed
there is nothing wherein the privileges of the Kingdom are more concerned then
in the liberties of the Parliament: And there is greater probability of the
land being watered with blood, by the way that the Army are in, then by that
way of accommodation that the Parliament men were in: and therefore it is but
their fancy, that the liberties of the nation are in danger; nay, that
particular mischief is not eligible, before this inconvenience of giving the
inferiors liberty upon their own private conceits to resist and disturb the
supreme Indicature of a Commonwealth.

Sect. 3.
But he adds thirdly; p. 31.
If there had been no clause in the oaths for the liberties of the Subjoct,
yet had the Army more then warrant sufficient to stand up for them with out any
breach of Covenant; for men stand bound by the Law of nature against all other
obligation whatsoever. Now there is no Law of nature that speaks more plainly
then this, that the strong ought to stand by the weak in cases of extremity.
Formerly you made exceptions in the cases of extremity, that a man may not lie,
forswear himself etc. Now all bonds must give way to the Law of necessity,
nor only word bur oath, oportet esse memorem. Again, I would know of him, if
the Sheriff differ in judgment from the Judge when a case is argued, page 21.
and the Sheriff thinks might overcomes right, and that if the Judge proceed,
he undoes or destroys a poor man and his family, Is the Sheriff having power
bound to pluck the Judge off the Bench, or keep him from the Bench rather then
suffer him to pass (in his conceit) an unjust sentence tending to extremity?
For what he adds touching the intention of the Covenant makers and Covenant
takers, I refer me to his conscience, whether though they did not intend the
Covenant to bind to things against the Law of nature, yet that they intended,
that they themselves should be ultimate judges what was for the public weal
of the Kingdom, and so not against the Law of nature; what not? and you know
the old rule, quacunque art verborum quis jurat etc. whatsoever art of words
are used in the oath, the oath is to be interpreted according to his sense that
gives it, not his that takes it.

But next he tells us, that this act of the Army in the dissociation of the
Parliament, does not give the least color or shadows to the act of the Kings
breaking into their House, and demanding which and how many of their Members he
pleased to be sacraficed upon the sor^^ice of his will.

But I answer 1. The act of the King is falsely and uncharitably, that I say
not maliciously represented by him; for the King did not break into the House
of Commons as he mouths it, but had admission there, which of right he may
claim in either House of Parliament upon occasion; nor did he demand the
Members to be sacrificed to his own will: his words were fayrer to have them
legally tried, touching some things which he had to lay to their charge; what
was in his heart you know not. Now compare the act of the Army to this of the
King, and see whether there be not only some color, but according to our
English Proverb, whether they have not made the King a Saint? 1. The King
demanded but five of the Commons Members; they imprisoned above forty, and
secluded as they say, above an hundred; Secondly the King took none out nor can
any man tell what he would have done, had they been there, reason might have
qualified him. They did not only violently inhibit many, but as I am informed
by Master Stevens himself, he and Collonell Birch were pulled out of the House.
Thirdly the King was the supreme Magistrate, they clothed with no authority.
Fourthly the King pretended a legal trial, they have no legal objection
against them. Fifthly The King confesses Parliaments should be free, Collect.
^ Declar. p. 37.
and one of his objections against the five members of Parliament, was that by
tumults they hindered the freedom of Parliament, and you affirm tumultuous
engagements have as much hindered freedom of Parliament this two years, Article
^
as the forcible act of the Army. Sixthly the King was easily reduced from his
error, and relinquisht it, and assured them of tenderness of privilege for
future; you avow the Armies act, and they persist in their soree. Now who is
the greater transgressour thus far? Neither did the King (as you say) look upon
the accused Members as the greatest Patrons of the Kingdoms interest, but under
the notion of such as fought to alter the well tempered government of it; as he
erred in his apprehensions, so do you now in your conceits of the Parliament
men restrained. Nor was the pretense of the King, ' to advance the will and
power of one against the peace and comfort of many, but to preserve the
government as it stood free from alteration, which was in the judgment of any
uninteressed far more for the benefit of this Nation, then the new model of
your fancy (wittily by Sedgewick termed All breech) which if it take, will make
us a base, and in all likelihood ere long a broken Kingdom. But if the King
under fair pretenses did intend, as you hint, tyranny, may it not as well be
objected to you that you intend Oligarchy? It Is therefore clear as the light,
tha^ as the King did ill, the Army did worse; and the Declaration of that House
against the Kings act, does militate as strongly against the act of the Army,
which declares the arresting of any Member of Parliament without a legal
proceeding and consent of that House whereof he is a Member, a breach of
previledge; C^ll. of Remonst. Decla. etc. page 39.
and the preson that shall arrest any such Member, is declared an enemy of
State.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1.
Master Goodwin proceeds to a fourth Objection, To prove the Armies Act
unjustifiable, because against the Law of the Land; which should rightly be
framed thus:

WHosoever being under law, and sworn to maintain the Law, or legal
Privileges of others; do against Law, or legal Privilege imprison the
Persons of others, are guilty of an act of impious transgression. The Army
being under Law, and sworn to maintain the legal Privileges of others yet
against Law, and legal Privileges have imprisoned the Persons of others;
Therefore by that act of theirs they have made themselves guilty of impious
transgression: That imprisonment of the Members is against Law, and legal
privilege, is clear; for the Law is, That no free man shall be imprisoned
without due process in Law. And the greater the person, the greater is the
presumption, in the oppression of them.

Master Goodw. To this: First, Sums up his Answers alread given to this
Objection, which have had their Answers in their places.

He adds, Page 33.
That we may charitably suppose, that there is no Law prohibiting any sort of
men from being benefactors to the Public especially from preserving the
Public Liberties, when they stand in extrema tegula.

Ans. How false this supposition is in the Armies case, to wit, that the
Liberties stand in extrema tegula, I have formerly showed, nor is there any
thing more prejudicial to the Public Liberties, then that the persons of
their Public Counsel, shall be restrained upon the uncertain fancies of a
small Party: And necessity cannot dispense with a lie, nor an Oath, as he has
formerly confessed: God can preserve where our hands are bound without our lie
Romans 3.7.
or perjury, or sanctify all that is to be suffered.

Sect. 2.
Secondly, Page 4.
Says he, If there were such a Law, it could have no obliging force, etc. If
he mean it could have no obliging force in foro Dei, in the Court of Heaven; so
that man should not obey it: It is true. But if he mean, it has no obliging
force in foro humano, in the Courts of men; so that a man ought not to suffer,
but resist, it is falfe; for then all the Laws of Emperors made against
Christians are invalid: And those sufferings of Primitive Christians,
especially when they grew into multitudes and legions, were not such glorious
actions, but rather the follies of the Christians, that knew not their Liberty
to use their power to resist those dead Laws to which they no ways stood
bound: At least, Bellarmines Answer in behalf of the Church of Rome, running
courses contrary to Primitive times, is true; that then derant vires
temporales, they wanted temporal strength; and Protestants have been in an
error that have ascribed the dissimilitude to the decay of spiritual graces.
But its nothing for such as Mr Goodwin to symbolize with Papists.

Sect. 3.
He proceeds: Thirdly, Page 31.35.
If there were a Law to make force in any kind to interrupt Magistrates in
their way punishable, yet this would not evict this Act of the Army, to have
been contrary to the Laws, because it is the constant genius and manner of
Laws, to lay down only the general Rules, and conceal the exception: Now the
exception does not break the rule. And here he cites something out of Tully,
Grotius, Aristotle, and the Impeirall Laws; and the chiefest exception is
necessity.

But first, where no such exception against the Law lies, there the Actor is
the Transgressor of the Law. And those that urge the Law against them, suppose
it clear that there was no such necessity. For those Magistrates restrained,
were good and wise men, and in their serious thoughts judged the way that they
were in preservative, and ten parts of the Land to one, are of their mind
still; and so the necessity is but pretended. Besides, though the Laws of men
be subject to exceptions, I refer it to his conscience, in case a Magistrate
may be consulted, whether he thinks that any of his Authors will say, that
private men's exceptions are to be received before the judgment of those with
whom power of interpreting Laws is entrusted? And lastly, whether an Oath to a
partiticular Law engage not to it, though it prove detrimentall? Psalm. 15.4.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1.
Master Goodwin proceeds to a fifth Objection, From the mischievous consequence
of the example of the fact of this Army which may be made use of by any Party,
finding themselves strongh enough to attempt the like disturbance and
confusion: but I would frame the Argument thus:

EVery action grounded on such Principles as are a manifest inlet to
wickedness, confusion and Anarchy, is pernicious and wicked: The force
exercised on the Parliament by the Army grounded on necessity, visible only to
them and their party, is a manifest inlet to wickedness, anarchy, and
confusion. Therefore the Armies said Act is pernicious and wicked.

Mr Goodwins Answ. 1. page 36. The lawfulness of actions is not to be judged
by what does, but by what is likely to follow and that not by accident, or
misconstruction, but by the native tendency of it, etc. Ans. 2 Though there
were not only a possibility but a probability, that the Armies Act should beget
disturbances, yet should not they have stood still, because when the seed time
is come, we must not observe the wind.

But these Answers reach not the Objection, as it is laid by me, and should
have been laid by him which condemns actions, grounded on such principles
which will bear out other persons of strength, in wicked and State confounding
actions: The ground of this action in the Army was necessity, whereof
themselves are Judges; for it appeaes not to others: But if necessity be a
sufficient warrant to disturb Authority in legal ways; and the Parties in
whom Power is, be Judges of this necessity: By this any Party of Power may
justify themselves to men in disturbing Governors, whether the Party be
Royalists, Papists, or Athiests: That plea would have served the Northern Army
if it had marched up against the Parliament, as well as the present Army did, or
the Apprentizes as well as them, they might have pretended necessity, and been
judges in their own case; ex veris nil nisi verum, nothing but truth will
naturally flow from true principles: Therefore the ground of the Armies Act was
a false principle, because it will bear false conclusions; nay further, if
necessity may dispense with Laws, and the Actors be judges; what if the
Levelling Part of the Army should have further designs then the Moderater Part,
and the heads of the Moderate Party stand in their way, may not they take up
this plea, and without Law, or legal process tollere e medio take them out of
their way? yea, then what bar is left against Jesuitical King-killing by
assassinates.

Sect. 2.
Nor will this be taken off by what he says Thirdly, Page 36.37.
that where there is not a concurrence of the same circumstances formally and
equivalently, there can be no place for exemplartnesse; for we speak not now
of the legitimacy of actions in the sight of God only but men also. We are to
provide for things honest in the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. 2 Cor. 8.21. And
if there be the same pretenses not to be disproved by men, which (they cannot
be) if they must be judges of them, who carry the long sword, Those actions
which are the same in external, though not in real circumstances, shall be as
impleadable by men.

Sect.
And there is yet less sense in his fourth answer, That it is not likely that
action should breed disturbance, that was done in due order to prevent occasion
and opportunity of disturbance etc. For what if they that leveld this shaft at
this mark, were unskilful Archers, may they not shoot quite wide the mark
they aim at, and hit a friend instead of the butr? I am sure they have been
most of them but little used to the bow of Politics, and what if the Scene
change? May not the present Army degenerate, (no man can say they are stable in
their Princiciples) and then will not this plea of necessity fit their hands
for worse changes, if worse can be? I am sure it has once served their turns,
to comply with the King against the minds of the Parliament, and now to
imprison Parliament men, and to threaten the destruction of the King, and who
knows what design it may carry on next? And is not this course a means to
irritate an opposite party, and who knows where God may cast strength? and
then what a gallant plea is here for them, Qu^dlibet audendi? adventuring upon
any thing.

Sect. 4.
Lastly he argues, 37.
that if that action of the Army is not disproveable by any likelihood of evil
that it may bring upon this Kingdom hereafter, no more then preservation of a
man from imminent death is reproveable, because by it he is occasionally
exposed to dye another time. There were something in this, if there were any
iminency of death over our Nation; but this is denied upon better grounds, then
they can give to the contrary, and that by those that are the legal judges of
it, which the Army was not. You add, they who conceive the Army had better
have sat still for fear of after disturbance, plead as if a man shall
counsel a friend dangerously sick, not to use a Physician, because if he do
recover, his recovery might prove an occasion of more sickness afterward. But
this answer has wit without reason; for first, it presupposes that to be
sickness of the Commonwealth, which indeed was good Physic for her recovery.
And secondly to make the similitude hit, the Physic that is dissuaded, must be
to have an influence by the hazardous cure of one malady, to have procured
more. And truly I should not think him mad but wise, that should dissuade such
Physic; nor is the example of Hezekiah any better, that he was to be
thankful for his recovery, though he were to dye fifteen years after. For
first it runs upon the former false supposition: And secondly that which
recovered Hezekiah, was not the cause of his death afterward. But here it is
objected against the medicine that he says revives, that it will have an
influence to kill afterward. Nay, after a pretended cure, that medicine which
he says revives, is not like to preserve long, not fifteen years, nor
fifteen months; for where there is one in the Kingdom that accounts this act
of the Army medicine, it is conceived there be an hundred that count it a cup of
poison and so to be broken: And what a Paroxysme this is like to beget shortly
in this poor Kingdom, let the prudent Reader judge.

CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1.
Master Goodwin proceeds to a sixth Objection, counted he says by some
impregnable; It is taken from Romans 13.1.2. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers; for the powers that be, are ordained of God. He therefore that
resists the powers, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist
shall receive to themselves damnation. And this I doubt not will yield an
Argument too hard for Master Goodwin to answer, or else sure all Protestant
Divines have been much mistaken: It may be formed thus.

Whosoever resists the higher powers, resists the Ordinance of God and
receive to himself damnation. The Army in secluding and imprisoning Parliament
men did resist the higher powers; therefore thereby they did resist the
Ordinance of God, and receive to themselves damnation. For the minor, Master
Goodwin will not deny but the Parliament are higher powers, to which the Army
are to be subject. This he says he has considered in the second objection,
yet because he would give surplusage in such urguments as pretend to Scripture,
he will take it in hand again; let us see whether he can acquit himself
better then he did before.

And first he presents us with a distanction between the power and the abuse
of the power; the abuse of the power is not of God, page 38.
and so the resistance of that not forbidden nor damnable. Now that the Army
did only resist the abuse of the power (he says) he has proved in his book:
And I reply, that it has been as often disproved in my Answer. Again, this
distinction between the powers, and abuse of powers, is to be taken with
caution, or else it may deceive. Mr Buroughs his distinction in his Lord of
Hoasts page 32. contains better divinity, which is between the commands of
abused anthority, and the commands that are from the wills of men in authority.
That is abused authority when those to whom power of making laws does belong,
shall make evil laws; in this case there is no help but passive obedience or
flight, until some way be taken to rectify the authority that is abused
(that is disannulling those evil laws) but when men that are in authority
command any thing out of their wills etc. So that in his judgment abuse of
authority being legal, is to be borne with patience, not resisted by violence.
And indeed if we consider that these powers were in St. Paul's times Heathens,
and how bloody their laws were against Christians, and how impious they were
in many other things, one might judge it had been sitter (after Master Goodwins
light) to have taught them his new doctrine of resistance, rather then to have
pressed subjection on them. Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, the laws of the
land the rule of it, while it keeps within that sphere; though the laws be
corrupt, the Magistrate is no tyrant; so he is a power ordained of God, and we
are to be subject in obeying or suffering, but may not resist.

Sect.
He adds, page 35.
it is manifest that they did not resist Parliamentary power because this power
remains quiet and indisturbed: but is he in good earnest? Is not Parliamentary
power a power represence of the whole Nation? Does it remayn undisturbed when
so great a part are secluded, and so many thereupon think it unlawful for them
to handle the affairs of the Nation without the concurrence of their fellow
Trustees, that as they say ordinarily, searce a sixth part of that number that
ought to sit, meet in the House? Secondly he says, that they have care to
settle Parliamentary power on better terms. Yes by their new Model. What
disturbers of present Governance were over found without that pretense? but how
few if ever any, effected it?

He objects against himself, That the Parliamentary pawer is under force now.
He answers, That they are no more under force now, then they were before the
Army secluded the Members. I answer, Why is that which he calls Parliamentary
power free from force now, but because they act after the Armies misguided
fancy? but should they cross them in their Idol Design, does Mr John Goodwin
think they would be more exempt from One Parliament man told me, that as he was
coming from the House the day after the seizing, one of the Soldiers cried
room, room, another said knock him down; so he never came there since. Was
not he forced a way? And are not many m^^^ (not of their principles* kept away
in like manner? And is the Parliament free from force*
force, then their brethren now secluded? why does he then trifle so? And it is
palpably false, That the Parliament now is not more under force, then it has
been for two years by reason of tumultuous engagements; for though there was
one unhappy tumult soon appeased, there was no other tumult so near them that
threatened them other ways then with desertion in affect on, whereas now they
are secluded the House and imprisoned.

Sect. 3.
But Master Goodwin proceeds the Ordinance of God in Magistraticall power, is
the adequate foundation whereon obedience to it is to be built, and he intent
of magistraticall power is the good of those that are subject to it. Therefore
there is no subjection commanded of God to any higher power, further or
otherwise then they act, and quit themselves in due proportion of the good of
men. I answer the conclusion here inserd is point-blanke to the plain word of
God; for the power of a Master over a servant is a power ordained of God, and
the Apostle Peter directs servants to be subject not only to the good and
gentle, but to the froward; for it is praise worthy to suffer wrongfully, 1 Pet.
2.18.19. and why this should not hold in office powers; I shall expect a solid
reason from Master Goodwin, till then his premises must pass for false with
me, because his conclusion is contrary to express Scripture, and he knows ex
veris nil nisi verum. And me th^nks it is strange to see what difference there
is between the new light and the old: The Apostles whom Christ Jesus made the
infallible lights of the world, were most careful to warn Christians, that
they should not suffer at evil doers, but as Christians, 1 Pet. 4.15.16. But
new (...) tells us that we need not suffer but when we are evil doers; for if
the powers molest us in good, they are abused, decline from their ends, so we
owe them no subjection, but may resist. But the Apostles had the spirit of
truth, and those that dissent give heed to seducing spirits. 1 Timothy 4.1
The truth is because Magistracy is an Ordinance of God appointed for the good
of men, though they through weakness do miscarry, yet so long as they act as
Magistrates, that is, legally, we are not to resist them, because they have
Gods Ordinance upon them. And utable to this was the doctrine of Pomitive times
to be read in the legible characters of their glorious sufferings; and
therefore sit seems they so understood St. Paul and St. Peter.

Sect. 3.
He adds lastly, That the resisting of the higher powers here condemned, is not
detaining men in authority by strong hand from doing mischief etc. but
detaining them by strong hand from going on in their Office, is the resistance
condemned, which the Army did to the Parliament men. (...) says Beza, is
verbum militare, the original is a military word, and therefore the Soldiers
restraining the Members as Soldiers in a warlike posture, did resist in the
exact propriety of the word, But says he, It is either refusing obedience to
their lawful commands, which he ascribes to Paraeus: but he abuses Paraus, if
he make that all that Paraus thinks is intended there, for he affirms,
Christianos non minus quam alios quoscunque potestatibus subjectos esse debere,
non tantum fidelibus, sed infidelibus, quales tunc omneserant: non tantum
placidis and aequis, sed etiam difficilibus and iniquis; Christians no less
then other ought to be subjest to the powers, not only when believers, but when
infidels, as all the powers then were; not only to the pleasing and equitable,
but also to the froward and injust. And what Master Goodwin cites out of
Parous, That every disobedience is not to be accounted Rebellion or
resistance, but only that which is practiced out of malice contrary to the
Laws, is true; but helps not him, but is only suitable to Mr Buroughs his
distinction, between the Authority of Magistrates, that is, when he acts
legally, and his will; disobedience, to his will, is not condemned but to his
Authority, that is his legal will: Again, if we disobey out of conscience, but
submit to suffer, and be not carried with passion to oppose, we do not rebel.
The latter thing which you cite out of Pareus, will stand you in no more stead:
That if a Tyrant set upon a private man at a Robber, etc. he may defend himself
from him (in case of no other means of escape) as against an ordinary Robber;
for in that case a Tyrant acts not legally, and his will, not his authority is
resisted.

But Mr Goodwin adds another sense out of Calvin, Page 41.
That by resisting it meant a completting and attempting to shake off the yoke
of all obedience to the Magistrate: But he abuses Calvin and the Reader, if he
set down that as the full of what Calvin thinks is forbidden; whereas he makes
that only the scope of the place to be the preventing such a tentation, to
which he shows it is likely Christians might be subject: But upon the place
delivers Doctrine as contrary to Mr Goodwins, as light to darkness; for faith
he, on Verse. 3. Caterum hic de vero and quasi nativo Magistratus officio
loquitun, a que tametsi non ^aro degenerant qui principatum tonent; nihilominus
deferenda est eis obedientia quae principibus debetur: Nam si malus princeps
flagellum etc. But the Apostle here speaks of the true, and at it were native
Office of a Magistrate, from which although they degenerate, which hold the
Principality; yet nevertheless; the obedience which is due to Princes is to be
given to them, for if an evil Prince be a scourge sent of God, Page 41.
etc. But you add, The Army did not in what they did, refuse to obey any
commands of their Superiors; false: The remaining Members in the Commons were
their Superiors; and their demands of their Members imprisoned twice by their
Sergeant, were commands disobeyed by the Army; You say also, They refused not
giving satisfaction to the Law by refusing to suffer any punishment;
Ridiculous: What Magistrate will attempt their punishment? Yet we shall see how
Mr Goodwins words will hold, when Mr Prynne brings his action of false
imprisonment against them.

But you have another clinch out of Calvin; he says, say you, but you tell us
not where that the Apostle speaks of powers in the abstract, not of the persons
of Magistrates at all, otherwise then he uses his power in due order. First,
this is flat contrary to that which I cited out of Calvin, That the place
teaches Obedience to Princes though they degenerate; therefore sure you abuse
Calvin: And Beza (that is not used to differ from Calvin) says. Potestatis
nomine este, tropice intelliguntur, qus sunt in illis dignitatibus cons^^tuti,
ut (...) have subjectione in i^sis dignitatibus habend (...) ^^^^msi
indignisint qui eo sunt evecti: By that name of powers, they are tropidully
understood, which are lac^d in those dignities, that we ^ay know this
subjection is to be given to the Powers, though they are unworthy that are
advanced to them. Besides, all that can be hinted in the name of Powers so
often used, is but according to the distinction between the will, and Authority
of the Magistrate for conscience sake, further, then it is clothed, with
Power, that is, legally, and that is plainly the inraning of Pareus cited by
you, He names Powers rather then Kings and Princes, for in the persons vices
(...) causes of disobedience are found; therefore he would have the Powers
different from the persons. That is, their corruptions will put them on to seek
to have their will a Law, and their Power extends no farther then Law, nor
further are we bound to obey. But what need we stand upon this term any
longer, since S. Peter expressly mentions the persons both of the King, as
Supreme, and all that are in Authoty under him? Therefore Mr Goodw. without
just ground, Limits the subjection to Magistrates only, while they act
regularly, and with a single eye on procurement of Good. Though I doubt not but
our Parliament men feised for endeavoring agreement with King, were both
regular in their way and aims: I may conclude therefore, for all Mr Goodwins
sleek Apology, the Armies forcible Act upon the Parliament stands convict of
grievous guilt, and yet we see the old adage ^^ue. Durum telum necessitas; for
behold that Army, that has so often prevailed against the sharped weapons of
their Enemies, fallen and expiring in their honors, vanquished by this one
poor dart of pre^ended necessity.

And yet this Act of theirs, that is so unwarrantable in it self, is made much
more abominable, by the intention of it, which the issue discovers; for its
evident it was to make a Party, to proceed to the deposition and destruction of
the King, if God prevent them not: A thing directly contrary to their sworn
Allegiance, to the Doctrine of the Church of England, to which they are also
engaged by Protestation, to the constant Profession of the Parliament in
general; their partakers in their Apologeticall Declarations, and Amongst
wh^^^ Mister (...) in his Anti cavalierisme has spo (...) as plain and
sensibly as any, That it is a just Prerogative of Persons of Kings to be secure
from the violence of men in what causes soever; and their lives to be as
consecrated corn, meet to be reaped and gathered only by the hand of God
himself: with other words which may be seen: (...) sent unto him by a learned
godly and ^orthy Knight, Sir ^ra. Nethe^sole.
Books whereby they engaged many people in their quarrel, who will now detest
the present Act, the more because they have been made somewhat to contribute to
it, by the former hypocrifie and present treachery of others. And this also
heightens the injury of the Armies Act, that they should exclude the Trustees
of so many Shieres, Cities and Burroughes, when a thing of so great a
concernment to them, as the life of their King is to come in question; is this
justice? If their Trustees be degenerate, should they not have leave and time
to have chosen other before such a matter had been taken in hand? For that of
Aquinas you cited to no purpose, page 15. will not take place here neither; for
you confess their choice was good, but the men are degenerate. I may therefore
conclude, little reason had Mr Goodwin to conclude his Book with such
hyperbolicall (that I say not blasphemous) flattery, as to compare so sinful
an Act of the Army, to the sufferings of Jesus Christ to save a lost world etc.
But the conclusion suits with the premises both Popish; for its the manner of
Papists to extol their assassinates, so they do it with a good intent
adificandicausa, and in case of necessity to save the lives, or prevent the
ruins of many Catholics. And I now seriously propose it to Mr Goodwin and his
Associates, Whether the nec^ssity harpt upon, be any other then danger to a
sort of people in the land, that out of pretended new Light, would live exempt
from the ordinary and received rules of Government. Danger I say to such, lest
they should meet with trouble; loose those preferments and that Ruledome that
they draw, and many times usurpt to themselves in Parliament, City, Country,
by the Power of the sword entrusted to more Public ends. If this be the
necessity, as there be hints many, that it is: How much more suitable were it
for men of conscience, not to disturb the Treaty for Peace, but interpose in it
for their own Interest? And if they think exemption from the coercieve Power of
the civil sword in matters of Religion be a native Liberty of Christians: Let
them desire it may be debated freely, before a free Parliament; and if we
convince not the impiety and iniquity of it, let them carry it. If they fall
short in that, yet whatever indulgence may be consistent with duty to Truth,
and the peace of the Church will never be denied them. Oh! did any relenting
appear to procure return from those irregular ways, how would all godly
hearts embrace them with joy, looking on them in their irregularities past, as
men under a strong tentation, and with consideration that they also may be
tempted. But if they be resolved, that what they have usurpt they will hold, I
hope I shall no^, I am sure, I need not envy their slippery places; for when
they have done Gods whole work on those under their oppr^ssive power, I am
confident God will visit the fruit of the great hearts of this aspiring
Faction, and the glory of their high looks.

DEO GLORIA.

FINIS.

