EXCEEDING GOOD NEWS FROM Beverley, York, Hull, and Newcastle.

With the valliant Acts of Sir John Hotham over the walls of Hull against the
Kings forces, and how he has taken Ten Captains and Cavalleres prisoners that
were going to Barton in Lincolneshire.

And how Sir John Hotham gave command to pull the Mayors Gown of Hull off from
his back, and set a guard about his House.

As also how Sir John Hotham gave command to burn the Houses that stood
betwixt the Kings forces and Hull, least any of the Kings forces should shelter
themselves, and so to assault the Town.

London, Printed for I. T. July 20. 1642.

From Beverley near Hull Saturday the Sixteenth of July 1642.
Noble Sir,
AFter the tender of my service, I recommend unto you an Abstract of such
occurrances as has passed in these parts, during his Majesty's Blocking or
beseiging of the Town of Hull, wherein you shall be informed of nothing but
the truth: also I shall give you a short narration of some perticulars from
York this last week.

Saturday being the ninth of July, Diverse Captains and other officers being
Rebels in Ireland, and lately taken by some Scottish forces there under the
Command of Colonel Montroe was sent over into England, and conveyed from
Sheriff to Sheriff, and so brought to the King at York, This day was they
sent for by his Majesty, who begged for pardon, but the King would not grant
it, but presently gave command they should be sent to the Parliament. The
Duchess of Buckingham also is at this present in York, to beg pardon for her
Husband the Earl of Antrim in Ireland, taken prisoner likewise by the said
Colonel Montroe, but as yet we hear not how she speedes.

This day Sir John Hotham sent to diverse inhabitants living without the gates
of Hull, near unto Beverley gate, to depart from their houses, with their
goods, necessaries, and housholdstuffe, profering to receive them into the
Town, or else to go to such friends as they had, whereupon their departure,
he burnt some of the said houses, and caused others to be pulled down, least
any of his Majesty's forces (who lies entrenched near Hull) should shelter
themselves, and so assault the Town, it being a Maxim in war (especially in a
Besieged place) to level and demolish all places that may prove Advantageous
to an enemy: As also to raise Batteries, and make such works as may stand for
their defense and security; Some difference this day has been betwixt Sir
John Hotham and the Mayor of Hull, who refused to assist him in defense of the
Town, whereupon he caused his Gown to be pulled over his head, and set a
guard before his door.

The King has a great strength both of Horse and Foot, whose forces are daily
augmented by diverse of the Gentry of the County of York, Lanceshire,
Cumberland, Westmerland, Northumberland, and of many other places, who
continually repair to Beverley, and strongly entrench themselves there, they
have made two or three works, and planted some pieces of Ordinance upon them,
which was taken out of the ship called the Providence, which came from
Holland with Ammunition to the King, and run ashore at a Town called Paul,
within five or six miles of Hull, they have labored continually to let out
the water our of the m^ddowes, which Sir John Hotham drowned, that thereby
their approach toward the town might be more secure and accessable, but all
in vain, for what was drayned out in the ebb of the Tide, was drowned again
at the flowing thereof.

Upon Sunday, July the tenth, Sir John Hotham shot continually into the Kings
works, and most part of the night, diverse great bullets being taken up near
the Trenches, but God be thanked not a man slain.

This day nine or ten Captains and other Cavalires were taken Prisoners by
Sir John Hotham, who were going over Humber to Barton upon the Coast of
Lincolneshir to animate that County or else to force them to assist the King
against the Parliament.

This Evening a Troop of Horse, Commanded by Sir Thomas Metham, and of my Lord
of Lindsyes Regiment sallyed out of their works toward Hull, where, in his
march, he caused 3, Windmills to be set on fire, but first turned out the
Millers, with their Wives and Children, and after retreated again to his
Quarters.

On Monday morning Sir John made diverse shot with great Ordinance out of the
Town, to clear the coast. Captain Ashburneham is here in the Kings Army, who
came over with my Lord Digby from Holland.

This d^y his Majesty removed from Beverley, to Doncaster, and so to Newarke,
conveyed by a Troop of great Horse for his Guard, set out by the County of
York: The Prince accompanied him, but the Duke of York returned back to
York: His Majesty has sent a Message to the Parliament, for the delivering up
of Hull unto him, before he prosecute any further, else he shall be forced to
reduce it to his Obedience, he has appointed the Parliament to meet him by a
Committee at Beverley on Friday last, it is thought he will return to York
upon Saturday.

TUESDAY, Sir John Hotham, confined the Major of Hull to his house, setting a
strict guard before his door. This day, a Petition from Holdernesse, was
delivered: to the King, Complaining of Sir John Hothams insolences done to
them, which his Majesty promised to protect against.

WEDNESDAY, it was generally reported that my Lord Digby was gone from the
King, toward Holland again, upon what occasion it is not certainly known;
but diverse reports come from the Court; that the King did not countenance his
coming over, but was displeased greatly with him, the Lords about the King was
discontented therewith likewise.

THURSDAY, News came to Beverley, that two great Demi Cannons and one whole
Cannon was planted at Barton upon Humber, by my Lord of Lindse^es direction.

This day came diverse graat horse to BEVERLEY from the West Riding of the
County: my Lord of Cumberland is made General, of the Kings Forces; His
Majesty's Proclamation was proclaimed in York this day, declaring his purpose
in beseiging of Hull, His Majesty's intention is to Block it up, both by Sea,
and Land; and to keep all provision from it, and so starve them out; which by
land I am persuaded he will accomplish, if not releived by shiping at Sea.

FRIDAY, a Warrant under his Majesty's Broad Seal, came to York, for the
erecting of a new Mynt there, some Commissioners appointed for the same, came
to veiw the place, where the old Mynt stood, which is now in Sir William
Saviles possession, near the Minster, where it appears money was coined in
Hen. 8. Reign.

This is all I can impart unto you for the present, so wishing a happy peace
betwixt King and Parliament, that thereby the distractions of this Kingdom
might be removed; I take my leave and Rest.

Yours to Command, T. G.
Beverley, July 16. 1642.
To the Honorable, William Lentall Esquier, speaker of the House of Commons in
Parliament.
Honorable Sir,
WE hold it our duties to tender you this short account of our Journey into
Worcestershire, which fell out to be very necessary and seasonable, for we
found by the way, and after our arrival here at Worcester upon Monday night
last (being the night before the Quarter Sessions) that great preparation had
been made for the Execution of the Commission of Array on this day, and great
distempers raised in the County, by the violent: prosecution of Master
Sherrington Talbott (whose high contempts and oppositions against the
Parliament shall be more particularly represented to you hereafter) giving us
just cause to believe that there was a design, hope, and probability, (with
reference to other parts adjoining) to have made this Country a place of
war; But (blessed be God) our coming down by the Command of the Honorable
House whereof we are unworthy Members, has wrought (we hope so effectually
that the Commission of Array was this day quite deserted by the whole County;
The Declarations of the Parliament most joyfully, and thankefully received, and
the minds of the People (which before were by mis-reports, and publications of
matters from York full of anxietie and trouble) are now (we believe) fully
settled, as may appear by this enclosed Petition, which in a very full, and
great Assembly as ever we saw at any Assizes, or Sessions, was by the Grand
jury presented to us, and the rest of the Justices with a great acclamation of
the company then present, and further intimations of ten Thousand hands more to
have been added to it, if time would have permitted.

Mean while Master Sherrington Talbott having the night before at his house
peremtorily refused to obey the arrest of the Messenger, as the messenger can
testify, with other his speeches and actions, and coming hither to this City
in a daring manner to have executed the Commission (finding his hopes fail,
and his apprehension like to follow) secretly fled away, and as we hear is
gone again toward York, with menaces in his mouth, leaving the Lord Dudley
(one of the chief Commissioners) to mannag the work, who being not seconded by
the Commissioners whom he expected (or any other) the same day quitted the
place, leaving the City and County (thanks be to God) in good peace and
quietness, wherein we hope by Gods blessing it will continue faithful, and
firm to the King and Parliament; and of other passages we shall be ready to
give the House a more particular account at our return, which we intend (God
willing) shall be very speedily. Mean while and ever with our due respects and
best service presented to you, we take our leave, and rest.

Your most humble, and affectionate servants, John Wild: Humphrey Salwey.

Wednesday, 13. Iulii, 1642. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

