A LETTER SENT From a Gentleman IN THE HAGUE, TO A Noble and Loyal EARL IN
SCOTLAND.

My dear Lord,
I Hold a very great Obligation to your fair opinion, that you dare so boldly
rely upon my weak, uncertain, and most unfixt judgment, as to make it the basis
and foundation whereon you have designed to build such noble resolutions as
shall render you to the world in all your actions glorious: This were, if
possible, to make me more your Lordships debtor, when in your high civilities,
and undeserved favors you have expressed your self a Tyrant, and have already
engaged me above my Abilities, or hopes to return the least satisfaction.
Without your commands, to which I owe a duty, and shall pay a reverence, I
should forbear to give you the present of my slender observation, and
inconsiderable knowledge, in which you will sooner meet a perplexity, then any
contentation. My ready obedience shall witness my respects, of which I can
give no other account, then that they are infinite.

My Lord, The eyes of all Christendom are intent and fixed on our young and most
hopeful King; he is the sole and Noble object of all men's thoughts and
expectations, and indeed, the most proper object of all Princes, whose
interests are so inextricably involved in his, that what is his cruel and
unjust Fate this day, by a sudden revolution may be theirs the next. Certainly,
It is not improvidence, but necessary prudence, to use their utmost endeavors,
and employ all their force to secure their own, when their Neighbors house is
set on fire: which they can no way better do, then by diligently attempting to
extinguish those flames, that so nearly and dangerously threaten them. If the
People, that Nobile sterquilinium, by an usurped power, will take into their
hands the public managing of Kingdoms, I know not what Government can be
either safe or lasting. When Monarchy, (under which we have flourished and
Prospered so many ages, and have been happy, to the wonder and envy of other
Nations) is supplanted and destroyed, our fundamental laws totally subverted:
when Kings are fotc't to render that account of their Actions before men,
before their subjects, which they owe to God alone and should not pay till the
last Audit; When they are sentenced and barbarously put to death; When the
encroaching sword controlls the awful Scepter, and Crowns (the glory of the
Kings head) are with contempt and scorn basely trampled under foot. Outrages so
horrid, that I abhor from my very soul the unworthy memory of them: the only
naming of them puts me into distemper, and my thoughts into a confusion I grow
enraged when I consider, how of the best of Kings, the best of (...), the best
of Saints, those Apocriphal Devils have made a cursed example without a
Precedent.

Who-ever shall revolve and search all the Registers of Antiquity, return to
the first Annals, and make the strictest inquiry into the Records of History,
shall never find that Justice did serve for a hand maid to (...) in a Murder
so inhumane, and so execrable; or that her sacred (...) and Power was ever so
blasphemed, that the most damnable impiety ^^^ginable should resume the title
of Righteous Judgment.

And that the most just and pious King, having acted nothing contrary to Law,
and being above Law, should be made subject to that Law, and suffer under a
mere formality.

My Lord, It is lost time, and no benefit to repeat past and so unpleasing
actions; it is high time to advise what is expedient and necessary to be done,
and since there is no remedy, no power to recall what is past presently provide
against future inconveniences. I shall freely communicate to your Lordship my
sense; and (if I understand any thing aright) what it is I conceive most fit
and just.

My Lord, I understand my self so well, as I shall not presume to advise,
conscious of my own weaknesses. Yet I know my self so well again, as I can
find no reason why I should despair so, as not to dare to inform. Information
is the life of Counsel, Counsel the life of a Prince: in the life of a Prince
how many are concerned? The King has now had time enough to consult with his
Melancholy, his Griefs must now yield place to his nobler Anger, his Majesty
grow austere, and put on just indignation. I would see those Blacks (sad
emblems of Sorrow) changed into revenging Scarlet, and the whole earth wearing
his purple Livery, dyed in the blood of persidious Rebels. Yet should the
inundation swell to that height, which might threaten an universal Deluge, it
would not suffice to wash away the stains of their black and detestable
Murder. No sacrifice can expiate and appease the incensed Deity, when innocent
blood spilt on the ground, can by no art be gathered up.

Revenge, Revenge is sweet! whose daily meditation is not Revenge, till he can
meet an hour and opportunity to breath i^ on those unparalled villains, he is
a Conspirator, he consented, and is guilty of the Kings Death and Murder. How
far short of his duty falls that Subject, that tamely spends and wastes his
strength in effeminate tears, whose Masculine vigor should be exhausted in
drops of blood? I would choose to avenge; yet I cannot choose too but bemoan so
dear a loss.

My Lord, I am confirmed in the same opinion, in which your last Consultations,
and your Lordships most answerable reasons did irresistibly engage me. I
conclude from those really true premises, the King must force his way to his
Crown in England through the heart of Scotland, it is most just and necessary
to reduce first to there due obedience that people that first and most unjustly
rebelled. The Question, and the Difficulty will be objected, which way? I
propose to my self but two* either by force or Policy: the sowing of the Lions
skin to the Foxes, or the joining of a Man's head to the neck of a horse, is not
a third distinct, but rather a conjunction of both policy and force in one,
where singly they come short of there expected operation: the nimblenesse, and
dexterity of the one quickens and spirits the powers of the other. Policy and
reason serve for a bridle to restrain and curb Force, when it grows too
refractory and headstrong. If Policy prevails in the purposes of the King
[policy is a kind of beating the Bush, while the Birds fly away and escape, for
they are too old to be caught with Chafe, and too strong to be held with
lymetwigs.] The King must then send an address to the House of Parliament that
defiled Cage of all manner of unclean fowls, and if he will ever rightly
understand the true state of that Kingdom, he must employ men able and
faithful of his own.

I remember well, what I heard long since the Earl of Dorset tell the late
King, [of ever blessed Memory] that, had he sent an Englishman into Scotland,
to negotiate his affairs there, when he commanded the then Marquis of
Hamilton, he had perfectly understood the real condition of that Kingdom, and
happily prevented the ensuing calamities of all.

If not impossible it is very improbable that ever the King shall come to a
full knowledge of Scotland, while he imployes Scotchmen into there native
country, where there proper and indeed all there interest lies. [Which very few
men do, and those find it very hard too to divest themselves of their own
interests, and lay them aside.] There Allies, there Estates, there Friends
there one thing, or another, abates there Zeal to his Majesty's service, what
earnestnes soever they put on for a disguise.

But this is that which most dwells with me I am so blind, I cannot see how it
is safe for the King to trust men that are privy to his designs here, and have
so great relation to Scotland: whither or no [for fall back fall edge, they
will provide for their own preservation] will not they [which hitherto has
been constantly, practiced,] conceal something from both, that neither the
King, nor his Subjects of Scotland shall come to a right understanding of each
other* they themselves shuffling and dealing will know how the Cards go, and
will suit their game accordingly. This benefit the King will receive by
employing English, He shall be certain to know faithfully what he must trust
to; and in extremities it is a singular good, to know the worst of ills. Which
way soever his Majesty's Counsel shall incline, the sending to them will be no
Remora to his other resolutions, for he may, and must prepare for action
howsoever.

If the King resolve [as I know not how he better can] to make use of his
power, and force them to the obedience, from which they are fain, My Lord, you
understand well, who must do his business, and beat their Apostasy, into
duty and performances: not they, who Traitorously presumed to take the Crown
from hi^ Ma^esties head, and Rebelliously entrencht on his Sacred authority but
those who would have set, and held it on. Not they, who to prosecute I know not
what private, sinister, and unhansome ends, publicly repented of having served
the last Sainted King of Sacred memory, in the just preservation of his Royal
Person and duest Prerogatives: not they, who in his Majesty's greatest
exgencies, and necessities, not only deserted his employments but as if that
had not been enough, entered into a confederacy with his severest and most
Barbarous enemies: Not they, who to show their power in one kingdom, weakened
and ensebled the strength of two and impoverished the Kings friends; to enrich
his enemies: Not they who led out Freemen in Scotland, to render them Prisoners
in England, and slaves to Foreign Countries. I have no F^^th ^n Covenants, nor
will I ever more trust the Oaths of perfidious and Perjurd me^. I will ^epose
more confidence in one excommunicated Christian then in a legion of Heathnish
Covenanters. Till this time I never thought excommunication a blessing When
Allegiance is there crime and obedience the cause why they are excluded the
Pale of there reformed Church. I shall look, and hope for salvation without it,
and a little doubt theirs that are within. Let me live and dye with those noble
Souls that to save their honors, have with those bad bold men, lost there
Titles. They are rich and happy though robbed of all it was possible to take from
them. They are honorable although degraded, and have good right to there Coats
and Honors, what usurping Covenanter soever and unjust pretender swell in the
borrowed robes of their untainted Titles

My Lord, i^ did not a little please me, after their several mockfasts in
Scotland, to see the very common people as if they were undeceived, entertain
the Covenant with scorn and laughter, in the very Churches: so ridiculous and
horrid a thing did it seem to them, for any to offer that again which they had
broke the first time, and intended nothing less then to keep the second. I
pity there present and sad condition, which coming but lately from thence, I
cannot so soon forget: which to repair I am confident they would now prefer
the Kings interest, to any whatsoever.

My Lord Your Lordship knows, that I know their several Factions and their
Fractions: Kind Heaven multiply their divisions. Divide and impera, was said of
old, and I could wish upon as good grounds the Heads of those Factions were
more heartily together by the Ears, that they were at that distance* I could
from my heart wish their heads from their shoulders. Till some of their heads
shall be divided from their bodies, it will be hard to divide the body of that
Kingdom, from those Heads. I fear Combination, and suspect Conspiracies amongst
those Covenanters. It was much the discourse before I left those parts there
had been meetings in the night, [the aptest season for dark intentions] between
the greatest seeming adversaries and irreconcilable. Let them design in
Hollowest Caverns of the Earth, and plot in deapest Hell, from whence they
borrow there black Counsels, whose Actions will not endure the light, whose
professions differ from their Actions who draw near to the King with their
lips, when their hearts are far from him. I dread that Monster worse then the
Nightmare, which these Nocturnae lucubrationes valde p^riculosiores, will in
time, if not prevented, unseasonably produce, when they blush not to fit in
Counsel by night, that are ashamed to be seen converse in the day, when the
Sun would blush to discover them together.

My Lord, Were it not strange for me to tell and you to believe, that yet the
Covenant is urged to the King That fatal Covenant which his Glorious Father,
of ever blessed Memory, with honor unexampled, and a conscience inviolable,
rejected and contemned. Away with the Covenant, that mere stalking Horse
trained up to betray and make a prey of poor innoeent and unwary simplicity:
What vizard must they put on, what confident face, that offer to the King or
expect he should keep, what they themselves have most wilfully violated? I
blush for them that they are no whit out of countenance, to present so unsavory
a dish to his Princely Palate of which many having furfetted they disgorged it
before, and have not themselves tasted in the second course: who having been in
the unlawful the dismal engagement are debarred from participating without
publik repentance made: Well may they give satisfaction to there Kirk and
retake that precious morsel, the Covenant it self can give none to the King,
when he shall consider the ruins of his Kingdoms, reflect on the loss of his
Crown, and meditate on the Barbarous murder of his innocent Father, sadly
occasioned by their damnable league, and cursed Covenant, against which he is
neither Loyal, nor Religious, that enters not his protestation.

My Lord, their remains one thing I shall acquaint your Lordsh with, which
se^i^usly I grieve to write: there are who whisper unprofitable and dangerous
delays in the Kings care insinuating what a longer time may bring forth.

I should be wondrous sorry to see the old but pregnant Mother of truth
delivered of more Monsters and prodigies: I fear all will miscary if there
appear no likelihood of quick and sudden action, and our big expectation, and
seeming hopes will conclude in a tympany. I fear ill designs and worse
intendments, when tedious advise, and lingering counsel serve for no other end
then to retard execution, when long deliberations prevent necessary
performances and give his Majesty's enemies who are not wanting in Scotland,
opportunity to strengthen and corroborate themselves, and oppose him with
greater advantages principiis obsta, is sound advise when we sensibly find,
sero medicina paratur. The continuation of there practices wants nothing but
continuance of time to cement those deadly conspirators of both Kingdoms to
strongly, that I know not how many ages will suffice to dissolve them. They
will be so firmly linckt together, the King will find it a difficult work and
an uncouth labor to unrivit and break them in pieces: the Kings flownes when
danger and necessity urge, will add to them, and take from himself. How
providently do they begin to secure themselves by either securing the Royal
party, or forcing those, whose loyalty they suspect, and of whose disloyalty
they have not a perfect assurance, to give caution good security nor to
disturb the peace of there Sion. We may vainly flatter and fondly deceive our
selves with hopes from those Men who have taken off the heads of so many
gallant persons for no other cause, then that of the Kings, and there
faithfulness to his commands and service. And which is the most inhumane and
savage thing, sold there King into the Land of Bondage, to be cruelly oppressed,
and basely suffered him to be butchered, where a professed Hangman in that, then
themselves more noble disdaind the base employment. And both are rendered to
posterity memorable, only the Hangman takes place, as justly deserving the
pre-eminence; and I am confident there would arise a contention about his, were
some of them to be exalred. My Lord I wish it were as safe, as necessary for
the King to appear there in his Royal Person, and indisputable right. Or that
there were not a necessity for one of the Royal line. Certainly the presence
and Majesty of a King has at least such influence on rebels, that if it
terrify them not* it abates much of their pride and malice, many will readily
rise in arms to assist him that will not stir a foot to follow though the best
of their fellow Subjects. Carry what virtue soever a Commission can, it is
their vice among many others, they foolishly distinguish his Person and his
power and fondly believe, to justify there resistance that they rebel not
against the King when they fight against his authority. And albeit they cannot
deny, in the word of a King, against whom there is no rising, there is Power
many of them will oppose that power derived from him, that will not dare to
affront his person. So unwisely do they argue and dispute, his personal and
politic capacity a costly distinction. But how shall the King be entertained
in Scotland by those that so earnestly invited, and gave so full and hearty a
welcome to his most cruel enemy* would they not entreat the second time there
coming, to keep him company. False people in common civilities out done by a
Hangman, who in that one act, the not doing it expressed less of the slave, and
more of loyalty to the King then ever they had done in there counterfeit
pretenses. And ignoble shadows of faith and Allegiance.

This is the reason why many declare there dislike to that Nation and
anaversion to the Kings going into Scotland, providing merely for his safety
and their own; they are extremely unwilling he should adventure his Person,
and imbarke with those that had shipwrackt your Royal Sovereign: he is an
unskilful Mariner, or too bold and hardy that hazards the splitting of his
vessel against a discovered Rock, or running on ground on shelves and known
quicksands, where he is swallowed up unpittied. Really it is a high adventure,
and his Majesty enterpriseth a dangerous, and desperate voyage, when he goes to
harbor in Scotland. But when we discourse of crowns, and Scepters, and
regaining of revolted Kingdoms, and when he has nothing left him, but his
life (which Heaven preserve) to make himself, and his Subjects happy, who will
not hazard that, which will otherwise be spent under the degree of a Prince
heir apparent, and undoubted Successor to three potent Kingdoms.

In the persuit of private affairs, let who will stop, or desist, at pleasure,
as they find it most conducing to their advantages, and the attaining of their
proposed ends; in the progres to the recovery of an Empire, there is no mean
between the death of an enemy, and the life of a Prince. It was the Devils
doctrine, all that a man has he will give for his life. The gallant man
returns him the lie, who to save that life, will not loose his honor.

For the King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, to reside in Holland,
ubi precario regnatur, and aliena vivitur Quadra, is to go less then himself,
when his high attempts, and mighty Actions should proclaim to the whole world,
from what Royal and most renowned Ancestors, he is lineally descended.

My Noble Lord, how should we joy to view him on the head of a Puissant Army,
confronting the Eenmy, in that bold posture Lucan draws Caesar, when he courts
his metal'd Soldiers, Steeled with courage and resolution, Ita per ignavas
gentes, per inhospita Regna
Atque uno ferri motu prosternite Mundum.


I have as great regards to his Royal Person, as who bears the most but I know,

Non jacet in molli lecto veneranda Corona. The Gods sell all things to us
Mortals here below, at the price of labor and sweat, and sure they set Crowns
at a higher Rate. I would see him make the tributary earth his couch, and the
auspicious Heavens spreading there embrodered and spangled Cannopy over his
sacred Head. And when the busy Traitor and too troublesome Enemy will spare him
so much leave and leisure as to refresh himself, make the grass his Carpet and
the ground his table that was lately both his pillow and bed I would see him
cut out a way to his Crown through the bowels of his proud and rebellious
Foes. Heap up Piles of slaughtered Bodies and make there bleeding necks the
steps, by which he should ascend into his Royal Throne.

I would see him run the hazard of a War, and trust the propitious heavens with
the success. I know what share Fortune challenges to her self in every
Battle, and I would allow that Blind Chance, better Christians call it
Providence no more then what cannot be denyd. Not to trust, were to disparage
providence, not to believe it, were a piece of Atheism It were absolute madness
to imagine, and believe, that the justly provoked deity (against which the
bloudthirsty Murderers have opposd themselves and taken counsel together)
will not be severely avenged of them for the loud crying blood of there
Anointed. When with one eye I look down on there Diabolical proceedings
against so pure an innocence* my other exalted reguards just Heaven, that has
an eye to them sees all there follies and shall have them in derision I cannot
but smile when I seriously consider he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh
at their Calamity and mock when there fenres shall invade them like a furious
and Impetuous Tempest and there destruction violently swallow them up like a
whilewind. When but in equal balance I weigh the actions of these cursed
Pagans. I find no parallel but the Jews crucifying our Savior. There was
Christ sold and betrayed by one of his Disciples one yet sat at table with him
here his Anointed is bought, sold and betrayed by his followers, whom he had
embosomed; betrayed by those, that had fed at his table, had eaten there daily
bread at his bounty warmed them at his fires made hey in the sunshine of his
favors and had sheltered themselves from the violence of oppressors under the
shadow of his Kingly protection, there was Christ betrayed by one of his
counsel. Here was one, unus instar omnium betrayed by many of his privy
Counsel. The Band the Captains and Officers of the Jews came forth to take
Christ, as a thief with flave and swords. They hurry him from place to place.
How often have the Captains, Officers and thieves of this cursed Band, come out
against, King Coarles, the First. Charles the Great the Good, the First Great,
Good, King three Kingdoms were alone most happy in. They came not only with
staves and swords. But fire, bullets, and what ever deadly engines of War could
promise them, or procure his unhappy Death. From how many several Prisons did
they convey him. Changing only the Dungeon not his bad condition while he
himself stood constant to his own excelling goodness. If they took often
Counsel how they might slay our Savior preaching in the temple they have as
often meditated his fall and murder praying in his chamber. While the fall of
a roof, must lay a foundation for his ruin and death?

There was innocence slandered and accused by falf witnesses. For every one our
Savior had, our King had ten thousand. At last two falfe witnesses rose up;
but two? would suffice: a bloody Priest, and a thirsting Multitude. But how in
inumerable swarms did they rise against our dread Sovereign every one fixing
and leaving a poisonous and deadly sting behind! The Jews reviled, mocked
Christ, and spit in his face, what unheard of usage did the King groan under,
what horrid abuses contumelies, reproaches base aspersions were heaped on him
by these ungentile Devils, yet he opened not his mouth. There were soldiers
too, that Gaped on him, and spit on his Majesty's Face. Those men accused
falsely Jesus the Son of God* of Blasphemy. See here a God among the Sons of men
Blasphemed by falls Accusers. His sacred Name blasted with disdainful titles of
tyrant, yet never King more merciful, more just. Traitor, yet no Subject: and
faithful to his God. He never betrayed the trust received from him Murderer.
Yet who can lay innocent blood to his charge? The soldiers among the Jews cast
lots for his Garments. It was all our Savior had: the Jewish Parliament and
the Pagan Army have divided the spoil and amongst themselves shared his royal
inheritance with the fat of the land. And now there remains nothing worse to be
done then the bringing of our Savior to the cross and our Sovereign to the
Block whither he bore the cross of his Savior. There is a soldier ready with
a spear to pierce his sides, here stand soldiers ready with an Axe to strike
of his head: one fatal and cursed blow, ends both there lives: ^e joy in the
former; it was happy for us; grieve and mourn in this latter, it ws ill for us,
though for him happy. Christ sits at the right hand of the Father, and
certainly Charles sits at the right hand of the Son and both shall come to judge
the Quick and the Dead. If these men prosper and carry it to there Graves. I
shall renounce one Article of my Faith. There crimes are so new so horrid and
so great there can be nothing added to increase there number or power: or
render them to the world more odious and contemptible. I trust to see them like
the Jews sc^ttered and dispersed, and foorer expect the calling of the Jews.
then the conversion of these sinners. I look upon them as certainly they are,
Antichrist: and daily pray for there sudden downfall. I account the Jews
less Guilty* then they, while they crucified our Savior, not knowing he was
the Lord of life. Or acknowledging him there King. By how many oaths of
Allegiance Adamantine covenants in which they had desperately sworn, and
protestations and vows were they indissolubly tied to him, a^ there Lord and
King. Yet they have put him to death, and of all then Oaths and damned
Covenants kept but that one particular, of making him a glorious King.

My Lord, Pardon me that I forget my self, and from a Soldier I turn a
Preacher, it is a liberty that carries with it a Passport in the Age we live
in. I know better to handle my Arms then a Text; which were I to analize, the
Campane should afford a Pulpit: Rebels be the auditors which I would have
preach, and thundered into such a Fear and trembling they should not to have
patience to stay out half the Sermon which should be a lecture of Anatomy
delivered in bullets. Fire, and sword.

My Lord there is one thing which your Lordship must pardon me, it is this
tedious [call it what you please] work of superrogation, and as little
meritorious. I promised a letter and it is swollen into a Pamphlet, had it been
more neately dressed it might have found the easier excuse. If from the result of
so uneven, so disproportioned judgment you can collect the least satisfaction,
I shall pardon my self in that, I have been the less troublesome, and add no
more, then that there is not a person living more, My Lord,

Your Lordships faithful, and Affectionate Servant. R.G.


