THE GENERAL RESOLVTION Of the two Kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND,
CONCERNING, His Royal Majesty, the Prince, and the Evil Incendiaries which
are now about them.

As it was concluded on by the Lords and Council of both KINGDOMS.

Also His Majesty's Oath and Protestation at York, together with the Lords
also, June 19.

Likewise three Propositions concerning the Militia, declaring the Reasons why
it does belong to the Parliament for the Ordering of the same.

With the Votes and Resolution of both Houses of Parliament, concerning His
Majesty's last Writ.

Together with the several Reasons to prove that every man is bound to uphold
the Parliament against all Opposers whatsoever.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons that these particulars aforementioned be
printed and published throughout the Kingdom.

John Brown Cler. parl H. Elsing Cler. parl.

June 24. Printed for I. Tompson and A. Coe. 1642.

The Reason why the Subject is bound to obey the Command of the Parliament,
Voted,
That if in case of necessity, if his Majesty shall deny his assent, the
Ordinance agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, does obliege the People, and
ought to be obeyed, being warranted by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

Both Houses of Parliament has took into their serious consideration the
Occasion and Reason why the Members of the said Houses should absent themselves
upon their summoning in, Whereupon they has drawn up a Charge against them, and
are resolved that they shall pay 100 l. a man, and to be examined by the
Committee before the next sitting.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be printed and
published.

John Brown Cler Parl. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl D. Com.


The General Resolutions of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
concerning His Majesty, and the Parliament, and concerning the Kings Resolution
for the taking Arms.
AT this present it is not unknown to the King who has incensed Him against
His Parliament, and who have given Counsel derogatory to the Honor, and
destructive to the essence of all Parliaments, and to the Parliament this is
utterly unknown; Yet the King desires evidence of these things from the
Parliament: Nay, though he disavow the sheltring of ill Ministers, yet he
conceals such as have traduced, and slandered the Parliament in some things
notorioussy false; and yet to an ordinary understanding, it is the same thing
to conceal, as to shelter a Delinquent: and if it be below a King to reveal a
traiterous Incendiary, that has abused His ear with pernicious Calumnies, it
is below him too to leave him to Justice being otherwise revealed.

Here it is supposed that Parliaments may make an Ordinance contrary to Law,
Nature, Reason, Sense; and it is inferred therefore, That they are dangerous and
may bring the life and liberty of the subject to a Lawless, and arbitrarie
subjection; this supposition is inconsistent with one of the most sacred and
venerable pillars of all Law and policy; and yet here it is insisted upon, let
all Chronicles be searched, and let one Story be cited of any Parliament, which
did tyrannize over King and Subject, or ordain any thing to the mischief of
both; Yet Kings I think will not make the same challenge. the best of them have
done Acts of Oppression, and the Reasons are apparent for it; but no Reasons
can be given why Parliaments should usurp, or how they can usurp; yet the
Kings inference runs against all Parliaments: He does not say this Parliament
tyrannizeth, and therefore he resides from them, and pronounces their Votes
invalid, but because Parliaments may tyrannize; therefore they have no power in
their Votes at all, at any time whatsoever, further then the King ratifies them.

The Parliament says not so much; they say he is now seduced by wicked
Counsel, and therefore rejects their Requests, to the danger of the State.

In such Cases they conceive there is a power in them to secure the State with
out his concurrence: At other times when the Kings are not seduced, they ought
to do nothing without their consent.

Our Case is not as Scotlands were, for our malignant party is far greater then
theirs; yet both England and Scotland are resolved to assist the King and
Parliament against all such opposers, and will to the uttermost of their
Endeavors root out all such.

The question concerning the Militia is not to be put indifinitely, whether or
no the King ought to order the Militia in times of no extraordinary danger; our
case is now upon supposition, if the King in extraordinary danger will not
yield to such a Posture as the Kingdom thinks most safe, whether the Parliament
may not order that Posture of themselves, so the Parliament puts it. But the
King puts it thus. If the Parliament invades his power over the Militia
causelessly, whether they may not as well seize a any subjects Estates.

That question then which must decide all, is this, whether that Posture which
the Parliament chooses, or that of the Kings, be most safe for the Kingdom at
this time, and who shall judge most properly. Till now that the ancient pillars
of Law, and policy were taken away, and the state set upon a new basis, no
evil was to be presumed of the representative body of the Kingdom, nor no
Justice expected from a King deserting his grand Council, but now every man
may arraign Parliaments, no King was ever yet so just but that Parliaments h^ve
in some things reduced them from Error, nor no Kings so unjust that
Parliaments did seduce into Error, yet Parliaments are now charged of being
Enemies to Religion, Laws, and Liberties. And the King to preserve these
absents himself from Parliaments, but since we must dispute for Parliaments;
first we say they must in probability be more knowing then any other
privadoes; Secondly, in regard of their public interest, they are more
responsible then any other, and less to be complained of in case of Error.

Thirdly, they have no private interest to deprave them, nothing can square
with the Common Council but the common good, and if 500 of the Nobility and
Gentry should aim at an Aristocraticall Usurpation, or any other power of
oppression, they could never compass their ends, it were folly in them.

The Lords all subsigned a Protestation to the King, to obey no Ordinance of
Parliament that was contrary to the known Laws, and in particular that of the
Militia, till the Royal assent were given to it, and to stand for, and defend
the Kings person, etc. And His Majesty signed another to the Peers, and to
govern them according to the Laws, and to protect them, in whatsoever they
should lawfully do for their defense.

It was resolved upon the question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That
the Commission of Array for Leycester is against Law, and against the Liberty
and property of the Subject. June 20. It was resolved upon the question, That
all those that are Actors in putting of the Commission of Array in execution,
shall be esteemed as disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom, etc.

Ordered that this shall be printed and published through the whole Kingdom.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.


