GENERAL MASSEYS Bartholomew-Fairings FOR COLLONELL POYNTZ, AND THE LONDON
REFORMADOES.

man, in Cavalier-style clothes, holding a sword and lifting something from a
table

Printed in the Year, 1647.

GENERAL MASSEYES Bartholomew-Fairings FOR Collonell POYNTZ, AND THE LONDON
Reformadoes.
It Was then, when as the name of Masseys Force,
Called all the idle Reformad's to Horse.
And drew the Bacon-eating Cavaliers,
(By the convenient Handle of their ears)
To leave their pot and pipe behind, and come:
(Their Calve-skin Breeches turned into a Drum)
T'out-stinke our streets at London, when as I
(Being guilty found of too much honesty)
By two Malignants was, Conscience and Reason,
Betrayed t'an act of Virtue, then called Treason:
His brother Poyntz was strait informed, a youth,
With goodly goggel eyes and large wry mouth,
Is sent for me, -- He knocks at Door:
Who Is there,
A Friend:
Duns I defye you all. Come near!
The word scarce spoke, there comes one rushing in,
With a jolly red Nose, his Buffe was of the same skin:
What could one think this was? a monstrous creature
buried in pearls alive, whose Visage Nature
Broached in the wrong place; Faith, I took't for a Man
(Boldly I must confess) and thus began:
What would thou Friend what brought thee to this place
He answers me from the other side of his face;
You are a Tub-man Sir, and Rebel we
Are sent to fetch you to a new Army.
Good words my Friend if you or I must be
A Rebel, I some hope of Comfort see.
Your Mouth does just in the hanging posture stand:
With that his Brows fierce bristles startled, and
I yield up Sir, I Will go along with you:
Walk on;
Nay leave me in the Chamber though,
Good Lord, you are so complemental,
Down,
We go and both matched up into the Town:
And which way now?
Nay good Sir keep the Wall
Excuse me Sir;
Nay as I live you shall
Why it is the windy side, and credit me
Your strong perfumes make my head ache.
Thus we
Marched to the Round-Hall; where being straight let in
Such company, such smoke, such stincke, such dinne.
Such swearing did salute me, that I fell
On wondering how we came alive to Hell:
For this could be no less; on every side
Such sawcer-eyes appeared such horrid, wide,
And gaping mouths, such teeths, such flounsing hair,
Which you might see both in the Uan and Rear,
Besides each horne-pipe voice seemed to betray
Where good S. Dunstans Tongs had spoyld the way:
Happy the men must sight with these, thought I,
For they shall nothing but their backs epsy.
Six volley of Curses against Independents, here,
Went off for entertainment, and a Jeere,
Or two were past for Complement; but I,
Like a brave*suffering Man, passed silent by,
They spent themselves about me: One steps out,
And cries, have at the Sectaries; all the rout,
Clap hands to the Basket-hilt, and Draw, they cry,
Oh that we had the Independent Army by,
Out you damned Garlick-earing Rogues, Do You think
You don't already vent sufficient stink.
But you must call for those whose very Name
Will dye your Scarffes and Braeches of the same,
Three tedious hours amongst these hell hounds we
Bravely endured; when coming in we see
A Scarlet Reformado who scarce yet did know
Whether he against the Army fought or no;
Who had bin Scholar once (to our shame be it spoken)
Since a young Merchant, and since that time broken
Then damned to the service of the Rout did: He
Proffer his utmost pains to set us free.
I, though it vexed me, any of them should
Do ought which even Complement might call good
Yet had not so much valor to deny
Quarter, though from a want wit, willingly.
Accepting this their offer; thinking then,
The greatest good could befall innocent men,
Was to be soon accused: With that away
We went to the Bear where a great Elder lay;
Where by the Captain we were brought before
A veryer Beast then that which hung at door,
A strange fat unlickt, mall-fac'd fellow, who
Was Massey all ore, head, Bunch, back, belly too:
He hoped to be an Alderman, but into's skin
Beside the tallow, large guts crowded in.
He having tuned his pipes with six or seven
Good rattling Oaths, began to speak:
Fore Heaven
Gentlemen this is strange, By -- it is:
And if it were but my case as it is his,
(Meaning the Colonels) I Would hang you all:
For look you, Sir, if any Body shall
Abuse the Reformad's as some of you
May chance, and have witness of it too,
Judge me, confound me, if you had but don't,
The best amongst you should hear further on it.
But oh! these wrongs sat heavy on them when,
They should opposed the Army, their Ills then
Stuck fast and strongly to them on all parts,
And sent a ghastly trembling through their hearts;
Their own Spirits among them did possess
Their Coward hearts with thoughts of guiltiness,
And fear of Vengeance: And each good man's prayer
Whose blood they sought; flew strong against the^ there
And (...) Colonel whom a more sordid Fate
(...) so strong and fierce a hate,
My venerable Poyntz to whom we owe
A Jury trial, thou yet shall grow
More famous now (if once my Verses can,
Or those my Friends can make) thou shall b'a Man
Greater then Fate has made thee (if Ballets be
But capable of Immortality)
Children and Market-maids in aftertimes
Shall see thee dreft in most vile Tunes and Rimes.
And Alehouses as yet not built, shall see
Thy Picture pasted on their Mantle-tree:
Nere look to dye, thou shall be laughed at still,
Longer then Nashes Harvy, or Triplets Gill.
FINIS.

