A LETTER TO THE States General of the United Provinces, FROM Prince WALDECK,
Who Commands Their Army in FLANDERS: Giving an Account of the Happy Success
they had against the French Army, Commanded by the Marshall d'Humieres, on the
11/25 of August instant, 1689.
Published by Authority.
THis Morning a good part of your Lordships Army being gone to Forage, we had
news, that the Marshall d'Humieres with his Army, which he had reinforced some
days before with 6000 Men, was on his March, or which we immediately advertised
the Foragers by firing several pieces of Cannon, as had been agreed on. In the
mean time the Enemies Vanguard attackt the Village Forge, where 800 Men were
posted under the Command of the English Colonel Hodges, Lieutenant Colonel
Goes, and the Major of the Regiment of Hesse. This attack lasted about 2 Hours,
but our Men defended themselves very bravely, till Major de Roo (who was sent
to give notice thereof to the Lieutenant Generals Webbenum, the Earl of
Marleborough and d'Huby, who were with the Foragers and to bring them back)
came to their Assistance with some Horse; whereupon our Men seeing the whole
French Army advanced toward them, retired Fighting till they came to a Hill
near the Town of Walcourt, in which was posted a Batalion of Lunenburghers of
Linstan's Regiment, who were afterward reinforced with the batalion of Colonel
Holle. The French attacked the said Town very furiously with many battalions,
and several pieces of Canon, which lasted two hours and a half. Lieutenant
General Aylna advanced with 3 Regiments toward the Town, of which he detached
that commanded by Brigadier Talmash, and the Lieutenant-Generall the Earl of
Marleborough, followed with the Guard du Corpse, and two English Regiments. In
the mean time Major General Slangenburg, advanced with a Detachment of Foot to
the other side of the Town, which obliged the Enemy to retire in Confusion,
leaving behind them their Cannon and Ammunition, and a great many killed and
wounded, the number whereof is not yet certainly known, amongst which are three
Captains of the French Guards; and Monsieur d' Artagnan Commandant of the
Guards, with several others, are taken Prisoners. In their Retreat came two
Drummers from the Enemy, to desire a Cessation to bury their dead; who said,
That six Battalions of the Guards, who likewise made the Attack, were, for the
most part ruined. On our side none of any Consideration are killed besides
Lieutenant Colonel Graham of the English, the Major of the Lunenburgh
Dragoons, and a Captain Lieutenant: and a Captain, and some Foragers, were
taken: And in the Town there were very few killed or wounded. The French
retired to their Camp, and our Troops kept their Ground till Night. The Velt
Marshall Count de Nassau, with all the other Generals and Officers, behaved
themselves as could be wished: and all our Troops showed a great Courage and
desire to come to a Battle, and particularly the English, who were engaged in
this Action, behaved themselves very well, And a great Success might have been
expected had the Situation of the Country suffered us to follow the Enemy.

I Congratulate your Lordships upon the good Success of this Rencounter, which
h^^ fallen out so fortunately for your Arms, and in which the Enemy has been
forced to ^^tire. Praying God farther to Bless Your Lordships Arms and
Government: To (...) Protection I Commend You, and Remain

Your Lordships most hum^^^ and most obedient (...) G. Frederick P. (...)
From the Camp near the Castle of Til, Aug. 25. 1689. late at Night.
Other Letters from the Army say, That there were 2000 of the Fr^^^^ (...)
wounded.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


