THE FIRST LECTVRE, Of an Introduction to COSMOGRAPHIE, (Which is a
description of all the WORLD) read publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbier His
ACADEMY, AT Bednall-Greene.

LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, and are to be sold by Hanna Allen at the
Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

The public Lecture of an Introduction to Cosmographie (which is a
description of the whole World) read public at Sr. Balthazar Gerbier his
Academy at Bednall Green.
Cosmographie is the description of the Celestial and Elementary Region.
IN the Celestial region, we learn to know Heaven; its matter, its quality,
the Planets, their motions, their order, etc.

In the Elementary, we see that most admirable establishment of the Elements,
who by their unequal proportioned assemblage do compose so many sorts of
mixtures as we see here below.

This will be held forth with their qualities, properties, and situations.

And we shall see in that which serves for a Center to the universal world,
store of satisfying remarkable and necessary things, viz.

1. The proofs of its Circular form; 2. Which of the Earth or of the Water,
does pass the one or the other in quantities. 3. The off springs of Springs
and Floods. 4. The smalnesse of the Terestriall Globe; not only in comparison
of Heaven; but also of the Sun and of the Stars, how the said earth can be
measured in its superficie and Soliditie.
Then we shall make the description of the Circles, which must be imagined to
be in the Heaven; to the end, we may learn the course of the Asters* and the
effects which we feel of them; as their rising and their going down: The Summer
and Winter, the long and the short days.

The Solstices and the Equinoxes, from whence proceeds the different
Constitutions of the Earth; And thus many things, the curiosity whereof is
extremely commendable, prove to be altogether necessary to those that do
desire to pass for men of knowledge and understanding.

And to make an end in our Sphere; we shall achieve with a Lecture on the
Meteors, wherein all the impressions which are made as well of Fire as of Air,
and of Water in the high, middlemost, and low region of the Air shall be
clearly brought and reported unto us.

That is to say, whence proceeds, in the high region of the Air, the
impressions of Fire viz. D^rds, Lances, Flying-stars and Commets which in the
Heaven seem sometimes to be all on fire; the lightning thunders, and
thunderbolts in the midlemost and in the lowermost; the wilde-fires,
glowworms, etc.

Next to this, the impressions of the Air, as the Winds, Storms, and
Whirle-windes; those of the Waters, as the Clouds, the Rayns, Snow, and Hail,
both made in the middlemost.

Then we shall proceed to other impressions, concerning that Crown of splendour
which is about the Sun, the Rainbow; and then we shall descend to know,
whence proceed Fogs, Dews, Frost, and Ice.

We shall end with the three kinds, Mineral, Vegetall, and Animal; seeing in
the Mineral, the generation of the Minerals in the bowels of the Earth, their
qualities and allyances; and how they are seven, correspondent to the seven
Planets. Then the Stones of all kind, and the Saps condensing in the Mines, as
Vitriol, Alum, etc.

In the Vegetall gender, we shall consider the nature of Plants, their
faculties to put forth, and to multiply by their seed; then we shall conclude
by the Animals, which besides the Soul and Vegetating faculty and putting
forth, have more and above the sensitive, which gives feeling and motion, and
are much above the Plants; all their Organes and natural parts being much the
more perfect.

But there are of two sorts of them, the Irrational and rational: Beast and
Man.

We shall leave the Beast to speak of reasonable.

Let us then say, that Man more worthy then all things has been created by
God; for that by his word all things have been made, Fiat Lux, Genesis 2. the
light has appeared; Formavit Dominus Deus hominem de Limo Terrae, and
inspiravit in faciem ejus Spiraculum vitae, and factus est homo in animam
viventem; and has animated him and indoved, besides the precedent said
qualities, with an intelectuall Soul, whereof depends the understanding and
the will.

Now let us consider I beseech you, how the mercy of God has always increased
some perfection of degree in each body, to make in man a fullness of the
perfection of all his works; and ha^h set him as a King to command, and to make
use of the aforesaid things: Et praesit piscibus Maris and volatilibus Coeli,
and Besti^s, universaeque terrae, omnique reptili quod movetur in Terrae; which
are only made for his use and advantage, for God was no less before the
world, then he is; and had no need of them to be more glorious: We ought
therefore to have a great and deep sense of acknowledgement; and that our
labor be not in vain, we must consider that great Architecture, in his
wisdom, in his power, in his liberality, and in his bounty; Adore him, honor
him, and admire him in all his attributes, and thank him incessantly, not only
for the present means (the vicissitude whereof sufficiently shows its vanity)
but for the hope of eternals. to which he has designed us, provided we prove
true, and that by Faith, made good by our works, that we do acknowledge him.

But unhappy man, that the creature is more praised then the Creator, the gift
preferred to the Giver; and that which we should but take passing by (as
Christian prudence permits and wills) we do abuse, of it by a most horrid
blindness, preferring a thing which we all know to be created in the order of
Nature, to the Author of it.

With horrid shame and confusion therefore the insensible things tell unto
those their Lesson, that dare so boldly and so impudently abuse of that great
author, guider and preserver of all things.

But he will not be abused, do what thou can, O enraged Atheist! thou
perverst wit, of the perverst time; and he will in the days of vengeance make
thee confess thy wilful malice; for ignorant thou art not, thy senses do
condemn thee, so do the Elements; who daily seek their elementary place, the
fire being light it ascends; the Air being less light, remains lower: the
Earth the heavier of the four holds the Center; the Water which is less
swim's above it.

Now those things that are mixed, as they have one of the elementary qualities
in degrees eminent above the others; they likewise seek their Sphere, and do
not rest until they are come where they should be.

A Stone would descend to the center of the Earth if there were an overture;
Wood swims above the Waters, and why?

Because there is more air and fire in its composition, then in the Water, nor
in the Stone: and let man do what he will, it shall ever be so, and why?
Because God has created them, and has given unto them the light and heavy
qualities, who cause that motion, which makes the light things to ascend, and
the heavy ones to descend; and this is inviolable, and all obeys unto it.

Now let us come to Man, made by God as well as the other Elements, and all
things; and wherefore? Is it not to be a beholder of his greatness, and to
adore him? That is the end: He has made him to his resemblance, given him a
Soul, with a reasonable taste.

To what can it be more fitly applied, then to follow in all things the design
and intent of his Maker, from the beginning to the end: and its without doubt
the true reason, and the true vocation of man; and thence it is, man ought no
more to depart from it, then the Stones to descend, and the Fire to ascend: God
has created thee O man to this effect; and it is his purpose; but if thou
do not follow him, to what serves thy intelligence, knowledge, and thy will,
but to harden thy self against the will of God? and more then all inanimate
things, and to hinder the effect of his purpose in thee: O man, think on this,
and hold it for certain, that if thou do employ that Talent which thou have,
to render more honor to vice, and to thy wilful unruled senses then to God,
thou art unworthy to be put beneath the insensible things; and that instead
thou was created for an eternal bliss, to the contrary, thou do deserve to
endure eternal torments.

Whereof God in mercy preserve us all, and grant unto us that true reason which
may preserve in us his true workmanship, and enable us to destroy our own: Dele
quod fecisti ut Deus salvet quod fecit; says the great Augustine.

Now let us enter into some particulars concerning this World, and for our
present use, disposing our selves to contemplate the same from above with more
security.

We shall begin with the Sphere.

What the Sphere is.
THe doctrine of the Sphere, is the knowledge of the World.

The World is the assembling and the order of all that God has created; it is
the composed of Heaven and Earth, or of the Celestial region, and of the
Elementall region: Therefore it is called Universe; and for to have a more
perfect intelligence of this science, there has been made an artificial
Sphere; this instrument is of a round form, composed of circles, by the which
(though imaginary) the motion of the Heavens is showed; the reason of the
changing of seasons, that of the difference of days and nights, according to
the places of the earth, in effect, the order of the World to the resemblance
of which this instrument has been made.

What Heaven is.
AS we have not a design to make a building in the Air, but to prove all that
which we shall say; it is necessary to prove, that there is a Heaven, before we
come to its qualities: but it is a thing very easy, because that nature
suffering no emptiness, it must of necessity be that that space, which is from
the Firmament and imperial, unto the lowermost of the Planets, (which is the
Moon) be filled of some matter; now this matter is called Heaven, which is
simple, solid, fixed, shining, transparent, incorruptible, and exempted from
changing.

Of the qualities of Heaven
ALL Natural things have two principles; God first, then Nature; to the which
he has given full power to work, by a certain universal spirit which he has
enclosed in her.

The Natural things are corporal essences, which subsist of themselves, and
issue of the union of the matter and of the form: Now then nature consists in
these two points, in the matter of the which the natural bodies are engendered,
and in the form which causes them to be that which they are; but the matter
is susceptible of diverse forms, and has not so soon lost one, but it takes
another; and for as much that it cannot receive any before it be deprived of
the Precedent; The Philosophers have established three Principles, the Matter,
the Form, and the Privation.

Now, there is two sorts of natural Bodies, some simple, and some mixed: The
simple are the Heavens and the Elements, because they are simple in their
creation, and can never be changed in diverse forms; the mixed to the contrary,
are those which draw their composition from the Elementall Qualities, and are
susceptible of diverse forms.

The Matter of the Heaven is then simple, it is also solid and fix, because
that the Stars which from the beginning of the world until this present move
and turn, have never changed, nor varied their figures, nor the distances
which they have the one with the other, and this order could not have been
conserved without some solid thing which constrained them thereunto, which can
be no other thing then the solid and fixed matter of the Heaven; Likewise it is
the opinion of the most sensed, and the most approved which is authorized of
the ancient Astronomers, Which have written that the Stars are of the same
matter that Heaven is, but more thick because they stop the light of the
Sun, and not the Heaven (as we shall show hereafter) and said that the Stars
were in Heaven, as the knurre in boards; others will have the Sarres and
Planets to be in a continued air, like as Birds in the air, but there ought
to be many particular properties, to maintain them all in an order so
Permanent and unchangeable against the violent swiftness of so many contrary
motions: I do also let pass that opinion with the Flight of their Birds.

The matter of Heaven is of an abundant shining, since that the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars are so, which are of the same matter; but to say better, the
matter of Heaven is Transparent, and the Sun and the Stars are not, that the
Heaven is transparent, its easy to prove it, and the experience does to much
manifest it unto us; for if the Heaven of the Moon were duskie, it would hinder
to see the Sun and the other Stars which are above it: For the Sun, the Moon
and the Stars that they are dusky, their eclipses do give it us to understand.

This matter is also incorruptible, and consequently exempt of changing since
it is simple, and in its quarters the generation finds no employment.

Of the Celestial Region.
THE Celestial Region is the assembling of all the Heavens, it wholly
comprehends it; we shall see the order and the course in its place.

Their matter, as we have proved, is solid, of the which are the Stars and the
Planets but more compacted together, that is to say, that the matter is more
gathered and as Polished bodies receive and cause the light which they borrow
of the Sun to reverberate (as we shall prove hereafter) for the Heaven it is
transparent.

There is two sorts of Stars, Fix and Errants; the Fixed are those which never
change their figures and have all one the same Motion, which is that of the
Firmament; The Errants are the Planets which have all different motions with
that of the Firmament, they are seven, to the which the ancient have given the
names of their Deities, for the power of their influences, viz. Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Mercury, Venus and the Moon.

Duskie Matter, is that which gives no passage to the Light, as the Wood, the
Stone.

Solid and Fixed Matter, is that which suffers not easily penetration, as the
Glass, the Crystal.

Penetrable Matter is that which suffers with facility Penetration, as the
Air, the Water, and the Fire.

Transparent Matter, is that which gives passage to the Light, as the Glass
and the Crystal.

The Matter of Heaven, is then Solid, Fix, Impenetrable and Transparent.

That there are many Heavens.
ITs proved that there are many Heavens by the diversity of the motions in this
manner.

Since the matter of Heaven is solid, two Planets having different motions
cannot be in the same Heaven; by the same reason it ought to be noted that its
not the Planet which moves, but its Heaven, otherwise they would penetrate the
matter which is solid; But the Sun and the Moon have different motions: For the
Sun atchieves its course in a year, and the Moon in a month, then the Sun and
the Moon cannot be in the same Heaven; by this reason there being not two of
all theseven Planets which have the same motion, there shall require seven
Heavens for the seven Planets, the matter of Heaven being fix and impenetrable.

There can be said against this, that there may be one only Heaven of an
impenetrable matter, in the which many spaces are imagined, by the which the
Planets having different motions can make their courses: but this comes always
to the point, viz. That there must always be seven spaces for the seven
Planets, which must be filled with seven bodies, which are called Heavens,
which are joined the one to the other.

Of the Firmament or eigth Heaven.
WE have proved that there are seven Heavens for the seven Planets: we will
show yet that there must be another Heaven for all the fixed Stars, different
from the seven others. For the ancient Astronomers having observed, that the
motion of the Stars was very slow, and did not advance; but from a hundred, to
a hundred years a degree: It has then been necessary to admit an eigth Heaven;
In the which are all the fixed Stars, which do not vary their situation,
distance, nor figure; and this Heaven is called Firmament.

If the Stars are infinite, and how the Astronomers divide them.
FOr the fixed Stars, we hold them to be infinite; as the holy Scripture
testifies it; its to say, that besides the great infinite number which are
seen; there is yet an infinite of others little, which are not seen, as has
been known by certain Prospective glasses which have been made in Italy. That
though the Ancients have not marked more then 1022. its not that they would
say, that there were no more; but that they have only observed the very
chiefest, for to serve to their observations. Those 1022. Stars are divided
into 48 constellations or Figures of animals, which the ancients have imagined
for to discern the one from the others; and have separated them in three
rancks, Septentrionals, Zodiacks, and Meridionals.

If the Stars are shining of themselves and Transparent.
ALL the Stars have no proper light of themselves, but in this manner; all the
Stars and Planets are of the same nature; but the Moon has no other light then
that which she borrows of the Sun, nor then any other Star. That if its
said, that the Moon loses not its light quite, when she eclipses in the
shadow of the Earth, because there appears a redness in the eclipsed party;
and that such redness can be her natural light? I do answer, that it cannot
be natural, because that if it were so, she would never quit it: But when
she increases, or that she is in the first quarter. The part of the Moon
which is not illuminated of the Sun, ought to be provided of that rednes; which
is not so, as the experience gives us to understand: Then all redness is not
natural to the Moon. That if it be asked from whence it proceeded, its from
the reflection of the light which is incountred in the shadow of the Earth: for
as the Moon is a polished body, and that the shadow of the Earth is never
destituted of some little light which causes that redness in her.

Of all before said, its clear seen, that the Sun is the principle of light.
God having adorned her with such an eminent quality.

Furthermore we say, that the Stars are not transparent as the Heaven; as can
be seen in the Moon and Mercuri, when they are interposed between our eyes and
the Sun; and that they Eclipse her, but that they are thick.

That the Heavens are round, and that they turn the one in the others, from the
Orient to the Occident,
WE have proved that there are eight Heavens; Now we must prove that they are
round, and that they turn the one in the other from the Orient to the Occident;
the which manifestly appears: For we see that the Sun, the other Planets, and
all the Stars do rise first in the Orient on the Horison; then by little and
little advance to the South; set to the Occident and next day rise again in the
Orient (let us fasten our selves but to the Suns) it must be the same Sun or
another, it cannot be another; for there would require every day a new one. If
it is the same, it must have passed over it, within it, or underneath the
earth: It cannot have passed over it, forasmuch that there would be no night:
the presence of the Sun causing the day. It cannot have passed within, since it
is greater (as we shall show hereafter) it remains then, that it is passed
underneath; and consequently its Heaven turns also about the Earth; and so
likewise all the other Heavens are round since they turn the one in the other
about the Earth, and that from Orient to Occident.

It is also proved that the Heaven is round, because being the part most Noble
of the world and which contains all the rest, it is necessary that it should
have the round form, since its the most capable, and the most perfect, If the
Heavens had another figure or form, those which are inferior to the others
could not carry their Planets from Occident to Orient, because of their angles;
or else the one must penetrate the others, and then there would be penetration
in the matter of the Heaven, which has been proved solid and fix.


