Astrologo-Mastix, OR A DISCOVERY Of the vanity and iniquity of Judicial
Astrology, or Divining by the Stars the success, or miscarriage of humane
affairs.

By JOHN GEREE Master of Arts, and Preacher of the word at St. Albanes.

JER. 10.22. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the
signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

Sapiens dominabitur Astris. Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for John Bartlet, at the Guilt-Cup at
Austines-Gate, 1646.

To my very loving and beloved brother Mr. Stephen Geree, Preacher of the word
at Guylford in Surrey; Grace and Peace.
SIR,
DEdication of Books is used not only as a Testimony of observance to great
ones: but of love also to Familiars, especially such as are learned. Famous
Calvin, who dedicated Treatises to diverse Christian Princes, presented one also
to his Reverend Master Corderius; What fitter name then can I prefixe to this
short Treatise, then yours? To whom besides the respect of an elder brother, I
stand engaged for my initiation into Logic and Divinity; of both which I here
present you some fruits. I am not ignorant that many have written of this
Subject. But I observe withal that most men buy and read Books as they do
clothes, that is, only those that are new and in fashion. So we must have new
books to confute old errors, because ancient Treatises are looked on but by a
few, else we may perish in the midst of Antidotes for want of using them; But a
short Book must not have a large Epistle, therefore desiring your prayers for
the Book and the Author; I am

From my study at St. Albanes, June 1. 1646. your loving and obliged brother
JO. GEREE.

QUESTION. Whether Judicial Astrology or Prognostications (touching persons
or Realms) by the Stars, may be lawfully practiced, countenanced, or tolerated?
PAVL being at Athens had his spirit (...) stirred, or provoked when he saw the
City given to Idolatry; therefore disputed he in the Synagogues, and in the
Market, and was incountred by the Philosophers, Act. 17.16, 17, 18. Though our
Nation be not so given to Astrology as Ephesus to Idolatry, nor my spirit so
full of zeal as St. Paul's was: yet such has been of late, the boldness of
some Starre-gazers in their predictions touching the affairs of this Nation,
and some persons in it, and many of all professions have cast such a respective
eye upon them, that my spirit has been often stirred to enter the list with
them, to try if I might give some stop to this sinful vanity, by the same
means and blessings wherewith St. Paul was mighty among the Ephesians. Now
this kind of Divination may be convinced of iniquity by three Arguments.

That which is condemned by the word of God as a grand offense, is not to be
practiced, countenanced or tolerated; But Divining by the Stars is condemned
in the word of God as a grand offense. Ergo. The Major is a principle
unquestionable; the Minor I make good by the places following, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11,
12. There shall not be found among you any one that makes his son, or his
daughter to pass through the fire, or that uses Divination, or an observer ^f
times, or an Enchanter, or a Witch, or a Charm^^, or a Consulter with familiar
Spirits, or a Wizard, or a N^; for all that do these things are abomination
unto the Lord. Here Moses reckoning up the diverse kinds of Sorceries uses
diverse words, that are taken to note out Astrology, that is, Divination by the
Stars as (...) a Diviner, touching which word A^enza^^ himself an Astrologer
says. Hoc est quidem commune omnibus divinantibus, sed proprium magis namen
Astrologorum (...) is a common name to all Diviners, but more proper to
Astrologers. 2. (...) Planetarius as Junius renders it, that is, (...) that
divines by the Planets, or as our Translators render it, an observer of times,
that is, of lucky, or unlucky times by the position of the Stars, as Ha^ did
by another kind^ of S^rcery, Esther 3.7. and this, as (...) observes out of Ki^
notes out curious Astrologers 3. (...) rend^^d Wizards Scioli; Man that pretend
to foretell things our of some knowledge that they have more then other living,
which Daniel disclaimed, Dan. 2.30. And whose humor does this more lively
represent then our Astrologers? Now all those are forbidden under this notion,
that those that do them are an abomination. Yes, the looking after them is
prohibited under the expression of going a ing after them, Levit. 20.6. and
does not the expression, Deuteronomy. 18.10. There shall not be found among you,
intimate, that these things are neither to be practiced by them, nor tolerated
among them?

Isa. 2.6. you have a sad expression; Therefore thou have forsaken thy people
the house of Jacob, because they be replerished from the East, (...)
and Soothsayers like the Philistines; where the same original word is
translated Soothsayers, which Interpreters most generally take to import
Astrologers, and these are sinners that when countenanced you see make God
forsake his people.

Isay. 47.13.14. Thou art wearied in thy Counsels, let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators, stand up and save thee from those
things, that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble, the fire
shall burn them. Here you have held forth not only the vanity, but the
iniquity of Astrologers; they cannot help by their Divinations, but they shall
be punished for them, and that grievously, Jer. 10.2. Thus says the Lord,
learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven:
for the Heathen are dismayed at them. Here you have the use of Astrology
forbidden as an heathenish way, and that we should not be dismayed at the
signs of Heaven, where the same word is used in the original, (...)
as in Isa. 44.25. That frustrateth the takens of the liars, which intimates to
us that the same Signs are meant in both places, viz. Constellations pointed
out by lying Astrologers. Now these they were not to learn, of these they were
not to be afraid; whence we may plainly gather, that this Divining Astrology is
a foul and a false Art; soul, because not to be learned; false, because not
to be feared. The Prophets that did foretell evil from God, they were to be
hearkened to, and to be feared, that by fear men might be excited to pray, and
prevent evils imminent; so Hezekiah, Jer. 26.19. so the Ninevites; what is not
then to be feared, or learned, it is not of God, nor has it any truth in it,
but is an irregular way, which is also hinted in that it is called the way of
the Heathen, and their fear the fear of the Heathens: that is, those ways
are heathenish, suitable to those that know not God; but unsuitable to those that
profess him, and know his word, which is one of the very Arguments wherewith
our Savior convinces the sinfulness of carking, Mat. 6.32. Dan. 1.2. Then
the King commanded to call in the Magicians, and the Astrologers, and the
Sorcerer^, and the Chaldeans. Here you have Astrologers reck^^d up with other
evil arts of Divination, as being of the same kind, whence we may justly
gather, that it is to be abandoned as an abomination with the rest. It Is true,
that the original words here used in Chaldee are not so exactly known to the
Hebrews, as other words proper to their own Language; yet there be two of
these words here used, either of which by their etymology may appear to note
unto us th^se Star-gazers, (...) from (...) C^^lom, because their Art is a^o^^
the Heavens, and (...) from (...) ^^^p^^s^ntum, because in the twilight they
were used to observe the Heavens; But what ever certainty there may be in the
particular word^; yet a certainty there is in the thing, that these Star-gazers
were one sort of their Diviners, that they relied on, and sought to, as is
clear by Isa. 47.13. before opened. And therefore no doubt they are to be
understood under one or more expressions in this Catalogue, which though it
might be honorable among the Heathen, yet is it indeed a black roll
presenting to us evil Arts to be abandoned.

We may add to these one testimony out of the New Testament, Acts 19.18, 19,
20. And many of them which believed, came, and confessed, and showed their
deeds; many of them also which used curious Arts brought their books together
to be burned before all men, and counted the price of them, and found it 50000
pieces of silver; so mightily grew the word of God and prevailed. Whence I
argue; that Art the practice whereof is by believers confessed as a sin, the
Books of it burnt, and that as an effect of the power of the Gospel, that is an
evil art not to be practiced, countenanced or tolerated; but such is this
Astrology. Ergo. The Major is clear, the Minor is proved by the words cited. In
the words foregoing you have a judgment related, which befell some Exorcists,
v. 13, 14, 15, 16. This was known at Ephesus v. 17. and thence fear, and
giving glory to the name of Christ, and thence also the fruits in the words
cited, as confession of sin, as of others, so no doubt principally of that
which was punished, and all of that nature, verse 18.2 the burning of their
books, that exercised these curious Arts, ver. 19. and this ascribed to the
power of the Gospel, ver. 20. All the doubt is whether Divining Astrology be
comprised under curious Arts or no, and that is a needless doubt too; for by
the number and price of books which were burnt, we may plainly gather that
Astrology was at least one of those Arts; for it must not be a Rusticall but a
Learned Sorcery that was so bookish, and what can be compared in that kind to
this of Divining Astrology? Besides, that the Ephesians were addicted to Magic
the Proverb witnesses, (...) Ephesiae literae; as Beza notes on the place.

To this first, and fundamental Argument from express Scripture, I may add
ex abundanti some others from the consequence of Scriptures.

That Art whereby men assume to themselves, what is peculiar to God, must needs
be sinful, neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated. But this we
do by divining of events to persons, and Nations by the Stars. Ergo. The
Major is clear from Isa. 41.22, 23. show things to come hereafter, that we may
know that ye are Gods, where you see the knowing and declaring things to come,
is as peculiar a being prerogative to the Deity, as to know the heart.
Therefore the foresight of future contingent events cannot be within the
compass of any Art; yea, the attempting of it is parallel to the sin of
Evah, in aspiring to be like God in foreknowledge of things.

That which withdrawes from God the Father, and Christ the Son, from
considering the works of the one, or heeding the word of the other, is an
evil not to be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated; but our Astrologicall
predictions draws from God and Christ. Ergo. The Major is evident; not to
consider Gods works is a sinful omission condemned, Isa. 5.12. and the Apostle
is as severe against every thing that withdrawes from Christ, Col. 2.8.18, 19.
Now that these Prognosticatours withdraw the minds from Christ, may be gathered
by that opposition put between them by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.10. to 16. where the
tenor of the word runs, that they must not hearken to Sorcerers that they
may bearken to Christ; And while men ascribe prosperity, or ill success in
humane affairs to the Stars, do they not thereby manifestly withhold men's
minds from beholding God in them, or making use of them? for while we are
detained in the view of natural causes, we shall not look to supernatural
ends or uses, or not so much as we should, and otherwise would.

That which is false, un^ertaine, deluding the mind with vain speculations, is
not to be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated. But our Star-divining is
false, etc. Ergo. The Major is evident. The Minor I prove. First, that these
predictions are false, Isa. 44.15. That frustrateth the tokens of the liars,
and and makes Diviners mad.

Who were those that were called liars here, but those spoken afterward, Isa.
47.12, 13. for both are spoken with reference to the Caldeant. So there you see
Star gazers by the Spirit of Truth are termed liars, their Artis false: If
they speak truth sometimes, it is at all adventures, more by hap, then skill.
Secondly, much less is there any certainty in this art of Divining. There Is
certainty in the motions of the Stars, but none in their influences to produce
particular voluntary events among men; Eclipses of Sun, and Moon, Conjunctions
of other Planets may certainly be foreknowne, but there is no certainty of their
effects or Estates. The motions of the Heavens are so certain, that they may
be certainly foretold, because they cannot be altered without a miracle: But
there is no such certainty of the events of them, that we may certainly divine by
them. For if their influences were so certain to produce, and so to discover
future events, then all here below were under a Stoicall Fate; nay it would be
unlawful without a miraculous faith to pray against those calamities, which
are discovered to be imminent by the Stars: for were there a certain connection
between the influence and the effects, as between the motions of the Heavens,
and Eclipses; then as the latter, so the former could not be hindered without a
Miracle, and a Miracle may not be prayed for without a miraculous faith.
Therefore we count it sin and folly to pray against an Eclipse, and so
against a calamity prognosticated by it, were there the same certainty of it.
But to restrain prayer to direct calamities, is impiety against Scripture,
therefore calamities depend not on the Heavens by any necessary casuality.

Secondly, I argue thus. The knowledge of that, which if it be acause, is but a
general, apartiall, a remote cause, cannot yield us any certain knowledge of
the effects to follow. But the knowledge of the Constellations of the Heavens
is the knowledge of that, which if it be a cause is but a general, apartiall,
a remote cause of events in States or affairs of men. Ergo. The Major will be
easily cleared, for there is no certain connection between causes general,
partial and remote, and their effects. The Aniome, posita causa ponitur
effectus, is only understood, as Logicians show, of that which is the next,
particular, and adaquate cause of such an effect, and the knowledge of such a
cause, only can lead us to the knowledge of the effect to follow. Tune (...)
cognoscere unumquodque cum causas primas, and principia prima, and usque ad
elementa dognoscimus. Now the heavens are but remote, general, and partial
causes of events among men; We use to say, Sol and homo generat hominem. All
Logicians know, that the Sun in this axiom is noted only to be a general
cause: The Heavens also are but remote and partial causes of humane events,
there be other causes nearer to produce them, yea, and such as the Heavens have
no influence on, whence I may argue. Thirdly, that the Heavens can give no
certain grounds for prediction in humane events.

3. Those effects that depend on other causes, on which the Heavens have none,
or no direct power, cannot be known certainly by the Positions of the Heavens:
But so it is with humane affairs. Ergo. The affairs of men depend principally
on the providence of God, and under him, on the wills and minds of men. The
providence of God orders things concerning men and States, Ephesians. 1.11. and
that not always according to the ordinary disposition of second causes; But
turning and overruling things in a secret way, beyond the intentions of men,
and the ordinary virtue of second causes; so in Rehoboams folly, 2 Chronicles.
10.15. and Amaziah's frowardness, 2 Chronicles. 25.10. Hence that of Solomon,
Eccles. 9.11. Therace is not to the swift, etc. And that of the Psalmist,
Promotion comes neither from the East, etc. Psalm. 75.4, 5, 6, 7. Now on the
providence of God the Stars can have no influence, that were blasphemy to
imagine, neither can these work on natural causes to carry them beyond their
natures or Sphere to effect moral ends, that is an irrational fancy. Secondly,
next under the providence of God, the spirits of men bear the sway in their
actions: their minds in counselling, their wills in moving this way or that
way, according to which as their next causes, their actions in an ordinary way
prosper, or miscarry; now the Stars have no influence on the soul, Coelum
non agit in animam nisi indirecte. Sapiens dominabitur astris. At the most the
Stars do but work on the temper, and on the soul, but by way of
inclination, which grace, education, civil wisdom, a world of things may
oversway.

3. Add to these, that the affairs of men and Nations are prospered and
blasted, not according to their use of natural means, but according to their
moral carryage to God, as they are sinful, or obedient, hardened or
impenitent, as they seek or as they neglect God: and men act in these moral
performances, as they are assisted by the grace of God, or deserted and
hardened: see Isa. 6.9, 10, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.33, 34.

Now are the Heavens any causes to move God to harden a people, or give them
Repentance, or pour out a Spirit of grace, and prayer upon them? no man will
affirm it; you see their prosperity and ruin depend on things, on which the
Heavens have no influence. Therefore the study of the Stars cannot give us any
certain foreknowledge of humane affairs, as things are known in their
causes.

But if they be not certain causes, may they not be certain signs of things
to come?

if they be signs foreshewing events, they must either signify (...), or
(...); by nature, as smoke is a sign of fire, or by institution, as an
Ivybush is a sign of Wine to be sold: but they are notifying signe^ in neither
of these ways. Ergo. The Major is evident: The Minor may be thus cleared.
First, natural signs they cannot be, because we have showed, that there is no
natural connection between the Constellations, and humane events. And if any
will say, they are signs, discovering, things to be by institution, he must
prove it. And here indeed is produced, Genesis 1.14. And let them be for signs,
and for seasons, and for days, and for years. But I answer. Signs there does
import natural signs, they are signs of the things which they cause, as the
seasons of the year, which they do both make and signify; so the Moon of
the courses of the tides in the Sea, and rivers, etc. But there is no institution
of them for signs, to presignifie contingent events in humane affairs, which
flow from moral or supernatural Causes. Yet, if we should grant them in
general to be signs, we were never the near certainly in prognosticating by
them, unless we had a particular Comment on them, to declare what they
signify, either by Divine revelation or by solid experience, but no such
Comment is extant; therefore we can have no certain fore knowledge by them.
Divine revelation to inform what such, and such conjuncture of Stars
portend, is not pretended; And any certain Rule from experience in this case
we cannot have. This may be cleared, First, from the nature of experience; true
experience arises from often observing the same thing.

As a Physician knows by experience that Rubarbe will purge choler, because he
has often tried it, and always finds it does so ever; but now we can have no
such experience of the effects of the Stars. First, because the Heavens do
not often, nay scarce ever return to the same positure. If some great
Conjunctions be many times the same, yet the positure of infinite other Stars
(which all have their influences) being other ways, may alter the force of the
other, augmenting it or increasing it, to vary the effects that follow it:
Besides, when any events follow after these Conjunctions, they cannot certainly
know, that these successes, or calamities were effects of such Constellations.
Many things fall out together accidently, without connection, or, dependence one
of another; the staff stands in the corner to day, and it raines to morrow, it
will not follow, when the staff stands in the corner again, the next day will
be rain: so though some dismal effect follow an Eclipse or other conjunction,
this may be an extraordinary hand of God, without any dependence on such a
Conjunction; and therefore to gather the like effect to ensue, when there is
such a Conjunction, is but an argument a baculo in angulo. Besides, we see
experience uncertain, for twins borne under the same constellation, so near
one another, as to hold one another by the heel, as Jacob did Esau, yet are
most different in disposition and events. Augustine lib. 5. de civ. Dei cap. 3.
brings in one Nigidius an Astrologer answering this objection, that though
there be but little time between twins, yet the Constellations of their
Nativity may differ, because of the swift motions of the Heavens; this he
illustrated by two marks made with ink, suddenly one after another, on a
wheel whirling about, which marks will appear a good way one from another:
So the swift motion of the Orbs may make great alterations in the Heavens, in
the short space between two twins. But first, besides that, Augustine excepts
that the conceptionof Infants was in one instant, though their birth differ a
little. Secondly, and others add that we may see disparity between two other
Infants borne at the same instant. Thirdly, Ludovicus Vives does wittily, and
truly turn this similitude to overthrow all certainty of divining by the
Stars: because if the swiftness of the motion of the Stars do so suddenly
alter the constellations, a man can never give an exact judgment of any birth,
because he cannot exactly know the minute of the nativity, and the least time
mistaken varies the constellation, and the judgment and experiment from it.
Again, Identity of effects do not only depend on the efficient, but the
matter also where the work is wrought, Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad modum
recipientis: Now though we could be sure, that the positure of the Heavens were
the same that it was an hundred years ago: and that then the constellations
had such effects, yet it would not follow that now the same events should
ensue, the difference of men in diverse ages, and Climates of diverse tempers,
educations, moral and intellectual principles, might cause a different event
from the Stars influence upon them, and so render the Prognostic incertaine
and untrue, Mat. 11.20.23. our Savior shows, that the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, the Gospel, upon different men would have a different influence and
event: and why should it not be so also with the constellations of Heaven; the
Sun melts wax, hardens clay, the same carriage wins some men, and alienates
others: and may not then the influence of the Stars produce diverse effects on
men of diverse dispositions? A hen one time hatches Chickens of her own kind,
at another time other kinds of eggs being set under her, she hatcheth
Partrige, ducks, or other foul; the heat of the hen the efficient of hatching
is the same, only the variation of the matter varies the effect. So though the
influence of the Heavens should by revolution become the very same; yet the
change of men and women might alter their effects: and so we can have no
certain rule from experience of what is past, to gather the like event from
the Stars for future: and so our Divination from them must need; be
uncertain, and delusive with vain speculations.

5. That which nourishes vain and forbidden hopes, and fears, etc. is not to
be practiced, countenanced, or tolerated. But this Astrologicall predictions
do, when hearkened unto: Ergo. To fear, and so to hope or joy, because of the
signs of Heaven, are forbidden affections, Jer. 10.2. and the signs of Heaven
having no certainty in them, the affections are vain as well as forbidden: yet
who can read their Prognostics with any respect to them, but his heart will be
apt to leap at good ones, to shrink at evil ones? and this is no small evil,
for if this Astrology be a kind of sorcery, as I have proved, thenfeares and
joys, etc. in relation to those Prognostics will in their last resolution be
found service to the Of this mind is St. Augustine. lib. de doctr. Christ. cap.
3.
Devil.

here it may be objected, that Astrologers do hit right in their predictions,
whereby it seems there is more certainty then is granted to their Art, and if
there be certainty, why may not the way be lawful?

An. 1. Do Astrologers foretell right sometimes? so do Witches, and those
that use Familiar spirits, yet all confess these Diabolical to be abandoned.
2. Astrologers do many times hit wrong, as well as sometimes right, Isa.
44.25. The tokens of the liars are frustrate. See Lud: Vives in Aug. de civ.
Dei. lib. 5. cap. 7.
But the Astrologers have this favor, that which they mistake in is not
regarded though the things be many. But what they hit right in they are cried
up for though they be but few. This has been so, and is so, and is an Argument
of the corruption of the practice, because our corrupt natures are so prone to
favor it. 3. Again, more is ascribed to Astrologers in point of Truth from
some tricks they use; then they indeed deserve; for they many times use the old
way of ambiguous expressions, which they rather interpret according to events,
Aug. de doctr. Chris. lib. 2. cap. 23.
then foretell events by them; they also add many ifs and cautions to many of
their predictions, whereby if the event answer not the prediction they do with
the vulgar avoid the shame of it, Aug. de civit. Dei, lib 5. cap. 7. (...) fine.
but if it do fall out they carry the glory. 4. It is and has been the
opinion of judicious Divines, that much of that truth that is in the
predictions of Astrologers, Perkins resol. of a Country man.
is not from the certainty of the rules of that Art, but from the assistance of
the Devil; who either by open league, or else in a voluntary secret way does
insinuate himself to draw on a league, and contributes his knowledge, and
guesses, which exceed man^.

That which adds strength to this conjecture, is, because conscientious men,
as Augustine, Perkins, etc. have been glad to relinquish this study, because of
the uncertainty that is in the rules of it. Now Satan may help curious heads in
this way, because, besides his own knowledge, which inables him in many things
to guess shrowdly, he may be permitted in a judiciary way to be a true spirit
in the mouth of liars, as well as a false spirit in the mouth of Ahabs
Prophets, se^ Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22. and Daniel
of the Caldeans. Dan. 1.17.20. And Astrology was one part of Learning in both
these Countries: therefore either it is lawful, or else these holy men learned
an unlawful Art.

An. There be two things in the Art of Astrology. First, Theory. Secondly,
Practice. Many have studied the Theory, that have renounced the Practice, (as I
shall show hereafter) finding by experience, that nothing could be done by it
in a natural way. And it is very probable, that all the Learning which these
holy men had in this Art (if they had any) was but theoreticall; there is no
footsteps of their practice of it in all their story, but the contrary: for we
read in the 2.4. and 5. chapters of Daniel, that he never was called in with
the rest of the Magicians, but was called after them, which is a plain
intimation that he renounced their society and way, though he remained a
Counselor to the King. And when he went about to find out the secret, he went
not to his books, but to his prayers, nor found he it by the Stars, but by
revelations from God, Dan. 2.17, 18. etc. Therefore Daniel and Moses were no
Astrologians.

But are not the Stars admirable Creatures of God, and the causes of many
strange effects? and are not effects known by their causes? then why may not
men divine by them?

Nihil agit ultra Sphaeram. Now their Sphere is within corporeal things;
Simile agit in simile. But humane affairs are though acted by the bodies, yet
guided by the spirits of men, which are in nature out of the Sph^re of the
Heavens operation: And their successes and miscarriages, are from a Divine
providence in a moral way, which is a Sphere of another and an higher kind,
then that which the natural virtues of the Heavens work in. And therefore
what ever may be prognosticated by them touching weather, or changes in things
vegetative, or sensitive, yet touching men, their virtue is so short in working
on them, that it can give no light to discover events concerning them.

Secondly, where their power of working is acknowledged, yet our knowledge of
their virtues and operations is so dim that we cannot divine by it: for many of
the Stars, yea most of them are unknown in their influences. And when they
all of them have their influences conjoined, who is able distinctly to say,
this effect is from the virtue of this Star, and from no other: And if he
cannot do this, then can he gather no certain experience to judge of the like
for future, because he knows not from what Star the former flowed. The
conclusion then holds good, that Astrologicall predictions ought neither to be
practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated.

I may add one Argument more, which though it be not so concludent in a
Logical way to Reason, yet it may be more moving in a moral way upon the
affections, then some of the former.

That which most godly and Learned men upon experience have renounced, and
repented for, is neither to be practiced, countenanced, nor tolerated: But
Godly and learned men have renounced and repented of their study of this
Astrology. Ergo. To him that denies the Major, I may at least say, as Tully
said in another case: Ego tantum collum non habeo, and for the Minor, I thus
prove it. Augustine the glory of his times for piety and Learning, and solid
judgment, confessed he had been addicted to this vanity, but by the grace of
God he afterward renounced it, as an Art condemned by true piety, affirming
that is magnuserror, and magna dementia, superstitio, and a great error, yea a
great madness, a superstition easily refelled. Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2.
cap. 21. in sine est initio capitis 22. To Augustine we may add another
mentioned by him on ps. 63. whom he brings in as a penitent renouncing this
Art, as though it were Paganism, and Judaisme.

Perkins famous for Learning, and piety went far in this way, but at length
desisted, repented, and renounced it. Hear his golden words: I have long
studied this Art, and was never quiet, till I had seen all the secrets of it,
But at length it pleased God to lay before me the profaneness of it, nay I
dare boldly say Idolatry, although it be covered with fair and golden shows,
therefore that which I will speak with grief, I will desire thee to note with
some attention. Thus far Perkins in his Preface to the Reader, before his
resolution to the Countryman. I will close with the confession of Mr. Briggs,
sometime Geometry Reader at Oxford, A man eminent for piety: and for his skill
in Mathematics, I think I may truly say nulli secundus inferior to none:
This loving friend of mine, upon a question moved to him by me, touching
judicial Astrology, told me this remarkable story touching himself, when he
came to Cambridge. First, he thought it was a fine thing to be of Gods
Counsel, to foreknow secrets, and resolved to have that knowledge what labor
soever it cost him: And so early applied himself to the Study of the
Mathematics, beginning with Arithmetic, and so to Geometry and Astronomy, and
to lay a good foundation, he left none of these Arts till he had attained
exactness in them. The foundation thus laid, he then applied himself to his
maine scope, the search of Judicial Astrology: But there he found his
expectation frustrate, there was no certainty in the rules of is; when he had
tired his body and wits in vain, he was much dejected with the frustrating of
his expectation. At last he repaired to a man in Cambridge famous in this Art,
and a practitioner in Prognostications by it; to him he made his moan what
pains he had taken to be an expert Astrologer, and how the uncertainty of the
Rules in that Art, did now defeat his hopes. The Astrologers reply was, that
the Rules of that Art were uncertain indeed, neither was there any cure for
it: whereupon Mr. Brigs relinquisht that study.

And he did then affirm to me, that he would undertake to the skilfullest
Astrologer in the world, that let him set down any conclusion touching any
man, or State, yea, or weather, and he will prove it contradictorily, that is,
both that it would fall out so, and that it would not fall out so from their
own Rules and Principles, whence says he, you may see apparently that there
can be no certainty in the Rules of that Art: He further added, that his
opinion was, to those that addicted themselves to the practice of Divining
Astrology, the Devil did at first secretly lend his assistance: And at length
gradatim (unless God graciously prevented) intise them into contract.

But having thus cleared the case that Astrologicall predictions are not to be
practiced, countenaneed, nor colerated; it may be needful in the next place to
discover, first, who practice. Secondly, who countenance. Thirdly, what it is
to tolerate such predictions.

1. To the first, all those are Practisers in this unlawful Art, who calculate
man's Nativities, and thereby divine what their condition shall be, adverse or
prosperous. They also that by the Stars take upon them to divine, what shall
be the success of particular enterprizers, in this kind they are famous, or to
speak truly infamous, that take upon them then to divine, what will be the
monthly changes or events in this present war; those also by erecting of
figures, and their issues, and to find out things lost, etc. Lastly, all those
that in their Almanacks, besides those things that depend on the motions of the
Heavens, which are certain and known, as the seasons of the year, Eclipses,
and such like; take upon them to foretell future contingents, as what w^^ther
will be every moves, and every day of the month.

2. To the second, they countenance Astrologicall Diviners, first, that go to
them to have their nativities calculated, to know their fortunes as they call
it, or to hear of things lost, etc. Secondly, that buy or read their books,
unless it be with an intent to confute them: These books may be read, or
bought from diverse grounds, or ends, first, out of curiosity, so some go to
mass, this is a wanton vanity, a playing with a temptation whereby we may be
ensnared. Secondly, out of respect, as supposing there is something in them,
and to make use of them, this is bad as the practice itself, it is called going
owhoring after them, Lev. 20.6. 3. with a purpose to find matter against them,
and confute them. Those that applaud them will hold forth the best side of
them, and only talk of that wherein they seem to guess right, but an
intelligent man by looking into them shall see their defects, and be able to
lay them open, to undeceive the simple: if we buy or read them in the two
former kinds, we countenance them, and are accessories to them, not in the
latter. Thirdly, those countenance them that believe them, and are stirred with
secret or open joy, as they prognosticate good or evil. Believing is a giving
glory to God, and so believing fearing, and the words of any other must needs
reflect honor on them. Fourthly, by talking of their predictions as things
that have something in them, and not to be contemned. Fifthly, by applying with
applause their predictions to events; this is just as such an one
prognosticated, this is to do that honor to them, which was used to be done
to the Prophesies that came from God.

To the third. Astrologers are then tolerated; first, when their books are
licensed, or not prohibited, when their books are let out, and left out, and
not called in, then are they tolerated: for overseers of Presses being appointed
for prohibition of unfit Books, if these books were esteemed, as they are,
false and noxious, they should, they would be prohibited, or if they steal
out, be called in again. Secondly, when the Astrologers themselves pass without
repress, or without restraint; when the Minister holds his tongue, and the
Magistrate his hand, when there is no Law against them, no penalty for them, or
none executed.

Conclusio Paraenetica.
Having cleared the unlawfulness of practicing, countenancing, and tolerating
Astrologicall predictions; I may now be bold to speak a word of exhortation to
all, that they have nothing to do in any of these particulars.

for the wages of sin is death. Do ye think it an honor to you? What is it
to be applauded of men and disallowed of God? neither will it indeed get you
any true honor among men: for Honos est consentiens fama bonorum. Honor is
the agreeing, good report of good men: but the applauders of Astrology, are the
most of them, of the worst, and lightest sort of men; the best and gravest sort
have disallowed it, yea branded it. Perkins reckons it up amongst the kinds of
Witchcraft. Augustine counted it but impious dotage and inconsistent with
Christianity: And in this strain the best, and the weightiest judgments run.
2 Pet. 2.15.
Does profit intise any? Remember what ever comes this way it is but the wages
of Balaam, the wages of iniquity, money that will perish with you, and be the
cankour of your souls. Be persuaded therefore to renounce this evil, spread
not a net before the feet of your brethren, to entangle their souls in your
vain speculations, to hinder them from looking to, or making use of Gods hand
in their calamities; you want not glorious examples, Perkins, Aug^stine, and
those famous believers, Acts 19. who confessed their sin instudying such
curious Arts, and burnt their books, go you and do likewise, and save
Authority a labor.

lest pertaking of their sin, they partake of their plagues. Remember
Timothie's charge, not to partake of other men's sins. 1 Timothy 5.22.
and that of the Apostle to the Ephesians, to have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. Shall
we countenance what God abominates, and strengthen men in that, which makes
both them, and the Land liable to wrath? Let them not then have the countenance
of thy cost to buy them, of thy time to read them, of thy tongue to mention or
applaud them, of thy soul to fear or hope, because of their babbling good, or
bad: This Jeremy expressly forbids, Jer. 10.2, 3. Perkins wrote a Treatise
against it. Devout believers, Acts 19. burnt their own curious books, which
they had bought, will you buy and keep such as they would burn? we use to say
receivers make thieves, and so the Law makes them accessory to the theft: and
so are the buyers of Astrologicall Prognostics, that buy them for curiosity,
or to listen to them. If there were no buyers there could be no sellers: If
there were no sellers, there would be no makers, at least no publishers of
these sinful vanities; therefore if the Astrologer be guilty, the buyer and
Reader cannot be innocent: Thou helpest to make this grievous sin National:
who ever thou art that countenancest it, for thou thereby art accessory to it,
and guilty of it; God has forbidden the using as well as acting these evil
Arts, and that under an hideous expression, and under a dismal doom, Lev.
20.6. And the soul that turns after such as have familiar Spirits, and after
Wizards, to go a whoring after them. I will even set my face against that
soul, and cut him off from among my people, Lev. 20.6. I conclude this
exhortation with that home passage of the Apostle, Romans 1. ult. wherein he
seems to make approvers, or applauders of sin in some sense worse then the
Actours, who knowing the judgment of God, (that they that do such things are
worthy of death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in those that do
them.

Acts 19. Sure if those books deserve the fire that derogate from man: As
Constantius. Cod. lib. 9. tit. 18. leg. 5.7.
then do those much more that withdraw the minds and hearts of men from God:
Yea, it is to be wished, that our Laws in this case defective might now be
supplied. And that our Astrologicall Diviners might be put into the Catalogue
with other Sorcerers, in the Statute, primo Jacobi cap. 12. to suffer the same
penalty for their presumption, which is imposed on the other: for the Scripture
makes them birds of a feather. Cod. lib. 9. tit 18. leg. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.
This diverse of the Christian Emperors are said to have done, and they deserve
imitation, when sin is not only committed but permitted, the guilt is not
only personal, but Nationoll. It Is punishment of offenses, that puts away
sin from Israel, both the guilt of it by expiation, 2 Samuel 21. and the
practice of it too, while others hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly,
Deuteronomy. 13.5.11. Though not only the Ancient Popes, but their sounder Divines
and Historians are against it. See Baron Annals Anno. 556. Sect. 12. Anno. var.
1.9.115, art. 41.
And certainly connivance at this sin can neither want danger from God, nor
dishonor among men: we are now for Reformation, and chiefly of Popery. And
shall we suffer such Popish Practices? Popish I call them, because under Popery
such practices had allowance, and countenance. Tindall informs us, that
Cardinal Murton had a License from the Pope for a time to study Magic,
whereof himself was one: And that Cardinal Woolsey calked the Kings Nativity,
which is (says he then) a common practice among Bishops, in all Lands. Tind.
practice of Popish Prelates, page 367. 368.

And was it not one of the blackest stains of our corrupt times, that that
infamous Wizard Doctor Lamb was countenanced, and protected by some? And can we
avoid aspersion, if we countenance, or suffer Divining Astrologers, casting a
favorable aspect toward us, since the holy Ghost has put them in the same
Catalogue oftentimes, If any desire to see more Testimonies of Fathers,
Counsels, etc. let him see Job. Picus Mirand. lib. adv. Astrologos.
and so does Learned Perkins, and he has many grave abettours: let then our
worthy Senators up and be doing, to remove this blemish, and guilt from us,
and deliver us out of the hand of the Lord, and we will rise up and call them
blessed.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

