A LETTER FROM SR. BALTHAZAR GERBIER KNIGHT.

TO HIS THREE DAVGHTERS ENCLOSED.

In a Nunnery at Paris.

MY DAVGHTERS ELIZABETH, Susanne and Marie.
I Have thought fit to concude all my former letters to you with this,
thereunto mouved by Fatherley tendrenesse to administer good and wholsome
things unto you: Care of your Salvation to drove you from pernicious errors,
and Justice to my self to vindicate my self from those asperssions as well
implicit as explicit laid upon me on your subject.

First therefore, since you with drevv your selves from the obedience to your
Parents you have written that your EYES have bin Opened; and ^^^t, it is
sustained on your one utterances that you had noe Religion before you were
taught what you now seem to profess.

As I do extremely vvonder at it, so i must deeply lament your casse, since
such a pretended and imaginary opening must be the work of a Spirit of strong
DILVZION, Such as could persuade our first Parents in EDEN that they were
blind; and that when they should follo^vv his advise, their EYES would be
opened, and that they should know good and Evil: Such an opening I justly
fear is yours.

No vvonder that you have bin thus surprised when once you gave both your
ears to charmers; and never lent one to your best and assured friends your
Parents: to whom you never gave any intimation of your resolution what you
would do: Onlly you let your Parents Know (in fievv words (but to late)
what you had don, leaving that injurious brand on them that during your aboade
under their roof you (as before said) had no Religion, and that they kept you
in blindness.

You were Babtifed in te name of GOD the Father the SON, and the HOLLY Ghost.

When you came to yares you were under my roof instructed in the Articles of
the Christian belief.

You were taught the ten Commandments, delivered by God in two tables on
Mount Sinai to MOSES.

You were taught the Lords prayer being the Sommary of all things necessary
for us to demand of God: and how with an humble and elevated Soul (on
bended knees) you should power forth your supplications unto him: You were
taught how you should receive the blessed Communion of te Boddy and Bludd of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST: and when ripnesse of years permitted, you were
thereto prepared; called, and admitted, and continued publicly in that
practice.

When you came to more strenckt (least you should fall into those nets
wherein now allas you are entangled because my employments under his
(Majesty of great Britain in the Residency at Bruxels during the space of
Eleven years occasionned my necessary conuerssation with Papists.) you were
taught the solid ansvveares to all the vveake* objections of the Roman Sect,
concerning their pretenc to ANT QVITI, VNIVERSSALLITI, VNIFORMITI, MIRACLES,
and the rest. These being the main props of there ruinous building.

You were instructed that ANTIQVITI is not to be determined by any Episcopal
Sea professing Christiannity, but by conformity unto the word of God:
delivered unto us by Christ Jesus, his Apostles, Evangelists, and Diciples,
comprised by the Author of Salvation in the two Commandments of LOVE.

For if all other Christians should since the Apostles time to this instant
have continued in a Doctrine contrary to the express doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles which is the doctrine of Love (as a forsaid] and that but
yesterday their had risen a congregation professing and practicing trully the
said Doctrine, it must needs be concluded that these would claim ANTIQVITI
before the other, because the mesure of Christianity must be the said doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, from which source Antiquiti takes its Original.

If this be not the Ancient and true Religion necessary to salvation, and
those marks the true signs of its Antiquiti what marks then?

This i am sure we profess and indeaviour to practice, Therefore we cannot
have any brand (...) Noualty cast upon us, butt rather it will light upon
you, who both in Doctrine and practice infringe the parfaict law of LOVE.

you were instructed that VNIVERSSALLITI must extend to the greater number.

If we look on all those that profess the Christian Religion you shall
find those that adherre to the Church of Rome feeuer in number, nay in extent
and dominions then we are.

Seuenthien entire Kingdoms are inhabitted by Legions of Christians under the
dominion of him who we call PRESTEIAN where the EFNVC of Ethiopia (beloning
to Queen CANDAS) which PILLIP converted settled the true Christian belief
unanimousley professing the same their until this present day, and agreeing
in Tenants more with us then with you: Christiannity is practiced throughout
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Suede, Dannemarc, Norvvege, Tra^siluanya,
Holland, Zuitserland with the annexed Cantons and Geneua: all which are
entire, and all to gether independent on the Sea of Rome: besides many bodies
in these several Kingdoms and Provinces ensuing to vvete, France, Germany,
Bohemia, Poland, Ireland, and Flandres, were computing the one with the other
the one half does disavoue the said Sea of Rome: So that their remaynes but
Spain and Italy entire acknolledging the Popes suppremacij.

Whereby it is clearly manifested that Vniuerssallity is not an anex of the
Sea of Rome.

What should men speak of several Religions not Christians, the Mahumetan
religion far more vniuerssall then the Christian religion; and Headenisme of
larger extent then they both, witness the vast AMERICA, besides great and
many kingdoms in ASIA, and AFRICA, one only king being as pouerfull as all the
kings of Europe putt to gether.

Whereby is manifested that the tuo main Marks where to the Romam Church
pretends to confirm it self to be the true Church of Christ do faille it.

For the conformity in Doctrine (which the Roman teachers will have annother
mark of the true Church) allas it is no other then what every sect and
Religion in the world has common with them.

All the Caluinists do perfectly agree in Tenants. Lutherans the same; so
lickvveise the Socinians, Anababtists: Famillists, Antinomiens, Nicholaitans,
with all other Christian sects.

The Jews do perfecty agree in opinions, yet allas they are so fallen from
truth that they crucified the Lord of truth and continue unrepentent.

The Mahumetans do perfectly agree; yet they are so far from being the true
Church that they are not honored with the title of Christianitii.

All conbinations of Headenish Idollators do agree in their opinions: whereby
it is clearly evident to any not blind that conformity in Doctrine is
likvveise no express mark of the true Church of God.

For MIRACLES, they are promised unto faith, and wheresoever that is found no
greater then a grain of Mostart seed, miracles may be vvraught, as their are
manifest Examp^es* if, histories and relations maybe believed.

The Religious among the Turcks do daily work Miracles: It is not inpertinent
in this place to tell the Story of a Turckis Emperor that defeated a Christian
Host, who had broken faith; he being routed, rallied again, called upon
Christ Jesus (in whose name the Peace had bin Sworn) adjured him to revenge
him upon those that had taken his name in vain, for in his name he would
fight.

That miracles are vvraught by Protestants their are several examples: butt
that they are not so frequently boasted off and forstalled among them is
because of their common Tenants that Miracles are ceased finding no use of
them, the Ch^istian doctrine being established, and Miracles being prosmissed
in the latter days as a mark of Antichrist by the expression of Lying
wonders.

The true marks of Gods Church are true LOVE and CHARITI. For their by you
shall knoue true Christians, Christ Jesus says, if you Love one annother
thereby you shall be knoune to be mine: And the effect of that true LOVE is the
unction from the Holly Ghost which S. Ihoan speaks of twice: wheresoever that
onction is to be found their you shall find the true Church and no were
elsse.

Christ Jesus said that his Kingdom was not off this world, which is full of
hate, striffe, and malice. Can their be a thing further of from Love, then to
condemn Christians to Hell, and that for bare opinions?

Can their be a more sinful insolent presumption then to exclude Heaven the
source off mercy and compassion to any penitent Sinner that runes to Christ
Jesus, that puts all his hopes in him that believes in him, that thirsts
after him, as the heart pants after the water brooks?

Can their be a greater deprauednesse then that which Teachers breath forth of
disobedience toward Souueraines, suppe^iours, and Parents, taking no other
grounds for such lessons then difference of opinions?

Can their be a more inpertinent Tenent then to sustain that Christians
should be damned if they do not believe and do all what the particullar Sea
of Rome does determine; since it is no more fre from errors then other Sects?
But that i may come home to you my Children, if you could take off those
spectacles through which you look now, which shue all things reuerst, then
would you see your Duty: Then would you see next unto to Service and
reverence due to God your Heavenly father, what your Duty is to your Parents,
whereupon you would conclude that those who persuaded you to set aside
obedience to Parents do delude you with pernicious Tenants: among the rest,
that you cannot do your Duty to Parents nor se them without indangering your
Salvation, your one words; Neither can hose blanchers (in your last letter to
me) any vvayes fre you of his Just Censure that you conclude your Parents to be
in the number of the Damned, and so argue you to profess a Sect void of all
Christianity, since you have no LOVE nor CHARITI and that you do transgress
the Divine precepts of Christ who forbids that we should Judge one annother:
Judgment belongs to God, and to none else, for he says Judgment is mine.

you would see indeed that the pretended opening off your EYES proves a
^hutting upp of your spiritual EYES.

Certailny if you could Seriously meditate on your said words, without any
inuitations or any of my arguments conclude all this to be true: As i have suid
before you have bin duly and carefully instructed in the principles of the
true CHRISTIAN belief, and helt to its practice as much as lay in your Parents
to do.

you my Danghter SVSANNE you must likvveise acknovvledge the same truth in your
one particullar; and for the-care I had to place you according to your one
desires with a most virtious Princess, the Duchess of TRIMOVILLE (reputed
for an example of Piety) yet you were seduced by the same Spirits of Diluzion
who had vvraught on your two other Sisters, who moved you to run from the
said Duchess as they had run from me, and all this you Know on a pretense
of vvorldly preferment: for so you vvritte to me, when you gave me notice of
the pretended opening of your EYES as that of your two other Sisters. Allas
poor Susanne could you not reflect on your name if you forgatt your
profession, and resist the Tempters; you felt no finger of GOD to tutch your
EyES.

Allas poor Children these falce pretenses cannot excuse you.

And you my poor daughter MARIE, its but to Manifest that your escappe from
your Parents without their Knowledge was resolved on fievv days after that
the eldist of you (who pulled you as a sheep is drawn to slavghter) held in
quality of God Mother a Child in the protestant Church at Charenton.

It is certain that neither she nor any one of you did since that time see any
Heavenly vision, nor heared you any express voice of God, nor Angel call you
from your profession and belief, nor could you in so feevv days study any
controuersses that could argue to your minds that you had lived in blindness
unto that uery instant.

You my daughter MARIE were said to have at your first being among the
Eng^is^ Nunns almost converted sum by those principles of the Religion you
have bin Babtised in, taught and professed, and that you did ever say you would
be no NVNNE. But allas you to soon fell away from the said principles, yet
are you some way excusable because you are the Iongest, and that you were
Kept in so strickt a prison by your guardiens, that you were not permitted to
read my letters, nor receive the wholsome Council sent you.

Butt you my eldist daugh^er Elizabeth you were reported to proceed with so
much boldness, so much forgetfulness to your Parents, so much injustice to
your selffe and insiuillity to many that did vvish you well even against the
persson of the reverend B^^hop of London Derry and against other Divines, as
that you would not after their first visitations afforde them any fit
impartial hearing: All this you^ did with breach of Divine laws; the Law of
Nature, the fondamentall Laws of the land, and the Laws of Nations, when you
would be carried and maintained against your Parents with a Strong hand:
with armed men, who did vvast you to a Nunnery with Pistols, which were
seen by a whole multitude and offered to be discharged against my men, that
did run to stop your Coach, follovved by me your father, who was
constrained (by the Suddannis of the Surprisall) to run a foot through the
dirt of the streets of Paris in prosecution of you my Children; to try if I
could rescu you from the Lions pavves, follovving you to the gates of the
Monnastery, vvitch were shutt against me, and where you were detayned.

Thus on my particullar has bin practiced an injustice without example, since
all Parents are permitted to have free acces to their Children in a neuter
place, yet they be admitted to take any religious orders.

All which considered, you may see how falacious that reason is [vvich you say
in one of your letters to me] to have bin te ground work of what you do in
hese vvores. Vi^z. My reason has alvvayes shevved and convinced me that they
direct what is most good etc.

To which I must repeat my former answer, that your REASON be the
touchstone of their directions your reason being falacious and contrary to
the Divine reason, expressed in the Divine word; then off necessity their
Council agreeing with your REASON must be as eronius as your REASON; and
consequently both deserve to be refo^rmed by the Ordinances of God; which
commands Obedience unto Parents, ordinances that are infa^ible.

your One REASONS indeed are the effect of your one Motions, if there fore
your Motions be subject te err why not your REASON?

And where yon are now taught to believe or at least to vvritte as of late
you did that you are in an extreme rest and security, etc. I must again tell
you that their are no Ateists but rests securer and quietter in consience then
you can be, for they have no scruple though they do never so wickedly; and
therefore your pretended security is butt a siprituall Letargy: Living under
your Parents roof you did behold those whose predecessors shedd their bludd
for the defense of Religion, the same that your Parents have ever professed and
wherein you were Babtised, instructed, and which you also did publikly
profess, the same Religion for which yout Father sufferd even in his mothers
womb, she flying the bluddy persecutions.

You ran away not for Religion, butt from Religion.

You had Coatches to transport you from your Duty.

You could never since like Joseph make readdy a Charet to transport you to
your Duty: to visitte your Parents and receive their blessing, he went to
gossen, and carried his two Sons with him, you would not come your selffe
the lenght of a feeld, nor permit your two sisters to come.

Well poor Children, the God of mercy and compassion open the EyES of your
Souls and minds truly, so to look on your selves, as that you may duly
consider whence you are come, how you are gone forth from the unity into
dissension, that you, have forsaken te Doctrine of LOVE, and laid hold on
OSTENTATION, not considering that the Doctrine of Christ is nothing else butt a
BROTHERLEy LOVE, whereby God binds him self unto us in Christ and we to
him. That all teaching must ay me at that, as also all all ovvr villing,
living and doing, and that whosoever teaches and does otherways, is BABEL,
and a mere FABLE; a carved work of pride* in i^ profitable Iudgings: and
disturbings of the world, and hypocrisy of the Diuill vvherevvith he blinds
simpliciti, when he talks of OPENING of EyES.

May you so do your Duty to God and to your Neighbors (the first vvheroff your
Parents are) that you maybe assured (in his infalible promises to all penitent
Sinners that turn unto rightiousnesse) to see the true light that enlightened
every man that comes into the world.

And that finally you may hear spoken unto you come yea blessed of my father
inheritte the Kingdom prepared for you from the fondation of the world, the
vvishes of

your loving Father BALTHAZAR GERBIER.
Paris the 4. of May 1646.

