A GILDED PILL, for a new Molded PRESBYTER.

OR, Wholesome advice for the holy Synod: and all New-modelled Reformadoes.

With some Hints or Observations concerning the late Petition (promoted by some
factious Shimeies) to ruin this famous City and Kingdom.

Now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not the Lord. Hos. 10.
3. Printed in the Year 1647.

A PILL for a new-Moulded Presbyter.
Brethren:
I Here present unto your view a M^p, that may well be called, The M^p of
Misery, or the direct Plot of the fatal Tragedy that should have been acted
upon you and this City: or a gilded Pill, that is without side Gold; within
side Deadly Poison, which I hope will prove a caveat to the well affected party
of this languishing Kingdom, and teach them (if they be wise and provident
while they have time and power) to avoid the Serpentine and venomous snares of
that execrated and pestilent brood of Presbytery, who in sheeps clothing, prove
ravenous wolves, and devoureth: too simple credulous and easi^ to be inveagled
sheep of the little flock of Christ. This Fraterni^y of Iniquity, of the
Soc^e^y of the Serpent, (or Only distinguished thus* The one lives in a hot
Country, the other in a cold.
Scot I should say rather) from whom they have q^ickly learned (as is most
proper to their natures) actions and Doctrines, crafty wiles, impieties, lies,
equivocations, murders, impostures, and the like, all which they are taught of
that old Scot, the D^vell, their principal Instructor, are now become an
overspreading Leprosy over the face of this Kingdom, (al^hough the Lord be
praised the The King, the true hearted Commons, and Sir Thomas Fairfax Army.
Head, the heart, and hands, of this Kingdom are yet (most of them) free from
this infectious dis^ase.) O let us use all the means we can for the cleansing
this Leper: let us purify the inward rooms of our hearts with the pure
incense of prayer, and wash the very walls and outsides of these out earthly
Tabernacles, with true repentant tears, that the Lord may put an end to all our
mis^ries, and that we may resolve in our hearts to give Caesar his due, to
fear God and the King, and not to meddle with these money changers, that sell
Doves in the Temple of the Lord, that is, That live by the The Synod.
ruins of the innocent people: But we truly believe, that the Lord will gather
his wheat into his Garner, and burn the Stinking Elders.
tares with unquenchable fi^e.

Courteous Reader, I have thought good to insert here the Petition for their
late combination, and to expose to thy view some notes or observations upon it,
which if thou take in good part, it shall be my Directory ere long to expose
to thy view a new Century of Presbyterian Priests, Vale.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen,
etc.
The humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers, Young men, and
Apprentices. etc.
Shows:
THat your Petitioners taking into serious consideration, how Religion, his
Majesty's honor and safety, the privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of
the Subject, are at present greatly endangered, and likely to be destroyed; And
also sadly weighing with our selves what means might likely prove the most
effectual to procure a firm and lasting peace, without further effusion of
Christian English blood, have therefore entered into a solemn engagement, which
is heereunto annexed, and do humbly and earnestly desire, that this whole City
may join together by all lawful possible means, as one man, in hearty
endeavors, for his Majesty's present coming up to his two houses of
Parliament, with honor, safety, and freedom, and that without the near
approach of the Army, there to confirm such things, as he has granted in his
Message of the 12. of May last, in answer to the Propositions of both
Kingdoms: and that by a personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament,
and the Commissioners of the kingdom of Scotland, such things as are yet in
difference, may be speedily settled, and a firm and lasting peace established:
all which we desire may be presented to both Houses of Parliament, from this
Honorable Assembly.

And we shall pray, etc.
A solemn Engagement, etc.
Whereas we have entered into a Solemn League and Covenant, for reformation,
and defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, All which
we do evidently perceive, not only to be endangered, but ready to be destroyed.

We do therefore in pursuance of our the said Covenants, both of Allegiance,
Oath of every Freeman of the Cities of London, and Westminster, and
Protestations, Solemnly engage our selves, and vow unto Almighty God, that we
will to the utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that his Majesty may
speedily come to his two Houses of Parliament, with honor, safety, and
freedom, (and that without the nearer approach of the Army) there to confirm
such things, as he has granted in his Message of the 12 of May last, in answer
to the propositions of both Kingdoms, and that by a personal treaty, with his
two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland,
such things as are yet in difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and
lasting peace established. For effecting hereof we do protest and re-oblige
our selves as in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts, with our
lives and fortunes, to endeavor what in us lies, to preserve and defend, his
Majesty's Royal person and authority, the Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the Subject, in their full and constant freedom: The Cities of
London, and Westminster, lines of Communications, and Parishes mentioned in the
weekly Bills of mortallity, and all others that shall adhere with us to the
said Covenant, Oath of Allegiance, Oath of every freeman of London, and
Westminster, and Protestation. Nor shall we by any means admit, suffer, or
endure any kind of neutrality in this Common Cause of God, the King and
Kingdom, as we do expect the blessing of Almighty God, whose help we crave,
and wholly devolve our selves upon, in this our undertaking.

Considerations upon the Petition, and engagement, and late Declaration.
TO the right understanding of the true intents and end of this Petition and
engagement, these subsequents fall necessarily into consideration.

First upon what occasion this enterprise is begun, and upon what ground it
pretends to take its foundation: The occasion and ground as both Petition and
engagement seems to import, are thus, that Religion, his Majesty's honor and
safety, peace and safety of the three Kingdoms, Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the Subject are not only greatly endangered, but like to be
destroyed.

Here Is an honorable occasion and ground indeed, were it as real as by them
pretended; but later anguis in herba, here is a bewitching entising bait, but
the hook is venomous and mortal; For if also we do but duly weigh and
consider, where, and by whom this great danger is, and who are those threatening
destroyers, those Petitioners and new devised Covenanters (especially the
contrivers and promoters of the design) will be found the only continent
wherein the said epidemicall mischief lodges, and from whence all fear thereof
arises, and yet this very Petition, and new Machivillian Protestation is no
other then an eleaven Membered design for a new bloody direful war even for
the destruction of Religion, of his Majesty's honor and safety, peace of the
three Kingdoms, etc. yea, and for the most horrible and dreadful destruction,
and subversion of this mighty populous City: For it is first to be considered
by all who shall be moved hereunto to subscribe, and be assistant before they
subscribe, assent or act, where, and by whom those forementioned principles of
Englands safety are so desperately endangerd; if it be found that these kind of
engagers, contrivers, and drivers on of this new device, be the very men from
whom all the said danger has hitherto arisen, and from who^ it is now only
threatened, then this new engagement can be no other esteemed then an engagement
of the people in the very destruction of that, for which it thus glori^usly
pretends s^fety and preservation: for can we expect grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? such as are the engagers, such must we suspect and deem
the intent of, the engagement and designs, for every thing produces its like,
and you may know a Bear by his paw. And to put the matter out of doubt, common
observation, or every man's woeful experience tell us where the faultlies; there
are but two parties in the Kingdom upon which now it can be laid, either this
Army and their friends, or the obstructing traitorous party in the two Houses
at Westminster, with their Clergy accomplices and confederates. As for the Army
and their friends they have ever actually and visible engaged for the foresaid
principles of common right and safety, and now to give undoubted testimony to
their uprightness and sincerity in their said undertakings, they do now
faithfully and unanimously stand for the due and effectual accomplishment
thereof, as their several printed papers evidence to every impartial
capacity: Therefore there can be no just ground or reason in the engagement for
these things, if the engagement be against them: for to engage against the
real engagers for a thing is a direct engagement against the thing it self,
though never so much under the notion and color of the thing: And now the face
of this new design is directly against the Army, for the rescuing of his
Majesty's Royal Person from their honorable safe protection and custody, end
enforcement of them at such a distance to the City; and yet it would seem to
make the subscribers believe, as if that were the most likely means, to prove
most effectual, to procure a firm and lasting peace without a further
effusion of Christian English blood; and how like that is, let the world judge:
For what can be surmised or concluded from them but j^rres, discord, strife,
confusion, wars, effusion of blood, etc. for such an engagement as this
cannot possibly be without such disasterous horrible effects, for what is done
in this nature, and after this kind, must needs be done by force of arms.
T^erefore this engagement must needs arise from such as are most desperate
inveterate enemies to the Army, and to these foresaid pillars of the peoples
safety, who for their own protection in the ruin of the Army would engage
King, Kingdom, and City in their own destruction; therefore let this be a
caution for every honest hand and heart endeavoring and desiring the peace and
prosperity of King and Kingdom to forbear subscription or concurrence
thereto; touch not, taste not, handle not.

Now concerning the factious traitorous party in the House (with their
accomplices) who are the hinderers of those forementioned principles of safety
but those? Are they not the party under the weight of whose treacherous
delusions, oppressions, and cruelties, this Kingdom still labors in pain?
and who obstruct the course of justice, and under that obstruction protect
themselves from justice, even to the disquieting of the Kingdom, ^ndangering
the peace, and eminent ruin thereof? impartial judgment tell us they are,
and how can this new engagement (those weighty premises considered) be judged
for any other end, then for the protection of these delinquent traitorous
Members, their accomplices, and accomplishment of their own factious designs,
and even to the very apparent ruin of the Cities of London and Westminster,
and endangering the stately structures thereof to be laid levill with the
ground? For who are the Armies enemies but these? And what party considerable
in the Kingdom have these men to shelter themselves from the edge of their
particular charge? Are not their greatest hopes in the City? And so rather then
they will perish even the City it self shall sinck and perish, for hereby they
would engage it, to lay it self in its own ashes: for if this their desperate
work should go forward, what can the City expect, but to be sacked, plundered,
and destroyed, and left in its own rubbish and ruins? for is not the whole
Kingdom in a manner concurrant with the Army? And if there should be such an
engagement, and protestation and vow in the City, as one man to make
resistance, and to suffer no neutrallity amongst them, how can they think to
stand against this just and faithful Army, and this Kingdom, and escape the
consuming vengeance of sword and famine? C^rtainely vengeance will dog the
heels of the Tyrant and oppressor whether soever he flies, and when
inquisition is made, woe unto his protectours and defenders; therefore you that
are, or shall be moved to this perilous bloody plot, look well before you
leap, yeasterday cannot be recalled, to day if you will hear the voice of
safety, harden not your hearts, least you hurry swift destruction upon your
own heads, the City, and Kingdom too: Thus having this foresaid Petition and
Covenant put into mine hands, I thought good in haste to add a short
consideration thereto, that if hapily I may add unto the just prevention of
the ruin of this Kingdom and City thereby, and so present and leave both to
the use, judgment and consideration of all whom it may concern, and remain,

Faithfully devoted to the peace and safety both of Kingdom and City.

FINIS.

