A CASE OF CONSCIENCE Resolved.

Wherein it is cleared, That the KING may without impeachment to his Oath,
touching the Clergy at Coronation, consent to the Abrogation of EPISCOPACY.

AND The OBJECTIONS against it in two learned Treatises, Printed at Oxford,
Fully Answered.

By JOHN GEREE Master of Arts, and Preacher of the word of God at St. Albanes.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for John Bartlet, at the Guilt-Cup at
Austines-Gate, 1646.

Question 1.

WHether the King (considering his Oath at Coronation to protect the Clergy and
their Privileges) can salva conscientia consent to the abrogation of
Episcopacy?

Affirmation.

When I consider, first, That there is no hope of the Kings or Kingdoms
safety, without an union between our King and Parliament. Secondly, that such
an union is tantum non impossible, unless the King condescend in the point of
Episcopacy. Thirdly, for the King to condescend renitente conseientia, though
it might gratify us, it would be sinful to him, and so he should forfeit
inward to procure outward peace, and be represented to times in the glass of
Conscience, to adventure the Heavenly to retain an earthly Crown. Fourthly,
the Oath taken at the Kings Coronation has been pressed by some learned pens
with that probablity, that may stumble a right intelligent Reader, neither have
they that I know, received any satisfactory Answer in print. I conceive it may
be a work worthy some pains to resolve this case, and clear your objections,
that while they stand unanswered, cast an ill reflection both upon the King in
condescending to abrogate Episcopacie, and the Parliament in pressing him to
it. Now the bond of the Kings Oath may be taken off two ways. Either by
clearing the unlawfulness of it that it was vinculum iniquitatis, and so void
the first day, for qui jurat in iniquum obligatur in contrarium. And if Prelacy
in the Church be an usurpation contrary to Christ's institution, then to
maintain it is to sin, and all bonds to sin are frustrate. And truly, as
Prelacy stood with us in England, engrossing all ruledome in the Church into
the hands of a few Lord Bishops, I think it may be cleared to be an usurpation
by this one Argument. That Power that despoyles any of Christ's Officers of any
Privilege, or duty indulged or enjoined them by the word of God; that power is
an usurpation against the word. But this Prelacy did, as it stood in England.
Ergo, English Prelacy was an usurpation against the word of God. The Major is
clear of it self. The Minor is thus proved. Presbyters are by Christ's warrant
in Scripture endued with power to rule in their own Congregations, as well as
preach; see 1 Timothy 3.5. and 5.21. Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.

Now as Prelacy stood in England, the Presbyters were not only excluded from
all society in Rule, but which was much more prejudicial to the dignity, and
liberty of the Ministry, were subjected to a lay Chancelour; and was not here
usurpation against Gods direction?

But though this way of invalidating the Kings Oath be most satisfactory to
some, yet to those that are not convinced of the unlawfulness of Episcopacy it
will not hold, and so it would cast the resolution of this doubt about the
Oath, upon another Question touching the lawfulness of Episcopacy, which is a
larger field. I shall therefore endeavor to show that though for Argument sake
it be granted that Episcopacy be lawful, yet notwithstanding that his Oath,
the King without impeachment may in this circumstance consent to the abrogation
of Episcopacy.

The usual way of clearing this assertion is thus. The King is sworn to
maintain the Laws of the Land in force at his Coronation. Yet no man
questions, and the constant practice shows; that it is not unlawful after to
abrogate any upon the motion or with the consent of his Parliament. The meaning
of the Oath being known to be to maintain the Laws while they are Laws, but
when they are abrogated by just power in a regular way, they are then wiped out
of his charge and Oath. So the King by his Oath is bound to maintain the
rights of the Clergy while they continue such. But if any of their rights be
abrogated by just power, he stands no longer engaged to that particular: And
this I conceive to be a sound resolution. For the Kings Oath is against acting
or suffering a tyrannous invasion on Laws and rights, not against a
Parliamentary alteration of either.

A namelesse Author in a Book impleading all war against the King.
But here steps in my first opponent, and though he dispute modestly, only
proposing what he holds forth to serious consideration, yet he objects subtlely
and his discourse runs thus. The Oath for maintenance of Laws is made populo
Anglicano to the people of England, and so may be taken off by a future Act,
because it is by their own consent represented in Parliament. But the Oath to
maintain the privileges of the Clergy, is made to such a part of his people
clero Anglicano, and particularly taken by him after his Oath to the whole
Realm, which were needless unless it meant some other obligation. This seems
(says the learned Author) to make it a distinct obligation, and not releasable
without the Clergies consent.

I answer. Taking it for granted that the Oath is thus taken by the King. That
Oath was so framed, when Clerus Anglicanus the Clergy of England, was a
distinct society or Corporation (as I may so say) a populo Anglicano, from the
people of England. This distinction between the Clergy and Laity we may observe
in our Historians. Daniel in the life of William the first, gives this for a
reason why the Clergy did so willingly condescend to him, because they had
their Province apart, whence they supposed a security to their Privileges,
however the Laity were inslaved. Dan. in the life of William the first, page 36.
The same distinction of the Clergy and Laity is observed by him in the life
of Henry the second, page 83. And this was not only in England, but in other
Nations, as it is observed by Marsilius Patavinus a Learned writer in Popish
times. Secularium petentes fastigia in legum lationes seorsum ab iis quae
Civium universitatis proruperunt: omnem Clei^^ abbine decernentes exemptum:
Civil sebismas, and principatuum supremorum pluralitatem inducentes ex lipsis,
quam velut impossibilem humane quieti certam ^^jus inducentes experientiam
demonstravimus 17o. 1 ^. Marsilius Patavinus defensi pacis, part. 2. cap. 23.
Hence are they styled by Tindall in his practice of Popish Prelates, corpus
neutrum.
Now being the Clergy and Laity were distinct bodies; the Clergy holding their
rights by Privilege distinct from the Laws of the Land; an Oath to maintain
the Laws of the Land secured not them: But as another body they had another
Oath for their security. But now this distinction of the Clergy from the
Laity, that they should be a distinct Province of themselves, being a branch of
Popery, is with it quite extinguished: And Laity and Clergy are now one body
Politic, and under the same power and Rule. For all privileges of the Clergy
that are contrariant to the Laws of the Land, were abolisht in the reign of
Henry the eight. As undoubtedly that was, that any society should be exempt
from secular power, for that was to set up two Supremacies. And therefore
though the Oath be continued in that order that it was when the Laity and
Clergy were distinct bodies; yet now that this distinction is abrogated, and
they are made one, the oath to the Clergy cannot be stronger or more
inviolable, then that to the Layetie for the preservation of the Laws of the
Land. Both subject to regular alteration.

Who knows not that one of the privileges of the Clergy was, for the Bishops
to sit and vote in the house of Peers, yet that is abolisht as incongruous to
their calling. And then why may not the removal of their Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction be consented to, as well, if it prove inconvenient and
prejudicial to the Church? The abolition of the one is no more against the
oath, then of the other.

Again, when this oath was framed, the Church was endued with the ignorance of
the times, with diverse unlawful immunities, in all which respects the oath was
invalid, being vinculum iniquitatis, and some were pared off as light shined
forth. And why may not the great Revenues of the Bishops with their sole
jurisdiction in so large a circuit, be indicted and convict to be against the
edification of the Church; and it be found more for the glory of God, that both
the Revenue be divided to maintain a preaching Ministry, and their
jurisdiction also, for the better oversight and censure of manners. And then is
there as good a plea, notwithstanding the oath, to alter this useless
Anti-Evangelicall pomp and domination of a few, as to antiquate other
immunities arising from the error of the times, not the tenure of Scripture.
Were indeed the privileges in question, such as were for the advantage of the
Church, to further her edification; or had the Prelates been good Stewards and
innocent in the use of them; then had the plea carried a fairer show: But there
having been so many forfeitures by abuse, and those great promotions and
jurisdictions, being as unwieldy to a Spiritual soldier, as Saul's Armor to
David; and so do not further, but hinder the work of the Gospel, where strong
holds are to be vanquished not by carnal pomp, but spiritual furniture mighty
through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. I see no just engagement to maintain such combersome
greatness, adding only glory to the person, not vigor to the maine work of a
Minister of the Gospel.

Again, thus I angue. If the King may consent to alter the Laws of the
Nation, notwithstanding his oath, then so he may also the Clergies immunities.
For those rights and immunities, they either hold them by Law or otherwise. If
by Law, then the Parliament which has power to alter all Laws, have power to
alter such Laws as give them their immunities, and those Laws altered, the
immunity cease, and so the Kings engagement in that particular. If their
immunity be not by Law, it is either an usurpation without just title, which
upon discovery is null. Or it was given by Papal power in times of darkness,
which being an Antichristian usurpation is long since abolisht in this Kingdom.

The Author illustrateth the force of his argument by an example holding forth
an inconvenience. Where public Faith is given for money, it is not
releaseable by Parliament, without consent of the party: for if it be, it is in
effect no engagement: so etc.

An. There Is a great deal of difference between an engagement made to persons,
on valuable consideration, and that which is made gratis to an office or
society subservient to public good. Of the former kind, is the engagement to
pay sums of money of whom they were borrowed for public good, which is
indispensable without the consent of the lender? Of the latter sort, is this
engagement to the English Clergy. Now engagements to a Society to maintain
their rights, indulged for the personal worth of present incumbents, or to
promote the usefulness of that office. If in their matters they prove
prejudicial to the office, or the succeeding officers by their ill demeanor
forfeit them, their engagement becomes alterable: There Is no injustice done to
make a Law to overrule, or alter this engagement. There Is no question of power
in the Parliament to overruled it: for in the former case of money, if King and
Parliament should ordain release of the engagement, the engagement were gone
in Law though not in equity; The Order would be valid in Law though injurious:
So if there be no injury, the King and Parliament may cancel any obligation.
And where there is forfeiture by miscarriage, or the privilege indulged to a
Ministry (which ought to hold nothing but for public good) proves
prejudicial; the abrogation will be just as well as Legal, there will be no
injury done.

But take it at the worst, it is but for the King to get the Clergies consent,
and I hope in this case they will not be so tenacious of their wealth, and
honor, as to let the Crown run an hazard rather then lay down their Mitres,
and endanger the whole Land to be brought to nothing rather then themselves to
moderation: I cannot but have a better conceit of the major part of them at
this time, which will amount to a consent, and that in this Authors judgment
takes off the scruple about the oath.

Besides this Argument, there be other insinuations brought in by the feign
Author, that it would be dishonorable to the Kings memory, to be an
unfortunate instrument to pull down Cathedralls, and impoverish them, etc.

Ans. To abolish Prelacy, and seize the revenues of Prelates to private or
civil Interest, undoubtedly could neither want stain nor guilt. Such kind of
impropriation as happened in the days of Henry the eight was cried out of all
the Christian world over. Illam bonorum Ecclesiasticorum dissipationem cum
detestando sacrilegio conjunctam, tecum, and cum bonis omnibus deploramus,
scelus universo erbi commune, says Beza in resp. ad Sarac. de gradibus minist.
page ult. But who knows not the great defect amongst us, of congruous
maintenance for parochial Pastors, by whom the work of the Ministry is
chiefly to be performed? And if those large revenues of the Prelates were
diverted to supply with sufficient maintenance all the defective Parishes in
England, there would be no danger of Sacrilege: And this would not be to
ruin, but to rectify the devotion of former ages, and turn pomp into use,
and impediments into helps. A work, for which following generations should not
need to pity the King, as put upon it by misfortune: but rise up and c^ll him
blessed, whose many other disasters ended in so good, and useful a work.

Had the motives of Heary the eight been as honest to cast off Papal
usurpation, as the Act was holy; and the improvement of Abbey Lands, as
conformable to Divine Law, as the dissolution of Abbeys to the Rules of Divine
wisdom; He might not only have been honorable in our Annals: but if I may so
speak, a Saint in our Calender. It was the defective circumstances of actions
in themselves glorious, which made them a dishonor to him, though advantageous
to the Church, which ill circumstances being avoided in the thing in question,
God and good men will highly approve it, which is the only real, and
regardable honor. Thus far my first opponent.

My second Antagonist exceeds the first, both in subtlety, and peremptorinesse;
for he plainly affirms, A Book called The review of the covenant. page 72. 73.
74.
that the King cannot desert Episcopacy without flat perjury; and hence falls
foul, both on those that would force him to it, and also on those moderate
Courtiers that for peace sake counseld it. He disputes thus There Is difference
between Laws and Oaths; where the supreme jus Dominii is, there is a power
above all Laws, but not above their own Oaths, in whom that power is; for
Law binds only while it is a Law, that is, till it be repealed. But an Oath
binds as long as it pleases him to whom it is taken: The reason is, because
the subject of supreme Power may cedere jure suo, and oblige himself where
before he was free: which if they do by promise, Justice binds them to
performance; but if by an Oath (the matter being lawful) then are they bound
in Religion, and Conscience, for an Oath adds a religious bond unto God. If
this were not so, no Oath were binding to them.

I answer. First, it is a ground laid down by this Author in the same place;
that no Oath is obligatory beyond the intention of it; and then I first propose
it to consideration, whether the intention of this Oath be not only against a
tyrannous invasion on the rights of the Clergy, not against an orderly
alteration of them, if any prove inconvenient, and to protect them against
violence, not against legal ways of change. For, first, this is as much as it
is rational for a King to undertake, and therefore in right reason the Oath
should have no other sense, if the words of the Oath will bear it, as the
words of this Oath will. Secondly, this Oath to the Clergy, must not be
intended in a sense inconsistent with the Kings Oath to the people, first taken
for their protection in their Laws, and Liberties; for then the latter Oath
would be a present breach of the former, and so unlawful. Now one of the
privileges of the people is, that the Peers and Commons in Parliament, have
power with the consent of the King, to alter whatever in any particular estate
is inconvenient to the whole. And therefore he cannot afterward engage
himself to any partionlar estate, to exempt it from this power; for by that
Oath at least cessit jure suo, in this Authors judgment. The Clergy and their
privileges are subject to the Parliament, or they are not; I hope they will
not now claim an exemption from secular power. But if they be under
Parliamentary power, how can it rationally be conceived to be the meaning of
the Kings Oath, to preserve the privileges of the Clergy, against that power
to which they are legally subject? or how were the Oath in that sense
consistent with the privileges of the Nation, formerly sworn to by the King?
If the Oath had such a sense in the times of Popery, when the Clergy were a
distinct corporation; yet when that exemption was abolisht, as a branch of
Antichristian usurpation, the change of their condition must needs change the
intention of the Oath, unless they will say, that the Crown stands still
engaged to them, to maintain such privileges, as by Act of Parliament were
long since abolisht; which is to make his Oath to them contrariant to that
taken before, for the maintenance of the against legal alteration of their
privileges by Parliament, makes it unlawful, and so not obligatory. And if it
be not intended against legal alteration, the King may pass a Bill for the
abolition of Episcopacy, when his Houses of Parliament think it convenient, and
petition for it without violation of his Oath.

Secondly, I answer from the expressions in the Oath it self, as they are set
down by the same Author, page 74. To protect the Bishops, and their
privileges to his power, as every good King in his Kingdom in right ought to
protect, and defend the Bishops, and Churches under their government. Here you
see the engagement put upon the King, is but to his power, as every good King
ought in right to protect, etc. Now such power is no further then he can do it
without sinning against God, and being injurious to the rest of his people.
When then he has interposed his Authority for them, and put forth all the
power he has to preserve them; if after all this he must let them fall, or
support them with the blood of his good Subjects, and those unwilling too to
engage their lives for the others privileges; I think none need question, but
that he has gone to the extent of his power, and as far as good Kings are
bound in right, for it is not equal to engage the lives of some to uphold the
honor of others; that were to be cruel to many thousands, to be indulgent to
a few. Suppose a King put a Commander into a City, and give him an Oath to
maintain the privileges of it, and keep it for him to his power; and this
Commander keeps this Town till he have no more strength to hold it, unless he
force the Townes-men to arms, against that privilege which he has sworn to
maintain; If this Governor now surrender this Town upon composition, does he
violate his Oath? I think none will affirm it; Such is the case with the King
in this particular; when he has gone as far in their protection as is
consistent with the weal of other his Liege people, which he is sworn to
tender; he has protected them to his power, and his obligation is no further
by the words of the Oath.

The only objection (as I conceive) which lies against this is, that though
it be not in the Kings power to uphold them, yet it is in his power not to
consent to their fall.

Ans. If the King should be peremptory in denial, what help would this be to
them? such peremptorinesse in this circumstance might endanger his Crown, not
save their Mitres. Besides, though it be in his power to deny assent to their
abolition, in a natural sense, because voluntas non potest cogi, yet it is not
in his power in a Moral sense, because he cannot now deny consent without
sin; for if he consent not, there will evidently continue such distraction
and confusion, as is most repugnant to the weal of his people, which he is
bound by the Rule of government, and his Oath to provide for.

Thirdly, I answer, that this opponent in this dispute, argues upon this
ground, that the Supremum jus Dominii, even that which is above all Laws, is
in the King; which under favor, I conceive in our State is a manifest error.
There Is a Supremacy in the King, and a Supremacy in the Parliament; but the
Supremacy, or the Supremum jus Dominii, that is over all Laws, figere or
refigere, to make or disanull them at pleasure, is neither in the King nor in
the Houses apart, but in both conjoined. The King is the Supreme Magistrate
from whom all power of execution of Laws is legally derived. The Parliament is
the Supreme Court, by which all other Courts which derive their power for
execution of Laws from the King by his Commissions are to be regulated; and
the King and the Parliament are the Supreme Power to make and disanull Laws.
Since then this Supremum jus Dominii, that is over all Laws, is not in the
King, He cannot lawfully make any engagement to any, against the Laws, and
Legal rights of others; for that were not cedere jure suo, but alieno. This
Oath then to the Clergy, cannot engage him against the legal Privileges of
the people, or Parliament; which he is bound to maintain; one of which is to
be ready by confirming needful Pills, to relieve them against whatsoever
grievance they suffer from any. And thus, I think the case is sufficiently
cleared, that notwithstanding the Kings Oath to the Clergy at his Coronation,
he may consent to the extirpation of Prelacy out of the Church of England.

FINIS.

