THE PRELATICAL CAVALIER Catechized, and the Protestant Soldier encouraged. By
a Missive sent to King CHARLES in the name of the Protestants beyond Seas.

Wherein these three Questions are resolved. Viz. First, how inconsistent a
Prelaticall Government is with the true Protestant Religion, and with the peace
and welfare of this Kingdom. Secondly, how absolutely necessary it is for King
CHARLES and his Associats, to entertain Peace with the Parliament at any hand,
if ever he hops to recover or enjoy any glory or splendor of his Royalty.
Thirdly, which are the best means King CHARLES, etc. can use for obtaining an
honorable Peace for the present, and improving and continuing the same in time
to come. Much conducing to encourage and confirm all true Protestants in the
truth of the Protestant Cause, especially all Soldiers that are for King and
Parliament.

Being a Work, very useful and profitable to be read of all.

Presented to the Honorable Councels of Great Britain, now sitting in
Parliament; and the rest of the Kings Majesty's Subjects.

By Eleazer Gilbert, a Minister of Gods Word.

Printed, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Leyburn, and Richard Wodenothe, and are to be sold
at the Star, under Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1645.

with brothels and whore-houses. But when did your Highness, or any of your
followers, tax these men? For not only dispensing with, but even selling and
licensing adultery, fornication, Idolatry, perjury, etc. Yea, which is as it
were, the very essence and soul of Church Discipline; (Excommunication) for so
great was the corruption of your Bishops, and their Officials; that for the
value of twelve pence or some other such trifling sum of money, a man might
either be received in, or ejected and cast out of your Hierarchicall
Consistory, so that they have made Excommunication almost a very Chimaera, and
consequently have enervated, extenuated, or rather annihilated the whole
strength and power of your Church Government.

Furhermore, we appeal unto your Highness and your Associates; what ungodly,
unjust and preposterous thing it was, that these Bishops Officials, being
themselves but Laick men; neither Prophets, nor perhaps bred in the Schools of
the Prophets; should at their own pleasure, summon up from the furthest corners
of your Kingdom; nay, and not only so, but punish, suspend, and censure, both
the persons and doctrine of your most godly, learned, and orthodox Divines; if
either themselves or their Bishop had conceived the least spleen against them:
may not the Proverb be well applied to such unequal and rigid Judges, Sus
Minervam; or may not such reverend men say unto such Laick Bishops, as the
Egyptian said to Moses, Who made you a Judge over us? In one word, if your
Highness will but with an impartial eye: behold or survey the stupendous
insolency and corruption of your Bishops Courts and their Officers, these
twenty years past, etc. you cannot but confess with us, that they were and are
no other then a company of covetous, temporizing Horsleeches come to their
Consistories (not so much to compose and decide differences, and to preserve
peace and piety amongst your people; as to get money and enrich themselves by
the sins of the people: whereas if this charge were committed to godly and
conscionable Pastors and Ministers assisted with the Suffrages of their Elders
and Deacons (as it is in the government Presbyteriall all this corruption might
be, or at the least, the most part prevented. Finally, that we may persuade
your Highness, etc. not only to leave, but also to loath the paps of that
enchanting Sorceress: we will add this one thing more, viz. the greatabuse
which was committed by your Bishops in their Ordination of Ministers, how
contrary to the Gospel? and inconsistent with the practice of a Protestant
Church is it? that the Ordination of many Ministers should be committed to the
hands and authority of one man: viz. a Bishop, and that when such easy terms,
and so small a trial; that let an Artificer or Husbandman come to a Bishop or
his Chaplain upon some Ordination day, provided with some perfunctory Letter,
or superficial testimony from a man (if but of ordinary quality) always
provided that he has his fees in his hand, and a black coat upon his back, and
then, although he were as false and wicked as ever was Judas or Cain: as void
of feature and good manners, as was Thersites and had no more learning then had
Balaams Ass. He shall be admitted to the Ministry, quite contrary to Paul's
charge to Timothy; which was not to lay hands suddenly upon any man. Not that
this authority of laying on of hands, or ordaining Ministers belonged to him
alone: as the Prelates do allege, for this is contrary to his own practice,
when 1 Timothy 3. 14. He would not be admitted himself without the laying on of
hands, of the company of the Eldership; but rather to dehort him from being
corrupted by the example of these men, who had arrogantly assumed unto
themselves this liberty, and as contrary is it also to the practice of Paul and
Barnabas, Acts 13. 1. and these Deacons mentioned, Acts 6. 6. From which
Pontificiall presumption, it has come to pass, that in your English Prelacy
(as from the Trojan Horse) there have issued so many Apostolical Preachers,
who being for their fees admitted to the Ministry by some Bishop, without any
Church, stipend, or maintenance, are forced (as it were) to beg their bread
from door to door, and that not out of conscience (as the Popish Mendicants)
but of constraint: they not having so much by their calling, as will supply
their necessary sustenance: or which is much worse, sometimes to go beyond the
Seas, and there turn Apostates, either to the Roman, Nicholaitan, or Lutheran
superstitions, or thirdly, which is as bad, or little better then the former,
or rather then they should starve, some of them do wander to Amsterdam or New
England, and their side with some new fangled schism: Good God how abominable
should this be to your Highness who profess your self Defender of the Faith?
How dishonorable is it to your Nation? and how prejudicial to the true
Protestant Religion and professors thereof, who should have amongst them all
but one God, one Faith, and one Baptism, and who should have no more Ministers
amongst them to work at their Altars, but such as have a competent maintenance,
and are able to live by the Altar: Is this the care of your right reverend
Fathers to provide for their children, or has your Highness all this time,
suffered your self so woefully to be misled by these ghostly Vultures, as to
permit them so shamefully (as the Pope does to himself and his Cardinals
Nephews) to ingrosse unto themselves and their symonaicall friends (neither of
whom, nor perhaps any of them ever dared to adventure themselves beyond the
seas to see the face, or learn the posture of any Christian or Protestant
Church, or it may be has no more learning in them then to resolve the Bishop
of that grand question) who was Melchisedecks father? to permit such men, them
we say, so shamefully to ingrosse to themselves all the fattest Benefices in
your Kingdoms, and that a few (perhaps forty or fifty prelaticall Priests or
Ministers, by their codpiece or Court Symonie, should have every one for his
yearly stipend 1000 or 2000 li. a year at the least, when it may be, 5000 more
godly, learned, and every way more worthy pastors, who have also a greater
charge to mayntain) shall not have so much amongst them all, but are enforced,
notwithstanding, their assiduous labors, and conscionable conversation, to eat
the bread of car fullness, and to drink the waters of affliction by measure.
That such barbarous, or rather Antichristian inequality, should not only be
tolerated, but also, with tooth and nail, so eagerly be mayntained, without
reformation and that by a Protestant Prince, who styleth himself, Defender of
the Faith, and by his associates who pretend and profess so much of the
Protestant Religion, is a thing we must needs confess beyond our admiration.
What should wespeak of your admitting Popish Priests and sacrificatures unto
your parochial charges, yea, and sometimes to steer the helm of Christ's ship
amongst you, without any imposition of hands, admission, or vocation, other
then they received from the Roman Bishops, by whom they were ordinated
sacrificers; to offer in their blasphemous Masses a Sacrifice both for quick
and dead which how far it does derogate from the all sufficiency of Christ's
passion, and how far such Sacrifices and Sacrificers are different from those
in the Gospel: Romans 12. 1. which consists principally in killing and mortifying
our sinful lusts and affections; we hope may appear easily to any true
Protestant whom God has not given over to believe strong delusions, and to
hold the truth in unrighteousness nor is there any less difference betwixt
the calling of a Priest by a Popish Bishop, we speak as they are devoted to
the errors and blasphemies of the Sea of Rome, as now it is unto the
dispensation and ministry of the Gospel, and the calling of a Protestant
Minister by a lawful Presbyter (for ought we know then there was betwixt the
calling of Annas and Caiphas, and that of Paul and Barnabas: Act. 13. 1. And so
also we could tell your Prelates of their permitting women to baptize children
in case of weaknesle, and if they cannot conveniently be brought to Church, as
if the salvation of infants did depend upon the act of Baptism and not upon
the free grace of God, who according to the good pleasure of his will; and in
relation to the covenant he has made with our fathers has elected them to
salvation in Christ their Savior for by the ministry of the Sacraments, Gods
promises unto us are not accomplished and finished, but only established and
confirmed: here therefore is one gross error more to permit women to baptize,
whom the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 12. will not permit to teach or speak in the
congregation, nor to have any public charge in the Church; certainly, if they
may lawfully be permitted to minister the one Sacrament, we know no reason why
they may not as lawfully minister the other, which we hope no sound protestant
will deny to be flat contrary to the ordinance of Christ, and a mere
profanation of those holy mysteries. The like also we might allege of the
Anabaptists, Brownists, and diverse other Schismatikes, that are permitted by
you on both sides to the great disparagement of our Protestant Religion who
although they were never brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, nor bred in the
schools of the Prophets, but mere husbandmen or tradesmen, whose credit wealth
and wit lies in their hands and fingers, yet forsooth will brag of the Spirit
and without any warrant or commission from Christ or his Church, will presume
to take upon them this sacred function, and both preach and baptize without any
warrant or calling, other then their own private fantasy or some brainsick
enthusiasme. What need we say more? seeing that which we have already affirmed,
is abundantly sufficient to discover to the world that your late English,
Episcopal Prelaticall Government, which your Highness and your associats do
so stiffly maintain, has been no other (we mean especially in point of
discipline) then a pattern of Popery, a map of Machiavilisme, a rapsodie of
Superstition and a bundle of corruption, in regard whereof (for ought we know)
we may as lawfully say, that of your Church and your Church government, as
Buchanan your Highness Fathers Schoolmaster spoke of old Rome.

Totam denique quantacunque Roma est
Nascentom, vegetem excute and florentem
Nihil invenies nisi Lupercall
Lupercale, Lupos, Lupas, Lupanar.
To conclude, therefore this first question, and apply it to the use of your
Highness, and your Associates seeing that your late Prelacy, as it was
exercised in England: and as it is now so stiffly maintained by you, has not,
nor ever had any just ground from the Word of God, nor from Christ, institution
nor the practice of Gods true Church for diverse hundred of years after Christ,
until Antichrist began to shoot out his horns. And for as much also as the
true and solid peace and prosperity of a people, and their welfare also in
respect of political government depends much, if not altogether, upon the
right and orthodex government of the Church, consisting in soundness of
doctrine, and integrity of discipline. It is high time for your Highness,
(seeing that yoy Hierarchy can hold no water, is not like to hold water)
although with the Papist you should plead never so much antiquity for it (for
as your own Hierarchicall Civilians will confess) Quod non valet ab initio,
tractu temporis non convalescit.) To bethink your self of some more sound,
lawful, and warrantable way of governing your people in matters of Religion
which is grounded; not to much upon men's inventions and Pontificiall Canons, as
upon the Institution and written Word of God, and of his Son Christ, whose
Gospel and Ordinance, does not only bless and sanctify but authorize and
qualify all humane actions, and that as well under the Gospel, as under the
Law: for why should we think, that Almighty God should be less careful of the
Government of his Church under the New Testament, then he was in the time of
Moses, or that he should then leave, or now under the Gospel allow all things
in his Church; nay, any thing to be managed by the will and determination of
subordinate Officers and Magistrates, without any ground (explicit or employed)
from himself, whereas we know, that (not only Moses under the old Testament
was so shie to do any thing) in the government of Gods people of his own head.
and without a special direction and commandment from God: that he would not
admit unto the Passover, one that at a Funeral had touched the corpse of a
dead man: before he had asked counsel of God, as you may see, Numb. 9. 6, 7, 8
verses, and in Exodus 25. 40. he is expressly charged by God not to make the
Tabernacle after any other fashion then was showed him in the mountain; but
also Christ himself, who was Moses prototype; whom God in the 18 of Deuteronomy
15. did promise to raise up as a Prophet like unto Moses, (although much more
excellent) for Moses as a servant, but Christ as a son, Heb. 3. 5, 6. Did
dispose and regulate his little flock according to the will of his Father; not
according to the will of man, nor according to his own will as he was man: but
according to the will of his Father; for as himself witnesses, John 5. 30. He
came not to seek his own will, but the will of his heavenly Father: and this
kind of government revealed in his Gospel without all question he will
continue and have amongst all his chosen people to be continued until his
second coming whose voice all Christians but especially, all Protestants, or
reformed Christians must obey, unless they will deny Christ to be their
Prophet or derogate from the worthinesle of his prophetical office; one
principal part whereof was not only to reveal unto his people his Fathers will
concerning their redemption, but also to govern and rule them in the
performance and execution of that will unto the end of the world: wherefore to
draw the frame and authenticalnesse of a Church government, from any other
pattern then from Christ and his Apostles, is no other then to deny both the
Prophetical and Regal office of the Son of God; who if he be a King over
his people, why should he not be able both to prescribe laws unto them, and
also guide and rule them according to these Laws so far as may conduce to his
owngory and their happiness: Surely they that draw the frame and government of
an Evangelicall Church under the Gospel, from any other authority, or build the
same too much upon the placets and inventions of men who are not only vain,
but vanity it self, nor subject to deceive, but also to be deceived, do but
take their marks by the moon, build their house upon the sand. preferring
Eleazer the servant to Isaac the son, and Moses the messenger, unto Christ
the master and Judge of all the earth. In a word to say that Christ is not as
careful of his Christian Church under the Gospel as Moses was of the Church of
the Jews; and that he has not in his Gospel prescribed, what kind of
Magistrates, Ministers; and Officers he would have, and by what Laws he would
have them to be governed, were to make him more negligent of his people then
was Numa of the Romans, Solon of the Lydians or Lycurgus of the Lacedaemonians;
all which (although Heathens did prescribe wholesome Laws unto their
Commonwealth) which so much as to think of the Lord Jesus (in whom were hiden
all treasures of wisdom and knowledge) were most damnable and blasphemous. So
much of the first Question, viz. How inconsistent your late Church government
was with the Gospel, and how far it has been of late years in your Kingdoms
abused.

The second Question.
HOw inconsistent this kind of Church government is unto your Highness safety
and prosperity of the Republic: and consequently what a preposterous thing it
is to continue the same in these Kingdoms?

This Question is easily resolved, if you will suffer your judgment without
partiality: but to reflect upon these three Objects, viz. First, the
disposition and affections of your own Subjects. Secondly, the reputation and
expectation of Protestant Princes and Professors amongst us beyond the Seas.
Thirdly, the condition and nature of the true Protestant Religion, and
Protestant Professors established and regulated by a Presbytery; which, without
all peradventure of all Christian professions this day in the World, is that
which is most sound and orthodox in it self: as being most free from
corruption, and most safe for a true Protestant Prince which undertaketh to
mayntain (not a Protestant Religion, for so do the Kings of Poland, Sweden, and
Denmark, although corrupted with the Roman and Lutheran Superstitions) but the
Protestant Religion, which only is most consonant with the doctrine and
practice of Chirst and his Apostles, and most agreeable to that pattern of
wholesome doctrine expressed in the Gospel, the patronage whereof no Prince can
deny that is a true Protestant unless it be such a Prince that affects
tyranny; and would make under the cloak of Relgion (not the Word of God and
welfare of his people; but worldly policy and private respects,) to be rule of
his government.

First then, May it please your Highness and Confederates, to cast your eyes
upon the people (we mean not such people, whom malice, corruption, or
covetousnes, (without any respect to the Word of God, or a good conscience)
have drawn to your side) but the mayn body of the two of your best Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, for the most and best part, how exasperatly and
uncontrolable are they set against this way: mayntayning it for a maxim (as
your Associates do) No Bishop, no King, so they (No Bishops, no Popery:) where
by the word Bishop, they do not understand any of Paul's Bishops mentioned in
the Epistle to Timothy and Titus, for such Bishops as these they seek for, and
their Petition unto your Highness is; Da nobis tales Timothaeos, and nos eos
cib abimus auro, and potabimus balsamo; Such Bishops as these may be well
consistent with the Presbyteriall Government, and by the prayers and suffrages
of such Bishops (before ever he meddled with a Hierarchy) your Royal Father
King James did enjoy many peaceable and happy days which (if it had pleased our
Great Landlord) might have been continued unto your Highness and your
posterity, and which (we beseech the Almighty, mangre the unhappiness of your
present distempers,) may be continued unto you and yours (as long as the Sun
and Moon endures.) But by a Bishop, your people for the most part, understand
a domineering, temporizing and self-seeking prelate; where by the word Bishop
or prelate, they do not so much conceive one particular office, or individual
person of one Clergy man, but collectively, all his subordinate Officers
Assistants, and Attendants; such as Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends Surrogates,
Chancelours, Commissaries, Registers, Proctors, Apparitors, Chaunters,
Choristers, Canons, Pety-Canons Vergers, and all their Ecclesiastical Courts,
Laws Canons, Orders, Innovations and Ceremonies which although they were in
themselves never so indifferent, decent, or commendable yet the Commons for the
most part of both these Kingdoms are persuaded, and hold it for* Maxim
irrefragible, that dictates such a Bishop (we say not such a Prines,
mayntaining or approving such persons or things) is no other then a relike of
popery; a limb of Antichrist: a Wenne upon the face, or a Boil upon the blessed
of a true Protestant Reformed Church. Nay, there be many thousands of
Husbandmen, Artificers and Tradesmen; besides people of greater quality (if we
be not much misinformed) within your Island, whom (if we should go about to
persuade of the lawfulness of such a Bishop but in jest) they would be ready
to cut our throats in earnest so rigidly are they set against this kind of
Prelacie: the Hierarchy, that the very name of a Bishop, is to an ordinary
English or Scottish country man as the King of Spain is to a Hollander: for as
the one takes it for an argument so much honesty to rail against the Spanish
King, so does the other hold this to be a special mark of a good Protestant
to condemn and cry down Episcopacy, the very name of a Bishop they hate worse
then a young Court Lady does old age, or a Jew Images.

Seeing therefore your people (for the most part are thus disposed) it is the
duty of a wise Prince, being Pater patriae, to comply to their desires; your
greatest strength consisting in their affections, and their affections being so
brittle as a Crystal glass, which being once broken can hardly be souldred
together again: yea, although that which they desire should be unreasonable,
yet (if the common stream be very strong; a discreet Prince can have no better
policy then to row with the tide (although he should be forced, through the
violence of the weather, to land at the wrong stairs) it is but a little going
on foot (if he cannot have a Coach or Sedan) that will bring him to his right
Harbor. Nor can the foregoing or quitting the Prelacy Hierarchy, detract any
thing (if you consider rightly from the stature of your magnificence. For why,
may not a Moderator (in a government presbyteriall) be as safe and honorable
unto your Highness, and as well endowed by your Highness bounty; as any
prelate under the government Hierarchicall; your Highness especially, having
therewith (which we are sure you have not now) the affections and consent of
your people. Neither can it any ways be dishonorable to admit of this change
at the request of the Commons, seeing you have the president of diverse wise and
mighty Potentates for the same; who rather then they would admit of war to
come within the channel of their Dominions, upon any terms; did think it no
disparagement to subscribe unto their peoples demands; although sometimes
absurd and ridiculous: Witness Jews the Eleventh, and Henry the Seventh; then
which all England and France; cannot point forth two of more profound judgment,
and better verst in the mystery of government, who in cases of controversy
with their subjects, were the first propounders and seekers of peace; and by
their soft compliance, did dint the bullets of their peoples fury; and so by
this means, when the storm was over, and business came to be debated upon the
great Carpet; did in a short time, and by degrees become Masters of their own
ends, and their subjects affections: Yea, which is yet more, Suppose that your
Great Counsel would comply with your Highness to continue this Hierarchy,
(which as we understand they will yet hardly do) yet shall not ever your
Highness or your posterity have any settled peace in your Dominions, unless
you abolish the same: The people will still once in twenty or thirty years run
into their old byas, Episcopacy (as it has been there amongst you exercised)
being in their construction (as is aforesaid) no other then a wound or gangreen
upon the breast of the English Church in which wound, so long as there remains
any corruption, so long there will be pain: and so long as there is pain, the
patient will complain, the humor therefore must be purged, and the wound
before it be sewed up, well cleansed, lest it burst out again, or if it be a
gangreen, the part that is festered must be cut off:

-- Immedicabile vulnus,
Ense recidendum ne pars synceratrahatur.
For if it be let alone, the whole body will be thereby endamaged so long as
the cause remayns, so long will the effect be continued; so long as your
Highness does mayntain and patronize Episcopacie, so long will your people
murmur and grudge at your government. As therefore you tender the health of the
Commonwealth, and as you desire the settled peace of this Kingdom; venienti
occurrite morbo: purge out this old leven, clear the breast, and heal the heart
of your political body, and that so seasonably and speedily, that your
miseries come not to a greater height; for,

-- Sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
If your disposition to jarring turn once into a settled habit of warring
(without the rich mercy of God.) there will be norhing wanting to make your
calamities irrecoverable.

Furthermore let your Highness and your Confederates (if you be as you
profess your selves to be true Protestants, duly consider what a great
improvement this will be to the Protestant Religion; if you will abandon this
kind of government, and establish throughout all your Dominions the government
Presbyteriall; what a great heartning and encouragement to all foreign
Protestant Princes and professors throughout Europe, who do worship God in
spirit and truth and are resolved to maintain their Religion in the same purity
it was in the Apostlestime, and many years after, until pride, ambition and
corruption began to sway: What joyful news (we say) will this be to them? that
your Highness and Associates have resolved to put to your helping hands
toward the curtaling of the Popes horns, and that you have given such a blow
to the Roman Antichrist, as that you have not only (within your Dominions)
cutoff the head and members (that is, the Prelaticall Bishops and their
Court-keepers, but also demolished and defaced the very Images, and
representations of that Babylonish Monster; yea, that you have not only
cashiered and discarced all open professors of popery (such as were Jesuits,
Priests, and others their Disciples and Emissaries; but also all
Ecclesiastical Dignities, Orders, Canons, Courts and Conditions of men, which
did any ways concern or relish a popish Hierarchy. For certainly (say what
you will) their is no Religion in the world next to the Muscovites, (except the
Lutherans) who yet in their Prelacy and Church Discipline, are not so corrupt
and extravagant) which does more punctually resemble the government of the
Roman Church, then does the English Hierarchy in so much that since the
beginning of your late intestine broyls in Great Britain, the Jesuits have not
failed to stir up and incense the King and Parliament of Poland, either to
banish and exterminate all your Highness Subjects and Countrymen out of their
Kingdom, or else to vex and charge them yearly with such grievous and
unaccustomed taxations, as that now they can hardly gain livelihood amongst
them (notwithstanding their laborious endeavors, good desert, and great
services which they have done for them) and why is all this forsooth, but
because they will not be of their own Kings religion; which they take for
granted (to be Roman Catholic) else why did the Jesuits of the City of Vilna,
(wherein is the chief Tribunal and Universitie of the great Dukedom of
Lithuania) in Anno 1641. upon their Saint Ignatius day (at which time the
Jesuits do use to keep a solemn Feast, for the honor of their Patron and
Founder: with great joy and acclamations, singing of Anthems, drinking of
Healths and shooting off diverse great pieces of Ordnance which they had planted
upon the top of a hill close by the City) congratulate and give thanks to God
for the happy conversion of the King of England.

Thirdly, for we will speak no more of this second Question, does your Highness
and Associates think, that the Presbyteriall government (if you should forsake
the other) will be prejudicial to Monarchy? Surely, howsoever your Prelates
have scandalized and spoken ill of that way, calling the followers and
professors thereof, and that in an ill sense, and that by way of obloquy;
Puritans: yet (if our observation fail not in most parts of Christendom (which
some of us have surveyed; and so have few or none of your English Prelates, or
Dirgy-men: For as we understand, they are none of the greatest Travelers, they
think this quality no ways suitable to their grandeur, and therefore leave it
to Seamen, or others of a meaner condition: and so receive all things willingly
(which they are to know or speak of, of other Nations) at the second hand.
Showing themselves hereby more careful and vigilant for the bodies, then for
the souls of men: if our observation (we say) fail not; you shall find that in
all the World there is no Religion to a Sovereigne, that desires to make
himself absolute, and would have a continued permanence of his Monarchy) even
to such a Prince, we say again: that there is no Religion under Heaven so
competent and agreeable as a Protestant Presbytery; in so much that we cannot
but wonder; that a Prince professing Religion only for policies sake: should
suffer any other to be within his Dominions. For let a Protestant King (we mean
one that rules over a people of that profession) be never so notoriously wicked
in his person, and enormious in his government: let him stamp vice with his
example, and make it current by being his, let him remove the ancient
bound-marks of lawful Sovereignty, and every day make more yokes and new
scourges for his poor people: let him take reward and punishment out of the
hands of Justice, and distribute them without any respect to right or wrong: in
a word, let him so exceed in mischief, ruin and oppression, as that Nero being
compared with him may be held to be a very Father of the people. Finally when
he has done all that he can to procure hate and contempt yet shall he not for
all this have occasion to fear such a people, but may boldly go in and out to
his sports, without either a public guard or privy coat; nor need he take the
less drink when he goes to bed, or the more thought when he rises: but may
without the least suspicion of a Jesuited Raviliac, solace himself in his
bedchamber; or elsewhere, more securely then the Grand Signeor can do in his
Seraglio.

The third Question, which is this, viz.
HOw much it concerns your Highness and your Confederates at any ^^nd and
upon any conditions: not only to embrace peace with your Great Counsel (if it
be offered) but also eagerly to pursue and seek after (...) such things as may
concern the same (if the Lord has not given you over to believe strong
delusions, and passed the same sentence against you and your Kingdoms as he did
once against Belshazzer, Daniel 5. 25. Mean, Mean, Tekell Uphansin: that is (in
our construction and as we probably conetjecture by the ways which you have
taken) to weigh you in a balance, with your Father, Queen Elasabet, of ever
blessed memory and diverse other good and glorious Kings of England, and f^^e
find you too light, then to number you: that is, to abate the number of your
Kingdoms and finish the glory and splendor of your Monarchy. For who is he
that has but half an eye, and does not perceive this course of war if it be
not both thoroughly and speedily diverted) to be altogether fatal and
destructive unto your Highness but especially in these four respects, viz.
First in respect of your Kingdoms. Secondly in respect of the Protestant
Religion, if you be, as you profess a lover of it. Thirdly, in respect of your
Sister and Nephews; who in all likelihood can never be restored, so well into
their rights as by the prosperity and success of the Protestant cause: and
fourthly, in respect of the duty which by the Law of God, you owe unto your
Subjects. First, in respect of your Kingdoms which by this course are almost
already consumed as by a raging fire, which consumes the houses or Millo and
Sechem, and the Cedars of Lybanon, Judge 9, 15. ^o for by war (as one house
sets another on fire one Kingdom destroys another. This means therefore
to allay your coffeehouse being too rigid and destructive, ought both
seasonably and speedily to be prevented, left your Kingdoms being hereby
depopulated the Revenues of Great Britain; prove as small unto your Highness as
are this day the Rents of Pomerland, unto the Duke of Prussia, which within
these twenty years and less; might pro tanto, have vied happiness, with any
part of your three Kingdoms: and yet they were consumed by strangers in a
public war, by an open and known enemy the wound reached no further then the
flesh and therefore the more curable: but you have struck your self into the
bowels, it is a private, as it were; an intestine and civil War: which you
have fomented and consequently, the more ominous, execrable and incurable, For
if a Kingdom be divided against it self, how can it stand? and if you thus
bite and devour one another how can you chose but be destroyed one of another?
If then war considered absolutely, and in it self be so rigid and exigent,
that it should never be undertaken, but in case of extremity (as a man should
never let blood but in case of necessity. How much more to be abhorred is that
Civil war, wherein all things are miserable? For it is not an open enemy that
you fight against, but even your own familiar friends; it is not a Turk, the
common enemy of the Gospel; nor a Spaniard the known enemy of England: but your
own Brethren and Countrymen; who do profess with you to have all one God
for their Father, one Christ for their Redeemer, one truth for their Religion,
one CHARLES for their King, and one Great Britain for their Country: and yet
alas, how does Manasseh advance against Ephraim, Ephraim against Manasses; King
against Subject, County against County, Father against Son, and Son against
Father; and that in such bitterness and eagerness of spirit, that one is
become a curse to another blowing the Trumpet of Sheba one against another; and
saying one of another; They have no part with us of God nor in the inheritance
of Christ Jesus; every one to his Tents o Israel so that, while as both of you
seem to strive about one Religion; there is in effect betwixt you both as much
as no Religion* Religion it self is almost lost through the quarrels and
questions for Religion: it faring with her as it did with the woman in
Plutarch, who having many Suitors (when every one could not have her to
himself, they cut her in pieces, that so none might have her. For certainly (if
our information fail not, there be almost as many false brethren, and
professors of the one side) as there be abettors of the Prelacy, and Papacy on
the other; yea, and as obstructive and obnoxious to the Protestant Cause though
both of them be eq^ally enemies to peace: being not only contentious but
lovers of content on: However we conceive the separating Schismatics to be the
most dangerous they being so wedded to their own fantasies and onthusiasmes,
that whatsoever opinion they once lay hold on (let it be never so contrary to
the analogy of faith, or the rules of charity in the communion of Saints)
thesemen wesay, are so zealously confident in their way, that they had rather
there should be no Protestant Religion at all in the world, then that opinion
or fantasy which they have conceived of it, should not prevail, atque hinc
illae lachrymae: From hence your Kingdoms have received a double blow, one from
your professed Friends, another from your professing enemies, whom because, nec
verit ati nec paci cedere norunt: they neither can, nor know how to give way to
a true Protestant peac^; we will leave to themselves, and proceed unto the
second motive which should incline your Highness and your confederates to
peace. And this is the respect you should have to the Procestant Religion:
where by a Protestant Religion we understand, not a profession of Christianity
which is reformed only an part, such as is that of the Lutherans, and your
late Hierarchy in England, which though (as is aforesaid) it was purged by the
care of godly and orthodox Princes from the heresies of the Roman Church (in
matters and points of doctrine yet did it in matters of discipline retain
diverse exorbitant scandalous and corrupt customs; and superstitious
ceremonies, which made the English Church (although not the same) yet to
resemble, and be too too like that, which is mayntained by the Roman
Antichrist) but by the Protestant Religion we understand such a profession of
christianity as is reformed in both these (so far as the excellency,
perfection and purity of a militant Church may subsist withal) without any
excessive or corrupt mixture of humane inventions or superstitious customs and
ceremonies either in doctrine or discipline (such as we believe your self will
confess (if you know any thing of a presbyterian government) to be this day
amongst all Europian Christians most heartily and incorruptible mayntained and
practiced by the Presbyterian Protestants.

This is that Religion which is in every godly and decent respect, most
consistent with the truth and purity of the Gospel and which ought to be
mayntained, preserved and cherished by Protesiant Princes and States with as
much eagerness and industry as the Jesuiticall Pentificians have to mayntain
their Romish Idol which an all probability can never be done by war,
especially by such a war as that is which is abetted by your Highness and
Confederates; for hereby (if we be not much deceived) you do what you can to
encourage and hearten the Papists against the Protestants and proclaim (as it
were with open mouth to the wide world) that you are turned Apostates from the
Protestant Religion: For what great cause or occasion can your Highness and
your associates give unto the Papist to work the final overthrow and ruin of
the Protestant Churches and States, then to entertain and harbor prejudicate
and inreconcilable affections against your Protestant Subjects and brethren:
this is all they seek for ^^fer if your Italy, Gallico, Haspamol^sed Austrian
Papists can have but such a strong foundation to build upon (as the distance
and estrangement of Protestant Spirits, either opposed or alienated one from
another in points of Religion, then are they persuaded (and so in all humane
reason they may well be) that neither their Counsels nor intentions can neither
fundamentally nor essentially concur, and conscquently no confederation nor
conjenction in real endeavors, will ever be brought to any settled purpose or
period, either in Great Britain, or elsewhere.

And to this purpose, we cannot admire enough of your Highness, and your
Great Council, that you should take so shall notice of the Spanish King, and
the German Emperor, who are so fast vying stakes with the French King which of
them should soonest by this means engrosse unto themselves the European States,
and erect a Catholic Christian Monarchy, to which purpose, they omit no way
or means to make the Protestant Princes and States fall by the ears together,
and keep their Houses and Territoires in perpetual division. To omit Germany,
and other places, where we have not been so well accuainted: we appeal to the
verdict of your own Countrymen, Merchants that travel into Denmark, Sweden,
Poland, Russia, amongst almost an innumerable multitude of Lutheran
Protestants, who (if they understand, or have taken notice of the practice or
preaching of these Luther Priests and Ministers, cannot but acknowledge and
testify how carefully and industriously the Jesuits (especially in Poland and
Prussia,) do foment and hire unconscionable Divines to mayntain pretenses of a
fundamental difference in Religion betwixt us and them: which in truth and
substance is but all one giving unto the Lutherans many promises and
privileges, which they will not so much as profer unto the Evangelick
Protestants that separation being made between the Lutheran Protestant and the
Reformed Evangelick Protestant, the occasion of Disputes envy strife, railing
and evil ^^mising might never be wanting amongst them; and that as well for
temporal and worldly, as for heavenly and spiritual respects.

The third motive to induce your Highness unto peace, is the Obligation which
God and Nature has laid upon you, to mayntain the Rights of your Sister and
Nephews, whose parents, if they had been either Papists or Neuterals, might
have this day been sitting in their Castle or Wittenbergh. For although
ambition, was the cause pretended; yet who knows not that knows any thing?
that their Religion was the cause intended. For had they complied so much as
some other Princes do that bear the name of Protestants (with the Spanish
King, and the Germane Emperor) neither had their Confederates so miserably
flinched from them us they did, nor they liad been so rigidly and cruelly
ejected out of their own inheritante us they were. But because Gods judgments
are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; for, who knows Gods mind? or
who has been his Counselor? and also because no man can discern Gods love
and hatred in this respect by this event of any temporal occurrence, all
things falling out to all to them that swear, as to them that fear an oath, we
will neither think the worse of them, because of their present afflictions nor
the better of their enemies, because of their achieved victories. The Almighty
has his own fullness of time, for the managing and disposing all important
passages under the Sun, but especially for such as do more immediately
concern his own glory and the good of his Church; and although he has
suffered the Roman Antichrist and his Catholic children, for these thirty or
forty years past, to ride over the bellies, plow, and make long furrows upon
the backs of these and some other Protestant Princes, Psalm 129. 3. yet as God
is just, and his Gospel true, the feet of all the enemies of Protestant
Religion shall slide in due time: Yet a little while, and he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. For when, That seven-headed and
ten-horned monster, having caused the Kings of the earth to commit fornication
with her, Rev. 18. 3. and stirred them up by policy and machiavilisme to fight
against the Lamb, Revel. 17. 14. so soon as she shall be fully drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ, and also has made
these Kings drunken with the wine of the wrath of her fornication; in a word,
when she has for a long time sitten upon that septicolled City like a Queen;
saying, and domineering over it, I am no widow, and shall see no mourning:
then shall there come upon her a sudden alarm, as there did upon Samson, Up
Samson, the Philistims are upon thee: Up Romish Babylon, for all thy strength
and cunning, a Lamb shall overcome thee, and these Kings which thou cast been
so much in love with, and have been so much in love with thee, they shall stand
afar off because of thy torment; saying, alas Alas for that great City, for in
one hour is thy judgment come.

If therefore your Highness and your Confederates have not already given your
names to this Beast: and if you be not yet drunk with the wine of the wrath of
her fornication. For the Lords sake, come out of her let not your souls come
into her counsels, neither be ye joined with her Assemblies, lest partaking of
her truelty you partake also of her plagues: For as the Lamb overcommeth and
destroys all such as oppose and contradict him in the truth and purity of his
worship; so does he in his appointed time, honor, crown, and bless all that
in syncerity and simplicity of heart join with him for the mayntenance of the
purity and truth of his Ordinances, of which number are (not only these noble
Princes) so many of them as have declined that broad way, and embraced this
narrow way; one that leads to the new Jerusalem, but also the mayn body of
Great Britain, England and Scotland, which have mutually and interchangeably
Hungary, engaged themselves (besides a considerable number of Reformed
Protestants beyond the Seas; yea, and the Luther an Protestants also
Transylvania, France, Ireland.
in Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Prussia, etc. besides the protestants of the
Greek Church, inhabiting the Territories of Muscovia, white Russia in Poland,
and other places, who are almost allequally engaged with us toward the
curtaling of the horns of the Romish Bishop: all which (as we conceive) if
there were any firm compliance betwixt you and your Great Counsel of State,
might here be brought easily to reconciliable minds toward us, to join with
us in one common cause, for the abandoning and abolishing all Antichristian and
and unlimited Jurisdiction from the protestant Churches throughout Europe. So
that in all places and Dominions of Christendom, there may be but one
Shepherd, and one sheepfold, every several Kingdom and Province thereof
(through the annual and mutual correspondence of their Princes and States;
and the strength of a general Council, by their authority seasonably
convocated, being persuaded and thoroughly informed in the truth of all
essential points that may any ways concern our salvation, and finally, all
that profess the name of Christ may be brought to consent together to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that there may be but one Faith, one
Lord, and one Baptisine, one Father in us all, through us all, and for us all,
and then, what an easy thing it were for a Christian King, that is, Defender
of the Faith Inot only to enlarge his Dominions, but also to improve his just
splendor and privileges both for himself and for all that he has relation to
throughout the known world, we leave to the censure of the indifferent reader.

But if wilfulness and prejudicacie have so much preposessed you, and your
associates, that you will not think of any other or better way to prevent your
own and your Kinsmens ruin, then that which you have now in hand: We have no
more to say to you but what Mordecay said to Ester, Ester. 4. 13. Deliverance
will be brought another way: For as God is true, you will find this certain
that so many of your kindred, and other Protestant Princes and States that do
justly suffer for the cause of Religion if they persevere unto the end) God
will exalt and raise them by the same Religion and work their deliverance by no
other means then by the same whereby they have suffered.

The fourth and last motive, which we shall mention at this time, is the duty,
which by the Law of God you owe to your people, which is to show your chiefest
care, and use your best means, for the preservation of their lives and
liberties, especially, seeing they are all members of that political body
whereof your Highness prosesseth your self to be the head, and seeing also
that in them, viz. in then good affections, health and welfare, does consist
(as Samsons did in his locks) your great strength and livelihood. For if there
be a sympathy and fellow-feeling, in the body natural, in so much as when the
foot is trod upon, or any other member hurt, the head will complain, as if the
injury were done unto it and so likewise in the true Church of Christ, or body
mystical (as the Apostle emplyeth when he bids us rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep: Romans 12. 15. And be like affectioned one
toward another. And again, Who is weak and I am not weak? who is offended, and
I burn not? if (we say) there is such a sympathy in the mystical and natural
body, why should not the same be also in the body political? if therefore any,
or many members of the body of Great Britain. be diseased or distempered
through malignant humors, which may perhaps, not only work obstructions in
the pipes of government, but also make the head complain, and cry out for pain;
yet are not these members (by war or any other means of this nature to be cut
off from the head, unless they prove so poisoned putrified, and gangrened;
that they are destructive to the whole body. But God be thanked Sir, the
humors of your people are not yet so desperate, but that if your Highness
(like a good Phisician) will vouchsafe in love to visit them, feel their
pulses, and apply unto them a dosis or potion suitable to their distempers, they
may be easily, both cured and qualified: but as for the medicine which you have
applied to them hither-tils, (if we be not much mistaken; the ingredients
thereof have been too sharp, and if you give them any more of it, you are like
to mar all.) For there be some humors and diseases that are sooner expelled
and cured by lenatives then by corasives by gentle potionsr then by sharp
purgations: and such are these of the Inhabitants of Great Britain, both Scots
and English; but especially the Scots, whom I cannot more fitly compare then to
a Cannon bullet, which is dinted and quelled with the least softness, and is
never so rigid and piercing, then when it is most resisted would you therefore
have the peoples sore healed? why then, Sir, correct your physic, this
plaster of war is too corasive; Bellona should be a Kings ultimum refugium,
his last, because his worst refuge; Be therefore persuaded by us, that
whosoever did first persuade your Highness to this course, had as good advised
you to tread upon a thorn, or put your hand into a Wasps nest. For when you
conceived, White Hall to be on fire, they did what they could to add fuel to
the flames, and cast on faggots when your house was burning, making the rent
greater, and the wound deeper; and consequently the remedy worse then the
disease. As therefore your Highness does tender your own Honor and safety,
welfare of your Children, and Friends, and prosperity of your people (if it be
possible) and as much as you can divert from them this course of war. Remember
that God will require the life of a man at the Hands of his brother, and if of
a brother; much more of a father. Genesis 9. 5 For a King is the nursing Father of
Gods people; take from henceforth a precise account of the death of your
meanest subject; and let his blood and life be precious unto you. Seeing that
homo quilibet, est pars communitatis: every particular person is part of the
whole State; a Subject of one Kingdom, and Aristot. Ethic. lib. 5.
member of one political body; If therefore one member suffer, let all the
members (especially your Highness the head of all) suffer with it. 1 Cor, 12.
26. Otherwise it is a dangerous symptom that the body of these Kingdoms is
palsie-stricken, or at the least some Lethargy or mortal sickness is
approaching, to it, which renders it both insensible and incurable.

The fourth and last question is, what is the best means or which may be the
chiefest preparatives for your Highness and your Associates to obtain an
honorable and lasting peace.

We shall in this point also endeavor to give you satisfaction if either you
will follow our advice, or receive the same without partiality or prejudice.
And first, we say, that the best way to a firm and honorable peace is by the
work of righteousness, For the work of righteousness is peace, and the effect
thereof joy and assurance for ever: as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 32, 17. Where
by the work of righteousness, we do not so much understand that imputed
righteousness of Christ, which is truly and properly inherent in him, but so
made our by faith, that God does accept of us as righteous for his sake, as if
this righteousness were properly and truly inherent in our selves, which is
called the righteousness of faith, Romans 1. 17. and the righteousness of the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6. 33. nor by this work of Righteousness do we
understand altogether thut actual righteousness which is to be performed by
us: whereby we show the truth of our faith, by the works of piety, charity,
humility etc. (although the words may admit either of these without prejudice)
but by the work of righteousness we conceive principally, an habitual
disposition and inclination, both to practice and affect things that are good
and righteous: in a word we mean no otherwise then that your Highness would
withdraw and alienate your affections from unjust and unrighteous persons.
Offices and Officers, who have these many years past mayntained, and still hope
to mayntaine themselves by the ruin of the Church and Commonwealth, who (like
so many Sirens) have so long and so miserably inveighled you; and by their
Circean enchantments, moved you to press that prerogative (which the Almighty
gave you for the preservation and welfare of the people) and that both in
Church and State Affairs; so much and so far as that whereas it should have
been as a Diamond in your Crown, to honor and adorn you, they have made it by
their Sophistical and Machiavilick insinuations, as a prick in your side, or a
thorn in your foot, to hurt and mischief you.

May it therefore please your Highness, to let this be the first preparative
to an honorable and happy peace, even to withdaw your Royal person and favor
from the contagious company of such flattering Sycophants; that from
henceforth you may not only profess, but practice that part of the Royal
Motto; Salus Populi, suprema Lex: And to this purpose, because your Great
Counsel of State are now about a work of Reformation, let not your Highness
fail to comply with them in the same, then which you shall find nothing more
pleasing to God, and profitable to your self, and that in these two things,
viz. First, in contenting your self with such a competency of Royal
Privileges, Revenues, and Prerogative, as may be most consistent with the
truth and purity of that Religion which you profess; manners of the Country,
and affections of your Subjects, showing rather a royal and Christian
moderation, then an imperious and insatiable ambition: and (so you may enjoy it
peaceably and comfortably) think your self-sufficiently enriched, although you
have no more for the present then what is shared out for you by the providence
of God, and love of the people; yea, although it were much less (especially,
rebus sic stantibus, then was left you by your royal Progenitors. For what
greater happiness can come to a King then contentment, who is never more
excellent and commendable, then when his affections are most moderated; and
what contentment can your Highness want (when, if complying to the complexion
and disposition of your political body) you continue to be the head of such a
wise, noble, and godly Nation; to sway the Scepters of three almost Angelick
Kingdoms in one City, whereof there is to be found more wealth, luster, beauty:
Prudence Temperance, Justice, Valor; and finally, all the delights of the
sons of men: then the Emperor of Muscovia, and diverse others great
Potentates can command within the Circumference of their vast Dominions. Happy
therefore is that Prince, who knowing that he cannot have all contenteth
himself with a part, even with such a part as he may quietly and honorably
possess with the suffrages of his people; for if the greedy appetite be not
satiated, a poor shepherd shall find more hearts case in a beggars cottage
then a great Emperor (if ambitious) in a Princely Palace. Let Kings therefore
consider, that the more they abound with worldly wealth: the more do abound
their cares, for when goods increase, they are increased that eat them; and the
best way for a King to be rich is to know when he has enough: and not to
improve his revenues through pilling and polling his Subjects by sordid and
unnecessary Taxations and Monopolies, for hereby he does not strengthen his
Crown, but bewray his tyranny, nor increase his honor; but call in question
that love which he owes to his people.

O what great grief it is to loyal and loving Subjects, to see their
Sovereigne undo himself, for the enriching a company of unworthy, temporizing,
and self-seeking Parasites? Who perhaps (if his back should be at the wall)
would turn their backs upon him, and like a shadow, follow him no longer then
the Sun shines, or if he should stand in need of their counsel, could give
him none better then that of Achitophel. That any Prince should thus mistarry,
is grievous and lamentable; but for such a King as your Highness should be who
have so often smarted through the Machiavillick impostures of the Roman
Antichrist and his Abettors; for such kind of men: expose yourself, your
posterity and Crowns to such extreme exigencies. Quis talia fando, temp^ret a
lachermis?

Be wise therefore, ye Kings, and be learned, ye Judges of the earth be
careful as to have the wicked removed, so also to have your desires moderated
seek no more then is enough either for your selves or others: for then
certainly you shall find in your Thro^e more cares then comforts, and in your
Crowns, more thorns then Diamonds for he that loves silver shall never be
satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase: as wealth
cannot fill man's heart so cannot grace his purse: natural desires are finite
but the desires of the soul are infinite, which when they are not watched but
let go loose roving up and down, and not composed and limited according to the
rules of godliness have brought men even Kings and Princes into infinite
labyrinths and anxieties: witness that insatiable conqueror, whose unlimited
ambition the Poet thus bemoneth:

Unus Pellaeo Juveni non sufficit orbis
Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi.
And many also of the Roman Caesar's, whose time we may read in their
insatiable affections and whose coverousnesse has brought their Titles and
Diadems unto their uttermost period, of whom we may almost say, etiam perire
animae that little of them that is left is perished: in a word, therefore,
happy is the man be he King or Subject, that delights more in piety then in
pelf, in heavenly goodness then in worldly goods.

-- Cui paternum
Splendet in mensa tenui salinum
Nec leves somnos timor, aut cupido
-- Sordidus aufort:
Secondly, for the obtaining an honorable and lasting peace, and performing
this work of righteousness, your Highness must look well to the rightnesse of
Religion viz. that the Religion which you establish be made choice of not
according as to the eye it seems gayest, but as it is most free from, and
most contrary to all corruption of man's life and manners, such as is grounded,
not upon men's invention, but divine direction: That your Highness give way to
such a kind of divine worship as is not according to the nature and will of
man but according to the will of God who being a Spirit loves best to be
worshipped in spirit and truth, and not in or by any painted or graven images,
outward pomps, gaudie clothes or superstitious representations of any thing
that is in heaven above or in earth beneath, such as all false Religions abound
withal, and whereby heretical and Idolatrous Priests, delude and dazzle the
eyes of simple people, who are naturally inclined to affect that soonest which
to the eye seems gayest, making them believe that these dumb shows and
pictures, are lay men's books, in the mean time hiding from them the power of
Christ in the work of the ministry.

And seeing there is no difference between your Highness and us in points of
doctrine (the word of God being preached by us both in as great purity and
orthodoxnesse as can be consistent with a militant Church) our request unto
your Highness is (as you tender either your own or our peace, to admit with us
the same reformation and purity in matters of discipline, as is employed in the
premises for certainly Sir solong as the discipline of your Church remains
unpurged, the members and professors thereof can never properly be said to be
of the true Protestant Religion: well they may be called Protestants, and said
to be of a Protestant Religion, viz. comparatively as they have relation to
Eutherans or Nicholuitans, or some other sect of Protestanisme but to be
Protestants indeed, that is, true Protestants, of the true reformed Protestant
Religion they cannot because their Religion is reformed only in part. viz. in
matter of doctrine, the discipline remaining and being retained in the same
corruption and superstition as they received it from the Roman Church: whereas
the true Protestant Religion exercised in the Presbyteriall government is
equally reformed as well in discipline as in doctrine, depencing absolutely
upon the word of God, without any excessive or scandalous mixture (other then
accords with Christian simplicity decency, and charity) of humane inventions,
or superstitious innovations: But if you Highness will needs maintain some
disparity amongst Ministers, preferring some before others, who in respect of
their eminent parts, may seem to deserve better we will not discommend it
providing that your Highness remember well your Fathers Council in his
Basilicon Doron, page 44. viz. so to charge and change them with such bonds as
may preserve them from creeping into corruption.

A third mean to procure an honorable and lasting peace is to unite the
people, as well as the Countries of England, and Scotland, (which can never be
effected by your Highness so long as you stand in opposition to the
Parliament; But and if you can be so happy as to come in then we conceive it
may easily be wrought in this manner; viz. First, by making an universal act
of oblivion in both Parliaments for all National quarrels and deadly feuds,
which have been a prohibition from all, which in time to come may acrew betwixt
the natives of either Kingdom by reason of any occurrence or passage of
preceding or future times. Secondly, by abolishing the respective names of
English or Scottish men; which (in respect of the great controversies and
differences, which have been between the two Kingdoms) do still continue names
of prejudice, to the great exasperating of the affections of both sides, and
possessing them with rigid and implacable minds, one against another, upon the
least and most slender occasional distastes, and that all the inhabitants of
this one Island may be called by one name, of East, West South or North
Britains; with some aditionall title of the Shire or County, prefixed for
disinction sake. Thirdly, by engaging an equal number of both Kingdoms in
their fellowship at arms, in some public and fortunate lawful war, beyond
the Seas, where their honor and danger may be equally divided, and no
jealousies, nor contention arise amongst them, but of well doing, certainly, one
victory obtained by the sound valor of the Scots and English, (wheresoever it
be, so it be not at home, let it be in Bohemia, France, Spain, or where your
great Council will think fiting) will make a stronger and more indissoluble
knot of union both between them and your Highness, and amongst themselves then
ever your Highness could make by choosing your Minions alternatively out of
each Nation, or by making Scotch men Lords of England; English men Lords of
Scotland; or yet by mixture of marriage, for although marriage may make two
persons one, yet can it not make two people to be one; certainly, all these are
too weak ingrediences to compound a love-potion for them that were wont to
thirst after one another blood, it must be something more energeticall and
virtuous that must qualify and chain the different humors of these two
Nations; and make them forget whose fortune it was to be envied, and whose to
be contemned in times past; and to speak ingenuously: never had King a fairer
opportunity to effect this, as your Highness has now, all the Kingdoms in
Christendom almost being now by the ears together, especially if in this your
day, your Highness would resipiscere, and come to your self, and so much
tender your own health and welfare, as to apply unto your almost gangreen, and
incurable wounds, a salving plaster of Parliamentary Union.

FINIS.

