A Pleasant WALK TO HEAVEN, Through the New and Living Way, which the Lord
Jesus consecrated for us, and his sacred Word reveals unto us.

Published by CLAUDIUS GILBERT, B. D. Minister of the Gospel at Limrick.

Prove. 3. 17. The ways of Wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are Peace. Psalm. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the
Law of the Lord. Act. 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea
and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord* and in the
Comfort of the Holy Ghost were multiplied. Hos. 14. 9. The ways of the Lord
are right, the just shall walk in them, but the Transgressors shall fall
therein. Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand in the ways and see, and ask
for the old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find
rest for your souls. But they said, we will not walk therein. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the Time
because the days are evil. Genesis 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was
not, for God took him. Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20. Many walk of whom I tell you
weeping, etc. -- But our Conversation is in HEAVEN. LONDON, Printed for Francis
Titon, and are to be sold at the sign of the three Daggers in Fleet Street*
1658.

To my Highly honored Uncle, Colonel Henry Markham, a Member of the
Parliament: AND, To my worthily Honored Aunt, Mis Esther Markham, his Endeared
Consort.
Dearly Honored, and Beloved in the Lord;
IT is good for man to draw near to God, Psalm. 73. 28.
whose fellowship is the chiefest good, the Fountain of all Good. The Psalmist
found still the choice experience of that Divine Oracle, and therefore
commended it so highly to others. The very beginnings of spiritual acquaintance
with Christ are so savory to a sanctified heart, Can. 1. 2, 4, and 7, 9.
that this precious Wine cannot but cause his lips to magnify the sweetness
Ephesians. (...)
thereof. Col (...)
Grace is the lively Image of the living God, Pro^ 4 (...)
resembling him still in activeness of communication and Holiness of
Conversation. 1 (...) 2. 5.
They that have tasted how good the Lord is in his Word and ways, cannot but
be moved by the strong Impulse of such experiences to encourage still
themselves and others to such a heavenly Communion with their God, and
faithfulness to him. The best good is still most communicative, diffusing its
streams and displaying its Rays to all round about. Rev. 17. 14.
The Followers of the Lamb have their reason, and all other Powers of the
Internal and external Man, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
Spiritually ennobled and sublimed to discern all things by a Divine Light,
Ephesians. 1. 23.
and make choice of Christ for their All in All, Col. 3. 11.
incomparably before all things else. Psalm. 73. 25.
Having once found him whom their souls do unfeignedly love, Can. 5. 10.
their desire is still to keep close to him, Can. 3 4.
and walk worthy of him, Romans 3. 11.
as far as his Grace is enabled through his Spirit that dwells in them, Romans 6.
6. 21.
to rule there for him. They cannot but find strong Endearments obliging there
hearts to be soliciting still others with themselves to this Divine Exercise.
It has pleased that Father of Spirits to make such an Impress thereof upon my
Conscience, that it engages me to judge my self deeply for former neglects, and
binds me forcibly to more diligent care for future occasions. This small Piece
now presented to you, will speak my ressentments more expressly about this
Subject. It comes out in a very plain dress, and without trimming, the matter
thereof being sufficient to commend its own worth to can did Christians, and
intended for the lowest forms of Christ's school, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
as well as for his Graduates. It is my serious purpose with the Apostle not to
know any thing ministerially and practically, Phil. 3. 9, 10.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
in the efficacy of his Resurrection, and in the fellowship of his sufferings,
being made conformable to his death. Its not therefore the enticing words of
man's wisdom I would delight in and labor for; but the demonstration of his
Spirit and Power. Herein I would studiously design through his Grace to imitate
Paul, as he followed Christ. None but Cbrist, none but Christ, was the Motto of
a famous Martyr. I would make it my desire and joy, my Resolve and endeavonr
through the supplies of his All-sufficient Spirit. Your Acquaintance with him is
best known to him and to his friends, that have had acquaintance with your
selves.

If this poor Tract may be found, any way serviceable to the improvement
thereof, my heart shall rejoice and bless God for it. Your zeal for him and
his, cannot be forgotten of him, nor of them. Your labor of Love cannot pass
unrewarded from God, whatever construction or retribution it meets with from
man. 2 Chro. 15. 2.
The Lord is with you whilst you be with him. 1 Chro. 28. 9.
The various experiences of his Word and Rod, Spirit and Providence formerly
dispensed and lately renewed toward you, Genesis 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
will be still of singular use and help, being duly remembered and improved.
Walk still before him in the perfect ways of his uprightsness, 2 Cor. 11. 9.
as Abraham and his faithful Worthies were directed by him, Ephesians. 6. 10.
so shall you be sure of his covenant-mercy in the performance of your
covenant-duty. His grace will be still sufficient for you, Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
and his strength gradually perfected in your weakness. Be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, for the promoting of his Interest in your
respective stations and motions against all spiritual enemies. The good Will of
him who dwelt in the Bush, rest upon you both, and all your Relations near and
farther off, for Direction, Assistance and Blessing. In him I delight to be
known demonstratively, as occasion serves,

Your cordially endeared and obliged Nephew, to serve you upon the best
account, Claudius Gilbert.
From my Study in Limrick, May 19. 1657.
To all the Friends of Christ called to be Saints.
Christian Friends.
Man's Life is a short Walk toward Eternity, A Race wherein Mortals continually
move nearer to their endless, unchangeable State: whether of Weal or Woe.

The great God, who is Al-sufficiently blessed in himself: 1 Cor. 9. 24.
was pleased to give Man a Being capable of Eternal Communion with Himself. The
Councils of his heart absolutely purposed before time: Psalm. 33. 11.
he fulfils in time by the works of his hand, Ephesians 1. 3, 4, 5, 9, 11.
that he might glorify himself in all his Divine Excellencies. 1 Kin. 8. 15.
He at first made man after his own Image, having made all the world for his
service. Pro, 16. 4.
His rational soul, that Divine Extract, that Work-manship of Heaven, received
as much perfection from God, as such a finite Creature could manage in
conformity to his infinite Creator. His Blessedness consisted then in walking
with God in that glorious state, wherein all Creatures were at his command, as
so many steps leading him to that God whom they did so clearly represent to
him. Satan soon envied man's felicity, having desperately cast away himself from
the like condition. Genesis 3. 1, 2, 9, 7, 82, etc.
He sets on the woman; finding her withdrawn from her husbands company, that
should have been her guide and stay, and walking toward the forhidden Tree. Her
gazing thereon gives him advantage to insinuate with falacious Queries, and to
infect her with his serpentine Breath.

Adam quickly felt the direful Touch of that sinful contagion, and turned
form his God to follow the charms of that subtle enemy toward his own Ruin.
Eccle. 7. 29.
Thus man tasted the fruit of that deadly Tree, Romans 5. 12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
21.
which gave him the Knowledge both of good and evil, by sinful privation and
woeful probation, Ioh. 3. 6.
to the utter undoing of his whole Posterity. Our whole nature was so totally
and universally poisoned thereby, Job 14. 4.
that like the spawn of venomous creatures, Genesis 6. 5.
all men draw from him through the^e parents loins, Genesis 8. 21.
the cursed Principles of sin and sorrow, Ignorance, Error, Atheism, Unbelief,
Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
with all the rest of that Serpents feed, do brood in man's heart still, Ier.
31. 3.
to draw him further from God and Bliss, Genesis 3. 15.
toward Earth and Hell, till Grace enterpose. Romans 5. 8.
God suffers all this evil to bring a greater good out of it by his overruling
of all men and devils to his glorious ends in a holy manner. Ioh. 6. 44, 45.
The eternal thoughts of his gracions Love toward his Elect in Christ, does he
in due time effectually demonstrate, promising Christ to them, giving him for
them, and through his Spirit bestowing him on them, in drawing them to him,
that they may walk with him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
and worthy of him. His Gospel is the word of Reconciliation, which offers and
gives his Terms of mercy to be treated upon between him and them. Joh. 5. 25.
By that voice from Heaven he calls them off from their sinful march, Heb. 12.
25.
and stops them in the midst of their woeful career, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
wherein they follow the Prince of darkness toward destruction. Ephesians. 4. 17.
Man's sinful life is a wretched walk in Satan's company through the enchanted
allies, Phil. 3. 18.
of a conceited Paradise, 2 Cor. 3. 16.
of seeming pleasures, profits and preferments. All men please themselves in
such Illusions and delusions, A^^. 26. 18.
till the Spirit of Christ takes away that enchanted vail from their eyes, Joh.
16. 8, 9, 10.
to show them convincingly both their folly and their misery. That Gospel-voice
of Christ which sounds in the ears of all sorts promiscuously, Act. 26. 18.
is carried into the very hearts of his peculiar People 2 Pet. 1. 3.
by distinguishing Grace, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
to turn them efficaciously from darkness to Light, Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
and from the power of Satan to God. Mat. 22. 14.
Through his glorious virtue he calls them to Glory and Virtue: Mat. 11. 25,
whom he did foreknow and predestinate, them he thus called, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
justified, and glorified. This effectual Vocation makes the great difference
between men and Act. 14. 16.
men, Luke 14.
the most remaining still strangers thereunto.

Many never hear the least hint thereof, Mat. 22. 3, 5, 6, 12, 13.
many do openly reject it, and many are found to profess owning thereof, that
never come up to the full terms of it. This miscarying mistake, being so facile
and frequent, so pleasing and pernicious, it concerns all to review with care
all their evidences to saving purpose. Whilst so many walk so unworthily, Jer.
23. 14.
we have all most need to take cognizance of our case and course. 3 Ioh. 4.
Most men walk in Lies, and few are found walking in the Truth. Psalm. 81. 11,
12.
Self is the grand Idol of this back sliding, Isa. 66. 3.
degenerating Age. The best are too subject to walk after the Lusts of their
own eyes, Romans 7.
and to choose their own ways, when left to themselves. The purest state of
Primitive Christians need frequent and mutual quicknings: much more do our
days. Our Christian Vocation is so eminent, that our unworthy walking of the
same, cannot but cast on all, a proportionable meameasure of Reflection. It Is
our choice honor and happiness to honor God and enjoy him in Christ, walking
before him as heroical Saints have done in all Ages, places and Relations. Our
holy Vocation does much resemble that lovely Eden, that Garden of Pleasure,
planted by the Lords hand for man's delight and exercise in his friendly state
of Communion with God. Christ himself is our Tree of Life, standing in the
midst of the Paradise of God, whose leaves and fruits abound with sovereign
virtue for the healing and strength of the Nations. Rev. 2. 7.
Variety of spiritual Ordinances and temporal Comforts he affords herein most
liberally for Rev. 22. 2.
Pleasure and help. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Sin is the only Tree forbidden unto us which may not be fed on without danger
of death, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
natural and civil, spiritual and eternal. His own society God himself is
pleased to assure and Genesis 2. 17.
vouchsafe there also by the sweet breathings of his 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
gracious Spirit in every Institution of his appointing* Romans 6. 23.
His Presence and Blessing still do come along Isa. 59. 21.
with that fresh Gale in the cool of the day to solemnize Exo. 20. 24.
the match between Heaven and Earth in the Isa. 64. 5.
Spring of his Grace, Ioh. 3. 8.
and ripen all things toward the fullness of his glorious Harvest. Genesis 2. 15.
Idleness therein he cannot endure, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
but allots to every one his Task, that all may work for him, I^h. 5. 17.
and like him in converse with him. Isa. 26. 12.
The Father works hitherto said the Son, and I work, Romans 8. 11, 13.
so does the Spirit work in all his People to direct, excite and enable them to
this Heavenly Work. How curiously gallant is such a Walk as this with such a
company, and in such an Eden, wherein all things conspire to render Christ's
friends most holy and happy! Should not this prevail with Rational Souls to
prefer Christ's ways before all the Worlds bewitching Braveries? Psalm. 110. 3.
Should not carnal Hearts be eflectually drawn to admire and embrace the
Beauties of Holiness upon Christ's own Terms of conjugal Consent? Hos. 2. 14 19.
Should not Spiritual Hearts be quickened thereby to walk worthy of such a
Vocation wherewith they are called? Should it not oblige them to utmost
Diligence in the best Improvement of all effectual means to the mutual
quickening of each other, in order thereto.

The lively Resentments thereof obliged my thoughts and engaged my Resolutions
of pressing my self with my christian Auditory, more vigorously to this choice
Duty and noble Exercise. The substance of those five Sermons, which were
publicly delivered on this theme, is here contracted in a plain Essay, which
some friends have conceived, might be of further use by such a publication as
this. The blessing of heaven go along with it, that this small Tract may prove
an open door into the Lords Garden, wherein his Spirit may lead you by the hand
to your chief good to your God in Christ from grace to grace, from strength to
strength. I shall leave you with him in such a blessed walk, that you may not
be longer interrupted from passing through the varieties thereof; but may feed
all your spiritual senses, most deliciously in his Paradise, walking before
him, and worthy of him in your fellowship with him. If you reap benefit from
this poor contribution, bless God for it, and rememember him at the Throne of
Grace, who cordially desires to be serviceable to God and his People, though he
finds still cause to acknowledge himself

The greatest of sinners, and meanest of Saints, C. G.

The CONTENTS.
THE Context opened. p. 1 Three main parts observed. 1. An eminent state. 2. An
eminent act. 3. An eminent help. p. 2 Hence three Conclusions.
Conclu. 1. A Christians Vocation is a most eminent Thing.
Explained, Confirmed, Grounded. p. 3 Reason 1 Its eminent Cause. p. 4 Reason
2. Its eminent Terms. ibid. Reason 3. Its eminent Properties. ibid. Reason 4.
Its eminent effects. p. 5 Appli. 1. By way of information in two Corollaries.
Corollary. 1 See hence the Excellency of Grace. p. 5 2. The baseness of sin.
ibid. Appli. 2. For Conviction. 1. To nominal Christians. p. 7 2. To real
Christians. p. 8 Appli. 3. For Inquisition. 1. By the Antecedents. p. 9 2. By
the Concomitants. p. 10 3. By the Consequents. p. 11 Appli. 4. Consolation to
the Lords called Ones. p. 12 Appli. 5. Excitation. 1. To uncalled sinners. p.
13 They should be specially moved. 1. To Diligence. p. 15 2, To Dependence. p.
16 Secondly, To the called Saints. ibid.
Conclu. 2. CHristians are eminently obliged to walk worthy of their Vocation.
Explication. p. 17 Ratification. p. 18 Demonstration. 1. From Ingenuity. ibid.
2. From Congruity. p. 19 3. From Expediency. p. 20 1. With respect to God.
ibid. 2. In reference to man. ibid. Use 1. Instruction in two consectaries. p.
21 1. Note hence the sinfulness of notional Libertinism. ibid. 2. Of Practical
Libertinism. p. 22 Use 2. just Reprehension. p. 23 Use 3. Examination. p. 25 1
In our general Calling. ibid. 2. In our particular Vocation. p. 26 Use 4.
Comfort. p. 27 Use 5. Exhortatian. p. 29. Particularly 1. To Superiors. p. 30
2. To Inferiors. p. 32
Conclu. 3. IT becomes Christians to improve the most effectual helps for
mutual quicking of each other, that they may walk worthy of their Vocation. p.
34
Deduction, Confirmation. ibid. Demonst. Rea. 1. From the importance of the
Duty. p. 35 2. Form man's condition. ibid. 3. From external Temptations. p. 36
Improvement 1. For Vindication of the Ministry. p. 37 Improvement 2. For
Admonition. p. 39 Improvement 3. For Trial. p. 40 1. In our religious Capacity.
ibid. 2. In our civil Capacity. p. 41 Improvement 4. For a choice Cordial. p.
42 Improvement 5. For solemn Exhortation. p. 44 1. Personally. ibid. 2.
Domestically. ibid. 3. Politically. p. 45 4. Ecclesiastically. 1. To the Church
Rulers. p. 46 2. To private Christians. p. 47. Generally and particularly 1.
More generally toward all fellow members in Christ; some choice Duties
performed, will be of singular help. ibid. 1. Cordial affection. ibid. 2.
Tender Compassion. p. 48 3. Earnest Supplication. p. 49 4. Seasonable
Exhortation. p. 50 5. Faithful Admonition. p. 51 6. Che^reful Condonation. p.
53 7. Ingenuous Disposition. p. 54 8. Meet Consolation. p. 55 9. Liberal
Contribution. p. 56 10. Impartial Administration. p. 58 11. Steadfast
Continuation. p. 59 12. Zealous Vindication. p. 60 13. Vigilant Preservasion.
p. 62 14. Careful Sequestration. p. 63 Secondly, More particularly toward
spiritual Rulers. p. 65
A Pleasant Walk to HEAVEN, Through the new and living Way, which the Lord
Jesus consecrated for us, and his sacred Word reveals unto us.
Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the Prisoner of Jesus Christ, do beseech you, that ye
walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.
THE Salvation of Gods people by Jesus Christ, is the Scope and Sum of Law and
Gospel, Old and New Testament. Our great Apostle preached this at Ephesus,
powerfully, effectually. His labors were wonderfully blessed from Heaven in
that place, so eminent for Pomp and Pride, wealth and wickedness. Many of
Christ's sheep were there gathered into his fold, of whose welfare, Paul in his
absence, was most solicitous. He therefore sends them a gracious Salute, and
begins with the didactical part of Christianity, to settle their minds and
hearts in the main Truths, and Principles of faith. From the great Mysteries of
their Election and Predestination, he leads them gradually to the review of
their Redemption and Vocation, that they might the more efficaciously be rooted
and grounded in the Truth of Christ against all the errors of the wicked.
Thence Obedience is pressed on them in the practical part, Grace ^^ll teaching
good manners. Faith and Holiness, Purity and Power are Divine Associates in the
ways of Christ. I therefore, says he, the Prisoner of Christ beseech you,
that you walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called.

Three main parts are here considerable, 1. An eminent State expressed in their
Vocation, their choice Dignity.

2. An eminent A^^ to be conversant thereabout, walking worthy of their
Vo^^^^on, their singular Duty.

3. An eminent ^^p, quickening thereto, by force of Arguments rationally d^duced
from the whole matter, ezpressed in the Context by the illative, therefore. 2.
From his personal relation to Christ, and suffering for Christ. 3. From his
persuasive Entreaty, I, The Prisoner of Christ do beseech you.

From which Premises: Three Conclusions naturally flow,

1. That a Christians Vocation is a most eminent Thing.

2. All Christians are obliged to walk worthy thereof.

3. Christians should use the most effectual helps for mutual quickening
thereunto.

1. Conclus.
A Christians Vocation is a most Eminent Thing.
For Explanation, this word Vocation is considerable in Scripture-dialect,
largely and strictly. 1. Largely, so it imports an external Call, given to many
by the Gospel, who never partake of the power thereof; witness the various
Ghests, mentioned, Mat. 22. 14.
Mat. 22. Many such are called, though but few be chosen. This is common to the
whole visible Church. Secondly. Strictly it signifies that internal Call which
efficaciously flows from Gods eternal election, and infallibly leads to Glory,
described Romans 1. 28. 29, 30. This is peculiar to Gods Elect, the members of
his invisible Church, who are all in due time efficaciously called.

This Calling has a double Aspect, general and particular: 1. General, toward
God in all the ways wherein he is to be owned for our. Sovereign, Lord and
chief good in Christ; this concerns all, thus to love and fear, to serve and
trust him with the utmost of the whole man. Secondly, It has a particular
respect toward Man, in the various Relations of this life, wherein every one
has his particular charge to attend upon, in each respective Station,
differing one from another, as Superior, or Inferior, in public or private,
etc.

The Greek word (...), Vocation, sometimes denotes an act of God toward Man,
calling him to himself; usually it holds out the state of man whereinto he is
brought by that Divine Act, whether external or internal, whence proceed all
humane Acts in correspondency thereto

This phrase in the Text is comprehensive of all, in the full Complex thereof,
but especially expresses that special state of Grace and Christian Profession
whereto Gods People are energetically called by the singular operation of his
sanctifying Spirit.

That this Vocation is most eminent, is a Truth confirmed fully and frequently
by the sur-beams of Divine Oracles in every branch of Gods Word. Ioh. 3. 3. 5.
6.
All the expressions that describe it testify so much, Mat. 18. 3
being equivalent with regeneration and conversion, the new Creature and new
man, Gal. ^. 15.
the translation of men from Darkness to Light, 2 Cor. 5 17.
and from Death to Life; their bearing of his Image, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and partaking of the Divine nature; their coming out of Bondage into Liberty,
Act. 26. 18.
by Redemption from Satan's Kingdom, 1 I^h 3. 14
into Christ's own Kingdom, etc. Instances might be given of the excellency of
every part ^ Pet. 1. ^.
hereof, Ioh. 8 32, 36.
with relation to this Christian Vocation. The Precepts requiring it, 1 Ioh 5.
1^
the Promises assuring of it, the prefigurations typifying it, (...) 1. 1^.
the Presidents performing it, are all eminent.

All Instructions and Encouragements thereto, all Threats and Punishments for
the neglect and abuse thereof, do eminently ratify the same.

The Reason of it is as remarkable, if we consider the Cause and Terms, the
Properties and Effects thereof.
1. THE Cause is eminent. Romans 9. 11.
Its God himself that calls thus by the Spirit of Christ, internally and
externally. His Divine Excellencies shine here in their Brightness. This is his
Work-man-ship, in the product whereof all his glorious Attributes concur
harmoniously. He is the fountain and the final Cause, whence it flows, and
wherein its terminates. He is the Prime and choice Agent, who appoints and
overrules all Means, in tendency thereto. His Voice gives the formal
Impression of it upon that matter, which his Spirit disposes orderly, according
to his eternal purpose, to be a fit subject for the Reception and Improvement
thereof. He speaks actively and effectively, Romans 4. 17.
calling things that are not, that they may be, according to the good pleasure
of his Will. God thus considered both Essentially and personally, is the
eminent Cause of this Vocation; not any mere Creature, nor any thing
considerable in it, either in Gods purpose or execution.

Reason 2.
The Terms of it are eminent Ones; both the terminus a quo, whence they are
called; and terminus ad quem, to which they are called: Its from slavery to
freedom, from a sinful to a gracious state, from the Power of Satan to God,
from misery to felicity, from the drudgery of Hell to the glorious Grace of
Heaven. Is not this call then a most eminent One?

Reason 3.
The Properties of it do further ground its Eminency; it is a high calling, a
holy, heavenly Vocation, free and full, sure and singular. Nothing excellent in
any creature but it sets out the choice qualities of this noble Vocation. Its
the highest Preferment, which the most high can afford in his Kingdom, to his
best friends, Children and Spouse. Its the conforming of them in holiness, to
that which is the Top of Divine Excellency. It comes from Heaven, leads to
Heaven, and trains up for Heaven, gradually, efficaciously. Its of his free
gift to sinful unworthy Wretches, to fill them with the fullness of Christ. Its
surely made out, and made good in a singular manner, to all the Vessels of
Mercy, prepared for Glory, through Grace. Here are eminently fulfilled the
fathers purpose, and the sons purchase in proper applications of every
Covenant-promise, through the operations of his holy Spirit, freely and fully
surely and singularly, in an high, holy and heavenly manner. All the Properties
thereof are most eminent.

Reason 4.
The Effects demonstrate its Excellency also. This Vocation renders men truly
noble and eminent. It raises up their spirits to the best pitch of generous
magnanimity, to the scorning of all sinful baseness. It stamps the characters
of Divine Nobleness upon their souls, giving them so large an Interest in the
royal blood of the King of Saints. Number. 14. 24.
They are hereby qualified with that Princely Spirit, which enobled Caleb to
act so eminently for God, and the public. So far as Christians harken to this
Call, it works on them, and by them, in a choice manner, to the promoting of
the Lords Interest, and the public Weal, against all internal and external
enemies of both. This is it that duly improved, makes all sorts of Christians
eminently useful in their respective places, whether superior or Inferior.

The Application may, 1. Inform our Judgment in two Corollaries. 1. Of the
Excellency of Grace, which calls Christians thus eminently. Car^^ hearts cannot
see any beauty, Psalm. 22. 6
nor comeliness therein, no more then in Christ's own person, Isa 41. 4^.
who was accounted a Worm and no Man. Yet is the Kings Daughter all glorious
within, Psalm. 45. 13.
in the beauties of Holiness, though blind eyes cannot discern it. Psalm. 110. 3.
The natural man understands not the things of Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.
neither indeed can he, because they are spiritually discerned; but the
spiritual man judges of all things spiritual, by due comparing thereof. Luke
17. 21.
The Kingdom of God, said Christ, comes not with ostentation and observation,
but is within you, and among you, like the Curtains of Solomon, Can 1. 5.
whose out side appears like the Tents of Kedar. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27.
What if God do not thus call many noble, nor many wise, nor many rich after
the flesh, that his Grace may appear to be free? Does not he make them truly
noble, rich and wise, whom he thus effectually calls? Have not the famous
Worthies of all Nations in all ages, learned in Christ's school, with
Theodosius, to account their Relation to Christ the choicest flower of their
honor and happiness?

Coroll. 2.
Observe hence also the baseness of every sin, Original, Habitual, Actual. It
is sin that so notoriously opposes, maligns and hinders this eminent Vocation.
Sin is that unworthy Varlet, that cheating Mountebank, who dares v^e it with
the Lord, and give a counter-call to millions of Souls. Sin is that impudent
Strumpet, that bewitches the simple with flattering Charms, of seeming
pleasure, profit and credit, thereby to keep off Customers from hearkening to
Christ. Sin like the Hyena, counterfeits often the shepherds voice in many
disguised Seducers, to draw in silly sheep into her snares. Sin is that
Monster, which Panther-like draws brutish sensualists by plausable allurements
into her cruel clutches. This is the Dalilab, that inveigles and captivates so
many Sampsons, by her juggling Tricks. Sin is that cunning Rook, which draws
out of Christ's road so many Travelers into the crooked ways of error and
baseness, by misperswasions. Is it not sin that debased the glorious Angels,
and the first Adam, and has made them Maps of w^^tchedness, that were at first
Mirrors of happiness? Is it not baser then Hell it self, being the cause and
founder thereof? Nothing vile enough in the worst of Creatures, 1 Kin. 8. 38.
to express this unworthiness of sin. The poison and bane, Iam. 1. 21.
the venom and pest, the excrements and filthiness of the very worst kind are
mentioned in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
to point at the inexpressible baseness of sin. 2 Pet. 2. 22.
This dung and dirt, this puddle and vomit, Psalm. 14.
this filthiness and excess of naughtiness, is the inveterate and desperate
enemy of our eminent Vocation. Psalm. 53.


Use. 2.
This should convince every Christian, nominal and real, of their
unanswerableness.
1. NOminal Christians that have yet but a bare profession. Sinners of all
sorts come under this rank. Oh, What pity, what shame to affront and slight
such an eminent Call as the Gospel sends to you! Do you bear Christ's name only
for a show, and for fashion-sake? Shall your profession serve as a Pandor to
your filthy lusts, and as a Patron to your Libertinism? Does not this aggravate
your sins eminently, that you thereby oppose such an eminent favor? What can
the swearing and lying, the tippling and gluttonous Christian have to say for
himself? What pretense shall the ignorant and lazy, the proud and wanton, the
covetous and passionate sinner plead in this case? What shall the Formalist and
self-justiciary pretend for excuse? What will the Notionist and
self-perfectionist cloak himself withal? What excuses shall the Scorner and
Derider make? Will not their conscience convince all such of the reign of sin,
by their Love and subjection thereto? Do they not thereby stop their ears, and
turn their back against Christ's Call? If Conscience be silent now, being
stifled, bribed and seared, so much the worse. It will awaken at last with a
witness, with a vengeance. It will show light enough to hasten to Hell, though
it had not enough to guide toward Heaven. Oh, The folly and the misery of every
sinner, that thus slights Christ's Call, to hearken to Satan's! How few heartily
hearken unto Gods Invitation to the marriage feast of Christ? Mat 22.


2. Luke 14.
Real Christians should be convinced also of their neglects, contempts and
mistakes, about their eminent Vocation. Should not our hearts bleed at the
sight and sense of so much disgrace we have cast thereon? Should it not humble
us deeply that we have so long deafned our ears hardened our hearts, and pulled
away the shoulder against such a Call? Is it not a burning shame, that any
Creature should prevail more with our spirits by their Syren-charms, then the
voice of Christ himself, calling on us still by his Spirit, Word and
Providence? It is our sin, let it be our sorrow, that we so readily hearken to
self, sin and Satan; are so deaf, so dull and dead to the calls of God. Lets
heartily grieve that our souls prove still such dry tinder to so many
Temptations of the common enemy, and such green wood to the sparks of Heaven.
We are as soft wax to the Tempters impressions, which easily touch and take;
but cold and stiff to the renewed expressions of the Lords Spirit.

Use 3.
Should we not hence be put upon an Inquest to try our Title to this eminent
Calling? The deceit is frequent, facile and pernicious, which should quicken
our industrious search. The most find flaws in their evidences, when duly
reviewed. Very much base coin passes for current till duly tried. Most
Christians rest upon an external Profession, which will prove to them but a
broken reed. To dream of Heaven in the broad way to Hell, Psalm. 26. 2.
will be found dreadful mistake. The best find most need of self-examining,
Psalm. 139. 23.
and are still earnest with God to do it for them, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
distrusting their own heart. Man's heart by the Lords Verdict, Jer. 17. 9.
is both deceitful and desperately wicked, so far as unrenewed. Many carnal
Hypocrites exceed the most gracious in outward shows. Mat. 25.
Many foolish Virgins have their Lamps better trimmed then the wise, though
they want gracious oil in the Vessels of their hearts. Nature refined by the
sublimations of Formality and Morality, makes a specious show, with a deal of
Varnish, though the inside be often but rotten stuff. Multitudes prove like the
Popish Pictures and Pagan Idols, curiously garnished to ensnare silly souls.
Many a fair Profession will be found much like Apothecaries Boxes, finely
painted, yet filled often with poisonous drugs, and like the Pharisees painted
Sepulchers, that are within full of dead men's bones. All then are concerned to
look to their Vocation, whether it be of good alloy, and of the right stamp,
such as will pass in the court of Heaven.

Quest. How may it be discerned?

Answ. By three signal things, viz. The Antecedents, the Concomitants, and the
Subsequents thereof.

1. The Antecedents foregoing it are considerable. The Spirit of Christ
convinces of sin still, Ioh. 16. 8, 9, 10.
and of righteousness, when he is about this effectual call. He awakens the
conscience to listen after his voice, though not in all alike. He deals with
men in a rational and orderly method, suited to their various conditions. Has
the Lord so dealt with thee, boring thine ear, and rowzing thy conscience, to
see thy self a forlorn, sinful Wretch? Romans 8. 15.
Have thou felt the pangs of the new Birth? Has the Spirit of Bondage made
thee sensible of thy sinful slavery in Satan's drudgery? Have thou found thy
self lost in the wilderness of sin and sorrow, like a poor Traveller that is
bewildred in the woods and bogs among cruel Tories, listening still, and
looking round about for help in his distress? Has the Lord allured thee into
the wilderness, that he might there speak unto thy heart? Hos. 2. 14.
Has he been busied with his spade and Ax about the breaking up and dressing
of thy soul, Jer. 4. 3.
to kill the weeds, and prepare his ground? Has he opened thine eyes that he
might turn thee from darkness to light, Act. 26. 18.
and from the power of Satan unto God? Have thou sensibly viewed thy
unworthiness and insufficiency, as of all things else, that thou might be
wholly beaten off from all selfish shifts, and creature-refuges? Have thou
perceived the absolute need of hearkening fully of Christ's terms, 1 Cor. 1. 30
for Wisdom and Righteousness, for Sanctification and Redemption? Have thou
been like a poor Wretch, sinking every moment under the raging waves of
corruptions and temptations, listening and looking after a saving arm, that
might reach them forth? Have thou felt thy self like a dying Patient, ready to
perish; and as a Malefactor, condemned on the Ladder-top, upon turning off?
Has this contrition and compunct on of heart, made the voice of Christ most
desirable to thee, to be preferred before all the shrill calls of self, Act. 9.
sin and Satan? Have thou so heard his Call, as Paul and the Jailor? Act. 16.
14, 30, 31.
The 3000 in Acts 2? as Lydea, at least opening thy heart to hearken to his
efficacious Call?

2. The Concomitants attending this eminent Vocation, are also to be observed.
Christ and his Spirit never come alone into any soul, but are still attended
with a gracious Train, conquering the whole man into a gracious subjection:
Has he so come to thee, as a mighty Conqueror, gaining thy heart, to yield up
thy self upon his terms, at his mercy, without reserves or capitulations? Have
thou surrendered all the powers and parts of soul and body, with cheerful
submission into his own hands? Are the black Regiments of sin and Satan cast
out with violence, that the Lords own spirit might garrison thee with his
gracious forces? 1. Pet. 1. 5.
Has thine Understanding, Reason and Conscience so harken'd to his voice, Col.
1. 13.
that thy Will and Affections do readily close with his Will and Pleasure,
above all things else? Hos 11. 2, 3, 4.
Have thou found thy self drawn so effectually by the cords of his love, Can.
1. 2.
as by the Bands of man, that thou could not resist any longer? Ioh. 6. 44.
Have thou heard the voice of thy Beloved so attentively and affectionately,
Can. 2. 14.
so submissively and applicatively, Can. 5. 2* 3, etc.
that conjugal consent has followed on thy part to be wholly and constantly
his? Has his pardoning and renewing Grace sounded so powerfully in his Word
and Ordinances, that thy soul could not but echo and resound a believing
penitential Return? Zech. 12. 10, 11.
Has the effusion of his gracious Spirit so melted and mollified thy heart,
that it could not but pour forth it self into a Spirit of supplications? Did
the sight of him, whom thou did behold as crucified by thee and for thee,
pierce through thy very heart, to the killing of sin, and quickening of thy
soul, that thou could not but mourn bitterly at the sense thereof? Psalm. 29.
2, 3, 5, 9.
Has that voice of his broken the Cedars, and cleft the mountains of thy
corruptions, whilst Gods servants in his house were speaking of his Glory? Heb.
4. 12.
Have thou felt his word sharper within thee, then any two-edged sword,
piercing deeply, discovering all, and dividing energetically between sin and
self, Can. 5. 3, 4, 5, etc.
by a spiritual Anatomy? Has his knock and voice wrought upon thee, as they
did on the Spouse, to call thee away from thy secure bed, and sluggish slumber,
into a diligent Inquiry after him, Mat. 9. 9.
pursued incessantly, till thy Beloved be found? Luke 19. 23, etc.
Have thou given Christ eminent entertainment in some proportion to his eminent
Vocation, as Matthew and Zachaeus did, being called by him?

3. The Consequents following this Call are likewise eminent. His called Ones,
are his faithful ones, following him fully in an obedience of faith and love.
Has he thus effectually prevailed with us to make us faithful, loving and
obedient, according to his Articles of marriage in every Relation, condition
and occasion? Is our obedience cordial and constant, Gal. 5. 24.
universal and perpetual, at least in our purpose and endeavors? Is there no
Duty we would willingly neglect, no sin we would leave unmortified, no mercy of
his that we would not fruitfully improve? Is his Will our Rule, his Glory our
End, his Grace our Principle, his Spirit our strength, whether in superior or
inferior places, in every Ordinance and Providence? Gal. 5. 6.
Does our faith work by love to him, and all his peculiarly, Gal. 6. 14.
fervently, orderly and continually? Is it our desire and delight, Mat. 10. 38.
design and labor to follow him through fair and foul, Mar. 8. 34.
through the Cross to the Crown, through many tribulations into his Kingdom of
Grace and Glory? Luke 9. 23.
Have we none in Heaven but him, Psalm. 73. 24.
none upon Earth in comparison of him? If thy Vocation be a saving one, its an
eminent One in the exercise of every Grace, in the crucifying of every Lust, in
the resisting of every Temptation, in the bearing of every Affliction upon his
account. Mat. 11. 28, 29.
Art thou as willing to take up his yoke, and to learn practically of him,
meekness and lowliness, as thou art desirous of his Rest? Do thou as
cheerfully, studiously obey every Precept, as thou delighest in every Promise
of his gracious Covenant? Is it thy trouble and grief, that thy self and others
do so dishonor and disobey him? Is it thy chief joy to see him honored and
obeyed by any of his? Does the sense of thy sinfulness still conflicting
within, make thee to cry out against thy wretched self? Does the sight of his
Grace any way made good to thee, melt thy soul into grateful acknowledgements,
and suitable Returns, as it did in Paul, Romans 7. 25, 26.
David, and the rest of his called ones? Do thou eminently improve that
calling, Psalm. 31.
thus eminently vouchsafed unto thee? Psalm. 119.
consider it well.

Use 4.
This speaks comfort to the Lords chosen, Rev. 17. 14.
faithful, called Ones. Your Vocation is most eminent, so is the Cordial that
flows from it against sin and sorrow, the flesh and the world, self and Satan.
He has called you to Glory and Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 3.
through Glory and Virtue, who is faithful, and will also do it. Whom he did
foreknow, them he did predestinate, to be conformed to the image of his Son,
Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
that he might be the first born among many Brethren. Moreover, whom he did
predestinate, them he called; whom he called, them he justified; whom he
justified, them he glorified. Therefore shall all things work together for
good, to them that love God, who are the called according to his purpose. Is
not this golden chain of your salvation a Sovereign Antidote against all fears,
from within and without, to be carefully laid up, and laid out as the Apostle
did? Thou trembling soul, whose heart is tender, that would fain love Christ,
and loath sin above all, that thou may follow his call, is not this thy
privilege? Should not thou join with him, in casting the Gantlet, and biding
Defiance to sin and Satan, Romans 8. 32, 33, 34, 35.
to self and the world, as he instructs thee in the following Context? Who
shall separate us from the Love of God? Shall Tribulation, etc. Nay in all
these we are more then Conquerors through him that loved us? Ver. 36, 37.
May thou not through his name, confidently resolve with him also, and be
persuaded that neither Life nor Death, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate thee from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? Thou
have his Word and Oath, his Hand and Seal, his Purpose and Promise, his
Purchase and Covenant, his Grace and Glory, yea himself with his al-sufficiency
engaged to thee for it, what can thou look more for? The more unworthy and
insufficient thou art in thy own eyes, the more is thy right cleared to his
Worthiness and sufficiency. His Gifts and Calling are without Repentance, Romans
11. 29.
being carried on in this saving manner, though his common Gifts and external
Calling admit often of a change, as appeared in Saul, Judas, and the Like
temporary Believers. Though thy hand be weak, yet his is strong enough, thy
strength and stay lies in him alone, and not in thy self. Though thou often
break, Ioh. 10. 3, 4, 27, 28, 29, 30.
yet does he not break, who calls his sheep by name to eternal Life. Thy
Vocation is eminently divine, for freeness and fullness, Mat. 9. 13.
sureness and singularness, to sense thy Soul against all enemies and
discouragements. Whom does he seek and save, Luke 19. 9, 10.
but that which was lost in a perishing state?

Use 5.
This should finally excite every One to look in earnest after such an eminent
Vocation, that the same may be faithfully Improved. The whole world is cast
into two Ranks, of uncalled and called Persons; both are to be effectually
dealt with.
1. UNcalled sinners that never gave yet hearty Obedience to the Call of
Christ. These are of various sorts, abounding every where to be spoken to, as
their case requires. Some are most ruled by one Lust, some by another; some
openly, others more closely, whilst they all follow the call of sin, and reject
Christ's Call. Should not all such be vigorously pressed to listen to his voice,
before it be too late? Who ever thou art that hearkenest to any thing else,
rather then to Christ, take notice of thy state in its sinfulness, in its
wofulness? Have thou not been juggling and jugled with long enough already, both
deceiving and being deceived? Have thou not followed Satan far enough in thy
ignorant and negligent course, in thy notional and formal Revolts, in thy
sinful pleasures, profits and esteem? Will thou still be cheated by such a
Father, and such children of lies? Will thou still hearken to that pernicious
voice, which calls thee away from Christ and his ways? Have thou not slighted
and abused him too long, in rejecting his terms, Isa. 47. 13.
and capitulating still to have thy own? Have thou not sufficiently wearied thy
self in thy wildred state, Luke 15.
like the Prodigal Son, from one Bog to another, from one Lust to another? Is
it not high time to come to thy self, by hearkennig to Christ's Call? Has not
he waited long enough on thee with entreaties and offers, precepts and
promises, chidings and threats, wooings and expostulations, Directions and
Encouragements of all sorts? Have not his Law and Gospel, his Mercies and
Judgments sounded loud and long enough about thee to call thee to Christ out
of sin and self? Shall nothing prevail, art thou grown so dull, so dead and
obdurate, like the Smiths Anvil, and his sleepy Dog? Has Satan so far blinded
and hardened thee, that thou can not deliver thy Soul, Isa. 44. 20.
by shaking off the lie of thy right hand? Will thou not admire the Treasures
of his Patience, Bounty and long-suffering exercised toward thee hitherto?
Have thou a mind to feel the Treasures of his Justice and Vengeance? Behold!
Christ is come once more to give thee a Call. Now hearken for thy Life. This
may be the last Now, if ever be persuaded to listen to him, and obey his Call.
Sinner, he calls thee by name, to look into self, about self, under self, above
self. Do thou not see thy self a forlorn wretch, Hell opening its Jaws, all
the Creatures armed to execute thee, the great God himself smoking in deserved
rigor against thee? Is not Christ's tender now be valued, owned, and embraced?
Awake and arise, he calls thee to himself, Mat. 11. 28.
for Grace, Mercy and Peace. Art thou weary and heavy laden with sinful
Burdens? come to him for Rest. Is thy heart blind, rotten and diseased, the
Master calls thee, that he may heal thee. Is it not equitable and reasonable
thou should yield to his voice? Is it not absolutely necessary to thee? Is
not thy own Interest specially concerned? Is not his Call most honorable, most
pleasurable, most profitable? Can thou hear of his Love, of his sufferings,
of his Grace and Glory, without relenting of thy tendrest Bowels? Can thy heart
hold out any longer against his Call? Will thou not abhor and abandon sin, self
and Satan, to give thy All to him? For shame come now to Christ, though thou be
very bad, that he may mend thee, pardon thee, purge thee with his Blood and
Grace, through his Spirit and Word. Let his Love constrain thee to a cordial
Reciprocation.

Quest. How shall it be done?

Answ. Two main things he calls thee to mind, Diligence and Dependence.

1. Diligence in the use of all means appointed by him in his Word and
Providence. Look for him, and hearken to his voice in every Duty, in every
Mercy; attend on him in every Ordinance and Providence. Neglect not any
opportunity of seeking his face, studying his Word, praising his name,
consulting with his People. Be much in secret and fervent Prayer, sigh and
groan, cry and chatter, if thou can not speak plain. Let his Sabbath and
service be precious to thee, and duly observed. Perform every Duty as thy last,
and as for thy Life, slight not any help from his meanest servant, make choice
of some special bosom friend, whose Prudence, Tenderness and Love may be most
helpful to thee. Be much in the study of Scriptures, such especially as most
suit thy case. Attend on the public Ministry with faith and diligence, as
upon the great Ordinance of Heaven for Conviction, Conversion, and Confirmation
of Souls. Romans 10. 14.
How shall men believe, unless they be preached to? How shall men preach,
unless they be sent? Make use of others Experiences for Direction and
Encouragement. Beware of Mountebanks and juggling Seducers, that will poison and
skin over thy sores, and at best, can give but a palliate cure, with all their
Bragadoxia's. Be willing to be dressed to the quick, by such sober and skillful
Physicians, such spiritual Chirurgians as the Lord does appoint and bless to
his People. Thou will not trust thy Estate, thy Clothes, thy Body and Temporals
with Idiots, and unskilful persons. Should not thy soul be much dearer to thee,
then to be trusted with unlearned Empyricks, that have gotten some few receipts
with many brags? In a word, be most diligent in every Relation and occasion to
serve the Lords Spirit, and observe his Will, by the right use of all (...)
Means, for his Honor, and thy good.

2. Dependence on him wholly and solely he requires also. Its he alone that
must bless the means, Isa. 26 3, 4.
and will be trusted for it. He bids thee roll thy self upon his Grace, lie at
his feet, acknowledge him in All. This is the Angel of the Covenant, whose
motion must communicate a healing virtue to the waters of Bethesda, Ioh. 7.
and of the Sanctuary. He can heal at the Pool, if not in the Pool. The sense
of thy weakness and emptiness must still drive thee to him for strength and
fullness. He calls thee to rest upon him, to derive from him, and keep close to
him for support and supplies in every condition. It is his Grace must pardon
and purge, direct and quicken, restore and save. His presence and blessing is
the cream and substance, the Life and vigor of every Ordinance, Pro. 3. 6.
of every Creature. Apply therefore his gracious Promises in order thereto.
Exo. 20. 24.
He will be sought and found in all his ways, Isa. 64. 5.
to meet us with a Blessing, where ever he records his name. He meets them that
rejoice, working righteousness, those that remember him in his ways, Mat. 16.
19, 20.
and is still present where two or three are met together in his name. He hears
in secret, Mat. 6. 6.
and rewards openly those that depend on him. The more thou findst thy self
unable, unskilful and unwilling to good, the more depend thou on him, who has
an Al-sufficiency of skill, Power and Will for thy good. So shall his Grace be
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10.
and his strength shall be perfected in thy weakness.

Secondly, Christians that are efficaciously called, should be stirred up to
make Improvement of their eminent Calling. Has the Lord vouchsafed so singular
a favor to any of us? How can it but inflame our hearts with grateful
rescentments thereof? Should we not with the Apostle, admire the dimensions of
that eternal Love, which wrought so effectually in the fullness of time, by
showing Mercy to such sinful wretches, after so many provocations? 1 Timothy 1
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
That we should obtain favor, who sinned so Ignorantly, so Unbelievingly, so
hainously, this is mercy indeed! That we should be called into his house and
Kingdom, that were by nature Children of wrath, and the slaves of Hell, this is
Grace indeed! Should not this provoke us to Improve it faithfully, in our
respective Employments toward God and Man, and therefore to observe the next
Conclusion?

Conclus.
Christians are eminently obliged to walk worthy of their Vocation.
Two words explained will clear the sense, Walking, Worthy.
1. WAlking, (...) imports a constant and pleasing Exercise, by a Metaphor
borrowed from bodily motion, to signify Emphatically the spiritual motion of
the whole Man in all the ways of God, with continued progress from Truth to
Truth, from Grace to Grace, from Strength to Strength. It holds forth the
circling and compassing of the full period of Gods Will and man's duty, in the
review and observance of all particulars, by an exact and accurate inspection
thereof, as a man about his Garden, a Commander about his charge. Thus it
implies a multiplicious Act of every power and part of a Christian.

2. Worthy, (...) digne, This Adverb does express fitness, but not
meritoriousness; it betokens here a comely sutableness, and honorable
pre-eminence, which becomes such a Vocation, as the learned observe from the
due compare of numerous Scriptures. The Calling of a Christian requires from
him such an answerable walk, wherein ^ne (...), and Decorum of all things
orderly proportioned, should reflect much Glory and Luster thereon, in
preferring the same before all lesser matters and worldly Bables.

That all Christians are thus obliged to walk, appears clearly from all Divine
expressions and Administrations. This is the Scope of Gods Mercy, and the sum
of man's Duty, so eminently inculcated in holy writ. The first part of the Lords
gracious Covenant is expressed by the many precious Promises of putting his
Spirit within men, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
that they may walk in his Statutes, Jer. 32. 39, 40.
and effectually keep his Judgments; of renewing their heart, Genesis 17. 2, 3.
that they may not depart from him etc. The second part thereof is held out in
answerable precepts of Genesis 48. 15.
of walking before him, Lev. 26. 3.
after him, eminently, as becomes his Call. Deuteronomy. 25. 33.
This was the Character of Honor, put upon all the Lords Worthies, Josh. 22. 5.
whose Presidents give us such famous Memorials from the Pen of the Holy Ghost.
Genesis 4. 22.
Thus Abel and Enoch, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah and Abraham, David and Asa, all the Patriarchs, all the friends of Christ
are remarkably described. 1 Kin. 9. 4.
The Apostolical Instances do pregnantly abound with Directions, 1 Kin. 20. 3.
and Motives, Luke 1. 6.
Prayers and Practices, of the like Comport. Thus Zecharias and Elizabeth
walked in all the Commands of the Lord blamless. Number. 14. 24.
Thus Caleb followed him fully, and the Churches were edifyingly multiplied,
Act. 9. 31.
walking in the fear of God. This Sun-light needs no further proof.

A three fold ground moves efficaciously thereto, Ingenuity, Congruity and
Expediency.
Ground 1.
INgeuuity is a powerful Principle, a spiritual Instinct in the new Creature.
All things are moved by their peculiar Instinct to their proper work for matter
and manner answerable to their Being. The true Christian is ennobled with a
generous Spirit, Psalm. 110. 3.
that makes him willing in the day of Christ's power, to fulfill after him, as
Caleb did. This Ingenuous Spirit cannot but a^^ them energetically to Ingenuous
motions. So far as they live in the Spirit, they must needs walk after the
Spirit. Gal. 3. 25.
Its for want of Grace, that any are found to walk unworthily. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
The best know and act graciously, but in part. Regeneration is indeed
universal in every part, Romans 17. 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 23.
but not total in any part. The Lords Spirit gradually renews the Spirits of
all his, that they may walk in the Spirit, and not fulfill the Lusts of the
flesh. Gal. 5. 16.
The natural Principle of all things moves secretly and sweetly, strongly and
sutably, successively and successfully. So does a Christians Spirit, by
ingenuous Instincts in each relation and occasion.

Ground 2.
Congruity presses thereto also, that there may be a due Correspondence in a
Christians walk, answering his Call. All Bodies natural, artificial and
Political, subsist orderly by a congruous disposal and composure of all parts,
in their harmonious Symmetry toward their proper actions. The like appears in
the Body of Christ, in his house and Kingdom. Its most congruous that his own
members should move in their place, answerably to their Call, that his Children
and friends, his servants and Spouse should duly observe their respective
Relations. Its most rational, just and equitable, that such a Decorum should be
duly maintained in a Christian walk. Disorderly Christians are most absurd and
irrational in their unworthy Walkings. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
They are (...), without rank and reason, most incongruous in their unsuitable,
uncomely motions about good and evil. Sin is the Ataxie and Dyscrasie, the
Disorderer and Distemperer of all things. So far as any walk sinfully, they
walk unworthily, Incongruously. The sweet Harmony and sure stability of things
depend upon their congruity, and due composure in station and motion. Is it not
congruous, that every Member should walk worthy of his Head; that every part
should keep its due proportion, 1 Cor. 12.
and respect to the whole? Ephesians. 4.
He that says, that he abides in him, ought also to walk, even as he walked. 1
Ioh. 2. 6.
The Apostle would have Christians therefore, to be his Followers, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
as far as he was a follower of Christ. Its most congruous, Mat. 11. 29.
that Christ's Disciples should learn of their Master, and write after him; that
his Soldiers should keep close to him, and march after his steps.

Ground 3.
Expediency has a strong influence into the same, with Reference both to God
and Man.
1. WIth Reference to God; a Christians worthy Walk is most expedient for his
honor and service. Unworthy walking is most disgraceful and disadvantagious to
his name and cause, to his Truth and Grace, to his friends and ways. The Glory
of all his Attributes is deeply concerned in his Peoples walking. He minds them
of it still in his Word and Providence. Christiani sancte vixissent, said the
Heathen in Dirision, Ezekiel. 36. 20.
Si Christus sancte docuisset. These are the People of the Lord, that are gone
forth out of his Land, said the reproaching Gentiles of the Jews unworthy
carriage, in their transplantations. Gods honor should be dearer unto us then
our best comforts. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
woks, Ephesians. 2. 10.
which he before ordained for us to walk in. His Interest requires that all his
Children, Servants and Subjects should walk like him, and with him, before and
after him, from him, and for him.

2. With Reference to man; a Christians worthy walk conduces wonderfully to the
public Good, and his own Credit and Comfort, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 14.
very many ways. Christians should be studious to maintain good works, as
things most profitable to men. They are redeemed by Christ to be a peculiar
People, Tit. 3. 8, 14.
zealous of good works. The welfare of the whole depends very much upon the
worthy Demeanor of every part, in its respective station and motion. Unworthy
walking is the great Obstructer of all public Interest, civil and sacred.
Thereby are the wicked hardened in sin, and the godly grieved and
discountenanced. The Cement and Juncture of all societies are Impaired and
ruinated by the same. Truth and Peace, Righteousness and Holiness are still
affronted, and basely abused thereby. The very props and bases of every
commonwealth shake and totter by unworthy courses. God will not own them that
will not own him. He walks against such, as walk against him. Psalm. 18. 25, 26.
With the Upright will he show himself upright, and against the froward, will
he appear froward. Our own personal good is signally engaged therein, in all
temporal and spiritual regards. Pro. 14. 34.
A righteous walking exalts a Nation, but sin is the reproach of any person or
people. Pro. 10. 9.
He that walks uprightly, Pro. 28. 18.
walks safely and comfortably. All the ways of Wisdom are pleasantness, Pro. 3.
17.
and all her paths are Peace. He meets him that works righteousness, Isa. 64. 5.
walking and remembering him in his ways, Pro. 3. 6.
to direct their steps, who acknowledge him in all their ways. The way of Life
is above to the wise, to depart from Hell beneath. Pro. 15. 24.
Christians unworthy carriage is the blast of all Credit, Comfort and
Conscience. Their worthy walking is most expedient for their own and others
good. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.
Many are won to Christ by the good Conversation of the very women, which have
long resisted the Spirit and word of God. The Life of Christians is the very
Life of their Christianity, making most lively Impressions upon others.
Examples are much more efficacious then Precepts, for good against evil,
Docemur praeceptis, ducimur exemplis. Christ himself appeared an eminent
Pattern, as well as a Principle of holiness, to lead all his people toward
happiness.

Use 1.
See hence the sinfulness of Libertinism, Notional and Practical.
1. NOtional Libertinism is most unworthy, whose Principles are found so
directly opposite to a Christians worthy walking. Many such loose Tenets spread
now like a Gangrene and ulcerous Cancers, whose case and cure we have touched
by Scriptural help, in our Libertine schooled, as also in our Antidote, and in
our Peacemaker, lately published. The famelistical quaking Opinions, raked out
of the old Gnostics Dung-hils, Popish rubbish, and German sinks, are put to
sale under specious disguises and refinements. Their pretended Light, and
self-sufficiency, their Pharisaical, Monkish Holiness, and sinless perfection;
their blasphemous abuses of God the Father, Son and Spirit, of his Word and
Grace, Sabbath and Ordinances: of Christ's Merits and Satisfaction, with the
rest of such wretched trash are diametrally cross to the Truth in hand. The
conceit of universal Toleration of all things, pretending to Conscience, though
clearly evil, is of the like Tendency, as also many of the Romish Principles,
pointed at elsewhere. Those who think themselves bound to follow the Light
within, in every suggestion, (without regulation and Limitation of the
Scripture Light) cannot but run into thousand hazzards and disorders, toward
delusion and confusion. Such expose themselves to every unclean and lying
Spirit, that has but cunning to bait his hook for them. To be given up to our
own hearts Lusts, Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
to walk after our vain Imaginations, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
is the sorest Judgment that God Inflicts upon the Despisers of his word and
ways. Such spiritual Judgments usher in temporal plagues, personal and
public, witness the Records of all ages and places. Oh! The sin and woe of
such unworthy Doctrines, which draw so many from the ways of God, into the
crooked paths of Delusion and Desolation.

2. Practical Libertinism appears hence a most unworthy thing, so wretchedly
contrary to a Christians Walk. The corrupt defluxions of notional Brains do
soon infect their hearts, and their hands. Their wretched opinions do quickly
putrify their affections and conversations: Levelling Principles do sadly
break out in Levelling Practices, to the razing down of every Ordinance, Divine
and Humane. The deadly weeds that were kept under ground in the winter of
former persecution, do now grow apace in this spring of Liberty and
Reformation. Whilst Christ is offering a Divine Liberty, to good, and from
evil: Satan is promoting a hellish Liberty, from good unto evil. This is the
Libertinism which the simple plead for, and wise men abhor, as most opposite to
our christian walk, and unworthy of the least Patronage from Christ's name and
friends. This sinful Liberty is woeful slavery to Satan's drudgery. 2 Pet. 2.
19.
Whilst such promise themselves and others Liberty, 2 Pet. 3. 3.
they themselves are the slaves of wickedness, walking after their own Lusts.
Iud. 18.
How unworthy are they of Christ's Name, that walk so unworthy of his Holy
Vocation.

Use 2.
It affords a just Reprehension to all that walk unworthily, whether sinners or
Saints. Sin raigns in the most, remains in the best. So far as the ways of sin
are trod upon, so far do Christians walk unworthy of Christ. The whole world
lies in wickedness, being like a great Bog, wherein multitudes utterly loose
themselves. The way of Truth and Grace is a royal causey, built at the costs of
Heaven, Ioh. 14. 6.
quite through the same. Christ himself is the personal way; his Word the
Doctrinal way, and man's Duty the practical way, Heb. 10. 20.
paved by the Lord for his People to walk in. Ier. 6. 16.
This new and living way is the good old way whereto all Gods friends were
called in all ages through faith in his name. Whilst poor Creatures are
wandering from Christ's road, they skip from one Hillock to another, venturing a
thousand plunges among swarms of spiritual Tories, toward destruction, if
Grace prevent not. Because this vast Bog is fairly garnished with flourishing
grass, it deceives millions, that do prefer it before Christ's high road, which
is hard and stony, scattered over with briars and thorns, by the subtilty of
the common enemy. Thus whilst sinful wretches are walking apace toward seeming
pleasure, profit or preferment, from one grassie plot to another, they ingulf
themselves into dreadful quagmires of sin and sorrow. Consider it all ye that
walk still in your Love, and course of Ignorance and Pride, Unbelief and
Wordliness, under the guidance of cheating Impostors and fleshly Lusts. How
unworthy of Christ's name are you, that walk so unworthily after Vanity and
Lies, to the shameful disgrace of your Profession? Could you but see your
Ghostly Leader, whom you follow so constantly in your sinful ways, what
amazement would seize on your heart! Satan himself is that Prince of the Power
of the Air, the Spirit that rules mightily in the Children of Disobedience,
Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
after whom you walk, according to the fashion of this world; whilst you have
your Conversation among them, in the Lusts of your flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind. Paul himself acknowledges it to have been
his own and others case before Conversion, being by nature Children of Wrath,
even as others. Is it not very sinfully woeful, to leave Christ's walk for the
Devils company? Are not all the Allurements of sin, so many ignes fatui, and
mis-guiding Meteors, made use of still by evil Spirits, to ensnare Travelers
in the misty night of Ignorance and Error, into dangerous Plunges and
Precipices, by drawing them out of Christ's high way? Will you still pretend to
be Christ's Soldiers, whilst you are marching after his desperate Enemy, under
the conduct of sin, Satan and self? Is it not pity, that any of Christ's
friends should be so unfriendly to him, and walk so unworthy of his Vocation,
as to be found walking in the crooked Bypath of Error and Sin? Should not
Gods Children be ashamed of such an Ignoble and base Demeanor, raking the
Channels, and embracing Dung-hils among the beggarly Drudges of Satan? Should
not his servants be deeply humbled for their shameful neglect of his work,
whilst they are so unworthily busied and stirring about the Devils own Work?
Should it not grieve Christ's Spouse at the very heart, that sinful Embraces
and Communion with the flesh and world are at any time preferred before
Communion with the Lord of Glory? Is it not baseness of the vilest rank, to be
found walking so unworthily of Christ's High, Holy and Heavenly Calling?

Use 3.
Examination we are called to by this Point also. All are concerned to try
their State and Acts, by this golden Rod of the Sanctuary. Does any profess to
be a true Christian? Let this Touchstone give a Test thereof. Do thou walk
worthy of thy Profession, in every Relaon toward God and Man, in thy general
and particular Calling?
1. Toward God in thy general Calling, Is it thy desire and delight, design
and endeavor to honor and enjoy him, as thy Sovereign Lord and chief good in
Christ, through his Spirit in every Ordinance and Providence? Are thy thoughts,
words and works so regulated by his Will, and directed to his Glory; so
principled by his Grace, and supported by his strength, that he is the Center
and Source, the Scope and Substance of thy happiness? Do thou Love and fear
him, do thou seek and trust him universally, constantly, peculiarly,
eminently above all? Is his Presence and Blessing the Life and Comfort of all
thy Life and Comforts? Are all the Powers and parts of Soul and Body resigned
up into his own hands, that thou may walk with him in all his ways? Are all
things else made subordinate and subservient thereto? Do thou so acknowledge
him in all thy ways, Prove. 3. 6.
for the directing of thy paths? Is it thy greatest trouble and sorrow, that
thou can not walk so humbly and holily, so sincerely and self-denyingly, as
thou should and would? Is it thy cordial Joy to see any other walking
orderly and diligently in his service and ways? Art thou zealous of those
things wherein thy Christian walk may truly honor him against whatever appears
to reflect any disgrace on him? Art thou so convinced of thy former mistakes
and mis-carriages, that thou studiously labourest to vindicate his name, and
redeem the time mis^pent by a more close and vigilant walking with thy God?
Do thou not willingly neglect any thing he requires of thee, either for the
matter and means, or for the manner and solemn Time of his Worship? Does his
Covenant-mercy still direct, excite and enable thee to reciprocal Duty,
according to the terms of his gracious Covenant? Is thy motion from every sin
of thine to every Grace of his, carried on still progressively by the help of
all his gracious appointments toward his Glory? Do thou so walk worthy of
his Name and Truth, of his Word and Grace, of his Son and Spirit, of his
Service and Sabbath, as becomes a loyal Spouse, an ingenuous Child, a faithful
servant, a cordial friend, a dutiful Subject, a generous Soldier in each
Relation toward him, according to thy Respective occasions and Condition? Do
thou thus diligently serve and observe his Spirit. Word and Providence, in the
right use of all suitable means, resting on him alone for Wisdom and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, through Christ in all the turns
of thy Christian walk? 1 Cor. 1. 30.


Secondly, In thy particular Calling toward man, Do thou walk worthy of thy
high, holy, heavenly Vocation? Does thy supreme Love due to thy God, move thy
heart effectually to love thy Neighbor as thy self, in subordination thereto?
Do thou therefore study all his Divine Rules of Justice and Equity, Mercy and
Charity, that thou may fulfill the same through his Grace, answerably to thy
several Stations and motions toward Superiors, Inferiors and Equals? Art thou
observant of that orderly Priority and Superiority, which his Providence
constitutes and governs below, in giving to every one his due, above thee,
about thee, beneath thee? Do thou mind and promote the safety and Purity, the
Propriety and Verity of others, as if they were thy own, not willingly doing to
another, what thou would not should be done to thee in the like case? Do
thou take so much contentment in that condition wherein the hand of Heaven has
settled thee, that thou enviest not what any other enjoys, but rejoycest in
his good, grieving for his evil, as if it were thy own? Is it thy Purpose, Joy
and longing to labor still after such a frame of Spirit, and demonstrate it in
the best way of actual evidence by thy speech and actions? Art thou therefore
often reviewing thy heart and life, to observe thy progress, and to mend all
faults by the Lords gracious Help? Does the sense of thy Unworthiness and
Insufficiency still drive thee to Christ out of self and sin, for Guidance,
Assistance and Acceptance, that thou may still be found walking with him,
whilst thou walk with man? Do thou give him thus honor and pre-eminence in
a suitable and comely behavior toward all sorts, in promoting good, and
eschewing evil? Have thou learnt to put on Christ by faith, Romans 13. 14.
that thou may follow his magnanimous Spirit, Number. 14. 24.
as Caleb did, against all discouragements from Earth and Hell, into all
generous resolutions, and courageous Executions for good against evil? Do
thou thus walk worthy of thy Vocation in each Relation, Domestical, Political
and Ecclesiastical, with Christian Prudence and Patience, Diligence and Zeal,
Meekness and Love, Fidelity and Conscionableness, suitable to each Condition and
Occasion? Thus may thou take a scantling of thy progress in Christianity.

Use 4.
Choice Consolation flows from this Truth to all faithful Christians, Exo. 20.
24.
walking orderly as becomes their eminent Vocation. The blessing of God will
surely attend his Institutions carefully observed. Psalm. 84. 11, 12.
The Lord is a Sun and a shield, to give Grace and Glory, Psalm. 1. 1. 2.
and withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 119. 1, 2, 3.
Blessed are all the undefiled in their ways, whose chief Exercise is to walk
with God. They shall walk with Christ in white, Rev. 3. 4.
for they are worthy, who have been diligent Followers of him, through black
and red, in all variations. Phil. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12.
He counts them most worthy, who count themselves most unworthy. His personal
Worthiness is Imputatively applied to them who still disclaim their own
personal Worthiness. His Implanted Worthiness is progressively imparted to
them, who keep close to him, resting on him alone in the diligent use of all
due means through says in his name He makes them worthy, not by any merits of
congruity or condignity in a Popish sense: but by fitness and sutableness;
making it their honor and happiness, to conform to him in the glorious
Characters of his Divine Holiness. Noscitur a socio, qui non cognoscitur a se.
Men are best known by their company and walk. They that are still walking with
the Lord, will be clearly discerned by his eminent Communications. A continual
walking in the Sun, cannot but tranfuse a proportionable measure of Light and
Heat. They have most of God, and will do most for him, that are most with him.
Christ Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, is most communicative in all the Beams
of his gracious Appointments, Mal. 4. 2.
through the glorious operations of his Holy Spirit. Those that honor him will
he surely honor, when those that despise him; shall become vile as Dung. His
exact followers will be often slandred and derided for their preciseness and
accurateness: he takes care therefore to see them righted in the best season
and way. They shall fare no worse then he himself does, and shall be sure of
Sovereign Cordials against all faintings. Their worthy walking is like to be
costly and chargeable; but his Al-sufficiency will make full amends. If they be
content to deny themselves in any thing for him; he will not deny himself, or
any thing to them. If they be found faithful in a little, he will make them
Rulers over much. Mat. 25. 22.
If they carefully make his Interest theirs, he will be sure to make theirs his
own. If they part with brass for him, Romans 8. 18.
they shall receive gold from him. If they spend a few moments in his work,
they shall rest with him in his eternal Bliss. Psalm. 126. 5.
If they conflict for him, they shall conquer and triumph with them. If they
sow in tears, they shall reap in joy. Mat. 19. 28.
If they follow him in the Regeneration, they shall sit with him in the Throne
of Majesty. Luk 22. 28, 29, 30.
No work or wages, no company or walk so excellent below, but it comes
Infinitely short of his. Rev. 3. 21.
They that walk worthy of his calliug, shall be sure to Inherit the comforts
thereof. Romans 8. 1.
There is no Condomnation to them that are in Christ, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit.

Use. 5.
A Vigorous exhortation should be hence also pressed on all Christians. Are not
all eminently obliged to walk worthy of their Vocation, both general and
particular? Do we need Arguments to move us thereto? Are not Ingenuity,
Congruity and Expediency of sufficient force to persuade all sorts to this
signal Duty, so pleasurable and profitable, so suitable and seasonable, so
honorable and so comfortable? Shall wicked men toil early and late to walk
after sin, Satan and self, in observing the Lusts of the flesh, and shall good
men think much of any cost or care in walking after Christ, and observing the
motions of his Spirit ratified to them by his Word and Providence? 1 Pet. 4. 2,
3.
Should not the time past suffice us, that has been so woefully misspent in
fulfilling the will of the flesh? Ephesians. 5. 15, 16,
Is it not high time for every one to redeem the Time, and walk circumspectly,
Ephesians 4. 17, 18, 19, 20.
not as fools, but as wise, because the the days are evil? Why should any
Christian be found walking as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,
having their Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their heart;
who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
commit Iniquity with greediness? If we have learned Christ better, let it
appear in our worthy walking, Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20.
for many walk, of whom we must witness with a bleeding heart, that their God
is their belly, their Glory their shame, who mind earthly things? Should not
our Conversation witness our corporation to be in Heaven, from whence we expect
a Savior? If we live in the Spirit, lets also walk after the Spirit, Gal. 5.
25.
that we may no longer follow our fleshly Lusts. What pity it is, that this
Divine Walk should be so unfrequented, whilst sinful, worldly walks are
continually crowded with multitudes? What a shame is it, that so much labor
should be still bestowed upon this carcass, this bag full of filth and bones,
whilst so little care is taken of our Immortal souls? Shall Jews and Turks,
Papists and Pagans walk more sutably to their profession, then reformed
Christians? Shall not Gods Interest and honor prevail efficaciously with us, to
walk worthy of his great and glorious Name, which is called upon us? Are not we
all eminently concerned therein, according to our Respective Stations and
motions, public and private, Civil and Sacred? Let all Superiors and
Inferiors study and pray, believe and consult, resolve and endeavor more
effectually for this Gospel-duty, so Important and necessary.

1. Superiors are eminently called thereto, that they may walk worthy of the
Lord, who dignifies them with the Title and function of his Deputies and
Representatives. He would have them to do most for him, and be most like him,
who receive most from him, and have most account to render to him. They bear
his Image and Authority, natural and moral in a singular way, that they may be
directed, excited and enabled to honor and promote his Power and Will, more
spiritually and efficaciously. Their Work and Burden, troubles and snares, are
much more then others; they therefore need still to be most watchful and
diligent in their Christian Walk. His Promises and Encouragements, Preceps and
Directions, Menaces and Judgments are eminently dispensed toward them for
good against evil. They are his Lieutenants and high Stewards, to Rule under
him, according to his Word, for his Glory, and their Inferiors good. Boleslaus,
King of Bohemia, was wont to carry his Fathers Image in his Bosom, and often to
kiss it, with a solemn wish, that he might do nothing unworthy of such an
eminent Parent and Pattern. Should not all Superiors be often viewing and
embracing the Lords Divine Image, carrying in their heads and hearts, the
gracious Characters of Christ's Righteousness and Holiness, that they may still
act and walk worthy of such a Father? Magnates will still be Magnetes; persons
of Honor and Power are great Loadstones, that will draw many either to good or
evil. Superiors are the Looking-glasses of their Families, City and Country, by
whose president, most will dress themselves. Like heavenly Bodies in superior
Orbs, they still carry a forcible Influence, whether benign or malign, by their
multiplicious Aspects and Motions. Like the grand wheels of Clocks and Watches,
they Regulate or disturb all the rest. Like Jeremies figs, they do much good,
or much hurt. The Jews were once banished out of England for poisoning the
publique-springs, to hasten an Epidemical Ruin. Our Governors whether
Oeconomical, or Political, Military or Ecclesiastical, are our public
Springs, which if poisoned, will prove most pernicious to all. Ingentia
beneficia, Ingentia maleficia, Ingentia supplicia. The aggravations of Divine
favors abused, aggravate men's sins and sufferings. They that have most of the
sweets of the world, have their suitable snare of the bitters thereof, to
prevent abuse and surfeiting. Crowns are still lined with cares, and onus is
never severed from honos, Duty being still an inseparable companion to Dignity.
The servant entrusted with his five Talents, has the greater account to give
up at last of his Improvements. Promotion comes not from the East or West,
Psalm. 75. 6.
it rises not from the Dust, its God himself that puts up some, in pulling
others down. He advances none to feather their Nest, to please themselves, and
to serve their Lusts, but to serve him and his. He expects most Rent from the
greatest Farms. The greatest of men are his Tenants at Will, holding* in capite
from him, quoad se been gesserint. They are at his disposal, as the Counters in
the Calculators hand, some whereof he places for Units and Tens, others for
hundreds and thousands. When the supputation is over, and this Life at an end,
they are alike again, as to Externals. This world is but a stage, wherein all
sorts have their part to act, being ushered in by Divine Providence in their
several orders and Ranks. That which makes the real difference between men and
men, is their worthy walking, wherein consists the true Grandeur and noble
Gallantry of Superior Persons. What Agesilaus, King of Sparta said of the
Persian King, he is indeed greater, if better then I, is worth considering
among all persons of Authority. Whilst Superiors walk worthy of their Calling,
they prove choice Instruments in the Lords own hand, to diffuse the
Communications of his goodness proportionably to their greatness. When our
Maximi appear Optimi, in their higher Spheres, as they resemble him most from
whom they receive all, so do they most advance the public Weal, and their own
Comfort, in promoting his honor and Interest. Their countenance and
discountenance carry still a great stroke for good or evil.

2. Inferiors should also be stirred up to walk worthy of their Vocation. The
meanest Member in the body Natural, Politic and Ecclesiastical has its proper
place, work and usefulness. The Lord despises not the weakest Children, nor the
poorest Lambs of his house and flock. Much service may be done by the lowest
persons for God and their Country. It was the poor man that saved the great
City, though very few took notice of him, Eccles. 9. 15.
or of his Wisdom. The smallest Wheels in a Clock and Watch, are of need and
use. We cannot spare the least finger or Toe. Faith and Prayer prevail most in
secret, when little discerned. The Graces and Gifts of Christ's holy Spirit,
Ephesians. 4.
are variously dispensed for Improvement, in order to the benefiting of the
whole by the contribution and concurrence of every part thereof. 1 Cor. 12.
Its not by Chance, Col. 2. 19.
Fortune or Luck, that any are brought to a low condition, but by the wise.
Providence of God, who best knows what place is fit for every one to stand and
more in. He sets the Limits of men's habitations, Act. 17. 26.
and gives every one his Task to perform in his great family of the Universe.
He gives special Rules to all Inferiors, as well as to Superiors, whether
private or public, civil or sacred, witness Paul's Epistles, and all other
parts of Divine Records. He expects Returns suitable to men's Receipts, Mat. 25.
15, etc.
and rewards the Improvement of the two Talents, as well as of the five. The
beauty and strength of every Society, consists mainly in the proper motions of
the lesser, as well as of the greater parts. The worthy walking of Inferior
Christians conduces very much to the adorning of their Profession. Moral
virtues and spiritual Graces, show their native Beauty best in a plain dress
and familiar Garb. Christian humbleness and self-denial, Diligence and
Patience, Sobriety and Contentation. Laboriousness and Fidelity, Submission and
Dependency shine clearly in a low estate, as the stars in a frosty night. There
is a Sympathy and reciprocation so necessary among all the greater and lesser
members of the Body, 1 Cor. 12. 21.
that one cannot say to the other, I have no need of thee. Christ himself
passed through all the conditions of man in his progress of Humiliation, from
his Conception to his Ascension, stooping to the lowest and most abject, that
he might sweeten and sanctify them all to his Peoples Comfort, and for Gods
Glory. He emptied himself; took on him the form of a servant, became a Worm,
and denied himself continually for a Pattern to all. Phll. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
They that have least of the Worlds Profits, Pleasures, and Preferments, have
least of the cares and snares, Psalm. 22. 6.
troubles and account that accompany them. Providence so orders and attemperats
all conditions below, Isa. 53.
that the Bitter sweets of every relation, John 13.
may be still effectual motives, inducing all sorts, to walk worthy of their
Calling. The mysterious Theology of the Ancients represented this by the two
famous Tuns, standing continually before Jupiters Throne, the one full of Honey,
the other of Gall: out of both which, he is still sprinkling and distributing
among all Mortals, such proportions, as best fit their several states and
relations. Inferiors are commanded strictly by the Apostle, as well as
Superiors to abide with God in that calling whereunto they were called, that
they may walk worthy of their vocation, as becomes Christians. 1 Cor. 7. 20.
He repeates his Charge and Instructions to them, to demonstrate the Necessity
and Utility, the convenience and excellency of that eminent Duty, whereto
corrupt Nature is still so backward and so contrary.

Thus should all Christians mind their obligations to Christ, and be vigorously
pressed to study their Calling, and seek his face with industrious Diligence,
that in the faithful use of all due means through faith in his name, serving
his Spirit, Word and Providence, they may be found to walk with him, and like
him in the constant exercise of a good Conscience, sutably to their various
relations for a further help thereto: Act. 24. 16.
consider we the next observation for improvement thereof.

Conclusion. 3.
It becomes Christians to improve the most effectual Helps for mutual quickening
of each other, that they may walk worthy of their Vocation.
THE Deduction of this Inference appears in the Apostles rational arguing, and
his cogent pressing of the Christians at Ephesus, by such forcible Inducements
drawn from the whole context preceding as also from his office, his personal
relations, his present state, their own condition, etc. I therefore the
Prisoner of Jesus Christ do beseech you, etc. Every word here is most
emphatical and weighty; what was thus written, was for our learning, and
concerns all Christians. His industrious care to quicken those eminent
Professors, that they might improve all effectual means for mutual helpfulness,
is a singular direction and encouragement to all, on the like account,

The confirmation of this Truth is abundantly cleared and ratified in the whole
Series of Divine Records. The Prophets and Apostles agree herein most
harmoniously, as in all things else. This is the main scope and substance of so
many Precepts and Promises, Instructions and Motives, Offers and Entreaties,
Expostulations and Admonitions, so frequently, so fervently still inculcated
and pressed in all parts from age to age even upon all Gods People. The high
Commendations and signal Rewards largely bestowed on the due Observers, and the
Menaces and Judgments dispensed against the Neglecters hereof verify the
same. The Ceremonial Types and Prefigurations pointed at this many ways. It was
a bloody Cain that answered stubbornly, Genesis 4. 9.
Am I my brothers Keeper? Heb. 10. 24.
Christians are often incited to consider one another, to provoke one another
to Love and good Works, Heb. 3. 12, 13.
to exhort one another daily, etc.

The Demonstration thereof may be made out on a three fold account.
1. FRom the Importance of this choice Duty of singular weight and worth, need
and use, sufficiently hinted at in the preceding considerations.

2. From man's condition so sinful and weak, so unstable and insufficient of it
self. All by nature are wholly corrupted, carrying about them the root and
spawn of all kind of evil. Genesis 6. 5.
The best find still cause to complain of the sad relics hanging about them,
Genesis 8. 21.
disabling from good, disposing to evil. All have abundant need of continual
help from those about them, Psalm. 14.
to keep them from evil, Psalm. 51.
and excite them to good. The Lord therefore so disposes of things and persons,
Ephesians. 2. 1. 2, 3, 12, 13.
that there should be still a due correspondency for mutual helpfulness in all
relations among all sorts of men. Romans 7.
His Wisdom oppoints, his Goodness affords, and his Power maintains all fit
means by his overruling al-sufficiency, that they may be blessed effectually,
through his All-sufficient Grace to his Glory, and his Peoples good. Act. 17. 28.
In him we live, move and have our Being, both naturally and Spiritually. He
suits all means to their proper ends, dealing with men by men, after the manner
of men in a rational communicative way. His immediate concurrence is so
absolutely needful to the producing of every effect that his Influx still does
interpose between the most proxime cause and its Product, Deuteronomy. 32 39.
in every kind and degree of causation for suspension or actuation, Isa. 45. 6,
7.
regulation and determination, supportation and disposition thereof. Yet is he
pleased to accomodate his Divine Actings to the state of his several Creatures
in their respective Beings and Workings, whether necessary or contingent,
whether natural, moral or Spiritual. His usual Method is to walk in his own
road, to bless his appointments, and to be found of his in all his ways, Exodus
20. 24.
reserving all extraordinaries to his own Pleasure and Dispose. Isa. 64. 5.
He still uses means though he needs them not, Mat. 7. 7, 8.
and would have all his People ingenious and ingenuously active in all the ways
of mutual helpfulness. He gives out his Grace and Blessing gradually and
proportionably, through the Conduits and Pipes of his own Institutions, sutably
to their several Capacities. Christians are like narrow-mouthed vessels, that
can receive the Liquor infused but by little and little Their condition below
is still indigent, that they may honor and enjoy Christ therein, in living
more by faith, and less by sense: yet does he not leave them destitute of help,
Gal. 2. 20.
but trains them up in an orderly way of Christian Communication, Hab. 2. 4,
through the multiplicious operations of his holy Spirit, Romans 1. 17.
that they may be still furthering one another in their journey Heavenward,
Heb. 10 38.
till they be all brought to the full measure of the stature of Christ. 1 Cor.
12.
What any one receives from him, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
is for the public use of all the rest. He cannot endure that any of his,
should be found an idle servant, hiding his Talent under any pretense. Mat. 25
26.
They that have most from him, must do most for his. Their weakness and want
still requires it under all the dispensations of his Providence.

Thirdly, Their many temptations challenge the same also? Sin and Satan, Ephesians.
2. 2, 3.
the flesh and the world, Earth and Hell, are desperately combined against
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
and against his friends, Children and Servants. The Prince of this world
maintains still a threacherous party in our very hearts, and fits all his
snares to our various tempers and distempers. His hooks are still plausibly
baited, and his Ingeniers are very numerous and active, subtle and strong,
malicious and vigilant. Christ's flock is but a very little one, in comparison
of so many goats and swines, foxes and wolves, Lions and Bears, that still
malign it. Luke 12. 32.
We are still surrounded with Spiritual wickednesses, and conjured enemies in
heavenly places and heavenly things. We wrestle not only against flesh and
blood, but mainly against Principalities and Powers, and need therefore to keep
close to each other, Heb. 12. 1, 2.
in keeping close to the Captain of our Salvation, who himself was made perfect
through sufferings, Heb. 2. 10.
in the completing of our Redemption. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
We are still marching in the enemies country, meeting every where with
Ambuscadoes, which should still press us to Circumspection, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
multitudes of his spies, under various disguises, are still plotting mischief
in the midst of us. Many are found professing Godliness in the form, 1 John 2.
16.
whilst they deny the Power thereof. The baits of this world are very catching
and wonderfully specious to allure all sorts to swallow down the hook, Mat. 24.
so fairly dressed with seeming pleasures, profits and preferments. Errors and
Lusts are highly sublimed and refined in these later days, to take silly souls,
and to deceive the very Elect as far as is possible. False Christ's and false
Prophets abound every where, to divert, pervert and subvert Christians from
Christ's ways. Lying wonders and Doctrines of Devils are so fairly trimmed and
garnished over with lightsome colors, that very many are easily cheated with
their juggling tricks. Every rank and degree of men, in every relation, has
still its peculiar way of temptation. Every Christian is therefore still
peculiarly concerned to give and receive all possible help in the right use of
all the means appointed of God for mutual reciprocations. The coals and sticks
put orderly together, do help one another to burn and kindle, whereas if
scatteringly dispersed, they will soon go out. Straggling Soldiers are still
exposed to danger, but keeping close in a firm Body, by mutual help, they prove
formidable to the enemy, and useful to friends. In all societies, civil and
sacred, mutual helpfulness is of singular use to the preservation and
regulation of the whole, and of every part. The best are too subject to grow
lazy and cold, selfish and dull, through the prevailing of renewed temptations:
it becomes there, fore all to improve all effectual means for the mutual
quickening of each other to the grand duty of their Christian walk, answering
their Call.

Application may be made hereof very usefully.
1. BY way of Instruction in vindication of the Ministry and Ministers of
Christ. They are appointed and blessed of him, as a special means toward the
foresaid end, and therefore most maligned and opposed by the common enemy,
Christ's ordinances are his Charets of state, wherein he rides in progress among
men, to dispense his gifts and graces unto them. His Ministerial servants are
peculiarly entrusted therewith, as Instruments and stewards under him, by whom
he brings home his people to himself, to build them up in himself. The many
honorary Titles which his Word discribs them by, setting forth their office,
denote their Duty to the effecting thereof. The same Engine which is mounted by
notional Spirits, against Christ's Institutions, would as easily level the
Magistrates civil constitutions. When men cease to be weak and sinful, they
shall then cease from needing such helps, and not till then. Evangelical
worship must continue in force, till every one of Gods Elect be perfectly
brought to the full measure of the stature of Christ. The Ministry was given
for that purpose by the Lord Jesus, as the choice Product of his Ascension.
Both the Office and the Officers are peculiarly set in the Church by God
himself, that his People may never want sufficient means for effectual
quickening in their Christian walk. The holy Ghost makes them Overseers, who
being by him duly qualified, are orderly called to rule in the Church, after
due probation and approbation. Such shepherds as come in at his door he
blesses to his People; the rest he accounts but Thiefs and Robbers, who intrude
themselves into the Lords flock in an ill manner, and to an ill end. Confusions
in his Church are as distastefull to him, as they are destructive to his.
Himself makes the difference between Rulers and those that are ruled, whilst he
forbids them Lordly-dominion and arbitrary dictates; he commands them to look
to their charge with all Authority in his name and strength, requiring their
flocks to show their observance and Christian obedience, according to his Word.
If every one were left to his own Will, How soon would Anarchie and desolation
ruin Church and State? All will become slaves, whilst all do strive to rule and
tyrannize; none studying to obey. Good Intentions will excuse no man from the
sin and Judgment of irregular Usurpations. Vzzah and Vzzias met with sad
strokes in their bold invasions of the Sacerdotal Work. Corah and his company
of pretended Saints, Jeroboam and his self called Priests, ruined themselves
and followers by their illegal Intrusions, if any that are called Ministers,
prove a blot to their Profession, by their ignorance, sloth or scandal, good
reason they should be reckoned with, as they do deserve, but little cause that
Christ's faithful servants should suffer for their sake. If any thing be found
to be unscriptural, that has been used about any Ordinance of his, the fault
may be mended without imparing of his Institutions. If any cannot find benefit
by Christ's appointmenss, let them blame themselves and not him, nor his. Is the
Spirit of the Lord restrained? Does not his Word do good to them that walk
uprightly? As all Christians need mutual quickening, that they may walk worthy
of their vocation, it becomes them to mind and observe that
Gospel-ministration, which Christ's spirit sanctifies so gloriously to the
enlightening and enlievening of all his chosen, according to his Word.

2 It speaks convinction to all that are careless and unwilling to give or
receive this quickening helpfulness. This is a common and sad miscarriage among
Christians, and the best find much cause to blame themselves for their guilt
thereof. As its our sin, it should be our sorrow that we do so much evil, and
so little good, we receive not friendly Admonitions in a friendly way; thereby
discouraging those that would help us with seasonable advise. Our sores must
needs wrankle for want of dressing, and our ill humors cannot but increase and
distemper us for want of purging. We are more ashamed to hear of our faults,
then to commit them, and more ready to neglect our duty, then to hear of it.
Should it not shame us to find self still so prevalent in us against others
good, and against our own, by thus shrivelling up our minds and hearts, our
tongues and hands, that this singular charge cannot be discharged? Sinful
bashness makes us still unwilling to offend others by our faithful dealing;
and selfish Love makes us as ready to be offended at their faithful dealing.
Christ was full of bowels, and clothed with them; we are empty and destitute
thereof. David desired to be smitten by the seasonable reproof of the
righteous, esteeming it to be a precious Balm that should not hurt his head:
Why should any of us be of another mind? Are not the wounds of a friend more
faithful then the kisses of an enemy? Why should any be counted our enemy for
telling us the Truth, as Paul was among the foolish Galathians? Why should we
be backward to receive and and give that Christian help by mutual
reciprocations, which our abilities annd opportunities challenge clearly from
us? Let it grieve us that we have so often grieved the Lords Spirit, in
grieving his friends by sinful silence, neglects and offenses. Lets be
ashamed, that Heathens and Turks, Jews and Papists should outstrip us in the
demonstrations of mutual helpfulness. What Bunglers are we at this noble Trade?
How untowardly and unskilfully do we go about it? Are not we often like foolish
Chirurgions, mistaking the Case, and wronging the Cure? Do not we usually run
into extremes of fond pity, or cruel Austerity? Are not we found too
indulgent, or too impatient, too mild or too harsh? Should we not be humbled
for our imprudence and ignorance, our rashness and unhandsomness, our passion
and pride, our sloth and frowardness about this choice work.

3. It may prompt us to a serious Examination in our Capacity Religious and
Civil.
1. IN our Religious Capacity, Do we act as becomes true Christians, both in
doing and receiving spiritual Good, in preventing and removing spiritual evil?
Is it our desire to be found still in a readiness for Christian helpfulness? Do
we delight in all officious reciprocations of faithful reproofs and
exhortations, supports and helps for mutual quickening? Is it our design and
resolution, to take nothing ill, but all in good part at the hand of others,
purposing to be as friendly to them in all due ways of Christian freedom and
assistance? Do we actually endeavor to manifest it in the most effectual
means, that may best conduce to the mutual quickening of each other in all the
ways of Christ, that we may jointly walk worthy of our Calling? Do we to that
end, prize and improve every Ordinance of his public and private, with
diligent care, and spiritual observance? Do we so seek his face, and attend his
word, study our duty, and consider others case, that we may still be enabled
and directed, excited and supported in this Spiritual Exercise for his Glory,
and his peoples good, through the supplies of his Holy Spirit? Do we move
herein by a generous Spirit, as Constantine and Theodotius, the senior and
junior, Marcian and Pulcheria, those Imperial Lights of Christianity; King
Lucius the Britain, and famous Alfred, the Saxons Glory; whose Courts and
Palaces were accounted Christ's Oratary and Academy, whose heads and hearts,
whose tongues and hands were continually employed with cheerfulness in this
noble work of religious helpfulness? Do we cordially labor to contribute our
time and skill, our Strength and Interest, our Credit and Wealth, our Power and
Authority to the utmost, for the promoting of this signal duty in all christian
reciprocations of advice and help through the Lords Assistance? Is it our grief
and trouble, that we have done, and yet do so little toward it? Is it our joy
to see others faithful and diligent about it? Are we moved with indignation
against all sinful Obstructions, that hinder the same? Are we content to break
through all obstacles and difficulties, that might retard us from it? Are the
Lords Encouragements from Heaven, efficaciously prevailing with us; above and
against all Discouragements from Earth and Hell, still re-enforced against this
work of Christ?

2. In our civil Capacity do we demonstrate the like studious industry for
Christian helpfulness, in each relation domestical and political, either as
Superiors, or as Inferiors, either as Governors, or as governed? Do Magistrates
and people, Officers and soldiers, Parents and children, Husbands and wives,
Masters and servants, friends and Neighbors in City and Country observe the
Lords Will, about this grand Affair, of so much import to his Glory, and the
public weal, in the furtherance of each others good: Is it our desire and
delight, purpose and Labor, to be found watchfully diligent, and self-denyngly
active about it? Do we gladly redeem all opportunities, of improving our
Talents, and laying out our best abilities through Gods help, to the best
advantage, of serving one another in Love, as becomes all the subjects of
Christ's Kingdom? are we cordially willing to be told of our faults, and mind
others of theirs, with meekness and Zeal, prudence and patience, tenderness and
faithfulness? Do we judge our selves for our sinful Jealousies, and causeless
prejudices, our indiscreet carriages, and unchristian deportments toward those
above us, about us, under us? Do we encourage others to deal freely with us,
and bear with their weakness: mistakes and miscarriages, making still the best
construction of their speech and actions? Are we candid in our address to
others, and ingenuous in our acceptance of their endeavors, though mean and
homely to our apprehensions? Are we still laboring to get and improve such a
noble genius, as the Roman Senator expressed, who would freely forgive all to
others, but nothing to himself, being most severe to our own selves, but most
tender to others? Are we of Titus Princely disposition, to account that day
lost, wherein we have not been doing some good to others? Do our actions
express effectually, what the famous Painter said verbally, nullus dies sine
linea, no day passing without some real effects of our Christian helpfulness?
Do we studiously labor in every occasion, in every company, to do and receive
no hurt, when we cannot do and receive good, as we would desire? Do we
therefore carefully avoid all the degrees and appearances of evil, exercising
our selves with choice diligence, Act. 24. 16.
to keep a conscience still void of offense, toward God and Man? Do we thus
help others, upon Christ's account, with a general Love of pity to sinners, and
a special Love of delight toward Saints, using all due means, for reciprocal
Aides, in our Christian Walk, becoming the suitable decency and honorable
pre-eminence of our heavenly Calling.

4. This Truth yields also choice consolation to zealous Christians officiously
employed about this great business of mutual quickening each other, in the Lords
Ways. Honor and pleasure, comeliness and profit do still attend it, however
carnal minds may mis-judge thereof: Its good to be found thus acting for
Christ, and like Christ, from Christ and through Christ, in christian
benevolence and beneficence. Though some harshness and difficulties may be met
withal from the hands of men to discourage you, as in all other eminent
Duties; yet comfort and help will never be wanting from the Lords gracious
hand. Christ's famous Axiom is strongly enforced by the Apostle to cheer up all
Christians about this great work. Act. 20. 35.
It Is more blessed a thing, said the King of Saints to give then to receive.
The next royalty is to receive in Love, what is given in Love for council or
assistance. The surest way to receive most from God, is to give most to men on
his score. Such a laying out is the best laying up. Mat. 25. 33, 34, 35, etc,
40.
That precious seed is cast into Christ's lap, which is bestowed upon men for
his sake His bosom never yet proved a barren soil, Prove. 19. 17.
but will surely return a plentiful Crop. He that gives to the poor, Prove. 9.
8.
whether in Spirituals or in Temporals, lends unto the Lord; Prove. 25. 12.
Who will repay it with the best advantage. Faithful advice bestowed an
obedient ear, Prove. 29. 15.
will be found a Jewel beyond Gold and Pearls. He is wise and happy that
hearkens to reproof in the Judgment of the wisest of men, Prove. 13. 18.
and will find such Physic singularly healthful, Prove. 15. 32.
though for a time it may smart and gripe, whilst it is working out of his ill
humors. Prove. 17. 10.
A rebuke enters more into a wise man, then a hundred blows do into a fool.
Such will find the rare benefit of having their sores duly cleansed and dressed,
when others ^all smart in shame and sorrow for their wilful neglects. Prove. 5.
12.
The weeding of their ground will cherish the goods plants, Prove. 10. 17.
and increase their fruit, when others shall be found overgrown with Brambles
and Nettles through their selfish, Prove. 1. 23, 25.
contemptuous laziness. Prove. 12. 1.
They shall be secured from the enemies wiles, who have been observant of all
warnings given; when others carelessness shall expose them to the Stratagems and
cruel insultings of the Lords malicious adversaries. Zealous Christians shall
reap the comfort of their officiousness in their friendly Reciprocations of
quickening helpfulness. Psalm 126
Though their seed time may appear gloomy and stormy, yet shall their harvest
be serene and joyful.

5. A solemn Exhortation should be hence pressed upon all Christians to attend
this work, and buckle to it with faithful diligence and prudent zeal, with
careful observance and tender cautiousness, with sensible affection and sober
discretion in every relation, condition and occasion. Do we need inducements to
quicken us thereto? Have not all the considerations hitherto hinted at,
sufficient force to persuade us with cogent Arguments to such a duty so eminent
and so expedient? Let all Christ's friends be then efficaciously urged thereto,
personally and domestically, politically and ecclesiastically.

1. Personally, going before others in an Exemplary way of gracious behavior.
Lets therefore begin at our own hearts, and sweep before our own door, that we
may the better give and receive help, Be we sensible of our own mistakes and
miscarriages, humbled for them, weary of them, watchful against them, through
faith in Christ's name. Beware especially of our darling Lusts, our greatest
enemies, that are to be daily crucified. Having so many precious Promises made
to us in him. Gal. 5. 24. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Let us cleanse our selves of all filthyness in flesh and Spirit, to perfect
holiness in the fear of God. Let the Grace of God teach us effectually to deny
ungodliness and all worldly Lusts, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
and to live soberly, justly, holily in this present evil world. Be we often
judging of our selves, and willing to know the worst of our selves (...) Beware
we of self-Love and self-pleasing, self-seeking, and self-conceitedness. Our
hearts being so misteriously deceitful and so desperately wicked: Jer. 17. 9.
above all things are never to be trusted. Lets not rest on any creature, Jer.
17. 5, 6, 7, 8.
or in any degree of Grace received, but still depend on Christ, Joh. 1. 16.
and derive from him in our progress toward further perfection; Mat. 5 3, 4. 5.
all needful help, even Grace for Grace through his holy Spirit. Heb. 6. 1, 2,
3.
Let Us be mean and low in our own eyes, thoroughly convinced of our unworthiness
and insufficiency, that we may be glad of any help from others in our Christian
Walk.

2. Domestically, in each of our Oeconomical Relations whether conjugal between
man and wife, or Parental, between parents and children, or despotical, between
masters and servants, Mistresses and Maids. Let every one study their Duty and
mind their own work with alacrity and sincerity as before God, and on his
account; that we may be ready to entertain kindly, Job. 1.
and gratefully to reciprocate all quickening help. We should Labor to please
one another for their good, Job. 31. 13, 14, 15.
though still with due regard of our own station, that priority and
superiority, Josh. 24. 15.
may be orderly managed and maintained according to Gods Word. Genesis 18. 18, 19.
David gives us an eminent Instance in the Psalm 101. Ephesians. 5. 23, 24, 25.
throughout, by his own purpose and practice, as Abraham, Job also, Joshua and
the rest of the Lords Worthies. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. etc.
Paul's Epistles, and other Scriptures direct all sorts in their respective
families, Col. 3.
to their several duties, becoming each of their Relations therein. 1 Pet. 3.
1, 7, 8.


3. Politically, in the civil state, there are public relations also between
Superiors, Inferiors and equals, wherein Christians are to be pressed to a
diligent use of the most effectual means, tending to their mutual quickening.
Magistrates supreme and subordinate, with all Officers, civil and military, of
a greater and lesser magnitude, have a special Interest and Influence therein.
There are many ways of help wherein all sorts of Inferiors are concernd, Rom
13. 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6.
and may be of of singular helpfulness. Neighbors and Equals should not
neglect any opportunity of doing and receiving good, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
preventing and removing Evil by due Reciprocations. The Spirit of Christ in
his Holy Word, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
explains at large the peculiar Ties, obliging each of them, charging every one
thereto with varieties of Instructions and Encouragements to that purpose.

4. Ecclesiastically, in the Church of Christ: there are likewise diverse
relations, engaging the Children and Servants of God by the nearest and the
dearest bonds to this Grand work and spiritual Exercise of Christian assistance
for reciprocal good in the family and Kingdom of Christ. Scripture takes notice
of two special ranks of Christians therein, some called to rule as public
Officers, others under rule, as private Members.

1. RUlers in the Church are public Officers, duly qualified and orderly
called in a regular way of probation and approbation to the charge of Gods
house, What their office is, and persons should be, Divine Records testify at
large. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.
They are termed his Stewards and Heralds, his Messengers and Ambassadors. 2
Cor. 5. 18, 20.
Shepherds and Guids, Angels and Stars, Nurses and Trustees, to declare at
once their Duty and Dignity. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Some were extraordinary needed at first planting of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
qualified with answerable Gifts, Revel. 1.
and attended with the like success. 1 These. 2. 7, 8.
Such were the Apostles, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
Prophets and Evangelists, whose work being done, their office expired,
together with their gifts. The ordinary Rulers continue as Christ's Residents to
the worlds end, the need and use of their office continuing still, whilst such
do act, becoming their function, they prove shining nnd burning Lights indeed,
helpful to each other for the good of the flock. They are often minded of
their work, 1 Timothy 4, 13, 54, 1, 156.
requiring special diligence and care, that looking to themselves and to their
Doctrine, they may save themselves, and those that hear them instrumentally in
subserviency to the Lords Spirit. The Lord binds them to their good behavior,
as such who are singularly trusted upon account with the richest Treasures,
Matthew. 5. 13.
both of Heaven and Earth. If any of them degenerate as unsavery Salt, they
become most vile, fit but for the Dung-hil. Optimi corruption is still pessima.
If they be not good, they are very bad. Their Burdens and Snares, Oppositions
and Difficulties are so numerous, that they do need mutual helpfulness in a
special manner. Their due correspondency and orderly associations; their
frequent meetings and brotherly compliance, are much to be desired, promoted
and improved: being useful helps through Gods blessing to the better discharge
of their Duty. Their Circumstantial differences in opinion or practice, should
not hinder them from this great Duty, but rather quicken them thereunto, that
they may be found to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the (...) 3.
bond of Peace. Their Ministerial work and pastoral care cannot but oblige them
in a signal manner, to be still stirring up of themselves and others, for the
reviving nnd improvement of all the Gifts and Graces bestowed on them, 1 Timothy
4. 14.
that they may be most exemplary to others in all the ways of Christ.

Secondly, Private Christians being Christ's subjects, the sheep of his pasture,
the members of his Body and Family, his trained Soldiers, and Disciples in his
school have as much need of this mutual helpfulness. 1. More generally toward
all fellow members. 2. More particularly toward their spiritual Rulers.

1. More generally, Christians are strongly obliged to use all effectual means,
for their reciprocal exciting of one another, that they may walk worthy of
their Vocation, in every Ordinance and Providence of Christ, as becomes their
spiritual Relations. Multiplicious Helps does the Word of God provide to that
end: to the right use whereof they are still vehemently pressed, especially
those that do follow, which we shall but hint, being so copiously amplified in
sacred Writ; and commented on by so many choice Pens.

1. Cordial Affection, and indearing Love, uniting them to each other in
Christ, through the singular Operations of his Holy Spirit. Col. 3. 15.
This is the Garment they are to put on, as being the bond of perfectness, Ioh.
13. 34, 35.
wherein they are to resemble him most, Ioh. 15. 9, 12, 17.
in loving one another, as himself loved them. This was Christ's Legacy
commended to them, so persuasively, by the Lord himself, Ioh. 17. 26.
as the choice fruit of his gracious Spirit, and the only debt, Romans 13. 8.
to owe still to each other. 1 Ioh. 2. 5, 7, 8.
to owe still to each other. Its his great Command, 1 Ioh. 3. 11, 14, 15, 18,
23.
renewed by him so wonderfully, in every expression and carriage. The Alpha and
Omega of Law and Gospel; the choice abstract of his Covenant in mercy and Duty.
He would have Christians to love the Brotherhood, 1 Pet^ 217.
to love as Brethren, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
not excepting the meanest member of his. They that have purified themselves in
obeying the Truth, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
through the Spirit, to the unfeigned love of the Brethren, are vigorously
charged, thus to love one another with a pure heart, fervently. This is the
great wheel that must move all the rest. Its a Divine Grace, of a special
Nature, the Rare Cement whereby the Spirit knits their Hearts in One, though
their minds may differ, and their persons may be at distance. This is the fire,
1 Cor. 6. 17
that must still consume all rising corruptions, and inflame all the powers and
parts of the whole man, Ephesians. 4. 3.
with the zeal of Gods House, Col. 3. 14.
and of all its Branches and concernments. As far as any bears true love to
God, so far, and no further does he love his people, that bear his Image,
notwithstanding all their infirmities. God is Love, and he that abides in Love,
1 Ioh. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 20.
abides in God. By this Token were all Primitive Christians discerned from all
others, as by their Badge of Honor. This is the Oil of the Sanctuary that must
anoint them with heavenly Joy, and supple all their wheels; that every motion
may be pliable and smooth, for their mutual help; the want of this is the shame
of Christ and Christianity, the scandal of men, the joy of Hell, the sadning of
Heaven, the bane of our comforts, the blast of all labors, the very pest and
ruin of all things. Oh! that Christians were more sensible of it and quickened
thereto.

2. Tender compassion toward each other, in all troubles and wants, Phil. 2.
1, 2, 3,
proportionable still, to each of their various conditions. Such a Sympathy and
fellow-feeling Christ himself commends unto them by his own example, Col. 3.
12, 13.
that they may may be clothed with Bowels, after his Pattern, and measure them
out, toward one another, as himself also did. Living Members must needs be
sensible of each others smart; if one suffers, all must needs suffer, in the
Body of Christ mystical, as well as in his natural Body. Christians are bid and
bound to rejoice still with them that rejoice, and weep with those that weep;
Isa. 63. 9.
Christ himself was still afflicted in all his peoples sufferings, They are
dead spiritually, Act. 9. 4.
who remain still senseless of others case, 2 Chro. 34. 27.
having their bowels shrivel'd up, by their base selfishness. A new heart is a
tender heart, such as Josias had; a melting heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14.
after Gods own heart, such as David manifested to God and his people; 2 Cor.
11. 29.
who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, Amos 6. 6.
and I burn not? said the great Apostle, so well taught of Christ. Heb. 13. 3.
To be like Judas, destitute of Bowels, is as woeful as it is sinful. Remember
them says the Apostle that are in bonds, as bound with them, Gal. 6. 2.
and them that suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. Nehem.
1. 10.
Christians should bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ. Nehemiah showed his nobleness of spirit, by his tender sympathy with
Gods people, under trouble, whilst himself fared sumptuously in the Persian
Court. Psalm 122.
The prosperity of Gods house should be esteemed and desired above our own.
Psalm 137.
Christ commends and rewards gloriously such a Disposition and carriage. Matthew
25. 36.
Paul highly celebrates their Name who had been thus affected toward him. 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17.


3. Earnest supplication for the good of the whole Church, and of every member
of it, is as useful as its needful, suitable to their various necessities.
Matthew. 5. 44.
Christ would have us pray for our enemies, Jerem. 29. 7.
and Oppressors, much more for all Saints, and one for another, Ephesians. 6. 18.
on special occasions, with all possible encouragements, to quicken thereto.
Iam. 5. 15, 16.
He excepts none from our prayers, Iam. 1. 5.
but such as evidently sin unto death, bidding us pray for all sorts of men, 1
Ioh. 5. 16.
particularly for Rulers, 1 Timothy 21. 2.
though no friends to us. ^hil. 1. 4.
All Relations, and spiritual ones peculiarly, challenge this help from us,
Col. 4. 12.
in a singular manner. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 6, 7.
they shall prosper that love thee. Gods Remembrancers are eminently required
to be continual Intercessours for Zion, Esaias 62. 6.
till she be made the praise of the earth; Romans 8. 26.
Promises of assistance and acceptance are innumerably given to us from Heaven,
Matthew 7. 7, 8.
to direct, Zech. 12. 10.
excite, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
and help us efficaciously to this choice exercise. Iam. 5, 17, 18.
It Is the great Engine that moves Heaven and Earth, Esaias 45. 11, 19.
wherein the meanest may act wonderfully, and help the greatest. Esaias 27. 5.
Its a conquering weapon, beyond compare, of Gods own furbushing, Rom, 8. 15.
guiding, and prospering. He yields to it himself in his condescension, and
makes it Victorious over hell and Devils, as over earth and men, by improvement
of his Divine strength, through the spirit of Grace and supplications, which he
pours upon all his children. This is the sure Post, that carries Intelligence
in a moment from all parts, Eusebius.
and makes all Gods people, though at greatest distance, helpful to each other,
Zonar.
by the surest sign of communication. The thundering Legion of the Christians,
so famous for prayer in the Emperor Aurelius his Army, wrastled with Heaven,
as Jacob had done, in a conquering way, and procured refreshment to their
friends, and ruin to their foes; which moved their Prince to show much favor
to all Christians, over his Empire, Hos, 11 4, 5.
which before had been much persecuted. The poorest soul may Jacob-like become
a Prince with God, an Israelite indeed, by such a violence offered to the
Kingdom and power of Heaven, which the violent do carry and take by a zealous
force, Matthew, 11. 12.
in the strength of Christ, especially from the days of John the Baptist.
Psalm 22. 26.
They shall praise the Lord that seek him, and whatever they ask in Christ's
name. John 14. 14.
according to his will, is certainly granted. John 16. 23, 24.
This was Paul's delight and constant exercise, which he heartily recommends to
every Christian, as their choice Antidote against all evil, Romans 1. 9.
and singular procurer of all good, Phil. 1. 4.
spiritual and temporal, 1 These. 5. 17.
public and private. This is the Key that opens prison-doors, Jude 20.
unlocks men's hearts, masters their hands, Acts 12. 5. 6.
overrules the clouds, and fetches contribution from every creature to the
relieving of all Gods children. A praying Christian is still doing and
receiving much good. God honors this Ordinance most, because it honors him
most, in all his Attributes. The groans and sighs, the tears and cries of his
poor weaklings are forcible Arguments, and efficacious Tools, which he cannot
gainsay, and will not resist. They pierce through his heart, and draw out his
bowels, by a Magnetic Virtue, which Christ's Spirit, through his blood and
Grace imparts to them, by a Divine Touch. All Christians should therefore
improve the same, to the uttermost for others, Job 15. 4,
as for themselves. Apostasy begins still with slight esteem and neglect of
prayer, public and private. A Christian so disarmed, is nakedly exposed to the
malice of his raging enemies, to be captivated into error and sin at Satan's
pleasure. All the great wonders of the latter days, are to be carried on by
prayer. The spirit of the living creatures, that moves in all the wheels of
Providence, turns this grand wheel of fervent prayer, Ezekiel. 1. 20, 21.
to make all the rest work, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
energetically and effectually. Christians should speak to God often for each
other.

4. Seasonable Exhortation, for mutual Instruction and quickening to the further
knowledge and practice of Gods will. This is a choice help often pressed unto,
which the best do need. Heb. 10. 24, 25
Let Us, says the Apostle, consider one another, to provoke one another to love
and good works, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more as you see
the day approaching. Upon all occasions of Christian conference, either more
private, Col. 4. 6.
or more solemn, our speech should be still seasoned with the salt of Grace,
that we may know how to answer and edify every man. Ephesians. 4. 29.
No corrupt communication should proceed out of our mouth, but that which is
good, to the use of edifying, that it may administer grace to the hearers. No
filthiness nor foolish talking, Ephesians. 5. 4.
nor jesting, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks should
proceed from us. Heb. 3. 13.
Exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and ed^fie one another, 1 These. 5.
11.
as ye also do, building up your selves in your most holy faith, Jude 20.
for the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man, 1 Cor. 12. 9.
to profit withal. Acts 18. 19.
Thus Paul, in all his visits made it his work to strengthen the Disciples,
Act. 20. 20, 21.
teaching all how to improve their abilities and opportunities, 1 Cor. 14.
with care and prudence, faithfulness and diligence, modesty and humility. Thus
he directs the due ordering of solemn conferences, among the Corinthians and
others. The sense of our former neglect and loss of much precious time, should
deeply humble us, and strongly quicken us to redouble all possible industry,
and solicitous labor, to Redeem the remainder of our Life, in such an
excellent way of mutual helpfulness. Contribution does the Lord require from
every person, toward the building of his Tabernacle, and repairing of his
Temple. The poor man's Rams-skins, Exodus 25. 5.
and the Widows mite are as acceptable, coming with good will, Exodus 35. 7.
as the rich man's silks, Mark 12. 42.
gold and Jewels. Thus Aquila and Priscilla helped Apollos, Acts 18, 23.
taking him unto them, and expounding to him the way of God more perfectly. Is
not this much better then worldly talks, and telling of stories, or carrying of
tales, in daily visits?

5. Faithful admonition, for conviction of, and help against what evil appears
in another. Levit. 19. 17.
This is expressly enjoined by the Lord; thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, 2 These. 3. 15.
and not suffer sin upon him. Yet then account him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother. We should to that end make straight paths for our
feet, least that which is lame be turned out of the way, Heb. 12. 13, 15, 16,
17.
but rather let it be healed. Looking diligently, least any man fail of the
Grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby
many be defiled. Lest there be any spiritual, or corporal fornicator, or
profane person among you, like Esau who for one morsel of bread, Heb. 3 12.
sold his birthright. Take heed, therefore, brethren, least there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, but exhort one
another, etc. Christ himself gives us a sure Rule to be carefully observed, if
thy brother shall trespass against thee, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17.
go and tell him his fault between thee and him, if he shall hear thee, thou
have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear, then take with thee one or
two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established. And if he will not hear them, tell it to the Church. The Primitive
Christians were eminent for this. I my self, says Paul, Romans 15. 14.
am persuaded of you my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled
with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another. Brethren, says James,
if any of you do err from the faith, and one convert him, let him know, that he
which converts a sinner from the error of his way, Iam. 5. 19.
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. This choice
help should be as willingly received, Prove. 29. 1.
as given. He that being often reproved, stiffens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without Remedy. This Fraternal act of true Love, (distinct
from the Rulers Authoritative acts, whether Doctrinal, or Disciplinary,)
requires much caution and wariness, tenderness and wisdom, meekness and
fidelity, with mutual watchfulness. Christians should not curiously pry into
another failings, nor maliciously search into doubtful unknown matters, to
trouble or disgrace him. 1 Cor. 13.
True Love thinks no evil, but covers a multitude of faults. We should be moved
with sincere respects to Gods honor, to our neighbors good, that his faults
may be dressed and healed, confessed and amended, by the right use of this
Divine Medicine, orderly applied, Christians therefore should look well first
to themselves, to pluck every beam out of their own eye; Matthew. 7. 5.
and proceed by the sure Rule of Gods own word herein, not upon their own
conceptions, attending all circumstances of time, person, place, and manner so
prudently, that good and no evil may be done thereby. In personal injuries that
concern our selves, much of pardoning ingenuity is still expedient, that we may
still manifest this Duty, to proceed from our obedience to Christ, and zeal for
his Name, as from tenderness to our Neighbors comfort and credit. Much sugar
is needful to sweeten this Pil, which of it self is very harsh and bitter unto
flesh and blood. Its an Ordinance of chief worth and use, eminently appointed
and blessed from the God of Heaven, to the healing of all distempers infesting
his people. This spiritual bone-setting and Chirurgical dressing is no bunglers
work, but challenges all due skill and care from Christians hearts, as from
their eyes and hands.

6. Cheerful Condonation in freely pardoning all injuries done us by others
mistakes. Matthew. 18. 21.
Christ expressly requires, though it be to seventy times seven, from day to
day. Rancor and Revenge he abominates, though the sweetest morsel to a carnal
heart. Matthew. 11. 25, 26.
When you stand praying says Christ, forgive if you have ought against any,
that your Father which is also in heaven may forgive you your trespasses: and
if you, do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive you
your Trespasses. Be ye kind one to another says Paul, Ephesians 4. 32.
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. Put on therefore as the Elect of God, Col. 1. 12, 13, 14.
holy and beloved, bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another: if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: and above all these
these things, Put on Charity which is the bond of Perfection. We should be
always ready to accept of reconciling terms, and pity others, that do offer
us wrong; rather then to cherish spleen and malice in any degree; such Candor
of Spirit becomes Christians, who still find cause to bewail their own
failings, and wrongs toward others. If we be enforced at any time to challenge
our civil rights, it should be done with such discretion, as that we may avoid
Jars and reflections, Passions and Prejudices. If others offenses may seem to
carry much of aggravation therewith, we shall show the more generosity and true
gallantry in forgiving and forgetting all that personally concerns us. Its the
Glory of God to cover a matter; and man's Glory to imitate him. Prove. 25. 2.
He proclaims himself to be the Lord, merciful and gracious, of long suffering
and tender commiserations; Exodus 34. 6, 7.
obounding in Pity and Truth, reserving mercy for Thousands, pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin. Should it not be our Delight to resemble him
therein, as its our honor thus to advance his name? How sad were it with us,
if he should deal with us as we deal with others? Do we not still need pardon
from men, as well as from God? Shall we not willingly measure out to others,
Matthew. 7. 12.
as we would desire to be measured to? The Gallant Roman, Luke 6. 31.
and the noble Grecian thought it the best revenge to return good for evil, and
scorn the baseness of a spiteful spirit? Shall Christians come short of
Heathens herein? They have the worst of it that do offend us, as Precious Mr.
Dod was wont to say, pity them, pray for them help them to repent, as God has
helped us by Patience and Love, kindling such a fire on their heads, as may
melt their hearts?

7. Ingenuous disposition and carriage of our thoughts, words and actions, with
utmost candidness of Interpretation, about the Intentions, Expressions and
Demeanure of others. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.
It becomes Christians to make the best Construction of all others that may
possibly be. Charity says Paul, by choice Experience suffers long, and is
kind; it envies not, it is not rash, it is not puffed up, it does not behave it
self unseemly, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, covers all things (so the Greek Stegei
properly imports,) believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Brethren, Therefore if a man be over-taken with a fault, Gal. 6. 1, 2.
ye that are spiritual, restore such a one with the Spirit of meekntss,
considering thy self, Romans 14, 12, 13.
lest thou also be tempted, let us not then judge one another, any more, but
judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, Romans 15. 1, 2.
or an occasion to fall in our brothers way. We that are strong, ought to bear
with the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves, but every one
to please his neighbor for his good to edification. We should wisely discern
between weakness and wickedness, between infirmities and enormities. There will
be still many sickly, froward and pettish Children in Christ's family, that must
be tenderly, not roughly meddled with. Grace will teach us so to observe their
several tempers and distempers, as to think of them, speak and act toward them
in the best way of doing most good, and least hurt. Imprudent and rugged
Christians will be sure to do themselves and others wrong, in bringing disgrace
to their profession for want of discret moderation. Some Spirits resemble the
sweet Bazil, Guicchiardin.
(as the Genoan Ambassador observed in the Duke of Florences Garden) which if
gently touched, will yield a fragrant smell, but if harshly crushed, will smell
rank and strong, and give a very offensive Odor. Others seem like Nettles,
which if they be not very warily handled, will sting and trouble one with smart
and anguish. Study we therefore industriously, that we may neither give nor
receive offense, Mat. 10. 16.
as far as we are able, being wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves, in such a
crooked generation.

8. Meet Consolation sutably to the various conditions of other Christians in
their spiritual or temporal troubles. Herein we should be followers of Christ,
who made it his business to speak comfort to the broken-hearts, and mournful
Spirits. He was anointed from Heaven to that end, Isa. 50. 4.
that he might speak a word in season to the weary soul. He sends his Spirit to
be our Comforter, and comforts us in all our tribulations, that we may be able
to comfort others also with the same comforts wherewith we our selves were
comforted of God. 2 Cor. 1. 4.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and commiserations, fulfill ye my
joy says the great Apostle, Phil. 2. 1. 2.
that ye may be like minded, heartily giving refreshment to others in their
necessities: to speak and act like Christ, in this very thing must needs be
desirable in the highest degree. Should not Christians demonstrate themselves
to be true Barnabasse's Children of consolation? 2 Cor. 1. 3.
Is it not our honor that the Father of Mercies, and the God of all
consolation will employ us instrumentally, that he may create the fruits of our
lips, Peace, Peace, true and lasting Peace to the distressed? Isa. 57. 19.
Much wisdom is required in administering of such a cordial, orderly and
seasonably, so as it may do good and no hurt. The matter of it is extracted out
of Divine Promises and Providence: the Spirit of Christ must direct us by his
Word to the right manner of dispensing it. He purges and prepares the souls of
his people, as wise Physicians deal with their bodies: that he may revive and
corroborate. He removes the cause of grief that the effect may cease. Ioh. 16.
8, 9, 10.
He clenses away sin to take away sorrow. He convinces of sin, of righteousness
and of Judgment, that he may be a sure Comforter. He shows unto men the worst
of themselves, that they may come to see the best of Christ. He makes them poor
in Spirit, Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
to hunger and thirst, mourning after Purity and Meekness, that he may bless
them with the Comforts of Peace. Let Us learn in his school to follow his Copy,
and mind such a Divine Principle, and Patten of Consolation.

9. Liberal Contribution freely to communicate to the support and supplies of
others wants, as God enables us, becomes all Christians. As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good to all, especially to the household of Faith. Charge
them we must that are rich in this world, Gal. 6. 10. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.
that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy, that they do good, that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come. This is so
needful a duty that they who have nothing but their own labor, are bid and
bound to spare out of that for those who cannot work. Christ accounts all to be
lent to himself, which is given to his poor members He is slighted, Ephesians. ^. 28.
Mat. 25.
when they are slighted. The rich are entrusted with their own and the poors
porti^n also, that they may be bountiful, and others grateful, and that God
may be honored both ways. Christ became poor to enrich us that we might be
able and willing to Relieve the poor. It must be our wisdom not to feed others
lusts, whilst we labor to supply their wants, and to prevent their becoming
poor if we can; by all due means regularly appointed by Divine and humane Laws.
Heb. 13. 16. Romans 12. 13. 2 Cor 9. 5, 6.
To do good, and to communicate forget we not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased, whilst we destribute to the necessities of the Saints, being
given to hospitality. Therefore let your gift be ready, as a matter of bounty,
not covetousness. He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly. Let every one
give not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful Giver. Paul
presses this at large in the eight and ninth chapter to the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
16. 1, 26
and appointed the first day of the week as the fit season for it, being the
christian Sabbath, well known and observed in all christian Churches, according
to Christ's Prediction and Institution, ratified still by the Apostolical
celebration thereof. 1 Ioh. 3. 17, 18.
Who so has this worlds goods says the beloved Apostle, and sees his brother
have need, and shuts out his bowels of compassion from him, How dwells the Love
of God in him? My little Children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but
in Deed and in Truth. This was Gods statute Law, Levit. 25. 35.
if thy brother be waxen poor, or fallen into decay, then thou shall relieve
him. Christ blesses those, and welcomes them his Fathers Kingdom, who have been
careful to visit and refresh him in his little ones under troubles and wants.
Mat. 25.
A nigardly religion is no good Religion. When God has opened the heart, the
hand will not be shut up. What a shame it is that any Christian should
wantonnize in superfluitites, and yet be sparing in the supplying of others
Necessities. Luke 16. 9.
Christ bids us make friends of the Mammon of iniquity, which may receive us
into eternal dwellings. All our abilities should be so improved, as that we may
thereby comfortably walk in the way to Heaven through the Grace of Christ. Iam.
2. 17. Gal. 5 6.
That Faith which is destitute of Good Works, is but a dead faith. True Faith
works still by love to God and to man upon Gods account. Good works are owned
by the Truth and friends of Christ to be via regni, though not causa regnandi:
we cannot be saved without them, nor yet by them. Christians should be ashamed
to be outstript by Turks and Pagans, Jews and Papists in justice and Charity.

10. Impartial administration of Ordinances, Censures and Christian helps to
all concerned in a regular way, so that the meanest may be condescended to, and
not slighted by any partiality in what their case requires. In ecclesiastical
as in civil judgment Gods forbids all partial respectings of persons, Lev. 19.
5. Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Deuteronomy, 16. 19.
that bring in neglect of justice and due to any one. This excludes not civil
respect due to any person, not confounding the proportion and distance, which
Providence has settled among men in their subordinate relations. In religious
matters it is Grace that makes the difference between man and man. They who
have the least degree thereof have their common share in Christ's family, of
portion and privilege, as all the members in the body natural to the meanest
of them have their common Interest in the whole. God would not have spiritual
matters carried on by any selfish byasses, but would have Christians to stoop
one to onother, to be of the same mind one toward another, Romans 12. 16.
not minding high things, but condescending to men of low estate, and not being
wise in their own conceit. Christ himself taught his Disciples so by his own
practice, washing their feet, stooping to them, teaching them to submit to the
lowest office of Love and help for each others good after his Pattern, Ioh. 13.
12, 13, 14, 15.
seeing the servant is not greater then his Lord. You shall not Lord it one
over another says the Lord himself, but whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your Minister: and whosoever will be chief among you, Mat. 20. 26.
let him be your servant. This humble way of mutual condescension and
serviceableness is the most honorable conformity to the King of Saints, the
fountain of Honor, and the best means of gaining Repute among wise men. When
it began to be neglected in the Primitive Churches, Iam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1
Pet. 2 13, 14, 17, 18.
the Apostles were forced to quicken them by cogent arguments to this choice
Duty, and to convince them of the contrary evil. My brethren says James, have
not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, etc. Grace
indeed teaches good manners, and makes every Christian respectfull to others,
according to their rank, giving honor and obedience to whom it is due, Romans 13.
7.
according to Gods Word. Yet does it also teach condescension, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians.
4.
that the poorest may not be disregarded, nor defrauded of such meet helps and
provisions as the Lord has ordered for them in his Kingdom and Family. All
societies require such an orderly care of all their members in Politicals as in
Spirituals; and whilst every one is laboring with prudent submission to give
respect to others as sweet harmony and mutual compliance arise from thence, and
afford the choice fruits of credit and profit, pleasure and preservation.

11. Steadfast continuation in all the ways of Christ, Ioh. 15. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
abiding in him, and keeping close to his people in every Ordinance and
Providence, not yielding to the least beginning of Apostasy from God, Col. 2.
5, 6, 7.
and his service. Herein Christians should be mutually helpful, in
corroborating and strengthening each other, that they may be further rooted and
grounded in Christ to walk in him, Matthew. 13. 20, 21.
as they first Received him. Christ gives a warning to all by the Parable of
the stony ground, soon withering away for want of Root. Though such for a time
rejoice in the Word, yet they endure but for a while, and are soon offended.
Paul is fain to press the Hebrews very hard about this very point, Heb. 10. 23,
24, 25, 33, 34, etc.
showing the danger of Revolt, the excellency of perseverance, their need of
mutual helpfulness thereto; assuring the Lords assistance, Grace and Reward,
and comforting against all discouragements. 2 Timothy 4. 10, 16.
Demas is mentioned with a brand of Infamy, that all may beware of making
Shipwreck of faith and a good conscience: 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.
as also Himenaeus, Alexander, Philetus, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18, 19.
and others, in forsaking Christ to embrace this present world. Backsliding
from the Lord will be found as woeful* as it is sinful. We must therefore beware
of the least beginnings and appearances thereof: Nemo derepente fit pessimus.
Sin gets force by degrees, coming on like a Tide, and growing up like weeds,
Rising to strength and violence quickly. Man's heart is very prone to grow dull
and Lazy, thence neglect and slight of this and that; thence contempt and
prejudice; thence Rejection and Opposition, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18 19, 20.
of one Ordinance after another, til such fall to the very bottom, of total and
final Apostasy, by such sad steps, if Grace prevent not; Traitors and
Runagadoes are always disgraced, even among those that have ensnared them.
Shame and confusion is their portion still, and has been in all Ages. Selfish
men love Treason, as Philip of Macedon said, but abhor the Traitors. Satan
pays them home: as Solomon the Turk, rewarded the treacherous Villain, that
betrayed Rhode and other places, with shamefnl Torments, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.
and a direful death. Perseverance is the crowning Grace, for our help wherein
the Lord has appointed all sorts of means* and would have Christians, Jude 19.
20, 21.
to observe and assist each other with utmost vigilance and diligence, that
none may withdraw from their stedfastness. The least breach in a Fence, will
gradually let in so much water, as will ruin all. A small Leak will soon sink a
ship, if let alone. A slender Bodkin will quickly wound to death. Princ piis
obsta, is a sure Maxim, Look to the first stirrings of every kind of evil.
Luke-warmness and indifferency will still lead us on to more mischief, as it
proved sadly with the Churches of Sardis, La^di^ea, Pergamus, Revel. 2. Revel.
3.
Ephesus, and other parts of Asia, to whom Christ wrote; as also with the
Christians of Europe and Africa, who did so woefully degenerate, that they
became a prey to Mahomet in the East, and the Romish Antichrist in the West,
having first been wasted by all sorts of Barbarous Invasions and Desolations.
In the ways of Christ there is safety and peace. He will keep us in all the
paths of his own Road and Walk. Keep close to him still, and to each other in
him; His All Sufficiency shall be then our Portion and protection against sin
and sorrow.

12. Zealous vindication of the Truth of Christ, in mutual preserving of each
other against all Errors and Seducers, though never so plausibly disguised.
Scripture every where warns us against such deceiving Impostors, 1* John 2. 18,
19, 20.
who do most mischief in these latter days. They are the petty Antichrists,
making way for that grand Antichrist, tha Roman Abaddon and Apollyon, in whom
they all center, as in a common sink; though their many streams run variously,
with their infectious mud, They went out from us, says the beloved Apostle,
because they were none of us, and do testify this to be the last Time, 1 John
4. 1.
by their active spreading of their cheating stuff. Believe not therefore every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God, because many false Prophets
are gone out into the world. If there be any that comes to you, and brings not
this Doctrine of Christ, (in faith and obedience,) Receive him not into your
houses neither bid him God-speed. 2 John 10.
For he that bids him God-speed is partaker of his evil deeds. I know this,
said Paul in his warning farewell to the Ephesian Elders: Acts 20. 29, 30, 31.
that after my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing
the flock. Also of your own selves, shall men arise speaking perverse things,
to draw away Disciples after them; watch therefore carefully. Revel. 2 14. 15,
16.
Christ himself rebukes the Church of Pergamus, for entertaining those, that
held the Doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitans, which things he hates.
Repent therefore, says he, or else I shall come to thee quickly, and will
fight against thee with the sword of my mouth. Paul renews such cautions to the
Romans very earnestly, Romans 16 17, 18.
and to Timothy and Titus, showing the great danger of such Gangreens and
cancerous Doctrines, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.
which draw into all evil, perverting many from all good. He would have a
strict course taken with all such by all possible means. 2 Timothy 2 16. 17.
The Lord Jesus himself redoubles his warnings against such false Christ's and
false Prophets, Tit. 3. 9, 10, 11.
showing their violence and fraudulency, their diligence and deceivableness,
Matthew. 24. 23, 21, 2, 26.
to the endangering of many thousands. Christians should therefore be well
settled in the Truth, that they may keep one another from unsetlement. Luke 21.
Mark. 13. Matthew 7. 15, 16.
Seducers will be known by the fruits of their ^ips, and Life, being foolish
and proud, disorderly and self-conceited, ignorant and imprudent, 1 These. 2. 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1 John 4. Matthew. 24. 1 These. 5. 21, 22.
uncalled and unlearned. It concerns every one to beware of Novelty, the
poisonous itch of this age. Suspect all praters, that are self-called, and
censorious of others, duly called and qualified, Beware of Mountebanks and
Empiricks, for your souls, as for your bodies and estates. Take nothing without
trial, but try not poison by eating thereof. The Bereans were highly esteemed,
Acts 17. 11.
for their daily scruting into Scripture, and proving of Paul's doctrine
thereby. Get good Antidotes against the poisonous Infections of this Age.
Matthew. 23. 15.
Wandering spirits, like Satan their master, compass Sea and Land to make
Proselytes. Many fair pretenses and plausible Baits, they will make use of, to
inveigle the simple, if you be not watchful and diligent, you will be soon
entangled in their snares. Their Pestilential contagion seizes quickly on the
finest spirits. Conceited Christians are most endangered still. Know we
therefore our own ignorance, weakness and insufficiency, that we may not trust
our skill and strength, in dallying or parlying with sin, and error; Eve was
soon catched, when she once began to listen to the Tempter, having left her
husband, that should have been her guide and her stay, if you be once drawn
from Christ and his public worship, and from attending on his servants,
regularly called thereto, you fall immediately into Satan's trap, and will surely
sink into his bogs. Itching ears will soon infect your brains and hearts, your
hands and feet, 1 Timothy 6. 5, 6.
if not diligently prevented and cured, Take heed therefore of all vain
janglings, needless Disputes, novel Opinions, and whimsical Notions, that are
the Serpents spawn: which he scatters up and down, that must carefully be
crushed in the shel, before they break out into Cockatrices. Those tares and
weeds will grow very fast, if not continually plucked up and cast away.

13. Vigilant Preservation of Unity and Order, watching against the least
inclinations to breach and Disorders, Discension and Discord. A very strict
charge is given to Christians for the keeping of each other close to their Head
Christ, Romans 16. 17, 18, 19, 20.
in their Christian Union and communion. Now I beseech you Brethren, says the
Apostle, Mark those which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. There are some spirits that
love contention, as the Salamandra; to live in the fire, or obout it. What a
shame it is, that any Christian should lend his tongue or Head, his heart or
hand, to the Devils Designs in dividing Gods people? Blind zeal is often found
to be fired from hell, and scatter the coals about the house, venturing the
Ruin of all, in a pettish mood. All should beware of such strange fire, and of
putting any fuel thereto, by quarrels and back-bitings, jars and strivings
about lesser things, and verbal differences. Sel^^sh Interests, fleshly
conceits, proud spirits, blow such coals apace. There is much need of
self-denial, and humility, sobriety and moderation, meekness and forbearance,
for the quenching of such uunatural and unchristian flames. The blessedness of
Peacemakers has been demonstrated in another Tract lately published, whereto
we must refer you for enlargements. Soft Words and strong Arguments will best
maintain Truth and Peace still against Error and Discord. Christ's soldiers
must still be careful to keep their Rank and File, that they be not Routed, ere
they be aware; scattering sheep and wandering Lambs are a ready prey, to any Fox
or Wolf; straggling soldiers meet with many deadly knocks. The beginning of
controversy is like the breaking out of Water. Prove. 17. 14.
Look to it betime, to avoid the deluge, that else will follow. Heart burnings
and Jealousies, distances and prejudices are to be abhorred, as pests and
cankers, of a dreadful and spreading nature. Crabbed tempers and fretful
spirits need much wisdom and Grace, to prevent tearing and dividing. Discord
and Disorder are the bane and plague of all bodies natural and civil,
artificial and domestic. The grand Interest of all Societies consists in their
due preservation of friendly union and orderly communion. Their Beauty and
strength, comfort and use stand and fall therewith. Diligent means should
therefore be improved, for effectual promoting thereof, and due preventing of
the least tendency to contention and breach. Difference of Judgment in
circumstantials should not breed distance of affection nor communion. Romans 14.
21, 22.
Have thou faith, in such a case, says the Apostle, have it to thy self, make
no stir about it, disturb not others, beware of making parties and divisions. 1
Cor. 3.
The Corinthians showed themselves carnal in such unchristian factions and
wranglings. Learn we more wisdom by the sad experience of their and our own
follies.

14. Careful sequestration from the sinful company and course of the world
about us, as far as may be, not excluding our civil Respects and engagements,
whereto we are bound, by natural or civil Relations. Have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, walking as children
of Light, Ephesians. 5. 8, 11.
is the charge given to all Christians. Turn away from such, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
who have a form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof. Prove. 14. 17.
Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the
Lips of knowledge. Though Israel play the Harlot, Hos. 4. 15.
let not Judah offend, and come not up to Gilgal, nor go to Bethaven (says the
Prophet,) the seat of their sinful Idolatry and Imagery. How strongly is this
pressed upon the Corinthians, by Divine Logic and Rhetoric? Does not the Lord
himself bid all his people come out of spiritual and external Babylon, 2 Cor.
6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
that they partake not of her sins and plagues? Revel. 18. 4. John 15. 19. Romans
12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, etc.
Christ's Disciples are not of the world, and should not conform sinfully
thereto, nor delight in familiarity therewith, further then our pressing
occasions and unavoidable ties do put us upon; Then should we be careful to do
good, and avoid evil, as far as may be with prudent zeal, and wise behavior,
when we are cast upon ill company. David's delight was still in the Saints that
excelled in virtue, and his eye upon the faithful of the Land. Psalm. 16 Psalm.
101. Psalm. 15. 4.
He gives it for the Noble character of a Citizen of Zion, that in his eyes a
vile person, (a sinful wretch, a known drudge of sin) is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the Lord. Companion am I, Psalm. 119. 63.
(said that Royal Prophet,) to all that fear thee and keep thy Precepts. Whilst
we are forced to walk through the dirt and infection of this evil world; be we
circumspect, that we get as little hurt, and contract as little filth as may
be. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Be not partaker of other men's sins, keep thy self clean; That charge is
applicable to multiplicious cases, and concerns all Christians in their various
occasions.

Thus are Christ's followers in their sacred Relations obliged to be mutually
helpful as private Christians to each other for their effectual quickening,
that all may walk worthy of their calling on a more general account.
Secondly. THey have a more a particular Relation toward their spiritual
Rulers, obliging them to respect and esteem them in a double manner to
encourage and help them to imitate and observe, to attend and obey them in the
Lord, on a peculiar account, according to the nature and extent of their
function and office, whereunto they were regularly designed, called and
commissioned by Gods word and Providence. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
This is often pressed in Scripture. Let a man so account of us says the
Apostle, as of the Ministers of Christ, Heb. 13. 7, 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Pet. 5
5. Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. Heb. 13. 18. Act. 12. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Phil. 2. 17. Col. 1. 24.
and Stewards of the mysteries of God. And we beseech you Brethren to know them
that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. Obey them that have the
Rule over you, and submit your selves. He would have the well ruling Elders
counted worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the Word and
Doctrine. Submit your selves to the Elders says another Apostle. Encouragement
and assistance by Prayer, Advise, Support and all due help is eminently due to
them for their Works sake, wherein Gods honor and man's good are so eminently
concernd. The Apostle is still soliciting the Prayers of Christians, and
commending them in a high degree, who afforded him help spiritually and
temporally, and giving many urging arguments to press the necessity and
excellency, the equity and utility thereof. Should not he have most help, that
carries most of the burden, meeting still with the rage and malicious
opposings of earth and hell Their miscarriages do often attend the Peoples
neglect, and bring with them the sad Attendants of public Judgments as of
public sins. The more care is taken by the people of the Ministers temporal
Comforts, the better able are they to give up themselves wholly to their
spiritual good, which has the Promises of this life also. Christ and his
Apostle argue this case by Divine reasonings again and again, because of that
worldly mindedness and niggardly spirit which rules in the most, and remains in
the best. 1 Timothy 4. 15, 9.
They plead the Laws of nature and nations, besides the Statutes of God, both
old and new for ratification and illustration hereof. Mat. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
The due observance of their Doctrine, and imitation of their godly life are
often urged upon Christians also. Remember them says the great Apostle who
have spoken to you the Word of God, 1 Timothy 5. 18.
whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. He beseeches
them to be followers of him, as he is of Christ, and mark them who walk so, as
they have us for an example. He presses Timothy to be an example of the
Believers in Word, Heb. 13. 7. 1 Cor. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7. Phil
3. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Mat. 5. 16. Deuteronomy. 33. 8, 9, 10, 11.
in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. Peter exhorts all
Elders to be examples to the flock. Christ would have them to be effectually
what they are by deputation, burning and shining lights in the Doctrine of
their lips and life, adorned still with his Vrim and Thummim, Lights and
Perfections, as was prefigured by the holy Garments designed by the Lord for
the vesture of his Church Officers. It concerns all Gods people to look
carefully to the trimming and feeding of those Lamps, 1 Ioh. 12. 35. 1 Ioh. 1.
6, 7. Ephesians. 5. 8.
and to walk in their Light as becomes the Children of the Light, and as God
himself is in the Light, that their mutual communion may be truly owned, a
fellowship with God by the Spirit of his Son, else he threatens hard the
removal of his Candle-stick, when people grow wanton, 2 Cor. 15. 18. 20.
playing by their Light, blowing at it, abusing of it, throwing water thereon,
and following false Lights, in stead thereof. The Lord would have them attended
and obeyed in every Ordinance according to his Word, as his Messengers and
Heralds, his Stewards and Ambassadors, his Officers and Ministers, Mat. 10.
40. Luke. 10. 16.
authorized by special power, qualifying them and Authority, comissioning them
to every part of his service, He that hears them, and receives them, hears and
receives him. He that slights and rejects them, slights and rejects him, and
the Father that sent him, as he sends them in his name. 2 Chro. 36. 16.
The slight and abuse of his spiritual Officers he has in all ages dreadfully
punished after many warnings He would not have them indeed lord it over the
faith of Believers, 2 Cor. 4. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Tit. 2. 15. 2 Cor. 4. 7. 2 Cor.
6. 1. Gal. 4. 14. Col. 4. 17. Act. 14. 27. Act. 10. 33. Act. 13. 44.
nor act as Lords of his Heritage, but perform their office with Love and
tenderness, humility and self-denial, yet with all Authority in his name and
strength. This Treasure they have in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the Power may be of God and not of man, and are to be received as an Angel of
God, even as Jesus Christ, as the Galathians did, for which Paul commends them.
They should be quickened to their work as need requires, and diligently attended
therein in all orderly meetings. whether fixed or occasional, every Christian
should carefully prepare for, and seasonably repair to the place at the time
appointed, as they did still in Primitive days, though then in much danger,
that all may be ready as before God to perform their duty with affectionate
attention and submissive application, with fervent zeal and holy self-denial
for future Improvement. To be first at a feast and last at Church, early with
the world, and late with God, ardent in fleshly things, and cold in Spirituals,
active in worldly trifles and trifling in Divine affiairs; vigilant about
earth, and dormant about heaven, shows a great measure of carnality, too
prevailing in our days, even among Gods people. The Lord quicken all your
hearts that we may more effectually stir up our selves and others by the
diligent improvement of all due means through his blessing to this eminent duty
of Walking Worthy of our Vocation, for his Glory, and our eternal Welfare. To
every one that walks according to this Rule, Peace shall be, and Mercy upon the
Israel of God.

FINIS

