A Sovereign Antidote AGAINST Sinful Errors, the Epidemical plague of these
latter days. Extracted out of Divine Records, the Dispensatory of
Christianity: FOR The Prevention and Cure of our Spiritual Distempers.

By Claudius Gilbert, B. D. and Minister of the Gospel at Limrick in Ireland.

Luke 21. 8. See that ye be not deceived.

2 These. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Whose coming is after the working of Satan, in
all Power, etc. and in all deceivableness, etc.

(...).

Graecan. Axioma. (...) Jehova Medicus tuus,

Exodus 15. 26. Adag. Arabic E^eg. Erronibus sibi solis sapient bu^ adaptatum.
(...)

Qui seipsum habet prosapiente, habent eum Deus and homines pro Ignaro.

London, Printed by R. W for Francis Titon, and are to be sold at the sign of
the three Daggers in Fleetsheet. 1658.

To the Honorable Colonel Henry Ingoldesby, Governor of the Precinct of
Limrick and Clare, and to the Inhabitants of the City of Limrick.
Honored and Beloved in the Lord.
THe substance of this Tract was through the Lords help preached lately in your
ears, and is of right now presented to your eyes, that through his Grace, it
may the better reach your hearts. The subject thereof is as seasonable as its
excellent. The Lord make it yours as profitably, as its made yours
affectionately. The choice usefulness of its provisions will make full Amends
for the plainness of its Order and Dress. Its not my work to tickle and flatter
you, but to reach healing and food to your souls. A Signal hand of Heaven
brought me over and fixed me here near five years ago; by the same good hand
have I been kept here in the Lords charge ever since. Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 3, etc.
We have had much cause still to mind and improve the wonderful dealings of our
God toward us from that very day, as in former seasons. Variety of
Dispensations has he carried us through both publicly and personally. Visits
of Judgment, and then of Mercy, we have had from him again and again. No ways
has he left unattempted that might do us good, though our Returns have not
been answerable. The Sword, Famine and Plague ranged in these parts upon Gods
Errand at my first coming, Ezekiel. 14. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
and continued a considerable time. I was thereby occasioned to contribute my
utmost by the Lords Aid, to the relief and cure of men's souls and bodies. It
was then my cordial delight and desire to spend and be spent for the good of
Limrick; as the same is still my design and labor through the assistance of
Heaven. The Voice of Gods Rod cried loud to this City then, that the man of
Wisdom might observe his Name who had appointed it, Micah 6. 9.
in hearing his Rod. Our Heavenly Physician saw it best then to diet and
physic us, suiting his Prescripts to our distempers. Few in this place did
miss of a Touch; the deeper smartings of many among us warned all the rest. Our
sins deserved much worse from his hand, yet he afflicted us very favorably. In
the midst of wrath he remembered mercy, Habac. 2. 2.
and stayed his rough wind in the day of his East wind. Esaias 27. 6, 7, 8.
After Purgations he gave us Cordials, and turned in due time our mourning into
joy. Thanksgivings followed our humiliations, Psalm 30. 11. John ^. 9.
and our bitter waters were turned into sweet Wine. The Springs of Elim
followed our Marah, Psalm 126. 5.
and they reaped in joy, Heb. 12. 11.
that had sown in Tears. If the peaceable fruit of that Rod may in
Righteousness appear among us, the Glory will be his, and the Comfort ours. If
our ill humors have been kindly removed, it will best appear in the right use
of our health. If any grow wanton after Recovery, shame and sorrow will be
their portion. It glads my heart that Gods Word and Works have not been quite
fruitless in the midst of us; yet I cannot but lament with a bleeding soul the
sad improvements of his renewed Kindness. Esad 5. 3, 4. etc.
What could more be done for us then he has done? Why then is our fruit so
wild and so empty? That it proves better with any of us, its of his Grace; that
diverse others seem to grow still worse, its through their fault. The Lord has
bestowed much cost upon us, Heb. 6. 7, 8.
but like the cursed Ground we bear still many weeds. He has not spared for
dressing or dunging: it will much aggravate their sin and judgment, Esaias 5. 5.
if any of us remain still barren. Matthew. 13. 24, 25.
The good Husbandman has cast in good seed in this Ground of his, but the
enemy has crept in in the dark to scatter his Tares. Multiplicious Errors
still spread among us as in other parts, which grow much faster then Christ's
spiritual Plants. Too many are found to play with their Light, and abuse it to
do the Devils work by. That good Word, which proves savor of Life to some, 2
Cor. 2. 16, 17.
proves too often savor of Death to others. The Spirits of diverse are grown so
childish, that neither Barnabas nor Boanerges will please their Palate. Act. 4.
36.
God has restored us to health and plenty; Mark. 3. 17.
but many souls are still diseased and starved. Sinful Infection troubles all
Relations, yet is little felt, because spiritual. Much malignity attends those
ill humors which work so strangely and perniciously. Some are Brainsick with
giddy Notions, and others heart-sick with feavourish Affections. The Heads of
some labor with Convulsions; the Vitals of others suffer defections. Spiritual
Lethargies benumb some into sleep and mortal dreams; raging Phrenzies do
inflame some others. Some are merrily mad with pleasing Conceits; others
melancholy through a sullen spirit: Lethal Apoplexies take some few suddenly;
and spiritual Palsies seiz upon others more gradually. Some have lost Appetite
to the dainties of Heaven; others seem to hunger, but digest not well.
Spiritual Rickets do possess diverse, and sinful Gouts trouble not a few.
Various obstructions disorder men's souls, whence the disfiguring of their Life
and Acts. Internal stoppages often discolor the external man; the
falling sickness and the swounding fits do also take turns in souls and
Societies. Consumptions and Dropsies appear so visibly, that they prognosticate
but Ominous things. Sad Symptoms are seen in men's faces and speech, their
tongues and breathings concurring therewith. If you feel their pulse and
Beatings of heart, you may soon descrie Syncopal Tokens. Schirrhus' s and
hardness are easily felt; swellings and sores manifest themselves. Thus this
world appears a sinful Hospital for the God of mercy to give visits to. What
comes away from men, proves a Semeiotick that points at the Cure by sad
Characters. The Causes of such dangerous Affects must needs be various and
multiplicious. Diseases complicate and inveterate, bespeak a difficult and a
dubious Cure. Secrecy and strength add much to that evil, besides senslesness
and unruliness. Disorder in food and in exercise with sloth and slumber
aggravate the same Strains and Ruptures with Dislocations, Tumors and Wounds
manifest more evil. Humors and spirits being distempered do soon disorder the
substantial parts. Excess in Repletion and vacuity, in number and extent, still
do make it worse. Retention of evil and wasting of good, do both testify the
method of help. Indications thus being so various, its no wonder if the cure be
slow both in Church and State. Purgations total and particular, must attend
diet, rest and all due help. Both the Patients care and all Assistants, will be
as needful as the Physicians skill. Politic Physicians and Ecclesiastical had
need look to Christ for skill, strength, success. Choice and cordial
Preservatives, Alexipharmacks are often needed, where malignity does infest
men's souls. Industrious Care and painful attendance will be found herein of
exceeding need. The Ladies hand and the Eagles eye, with the Lions heart, will
help very much in all such dressings. Seek therefore and wait for that
Sovereign Aid without which no means can find a Blessing. Phil. 2. 12, 13,
Observe his Precepts, taking what he gives, Rom 9. 16.
carefully forbearing what he does forbid. Fear to displease Christ, our
Gospel- Phoebus, that must teach and prosper Aesculaps An eminent Physician,
the Son of the Sun among Poets.
labors. That Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing wings to all such as
love and fear him above All. Mal. 4. 2.
Neglect then no means appointed by him; 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
abuse not the means by resting thereon. Esaias 64. 5.
His All-sufficient Grace believe and expect for his own Glory in each of his
Ways. Psalm. 37. 4, 5, etc.
If he make you smart, Prove. 3 6.
its for your good that you may be healed on the best account. Heb. 12. 10.
Here is an Antidote fitted to our Case, the good Lord bless it to you and to
me. Be helpful to me that I may help you at the Throne of Grace, so shall we
find him our present help still. His Grace will sure be sufficient for us, Ephesians.
6. 13, 19.
and his strength shall be perfected in weakness. Col. 4. 3, 4.
I shall as heartily rejoice in your good as if it were mine; Psalm 46. 1.
and shall design to be, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
through the Renewed supplies of Christ's Holy Spirit,

Your Affectionate Servant for his sake, in all Gospel-work, CLAUDIUS GILBERT.
From my study in Limrick, 11. 11./Januar. 23. 1656.
PREFACE.
Christian READER.
ERROR is the Epidemical disease of this Age, See Mr. Boltons Arraignment of
Error; Danaeus, Epiphan. August. Hieronym. de Heretic. etc.
exactly considerable in its Nature and Descent, in its Species and Degrees, in
its Cause and Effects, in its Symptoms and Cure. We shall but touch those
things which others have elaborately handled, to usher in the Scope and
Substance of the following discourse.

1. The Nature and Idea thereof consists much in a sinful straying of man's
Judgment from the Truth of God into falsehood. 1. Man's Judgment is the proper
Subject and Seat thereof: (we meddle not now the Angels Failures) from whence
it casts a malign Influence upon all other Powers and Parts.

2. Its Genus is straying or wandering. (...), hence (...).
So the Greek properly imports, a slipping and sliding from Truth into falsehood
and by-ways.

3. Its difference lies in both the terms. First, From which it swerves; i. e.
The Terminus a quo, from the Truth of God. Secondly, To which it leads, the
Terminus ad quem, into falsehood. So its distinguished from bare Ignorance, both
negative and privative; Error being a soul-sickness, an (...), a disorderly
Distemper, disposing to evil positively, both habitual and actual, as it
deprives of and indisposes to that good, r^specting the Souls health; It
differs also from Scruples and doubts, which are but uncertain motives from
Truth, and weaker Inclinations to falsehood, as the grudgings and Rudiments of
spiritual diseases. Its likewise differenced thereby from Heart-Hypocrisie and
verbal lies.

Secondly, Errors Descent fetches its Extract from the Prince and Father of
Lies, John 8. 44.
who abode not in the Truth, but drew thousands of glorious Angels, Jude 6.
who kept not their first state, into Error and Apostasy. His Serpentine spawn
by dub^ous Queries was soon cast into our first Parents, where it quickly bred
Error and all sin. That unhappy Breath so strongly infected them, that this
sinful disease is become hereditary to all their natural Posterity. This
woeful Leprosy has been thus propagated from our Head Adam to all his Issue,
through the loins of sinful parents. It cleavs to man's Nature, and has been
in all ages successively communicated by a woeful Series in all sorts, more or
less. Levit. 14. 44, 45.
As the Leprosy cleaving to the Wall, could never be totally removed, till the
Wall it self was quite pulled down: So does this Plague cleave to man's soul,
till man's dissolution. Adam received at once the seed of corporal and spiritual
Diseases and death, in the same moment that he began to sin, he began to die,
according to Gods Word; from whence the progress of a dying life in him, and
all his, till Grace begin that spiritual Life below that Glory compleats above.
Israel had contracted their woeful Leprosy from that Egypt that enslaved
them; Deuteronomy. 28. 27.
so is our spiritual Leprosy contracted from that mystical Aegyt which has
poisoned us so desperately, and infests still the Canaan-State of Christ's
militant Church. Dato uno absurdo, mill sequuntur. Cadmei Proles, Adag.
As Truth is a most diffusive Good, so is Error a most diffusive Evil. Error
like a stone thrown into the water, rises in Circles, each Circle begetting
another and growing still wider till they all quite lose themselves in the end.
Like Cadmus Brood they start up suddenly, and as soon fall foul each on other.

3. The Species and Sorts of Error are multiplicious, like the diseases that
trouble the body. As there are various sorts and denominations of divine
Truths, so are there as many distinctions of Errors. The specifical difference
of each Error is measurable still by the dimension of that Truth it opposes and
strayes from, and of that falsehood into which it slides. Veritas Radicis,
Indicis and Entis, apud Scholasticos.
The Truth of God is the conforty of his Thoughts, Words and Works, to his own
glorious Essence. The Truth of man is the due conformity of man to that Truth
of God, whether mental, verbal or practical. Error is accordingly diversified
in its general acceptance; but properly to our purpose it is restrained to the
Judgment, and distingushed from other sins which are verbal or practical
Errors, flowing from man's Will and affections more directly. That Truth of God
is especially considerable in matters of Religion, either fundamental or
juxta-fundamental, Errores quidom citra, alii circa, alii contra fundumentum.
Primi divertunt, Secundi pervertunt, tertii subvertunt fidem Orthodoxam.
or more superficial and circumstantial. Error is accordingly discernable in
its several wanderings from that Truth. The Scripture of Truth declares the same
in all their specifical variations. Tue Fundamentals of Religion are summed up
in the Articles of our Faith, called the Apostles Creed, because extracted out
of their writtings; which Symbol has been successively explained by the
several Confessions of the primitive Churches, as the Nicene and Athanasian
Creed, as also of the Reformed in Germany and France, Belgium, and England,
etc. As there are varieties of Weeds and poisons about the earth which
peculiarly offend the several parts of the Body, some being more hurtful to
the head, some to the Stomach, etc. So do various Errors offend the several
parts of Truth, whence various designations are given to them.

4. The Gradations and Degrees of Error admit also of a variable Latitude,
according to the variation of its aggravations. As diseases do vary in their
gradual recess from health, being either simple or compound, either more or
less malignant and hurtful; Thus Errors admit of many adjuncts which render
them more or less sinful and injurious. In every Error there is a sinfulness,
an (...) and (...), a defect of Truth privative, and a disposition to falsehood
positive. As in every disease there is an evil deflection from the (...) or
sound disposition of the body; so in Error from that of the mind. But this
deflection is not alike in all, but is clothed with numerical differences and
personal aggravations. Some Errors are more, and others less rooted: Some are
more single, and others complicate. Some are more submissively held, and others
more pertinaciously: some are kept close, and others published; some have more
of the Will and Affections attending them, others less: some are more, and
others less pernicious: some are more quiet, others more turbulent. As the
malignity of infectious diseases admits of a great Latitude: as the variety of
venomous Creatures, whether Plants, Minerals or Sensitives, is multipliciously
diversified by the variations of their clime, intentions of degrees, etc. some
being cold as Hemlock, others hot as Euphorbium: some in the first or second,
others in the third or fourth degree: some working more slowly, others more
quickly: some by their Tail, as the Scorpion: some by their Teeth, as the Viper
and Rattle-snake; some by their Tongue, others by their Excrements: some more
sensibly, as a mad Dog; some more insensibly, as the Asp: So do Errors appear
under variety of offensive qualities and adjuncts.

5. The Cause of Error also, as of every disease, is multipliciously
observable, especially in a threefold Division of Evident, Antecedent, and
Continent.

1. An Evident Cause among Physicians, is much from Externals, if not
altogether, whereby a Distemper is occasioned in the body. So in man's soul this
sickness of Error may be occasioned by external Causes, as by infection, ill
company, bad books, various Temptations, etc.

2. An Antecedent Cause of sickness bodily, is from some thing within, whether
vapor, humor or Spirit, distempering any part, and disabling it from its proper
Action. Thus the foregoing Cause of this spiritual disease, lies in some
flatuous, humorous or spiritual evil that disorders the mind from its right
discerning of the Truth, causing it to deviate into the way of falsehood. Romans
5. 12.
Habitual Corruption within, flowing from Adams first sin, (which is ours by
Imputation,) attended with the want of original Righteousness, and often called
original sin, because the womb of all sin in us) is the chief cause from which
all other evils flow, that breed and increase these sad distempers. This
Corruption acts variously in the way of Pride and Self-seeking, Security and
Worldliness, etc.

3. The Continent Cause of a corporal distemper is that immediate thing which
cherishes it, being cherished from the remote cause, whether corrupt blood,
wind, water, gravel, etc. So the continent Cause of Error, is that peculiar
Corruption whether. Ignorance or Pride, self-conceitedness or worldliness, etc.
which sticks close to the mind, to breed and cherish its several dyscrasies and
distempers. Thence such clouding of men's Judgments and disorders in their
Reasonings: 2 Timothy 3. 8.
hence perverse Disputings of men that are reprobate concerning the Faith; as
Ambition and Pride carried Simon and Menander, Nestorius and Macedonius away;
Discontent and Envy prevailed with Arrius; Covetousness carried on Demetrius
and his Comrads. There is a Complication of such causes in most.

6. The Effects of Error, as of every corporal disease, are likewise variously
numerous, according to the variations of its numerical Idea, of its specifical
nature, of its descent, gradations and causes. This spiritual sickness is a
Tendency to further sin and eternal Death; as every bodily sickness is the
beginning of corporal death. Rom, 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death; sin deserves it, it binds ever, it leads to it, it
fits for it, it begins it. As much as there is of sinfulness, so much is there
of death attending it, Corporal and civil, spiritual and Eternal. Grace indeed
does restrain and limit, it pardons and subdues, it purges out gradually, and
at last exterminates all sin in Gods Elect; yet it changes not the Nature or
desert of sin, though it chances the sinners nature and relation. Providence
limits and overrules this sinfulness also in the Reprobate. As the wise
Physician corrects his Opium in a Confection; so does God correct sin remaining
in his Children. As the same Physician appoints fit means against infection to
all indefinitely, so does our Sovereign Physician by showing the dangerous
effects of Error. As the effects of Poisons are very various, yet always sad:
so are sin and sorrrw inseparable Twins. Error was set forth to the Life by
that Leprosiy of the head, which had a peculiar mark of Ignominy, Levit. 13.
29, 30, etc.
Infection and danger. Its like to those poisonous Minerals and Vegetables,
which strike first ai the head, and thence at all other parts. Its a spiritual
Plague which cannot but be mischievous still, though not in all alike. All
sorts of men in all relations are made to feel the sad Consequents thereof. Its
a fruitful womb, a breeding dung hill, a poisoned spring, Lerna malorum. It
engages and leads insensibly to more evil, notional and practical. It disgraces
God, opposes his Truth, distempers men's souls, endangers their families, blasts
their Profession, stains their Repute, scandalizes many, ensnares diverse,
troubles Church and State, and complies with Satan in his various designs, by
nursing of his brood. This Age gives sad demonstations thereof. As Cephalical
diseases are on many accounts the most dangerous of all in the Body: so are
these heady distempers in the soul, which are easily communicated to all the
vital and inferior parts. The poison of some works in a stupifying way, as
Opium, Henbane, Hemlock, etc. others venom acts by an enraging quality, as
Elaterium, Euphorbium, Scammony: The effect of some is more speedily mortal, as
in the Touches of a Basilisk, and Asp, of the Viper and rattle Snake, if not
very timely looked to; others are more slow and less dangerous, as in the
operations of various simples appears. The Parallel of spiritual Poisons
therewith is easily drawn by an observing Christian.

7. The Symptoms or Signs of Error, as of Corporal deseases, are of diverse
sorts, some more Common, others more Proper.

1. The common signs are such as attend diverse distempers in a general way, as
enfeebling of the parts, change of complexion, Indiposition to action, etc.
Thus Errors have their Common signs, wherein many of them agree, appearing much
in their sad effects against Gods Honor and man's good, though often under far
Colors, like that Indian Apple in the Western Islands, which seems beautiful,
and yet is rank poison.

2. There are proper Tokens and characteristical (...), and notes of each
bodily disease, setting out its specifical Idea by its numerical and peculiar
properties, whether one or more, and usually by a (...) and Concurrence of
diverse, as a Frenzy, a Lethargy, an Apoplexy, etc. have singular marks from
the defect and disorders of the faculties animal, vital and natural.

Thus Error, the Frenzy of the soul, when boiled up to its height, sets a man
on a rage against Truth and her friends, rejects the Means of its cure, raves
and ranges at Will, inflames the Spirits, disorders all the powers and parts,
hastening to destruction, as appeared in the ranting Crew, formerly and lately
in Germany and England; another error may more resemble a Lethargy, benumming
the Soul, fixing the Spirits, casting the person into a feavorish sleep,
stopping the senses, filling them with dreams, closing their eyes, and
distempering all powers and parts, rendering them incapable of sense and help,
if the Lord work not extraordinarily, witness James Naylor and his quaking Rout.

Another Error may be found more like an Apoplexy; suddenly taking away sense
and motion, reason and life, as that of some Circumcellions, and the bloody
rabble of Germany and Switzerland from Anno 1522. See Sleidan, Cloppenburg,
Hornebeck, Bulinger, Luther, Calvin, etc.
till 1534. Another is more like a Palsy, stopping the fountain of the sinews,
either totally or partially by distempering the head and its Conduits, whereby
sense and motion are conveyed to all inferior parts, and gradually hastening
man's end. So it fares with diverse Quakers now, and many monkish Pharisaical
Notionists, Rose-Crucians, Eremitical Recluses and Behmenists. Thus might we
instance in every disease, and draw the parallel of Error along in its various
Symptoms and Characters; the which are accompanied with malignity and
infection, with Confidence and peremptoriness, with Censoriousness and
self-conceitedness, more or less, according to the Nature, Extent and Causes of
such distempers. But as some poisonous Weeds do very nearly resemble the good
plants among which they grow, as young Hemlock among Parsley; So diverse Errors
grow like Truth for a while, till they come up to strength (which they do much
faster then good herbs) to be better discerned by their ill qualities and
woeful effects.

8. The Cure of Error, as of bodily sickness, is diversely to be observed in the
Indications directing thereto, in the materials to be used, and in the due
method of preparing and ministering of them sutably to the Rules of Art, and the
Patients Case.

1. (...). Galen.
The Indications of Error, as of the bodily diseases, require the removing of
the Cause, the rectifying of the parts, the restoring of strength, and
preserving of it by all convenient means.

2. Providence affords in every Country Remedies suited to their Maladies, and
Counter-poisons against their Poisons; witness the Rattle-snake, and Snakeweed
of Virginia and of New England; The Italian Tora and Antitora, etc. So has the
Lord provided a suitable proportion of divine Truths and helps to be duly
applied for effectual Relief.
The Materials and Ingredients that are to be used toward that Cure for soul
and body, are considerable in a regular diet, in orderly medicines, and the
Chirurgions seasonable help. Thus erroneous Persons are 1. to be dieted, in
shunning evil food, evil company, evil motions, etc. and in using food,
company, exercise, etc. tending to spiritual health. 2. They are to be well
purged with due preparatives and Laxatives. 3. They must have the Chirurgions
help also in letting out the corrupt blood of sin, in dressing of their
spiritual Sores, in applying of all fit Medicaments, and administering of all
things orderly.

3. The Method of preparing and dispensing of them all for the cure of
Diseases, Spiritual and Corporal, is to be guided by the skillful Physician of
Heaven, who has appointed Men and Means, that in observing the Prescripts of
his Word applied sutably to every ones case, his promised Blessing may be
waited for, and received in an Obedience of Faith and Love. The following
Antidote prescribed by him may be through his Grace singularly helpful thereto.

The Contents.
The Context opened.
THe Text divided into six Doctrines. page 6. Doctrine 1. Wicked Lawless
persons are exceedingly subject to be carried away with destructive Errors. p.
7 Reason 1. Reigning Corruption. p. 8 Reason 2. Errors deceitfulness. ibid.
Reason 3. Divine Judgment. p 9 Use 1. Information; the ground of our numerous
Errors. ibid. 2. Admonitin to lawless Ones. ibid. 3. Examinatioon. ibid. 4.
Exhortation. p. 10 Doctr. 2. Error will endanger a Christians stedfastness.
ibid. Reas. 1. It loosens a Christians hold. p. 11 2. It impairs a Christians
strength. p. 12 3. It snatches with forcible fraud. ibid. Use 1. See hence the
source of our Revolts. ibid. 2. Convictions to erroneous ones. p. 13 3. Trial
of our state. p. 14 4. Advice to all. ibid. Doctr. 3. All Christians, even the
best, need still due warning to keep themselves from Error and Revolt. p. 15
Obj. 1. What need the Elect to be warned thus? p. 16 Ans. In seven particulars.
ibid. Use 1. Consect. Hence see the usefulness of a Gospel Ministry. p. 17 2.
Reprehension. p. 18 3. Inquiry. p. 19 4. Excitation, 1. to take warning. p. 20
2. Improve warning. p. 21 1. Personally. ibid. 2. Relatively. p. 22 Doctr. 4.
The gracious Knowledge of Christ is a singular Jewel. p. 23 1. Explanation in
the (...). p. 24. 25, 26 2. Confirmation in the (...). p. 27 3. Demonstration
in the (...). ibid. Reason 1. From the Object, Christ considerable p. 28 1. In
his Person, as God, as man, as God-man. ibid. 2. In his Office, Prophetical,
Sacerdotal, Regal. p. 30 3. In his Progress of Humiliation to Exaltation. ibid.
4. In his Purchase for value and virtue, considered. p. 32 5. In his Relation
variously set forth. p. 33 6. In his Influence. p. 34 Reas. 2. From the subject
Recipient thereof. p. 35 Reas. 3, From the Canse efficient, formal, final. p.
36 Reas. 4. From the Nature. p. 42 Reas. 5. From the Properties. p. 44 Reas. 6.
From the Effects. p. 46 (...) or Use 1. Instruction, the Method of study. p. 47
Use 2. Reprehension. p. 49 Use 3. Examination, page 54. Therein is considered,
1. What is wrought. 2. How it was wrought. 3. What it works. p. 55. 56 In
allusion to Vegetative, Sensitive and Rational Acts. ibid. Use 4. Consolation,
Obj. Ans. p. 64 Use 5. Exhortation to Nominal Christians. p. 65 Many Obj. Answ.
p. 67. 68, 69, 70, etc Exhor. 2. To Real Christians. p. 73 Doctr. 5. Growing in
the gracious Knowledge of Christ is a special Gospel-Duty p. 77 Reas. 1. The
Christians Nature. p. 78 Reas. 2. Gods Honor. p. 79 Reas. 3. Man's Interest.
ibid. Use 1. The Necessity of a standing Ministry. p. 80 Use 2. Conviction. p.
81 Use 3. Examination, Is our Growth Universal, proportional, perpetual? p. 82
Use 4. Excitation to dead and living Christians. p. 84 Doctr. 6. Spiritual
Growth is a Sovereign Antidote against Error and Apostasy. p. 89 Res. 1. It
removes the Causes. p. 91 Reas. 2. It fortifies the parts, p. 92 Reas. 3. It
improves Christ's specific Virtue. p. 93 Use 1. Information, showing the ground
and cure of all our distempers. p. 94 Use 2. Admonition to all under the Reign,
or Remainders of sin. p. 95 Use 3. Enquiry, personal and public p. 96 Use 4.
Counsel to prize and desire, embrace and ensure, keep and improve this choice
Antidote against all evil; specially p. 97
First, Against Error opposing Christ.
1. In his Deity. p. 99 2. In his Humanity. p. 100 3. In his Soul and Body. p.
101 4. In his Person. p. 102 5. In his Spirit. p. 104 6. In his Office. p. 105
7. In his Priesthood. p. 107 8. In his Prophetical. p. 108 9. In his Regal
Function. p. 110 10. In his Humiliation. p. 111 11. In his Exaltation. p. 114
12. In his Word. p. 115 13. In his Ordinances. p. 118 14. In his Sabbath. p.
120 14. In his Laws. p. 123 15. In his Covenant. p. 124 17. In his Seals. p.
126 18. In his Church. p. 128 19. In his Electing Grace. p. 130 20. In his
Redeeming Grace. p. 132 21. In his Renewing Grace. p. 137 22. In his saving
Grace. p. 142 23. In his Magistracy. p. 145 24. In his Ministry. p. 148 25. In
his Providence. p. 153 Secondly, Against Apostasy. p. 157
A Sovereign Antidote against sinful Errors: The Epidemical Plague of the
latter Days.
Extracted out of Divine Records, the Dispensatory of Christianity.
2 PET. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore Beloved, seeing ye know these things before,
beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your
own stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.


THIS Text affords a signal Prospective into our present State, in conjunction
with the Context, whereto it points by the Particle therefore. Yea, Therefore
Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, etc. What things? The Context tells
us. This Epistle was sent for a Sovereign Antidote against Error and Apostasy,
to the scattered believing Jews, whereto Peter was eminently sent as Paul to
the Gentiles. Gal. 2. 7, 8, 9.
Many of them had been converted, Act. 2. Who returning home to their several
Countries, propagated the Gospel. They suffered much there, both of the Jews
and Gentiles, as the rest did in Judea, which moved our Apostle to fortify
them to his best; by his presence first, and then in his absence; witness these
two Epistles, James and Jude, 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2.
Paul and John furthered the same work, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
which Peter in this second, received a fresh. Thus the people of God need
still renewed supplies from the joint labors of all his servants. Yet after
all, those believing Jews were much endangered by Satan's designs, which
occasioned this latter Epistle. The Light of Christ shines so brightly herein,
that it scatters all the mists of doubts, which mistakes have raised in some,
about its being Canonical. C^nsult Epiphan. August. Athan. Council. Laodicen.
Carthag^n. Damascen. Bed. Centur-Magdeb, etc. about it.


Three parts are therein observable, the Prologue, Discourse and Epilogue.
I. THE Prologue ushers in by an Apostolical Inscription and Salute, an
entrancee into the substantial discourse following; by a Divine Insinuation
into their mind and heart, to hasten their Pace toward Christian Perfection.

II. The Discourse it self is brought in by way of Excitation, warning and
prophecy

1. He stirs them up to spiritual Improvement by the light and strength of many
Arguments, in the first Chapter.

Secondly, He warns seriously against Seducers, whom he describes at large, in
their Persons and Doctrines, in their rise and Ruin, in their acts and
Methods, in their Principles and Practices, throughout the second Chapter,
wherein they are pourtrayed to the Life. Here we have the skillful Anatomy of
Error, exactly managed by the Divine hand of Christ's Spirit, guiding our
Apostles Pen.

Those Monsters of Darkness are here exposed to public view by the light of
God in all their parts and properties. Those Mysteries of Iniquity he rips up
with his Incision knife, and unbowels those Tragical designs of Hell disguised
under the mask of Heaven. The several Lineaments of that pernicious Brood, he
distinctly marks out, that exact notice may be taken of them all. Their various
Characters, his pensell limbs out with accuratness, that such pests might never
be mistaken. He sets them forth.

1. verse 10. (...).
As unclean Beasts and filthy creatures that walk after the flesh, in the lusts
of uncleanness, witness the Carpocratians and old Gnostics; the late
Familists, Ranters and Nicolaitans.

2. (...).
As enemies to rule an order; They despise Dominion, and are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, (...). witness the German Anabaptists, John of Leyden
and Battenburgh, Muncer and Knipperdoling, with our quaking multitudes.

3: (...).
As proud and audacious, presumptuous are they, witness those wretched
followers of Nailor, Fox, etc. as the Montanists and Manichees of old, the
Simonians and Minandrians, the Marcionites and Ebionites.

4. (...).
As Peremptorily, selfish and arrogant in pleasing themselves; witness our
conceited Perfectionists; in their Pharisaicall Monkish Holiness; like the
Cathari of old* the Paracelsians and Behmenists since; all revived in the
Quakers.

5. verse 11, 12. (...).
As notorious Railers and malicious Slanderers, by mis-interpretations and
mis-applications; whereas the Angels themselves, greater in Power aad might,
bring in no railing accusation against Rulers before God, witness our Quakers
and Notionists of all sorts, like the Circumcellions, and others of old.

6. verse 12. (...).
As brutishly wild Beasts, that are made to be taken and destroyed, speaking
evil of the things they understand not, who shall utterly perish in their own
corruption, receiving the reward of unrighteousness: witness the Basilidians,
Valentinians, Marcionists, and such Gnostics of old revived in the German, and
British Ranters, Familists, Paracelsians, Quakers.

7. ver. 13. (...).
As debauched Libertines, that account it pleasure to riot in the day time,
witness our Ranting-crue, and the German Rabble of Munster in 1533, like the
old Borborita.

8. (...).
As cheating Impostors, seducing those with whom they feast themselves. Their
methods and wiles discovered of old, are refined and sublimed to the utmost in
these days by Chemical arts.

9. (...). See about them, Eusebius. Socrat. Epiphan. Austin. Ammian, Marcel.
As Atheistical Villains, like spots and blemishes, sporting themselves with
their own deceivings, while they feast with you. Thus the Heretics of old
brought the Heathens odium, and and Taints upon the Christians, as the Papists
cast the reproach of all Sectaries on the reformed.

10. v. 14. (...).
As Spiritual Fornicators, having eyes full of Adultery, that cannot cease from
sin, beguiling unstable souls. Thus former and latter Herericks have still been
defiling Christ's marriage bed, his Gospel-ordinancess by their corrupt
Additions and detractions, setting up of Altars against his Altar.

11. (...).
As earthly minded wretches, having an Heart exercised with covetous Practices:
witness our experience, as theirs of old.

12. v. 15. (...)
As accursed Sensualists, woefully revolting from the blessed Truth of God;
cursed Children, such Apostates abound every where.

13. (...).
As bewitching Seducers, the egregious Disciples of Balaam, and other false
Prophets, which have forsaken the right way, and have gone astray, following
the way, and loving the ways of unrighteousness.

14. ver. 17. (...).
As desperate Hypocrites, Balaam like, stabling the very heart of the Lords
Truth and cause, under many plausible expressions and specious pretenses.

15. ver. 18. (...).
As infectious Bedlams, whose madness, like his, will not admit of conviction,
or cure.

16. As ignorant sots, fitter for the Asses scourge, Balaam-like, then for
rational course and company.

17. As empty vain Boasters, speaking great swelling words of vanity.

18. As subtle Deceivers, alluring through the Lusts of the flesh, and much
wantoness of spirit in fair promises of Liberty, such as had clean escaped from
them that live in Error.

19. As relapsing Apostates, like the dog turning to his vomit; and the sow
washed to her wallowing in the mire.

Thirdly, He sets forth Prophetically a ranting Crew of scornful mockers: that
should pester the latter days, whom he does accurately paint out in this third
Chapter; that we might be effectually provided against such a storm. Scoffers,
says he, shall arise walking after their own lusts, deriding the promise of
Christ's coming, wilfully ignorant of the Angels fall, the worlds drowning,
Chap. 3.
Sodoms firing, and all such Preludes of divine vengancee upon all impenitent
Infidels.

Thence he hastens toward his close, by sure demonstrations of that grand
Truth, which they mainly opposed. Christ's last coming he lively represents, and
assures of; which would be sudden, seasonable and successfuls. That Christ of
Gods so much slighted by men, shall come upon them, says he, as a thief in the
Night, to fulfill that divine Word, which has reserved heavens and earth to be
burnt up with fire; then shall the heavens pass away with a great Noise; the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; ver. 9. 10, 11.
the earth and works therein shall be burnt up: Thereby moving all Christians,
to have a singular care of holiness and Godliness in Heart and Life.

But least the friends of Christ should be troubled at the terribleness, of his
Approach, he promises to them a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness. Thereby he Revives their hearts, Verse 13.
and presses them to improve savingly, what others abuse desperately. The
patience of God, bearing so wonderfully with all, Verse 14.
gives his Elect time of returning home, and renders the rest inexcusable. This
he uses as a strong Incentive to Reinforce on them his former Exhortation,
whereto also his Fellow Laborer Paul had in his Epistle cogently pressed them.
Verse 15.
His writings so divine, as all other Scriptures, could not escape the abuse of
wicked minds, and Reprobate Consciences. They were then, as still they are
shamefully wrested by unlearned and unstable souls, to their own and others
destruction. Verse 16.
He therefore, with the more vigor, charges Gods people to study and observe
them with more diligence and sobriety, with more prudence and circumspection;
with more sincerity and self-denial.

Therefore ye Beloved, says he, seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye be
led away by the Error of the wicked, Verse 17, 18.
and so fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Thus you see the ushering in of our Text, to give us an excellent
Counter-poison, against all sin and Error, suited to the Complexion of these
latter days, in a peculiar manner; and that by way of Epilogue and Conclusion.

III. This Epilogue or close, sums up all in an Emphatical Exhortation, by a
pressing Disuasive from evil, v. 17. and a pregnant persuasive to good, ver. 18.
1. THe Dissuasive expresses three main particulars.

1. The proper subject of damnable Errors, viz. wicked, Lawless persons.

2. The contagious danger thereof; good men, themselves being too ready to be
led away thereby, and so to fall from their own stedfastness.

3. The singular method of self-preservation from it, by improving of all
divine Warnings, to the faithful keeping of our selves, in our stedfastness.

2. The Persuasive in ver. 18. Exposes also three choice things to our
consideration.

1. The chief Ingredients of our spiritual Antidote, Viz. the Grace and
Knowledge of Christ

2. The gradual completing and fitting therereof, by growing therein.

3. The due Application of the same in Opposition to that infectious Venom, by
a proportionable Improvement or this Antidote; employed in the particle [ But:]
but grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

These several Points are to be more distinctly viewed, to our present purpose.

1. From that special Attribution of Error, to wicked men, which our Apostle
pathetically expresses by the double demonstrative particle, (...), whereby he
Emphatically denotes their property and Interest in such a way of Error. We may
observe to good purpose that,

Doctrine 1. Lawless wicked Persons are exceeding subject to be carried away
with destructive Errors. The Godly may accidentally fall into them: but the
ungodly are peculiarly, totally and finally carried away therewith.
1. WIcked Ones are called (...) i. e. Lawless, or boundless; ab (...)
Privative, and adversative, and (...) Lex, Law. They are (...) opposite to Gods
Law, as well as destitute of it. Athenaeus l. 12.
They love not, they know not, 2 Pet. 2. 7.
they own not Gods law; Romans 8. 7.
they observe it not, Romans 7. 11, 22.
whereas the regenerate delight in Gods Law as Paul; though they look not to be
justified by the works of it. Gods Law is the Revelation of his Will,
concerning man's duty fully Registered now in the Scriptures of Truth, Gal. 2.
19. 2c.
the perfect Rule of Faith and obedience, 1 cor. 9. 2r*
summed up in Gods Statute-books of the old and New Testament. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
16, 17


Error is (...) wandering from the Truth, either Natural, Moral, or Spiritual;
either in foundation, or superstructure. According to the Import of the Truth
opposed, so is every error more or less dangerous. Those Errors are damnable,
in the Apostles phrase, which deny or destroy Fundamental Truths, as about the
Natures, Person, and Office of Christ, Mediator: the misery of man, his
Recovery by Grace, the need of Regeneration, resting on Christ alone, etc.

To be led away, (...) is to be carried by the force of a torrent and stream,
or in a crowd and hurry.

Thus Lawless men are hurried away by the fraud and force of Error into evil;
thence ver. 12 13. they are compared to natural bruit Beasts, fiercely running
to their destruction.

It has been too sadly confirmed in all Ages, specially in our days. Those
grand Seducers and their prime followers, which did so much pester the
Apostolical Churches, are thus described, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, etc.
and we are told at large, what monsters of wickedness should follow their
steps; Iud. 1. to 19.
Paul and Peter, John and Jude set them forth in lively portraictures, Mat. 24.
5. 11, 23, 24.
as Christ himself had done before: Scripture and Ecclesiastical History do
fully demonstrate it. Luke 21.
In this very Chapter and the foregoing, the direful characters given by our
Apostle of those Impostors, Mar. 13.
that would successively disturb Christianity: 1 Ioh. 4. 1, 2, 3, etc.
demonstrate it ex abundanti. Such were Simon and Menander, Ebion and
Cerinthus: Basilides and Priscillian of old; Paracelsus and David, George
Muncer, and John of Leydon, with many more of later date.

Reason 1, Psalm. 58. 3.
The Reigning corruption of such Lawless ones must needs incline them thereto.
Psalm. 14.
The spawn of all Error is born and bred with them. Psalm. 53.
Man's dunghill heart is the fruitful womb of all such weeds. Romans 3. 11, etc.
Sin grows into strength, by custom therein; its more radicated and settled in
them. As it rejects the bounds of divine and humane Laws, Ier. 17. 9.
so does it carry the soul headlong into all bypath of Error and folly. It
endures neither Physic, nor Physician, though never so choice. Such a heart is
dry tinder to the Devil, but wet to God.

Reason 2. 2 Timothy 3. 13. (...), impostors and prostigators, bewitching Cheats.
The deceitfulness of Error helps much that way, that seed of the Serpent
resembles him in this as in all things else. It disguises its foul face, under
many fair colors; it goes still masked: it baits every hook sutably to man's
deceitful heart, Thence the Scripture speaks so much of Errors, Methods, and
crafts, devices and subtilties, snares and wiles Arts and stratagems; Juglings
and deceits.

Reason 3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8, 9, 10.
The Just hand of Heaven, giving up such to blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, to be led away by sin and Satan, Ephesians. 4. 11, 19, etc.
because they received not the Truth in love, but abused and corrupted it, and
themselves thereby; they harden themselves sinfully, then God hardens them
judicially.

Use 1. See the ground of so many errors among us, because iniquity so abounds
in these later days, Love to Truth waxes so cold. Mat. 24. 12.
Most turn practical Antinomians of the worst sort; Psalm. 18.
as they reject both God and his Law: he gives them up to the Law of sin and
death. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Whence so many Bedlams of all humors and complexions. So many turns from one
sin to another; Sin being justly punished by sin. So many carnal hypocrites,
and proud Novices fall daily into the Devils condemnation.

2. Admonition to Lawless men, it should convince such of their folly and
misery. See what its to break the Banks, and to be left to a man's will. Whether
will ignus fatuus, lead, but to bogs and precipices? Prove. 29. 1.
Such are next step to vilest Errors ready to be drawn into the snare. Psalm. 2.
All ignorant, negligent souls, 1 Timothy 1. 8
that slight and oppose the Law of God and man, should be thoroughly humbled. To
shake off Christ's bands is a Heathenish part: when the Apostle speaks against
the Law, its still against the abuse thereof, and resting thereon. For the Law
is good, used Lawfully.

3. 1 Cor. 9. 21.
Examination. What kind of Christians are we? like to escape the snares of
Error? Ier. 31. 33.
Are not we lawless, but under the Law to Christ? Ezekiel. 36. 27.
Do we own and study, love and practice that Law; Romans 8. 2.
for sanctification, though not for merit? Is it written upon our heart? Is his
Spirit put within us, so as to cause us to walk in his Statutes; that we may
keep his Judgments and do them? Has Grace freed us from our sinful bondage?
Has the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Jesus Christ made us free from
the Law of sin and Death? Superiors and inferiors should view themselves in
this Glass of Truth. Does the principle of his Law within us, quicken us still
to the careful observance of the perfect Rule of his Law without us?

4. Exhortation. 1. To sinners. Learn the Law of Christ, see the need, and use
thereof. Be willing to know the wretchedness of a lawless state. Its sad to
abide under the law of sin and Death. To be the Devils slave, and the drudge of
sin. Study the Beauty and sweetness, Job. 22. 21, 22, 23, 24, etc.
the pleasure and profit of Gods Law. Acquaint thy self with Christ, and be at
peace, etc. Receive I pray thee the Law from his mouth, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
etc. Thus are you invited in the Lords Name. Esa. 55.
We are Ambassadors for Christ. etc. Tit. 2. 11. 12. 13.
Christ must do all the work in you, and by you. Come to him for all,

2. To Saints; improve your acquaintance. Keep the Law of Christ, that it may
keep you. Look to your fence and Rule, all neglect here is very dangerous.
Error is soon let in, before you be aware. Psalm. 91. 11, 12,
God will keep you in his ways, not in the Devils ways. If your compass be
slighted, you must needs rove. 2 Chro. 15. 2.
If you attend not the Shepherds voice, how can you but wander? Prove. 3. 6.
Walk therefore circumspectly, Ioh. 10 27.
(...): see to it, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
improve the Law of Christ against all internal corruptions, 2. Against all
external temptations. Bring all things to that Touch, Esa. 8. 20.
let nothing pass untried: if any Notion come under a dress of new Light, bring
it to the Law and Testimony. Satan comes often under a Scripture-Mask,
pretending conscience, and pleading very fair. He must be sifted over and over,
and his Vizard must be pulled off. Christ dealt with him thus. This Gloss on
Scripture still spoils the Text, either in the sense or application.

Doctrine 2. Error will endanger Christians stedfastness (...) The verb (...),
is Emphatically to fall out, as a man out of a window, as Eutiches; or as a
member out of joint.
THe word, Act. 20.
stedfastness, (...), is Metaphorical, denoting the settlement of the soul, in
allusion to the strong composure of natural and artificial things, well
grounded and fixed. The soul is then settled, when united to Christ, by a lively
faith, Col. 2. 6, 7.
on conjugal terms, and harmoniously settled in his Body Mistical, in the place
and fitness of an orderly member. The Christian thus as a living stone, Ephesians. 1.
22, 23.
well cemented on Christ, the Foundation, 1 Pet 2. 5, 6.
is orderly Knit to the whole Building of his Church Political also. Ephesians. 2.
20, 21.


Such a living Twig, Ioh. 15. 5, 5.
ingrafted into the stock of Jesse, is thereby established in that Root of
David, to receive all its sap and strength from thence, by abiding in Christ.
This is further set forth by all Politic frames and corporations.

Error is that grand evil, that endangers such a stedfastness, that disorders
such a symmetrie, and discomposes the whole, by disordering the parts, putting
them out of their prop^r seat, (...), their own station and stablishment. It
puts them out of Joint, order and harmony. According to the comport of that
particular straying from the Truth, more or less material, the danger
answerable appears, more or less dreadful.

The sad experience of Gods people in all Ages of the Church, Mat. 24.
both before and since Christ, Mark 13.
has given to this day a woeful Test thereof. Luke 21.
The poison got into men's Brains, does easily slide into all inseriour parts
and powers. 1 Timothy 4.
Fishes begin to stink in the Head. 2 Timothy 3.
Vain Notions soon breed vile affections, Jude
such ill humors easily disperse into all the joints, 1 Ioh. 4.
to produce direful convulsions. Christ gave warning of it; so did his Apostles
again and again; who were as careful to warn all Christians, that they might be
kept steadfast in his ways. The sad Revolts of so many Apostates in all Ages,
who slighted Gods Word, and followed Seducers practices, stand on Record, as
Monuments of Salt, to season the rest.

Reason 1. Error loosens the Christians Hold. The looser he is from Christ,
Col. 2. 19.
the more unsteady, according to the Nature and degree of Error: so is the soul
more or less loosened from Christ, that Divine Anchor. The looser any member is
in the Body from the Head, the less steady still. Error is that malignant
humor, Heb. 6. 19* 20.
that dislocates and benums Christ's Members, breeding sinful palsies and
Relaxations; It works as poison in the Body, as the fumes of Mercury and
Orpiment; that loosen the joints, and breed tremblings, and distortions. It
brings the soul into quicksands by loosening it from the Rock it stood on. It
ruins the cement of the soul, and so loosens it from its Foundation.

2. It impairs the Christians strength, and thence his stedfastness. A Limb
weakened cannot be firm and steady. Error infeebles and enervates the soul,
devouring its vigor and Liveliness proportionably to its Degree. There is a
secret malignity therein, which strikes at the Vitals: Faith and Repentance are
that radical moisture and native heat which preserve the soul in life and
strength. Error preys upon them a main, breeding varieties of Fevers and
Rickets, wastings and languishings of every part. As in the Building stones
decaying, endanger themselves and the whole: so does Error, by wasting all the
faculties and parts. Thence such grow unstable and unsteady, ready to be turned
by every wind of novel doctrine, and sinful temptation.

Rea. 3. Error snatches him away with fraud and force from his proper standing.
Things disordered are much endangered. The Father of lies comes with skill and
strength along with his brood to deceive poor souls. Strong insinuations and
subtle persuasions come along still. Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
They are Principalities and Powers, spiritual wickednesses in high places that
we wrestle with, notable methods and Arts, polices and powers do stir therein.

Use. 1. See the source of our frequent Apostacies. Its a revolting age: the
backslidings of Professors are so many, so notorious, a great cause thereof is
from errors prevalency. Satan gets in by degrees into men, Genesis 3. 1, 4, 5.
as he did with our first Parents. His insinuations are carried on by plausable
Queries. He breeds doubtings and scruples, which soon grow up into pertinacious
Errors. His spawn is dubious and inconsiderable at first, but it thrives apace,
like the weeds of the dunghill; strength being gotten, it preys for it self,
being humorous and ambitious, it makes brawls and contentions, then divisions
and separations. Thence such lamentable departings from Gods goodness and good
men. Hence such impostumes and inflammations, such Tympanies and Ruptures in the
souls and societies of men. When the Serpents head gets into the hole, the body
will easily follow. Thence such weakness in men's Judgments, Affections and
Practice. Good men are not free from those many snares. What lamentations might
we take up over such! Our hearts cannot but bleed in the thoughts thereof. Mat.
24.
Oh! The sad Revolts of this Age. Few keep their Reason sound, their heart
warm, their conversation clear, Because Iniquity abounds, the love of man waxes
cold.

2. Admonition to erroneous persons. Your case is pitiful indeed; so much the
worse still, by how much the less sensible you are thereof. Sleepy feavours are
the most dangerous, because the less felt. Lethargick and Comatick bodies are
for the most incurable. The Lord awaken you that you may be dressed.

Error is your seeming friend, your real enemy. Its a Bosom Traitor, that
corresponds with Satan still to betray and ruin you. The poison is subtle, but
desperate, though of various degrees. There is a latitude in such distempers,
but the least is bad enough. The giddiness inclines to frenzy and faling
sickness, diseases and errors admit of gradations. Nemo de repent pessimus. A
Bodkin may wound to the very heart; so will an error with little show and
sense. The more erroneous, the more subject still to apostatize. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
Spirits of error, will tear and range: Fractions and Factions are their proper
effects: What a sad Spectacle does a Hell set loose afford! Yet how many will
plead for such Mountebanks and cheats, who carry the poison sugared and gilded
over into all parts! Will you still slight and abuse your Physician? Will you
still run into plaguey Company? Will you still scorn and reject the Sovereign
Physic, Joh. 1. 11
that would suit your case? Christ himself the grand Physician of Heaven came
on this errand to physic his own, but they received him not. Such is the Lot
of his Messengers, his under Physicians, both in Church and State. That disease
is sad and desperate, that makes the Patient thus to rage and range. Romans 16.
17.
But it may be you pretend Conscience; so does the Devil often in his worse
Instruments. Romans 13. 3, 4. etc.
But shall sin be covered under Christ's royal Robe, or possess his Throne
without disturbance? What rule God gives against any error, his servants are
duly to prosecute: you oppose Christ in opposing them.

3. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Try therefore thy soundness in the Truth of Christ, how far art thou from
Apostasy: How stands thy heart toward Divine Truth? Heb. 4. 2.
Do thou receive it in love? Is it mingled with faith? Do thou long for it,
and delight in it? Do thou feel the want, and bewail the absence thereof? Art
thou zealous for it in thy place and sphere? Art thou troubled at the troublers
thereof? 1 Ioh. 2. 20. 28.
Art thou a studious scholar under Christ? Do thou observe the Teachings of
his Spirit, internal and external? Do thou learn for practice, and practice
in learning? Are thy Speculations brought into Realities? Do thy heart and
hands thrive as well as thy brains? Art thou fixed in Christ's ways, and settled
in his Word? Have thou ceased to be a wandering Planet, and a floating Meteor in
Religion? Do thou close with Christ, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
and keep close to him in every Ordinance? Mat. 5. 2, 3, 4.
Does thy spiritual health and integrity, appear by thy vigor and activeness
for him; 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
thy hungrings after him; thy fervent and constant following of him? Do thou
desire and digest the food of divine Truth, so as to thrive effecutally
thereby? Is thy Judgment well informed and fixed? Is thy heart cemented to
Christ, and rooted in him? Do thou observe him in all his Prescripts, to give
thee seasonable preservatives and help? Is Christ thy strength, thy hold and
support? Does thou cleave to him, and rest still on him? Art not thou moved
from thy place and station, by tempting notions? whether in a Superior or
inferior charge? Do thou stand firm against all assaults? Do thou manifest
both in Church and State, that thou hold Christ for thy head in all things?
Phil. 2. 13.
Art thou strong in his strength and power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.
against all spiritual enemies?

4. Christians be well advised, beware of Errors, slide not on that Ice, if you
would shun a fall. Avoid every kind and appearance of intellectual evils.
Tamper not with poison, if you love your health. One scabbed sheep may soon
infect many. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
Try all things by Gods touchstone. Receive nothing without trial. If you
suspect poison, be the more careful: If you deal with known cheats, beware of
trusting. If Mountebanks speak you fair and big, distrust them the more: beware
of self conceitedness: be not wise in your own eyes: dread the smallest
Beginnings, of evil in opinion, affection or converse. The sums of this arsnick
rats-bane and mercury will distemper you before you be aware. Avoid the first
step to avoid all the rest. Beware of the brink, if you fear the Precipice: if
you keep ill diet, Rev. 25.
and feed on venom, wonder not at your wasting and decays. Remember Ephesus,
who sadly miscarried by neglect of this care. Make sure of Christ upon his own
terms, and keep close to him. The noble Bereans showed their Nobleness in
trying daily the Doctrine of Paul by the Scripture-rule duly examined: take
heed what you hear, Rev. 2. 5.
and how you hear it: so Christ directs you: bring all things still to the
Lords Touchstone, Mar. 4. 24.
to his Rule and standard, to his Balance and Test to move you consider: Luke
8. 18.
That,

Doct. 3. All Christians, even the best, need still warning to keep themselves
from Error and Apostasy.
Says the Text, (...),
keep your selves well that you may be kept: be very active that you may not
suffer. This voice answers the Hebrew Hithpael; keep your selves with all
delight and diligence, let every power of soul and body be kept on the watch.

All Christians need this, yea, the very best. They must take warning from
every part. Heaven and Earth do warn, and must be hearkened to. Christ warns in
conscience by his Spirits motions in his Word and Providence by the same
Spirit. His motions are regular and harmonious still, they are seasonable and
proportionable. He warns by friends, and sometimes by foes in adversity and
prosperiry. Satan's motions are irregular, unseasonable and unproportionable.
They are unscriptural in the scope and substance, though often disguised with
Scripture expressions, 2. Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15.
sadly perverted.

All do need warning* though but few take it. The best find most need and
benefit thereof. La coz de la yegua no haze mal al potto, Proverb Castigl.
Peter warns the Christian Hebrews here, though well grounded and settled in
the Truth. Warning never hurts, it cannot but do good, if it be well taken. The
best retain much sin and weakness still. They cannot but feel their sinful
Relics. Quae relinquntur in morbis, recidivas faci unt. Hippocrat.
To prevent Relapses and remove much evil, warning must be given. The
Physicians warnings are of singular use to all sorts of Patients. None stands
so fast, but he still stands on slippery ground. The world is a great Ice, very
dangerous. The enemy is subtle and numerous, vigilant and active. We cannot
but find many lurking fiends in our own bosoms: our hearts are deceitful and
desperately wicked. Ier. 17. 9.
We stand no longer then we keep our hold; 1 Pet. 1. 4.
God indeed keeps his unto Salvation, and therefore bids them keep themselves.
He appoints the means as well as the end. As he keeps them by his own power, so
must they keep close to him by faith. They shall never fall totally, nor
finally, but they may often fall partially and dreadfully. If left to
themselves, they would kill themselves; They must therefore be faithfully
warned.

Objection. But what needs all this, if the Elects salvation be sure?

Answer. Mat. 22. 14.
1. All are not elect that seem to be such, many are called* but few are
chosen. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, etc. 10.


2. Though Salvation be sure to the Elect, yet must it be assured to them.
Warnings must be taken, that they may obtain such an assurance. They may have
the Grace without the comfort. All diligence is therefore required to make
their Calling and Election sure. Phil. 2. 13.


3. Esa. 64. 5.
Though Salvation be sure to the Elect, yet must it be wrought out by them with
fear and trembling, Exodus 20. 24.
because its God that works in them both to will, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
and to do of his good Pleasure. He will be sought and found in every one of
his ways, that he may still meet them with a Blessing.

4. 2 Cor. 3. 5. acti agimus.
Though Salvation be sure to the Elect, yet because they are men mixed among
men, he deals with them by men, after the manner of men. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
Rational creatures must act rationally, and so be acted with. Romans 11. 20.
He changes not the substance, but their qualities in renewing them. They are
so moved, that they are enabled to move themselves in following him.

Though the Elect cannot perish utterly, yet they may fall very sinfully.
Warnings well taken are effectual means to prevent much shame, sorrow and loss.
God warns his children that they may be taught good manners. Conditional
Threats are intended to prevent the mischief treatned, and are effectually
blessed to Gods Elect. Rev. 3. 19


6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14.
The assurance of the Elect lies not in themselves, as it flows not from
themselves: The Fathers Purpose, and the Sons purchase: 2 Timothy 2. 19.
the Spirits indwelling, and the Covenant-Promises made by the Father in his
Son, Romans 9. 11, 16, 23.
through his Spirit to them, Romans 11. 7.
are their efficacious Grounds. In subserviency thereto all due means are
therefore needed and blessed warnings among the rest. Natura naturans nihil
facitant loquitur frustra.
God neither promises nor commands in vain. His word is still sure, as all ages
have found, Psalm. 93. 5.

7. There is a peculiar virtue attending the word and means of Grace to all
Gods Elect in due time and order. That quickening power raises a Lazarus,
leaving others dead, destitute thereof. That saving Grace of Heaven betters the
good plants under every shoure, when the weeds grow worse. That discriminating
Influence from the Sun of Righteousness, makes the flowers fragrant, though is
occasions the dunghill to stink. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
Thereby is Gods word made a savor of Life to some, whilst it proves a savor
of death to others. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Who makes a man to differ from another? What has he that he has not
received? Must not the prime and ultimate cause resolve into Gods Will? Do not
you else subject Gods Will to man's? There can be surely but one Independent,
either God or man, which is to be chosen, let reason it self judge by
Scripture Light.

Consect. 1.
SE the usefulness of a Gospel Ministry. Christ's Officers are given especially:
to that end the Churches watchmen are called to this great work. Ephesians. 4.
He sets them apart by an orderly call, 2 Cor. 12.
to be his Heralds and Ambassadors, his criers and publishers. Acts 20. 28.
The Father sets them in, the Son gives them to the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.
makes them overseers in the Lords flock. They are especially charged to warn
the unruly, to prevent Error and Revolt. Therefore did Christ receive and give
so many royal Coronation-gifts upon his triumphant assention, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12,
13, 14.
for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. that we hence forth migh be no more
Children tossed too and fro, with every wind of Doctrine by the craftiness of
Seducers, etc. The best need warning. Heb. 13. 17.
Christ's sheep must attend their Shepherds, who are deputed to office by that
grand Shepherd of their Souls. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
Such must be set a part thereto from age to age, as Timothy was charged by
Paul to choose and charge such, who should be able to instruct others: 2 Timothy 2.
2.
all indeed are bound in their several ^alces to instruct each other
charitatively, according to their abilities and opportunities. But Christ's
officers must do it authoritatively, ex officio. Governers of societies must
instruct their Inferiors with civil Authority, these with Ecclesiastical. Deuteronomy.
33. 10.
Thus it was of old by Gods appointment: the Levits were to teach in all their
Cities. Thus its still in Gospel-days, Read Plato Arist. Seneca. Plutarch,
Cicer. Macro. Histories of the Western and Eastern Indies for proof hereof.
in this and other points by the same Authority. The very light of nature has
taught all Nations in all times and places to set some apart for a sacred use,
who should officially act between God and man. None so barbarous, but do
acknowledge a supreme Deity, and highly esteem of sacred persons, solemnly
consecrated to him. Heathens observe this as well as Christians, finding
absolute need and choice use thereof. Satan indeed still appears Gods Ape, in
counterfeiting ridiculously and impiously Gods pure worship, by gaudy
traditions and innnovations, of multiplicious sorts among all nations. That his
malice and desperate rage to spoil the best things, and do most mischief by
such corruptions.

Use 2.
IT should convince negligent Christians, that will neither take warning, nor
keep themselves from such a danger. Is not such a felo de se much to be blamed?
Is not this evil very sad and common? they must thank themselves, that contract
deadly diseases through-wilful carelessness. If people will run to infected
places and persons, they are like to smart. Errors are most catching in this
Backsliding generation. Its one of its characteristical Notes, Mat. 24. 42.
given by Christ himself; Floods of Heresies the Dragon of old spued out of his
mouth against the Church in her flight: Revel. 12. 15.
and is not he doing the like again upon her Return? Is it not a dreadful sin
to tempt the Devil, that he may tempt us? Is it not woeful, to see so many
embrace such palpable Delusions? The Lord awaken them, that sleep so securely,
when destruction is so near at hand. He that being often warned, Prove. 29. 1.
hardens his heart still, shall surely and suddenly perish. Spiritual*
Judgments are the worst of all, which give up so many to brutish senslesness,
and usher in still temporal judgments. See Eusebius. Socrat. Sosomen. Zonar. Chal.
Carrion. Chron. Center.
The seven Asian Churches, and all those flourishing Societies in Europe,
Africa, and Asia, both Major and Minor, were made sad Monuments of such Divine
Justice. They slighted warnings given them from Heaven, by word and Providence,
Magdib. Baron. Annal. History of Turks. Sarac. Tartars.
and were suasively exposed to the Rage of Sarracens and Turks, Tartars and
Parthians, Persians and Infidels, under which they do remain to this day. Iim
and Jiim, Satyrs and Devils are now howling there: where so many famous
Churches resounded aloud the praises of Christ; Esaias 34. 14.
Go to that Shiloh, Ierem. 7. 14, 21.
and to the Jewish, that you may behold, with a bleeding heart and Relenting
Bowels, the direful fruits of slighting warning, and pampering Errors. Ierem.
26. 6. 9.


3. Bring our case to the Test, have we learned to act as becomes Christians?
do we take warning, do we keep our selves from Error and Revolt? Is it our
desire to be admonished? Do we delight in the means of prevention? Is it our
purpose to avoid the snares? Do we endeavor, with diligence the use of all fit
means, to keep our selves and others? Are we convinced of our former neglects?
Have we been humbled for our many Revolts? Ierem. 31. 18. 19, 20.
Do we smite on our thigh, as Ephraim did, because we have born the reproach of
our youth? Do we make it our work, with all diligence and delight, personally
thus to keep our selves, and Relatively to keep those about us and under us,
through the Lords help? Do we improve our time and strength, our skill and
credit, our utmost endeavors, to prevent and remove the Errors of the wicked?
Deuteronomy. 4. 9. etc.
Are we studious of that signal charge given and renewed unto all Gods people
with so much of power and caution, again and again? The Cananites and Tories of
our hearts, are still remaining as pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides:
external enemies are multiplicious still to ensnare us into Satan's crooked
paths. Do we earnestly redouble our watch and Guard, against such eminent
dangers?

4. Be stirred up to take and improve warning.

1. Revel. 2. 5, 14, 15.
Take good warning and refuse it not, ye that incline to Error and Backsliding.
The Lord speaks to you* as he did to Ephesus and Sardis; Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3.
Remember whence you are fallen, and Repent. Have you sucked poison at unaware?
Be persuaded by your Physicians to see your danger, and take good Physic? Will
not you give your watchmen the hearing, on the descry of a dreadful enemy? Does
it not concern you to mind your Shepherds Voice, that warns against the Wolves
and Foxes? What if they be disguised under sheeps clothing? Are you like to be
the safer, or will you be the less vigilant? Its your mercy, that God bears yet
with you, he will not always bear; after many warnings he will strike at last,
if you still refuse the things of your peace, they shall at last be hid from your
eyes. Be not like Jerusalem in sin, least ye be like her in sorrow also. The
Lord took much pains by the former and later Prophets, all his Forerunners to
awaken them; Himself in person came to them at last; Luke 19. 42.
but they would not hear. Prove. 29. 1.
Therefore came wrath on them to the utmost. Does not he warn you for your
good? 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
Should not self-interest move you, 1 These. 2. 16.
if the public do not? Will you gallop still toward your own Ruin? You will
repent it. when it may be too late. Is there no spark of Ingenuity left? Has
Satan robbed you of your Religion and Reason at once? Bruits will take warning,
are you worse then they? Have you been so deeply baptized into the spirit of
Error, as to loose your Sense, Wit, and good manners? Do not ye see so many
before you going up the steps of the Devils Ladder, A full Relation of James
Nayler and his comrades, is lately printed by Mr. Farmer of Bristol.
to execution? Are your eyes quite out, that you cannot discern the issue of
all your High-flown Notions? Have not the Seekers and familistical
Revelationists turned to Levelling, Ranting and Quaking? Is not James Nayler
with his prodigious crew: a fair warning to each of those, that slight the
public Ordinances of Christ, to follow their fancies in private? Cannot ye
discern yet, that one Error will lead unto more: Ephesians. 4. 18, 19, 20.
one separation from the good old way will usher in another; Jer. 6. 16.
til you come step by step to the devils bottom? John 14. 6.
Ask then at last, enquire for the good old way, the new and living way; Heb.
10. 20.
that you may walk, and find peace therein.

2. Improve the Warning, and abuse it not. Learn to keep your selves from
backsliding Errors. Show your Christian care in all due means appointed by him,
Job 32. 1, 2.
Personally and Relatively.

1. Personally, Look well to your own souls Beware of Error in its first
motions. Mind your Guards, slight not your watch, Ephesians, 1. 18, 19.
in the several sorts of your internal man. Keep well the outworks of your
external senses. Learn with Job to make a covenant with them. Observe well the
In-work of your Imagination, that it be well kept and fortified against the
black Regiments of Hell. Let not your Fancy be a common Road for every Notion
pretending to new Light. Ier. 4. 14.
Observe well the great gate of your understanding, that no disguised enemy may
slip in unaware. Sift and search every thing by Scripture Light, Tit. 3. 5.
that ye may know the Truth. Watch narrowly the Fort of Judgment and
Conscience, that carnal Reasonings may not get in, and thrust out spiritual
Reason. Let divine Reason by the Scripture of Truth fortify the same, against
all surprises of the enemy. Yield up your selves therefore to the Spirit of
Truth, Acts 24* 16.
for effectual renewing, that through the Blood of Christ you may have it
purified and pacified. If Error get once into your conscience, he will make sad
work there. Exercise your self therefore, to have it always void of offense
toward God and man. The Citadel of your Will requires a special watch. Prove.
4. 23.
Keep your heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. Have
a singular eye to the Ammunition of your Affections; if wildfire get thither,
it will make work indeed. See them all well ordered, and well guarded least any
be mounted for Error against Truth, and for Revolt against perseverance. Your
Love and hatred, your desire and fear, your joy and grief, your anger and
distaste, your hope and despair are Guns of great use; if well managed; but if
error get once the mastery, they will tear you and others to pieces. Stand on
your watch then, as Christ commands all in these sleepy days. Watch and pray,
watch and Believe, watch and Labor against such an enemy. Mat. 24. 42.
The Baits are specious that will entice you; Mark. 13. 33, 35, 37.
but dreadful hooks lie close under them. Deadly poisons, desperate Diseases
will tempt you round, under fair disguises Satan's Powder-plots are most
desperate in these later days. His venom is refined and sublimed to its
height. His old stratagems are revived afresh with more plausibleness. Mark. 9.
20, 26.
Unclean spirits struggle and rage most still, when near ejection. Psalm. 91.
10, 11, 12.
The Lord will keep you whilst you keep close to him in his Word and Ways. He
is with you whilst you keep with him: 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

2. Relatively, Keep close to your work, in looking to others. All Superiors
have a special charge to keep their Inferiors from these dreadful Evils. Study
and improve your Relations well, to this very end; whether Political, or
Ecclesiastical; Act. 20. 28.
Magistratical, or Ministerial; whether Parental, Ephesians. 6. 4, 5.
or Magisterial, Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock committed to
your charge. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Act Gods part toward them; 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
and act like God, whom you Represent. Use all such means in Church or state,
as Christ himself would use, Tit. 9. 10, 11, 12, 13
were he in your place. If fair Means will do good, so much the better; but
rather then fail, use sharper Tools. Tit. 2. 15.
If Lenatives will not avail, Corrosives must be used. When a Limb is
gangreend, and mortified, it calls for Iron and fire. If the Patient grow
phrentick, he must be bound and kept very close and solitary. If the disease be
contagious, company must be kept off. If the sore will not fairly resolve by
proper discussives, it must be ripened, lanced and cleansed with stronger
medicines. Esa. 3. 7.
If a member be broken, disjointed or wrenced; A Ruler is called (...), a
Healer or Repairer, to signify his office from (...), to bind, restrain,
dress, fit and order.
you can hardly cure it without pain and trouble, Superiors are Physicians in
their kind: if your Patients be froward, you need the more wisdom, care and
diligence. You are Shepherds and Rulers of men, all your Titles of Honor will
still mind you of your Duty and Burden. Dignity and Duty are still
inseparable. You are set over others for their good. Keep off therefore these
great evils from them, and keep them from these evils of revolting Errors. The
external man is within your reach, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
The internal man accounts to God alone. They that so honor God, he will
surely honor, but they that despise him in slighting his work, shall become
vile and base. Whilst you act like God, in acting for God, the Glory will be
his, and the comfort yours in the furtherance of the public good. Ezekiel. 22.
30, 31.
God looks now for such to stand in the Gap, Josh. 22.
and make up the breach, to prevent a fatal ruin; One man of note may do a
world of good; Number. 25. 11.
one Moses, one Phineas, Psalm. 100. 30.
one Joshua, one Nehemiah may be an eminent Savior under Christ in this
Israel. Exodus 32. 26, 27.
Who is on Gods side now, against Blasphemy and damnable Heresy: Neh. 9. 27.
against divisions and strong delusions? Neh. 13. 13, 17, 25, 26.
Act Gods part now in your relations, with zeal and courage, with prudence and
care, Its Gods own work you may well trust him for Council and strength,
support and blessing.

The Lord never yet failed faithful Reformers, who denied themselves for the
public Weal. Error, like the Giant Anteus, looses strength and life, by
losing the Ground, whence it was cherished.
Carnal policy will discourage you. Divine Policy will quicken you still.
Christ himself met with strong Contradictions from all evil men, and evil
Spirits. Your worst enemies are conquered ones, both in Spirituals and in
Temporals remember and improve all your experiences, renewed so often for these
many years. Error discountenanced will soon wear away, Truth cannot lose
Heaven, and therefore prevails against earth.
whereas Truth opposed will gather more strength. Sinful tolerations are the
devils Nurses in all relations, public and private. Be zealous for God, mind
his Interest, then shall your interest besurely settled.

Doctrine 4. The Grace and Knowledge of Christ is a singular Jewel.
THE word (...), 2 Cor. 2. 14.
Grace, in Scripture-sense has diverse acceptions, 2 Cor. 8. 4.
improperly and properly.

Improperly, 2 Cor. 1. 15.
it signifies in a larger sense, Thanks, Joy, Liberality, Gift, Psalm. 1. 7.
Office, etc.

Properly and strictly, it denotes two things. 1, Gods special favor toward
his Elect. 2. His sanctifying work in the Elect; the former is favoring Grace,
this later is renewing Grace. Ephesians. 2. 8.


1. Romans 11. 6.
It signifies Gods peculiar favor toward his Elect and that considered in the
fountain and streams.

1. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 11.
Grace in the spring is called his pleasure, purpose council of his Will, Amor
Benevolentiae, his love of benevolence.

2. Favoring Grace in the stream, signifies the various emanations of that
eternal Love in all the expressions thereof toward them, sutably to all their
necessities; thence the denominations of his predestinating and redeeming
Grace, his adopting and pardoning Grace, his supplying and supporting Grace,
etc. Which are in God one single entire Act that is variously denominated from
its object. This is Amor beneficientiae, his love of beneficence, whence flows
his Amor Complacentiae: Ioh. 1. 14, 16.
his love of delight, embracing of them. Gal. 5. 22, 23,


1 Ioh. 3. 9.
Secondly, Grace signifies also properly Gods sanctifying work of his Spirit in
his Elect, called the fruits of his Spirit the work of his Grace, the gift from
above, (...) often the peculiar saving operations of his gracious Spirit in
them, and by them; this Grace is considerable in the Root and Branches in the
habit and acts, in the principle and effects, in the seed and fruits, in the
source and streams: in the beginning and progress thereof, Ioh. 4. 14.
being often called metonymically; the Spirit for the gifts thereof. Ioh. 7.
37, 38.


1. Renewing Grace in the Root and Principle, in the Habit and Source, in the
seed and beginning is first given to the Elect in their Regeneration and
Conversion, to be the original of all actual Graces in them; this is called the
new creature, the new man created after Gods Image, the divine Nature; the
forming of Christ within, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
etc. Of this children are capable, if they be not of actual Grace, Ephesians. 4. 24.
which yet seems probable. This is inherent Grace in the first principles and
Habits thereof, Col. 3. 10.
both gratis data and gratum faciens, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
in an Orthodox, not in a popish sense.

Secondly, Gal. 4. 19.
Inherent Grace in the Branches and streams, in the Acts and Effects, in the
fruits and progress, is variously denominated from the Objects, Subjects,
manner of acting, etc. its called faith, to express the motion of the renewed
soul toward God in Christ upon conjugal terms, believing his Truth, closing
with his Person, trusting his Promises, depending on his Mercy, deriving from
his fullness, observing him in all things which is called the life of faith.

Its called Repentance (...) and (...), as it turns the whole soul from all sin
to God, Both in purpose and endeavor through his Spirit, this and all other
Graces are still concomitants and subsequents of faith in their gradual
proportion.

Its called love, to denote the affectionate embracing of God in Christ, and in
his people for Christ's sake, as the most amiable object.

Its called obedience, as it acts the whole man to a free and full compliance
with Gods Will, revealed in his Word.

Its called Thankfulness, as it affects the heart with the sense of Mercy
received.

Its called self-denial, as it moves the soul to prefer Christ before all
things else, and part with any thing for his sake.

Its termed Patience, in regard of sorrowful evils which it learns to bear
submissively.

Its named humility, with respect to its low thoughts of self: submitted still
to Christ.

Its nominated Temperance, in regard of its care to avoid all excessive use of
Creatures.

Its termed Zeal, as it moves with fervor for good against evil.

Its termed Justice or Righteousness, in respect of its readiness to give every
one their due.

Its called Prudence, as it regards all due means tending to right ends.

Its termed Wisdom, as its acquainted with the best things in their nature,
cause and end.

Thus Grace inherent has its various appellations and distinctions, both
habitually and actually; being the Grace properly meant in the Text, as being
that Grace which is capable of Growth.

The Knowledge of Christ is taken also in a sense more large or more strict.
1. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
LArgely and commonly for a notional Knowledge, void of saving Faith and Love,
1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
such as puffs up an empty Brain.

2. Phil. 3. 8, 10.
Strictly and specially for that saving applicative knowledge which includes
all Grace by an elegant Hebraism, Ioh. 172.
verbs of sense and knowledge, Esa. 53. 11.
signifying both affectum and effectum. Natural knowledge of things is acquired
by sense, Reason or Authority. Hos. 2. 19, 20. Affection and Operation.
Thus in spirituals, this knowledge of Christ's is spiritually sensible and
rationally fiducial Its a conjugal knowledge which implies. 1. Apprehension of
the Truth of Christ's proper Object. 2. Credit and Assent thereto upon his
divine Authority. 3. Personal consent and particular Applications in mutual
Acception and Reciprocation.

Grace and Knowlede in the Text may be understood. 1. Distinctly, Conjunctly.
1. DIstinctly, showing the excellent Worth and needful use of every Grace,
and of the knowledge of Christ.

2. Conjunctly by a figure called (...), Grace and Knowledge, signifies
gracious Knowledge, as in that like phrase, (...), Grace and Apostleship for
gracious Apostleship. Romans 1. 5.
So the sense will be very emphatical, suiting our purpose in characterizing
this excellent Jewel, so singularly transcendent beyond all other. This
precious Jewel is curiously set out in the golden ring of divine Records, where
you find it held forth in its radient Luster, whose glorious beams may be
contracted for our clearer apprehension into plain description, you may then
observe it to be a conjugal acquaintance with Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, wrought in Gods Elect, by the special operation of his renewing
Spirit, and effectually improved to Gods honor and man's good in every Relation,
toward God and Man.

This is the choice Jewel, whose eminent worth has been in all ages so
incomparably prized by the Word and friends of God. Many choice Tracts have
been written formerly and lately about this excellent point: see among the
modern, Mr. Perkins, Dr. Stoughton, Mr. Reynolds, and very lately that by Mr.
John ^all of London, upon 1 Cor. 2. 2. and Mr. Shesfield, upon Mala. 4. 2.
Every Page of Scripture sets forth the peculiar Eminency thereof: every
precept and Promise; every prefiguration and Prophecy; every President and
performance points unto this. This was under the Old Testament more
ceremonially veiled, and under the New, is more Evangelically Revealed. This is
the center; wherein all the Lines of Scripture do meet. All the Patriarchs
aimed still at this; Abraham saw his day and rejoiced; Davi^ is full of it; Job
was divinely advised to such an Acquaintance, as to the source and sum of all
good; Paul accounted all loss and dung, in comparison of this excellent
Knowledge; and rationally determined, to know nothing else. Peter sums all up
in this.

Good Reason for it, if we consider the Object and subject, the cause and
Nature; the property and effect thereof, which are all hinted in the former
Description.

Reason 1. The proper Object adequate of this gracious Knowledge is our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; John 8. 5.
a singular Jewel indeed, Job 22. 21, 22, etc.
in every consideration. The Paramount and Non-such, the chiefest of ten
thousand, both in his Person and Office, Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10* 1 Cor. 2. 2.
in his progress and Purchase, in his Relation and Influence.

1. The Person of Christ is a noble Paragon considered, as God, as Man, as
God-man.
1. Phil. 2. 6.
CHrist is God blessed for ever, the eternal Son of his eternal Father
co-essential and coequal with him; Heb. 1. 3.
the the Brightness of his Glory, (...).
and the express Image, or Character of his Person, in whom dwells the fullness
of the Godhead, (...) substantially, and bodily: the only begotton of the
Father full of Grace and Truth; essentially one with the Father, though
personally distinct, Ioh. 10. 30.
by an eternal Generation, unutterable to man: firmly to be believed, (on Gods
Testimony) and piously adored, not curiously pried into. The wonderful Wisdom
of the Father, who was his Delight before Time, by whom in time he made the
world, and upholds all by the word of his power. Essentially, he is God of
himself; Personally, God the Son of God the Father. Prove. 8. (...)
His proper Name is the Word of God, the Wonderful Councellor, the Father of
Eternity. He that does what ever the Father does, Joh. 5. 11. 19, 21, 23, 26.
and to be worshipped, as the Father is worshipped. He that sends the Spirit
from the Father* who being in the form and substance of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. To him be glory for ever, Amen.

2. Christ as Man, is the Rare Object of this Knowledge. For the word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us; and we have seen his Glory. So the beloved Apostle
witnesses of him. He took on him, Ioh. 1. 14.
not the nature of Angels, 1 Ioh. 1. 1, 2.
but the seed of Abraham. Thus the Son of God became the son of man, Heb. 2. 16.
being miraculously conceived of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 1. 20, 23.
in the womb of Mary the Virgin, Luke 1. 35.
(over-shadowed by Gods Spirit,) and born of her, Heb. 4. 15.
in the humane nature, like to us in all things, except sin. Thus was God the
Son made manifest in the flesh; 1 Timothy 3. 6.
by assuming the Nature (not the person; for then had he been two sons, and two
persons,) of man to himself. This Man Christ Jesus has body and soul, the two
substantial parts of Man, even as we have, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
as appeared in his whole progress: both which he has Glorified, not
nullified. This Fatherless man is as Wonderful, as the same motherless God, for
who can declare his Generation, as to the manner of it? Thus Infiniteness
confined himself. Esa. 53. 7.
God eternal was born of a finite poor Virgin. Act. 8. 33.
Here is an Object indeed for the best knowledge of the best man, God become
man.

3. Christ is God-man, Emmanuel (...) God with us: The true Ithiel, God with
me; the very Vcal; who is All. In him, Esa. 7. 14.
by hypostatical Union, Esa. 8. 8, 9.
the humane nature with the Divine, do both subsist in God the Son, Pro. 3. 1.
the second person of the divine Trinity. In Christo reperitur unio personales,
non personarum, and unio naturarii, non naturalis.
Here is indeed a complication of ineffable wonders. As there one Divine Nature
subsists distinctly in three divine Persons. So here two Natures, the divine
and humane, subsist both in one person, each of them acting and remaining
distinctly, conjunctly and inseparably, incommutably, and unconfusedly, as the
Fathers expressed it, to avoid Errors on both hands. (...), aliud and aliud,
non alius and alius. In Trinitate divina datur alius and alius, non aliud and
aliud. (...) vere and perfect.
Here is no mixtion, nor composition, no confusion nor conversion, but a
mysterious and transcendant Union, from whence flow the various expressions of
Scripture. 1. When that is attributed to each Nature, which properly belongs
thereto; as suffering, to humane Nature, and also, when that is attributed to
the person, which therein belongs to both natures, as to be Mediator: this is
most proper. Secondly, When that which is common to the whole Person, as to be
Mediator, is attributed only to one of the Natures, suppose to the humane: this
is more improper. Thirdly, When that which is proper to one Nature, is
attributed to the other Nature, in concreto, by a name denoting the whole
Person: In that sense its true that God purchased his Church by his Blood, and
that the King of Glory was crucified, by communication of Properties. 1 Timothy 2.
5.
Yet this acception is the most improper of the three; This Dialect of Gods
Word is called (...), by the Fathers, communicatio Id^omatum.
being Metonymical, as the second is Synecdochical.

In man two imperfect Natures, Soul and Body, are coadunated, with reservation
of Proprieties, to the constituting of one Suppositum and Person, by the virtue
of God. Christ's Person in the divine Nature, being most perfect, took the
humane nature into the unity of one person, by his own Virtue. So that its one
and the same Christ, visible according to the humane, invisible according to
the divine Nature. Act. 20. 28.


This hypostatical Union was the work of the Trinity, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
mediately; of the Holy Ghost, The humane Nature being (...) first, was then
made (...).
immediately, and of the Son, terminatively. The Fathers compare this Mystery
to the joint work of three Sisters, making up one vesture, and putting it all
conjunctly upon the second of them.

It was necessary that Christ should be God, 1. To impart an infinite value and
virtue to his complete Obedience. 2. To overcome all sufferings and enemies. 3.
To communicate all effectually by his Spirit to his people.

It was as needful that he should be man; 1. Because the Godhead could not
suffer; Secondly, because the same Nature that had offended, was to satisfy,
3. That our Nature corrupted by the first Adam, might be restored by the
second, Christ Jesus our Lord.

Thus is Christ's Person, the Amiable Object of our Knowledge.
Secondly. CHrist considered in his Office is a precious Object, his chief
business, as Mediator, being to procure effectual Reconciliation, to the saving
of his people, by his perfect Oblation presented to God, Mat. 1. 21.
for them, and applied to them by Gods Spirit; Psalm. 45. 7
He assumed the Name and function of Jesus the Savior; Psalm. 110.
He was anointed as the Christ of God; with all suitable qualifications: and
made Lord of all, but especially made our Lord and Savior, by personal
appropriation, and effectual application.

Thus was Christ voluntarily made of a woman under the Law, Gal. 4. 4.
subjecting himself, Heb. 5. 4, 5.
in that wonderful dispensation of his Mediation, to receive from the Father,
his Call to that redeeming Function.

There was no defect in God, but in us only, who wanted skill, Act. 5. 31.
power and will utterly, to the curing and saving of our selves. Act. 3. 21,
22, 23.
Christ therefore was divinely anointed to be our Sovereign, Prophet, Psalm. 110.
Priest and Prince, to effect all for us and in us needful to salvation. Esa.
32. 1.
As a Prophet he Reveals the whole Council of God; Esa 33. 22.
As a Priest he makes full expiation to God, and Intercession for us: As a
Kingly Prince, he subdues all spiritual Enemies, and makes all things
serviceable to the guidance and protection of his people, under his Sovereign
Rule and Government. All this he did and does by his Eternal Spirit, as the
Scripture Records, freely, fully, surely and singularly, being therein a
glorious Object of Christian knowledge.

Thirdly, Christ in his Progress is considerable, under a double state of
Humiliation and Exaltation.
1. HIs Humiliation, appeared in all the steps of his Conception and Birth, of
his Life and Passion, of his death and Burial most wonderfully: This God head
was then covered with the dark vail of his humane Nature, mourning as it were
in the sad habit of his infirmities, for his peoples Enormities. He willingly
then eclipsed his divine light within the dark Lanthorn of this submissive
state, Phil. 2 5, 6, 7, 8.
he humbled himself to exalt us, he emptied himself that he might fill us. He
parted with all, that he might give us all. He showed himself to be the Son of
man, to the lowest degree, that he might bring all his into the state of
Children. Had there not been an absolute necessity thereof, he had never done
it. Had not our case been so desperate; could any other way have expiated and
destroyed his peoples sins, Christ had not come down from the height of Glory
to the bottom of ignominy. Here is an object of admiration indeed, God humbled
to a child's state, growing up by degrees in Stature and Grace, doing and
suffering every moment for his enemies in rebellious arms. Behold the Son of
man wrestling with earth and hell, yea with heaven it self, conflicting with
man's rage, the devils fury, and the wrath of God! What think you of sin, the
murderer of this Christ, and of that Love which gave him to the death? Esa.
53. 1, 2, 3. etc.
Thus made he his soul a sacrifice for sin, that he might see his seed, and the
good will of the Lord prospering in his hands. He laid in the grave to confirm
his death, and to air that Bed for our Repose. His God head held his soul and
body asunder from each other, yet still inseparably united to himself. Thus may
you see a man drawing out his sword, holding in his hands still both sword and
scabret, till it be put up again. Thus it was needful that Christ should
suffer, and so make entrance into his Kingdom.

Secondly, Christ's Exaltation is further worthy the best observation. Therein
his glorious person unvailed himself of all humane weakness, though he still
retained the nature of man and its properties. Romans 1. 4.
He laid down his sable weeds to put on the roabes of Immortality. His Godhead
did then raise up his Manhood in his Resurrection; and the Son of man declared
himself by his divine Power, to be the Son of God: The Price paid for his
people in his humiliation; 1 Timothy 2. 5.
he applies by power through his exaltation, to them orderly and effectually.
He is God-Man still, and therefore termed the Man Christ Jesus. Thus his
office was to be completed by the completing of his saving Progress. He
conversed then among his Disciples, the space of forty days to confirm their
faith; and to instruct them in the affairs of his Kingdom. Romans 8. 33, 34, etc.
Thence his Ascension was solemnly performed, Psalm. 110.
followed with his Session at the Fathers right hand; Heb. 1. 3, 4.
and Intercession for his people. Col. 3. 1.
These are the four main steps of his exaltation to be singularly improved.
Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.
He rose that we might rise from death to Life: Rev. 3. 21.
he ascended, that we might ascend; he sits at Gods right hand, Romans 8. 33, etc.
that we may sit with him on his Throne; and he still intercedes to make all
our Intercessions effectual. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? Its Christ that died, yea rather, that rose and ascended, siting now at
the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 7. 25.
and ever lives to make Intercession. Thus is Christ's progress of chief worth
and consideration.

4. Christ is most considerable in his purchase also made for all his People,
which has both value and virtue in it.
1. THE value of his whole Obedience was of infinite worth, being the merits of
God-man, giving full satisfaction to Gods Justice, Heb. 10. 14.
for all the sins of all his elect, and making a full acquisition of all the
good they were and should be capable of. This price of Christ's perfect
Righteousness, active and passive, Esa. 53.
was put into Gods Coffers, to be seasonably and effectually applied to all his
people orderly and actually from their conversion to their utmost salvation by
his Spirit according to his eternal Purpose. By the same value were all Gods
elect from Adam to Christ's death, delivered from the guilt and wages of sin
upon Christ's engagement of seasonable performance; For he is the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world; Rev. 13. 8.
intentionally in the divine purpose and promise.

2. The Virtue of Christ's perfect Obedience, extends to the effectual
application thereof to all Gods people. So the Fathers purpose in electing, and
the Sons Intention in redeeming, do run parallel. Romans 5. 8, 9.
That value which Christ's merits presented to God, cannot but be attended with
answerable virtue for the making good thereof to the utmost. The Son of man
came to seek and save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10.
and that to the utmost, seeing he ever lives to perform all. Heb. 7. 25.
Whilst therefore he was gone into Heaven to act his part there, he was
careful to send his Proxy, Ioh. 14. 16, 26.
even his own Spirit, that should make a through application of all his
Purchase by the conveyance of his saving Grace to all his Chosen. Ioh, 16. 7,
8, etc.
His Oblation is living and lively still, even as Christ himself who abides for
ever. The ceremonial Oblations had him shadowed out, to represent the
efficaciousness of Christ's Oblation.

A wise man paying a Ransom or Debt, as surety for another, will be sure to
know for whom, and to see his purpose fulfilled to his power. The agreement or
Covenant made between God and Christ (distinct from the gracious Covenant Esaias
53. 10, 11. etc.
made conditionally with the visible Church in Christ) imports as much. John
10. 18.
As the Father required, that he should offer his soul a Sacrifice for sin,
John 6* 28, 29, etc.
which the Son willingly undertook; so was it engaged to him, that he should
see of his seed, and the good pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand.
So that the virtue of his blood is still included in the value of it; both
being directed by divine intention, which terminates in the proper subjects
thereof. Therein concurs his threefold office, he being still a Prophet and
prince, as far as he is a Priest unto any. The virtue of Christ's Merits is
indeed intrinsecally infinite like himself, and only limited with the value
thereof by the divine pleasure. This purchase of his may be said occasionally
and secundarily to comprehend the whole Creation in subserviency to divine
Intentions, but directly and primarily the Scripture limits it to Gods Elect,
for whom he came, and lived, prayed and died, rose and intercedes still. It
extends to the removal of all evil, both of sin and sorrow inchoatively,
progressively and consummatively. It reaches also the Import of all suitable
good spiritual, temporal and eternal. All things are ours, and for our sake,
that are truly his, and so far as we are his. Is not this a choice Jewel to be
duly viewed? 1 Cor. 3. 20, 21, etc.
Does not such a purchase challenge our best knowledge? The possessive Our
gives relish to all. It does us little good to hear of Indian Treasures that
are not our own.

Fifthly, Christ is most precious in his Relation, multipliciously expressed to
his people, by Allusion to all choice relations in things natural, civil and
artificial. The perfection of all creatures is radically in him, originally
from him, and reductively leads to him again. None of them can sufficiently set
out his wonderful Relation wherein he stands toward his chosen Ones; he
therefore borrows the cream and quintessence of them all to shadow out to our
shallow capacity the marvels of his glorious Grace. Thus he speaks to his Babes
in their known Dialect, Isa. 53. 2.
that he may gradually and familiarly be understood of them. Revel. 5. 5.
He calls himself their root, Revel. 22. 16.
giving sap and life to every branch of his. He is the Head that conveyes all
motion and sense to all his members. Ephesians. 1. 22.
He is the Fountain-Spring, Psalm 36. 9.
from whom all living waters flow into the streams by his proper conduits.
Psalm 87. 7.
He is that Sun, who carries Light and Life by his access unto all Creatures.
Mal. 4. 2.
He is the Father that tenders his Children. Esaias. 8. 18.
He is the husband that cherishes his Spouse; Heb. 2. 13.
the elder brother that looks to his adopted Brethren: Romans 8. 28.
the Master that has the best care John 13 13.
of Servants. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, etc.
That Foundation is he, on whom the Fabric stands; Romans 13. 14,
that garment that must cover us, that food that must sustain us, John 6.
that Portion that must maintain us to saving purpose. 1 Co. 10.
Look into the whole compass of creatures; Psalm. 73. 26.
what ever good you can find therein is used by him to set forth his goodness.
What ever defect you find in the Creature, he is not capable of that is all
goodness, all perfection. Is not such a Christ a singular object to exercise
our knowledge about? What his office called him to, his progress fitted him
for, and his relation makes conveyance of through his holy Spirit unto This Sun
of Righteousness is to the life set forth, Mal. 4. 2. by allusion to the
Sovereign influence of the natural sun, quickening all the world.
all his.

Sixthly, His Influence is considerable for actual Communication of all. Each
Relation of his carries still with it a secret, sweet and suitable Influx, which
does strongly and efficaciously operate on all his: thereby they are made more
and more Partakers of the divine nature, in escaping the pollutions that are in
the world through Lust. The Apostle had found the precious virtue thereof,
which made him so desirous to know him in the power of his Resurrection, 2 Pet.
1. 4.
and in the fellowship of his sufferings, Phil. 3. 9, 10.
being made conformable to his death. This the Converts at Ephesus felt, who
being made acquainted with this gracious knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
were quickened by his power, Ephesians. 2. 5, 6.
and made to rise with him. yea, to sit with him at Gods right hand. John 3. 8.
This Influence is free indeed, Deus non alligat suas manus.
this spiritual wind blows where it lists; not being tied to any means, it
works at pleasure with or without means, by weak, small, improbable or contrary
means, yet ordinarily God works by his appointed Tools; he walks in his own
road of Providence, and leads his people step by step to the very top of Jacobs
Ladder. Genesis 28. 11, 12.
In the course of things natural and spiritual, he limits us still, though not
himself, and will be sought and found in each of his ways for the further
knowledge of his divine Influence. Its he that is the Life of our Life, the
strength of our strength; in whom we live, move, Acts 17. 28.
and have our Being, both naturally and spiritually. How excellent then is that
gracious Knowledge, whose Object is thus excellent in every consideration?

Reason 2.
THE Subject and Recipient of this knowledge sets forth 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
the inestimable worth of it. Amos 3. 1, 2.
They are his Elect, Psalm. 144. 15.
his chosen Jewels, Psalm 76. 1.
his peculiar people, to whom he imparts this Jewel unto. Matthew. 13. 45, 46.
Them only does he know for his of all the Nations to whom he makes himself
thus savingly known. Gal. 4. 9.
As he makes himself the Pearl or Price to them, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6.
so does he make them Pearls of Price thereby. Psalm 138. 6.
Blessed are the people who learn to known him, Psalm 1. 6.
being first known of him. The rest are refuse stones, Romans 1.
these are his living precious stones. Matthew. 25.
Others he knows with a general knowledge of intuition, Ioh. 10. 14, 15.
but these with a special knowledge of appropriation and approbation. Ephesians. 3.
18, 19.
The rest delight not to know him, Those Countries which are nearest the sun,
having most of him, abound most with precious Minerals, Gold, Jewels, and
Pearls.
as he delights not to know them. He never knew them, and they never knew him
in this choice manner. For his own he came to make himself thus graciously
known to their souls in all the Dimensions of his eternal Love, surpassing man's
knowledge, that they may be filled with the fullness of God. How precious is
that knowledge that makes the Subjects thereof so precious! How admirable is
that Jewel that takes up the the sublimest Contemplations templations of the
most glorious Angels! 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Those Elect Angels are still attending in his Ordinances, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
to join with his Elect, and learn of the Church this manifold wisdom of our
God. Ephesians. 3. 10.
For those Elects sake Christ suffered all things meritoriously, 2 Timothy 2. 10.
and Paul his servant providentially. Romans 12. 9.
Those Elect whom the Lord did foreknow, Romans 11. 7.
he never casts away, Mal. 3. 16.
but makes them up among his Jewels, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 9.
by making his Christ so precious to them, in a greacious way. The original is
very Emphatical (...). Both these Articles are very pregnant, and the abstract,
(...) imports Honor, esteem, choiceness, etc.
His choice Love did freely choose them before time, and is fully assured to
them in Christ, being communicated through the precious Operations of his
Spirit, to make them precious like himself in due time, unto eternity.

Reason 3. The cause of this Gracious Knowledge does as wonderfully magnify
the same, considerable in the Efficient, formal and final.
1. THe Efficient cause and Author thereof is the blessed Trinity jointly, yet
distinctly, Revealing and communicating Jesus Christ unto his chosen people.

1. The external Operations of God toward the creature being indivisibly
effected by the three Persons, Opera ad extra sunt indivisa.
concurring in One, the Son doing nothing but what he sees his Father do, and
working still, as the Father works; and the Spirit proceeding from both, speaks
not of himself, but whatsoever he hears from them both, Ioh. 5. 19, 23.
that speaks he unto Christ's Disciples.

2. Distinctly, according to their distinct personal Relations.

1. The Father electing from eternity; having chosen them in Christ before the
Foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 11.
that they might be holy and unblameable before him in Love; and therefore
predestinating them to the Adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his Will; and making them, Col. 1. 12.
through his knowledge, meet partakers of his Inheritance in Light, 1 Pet. 1.
2. 3.
by translating them into the Kingdom of his dear Son, who were chosen
according to his foreknowledge through sanctification of the Spirit.

2. The Son accepting and undertaking, tendering and effecting, in and by
himself the whole business of their Salvation; making known the same by his
Word and Spirit, as also by his own Person, in the days of his flesh.

3. The holy Spirit by wooing of their souls, opening their eyes, and fitting
them for the Reception of this Excellent Knowledge, infusing the same into
them, applying it particularly to their several dispositions and occasions;
removing daily the scales of their ignorance and sin, scattering the mists
raised by the Prince of darkness; Repressing the vapors steeming from their
boiling Lusts and dunghill hearts; setting forth Christ to their souls in his
full Beauty and Loveliness; Ioh. 13. 14, 15.
and leading them into all Truth, by taking of Christ to impart unto them the
gracious secrets of the Fathers Counsel.

Thus the glorious God works graciously in and by all Means of his appointing,
to the creating, increase and perfecting of his singular Jewel.
2. THe formal Cause is very Remarkable in that peculiar saving application
made of Christ to his Elect in their conversion, gradually carried on toward
perfection by the Spirits gracious Operation. For then does he stamp on that
soul the glorious characters of Christ's Image, and begets that new creature,
which divine offspring moves upward instantly, in conjugal Reciprocations,
dilating the soul in all her faculties to the further comprehension of Christ.
It may be paralleled with that Energetial Power, whereby the rational soul, and
(...) animates the humane nature, into all suitable operations. What the soul
is to man, in naturals, that's Christ to the soul in spirituals. The principle
of all Life, Sense and Reason thus spiritually applied to the Regenerate,
enables and excites, directs and strengthens them to the choice Improvements of
this conjugal Acquaintance. Christ on marriage terms by his Spirit in his Word,
tenders and gives himself to be their Husband. Matthew. 22. 1, 2, 3, etc.
By this quickening Touch, they are efficaciously moved to close with him, Luke
14.
and keep close to him, by Matrimonial Reciprocations. Forma dat esse and
operari.
Thus does the gracious knowledge of Christ Receive its first Being and
progressive Operations from that Light of Life imparted to Gods people in this
conjugal Union and Communion. I will betroth thee unto me, says the God of
Grace, in Kindness and Mercy, in Truth and Judgment, Hos. 2. 19, 20, etc.
and thou shall know the Lord. Admirable sure in this divine Acquaintance, that
is thus twisted by the Lords own hand, and embraced by a gracious hand! Rare is
that Jewel, which is so curiously wrought for the Workmanship of the God of
Heaven. Therein do shine all divine Attributes in their Orient brightness, at
the wedding Feast of the King of Saints. Is not this Life eternal, thus to know
the Father, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent? Does not
this Sun of Righteousness bring Healing under his Wings to all that fear his
Name? John. 17. 2, 3.
Is not he that Living, that quickening Light, Mal. 4. 2.
that dispels all darkness and Death, John 8. 12.
by his gracious Visits and Influxe? John 9. 5.
Do not his amiable Aspects produce a joyful Spring of all Divine Graces in the
New world Ioh. 12. 36. 46.
by his glorious Light and efficacious Heat? Psalm. 19.
Does he not Ravish with divine Embraces the New Creature, The Apostle in Romans
10. 18. alluding to the natural Sun, wherein God has pitched his glorious
Tabernacle, sets out the p^ogress of his Gospel most elegantly, by the very
words of the Septuagint. Thence some call the Sun the Natural Apostle of the
Deity, showing the (...), Romans 1 19, 20. to conviction, though not (...) unto
Salvation. That is of common nature, this of peculiar Grace, Mat. 11. 25, 26.
Mat. 13. 11, 12, etc. Pro. 16. 4.
with his All-searching Presence, and his perfective Influence, through all the
Beams of his Transcedent communications? Do not his Active Rays cherish, by
all his renewed Motions the Principles of Life given to all his? This Divine
Sun never ecclipsed but once for the salvation of his, though he seems often to
be clouded, in his alternative Access and Recess.

3. The final cause of this gracious Knowledge adds very much to the
choyiceness thereof. We may consider it both as Supreme and subordinate.
1. THe supreme Ultimate end of it is Gods Glory, which is also the end of all
things else, which are all made for him. This Relative Glory of God, which was
laid in the dust by man's Rebellion, Christ undertook to repair; which he
performed fully, giving satisfaction in Man's Nature, and so glorifying all the
divine Attributes. Thus in the first building up of Zion, as in the
Restoration and preservation thereof, he still appears in the Glory of all his
Excellencies. His Power and Wisdom, his Greatness and Goodness; his Mercy and
Justice, his Truth and Holiness shine Radiantly in every part of it. Psalm. 102.
16.
Christ thereby read us our Lesson, and writ a fair Copy for our Imitation,
that we may glorify God by the knowledge of him, in giving each of the Divine
persons their proper honor.

1. The Father, Ephesians. 3. 11.
for giving such a Son for such enemies, and upon such terms; John 5. 17, 19,
21, 26.
All the honor of Christ redounds to his Father; For the Son does nothing but
what he has seen the Father do, and speaks not of himself, but the Father by
him.

2. The Son by our embracing and publishing, desiring and esteeming the
particulars of his Infinite Glory, whereof he is so full, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19.
that we have still cause to admire with all Saints, the length and breadth, the
height and depth of it, in the manifestation of all his Excellencies.

3. The holy Ghost by whose special favor and Influence we are made partakers
thereof. Ioh. 16. 14, 15.
He shall take of mine, said Christ, and impart it to you; For all that the
Father has is mine. What Infinite Condescension is it, for that glorious
Spirit to stoop thus to sinful Dust and Ashes, to Reveal and apply the gracious
Counsels of God in Christ? Yea, to bear with our Ignorance and unbelief,
contempt and neglect, abuse and Affronts? Nay more, to dwell in such dunghils
and Receptacles of all filthy Lusts? What Infinite Mercy is that which carries
on the work of Grace through all Opposition, and keeps a weak spark alive in
the midst of an Ocean? What mavelous power is that which preserves a poor
smoking flax among so many storms!

2. The subordinate and proxime End of it is man's Good; both Personal and
Relative.
1. PErsonally our own Salvation, purchased and manifested by the Author and
Object of this knowledge, is hereby assured and orderly confirmed to us, in all
the ways and means of his appointment, through his peculiar Blessing. The
perfect knowledge of him will complete, as the beginning thereof begins our
Salvation. Through the Knowledge of him are given to us all things pertaining
to Life and Godliness. 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
As he came once in person, so has he from the beginning by his Spirit through
the same communicated all saving good, and will still do it. That Bosom friend
of his leads us thereby into his very heart, there to behold and embrace the
whole Platform of our Salvation, in all the steps of it, from Election to
Glory, that by walking therein steadily, we may ascend to his Father and our
Father, John 20. 17.
his God and our God, through the same Ladder, even Christ, whereby he comes
down to us. Christ's Deity surpassing the highest Heavens infinitely, is the
Top; and his Humanity, fixed as it were on earth, is a sure step for us. The
more careful we are to attain this End, the more certainly shall we promote
that further End. God has so wonderfully twisted our happiness and his honor,
that we advance the one by furthering the other. One eye he allows us for the
recompense of Reward, that we may thereby effectually look through it, to his
Glory. Is not this Knowledge a Jewel of Price, which conveighs and assures all
good to us? The end of his Electing and predestinating us, of his Blessing and
saving of us, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
is it not that we might be to the Glory of his Grace, whereby he has made us
Accepted in the Beloved? Christ himself desired Glory for that End, that he
might glorify God. John 1. 17.
This excellent Knowledge was never so dearly bought, to be a mere pleasing of
our selves and sin, but to spiritualize us thoroughly, in all the powers and
parts of soul and Body, that we may be holy and happy, like unto him, in the
honoring and enjoying of him.

2. Relatively, the subordinate end thereof is the good of our Neighbor; Ephesians.
4. 11, 12, 13, etc.
that speaking the Truth in Love, we may grow up unto him in all things, which
is the Head, even Christ. He gave all the means of Knowledge, Col. 2. 18, 19.
and all Teachers ordinary and extraordinary for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of his Body. God has so
contempered his gifts among the members of Christ, and his Spirit does so
variously convey the same, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 14, 15, 21, 22, etc.
that the One cannot say to the other I have no need of thee. He could in a
moment, and immediately from himself, bring them to their full perfection. But
his infinite Wisdom has thought it best, that his Body should be joined
together and compacted by that which every joint supplies, according to his
several workings in the measure of every part, Ephesians. 4. 16.
to make an increase of it self in Love. He loves not, he allows not
selffishness in any of his. By his own example and Command he has directed us
to seek the things that make for Peace, wherein we may edify one another. Romans
14. 19.
Convulsions in his Members are most direful and dangerous Symptoms, proceeding
from ill humors, vapors and Spirits. Whilst the Limbs fall a jarring, the body
must needs decay. That Wisdom from beneath, which cherishes contentions and
envy, Iam. 3. 14, 15, 16.
is sensual and devilsh. The Devil has no better sport then in such troubled
waters. These Confusions of Tongue become Babylon better then Zion: Must not
the stones of Gods Temple be proportionably squared and fitted to each other,
that his Sanctuary may be erected? Should not they that believe in one God, are
saved by one Christ, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
justified by one faith, acted by one Spirit, sealed by one baptism, supported
by one hope, and ruled by one Lord, walk in one Love also, and be shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of Peace? Ephesians. 6. 15.
There is too much of hell fire in unchristian Combustions. Such ignes fatui,
and cheating Meteors lead many to destruction. Do not such wandering stars and
blazing Comets manifest divine wrath and portend woeful Judgments? If our Light
and fire burn better then another, have we not cause to be more thankful and
communicative? What have we that we have not received to impart to others? Romans
14. 1.
Are not the strong bid to bear with the weak, and not please themselves? Our
Neighbors good is coordinate still with our own Interest, for we should love
our Neighbor as our selves. Mat. 22. 39.
Is not this Jewel a very precious one, Iam. 2. 8.
which is of such Import to the benefit of all?

Reason 4. The Nature of this gracious Knowledge does further demonstrate its
Excellency. There are three special parts that do make it up, being the choice
Ingredients thereof, Apprehension, Assent, and Application.
1. APprehension of the matter understood, Esa. 45. 22.
is found in every kind of knowledge, 2 Cor. 5. 18.
specially in this. A view of Christ's Beauty and Excellency is taken by the
mind thus spiritualized. Can. 5. 10, 11, etc.
The lively picture of Christ's al-sufficiency is drawn in his Gospel by the
pencil of his own Spirit. The Lord himself opens his very Bowels to the
Prospect of his peoples eyes therein. Is not this a precious sight indeed, to
behold such a Savior in all his proportions? Romans 7. 23, 24 etc.
Does not the sensible sight of our vileness and sinfulness recommend such a
merciful Redeemer to our apprehension? Can we behold our own wretchedness.
Insufficiency and unworthiness; and thence cast a glance on his suitable and
sure Redemption, Ioh. 1. 14.
without admiration? Does not the survey of divine fullness, thus exposed to
view, exalt the Lord Christ above all other Lovers? Are not all his royal
perfections, a magnificent sight to a gracious Soul? 3 Ioh. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Can there be any thing more swett and stately?

2. Assent and Credit to the Truth apprehended attends this knowledge in a
singular way. Ioh. 3. 33.
The God of Truth bespeaks this Assent by the word of Truth. The Hebrew is very
emphatical in Hos. 2. 24.
Salvation by Christ alone for true Believers upon conjugal terms, is the sum
thereof. (...) Et loquar ad animum ipsius. God speaks to the heart then as to
the purpose.
He that believes his Testimony, has set to his seal that God is true; divine
Authority gaining thus credit to his Assertion, sways the Judgment to reason
the case, and cast its resolve upon Christ's side. Divine reason then persuades
man's Reason, that such a Christ is worth the accepting upon his own Terms. The
soul thereby judges all capitulations and Reservations to be sinful,
dreadful, irrational. Man's reason is then brought over to such a subjection as
Christ's reason demands without delays or exceptions. It sees that in Christ,
which is better then All, and suits its wants in every part thereof. It sees no
help from any creature to be looked for, and judges all to be but vanity and
Lies that hinders from Christ. The soul then learns feelingly to cry, None but
Christ, none but Christ, as the Martyr did, with due conviction of sin and
righteousness in order to Judgment through the Spirits help. The soul thus
weary both of self and sin, readily assents to that truth of God which presents
Christ for a faithful and loving Husband, for Savior and Lord: And is not this
of singular worth?

Thirdly. Application and hearty consent is the main ingredient of all conjugal
Knowledge, especially of this. The soul is hereby effectually yielded into
Christ's own hand upon his own terms. The Will in this Act accepts of Christ,
and renders up it self to his disposal. Conjugal Acception is thus
reciprocated, that the whole man may yield unto him all loyal obedience of
Faith and Love. This great wheel thus moved, all the Affections turn
accordingly Christ ward, heavenward, that before still moved self-ward and
earth-ward. The soul being thus surrendered to Christ, depends on him, and
derives from him still Grace for Grace. All other things then become
serviceable to the honor and service of Christ. Ioh. 1. 16.
This Marriage-union brings with it a free and full, a singular and sure
Communion. Ex cognoscente and cogn^^o fit unum. Axioma. Philosoph.
Then says the soul, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. I have all from him,
and all for him, Can. 2. 16.
all in him and all through him. And is not this a very rare Jewel, Can. 6. 3.
that makes a match between Heaven and Earth? Is not this Knowledge of singular
worth that marries sinful man to God Almighty? Is not this thing of a rare
value, whose nature appears so supereminent?

Reason 5. The Properties of this Knowledge do much commend its excellency
also. They are expressed by a pregnant word, full of sense and virtue, being
called a gracious knowledge.
1. IN regard of Gods favoring Grace, whence it flows, which it manifests, and
whither it leads. The glory of divine Grace does so admirably and so
wonderfully shine forth therein, that its preciousness is as remarkable, as the
Noon-Sun in a Summer-day.

2. In respect to his renewing Grace, this knowledge is truly and incomparably
gracious; Gal. 5. 22. 23.
being attended with all the gracious Train and fruits of Christ's Spirit. So
far as the Lord is duly known by his people, so far is this knowledge attended
with a proportionable measure of saving Grace.

1. Esa. 45. 22.
Its a fiducial knowledge that knows Christ with conjugal faith, Zecha. 12. 10.
discerning of him, Ioh. 1. 12.
looking up to him, Ioh. 10. 27.
closing with him, Esa. 26. 3.
following after him, Ioh. 6.
trusting in him, feeding upon him, drawing all from him, Ioh. 1. 16.
and returning all to him.

2. Its a loving knowledge that embraces Christ's love, Romans 11. 36.
and retaliats Love for Love, loving his person first, and then his goodness.
That soul that knows Christ, loves him sincerely and self-denyingly, fervently
and constantly. That soul hears and speaks, 1 Ioh. 3.
prays and acts in love to him, Ephesians. 4. 14, 15.
loving his Word and ways, Ephesians. 5. 2. 3.
his name and honor, his service and servants, out of Love to him. That soul
for his sake, loves his Saints with a Love of delight, and sinners with a Love
of pity. The more she knows of him, the more is her heart melted into his
heart, to be cast into the mold of his Love. What Is recorded of famous
Ignatius, Amor meus crucifixus est, was his Motto still. Christ my Love was
crucified to crucify all to me, and me to all but himself.
is verified of such, the name of Christ is engraven on their heart by the
finger of his own Spirit.

3. Its a penitential knowledge that melts the soul with godly sorrow, Zach.
12. 10, 11, 12.
as looking on Christ pierced by him, and for him. The sight of such a Savior
so unkindly requited cannot but make sin out of measure sinful to such a
tender heart. The sweetness of Christ must needs embitter every sin to such,
who have tasted how good the Lord is. 1 Pet. 2. 3.
Such do hate sin with perfect hatred, Psalm. 34. 8.
knowing the baseness and unreasonableness thereof. Psalm. 119. 128.
Christ clears their eyes to descry and detest the least appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
The more beauty is discovered in him, the more ugliness do such observe in
sin, his grand Opposite. They take most pains to mortify those Lusts which are
most opposite to Christ.

4. Its an obediential knowledge, careful to observe the Lords Will made
known. If any say that he knows him, and keeps not his Commands, he is a liar,
and the truth is not in him. 1 Ioh. 3. 7, 8, 9, 24.
If we know that he is righteous, we know that he that does righteousness is
born of him. This knowledge is not notional but practical. 1 Ioh. 2. 29.
It rests not in the brain, but conveys Influence into the whole Life. Its not
idle, but very active. It studies his Will to fulfill it, and fulfills it in
studying thereof. Its obedience is neither blind nor lame, but a spiritual
Sacrifice, Romans 12. 1, 2.
a rational Service. The whole man in heart and life compleats this oblation of
loyal observance. It minds the precepts as much as the Promises, and desires
holiness as much as happiness. It would act like Christ, in acting for him.

5. Its an humbling knowledge that puffs not up, but lays the soul low. The
more any know of Christ aright, the more still do they know of their sins. The
best of Christ being duly known, makes them to know the worst of themselves.
Christ's eye salve does so clear their eyes, that they see easily those sinful
motes of lesser faults, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
which by their moonlight of notional knowledge they could not discern. Their
beholding of Christ in their Gospel-glass, with open face thus, shows more of
this shame and of his Glory. Thus Job was more humbled by seeing of God in a
clearer light. Job. 42. Genesis 18. 27.
Abraham acknowledges himself dust and ashes upon familiar Conference with
Christ. Their Affronts put on him in their time of darkness, humble them
soundly in this season of Light. Romans 6. 21.
They learn daily as Socrates said, to know their ignorance. As Simonides the
more they study the knowledge of God, In Plutarch. Diogen. Laert. etc.
the more amazed are they with his glorious unsearchableness.

6. Its a grateful knowledge, that cannot endure sinful ingratitude. They know
thereby the worth of Mercy, and the high price, paid by Christ's blood for every
favor afforded to his. The bounty of Christ so magnificently multiplied on
them still renders them thankful Debtors, mindful of their Bonds. Their
Insolvency they more thoroughly know, which makes them the more beholding to
him. What others enjoy by common Providence, they receive still by a Gracious
Promise. Ingratitude, the sum of all evil, they abominate as the Devil himself.
Their homage and rent do they bring to him, whom they well know to be their
chief Lord. Returns of Duty they labor to make in some proportion to their
Receipts of Mercy.

7. All other Graces do beautify this, attending on Christ in following his
Train. Patience and Prudence are found in their Rank. Zeal and diligence will
not be backward. Meekness and sweetness will not be strangers. Courage and
Fortitude are ready at hand. Sincerity and self-denial are inseparable
companions thereof. The Knowledge of Christ then is a choice Jewel, that is so
well set and accompanied. Nothing is wanting for knowledge or comfort, so far
as Christ is known or enjoyed.

Reason 6.
The Effects of this gracious Knowledge do add very much to the price thereof.
It works effectually upon the whole man, in every Relation toward God and man.
There is no condition, nor occasion here, wherein its Influence is not
manifested. Its a precious Root, that bears much fruit, solid, substantial, and
still seasonable. It renders a man fit for every good, and is a Preserver from
all kind of evil. It makes a man still to look to Christ, and to seek for him
in every Ordinance. The matter and means of Divine worship with the manner and
solemn time thereof it spiritually minds. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
In every Providence Christ is also acknowledged by such, in every Duty toward
their Neighbor. I am. 2. 8.
As the first Table of Christ's Divine Law is unto them the Standard of Worship;
Romans 7. 12, 14, 22.
so is the second Table of his Decalogue their constant Rule of officious Duty
toward every man. That order and safety settled by Gods Word, for Beauty,
strength and use in this worldly Fabric, the knowledge of Christ teaches how
to preserve with all possible care. The chastity and propriety of body and
goods, as well as of souls, it looks after. The credit and content that
concerns all men in their respective places is much furthered, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
and duly preserved by this gracious Knowledge. Its good physic to purge out
ill humors, for the curing of all distempers. It affords choice food for old
and for young, Ioh. 6. 52, 55, 56.
for strong and for weak, in all necessities. What the Rabbis soy of the
material manna, is truly verified of this spiritual Meat: that its relish suits
every Palate, and may satisfy every desire. Psalm. 119. 92.
Its a Cordial against all faintings, to revive the feeble in their Agonies.
Armor of Proof it furbishes for war, Ephesians. 6. 12, 13, etc.
against all enemies inward and outward. It is the Key of Christ's Magazin and
of all his stores, Ioh. 20.
opening the Treasures of our All sufficient God, our El Shaddai. If you can
conceive any thing of worth either in Heaven or earth, This Knowledge of Christ
will both match it and get it for you, so far as may tend to your real good.
Its in a word the true Elixar, and Philosophers Stone, that turns all to Gold,
and puts a choice virtue into every thing toward felicity.

Use.
This knowledge appears a singular Jewel upon good Reason: good use thereof
should be made also. The best things are made for the best use, and appear best
therein. As Christ himself is of infinite usefulness, every kind of way; so is
his Grace participatively and communicatively. This may be improved then,

1. In a word of Information, 1. See hence by way of Corollary, the singular
Method that should regulate every man's study. Men are naturally desirous of
Knowledge, by an Instinct suited to their rational Being. Man's soul was at
first made after Gods Image in perfect Knowledge. Col. 3. 10.
What sin lost and defaced in Adams Treason, Rev. 2. 7.
Grace only Restores. The Knowledge of Christ affords a Tree of Life; Rev. 22.
1. 2.
but most follow the Serpents advice still, in longing after another knowledge,
both of good and evil. The sinful Issue of sinful Adam do still love to tread in
his steps, hearkening to Satan rather then to God. They are still Learning to
know good and evil by sad experience. This Tree of Life is little observed and
less improved, men's palats are so far degenerated. Most are still scrambling
about that Tree for fruit, which can yield nothing but sin and sorrow. See
Plin. Joseph. Solin.
The best of its fruit like to Sodoms Apples, look very fair but by the least
touch turned into Ashes. Most men break their necks in clammering about and
climing of that Tree whose fruit brings death. Some such are in the West
Indies, fair and full of poison.
If that fruit seem hard, its but a shell; if it appear soft, its through
rottenness. In every condition, See Hackluit, Purchase, Acosta.
men study something, but most mind least this choice Tree of Life. Christ is
Divine Wisdom, Essentially and Personally. In him are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. Pro. 6. 8.
He keeps open school, and sends his Spirit to be his Usher. Col. 2. 3.
He teaches within, by motions of Conscience; 1 Cor. 1. 24.
and without us in his Word and Providence. The Volumes of his Truth, Col. 2.
19.
and of all his works he gives us to read, that the former may explain the
latter. Heb. 12.
He is the best Master for skill and sweetness. Yet few do learn to any purpose,
because they slight the knowledge of him. Men study pleasures, profit and honor
in the world below, which are to be had only from him. Arts and Sciences others
would attain, but they miss their aim im^missing of him. Some gaze at the
stars, and stumble in the dark, like the blind Philosopher for want of Christ's
Light. Many study words to tickle men's ears, neglecting Christ's Word that would
teach the heart. Some mind the Law of men so disorderly, that they attend not
to the Law of Christ. The bodies of men are studied by many, whilst their own
poor souls are wholly neglected. The care of souls is professed by some, who
yet little mind this saving knowledge. Diverse, Parrot-like, do speak of Christ's
knowledge, not by experience, but only by Roat. Too many are found studying how
to sin, without trouble and sense, without stop and Remorse. Not a few tempt
Satan to tempt them, and study how to act a Satanical part of tempting of
others. Til Christ be the Rule of all our studies, they will be fruitless,
being without Rule. Till he be our End, they will be sure still to prove
endless. Til he be the ground and the strength thereof, they will prove
groundless and supportless still. If we learn him well, he will teach us all
that we need to know. If we know him not, Si Christum discis, satis est si
caetera nescis. Si Christum nescis, nihil est; si caetera discis, was the
choice saying of a choice Christian.
we shall learn nothing, that's worth the knowing. Knowledge is excellent, when
its orderly learned and improved but it proves mischievous, when its once
corrupted and abused. Such men like Toads, carry a stone of worth in their
heads, being full of poison in their heart and Life. Like monstrous Sirens,
they have a fair face, but a shameful Tail. The tinkling Cymbal, and the
sounding Brass is the fit Emblem of too many now. 2 Timothy 3. 5.
The Lord teach us to study Christ still, in all, above all, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2, 3.
that we may know all in him and for him.

Second Use is for reprehension, both to the Graceless and to Gracious souls.
1. IT justly reproves the Graceless and unregenerate, that still many ways
stand against this Truth, as 1. All ignorant ones, that do not know and will
not learn Christ. Such live in the dark, as Moles under ground, and Owls or
Bats in the open air. They are born blind, and will continue so, not looking
for cure. Hos. 4. 1. 2, 6.
It was so of old, and its so still; my people parish for lack of knowledge,
Hos. 6. 6.
was the Lords complaint. A people of no understanding shall find no mercy from
him that made them. Esaias 27. 11.
Consider it well; Gross wilful ignorance will aggravate, not lessen your sins.
Under Gospel Light such Ignorance is very dreadful. John 3. 19.
This is a sad condemnation indeed, that seals up the full measure of all other
sins. Esaias 5. 21.
Men think they see, and therefore remain blind. John 9. 41.
None are such fools as the conceited wise. Prove. 26. 12.
My people is foolish says the Lord; again, they have not known me. Ierem. 4.
22.
They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. See History
of the Netherlands.
Men pretend business, they have not leisure, like the Duke of Alva, who had so
much to look after on earth, that he had no time to look after Heaven. But is
not this egregious folly, to slight the Jewel, and mind only the cask? If you
have not so much time as others, why do not you Redeem what you have? should
not you rather spare it from your sleep, work, or Recreation, then from this
Jewel, so much concerning both Gods honor and man's good? Is Christ so little
worth knowing and owning? Will not you rue it to eternity? Is not sinful
darkness the beginning of Hell and utter darkness? Is it not the womb and Nurse
of all sin? If Papists be content with picture-Teachers, and blind obedience,
slighting and slandering the Word of God; should their folly be followed among
us? Is the Light of Christ so to be disowned? If the servant that knows not his
Masters will, shall be beaten, Luke 12. 47, 48.
though with fewer stripes; what will become of him that would not learn to
understand his will?

2. All negligent ones, that will not take pains to attain unto this gracious
knowledge. Such may possibly enjoy special helps; they may have pregnant parts,
profess fair, and seem to desire good; but they are sluggish, they improve not
all means, and prove lazy in their enquiries after Christ's wisdom. This is a
sad and common evil. Luke 13. 24.
Many such shall seek to enter in, Qui timide rogat, docet negare.
and shall not be able. He that asks lazily, teaches denial. The lazy servant
that hoarded up his Talent smarted sore for it. None can be excused for such a
neglect. Matthew. 25. 24, 27. 28.
Is not Christ well worth the taking pains for? Who looks for a conquest
without trouble? Who expects a crop without care and cost? Who can drive a
Trade without pain and venture? Is not this the best Trade and Husbandry, Prove.
2.
the best warfare and surest Venture? Who gets acquaintance with the Lords
wisdom, Prove. 3.
without crying, waiting and searching? Prove. 4.
Why art thou content with a Velleity, Prove. 8.
and a woulding will without endeavor, like the sluggards wish? Prove. 13. 4.
Why art thou pleased with barren desires, and fruitless Resolves? Prove. 20. 4.
If thy seeming longing make thee not active and inquisitive, impatient of
delay, and unsatisfied, its a false longing. Matthew. 13,
If thou be not better then the stony ground, lasting but a while, Luke 8.
and soon blasted, what will thy end be? Do thou not hereby reproach Christ
sadly, by preferring creatures before him? Thou will Repent when its too late,
if Ephesus warning do not rouz thee up. Be convinced then of thy laziness;
Revel. 2. 5.
be ashamed and weary of it. It concerns thee to see thy folly and thy misery.

3. 2 Timothy 3. 5.
This Truth looks wishly upon Formalists, that have indeed a form of Godliness,
but deny the Power thereof. A bare external painted form they have, a shel of
duty and carcass of Religion, but without the Life and inward vigor. Such are
Pharisaical monkish Hypocrites; Prove. 26. 23.
varnished potsheards, garnished Sepulchers. Christ was troubled with such, and
so are we still. Matthew. 23. 27.
Profession is grown into fashion, shifted by many as men shift their clothes.
Las quentas en la mano y el diablo en el capillo. Hisp. Adag.
They make use of God to serve their own turn, and enjoy their Lust. Such are
on a round of duty like a Mill-horse in a course, perfunctorily. Religionis
their task and Burden. They post from one Ordinance to another as to a stage,
longing to be rid of their trouble. Used to a Road, as a Carriers horse they
carry their Load, and take their turns. 2 King. 17. 31, 32, 41, etc.
But this gracious knowledge they are strangers to. Their worship is much like
the mongrel Samaritans, that knew the Lord in a mixed formal way, Matthew. 15. 9.
but knew him not aright. Is not this a woeful condition! think thou to
baffle Christ thus? John 4. 24.
Will this foppish way of dead performances be pleasing to him who is a Spirit,
Phil. 3. 5, 6, 7, etc.
and will be worshipped in spirit and Truth? Did not Paul himself see the
vanity of his utmost Pharisaical holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
wherein he rested before his conversion? Have thou not much more need to
bewail thy coldness and deadness, See Tit. Livius Flor. Tacit.
thy cursoriness and heartlesness? A sacrifice without a heart, was always
ominous, as it proved among the Romans. Wilt thon put off God as Heathens serve
their Idols, Mal. 1. 8.
with a liveless worship? If thou offer the lame and the torn, is it not evil?
Gal. 6. 3.
How far art thou from knowing of Christ, that know not thy self, Isa. 1.
12, 13, 14, etc.
but art well conceited of thy good meaing, and thy good Duties? Isa. 66. 3, 4,
etc.
Who has required these things at thy hand? Will not the Lord rebuke thee as
he did Israel in the like case.

4. It justly reproves the Justitiary Legalist, that seems exact in his way of
good works, and rests thereon. He is not so bad as the worst, and therefore
thinks himself as good as the best. His seeming Justice, equity and charity
beguiles him as much as the Formalists painted holiness. He hopes to be saved
by his good Deeds, and good Intentions, as the Papists do* thinking that Christ
will make up for him what is defective. Alas wretched soul, will thou patch up
thus a Linsey Woolsey Garment of thy own Righteousness, mingled with Christ's
Merits? Will thy fig leaves cover thy nakedness? Will thy cracked penny make
amends to God for millions of pounds due to him from thee? Can thou do any
thing without sin? Art thou not bound to be wholly his? Can thou satisfy his
Infinite Justice, Luke 17. 10.
or deserve his Infinite Mercy? Did Christ merit that thou might merit? Acts
4. 12.
Is he a Remote Savior, that thy self might be thine immediate Savior? Romans
2. 32.
Can thou climb to Heaven with a Ladder of thy making, Romans 3. 27, 28, etc.
or waft thy self over into the Indie's in thy own Nut-shel of
self-Righteousness? Romans 11. 6.
Civil morality is good in it self, but not to Justify thy person; Secundum,
non propter opera.
as a piece of brass is good for something, but not to pass for Gold, Psalm 62.
nor to pay an Infinite ransom. God gives indeed a Reward to his according to
their works, Revel. 2. 23.
but not for their works sake. Matthew. 25,
Thou can not be saved without good works; and yet not by works. Romans 9. 16.
If thou knew Christ graciously, thou would know thy self to be unworthy
and insufficient still. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
See thy folly and thy misery, Ephesians. 2. 8.
in trusting to self; thou loosest and slightest the only Pearl of Price.

5. This point casts a very ghastly glance upon all profane licentious persons,
Jude 4.
that turn Christ's grace into wantonness, and delight in a sinful Liberty. 2
Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Consider it thou Swearer and drunkard, thou Liar and unclean wretch; thou
scoffer and malicious; Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
thou proud and wanton; thou slanderer and riotous Liver. Why do thou profess
the Knowledge of Christ to abuse him thus? Art not thou much worse then Pilate
or Judas, then the Jews and Romans in affronting and murdering of Christ?
Do thou not give him ten blows for one good word, destroying thy self in
disgracing him? Do thou presume on his mercy still, whilst thou delightest in
the Devils work? Does the Name and Baptism of Christ give thee a Protection
from Divine Justice, whilst thou remainest still in open Rebellion? Matthew. 7.
21, 22, etc.
Do thou hope still to pacify him with a few faint words of Lord hove mercy,
I am sorry, and such like mock-speeches? Is Repentance in thy own power, or thy
Life and Means, that still thou put off? Will thou lay the whole Burden on
the tired horse, and wave returning till thy elder age? Will thou give Satan
the cream, and Christ the Refuse of thy time and strength? Can thou hope for
Christ's Salvation in the high Road to thy damnation? Will thou still delight in
the Devils work, and yet hope for wages from Heaven? Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
Is not thy case very desperate, to follow the Devil into every sin? 2 Timothy 2.
26.
Could thou but see thy Infernal Guide, that leads thee captive at his will,
what a dreadful sight would that prove to thee? Have thou lived so long under
the Gospel, as the Smiths Dog under the Anvil, to deafen and harden thee? Will
not thy later end prove most desperate, that have made so much haste in the
broad way to Hell? If Grace prevent not miraculously, thou shall know that
Christ to thy confusion, whom thou would not know to thy conversion.

6. This Truth looks wishly on carnal Notionists, who pretend much to the
Knowledge of Christ, and yet remain destitute of his Grace. They have learned
to prate about Christ, and to use his Name for a Sanctuary to sin. From vain
Notions they speedily run into vile affections, and their devotion lies most in
their fancy. Their Tongue is tipped with the Language of Canaan to deceive the
simple in deceiving themselves. 2 Timothy 3. 13.
This age abounds with such, 2 Pet. 2. 13.
the Lord awaken them, who are lulled asleep in the Devils Lap. Alas wretched
soul, what will be thy end, and what is thy case in such delusions? If thy head
swel much with giddy Notions, does it not betoken a woeful disease? 2 Cor. 11.
14.
Whither will Satan transformed into an Angel of Light lead thee at the last? 2
Pet. 3. 16.
How sad is it thus to poison thy self and so many more, 2 Cor. 2. 17.
in mingling fancies with Gods holy Word, perverted by thee, to dream thy self
into a fools Paradise, whilst thou slightest Christ and his Ordinances, how
woeful is it? Thou playest like a Gnat and Moth about the Candle, till thou be
consumed by the heat thereof. Golden Imaginations do tickle thy thoughts whilst
Satan is leading thee captive at his Will. Are not such spiritual Judgments
the worst of all to be given up thus to strong delusions, 2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11,
12
to believe such Lies? Is it not because thou receivest not the Truth in the
Love of it, Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
that God gives thee up to thy own hearts Lusts? How far art thou from a
gracious knowledge, that turnest his Grace into wantonness? Did thou know
Christ aright, thou would know thy self better, and would see thy new
pretended Light to be but old darkness. Thy pretense of Christ's name will do
thee little good whilst thou slightest his Word and Ways, his Sabbath and
Worship, his Service and Saints. Isa. 50. 11.
Satan may cease troubling of thee, and fill thee with false joys; Eccles. 7.
6.
but thy carnal Raptures will soon end in woe, like the crackling of Thorns.
Psalm. 58. 7, 8, 9.


2. The most gracious may find just cause from this very point to humble and
judge themselves for the remaining of so much sin in them. The most are totally
guilty, and the best in part of too much darkness and dullness, selfishness and
sinfulness against this precious Jewel. That Christ is no better known unto
thee after so much of his glorious discoveries, what a shame is it? that there
is yet so little of Grace, and so much of corruption in us, should it not
deeply humble us? that we savor so much of self, and so little of Christ: Is
it not matter of sad lamentation, that Christ should be slighted and abused,
forgotten and forsaken in such a manner by his very Friends? Is it not woeful?
The more precious Christ is unto us, Psalm. 55. 12, 13.
the more vile shall we be to our selves? Says not Christ to us, As Caesar to
Brutus, Tu etiam mi fili?
as David his Type to his bosom friend that wretched Anitophel? Is it not
dreadful to be abused by our nearest and dearest relations? Had thou struck
thy best friend in the dark on mistake, how would it break thy heart?

3. This Truth will afford a needful Test for a due examination. Hence may we
try our state personal and public to frame a Prognostic of our hopes and
fears. In this balance of the Sanctuary our case should be weighed. Deceit is
common and very dreadful. Matthew. 24. 24.
False Christ's and false Prophets variously delude themselves and others too.
Bring then all to Gods Touch.

1. By the due review and application of all the former particulars: do we know
Christ thus in his person and office, in his Progress and Purchase, in his
Relation and Influence? Are we the subjects so wrought upon by him? Are we thus
acquainted with the cause and nature, with the properties and effects of this
gracious knowledge? Are we not still in that unregenerate state of reigning
Ignorance and neglect, Ephesians. 2. 12.
of formality and self justifying, John 3. 3, 4, 5, 6.
of profaness or notional delusions? Is the spiritual Change yet wrought within
us by the Psalm 14.
special hand of Christ's renewing Spirit? Psalm 53.
Our nature of it self is as bad as the worst; Romans 2.
Is it now savingly transformed in the Spirit of our mind? Romans 3.
How far is this change wrought in our selves and others? Matthew. 18. 3.
mind it exactly by the standard of Truth.

2. How this Change was wrought, is as considerable. What Method and Means did
Gods Spirit use, and in what manner did he prevail with us? Were we effectually
convinced by him of sin and Righteousness? Were we made to see the worst of our
selves, John 16. 8, 9, 10.
that we might embrace the best of Christ? Have we felt at the heart such a
clear discovery of our emptiness and sinfulness, of our Wretchedness and
Unworthiness, of our Insufficiency and nothingness, as to be wholly weaned from
self, and carried out to him? Have we duly observed the unability of all
Creatures to afford us help? Has the sight and sense of our woeful state so
opposite to God, made Christ truly precious to our souls? Are we more troubled
at the pollution then at the punishment of sin? Does it grieve us to the very
soul, that we have grieved such a dear Savior? Have we beheld our state in the
Glass of his Law, and of his Gospel to make us sensible efficaciously both of
our Malady and of his Remedy? Romans 7. 9, 14.
Has he made his Word so to work on us, Ierem. 23. 29.
as to break our hearts and melt them kindly? Have we found that hammer and
fire of his killing our sins and quickening our souls? Has he made us thereby
cheerfully willing to give up all to him, and prefer him above all? Has he
blessed the means so effectually, as to make us feel him in and through them
all? Has he made every sin more bitter to our Taste, then ever we found any
sweetness therein? Has he knock^d us off from all other props, that we might
rest upon him alone?

3. Consider also how this Change works now to clear this Inquiry with
impartiality. Does his holy Spirit operate on us by this gracious knowledge, as
the Soul does upon the Body through its variety of intermediate Spirits?
Observe it we may in the resemblance of that threefold Life, which man's soul
does communicate to its proper subject. A vegetative, a sensitive, a rational
Life is afforded thereby: Does Christ do so to us spiritually?

1. A Vegetative Life is for Nutrition, Augmentation and Propagation.
1. FOR Nutrition, whereto serve the several faculties attractive and
retentive, concoctive and expulsive: Does this knowledge of Christ act thus
within us?

1. Do we draw and attract spiritual nourishment to the supply of our renewed
wants? 1 Pet. 2. 2.
Do we suck his breasts as new born babs, Matthew, 5. 6.
and desire that food that may sustain us to eternal Life? Is it done in season
and order, in quantity and quality meet?

2. Do we retain and keep the same with all diligence, lest at any time we
should let it slip? Heb. 2. 1, 2.
Is it laid up in our hearts, Psalm 119. 11.
and industriously kept, Luke 8. 15.
that it may keep us.

3. Do we concoct and digest it well by spiritual fervor, to be distributed
unto every part? Ierem. 15. 16.
Do we shun and abhor Crudities, Micah 2. 7.
Cloyings and Oppressions that might hinder it. John 6. 55. 56.


4. Do we expel all sinful Excrements that continually do breed within us?
Iam. 1. 21.
Do we loath, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
detest, and cast out duly all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and all superfluity of naughtiness from every part of us?

2. For Augmentation, Is our spiritual Life, like the natural, Psalm. 92. 12, 13
still upon increase, spreading it self into every part, Phil. 1. 9.
that our growth may be proportional, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3, etc.
universal, and perpetual? Does this knowledge dilate all faculties in Mind and
Judgment, Reason and Conscience, Will and Affections?

3. For Propagation, Col. 1. 10.
Does our spiritual Life, as the natural, labor still to beget in us, Gal. 6.
10.
and produce in others more fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23.
more issues of Grace to perpetuate this divine offspring? Is nothing more
active and communicative? Does it diffuse its species round about, as being the
Issue and Image of him who is the chief and most communicative good?

2. A sensitive Life is for Sense, Motion and Appetite; so it our spiritual
Life: Does Christ do so to us spiritually?
1. Does he give us Sense external and internal, as in Nature, so in Grace?
1. External Sense is five-fold, by Sight, and Hearing, Smelling, Taste and
Touch.
1. DO we spiritually discern and delight in the Beauty of Christ's divine
holiness in all his perfections, Psalm. 119. 18.
in all his Ordinances, Can. 5. 10, 16.
and in every Providence? Do we thereby see all other things, and reflect on
our selves as becomes us, that we may not behold vanity?

2. Is our Hearing spiritually employed in listening after the Fathers Commands,
Can. 5. 2, 4, 5.
Christ's invitations, Mic. 6. 9.
the Spirits motions, in his Word and Rod, Exodus 21. 6.
within and without us? Is our ear opened to our Beloved, Ioh. 10. 26.
and boared to the posts of his house, that we may not hearken after any
Tempter?

3. Have we a spiritual Smell after the perfumes of Christ's precious Garments;
the droppings of his Graces and Benefits, and the fragrancy of his divine
Spices: Psalm. 45. 8.
Do we odorare the sweetness of his Garden, Psalm. 133. 3, 4.
and prefer it before all the rankness of sin, Can. 1. 2, 3, etc.
self, of the World and Satan?

4. Is our Taste spiritually active to relish the dainties of Christ, Psalm.
34. 8.
the pleasures of his Table, 1 Pet. 2. 3.
the choiceness of his feast? Do we prefer his flaggons and apples, Can. 2. 5.
Do we relish him in his sweetness and comfort before all the worlds cheer?
all, and all in him? Psalm. 73. 25.
Do we therefore abhor the bitterness attending every sin, though sugard with
Pleasure, Profit or Honor? Do we taste and know how good the Lord is?

5. Is our Touch also spiritually employed to feel the difference between heat
and cold, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
between good and evil in the things of Christ? Heb. 5. 14.
Is this sense as others, so well exercised to avoid all evil, and embrace the
good?

2. The Internal sense receives from those Cinque Ports and Gates, all sorts of
Objects to be orderly viewed and compared, laid up and improved by the
faculties called Common sense, Fantasy, and Memory. Are we thus spiritually
sensible through this gracions Knowledge?
1. BY common sense and general Perception of the species of things, with their
circumstantiated differences of Motion, Rest, Magnitude, Number, etc. to give
thereof a definitive intimation unto the Fantasy. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
Does Christ's Spirit thus help us to discern of all things presented for a
spiritual use, Heb. 5. 14
to be faithfully reviewed and transmitted for orderly Improvement? Do we keep
watch, and take due account of all sorts of Passengers and Guests coming to
visit our internal man, that they may be punctually discerned and orderly dealt
with?

2. Fantasy or Imagination entertaining those various Objects, Psalm. 94. 19.
compares, divides and composes them much like a Printer, Psalm. 139* 17.
does order his work with multitudes of variations and flowrishes. Psalm. 10. 4.
Have we a like spiritual skill faithfully to compare the things that differ,
to separate the good from the evil, to compose all things to spiritual
advantage?

3. Memory lays up what is thus ordered, and lays it out again, Psalm. 45. 1
7.
as there is occasion, in the na^ural man. Is it so with us in the spiritual
man? Psalm. 119. 52, 55.
Do we remember well the things of Christ's Glory, Psalm. 78. 35. 39.
and of our own Peace? Do we so record what he teaches us, as to improve it in
season and order? Do we so lay up as to lay out in the best manner? Are we
careful not to forget him, or any thing of his? Do we therefore beware of
oblivion-water, Psalm. 106. 7.
that we become not like wretched Israel?

2. Sensitive Life acts by way of motion, upward and downward, to the right and
left, forward and backward, in Pulsation and Respiration. Do we move thus
spiritually?
1. DO we move upward toward Christ and Heaven, Psalm. 25. 1.
aspiring still after Eternity? Col. 3, 1, 2.
Is our Center above, and our Lodestone there where Christ sits at the right
hand of God? 1 Cor. 11. 31.
Is there a divine fire within us, bending still heavenward to its first
original? Rev. 12. 1, 2.


2. Do we move downward against every sin? Gal. 5, 24.
Do we labor still to tread self and Satan under foot, Gal. 6. 14.
with all sublunaries, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
as Christ and his spouse eminently do? Ephesians. 4. 2.


3. Do we move to the right in compassion and brotherly Love, Romans 12. 10.
friendly assistance and Christian forbearance, as Christ and his Apostles
teach us practically?

4. Do we move to the left by pitying and bemoaning sinners, Mat. 5. 44, 45.
praying for them, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
reproving of them, 1 Ioh. 3. 17.
and directing and exhorting them that yet remain in the gall of bitterness,
Jud. 22.
and in the bonds of iniquity, Heb. 5. 2.
plucking some as brands out of the fire? Christ himself did so in the days of
his flesh.

5. Do we move forward still, Heb. 12. 1, 2.
toward the price of the heavenly calling, Phil. 3. 12, 13, etc.
looking at Jesus, etc? Do we so press forward toward the Mark, forgetting the
things behind, that we may lose no time in this race of ours?

6. Do we move back sometime to hasten our pace, Psalm. 119. 59.
that we may leap better, Ier. 8. 6.
in considering our ways with remorse of sin, and strong resolves to be more
diligent in learning Wisdom from former follies?

7. Does our Pulse beat spiritually with freeness, strength and orderliness, to
signify the due Composure and harmonious Accord of all our Vitals in the ways
of Christ? Does our heart keep a right Circulation of spiritual blood from the
Center to the Circumference with renewed Reciprocations? Ephesians. 4. 4.
Do the various Communications of his Spirit (set out by the Title of seven
Spirits, to denote Perfection, Variety and Sufficiency) manifest themselves in
the constant Tenor of Rev. 1. 4.
of our spiritual Pulse, 1 Cor. 12* 4, 5, 6.
by returning still to Christ what we are still receiving from him? Are we
sensible of any change there in weakness, Rev. 3. 4.
inaequality and disorderliness for speedy remove Rev. 5. 6.
of all obstructions disturbing the same? Zach. 4. 6.


8. Do we move also in Spiritual Respirations; 1. Inspiring the fresh gales of
his reviving Spirit; Ioh. 3. 8.
who blows where he lists, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
and breaths into us by internal and external motions to temper our Spirits,
Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
and to revive them? Psalm. 84. 1, 2.
Do we therein imitate David and all the friends of Christ in their spiritual
Pantings and longings? Phil. 1. 23.


2. Expiring the fuliginous vapors of our sinful hearts, Romans 7 23, 24.
and breathing forth the desires of our souls to be rid of those fumes that are
so noisome to all our vitals, Psalm. 139. 23, 24.
and still breeding feavourish heats in our internal man? Psalm. 19. 12, 13.
Do we long to eject these unwelcome Guests, who still like that serpent in
Aesop, will be sure to sting and poison their host, when they recover heat?

3. Sensitive Life acts by Appetite. Does spiritual Life act so within us, both
Concupiscibly and Irascibly?
1. The concupiscible Appetite acts the Affections of Love and Hatred, Joy and
Sorrow, Desire and Disdain. Is the like felt in us spiritually?
1. DO we love Christ as the best Object for sweetness and beauty, Psalm. 116. 1.
excellency and sutableness, Can. 1. 7.
the incomparable Paragon of all? Can. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Have we none in Heaven but him, and none upon earth in comparison of him?
Psalm. 73. 24, 25.
Do we love all his for his sake, 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
in subordination to himself? Do we therefore love all the ways and means
wherein his Love is showed toward us, 1 Ioh. 4. 19, 20, 21
that our Love may reciprocate toward him again?

2. Do we hate sin and all Christ's enemies as he hates them Psalm. 139. 22.
upon his account? Psalm. 119. 104, 128.
Do we abhor and detest whatsoever is contrary to that lovely Object, as
contrary to our very being also? Psalm. 97. 10.
Hatred extends unto all the kinds. Iud. 23.
Does our Spirit thus abominate all sinful habits and acts, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
inclinations and allurements, provocations and examples, yea every appearance
of evil in our selves and others?

3. Is our Joy spiritually delighted in that Sovereign good presented to us, to
be certainly and intimately enjoyed, both in free and present fruition? 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
Do we rejoice thus in the Lord always from the possession of that Kingdom of
Christ, Phil. 4. 4.
which is Peace, Romans 14. 17.
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 1. 6. 8.
and Joy in the Holy Ghost? Does the Pledge and Earnest of his eternal Glory
given us thereby, Neh. 8. 10.
fill us with that Joy, both unspeakable and full of Glory? Is this Joy of the
Lord our strength, to quicken and supple all the wheels of our souls?

4. Is our Sorrow spiritually active in grieving for all sin, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11.
Original, Romans 12. 15.
habitual and actual; for the great dishonor still done to Christ, Rev. 11. 3.
the contempt of his Gospel, abusing his Mercies, breaking of his Laws, Mat. 5.
slighting his warnings, hardening under his Judgments? Ezekiel. 9.
Do we mourn for the failings and distempers of his people, and make their case
ours among his Mourners, marked for safety?

5. Does our Desire move spiritually with unsatisfiableness after that Good not
yet attained, Phil. 3. 12.
setting an edge upon all endeavors, Isa. 26. 9.
sweetning all troubles in the way, facilitating all difficulties, spurring on
sluggishness, and teaching all Improvements of what is received in order thereto?

6. Does our Disdain act spiritually to scorn all sinful baseness, 1 Timothy 6.
11.
which might hinder us from the good desired? 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Does it make us fly from whatsoever might keep that from us by keeping God at
distance? 1 Cor. 6. 18.
Does it make us disown what might grieve Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 14.
and offend his Spirit, whose acquaintance is our chief desire?

2. The sensitive Appetite moves irascibly against all difficulties by the
Affections of Hope and Despair, Fear, Confidence, and Indignation. Does this
knowledge of Christ act thus within us?
1. Does our Hope stir spiritually toward the full enjoyment of eternal good,
Heb. 6. 18.
though surrounded with discouragements from Earth and Hell? Col. 1. 5, 23, 27.
Does it cast. ^^^^eff. 5. 8.
Anchor within the vail upon the rock of Ages to stay our souls in the Ephesians. 6.
midst of all storms? 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Is it that Helmet which safeguards our head in all Conflicts with many Legions
of sins and devils?

2. Do we spiritually despair, Ie 1. 18. 12.
not of Christ, but of sin, of self, Esa. 57. 10.
of all creatures, expecting all good only from Christ in the use of good means
appointed by him, but not from themselves, much less from self or sin?

3. Is our fear spiritually active, lest we should displease him, Phil. 2. 12.
and frustrate our own good by neglecting our duty, or doing any thing contrary
to him? Heb. 11. 7.
Does this filial fear move us with Noah by faith to prepare all things, Heb.
12. 28.
and repair to the Ark, casting out all slavish tormenting fears?

4. Does our Confidence appear spiritually in Christian resolutions against all
Christ's enemies to the discharge of our proper Duty he calls us to? Prove. 28. 1.
Are we bold with a generous audaciousness to follow Christ, Heb. 2. 10.
the Captain of our Salvation through all Impediments? Heb. 12. 12.


5. Does our spiritual Indignation move in holy Zeal to the removing of all
obstacles that lie in the way of our Allegiance to our Sovereign Christ? Psalm.
119. 139.
Are we enflamed with that prudent zeal which consumed the very heart of
Christ, Psalm. 69. 9.
for the purging and settling of his house? Esa. 59. 17.
Is our fire kindled against sin, Ioh. 2. 17.
whilst our heart melts for the sinners good as far as possible? Tit. 2. 14.
It it not a blind, Rev. 3. 19.
but a well-guided zeal? 2 Cor. 7. 11.
not a wild fire, Gal. 4. 18.
but duly ordered.

III. Natural Life appears in the Rational faculties, by the several Acts of
the Mind and Judgment, Conscience and Will, Memory and Affections; does our
spiritual Life appear therein also?
1. Does our mind act spiritually in understanding of spiritual Matters,
Whether these faculties differ really, is not our business now to question.
and apprehending the mind of Christ made known to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.
16.
Word and Providence? Ephesians. 4. 23.


2 Does our Judgment act in discerning of things that differ, Phil. 2 5.
and reasoniug of things, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
answerably to his divine Reason signified to us, Phil. 1. 9.
either expressly, Ioh. 16. 10.
or consequentially? Do we judge our selves first, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
and our own sins, that Satan may be judged in us and by us? Act. 23. 1.


3. Does our conscience move spiritually in a due reflection on self, Act. 24.
16.
with subordination to Gods Judgment? 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Does it speak for God as becomes his Deputy and Substitute; Heb. 9. 14.
in Teaching and Ruling, Heb. 10. 22.
in Witnessing and Recording, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
in Judging and Executing according to Gods Will? Tit. 1. 15, 16.
Is it not blinded, bribed and feared? Is it not benumbed, deaded and gangrened
by self-love and corrupt Opinions?

4. Does our will spiritually stir in choosing true good, Romans 6. 17.
and refusing true evil? See an Elegant Emphasis, (...), The mold into which ye
were cast.
Is it brought over to subject freely and fully to the will of Christ? Has the
Key of Heaven opened the great Spring to lift up these everlasting Gates to the
King of Glory? Is thy heart of stone turned into flesh, and this Iron sinew
melted into Gods mould?

5. Does our Intellectual memory spiritually act in laying Psalm. 24.
up those things which those faculties have committed to its Ezekiel. 36. 26.
charge? Lam. 3. 19, 20, 21.
Does it recall such things to Remembrance by its peculiar Acts of Reminiscency,
1 Pet. 4. 10.
and recovering those many useful things, which accidentally had slipped away?
Mat. 13 52.
Does it carry it self like a good Steward indeed, bringing out of its store
good things, new and old?

6. Do our rational Affections move spiritually toward Romans 7. 21, 22*
good against evil, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25* 26, 27*
under the guidance and Rule of these superior Powers, 2 Cor. 10 3, 4, 5.
which are still to follow the dictates of Heaven? Do these wheels and weights
stir Regularly? Do these wings and feet carry our souls orderly? Do these Sails
and Oars convey us safely through the current of all our Relations to the
service and enjoyment of God.

Thus may we take a due Estimate, by this scantling and Abstract of our
spiritual Acquaintance with God, according to our measure of this gracious
Knowledge, variously acting toward Christ and from Christ; for him and through
him by his Spirits Energetical motions. 1 Ioh. 5. 12.
He that has the Son, has life; he that has not the Son, has not life.

Use 4.
This Truth speaks singular Consolation to the real friends of Christ. Choice
is the Jewel afforded to them, as former particulars do fully evince. This
precious Cordial will be of excellent use against all corruptions and
temptations; against all Afflictions and desertions: There will a season come
for the benefit thereof to all Gods people. It concerns all to make the best of
it.

Objection. This is good indeed, may the trembling heart say, but its none of
mine, that am so far from the Knowledge of Christ. I fear I am a stranger to
him yet.

Answ. Its bad indeed to be far from Christ, Mat. 9. 13, 14.
but its good to be sensible of it. Primus gradus poenitentiae, cognitio
peccati.
The knowledge of thy disease is a good step to the cure. There is hopes of
good in sensible sinners; nothing but woe to senseless Perfectionists.

Answ. 2. But what makes thee fear thy estrangedness? Is not thy desire to him,
Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5.
and delight in him, thy design for him, and endeavor after him? If so, thy
fear is the fruit of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
so far as it drives thee not from him, but draws thee to him.

Answ. 3. What makes thee complain of thy Ignorance? Is it not thy esteem of
the Knowledge of Christ? Art thou weary and ashamed of thy Ignorance? Romans 7.
Art thou still wrestling against it, throughout.
for attaining of Knowledge? Ar thou diligent in all the means he affords thee,
to dispel darkness and get light from him? Do thou bewail thy deadness and
dullness, thy sloth and selfishness, thy formality and hypocrisy, thy
worldliness and unfaithfulness? Is it thy greatest trouble and grief, thy shame
and sorrow? Do thou act the more humbly and self-denyingly, the more
watchfully and industriously in thy general and particular calling? If so, the
comfort is thine, and thou will know it in the best time.

Answ. 4. There are diverse degrees in the school of Christ, and diverse manners
of his dealing with his Disciples. Thou must not measure thy condition by
others so much as by his Rule. 1 John 2 12, 13, 14.
The least degree of his Grace deserves thanks, though we must not rest there.
There are many little weaklings in his house which must not be slighted, nor
mis-judged of, because they are not so strong and healthy as others. The
smoking flax, Esaias 42. 3.
and the bruised Reed, Matthew. 12. 20.
are neither to be quenched nor broken in his House, till he bring forth
Judgment into victory, according to Truth.

Use 5.
This point should be improved in a pressing Exhortation to all Nominal and
real Christians. Does it not concern every sort of men to look after such a
singular Jewel? Does any need Incentives to move thereto? Is there not matter
enough already expressed to inflame all our hearts after it? Is not this
knowledge the most profitable, the most pleasurable, the most honorable that
can be conceived? Is it not still of absolute need, and singular use? Is any
good to be had, any evil to be avoided without it? Matthew. 13. 44, 45, 46*
Is not this the Field that holds the Treasure, and the Pearl of Price? Does it
not bewray an ignoble spirit to neglect and slight it? Is not this Jewel the
Quintessence of Good, that will sanctify all conditions to any of us? Be we
all pressed then to make it our business to look after it, as the wise Merchant
after the Pearl of Price; he seeks and finds it, he sels all for Joy and buys
it out right. Do you so likewise, that you may be enriched thereby.

Two sorts are specially invited hereto, the Nominal and real Christian.
1. THe Nominal Christian that has but the Name, without the Grace of Christ.
Sinners of all sorts still unregenerate, are comprised here. Such of all Ranks
are called to Christ, John 5. 40.
though they will hardly give him the hearing. We speak to all indefinitely; 2
Cor. 5. 19.
Christ's Spirit will speak to his peculiarly. We offer to you a singular Jewel,
to be obtained upon Christ's own terms. Esaias 55.
Come and view it well, turn it every way; there is no blemish in any part
thereof. Does any of you see the worth thereof? Be then willing also to part
with all for it. Thy natural, Mark 8. 34.
sinful and Religious self thou must deny, Matthew. 16. 24.
that Christ may be thine. Luke 9. 23.
The destruction of thy sinful self, is the only way to thy salvation. Thy sin
is thy disease, thy poison and plague; art thou unwilling to be rid of it? Thy
natural self will be bettered, by putting of it into his keeping, who will be
sure to mend it for thee. Thy Religious self in thy best duties, cannot be
useful but by being put into Christ's own hand. But where is the Price to buy it
withal? Its in Christ's Treasury, not thine own. Thy souls empty hand must be
reached forth to receive at once the Price and the Pearl. Matthew. 11. 28.
Come to Christ then, John 6. 35, 37, 44.
that thou may get Christ, and through his Spirit may close with his
Father. The worst of thy sins shall not keep thee off, when thou once come on
conjugal Terms. Will thou be moved thereto cordially? Hear the Embassy sent to
thee from Heaven; 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
We are Ambassadors for the King of Saints, to beseech sinners to be
reconciled. Consider how much is laid up in this to draw home thy soul most
effectually. Mind then

1. The Person offering, the Lord of Glory, thy Sovereign, the Almighty God,
All-sufficient Savior, provoked by thee to the utmost; that needs thee not,
and can in a moment crush thee to nothing. Its the God of all Grace, full of
mercy and Truth: the Fountain of all good, most precious, most sweet, a most
suitable match; will thou refuse him?

2, The matter offered, is the only Jewel, the sum of all Good, God himself to
be thy portion; fullness of Grace to pardon and purge, to quicken and save;
Treasures of mercy most free and full, most singular and sure: its a match with
Heaven; an extract of Blessings suiting thy state most exactly. Here is Wisdom
to teach, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Righteousness to absolve, Holiness to renew, Redemption to save thee: what can
thy heart wish that is not laid up here? Will thou refuse it yet?

3. Mind his manner of offering, with entreaties and Invitations; He waits, he
knocks, he expostulates again and again: Mercy kneels to thee, beseeching,
pleading, tendering all with open arms; bearing with thee, forbearing of thee,
attempting all means of doing thee good. Should not this prevail?

4. Consider the Person offered to, thy wretched self, a forlorn sinner, a
Rebel in Arms, a desperate enemy, full of Venom and deadly poison; a miserable
worm, sinful dust; a Traitor at the Bar under condemnation; an abuser of every
favor, unworthy of the least good; a vile Bankrupt; a riotous Prodigal utterly
undone; a starving beggar, a drowning wretch, a servant of sin, a slave of
Hell, Satan's prisoner, empty of all good, full of all evil. Is not this thy
picture, thy name and state, and ten thousand times worse? What madness keeps
thee from coming to him that would help all this?

Quest. What if I come not?

Answ. Then will thy case prove despenate indeed. Justice will speedily send
thee to thy place. Matthew. 11. 24.
Infinite wrath shall be thy portion, Luke 11. 12.
thou shall fare worse then Sodom and Gomorrah in endless, easeless, remediless
Torments. All thy mercies shall prove thy Judgments; thy own conscience shall
be thy witness, Recorder, Judge and Executioner. This very Word shall rise
against thee and stop thy mouth to eternity. Thou wast fair offered once, and
wilt know it when the time is past.

Quest. What if I come?

Answ. Then thy case is happy; all good is thine, thou shall be as welcome as
the lost Son to thy Fathers arms, meeting thee half way with Tears, with joy,
with a feast, with a royal Robe. Thou shall be married to the Kings own son,
and Heaven shall rejoice at the Repentance of such a sinful wretch. Luke 15. 7,
10


Object. But I doubt I am not elected, and then all is in vain?

Answ. How know thou that? Who has told thee so? Find thou thy self
excluded by Name? No, no such matter. Secret things belongs to God; Deuteronomy 29. 29.
revealed things to us. Come, and thou shall know thou wast elected. Exclude
not thy self before he excludes thee.

Object. But all are not saved. Many do perish. May not I be of them?

Ans. What then? Should it not quicken thy pace to Christ, that thou may be
saved? Do thou not see how many as bad as thou can be possibly, have been
welcome to him; what think thou of Mary, of Paul, of Manasseh?

Object. But if I be a Reprobate, I cannot be saved, the labor is lost?

Answ. Were thou a Reprobate, thou would not be so inquisitive after Christ
and Heaven; their heart never yields unfeignedly to Christ as thine seems to
do. Thou can not be sure thou art such a one. Yea thou may quickly be sure
thou art not such by coming to him. But if thou refuse still, and harden thy
heart, thy case then will be very suspicious.

Object. But is it possible, that such a wretch as I should obtain mercy?

Answ. Yea, its possible, its probable, it may be certain quickly if thy heart
be but yielded to him.

Object. But this is but A may be?

Answ. 2 King. 7. 3, 4, 5, etc.
A may be is sufficient Inducement to put thee on trial. Remember the Leprous
men about Samaria, A may be saved them. 1 King. 20. 30, 31, 32, 33.
Mind the Syrian Ambassadors, and the Jewish case. Joel 2. 12.
If thou try not, thou art certainly lost.

Object. I have often tried, but to little purpose.

Answ. Thou did not try aright, blame thy self, not God. Is it not well worth
the trial again? Observe wherein thou missest, to amend the fault. Possibly
thou wast too cold and formal, too hasty and unmannerly; too self-conceited and
not thoroughly humbled. Thou did not know the worst of thy self. Thou wentest
in thy own strength. Thou wast not wholly taken off from self, and weaned from
every creature. The Lord has been preparing of thee by all his put-offs, to
spur on thy desire and pace. Try once again, come to better purpose.

Object. Alas I cannot come, my heart is dead and hard.

Answ. 1 Cor 15. 45.
That's bad indeed; but has he not a quickening Spirit? Is not his Word a word
of Life, John 5. 21.
Power and Salvation? Has not he promised a heart of flesh, John 10. 10.
in taking away of the stony heart? John 6. 33.
Is it not he that quickens the dead? Is not he come to give Life to that world
whom he calls his sheep, and to give it them more abundantly?

Object. I am not sure I am one of them.

Answ. Neither art thou sure thou art none of them. His sheep hear his voice
with attention and affection, John 10. 26.
with submission and application; do thou not desire and delight, do thou
not design and labor to do so? John. 5. 25.
Is not the hour come, wherein such a dead Lazarus as thou, John 11. 25.
should hear the voice of the Son of God and live?

Object. But I have no free will of mine own to spiritual good.

Answ. Thou have a moral will; capable of the means, and doing thy duty, though
in a weak manner. Bestir thy self therefore, and whilst thou art making use of
that, Christ's Renewing Grace thou may meet with to spiritualize it, and make
it free from its sinful Bondage. John 8. 32, 33, 34 35.
His Truth will make thee free.

Object. John. 6. 44.
But none comes to the So^^ but such as the Father draws.

Answ. Is not the Father drawing of thee now? Are not his Ordinances, Mercies
and Offers strong cords of Love, and the Bands of Man to fetch thee home? Hos.
11. 4.
Is not he drawing thee internally also by the motions of his Holy Spirit upon
thy conscience? Resist no longer, burst not his Divine Tresses, but yield and
follow.

Object. But I.

Answ. No more Buts against God and thine own Good, thou must yield now. Christ
is resolved on it. He will have thee home, thou must come, its in vain to
struggle; All sufficient Grace will be all-efficient. Do thou not feel him
turning of thy heart, silencing thy doubts, stirring in thy Bowels, opening
thine eyes, and drawing thy will to embrace his own terms? Are not these sure
signs of his saving Grace? Come on then, come home to thy Christ.

Quest. How shall I come, that I may be welcome?

Answ. 1. Come instantly, without any delay; demurs are dangerous. This may be
thy last moment of Life, and his last word to thee. Strike, whilst the Iron is
hot; come whilst there is hope. Esaias. 55. 5, 6.
Seek now the Lord whilst he may be found; cast in thy mettle whilst hot, Romans
6. 17.
into his mould. Yield thy softened wax to the Seal of his Spirit. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
His spirit will not always strive with man. Genesis 6. 3.


2. Come self denyingly, not in thy strength, but in his: follow his effectual
drawing, from the sense of thine unability. Let thy heart still say with the
Spouse, Draw me, and we will run after thee. Cant. 1. 2.
Know still thy unworthiness and insufficiency, laying thy self with recumbency
upon his merits; Esaias 26. 3, 4.
not on any thing else.

3. Come self-resigningly, on conjugal terms, to be wholly given up to him.
Make no capitulations, no Reservations of any sin, of any creature, though as
dear to thee as thy right eye, Mat. 5. 30, 31.
right hand, or right foot. Be content to be wholly his, as he is content to be
wholly thine. Thy skill and power, thy will and comforts, thy time and credit,
thy soul and body, thy Interest and friends, must be wholly given up to him.
Nothing is his, Psalm 12. 2.
if all be not his; a ^eart and a heart, he cannot endure.

4. Come sincerely and cordially, without dissembling without base designs.
Come for his Person first out of Love to him, not merely to his goods. Come
chiefly to partake of himself, and to enjoy him, though he should seem to
withold all things else. Come to a Husband, not to a Fair. Come for marriage,
not for a Bargain. Choose him for himself, and all his goodness must needs be
thine too.

5. Luke 14. 26, 28, 30, 33.
Come understandingly, not in a blind manner. Know what thou art about, Romans 8.
18. the Greek (...), signifies a most rational supputation, cast up by divine
Arithmetic exactly
and be well advised. Consult and reason the case to the full. Cast up thy
accounts, what it may cost thee. Can thou be willing to live and die with him
and for him? View him thoroughly in all his Perfections, and in all his Precepts
too. Be well acquainted with his marriage Covenant, engaging to Duty, by
engaging Mercy. He is a jealous God, as he is Gracious.

6. John 6. 35.
Come fiducially, not distrusting him. Study and apply this Promise of marriage
so variously and so frequently expressed to thee. That Promise is set out both
absolutely and conditionally. Suck those Breasts still, and draw with comfort
the water of life out of those saving Wels by the Bucket of faith, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
let out by the cords of thine Affections; when thou can not find in thee the
Condition required, Isa. 66. 11, 12.
then press that word upon him and thy self, Isa. 11. 3.
which freely promises to give that Condition. Psalm. 51. 6, 10.
Do as David, begging for a new heart from him that had faithfully promised it,
Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
and therefore required the same. Ezech. 36. 26.
There is no Precept nor Condition in Gods Word, that has not a Promise to
answer it. Ezech. 18. 31.
Do as Jacob did, to make use of all. Genesis 32. 9. 10, 12.


7. Come penitentially with a bleeding heart to a bleeding Savior, Zech. 12.
10, 11.
looking upon him whom thou have pierced, mourning over him, and judging thy
self for abusing him. Come from the sensible sight of thy sinful Revolts,
condemning thy self as unworthy to be his Servant. 1. Sam. 29.
Come as Abigail did unto David, Luke 15.
as the Prodigal did toward his Father. His infinite kindness must needs
aggravate thy horrid unkindness. He forgets thy sins, but thou must remember
them. He forgives thee freely and fully, that thou may forsake them
accordingly. Come then with a tender heart to such a tender Christ with lively
Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11*
never to be repented of. Such Music on these waters will be found most sweet.

8. Come obedientially because he commands it who is thy Sovereign. Psalm. 45.
10, 11.
Come to do thy homage in loyal Allegiance to him that is thy God, to worship
and serve him. Its a loving and faithful Obedience he expects from thee as his
proper due most dearly bought. Thou art ransomed with a divine price that thou
may be his wholly and eternally. 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
If any part of thee be at any time given up to sin against thy husband, what
treasonable Adultery will it prove? Come then to thy Lord to be ruled by him in
every Ordinance, in every Providence. Come to thy Fathers house to show all
loving dutifulness there, Gal. 5. 13.
not to be lawless or a servant to sin. His royal Law calls to perfect Liberty,
Iam. 28.
that thou may be as free as the Children of the most high God. 1 Pet. 2. 16.
6


9. Matthew. 22.
Come lovingly with fervent Affections to this royal feast of Christ's own
wedding, Luke 1^.
that so nearly concerns thy self. Nehem. 8. 8.
Let the Joy of the Lord be thy strength herein to tune the whole man to the
highest strain of heavenly delight. Is not this Solemnity so incomparable to be
observed with sutatable Enlargements? Stir up thy soul in coming to Christ,
that the vigor of all thy faculties may sweetly embrace the great King of
Saints. Purity and Fervency meet here admirably at the Celebration of this
wonderful match. Christ comes to thee, Esaias 59. 17.
and all over with zeal; thou must meet him in the like apparel. Psalm 45.
Observe the Brides Attire in that glorious Type of Solomon's marriage
answerable to his, that thou might learn how to come to Christ thy divine
Solomon.

10. Come gratefully to thy Benefactor with hearty thanks for his unspeakable
Gifts. Col. 1. 12.
Cast thy Crown at his feet, and give him the Glory of all his Mercies. 2 Cor.
2. 14.
Let him wear the Crown who has done and suffered so wonderfully for thee. 2
Cor. 9. 15.
Begin betime that Angelical Duty, 1 These. 5. 18.
which shall be thy task and thy happiness to Eternity. Revel. 4. 10.
Triumph in thy God that makes thee to triumph. Let thy soul be harmoniously
set to sing forth his praises in the sweet Consort of all thy Powers and Parts.
Ephesians. 1. 3.
In all things give thanks to the wonderful Dispenser of all things. Bless him
continually who thus blesses thee.

11. Psalm. 104. 45.
Come diligently in the use of all means appointed by him. Esaias 55. 6.
Seek him in all his ways, attend him in his road, hearken to his Spirit, Prove.
3. 6.
study his Word, seek his face often, think much of him, Exodus 20. 24.
inquire of others, neglect no help, and rest on none but on Christ himself.
Esaias 64. 5.


Thus nominal Christians should be persuaded to make sure of Christ in closing
with him upon his own terms, to make them real Partakers of Christ and
Possessors as well as Professors.
Secondly. REal Christians should also be pressed to make use of this gracious
Knowledge, by keeping close to Christ in the spiritual Improvement thereof.
Each of us should strongly be quickened thereto by all the former
Considerations. This singular Jewel is given for use, not merely to gaze at.
The best find much need still to be quickened to their Duty herein, that this
choice Mercy may be well improved.

1. Personally in our several places; our fruitfulness should demonstrate still
that we have learned to know Jesus Christ in a saving way. This gracious
knowledge must have influence into every thought, every word and work. In every
Duty to be performed, in every Mercy to be improved, in every sin to be
mortified, in every Grace to be exercised.

Remember Christian who ever thou art that have been effectually taught in the
School of Christ, thy constant work must be to practice the Lessons got there.
Action is the end of Contemplation. Thy Speculations must never be idle. Thy
general and particular Calling will still find thee matter for the spiritual
use of this gracious knowledge. Mind Christ still then in every Duty toward
God and Man.

1. In thy generrl Calling look for him, attend him in every Ordinance, The
Charets and Walks of Communication between him and his.
1. OBserve him in his Word, speaking to thee that thou may know his divine
Oracles, Heb. 12. 25.
hearken to this voice, Mat. 10. 40.
who speaks from Heaven by men and means to us. Has not he promised that all
his people shall be taught of Luke 10. 16.
God? hear him then in hearing his servants, Act. 3. 23, 24.
appointed and duly called to his work, that you may not teach one another
still Ioh. 6. 45.
Ier. 31.
Pharisaically, Heb. 8.
as the Sect-masters did; hearken to his orderly appointments, 1* John 20. 28.
that you may receive his Anointing from above to teach you all things
gradually, Heb. 6. 1, 2.
so as you shall not need to be put a fresh to your first Elements, to spell
the principles in a childish manner. Minding of him will put you further
toward perfection, that you may be able to teach others also. Ioh. 5. 39.
Read often those precious Love Letters sent unto you from your best friend
above; and search the Scriptures for the Records of him who is the Treasure of
those golden Mines. Behold in that Gospel-glass of his his glorious Image, that
thou may be transformed into the same. 2 Cor. 3. 18.


2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 18.
Visit him often in spiritual prayer, secret, private public. This is the line
of Communication between Heaven and Earth, whereby Christ's Soldiers keep
correspondency with each other, as with their General. This fiery Chariot may
carry thy soul Eliah like to thy dear Savior in Abraham's bosom on any
occasion. Ezekiel. 36. 37.
Its a sure and a speedy Post for any dispatch. Iam. 3. 16.
Its a choice key that will unlock all the stories of his al-sufficiency. Ioh.
14. 14.
It will avail much if it be fervent; for what ever thou ask in his name, 1
Ioh. 5. 14, 15.
thou may be sure he will do it in the best way and season. Psalm. 65 1, 2.
He is the God that hears prayers, Ier. 29. 11, 12.
that will be sought and found in every thing.

3. In Meditation, retire thy self into a private walk, that thou may enjoy
him the more freely to renew thy acquaintance more familiarly. Prove. 18. 1.
Thus a man having sequestered himself from the crowd of Creatures, seeks and
intermeddles with all divine Wisdom. This choice Duty is the souls withdrawing
Room wherein Christian sincerity appears most in its purity, Genesis 24* 63.
nothing so subject to hypocrisy as other services. Attend Christ herein as
Isaac did, retiring thy self in the most convenient season, to exercise the
noble faculties of thy rational soul in the noblest way of Intercourse between
Christ and thy self.

4. Look for Christ also in Christian Conference which he has promised to
honor and further with his singular Presence and Blessing. He loves to see his
Members helpful to each other this way. Mat. 18 19, 20.
The one cannot say to the other, I have no need of thee. Mal. 3. 16.
The meanest may be of great use therein. 1 Cor. 12.
Thus Iron sharpens Iron, Pro 27. 17.
and the sticks together do burn much the better. Eccle. 4 9. 11, 12
Two are better then one, and a threefold cord is not easily broken. A sadder
woe there is to him that is alone. Christ loves to meet with his friends this
way. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, etc.


5. In the solemn Seals of his Covenant, Christ will be peculiarly observed.
Mat. 26.
Those sacramental Institutions are the choice Remembrancers of him. Mar. 14.
Behold and attend him there with a Spirit suitable to the Nature of such
Ordinances. Luke 22.
Mat. 28. 19, 20.


6. Rev. 1 10.
In praising of him and sanctifying his holy Sabbath, in spiritual fastings and
feastings, Col. 3. 11.
in every Institution of his thou will still find the sweetness and strength of
this gracious Knowledge, Gal. 3.
that Christ may still be thy All in All. Ephesians. 1. 23.


2. Ephesians. 4. 6.
In thy particular Calling, each Relation toward thy Neighbor, whereto
Providence calls thee orderly, will require a spiritual use of it, according to
the variety of his dispensations toward thee. Pro. 3. 6.
In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will direct thy paths. In Prosperity
and Adversity Christ is still to be experimentally known. Every smile and frown
of his, every check and stroke comes as a Messenger with a special Errand. All
his Providential Administrations will declare much of his conjugal Care toward
thee. Thou may learn thence to carry a Counterpane in thy heart and life
proportionable to the several motions of his hand. In every Condition and
occasion thou will find hereby cause to observe all his ways to be Mercy and
Truth toward such as know him. The Checker work of his Providence will hereby
appear to be most beautiful in the Result, when all things shall work together
for good, Romans 8. 27.
though some particular passages may seem harsh and disorderly.

2. This gracious knowledge should be improved Relatively in a Christian way of
Communication, doing good to All, Gal. 6. 10.
especially to the household of faith. Every one in his place should therein
labor to resemble the God of all Grace, who is always streaming forth goodness
round about. Mat. 5. 44. 45, 48.
Its our honor and happiness to be faithfully active therein, for him, and like
him. By Faith and Prayer, Advice and Counsel, the meanest may improve
Opportunities of serving his Providence for others help. But Superiors in their
Relations, Civil and Military, Oeconomical and Ecclesiastical, are especially
called thereto by the Lord himself, whose Substitutes they are. Psalm. 82. 1, 2,
5.
Each of them in their places will find most comfort in the promoting and
improving the gracious knowledge of Christ. Prove. 8. 15. 16.
Encouragements and Directions he affords very plentifully to all Magistrates
and Officers, as also to all his Ministers and Governors of Families, to
advance the same in its Power and Purity, Esa. 11. 9.
that the earth may be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters
cover the sea. His Spirit and Providence will seasonably remove all Lets and
Obstacles. Blessed shall they be whose prudent zeal and faithful 1 Cor. 2. 2.
Diligence shall be still found subservient thereto. To know Jesus Christ, and
him crucified was the scope and sum of the great Apostles preaching and
practice; let it be so of ours that our conjugal Acquaintance with him may
effectually be demonstrated to his honor and man's good. This precious jewel is
daily endangered by variety of close and open enemies. Many false Lights are
daily setting up by the strong factions of the Prince of darkness to
counterfeit and disgrace divine Light. The public Interest as well as our
private is wrapped up together and shipped in one Bottom with Christ's Interest.
1 Chro. 28. 9.
Our best Politics do wholly depend on the right use of this gracious
knowledge. Does not the Lord speak again to each of his people, especially to
our noble Worthies, what he solemly expressed by the royal Prophet to his
famous Son, And thou Solomon my Son, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve
him with a perfect heart and a willing mind; If thou seek him, 1 Corh. 28. 2,
etc.
he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him he will forsake thee. 1
Chro. 19. 1, 2. etc.
The like charge he pressed in effect upon all Gods people in that great
convention of state. To further it, mind that.

Doctrine 5. Growing in the Gracious Knowledge of Christ is a special
Gospel-Duty. It becomes Christians to be still growing in that gracious
Knowledge. The Apostle sums all up in this, as the great work of every
Christian, from which none are exempted. Improvement of that singular Mercy,
must needs be a singular Duty.
THis Spiritual Growth is variously expressed in Scripture-Dialect, being
compared to the growing of corn, Mat. 13.
the increase of Light, the spreading of a Tree, the augmentation of the Body,
the fermentation of Leaven, the ripening of Vegetables, etc. All sorts of
things natural, civil, artificial, all vegetative, sensitive and rational
Beings contribute toward the Illustration and Resemblance thereof. Growth
still attends Life, Luke 1. 80.
the Principle of it. Christ himself grew in Grace and Statute before God and
Man; so does the knowledge of him in every gracious heart; Its thriving still.
The most spreading plants are used still in Scripture to set forth this
spiritual Increase of divine Plants. The Jewish Rabbeis tell great wonders of
the Mustard-seeds increase.
They grow as the Mustard Seed from small beginnings to a huge increase,
especially in that Country. They sprout as the Lilly for suddenness, beauty,
uprightness and use. They spread as the Vine for abundant fruitfulness, as the
Oak for strength and durableness, Hos. 14.
as the Cedar for taleness, straightness and medicinableness, Ioh. 15.
as Roses for choiceness, pleasure and cordial virtues. Can. 2. 1, 2.
Thus being planted in the house of the Lord, they flourish in the courts of
our God, Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14, 15.
and most in their old age. Its a choice Duty, obliging all sorts in their
several capacities, which the Gospel-commands and commends frequently and
singularly; the neglect whereof is as largely reproved, threatened and visited
for. The variety of Ordinances and spiritual Provisions which he affords, so
abundantly demonstrate the same. Psalm. 1. 3, 4.
He compares them therefore to the Tree planted by the water side, Rev. 22. 1,
2, 14.
whose leaves flourish, and whose fruit comes still to solid, savory and ripe
fruit. Christ the tree of Life by his own Growth, Rev 2 7.
teaches them thus to grow, affording still the sweet streams of his gracious
Influence, Ier. 17. 7, 8.
in each Relation from his Person through his offices, Psalm. 23 1, 2.
that the fruits of his progress and purchase may be brought forth in Esa. 5 5.
1.
them Those eminent places in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 47. 1, 9, 12.
and other Scriptures hold this forth to the Life by the increase and
Improvement of the Sanctuary-waters. A fruitful Parable the Lord himself
spreads before us to express this emphatically by a large and pregnant
Allegory, Ioh. 15.
whose divine Branches have been elaborately trimmed to this purpose by a very
worthy Pen. Dr. Thomas Goodwin in his Christ's Growth.
The God of all Grace likes not to see his gracious Offspring wasted with
Rickets in a decaying posture. His Messages from Heaven to the seven Churches
of Asia testify the same, Rev. 2.
and hold forth a lively resemblance of his various dealings with his people
from that time hitherto, Rev. 3.
according to the various proportions of their Growth or Decay.

Reason 1.
Their Nature requires it; full of Spirit and Life they are, and must needs
grow. Psalm. 36. 9.
The more of Life in any thing, the more of Growth. 1 Ioh. 5. 12.
The more of Spirit, the more of liveliness. Grace is spiritual Life, Gal. 2.
20.
the seed of Glory, and eternal Life. Col. 3. 4.
Its the Life of Christ, the operation of his holy Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 12.
as far as man is capable thereof. The best of a man's natural Life is but dull
and dead, in comparison of this gracious Life. Union to the living God, and
Communion with him in Christ through the Spirit, is the Principle of this
supernatural Life. The new Creature must needs grow that Partakes so much of
the divine Nature in similitude, Ioh. 15. 6.
though not in sameness; in quality, though not in equality. 1 Ioh. 2. 17.
Want of lively Principles, makes so many glorious Professors to wither and
waste so miserably. Psalm. 129. 6.
They were but seeming Branches, Psalm. 90. 5.
and as Cions merely fastened about the stock, Esa. 37. 27.
but never incorporated therein intimately. They that have their root and Life
from earthly Nature, Col. 2. 6.
still may for a while flourish, but will soon be blasted. The Root and Life of
the new man is above in Gods bosom, in the heart of Christ, still supplied by
his Spirit to safeguard them from all winter-blasts of renewed Temptations and
corruptions.

Reason 2.
Gods honor calls for it. Prove. 16. 4.
All things are made for him, as they were framed by him. Romans 11. 36.
Of him, through him, and to him are all things, Esa. 60. 21.
as in Nature, so in Grace peculiarly. This people has he formed for his
praises. Esa. 61. 3.
They are the plants of his setting, Ioh. 15. 8.
the work of his hand, that he may be glorified. And herein is their Father
glorified, that they bring forth much fruit. The growth of his Garden is the
glory of that Divine Husbandman. The thriving of his children must needs
commend his Fatherly care. Romans 8. 28.
His Love and service cannot but press thereto. If his children be so unlike
him, they can neither honor nor serve him aright. Mat. 25.
He hat much work for all his servants in every Relation and occasion. If they
be sickly and wasting, what are they fit for? Must not his people be lively
like him, that they may be still faithful and successful? The more Christ is
known in a gracious way, the more does sin waste, and Grace flourish. 2 Cor. 5.
14.
The vigor of a Christian is still in his Christ. The Love of Christ must needs
constrain him to live more to him, in being more like him. Much strength and
Spirit is still required in every part of the Lords service. He would have us
fervent in spirit, Romans 1. 9.
as Paul himself was therein, which does require a spiritual growth to make us
vigorous. Romans 12. 11.


Reason 3.
Man's Interest challenges it, their credit and comfort, their honor and
happiness depend upon their growth. Their profit and pleasure, their
helpfulness to others still attend the same. A wasting sickly life is as
uncomfortable as unserviceable to our selves and others. Rickets and
Consumptions render our children useless and burthensom; spiritual decaies are
far more offensive unto Gods children. They can neither help themselves nor
others, that are thus pining and consuming. The life of our life is in our
health and strength: without it we cannot receive nor do good to any purpose. A
diseased Life is but a living Death, and a dying Life. Christ must be known
more graciously still, that we may enjoy more of his comforts, 1 Cor. 12. 1, 2,
3. etc.
and be more useful to all his members. The more any Limb receives from the
head, the more assistance may the same afford unto its Body. Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. etc.
We must still be deriving from Christ, what we are still to communicate to our
fellow members. Christian sympathy and communion will still challenge
serviceableness from every part of his mystical Body.

Use 1.
See the Necessity and Benefit of a perpetual Ministry and Ordinances. They are
the special means appointed and blessed for the promoting of this spiritual
growth. He gave Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. etc.
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, until we
all come into a perfect man in him, to the full measure of his stature; that we
henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine,
but speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up into him in all things, who is the
Head, even Christ. The slighting of Christ's Institutions makes so many to decay
apace in their profession and affection, in their parts and practice. They are
the food and refreshings of Gods House, Esa. 84.
suited to the case of all his children and servants therein. Esa. 56. 5, 6.
The neglect, abuse and poisoning thereof must needs be very sinful and woeful.
How can they but languish and perish, that scorn and defile, that spoil and
pervert the precious Means of their Life and growth? Providence ever knits the
End and the Means. What the Lord appoints, he does surely and seasonably bless.
Out of his road he will not be looked for, nor assure his Grace where he
Records not his Name. Exodus 20. 24.
His General presence fills all places indeed, and Rules in hell it self
Judicially. Esa. 6^. 5.
But his favorable and fatherly presence, Luke 6. 46.
is to be sought and found in his gracious Ordinances. What can Rebels expect
from a Sovereign whose Orders they still oppose and reject? Who can look for the
Blessing of Heaven in following the ways of darkness? What hope of growing in
any good things, without answerable supplies and relief? We waste a pace and
need refreshing still, that we may grow in the knowledge of Christ.

Use 2.
It may convince and humble all ignorant and negligent Christians. Its our sin,
let it be our shame and sorrow that we grow so little under such helps in the
Lords husbandry. 1 Samuel 2. 12.
This evil reigns in most, it remains in the best. Most continue in the love,
under the power thereof, making a trade and a sport of it; the best find much
cause to be still judging themselves for the sad Relics of these unhappy
weeds. The dunghill abounds continually with filth and Vermin, Ierem. 17. 9.
so does man's unrenewed heart. The best Garden will ever be troubled with some
trash or other to be looked after. Their case is saddest that are most senseless
of it, and secure in it. The soundest bodies retain some ill humors, that will
augment too much Putrefaction if not timely removed. Thence the cause of so
many Diseases that hinder the growth of the inward and outward man. But how
dreadful is their condition that still feed their disease, and love nothing but
what increases distempers? Corrupt nature still will bring like to like, and
undo it self by pampering self. God provides us very wholesome food in his
Ordinances; but like foolish children we frowardly dislike it, and prefer any
trash rather. We feed on crude and corrupt matter which breeds choler, phlegm
and worms a pace. Thence an increase of putrefaction, which spoils our appetite
and taints our palate. Want of exercise and orderly care in the ways of
Christ, makes us such weaklings, and such punies in his Grace and Knowledge.
How does it trouble us to see our children wasting with Rickets, worms and
Fevers through their own folly? Is not our case much worse under our many
spiritual consumptions, still contracted by our negligence? Let is humble us and
make us ashamed, that we grow so little in that which is good, and so fast in
that which is evil; is it not our folly and our misery? Should not it be our
shame and sorrow?

Use 3.
Examination. Does your spiritual Life appear to your self and others by your
growth? Is it universal, proportional, and continual? Living things do grow in
every part still, with proportion and continuance. Do you thus spiritually grow
in the gracious Knowledge of our Lord Jesus? Observe it in the particulars.

1. Is it an universal growth, both internally and externally?

1. Internally, do you grow in every faculty and power of the inward man? See
Romans 7.
Does your mind and Judgment, your reason and conscience, Psalm 119. and other
pieces of Saints experiences lively anatomized.
your will and Affections, your memory and Sense grow more spiritual, solid and
substantial? Are you better acquainted with his Person and Office, Progress and
Purchase, Relation and Influence? Do you feel thereby more vigor and strength
flowing into your soul out of his fullness? Do you find his Spirit quickening
your spirit by every Ordinance and Providence of his, to an higher Degree of
Grace and Knowledge? Are you more sensible of your need thereof as of your own
insufficiency to support and supply you in every Relation? Do you long for it
and delight in it, grieving for the want, striving after it, restless without
it, refreshed with it? Is Christ sweeter, and sin bitterer to your soul more
and more?

2. Naturalists mention a strange creature, whose skin is as big at its birth
as ever after, the internal substance filling it up by degrees, like a pouch; a
gracious soul is no such Monster.
Externally, do your leaves, buds and fruit increase in Loveliness toward God
and man? Do you grow, as Christ did, in Grace and Favor? Is it your study,
design and labor to perfect holiness in the fear of God, by putting away every
filthiness of flesh and spirit, through the improvement of his precious
Promises? Is your growth uniform in its universal augment? Do you abhor sins of
Omission, as much as you do sins of Commission? Have you an eye still to the
second Table, in minding the first; and to the first, in minding the second? Do
you make conscience of the least Precept, in improving every Promise? Does not
your Interest encroach upon Christ, or your Neighbors various concernments?
Are you more sincere and* self-denying, more courageous and zealous for Truth
and for Peace? Do you grow in Patience and Prudence also, as in diligence and
Dependency? Are formality and hypocrifie more loathsome still to you as to God?
Job 17. 9.
Does your hand grow stronger and steadier in all offices of Justice and
Charity as of Piety and true Devotion? Is your speech active and lively? is
your life speaking?

2. Is your growth proportional? Does it answer the measure of every part? Ephesians.
4. 14, 15.
Its a Monster that grows not aright in Nature and Grace for quantity, order
and quality. Observe how Plants spread with fit proportions, and sensitives in
every member; mind the very growth of your own and others Bodies, to compare
your spiritual case therewith. Do you grow downward in self-denial and
humility, as well as upward in knowledge and comfort? Is there no disproportion
between your profession and Conversation; your parts and practice? Are not you
sick of spiritual Rickets that puff up the head and waste other limbs? Do your
sense and motion grow spiritually, orderly and fitly? Are you not like
Mushroms, of a sudden monstrous disproportionable growth? Has every faculty
its proper increase for the service of all other parts? Do you digest well
spiritual Nourishment, which every part must assimilate into its proper
substance and use? Does your increase of Gifts and Knowledge, Phil. 1. 9.
make you to grow in all Judgment of Christian helpfulness toward every
Relation above you, about you, under you? Do all the parts of the New creature
keep an harmonious symmetry and orderly motion within you? Is there no
excrescence, or exuberance, no dislocation, or disruption there willingly
suffered? Are not you like Hydropical Bodies, puffed up with wind, water and
humors? Is your Judgment sound, and affections warm; your will supple, and
conscience tender; your tongue seasoned, and your whole man strengthened daily,
by this gracious Knowledge? Does your Growth answer Christ provisions?

3. Is it continual? Is it still your desire and delight, design and labor to
be found ripening toward Gods Harvest? Is your way still as the morning Light,
Prove. 4. 18.
which shines more and more to the perfect day? Job 17. 9.
Do you hold on in that gracious course, waxing stronger and stronger, as he
that has pure hands? Do you abhor sinful Remissions and intermissions in your
self and others? Observe the growth of all living things, how they hasten still
after their proper (...) and perfection? Is it so with you on a spiritual
score? Phil. 3. 12* 13, 14.
Have you learned with Paul to forget things behind, and still press forward? Do
you therefore labor to cast off every weight that does hinder you, Heb. 12. 1,
2.
and the sin that so easily besets you? The Lord is continually dropping down
fatness from Heaven upon you; Do you Return thither, answer your Receipts
thence? Are you like a Plant in the Lords Garden, spiritual and civil, in
Church and State, ripening still toward a better state? Do you mark and bewail
your failings and neglects? Do your falls and slips quicken your pace and your
watchfulness? Does others folly teach you more wisdom, to walk more steadily in
this slippery age, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
whilst the Seducers do wax worse and worse, both in deceiving and being
deceived? Are you still striving to grow better and better? Matthew. 13.
Are you not like the high way, stony, or thorny ground, Luke 8.
which are but for a time; but like the good ground fruitful to perfection?
Heb. 6. 12.
Do you Resemble those true Believers who through faith and patience inherited
the Promises; Heb. 10. 36.
rather then Judas and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20.
Anannias and Saphira, with thousands more that failed halfway? 2 Timothy 2. 17.
Do Hymeneus, Philetas and Demas awaken your care, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
and quicken your diligence, that you may not prove like to them in forsaking
Christ? Do you give your Lusts neither Peace nor Truce in your warfare against
spiritual evils? 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Does your profiting in this Knowledge of Christ appear unto all in all
occasions?

Use 4.
Be we stirred up to obey this divine Charge of growing in Grace and in the
Knowledge of Christ. Are not we all nearly concerned therein? Does not our
profit, delight and credit challenge this from us? Is not Gods Interest of
greater moment to prevail with us? Should not our Relations to others put as
upon it? Mat. 13. 45, 46.
Are not Christians spiritual Merchants? Shall we not improve then such a
precious Jewel? Should not we still be trading with Christ in the great
Commodities of Heaven? Strong encouragements we have from all parts thereof, if
but duly weighed. The Trade, the Factor, the Commodity, the Venture and Gain
are beyond compare. Men improve their grounds, and manage their state to the
best advantage, that they may live well. Should not we then improve this stock,
and husband this portion upon better ground? It is a field that will never
fail; the more we till it, the more it will yield. As Christ himself, so the
knowledge of him, are richest Mines still full of Treasure: Prove. 2.
springs of all good still inexhaustible. The more you draw the more will
follow it; Prove. 3.
like the woman's Oil that will never stop, 2 King. 4. 5, 6.
but for want of Vessels. This improvement will improve all things else; and
without it nothing will do well. This speak to dead and living.

1. Death Christians should be excited, that they may get Life, else they
cannot grow. You must get the stock before you can trade. Your heart must be
renewed that it may be bettered. Former directions will stand you in stead if
duly minded and observed. Matthew. 20.
You must be convinced of your spiritual death, Mark. ^0. 46.
to feel the need of the Prince of Life. Seek then to him as blind Bartimeus,
Mark. 8.
cry hard after him, let him have no rest til he give you Life and Light at
once. He never yet rejected any soul that unfeignedly did attend on him. If you
wait long at Bethesdas pool, John 7.
its for your good, and he will be found in the best season; if he put you off
as he did that famous woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. 22, 23, 24.
it is but for trial and to quicken you. If you cannot go* send your heart and
friends, your Prayers and Tears to give him a call. Be sure to observe what he
says to you in his Word and Providence, as by his Spirit. As you desire Life,
neglect no Means helping thereto, Looking still to him for his Blessing in all.
Retain no sin, and slight no Duty Voluntarily; give him your bad heart to mend
it for you. Feel your deadness that he may quicken you. Know the worst of your
self by inspection in his Glass, that you may learn to know the best of Christ.
Beware especially of your darling Lusts, Phil 3. 5, 6, 7, etc.
your Dalilah corruptions, whether sinful pleasure, profit or Pride. Know your
wretchedness and emptiness, your insufficiency and unworthiness: 1 Cor. 3. 18.
that Christ may be your all, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
for Wisdom and Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. 2 Timothy 1. 6.


2. (...) to stir up and blow the coals; to quicken the dying sparks, by an
elegant Metaphor.
Living Christians must stir up themselves increase this Life. Rouz up the
Grace of God that is within you. Blow up those sparks, and make it your work to
grow still in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Food and
Exercise, Physic and Diet, Temperance and Vigilance will be found special
Helps, as for bodily, so for spiritual improvement of Life. There is an
Instinct in every creature, for self-preservation and increase, which moves
still toward proper Objects in all due means.

1. Look well to your food then of a spiritual Nature, to shun what is evil,
Job 23. 12.
and improve what is good. You must therein mind the quantity and quality,
Psalm 119.
the order and season of Receving it for due concoction. John 6.
The Scripture Word will afford you still the living Bread, Ierem 15. 16.
and the living Water; the flesh and Blood of Christ to feed on by Faith. Heb.
5. 12, 13, 14.
Its milk for Babes, and strong meat for adult Christians. Let it not be mixed
nor adulterated by humane additions or detractions. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
Hunger and thirst still after the Word and Righteousness of Christ. Take what
suits your case, Mat. 5. 6.
and observe what Rules himself gives you. Plain dressing thereof will be still
best for your profiting. Feel the need of it, and long after it; cry and seek
hard for it, make good use of it. You must feed well that you may thrive well.

2. See to your exercise; that it may be moderate, suitable and seasonable; so
will it be of singular help to discuss ill humors, and to augment your native
heat, by fit distribution of food and Spirits. Acts 24. 16.
In all the ways of God exercise your self unto Godliness as the Apostle did
for himself, 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
directing Timothy and all others to the same. Heb. 5. 14.
Such an exercise has the Promises of this Life and of that to come, being
still profitable for all things. Beware of straying into the devils paths, and
training in his military Yard. You must wrestle against sin and self, against
spiritual enemies of all sorts. Your sinful body must be kept under, that you
may be nimble and swift in your Race. 1 Cor. 9 25, 26, 27.
The whole Armor of God is furbished to your hands, that you may put it on and
use it with success. Be thus strong in his strength and in the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.
that you may prevail in all your conflicts.

3. Mind seasonable Physic which you will often find the need of to purge out
your peccant humors that are increasing and putrefying still. Your Growth will
be stopped if these sinful stoppages and putrid matters be not duly removed.
Advise therefore with the best Physician for Prescripts and Medicines sorted to
your case. Exodus 14. 26.
Deal very freely and fully with him without dissembling and reservation. Mal.
4. 2.
Give him exact account of what you do know, Hos. 6. 1, 2.
that you may be dealt thoroughly with for good; Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
observe his directions with puncutual care in receiving good, Ierem. 51. 9.
and eschewing evil. His Skill, Power and Will are incomparable and
unquestionable. His blood and Grace by his Holy Spirit he mingles in his Word
to destroy your sins, and to save your soul. If his Pills appear bitter to, your
taste, they are the fitter to kill your corruptions: Your eure is certain if
you be but ruled under his preparing, Some diseases are called Opprobria
Medicorum.
purging and dressing. No disease ever proved shame to him; trust him, obey
him, and your case is safe.

4. Keep a due Diet as he does instruct, who orders all things to his peoples
good. To abstain from evil is still as needful as to be doing and receiving
good. Observe then what things are most offensive to your constitution, 1 These.
5. 22.
that you may avoid the first beginnings and appearance thereof. Some are more
bent to pride, others to Passion, some to vanity, others to wordliness, some
are more lazy, others more wanton, some grow more secure, others more foolish.
Error will tempt you under various shapes, 2 Cor. 12. 14.
putting on often the Garment of Light. Ignorance and Pride will still cherish
it; self-conceit and folly will still be its Nurses. Meddle not with pitch to
avoid its filth. 1 These. 5. 21.
Try all things aright, that you may suck no evil. Advice from sure hands will
preserve you much from the common Woe of this erring Age. Improve your own and
others Experience, confirmed to you by Scripture-Records.

5. Forget not Temperance, Phil 4. 5.
the Nurse of Virtue and the Ruin of vice. Let your moderation appear to all
men, the Lord is an hand. Sobriety in all things lawful must attend abstinence
from things unlawful. 1 These. 5 6, 8.
The supreme Physician directs often to this, both by his own mouth and his
Servants Pen. 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Intemperance is the womb and breast of all sinful evil that would weaken you.
You may soon surfeit with worldly Creatures, if you be not singularly careful;
that you may grow apace in the things of Christ, be very moderate in all other
things. Naturae pauca sufficient. Senec.
Nature is content with little, and Grace with less, where Inordinancy has not
burst the bounds. Know well what becomes your Complexion and Condition, that
you may still cut your garment to your cloth, and to your wearing. He is rich
indeed that has learned Contentment, the choice Jewel which Christ alone
gives. Paul studied long and hard for the same, Phil. 4. 11, 12.
being instructed in the School of Heaven. 1 Timothy 6 6, 8, 10.
Follow his steps to attain his End: so shall you know how to want and abound.
Godliness with Content will be your great gain; the Blessing of the Lord will
make you so rich, Prove. 10. 22.
as to add no sorrow thereto.

Sixthly, Matthew. 24.
Be very watchful; this is Christ's own Rule, often inculcated to spur on our
dullness. Matthew. 25.
We naturally are very drowzy, Mark 14.
much inclining to sloth and slumber. In this sleepy age the wisest Virgins
contract infection among the foolish. Luke 21.
They all slumber and sleep through their own default, the Bridgroom tarrying
for some longer space then some expected. Watch and pray, 1 These. 5.
watch and be sober, lest ye be surprised ere you be ware. You are surrounded
with mortal enemies, very numerous, cruel and cunning: Look well to your
Guards, inward and outward; your danger within is often greatest. Ephesians. 5. 15,
16.
Redeem the time well, walking circumspectly, not as fools, Col. 4. 2.
but as wise in these evil days. Watch unto all good against every sin, so
shall you be ready for your Masters coming. Matthew. 25.
The lazy Servant shall see him with horror, whom the diligent shall welcome
with Joy. The night of Ignorance, Error, and all sin, is the season that
requires this most. Troubles of all sorts will attend the same if all due care
be not rightly used. Christ comes as a Thief unexpectedly, both on the former
and this latter world, whilst robbing Spirits are catching abroad. Blessed is
he that watches, and keeps his Garments. Revel. 16. 15.
If any of us be stripped by their Wiles, we shall be found naked to our open
shame. Seducing Spirits do haunt every place with their cheating drugs and
Mountebanck Tricks. Look well to your selves and to all under you, that ye be
not poisoned by their Artifice. They can cog the dice, and shuffle their Cards
with all nimbleness and secret methods. The Prince of this world is still
teaching them to abuse Scripture, and corrupt its sense by wresting its words.
Watch therefore to improve the knowledge of Christ with more vigor, zeal and
diligence. Be moved thereto by further viewing the following point, as the
Remedy against such Maladies.

Doctrine VI. Spiritual Growth is a Sovereign Antidote against Error and
Apostasy. This clearly appears from the respective Aspect of this Text upon the
Context, as is employed in the particle But.
ERror is a subtle and a strong Poison, as does appear from the former hints.
It blinds the Judgment, and misleads the soul into Satan's road of falsehood and
deceit. Spiritual Errors are most dangerous in the great matters of our
Salvation. Scruples and doubts are more unsettled; Error grows fixed, and
radicates it self. In Circumstantials of Religion there is less danger among
sober and humble Christians. If this disease grow to greater height, near the
foundation and the noble parts, it will be worse still. If once it strike at
Fundamentals, its intolerable, not to be born with. The venom thereof is set
out in Scripture by the most poisonous Creatures that can be. Minerals and
Plants, Vermin and Serpents do all come short in setting it forth. The vilest
Excrements and the worst disease cannot sufficiently express its deadliness.
Its the sad abstract of all kind of evil, wherein sin and Sorrow do fully
center. All sorts, even the best, being subject thereto in different ways,
should be made careful to provide against it. As Countries vary, so do their
poisons; as bodies vary, so do their diseases. This poisonous disease does
likewise vary on diverse accouts to be distinctly known toward a cure.

Apostasy and Revolt from God is a pernicious evil, and the common Attendant of
Error, which still endangers a Christians stedfastness. Romans 5. 12, 13, etc.
The word signifies a turning aside, and setting man's back against the living
God. Genesis 6. 5.
Every sin is Gods enemy, Ier. 17. 9.
and turning to sin is running from God. In the first Adam we revolted all,
Psalm. 14.
and corrupt nature is still bent to sin, through the sinful venom received
from him. Romans 3. 10, 11. etc.
Christ the second Adam came into the world to save his people from their
sinful death by a gracious Covenant published in the Gospel. Mat. 1. 21.
Some do embrace it but externally, others cordially. Satan is still attempting
to turn every man from it by various Errors and Methods of his. Luke 1. 72, 73,
74.
He prevails with-most to their undoing, Gal. 3. 14.
and gains too much credit with the best. This Apostasy and turning from God is
total, or partial. Total Apostasy raigns still in all the unregenerate that do
shake off the good ways of Christ. Partial Apostasy often distempers the
Regenerate to a high degree, though it never proves total nor final. They turn
as far from God as they turn aside into crooked ways, being disturbed with the
fumes of corruption and temptation. They turn from one Truth, and then from
another by following Satan and his counterfeit Lights; from one disease they
contract another, by the putrefying of their ill humors to more malignity.

These dreadful evils need a Sovereign Antidote, and a suitable Counterpoison,
that they may not turn all into confusion. All Societies civil and spiritual,
are very much endangered thereby as well as men's souls. Spiritual Growth is a
choice Remedy fitted by the Lord for such a disease. In every Country
Providence affords some Preservative against all diseases and poisons that
infest the same. Wise Physicians know this very well, though they make use of
foreign drugs also ex abundanti. God has showed no less care of the souls of
men then of their bodies, having sent his own Son to be the Savior and Lord of
his people. He is held forth indefinitely to all that will hear, and is
peculiarly given to such whose heart is by special Grace renewed efficacioussy
to the embracing of him. By his Spirit he draws home his Elect from among the
rest to a conjugal acquaintance with himself. This gracious knowledge is to be
improved for a singular Antidote against sinful Errors. It has appeared to be
so in all ages, and will still be so upon solid grounds which divine Reason
suggests to us.

Reason 1.
Because it removes and prevents the causes thereof, External and Internal. The
cause removed, the Effect will cease.
1. Sublata causa, tollitur effectus
THE External Causes, called evident among Physicians, are all such as from
without endanger men, as ill Company, Disorders, Infection, Wounds, etc. from
Sin and Satan; thus spiritually many external causes do still assault us, Heb.
5. 14.
which the knowledge of Christ prevents and removes. A well grown Christian
has his senses exercised to discern aright between good and evil. 1 Cor. 2.
13, 15.
The spiritual man judges of all things, comparing of them spiritually. Pro.
22. 3.
He is not easily caught into the snare, Pro. 27, 12.
but wisely foresees it and escapes. He believes not every Spirit, 1 Ioh. 4. 1,
2.
but tries them all by the Lords Touchstone. He is forewarned and forearmed
still against Infectious Temptations of all sorts.

2. Internal Causes are either Antecedent and remote, or continent and proxime,
which are bred within by congestion and defluxion of several ill humors,
putrefying gradually and variously to the distempering of the several parts,
and of the whole also. Thus sinful Corruption does spiritually disorder men's
souls. Spiritual Growth affords Christ's own help to the purging out of such ill
Humors, Vapors and Spirits. It kills the worms, takes away stoppages, cleanses
the parts by all convenient helps, internal and external. It purges the whole,
and then the parts in a due Method, using revulsions and derivations with all
sort of evacuations. So far as Grace is grown up within by the knowledge of
Christ, 1 Ioh. 3. 3.
so far is corruption purged out gradually. Romans 8. 13.
He that knows him purifies himself even as he is pure. 1 Ioh. 3. 7, 8, 9.
Christ's own Physic dispensed daily in his Word and Providence, is through his
Spirit improved that way. He that is born of God does not so sin, as he did
before, neither can he so sin, either totally or finally, because the seed of
God abides in him. As he finds corruption breeding afresh within, its his
desire and design, his delight and labor to crush the Cockatrice in the shell,
and suppress the first beginnings. He has a tender heart, sensible of the
first stirs, of the least vain thoughts, and keeps himself that the ev^l one
touch him not, as before.

Reason 2.
Because it corroborates and fortifies the noble parts, and thereby all the
rest against all internal Corruptions and outward Temptations. Thus health and
strength are procured and improved against the malignity of all spiritual
distempers. Corroboration is a singular help, as in the bodies, so in the Souls
of men against all diseases. Ill Humors do leave in the parts affected an (...)
and (...), a Discomposure which enfeebles it, Sperma morbosum.
and by a ferment and a sickly Spawn, makes it prone to new disorders. Error
and Sin work in the like manner upon men's souls, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24.
striking chiefly at the Vitals and Chief. Romans 6. 4, 5.
The knowledge of Christ duly improved, does orderly eradicate and extirpate it
by Communication of his divine strength to vivification of every Grace, Col. 3.
3, 4, 5, 6.
and Mortification of the old man in all its Members. The more a soul lives in
him and by him, the more of his renewed Supports and supplies come in, which
compose the Christian into spiritual health, rectifying every part. All the
faculties are secured and fortified thereby against Relapses and struglings of
sin. Phil. 4. 13.
Such can do all things through Christ strengthening them. 2 Cor. 3. 5.
The sense of their own insufficiency drives them still to his Al-sufficiency,
1 Cor. 15. 10.
that his Grace may be sufficient for them, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.
and his Virtue perfected in weakness.

Reason 3.
Because it derives still a specific Virtue out of Christ himself, Psalm. 103.
3.
whose Sovereign Property mingled with all due means of his appointing, Mar. 1.
4.
affords still a sure Preservative: Physicians observe the specific Virtue of
natural Medicines, simple and compound, which renders the whole effectual
toward bodily cures. Such a signally peculiar force is found in the Lords
choice Antidote, dispensed to his Patients. The knowledge of Christ duly
improved, fetches out of him that wonderful Grace which he mingles with all
the Medicines appointed for their good. His Blood is that Aurum potabile and
Panpharmacum, that Catholicon and Elixer of Life which sanctifies all things
effectually to his Peoples good. Ier. 8. 22.
The more any soul grows up into acquaintance with him, Plin. Solin.
the more use is made of that Sovereign Balm of Gilead, Esa. 53. 5.
flowing from the Physicians very heart. Jer. 17. 24.
The Pelican is said to cure his little ones with his own blood. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Christ to be sure makes this good to his. His Grace is the Basis of every
Dose, Mat. 4. 23.
of every Topic, of every means appointed by him. (...), greater and lesser.
The strongest poison is quelled thereby, the stoutest humors are subdued, the
sorest obstructions are removed, and the worst Maladies cured by the same.
Psalm. 105. 20.
He healed all manner of diseases and sicknesses among the people in their
bodies and souls, Esa. 3. 7.
in his progress on earth, A Magistrate is a State-Physician.
and he does so still by his Spirit from heaven. His Word and Ordinances are
the proper means used by him for application thereof. Esa. 20. 26.
He employes his servants of the Magistracy and Ministry to observe his will in
the right use thereof by all fit helps Spiritual and Civil. Hos. 7. 1.
His Providence points out the case to be dealt with all spiritual skill. Our
Antidote improved affords every Christian to manage all aright. His special
Blessing he affords in all according to Promise. The Reason is good; make good
use of it.

Use 1.
Corollar. 1.
Hence may we view the Ground and Cure of our spiritual Distempers in all
Relations.
1. Hos. 7. 1.
THE Ground is much from want of spiritual Growth in the best, Ier. 6. 14.
as from want of Life in most. Were Christ known to better purpose, Ier. 8. 11.
both Church and State would not be so sickly. Ier. 15. 18.
But the most are ignorant of him, Ier. 51. 8.
and the best much too blame. Ezekiel. 34. 4.
Thence so many diseases and sores in all Relations and Societies. Hos. 11. 3.
Every Person, every Family finds cause to complain, because the Lord Christ is
so much slighted. The Evangelists vary the phrase; he would not says one, he
could says the other; he would not, he could not.
No wonder if the sickness increase, and the venom spreads, when such a
Physician with his Antidote are so basely used. Wise men easily see whence this
evil comes and is aggravated. Gross wilful unbelief is the forest disease that
aggravates the case, making it desperate. This was the case of Gods people of
old in the wilderness and Canaan, again and again. Mat. 13. 58.
They slighted Christ and his Messengers, till they were grown beyond all
Remedy. Mar. 6. 6.
It may give us warning. Mat. 17. 20. Heb. 3. 18, 19. Psalm 95. 2 Chronicles. 36.
16. Till there was no healing. (...), Sanatio.


2. The Cure and Method of Relief is hence observable; the Lord has not left
us yet remediless. There is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there with
Sovereign Virtue to cure our Israel. Ier. 8. 22.
The Method thereof appears clearly from what has been said. Esa. 57. 18, 19.
This gracious knowledge will afford us the sure Medicines for a distracted
Church and a discomposed Ier. 30. 17.
State. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 21, 24.
Any diseased soul and disordered Family may hence take Receipts with the best
Probatum. Politicians would prove far more prosperous, Ier. 8. 9.
would they study Christ more, and Machiavel less. Ier. 23. 22.
Did Ministers know him more graciously, they would meet surely with better
success. Did all Superiors attend his Prescripts, every business would find
under them much facility. Did private Christians observe this better, they
would sure enjoy much of Truth and Peace, both for the internal and external
man. The Lord thy Physician, is his Title of honor, Exo. 15. 26.
which Christ sets up by his great Herald, and proclaims to his people for
speedy help in every trouble.

Use 2.
It should admonish all carnal and notional Christians, under the total Reign,
or partial Remainder of Spiritual Errors and Revolts. What pity is it that such
a choice Help so freely tendered should be so basely slighted and abused! Does
not this Point then justly Reprove.

1. Such as are under the total Reign of sin and Error, all sinners in grain?
Is not your case very woeful indeed, that wilfully abide in a Christless state,
by still abiding in a sinful state? Sin is your plague and you know it not;
Error Rules in you and you feel it not; why are you senseless in such a danger?
Because sin is there in its Element. Your disease is a sleepy fever, or a
phrantick madness; else you would never slight Christ's Physic no more then his
Person. You feed upon ashes, Esa. 44. 20
a deceitful heart has carried you aside that you cannot see the lie in your
right hand. Object.
It may be you think you Reject not Christ: why then do you reject his Terms,
and prefer your own? Answ.
Why do you still love what he loathes, and loath what he loves? Why do you then
continue still in the love and trade of your darling sins, secret or gross? Why
do you still provide for your Lusts, and plead for them, covering of them,
mincing the matter and returning still thereto as the dog and swine? 2 Pet. 2.
22.
Why do you still then loath his Ordinances, his Word and Sabbath, his service
and servants? Do you pretend Allegiance to him, and yet continue still in
Rebellion? Do you profess to own his marriage terms, and yet remain still wedded
to the world, to your gain and will, to sensual pleasure and windy honor? Do
you profess to believe in Christ, and yet will not do what he bids you, nor
forbear what he forbids? This is to mock, Mat. 7. 23.
not to honor Christ; he knows you not, that wilfully and constantly work
iniquity in opinion, Luke 13. 27.
affection, or life.

2. Under the partial Remainders thereof will Regnerate Saints be found, though
not all alike. The best therefore may justly be Reproved for their sinful
estrangedness from Christ. Is not this the cause of so many Errors and Revolts,
our not growing in that gracious Knowledge that would prove our Sovereign
Antidote? Why do we study the Lord Christ so little and the world so much? Is
not our ignorance and self-conceitedness, our sloth and neglect about this main
thing, the great cause of our sad distempers? Factions and Fractions we justly
bewail in every Relation. Most carry fire and fuel to the common Incendy to
increase it still; few mind the water of the Sanctuary for to quench the same.
Do not the best find upon due search much of selfishness in all disputes and
controversies? Do they not also find in their private affairs how much self is
preferred before Christ? Should not this great evil humble our souls deeply,
that we thus forsake the Fountain of living Waters, Ier. 2. 13.
and dig unto our selves broken empty Cisterns that will hold no water? Is this
our kindness to our dearest friend? Is this our Loyalty to our dread Sovereign?
Is this our love to our selves and Neighbor, to despise thus the only way of
cure? Be we ashamed of this vile neglect, that Christ's Truth and Ways have
suffered so much through our great folly. Are our experiences of so little
worth, and our acquaintance with Christ so inconsiderable, that we slight all,
and yield to every assault of temptation and corruption, drawing us aside?

Use 3.
Enquiry and search into our spiritual state; our Complexion may be hence
observed, that the Tokens of our Personal and public Constitution may be duly
brought to Divine Test.

1. Hence may every one personally view his case and state toward Eternity. We
are all by Nature deadly sick of sin, still subject to Error and Apostasy of
the basest kind. Our hearts are full of mortal poison, carrying still within
the seed and Root of the worst disease naturally and spiritually. What Antidote
have we got against all such dreadful evils? Have we learned Christ in the
truth of him, that our gracious knowledge might still be growing? Are we thereby
fenced against the sinful causes of Error and Revolt? Are we daily mortifying
sin, dying to the world, resisting Tempters, denying our selves through the
knowledge of Christ? Are we still fortifying our souls with his precious Grace,
that all our Faculties may be preserved in spiritual health against sin and
Error? Do we rightly apply the virtue of this Christ in each of his specific
properties, whilst we attend his will and Blessing in the diligent use of all
the means appointed by him? Do we still mind his Word and Blood, his Grace and
Favor in every Ordinance and Providence through his Spirits help?

2. May we not hence also take a Public Estimate of the state of Affairs in
this place, in this Land, in this Republique, yea of any place whatsoever? The
true Prognostics of present and future Weal, or Woe, will be hence made
perspicuous. Away with Star-gazers and carnal wisdom, that we may consult with
Gods own Personal Wisdom. How far are we then in a public posture acquainted
with Christ? How far is that Acquaintance improved? Resolve these queries, and
the case will be as clear as Noonday. God may save us with A Notwithstanding
miraculously, Psalm 106. 8.
at his own pleasure. But we must judge of persons and things by the known Rule
of his Word, compared with Providence. So far as we slight Christ publicly in
any concernment of his, so far may we rationally expect that he should slight
us in our concernments. Ezekiel. 21. 27.
Let every one make due application as he shall see cause in all Hag. 2. 6, 7.
public Affairs, Heb. 12. 26, 27.
whilst God is shaking and overturning all things in the Nations, and will do
so still, til Christ come to his Right to fill his house with Glory.

Use 4.
May be for counsel to all Christian Professors; prize and desire, embrace and
insure, Keep and improve this precious Antidote. Its an infectious season, it
concerns all to look to themselves, and therefore look well after this
Antidote, to prevent and remove all sinful diseases. That it may be yours
effectually thus,

1. Prize it, undervalue it not; consider its worth and singular use. Its
Christ himself with his saving Grace that is to be duly known and improved. Let
no creature then come into competition. Christ will endure no Corrival nor
Superior. Let not any darling sin be cherished now to undervalue Christ. If he
be not infinitely better, mind him not at all; if he be, mind him above all.

2. Desire it, disdain it not. So lovely, so needful an Object should set all
your Affections on flames. You have disdained him too long already; is it not
high time to long for him, to breath and pant, till you obtain him? What would
a dying man give for a sure cure? a condemned man for a pardon? a drowning man
for help? Let your heart give that, and all to this Christ.

3. Embrace it, reject it not; accept of him if you love your self, upon his
own Terms. If you capitulate, or reserve any thing, Christ will none of you.
This offer may be your last. Let your whole soul now close freely with him in a
Conjugal way, John 1. 12.
by mutual consent. Receive and Take that you may be One, and may know him thus
and your self aright.

4. 2 Cor 1. 22.
Insure it, neglect it not; you have his Insuring Office to make all clear and
firm. Ephesians. 1. 13.
His Spirit within by his privy Seal; his Sacraments and Ordinances without,
Ephesians. 4. 30.
by a broad Seal ratify his gracious Covenant. Romans 4. 11.
Observe and grieve not that Spirit of Adoption, that must witness within by
evidencing Grace, and operate without in all the means of Grace, for the
Obsigation and security of your Interest.

5. Hipocrat.
Keep it, los it not; so Rare a Jewel, so choice an Antidote should be laid up
with all possible care. Paulus. See Galen. Avicen. Averroes. Mesue. Avenzoar,
Serap. Reub. de Gemm. and all modern Physicians of all Nations.
Precious stones are found to be specific Cordials against various diseases
and poisons. This choicest Jewel should be chiefly set in the Golden Ring of a
gracous soul, to be worn and kept against all danger. Beware of sullying,
breaking and hurting so curious a Piece.

6. Improve it, abuse it not; This precious knowledge was never intended to
feed vain Notions, or vile Affections: but to fence you against every evil, and
help you effectually to all true good. Improve it therefore unto such Ends,
wherein you may be sure of Gods Blessing. There was never more need of such an
Antidote, to preserve Christians from Epidemical sins. This gracious Knowledge
of Christ well improved has virtue enough to fortify you against all the
Wiles of the wicked, and all the deceits of your sinful hearts; make use of it
then against every Temptation and corruption, especially against Error, the
woeful disease of this sinful Age; There was never more need of Christ's help
against so many unclean spirits, ensnaring many simple hearts. Prudence and
Zeal are here most needful, 2 Samuel 15. 11.
to discern aright of persons and things. Phil. 3. 15, 16.
Some good men are drawn in on mistakes, Gal. 6. 16.
as the four hundred that followed Absalom in their simplicity. Romans 14. 1, 2,
etc.
Some Errors are more superficial wherein Christians must bear with each other,
Gal. 6. 1, 2, etc.
walking together as far as they agree, waiting for the Lords further
discovery. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
Many Errors are so fundamental, that they are inconsistent with the hope of
Salvation, Iud. 3. 22, 23.
and must be earnestly contended against, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
by due improvement of this Antidote; 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. etc.
all of them militate against Christ, either directly or reflectively, in
opposition to all that is near and dear unto him, Tit. 3. 10.
variously assaulting.

1. 2 Ioh. 7. 8, 9. 10.
His Deity; which the Arrians, Gal. 1. 8.
and Sabellians blasphemously denied, making him but a Deus factus; and the
Socinians after them, following therein both the Socinus's, Uncle and Nephew;
About these see at large Epiphan. Augustine. Eusebius. Socrat. Concilior. Tom.
Danaeum; Chamier. Iunium. Paraeum. Simpsons History of the Church. History of
Socin. Anatom. of Socin. Cheynels Trinunity. Centuriat. Magdeb. a Testimony
born to Christ by the London Ministers, with Lyfords Explanation thereof, etc.
whose Italian Venom carried so much infection into Poland (lately revived by
too many among us, as by Paul Best. Biddle, etc.) as it has been scattered in
Transylvania, and Neighboring parts by diverse such Instruments. Turks and
Jews agree with them therein. For the prevention and cure of this deadly
plague, spiritual growth in the Grace and Knowledge of Christ will be a special
Antidote faithfully improved; fortifying your soul with his Truth, making you
to feel the Power of his Godhead through the beam of that Sun of Righteousness.
Phil. 3. 10.
Reason and Experience thus spiritualized will demonstrate Mal. 4. 2,
to you and to others by you, the Record which God bears of his Son, Col. 2. 9.
in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, or essentially as the Greek
(...) imports. John 1. 3.
The same Titles and Attributes, Heb. 1. 2, 3.
the same Worship and works ascribed to God the Father, Heb 3. 4.
are also ascribed to God the Son. The wretched Arrians called Christ in scorn
(...), a diminutive God, Mark 2. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and would grant him to be (...), Luke 6. 8.
of a like substance, but denied him to be (...) of the same substance. Revel.
2. 23.
Were he not God co-essential and coeternal with the Father, Ioh. 15. 24, 26.
how could he be one with him, Romans 1. 4.
as himself affirms? Heb. 4. 6.
How could he have made infinite satisfaction and procured infinite Salvation?
John 20. 28.
How could he have born Gods infinite wrath for his peoples sins? Matthew. 4. 10.
What shall we think of those quaking Impostors, that own no Christ above, John
10. 30.
but what is in them, that renew the Ranters blasphemy of Gods being all things,
their being Christed, etc? Do they not affront the God of Glory? The Godhead
of Christ takes up man to God, conveying from God all good through his Manhood.
There must be our strength against every sin, About this read Beckmans exercit.
against Behmen. The History of Familists: the answers to Quakers by many godly
Ministers. Hornebeck de Anabapt. German. Epiphan. de haeret. Augustine. Danaeum.
Bishop Usher of Christ's Incar. etc. Downames Body of Divinity, etc.
that Christ our surety is the blessed God.

2. His Humanity variously assaulted by Notionists of an old and new stamp, by
many Behmenists and the swarms of Quakers, who have con'd too much of their
mysterious absurdities. This poison once got into men's Brains casts them into
strange dreams about Christ's manhood; which they fancy to have been but a
fiction and figure, a Phantasm and Apparition, that vanished after a while, to
represent that within them which they call Christ. To repress those pestiferous
fumes from intoxicating your head and heart, your Antidote will inform your
Judgment with the Truth, and warm your heart with the substantial goodness of
his human Nature. It will show you out of Scripture, that he is truly the Son
of man, who took on him the seed of Abraham, was made flesh, in all things like
to us except sin. Without controversy, Great is the Mystery of Godliness; God
manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, believed on in
the world, preached to the Gentiles received up into Glory. Heb. 2. 16.
Had he not been a real man, John 1. 14.
how could he have suffered on his peoples behalf? Heb. 4. 15.
How could he have made his soul an offering for sin? 1 Timothy 3. 16.
His sufferings Esaias 53. 10.
were most real sure, Luke 22. 44.
that forced from him such a bloody sweat, (...) quasi grumosus sanguis
largiter defluens.
in the open air of a cold season, and that in the night; that made him cry out
so lamentably, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? that spent him wholly
to his last breath, with a most cruel and painful torment. Matthew. 23. 46.
They might as well deny the Sun-light at noonday, So far as Scripture teaches
to Allegorize, as Galat. 4. Its very useful, so as still to retain the proper
sense of the place. But to strain Allegorles to the destroying of Truth, is a
dreadful wresting and wracking of Scripture, all sorts of monstrous Errors in
every Age.
who deny this Truth. To turn plain Scripture into Allegories, is to turn
substance into a shadow. It cost Origin a self-mutilation, for mutilating
divine writings thus. He was called Centaur, for monstrous Opinions, flowing
from Allegorical strainings of Scripture. Christ's Manhood should be so precious
to us as not to endure affronts put on it. Therein God and man do most sweetly
meet; which will help weak faith in every time of need.

3* See Epiphan. Eusebius. August. Socrat. Daneus. Calvin. Centur. Magdeb.
Simpsons Hist. of the Church. Chamier. Panstrat. Hornebeck de variis heretic.
Chemnit. exam. Ames. Bell. Ener. Anatom. of the Mass by Mornay; Anatomy dela
Mess, par Mousieur du Moulin. Willets Synops. Perkins Reform. Catholic. Iun.
Antibellarm. Not. Books against Quakers. Pagets Heresiogr.
Against both the parts of his humane nature, his soul and Body, many also
fight: Apollinarius denying him a human soul; as if the Godhead had supplied
the want thereof. Eutyches destroyed both, by his pretended swallowing of them
up into the Divine Nature. The Manichees and Valentinians allowed him but an
aerie fantastical Body, running through the womb of Mary as through a Pipe.
Mahometans fain it to have passed through Mary's Paps, and by the smell of a
Rose. Diverse Novelists are daily broaching strange conceits about it. The
Vbiquitarians give him a monstrous Body, immense and filling all places; the
Papists as monstrously would have his Body to be distinctly in many places at
once; to be without quantity, without extension, without sensible accidents: to
be made a new daily at the Priests will: to be broken and not broken by
himself, and by all their Priests, etc. Many such contradictions against
Scripture and sense, Reason and all Sciences they are forced to for their
fictitious Transubstantiation sake. All such Malignant vapors which infest
many, will be effectually dispelled by the right use of your spiritual
confection. Christ was and abides ever a perfect man, consisting of Soul and
Body, both subsisting in his divine Person, being united to the divine Nature
therein. It will show you, that his soul was sorrowful to death, Mat. 26. 38.
and was made sensible of all humane affections, though without sin: as clear
Crystal water moved without any mud. It will teach you that his Body had flesh
and bones after his Resurrection as before, which a spirit has not. Luke 24.
39.
That the same Body did visibly ascend into Heaven, Act. 1. 9. 11.
before the Disciples eyes, and shall return thence in the same manner. Act. 3.
21.
That the Heavens must hold him, till the Restoration of all things. The
Seulicians of old shewe'd their Enmity to Christ, as modern Noonists in
faigning a distinctive dissiolution of Christ's humane nature.
That the glorifying of his Body has not, could not have annihilated it, or
changed the substance, though it has bettered the qualities thereof. It will
help you to know the flesh of Christ spiritually, though you learn to know him
no more after the slesh carnally. It will teach you that his bare flesh, and
the fleshly sense thereof, profits nothing a Capernaitish soul, being destitute
of his Spirit: but that its his Spirit that quickens us, giving Life to his
flesh and to his Word, that both may be Spirit and Life to us in a spiritual
and lively improvement. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
Christ's manhood is that precious Golden Ring, Ioh. 6. 63.
that sets forth the Jewel of his Godhead to us. Its a curious Vail of his
contriving, that his glorious face may through it be beheld. Its a Crystal
Glass of the Lords framing, to reflect thereby his Image upon us. Out of Christ
God is a consuming fire, but thereby he becomes a Reconciled Father. If Christ
were not man still, there were no hopes for man; if we know him not thus, we
know him not at all. Its not a figment of our own divising, but the man Christ
Jesus that must be our Savior. He cannot be ours unless wholly ours.

4. Histor. Council. Eusebius. Epiphan. Augustine, Baron. Annal. Gentur. Magdeburg.
Chamier. Phanstr. Anat. of Socin. Histor of Socin. Iun. de Trin. Cheynels
Triunity, Calvin. Paraeus.
Against his Person, appear, Nestorius dividing it into two Persons, Sabellius,
Arius, all Antitrinarians, denying his distinctly eternal Personality from the
Father; The Socinians and Notionists that fancy the distiction of persons in
God to be but nominal according to various dispensations, witness Hob's
Leviathan, among many other poisonous books, so commonly scattered abroad.

TO queneh the force of these pernicious Errors, your Counter poison will
season your soul with the scriptural description of Emmanuel, Esaias 7. 14.
our (...), God with us. It will prove him to be God-man, having both Natures,
divine and humane, subsisting in his person, the Son of God, the second Person
of the divine Trinity by Hypostatical Union; it will clear him to be the
Brightness of his glorious Father, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.
2.
being that one Mediator between God and Man, and therefore God-man, that he
might conquer by suffering, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
and make his suffering infinite for virtue and value, for satisfaction and
acquisition. It will show you that there are three in Heaven, 1 John 5. 7.
the Father, the Word and the Spirit, and that those three are one. That this
Mystery is not against Reason, though above it in its common shallow
apprehension; that the Son sends the Spirit Comforter from the Father, and is
therefore distinct from them both, yet that he and the Father are one in
Essence, though distinct in person. John 14. 26.
That Gods Reason is the Rule of ours, being revealed to us in his divine
monuments, John 15. 26.
that we may assent to his Assertion, though we cannot fathom the Explicitness
thereof, no more then Bruits can fathom our rational expressions. That the
Person of Christ coming out of the water, must needs be distinct from that
Person of the Spirit, Mat. 3. 17.
who came in the likeness of a Dove, lighting on him at his Baptism, and from
the person of the Father, whose voice from Heaven said, This is my Beloved Son,
hear him. Thus the Grace and Knowledge of Christ, will teach you, that he who
thought it no Robbery to be equal wtth God, Phil. 2. 6.
( being in the form of God substantially) made himself of no Reputation, that
as God-man he might restore man to God in the gloryfiing of all divine
Attributes. Our Faith is not true if we do not own the true God truly, as he
holds forth himself in three distinct persons. Those divine persons are not
mere modes, or manners of Attribution or Manifestation, but real subsistences.
The Father is not the Son, the Son is not the Spirit personally, though they be
one God essentially. The person of the Son alone was incarnate, Ioh. 1. 14.
not that of the Father; he could not be Son; the schoolmen, Mornaeus de
veritate religionis Christi, and many others are large on this Subject,
shadowing out this mystery by Similes, from man's intellect, from the Sun, etc.
not that of the Spirit; there had been two Sons then. The Word became flesh,
not the Father nor Spirit. Diverse Emblems are used to set forth this glorious
Mystery; but Scripture Language describes it best to a sober faith. The Word
Person is a Scripture Word very proper and significant. They that deny this
right use thereof, make way for further denial of Truth. The Person of Christ
is then to be owned by all that intend to be owned of him.

5. Against Christ's Spirit stirs first Macedonius, denying him to be a divine
Person distinct from the Father and Son. Secondly, All Antitrinitarians, About
this read Concilior. Tom. Eusebius. Danaeus. Calvin Magdeb. centur. Simpsons
History; Zonar. Sleidan comment. Bulinger. Histor. David. George. Pagets
Heresiogr. Luther against Enthus. Hornebeck de haeret. Cha^mier. Panstr.
who oppose the distinction of divine Persons. Thirdly, The Greek, who deny
the Procession of the Spirit from the Father through the Son. Fourthly. The
several Blasphemers that vaunted themselves to be the Holy Ghost, as Simon
Magus, Montanus, David, George, etc. Fifthly, All Enthusiasts who father their
lies on Gods Spirit, etc.

TO quell this woeful poison, your Preservative will set your Judgment right
by the Grace and Knowledge of Christ's Spirit. Thereby you will surely
understand that the holy Spirit has in Scripture ascribed to him the same
Titles and Attributes, the same divine worship and works which are ascribed to
the Father and to the Son, and therefore must needs be God, blessed from ever
and for ever. That the working of all Scripture Miracles, the penning of all
those divine writings, 1 Pet. 1. 21.
the wonderful quickening of dead souls and bodies, Romans 8. 9, 11.
and the daily experience of all spiritual Christians do fully demonstrate it.
2 Chro. 13. 14.
That therefore the fanatic illusions and delusions of Revelationists, Revel.
1. 4, 5.
being so opposite to Gods Truth and Holiness, must needs proceed from that
lying Spirit, who persuaded so many of Ahabs Prophets, 1 Kin. 22. 22.
and still possesses the false Prophets of our days, Mat. 18. 31, 32.
to speak and act against the Dictates of Christ's Spirit. The malicious
opposing of the Truth confirmed so undeniably by the miraculous Mar. 9. 29
Operations of the Lord; Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
The Spirit has therefore the most desperate aggravations even unto death,
Heb. 10. 27, 28. 29
attending the same, Ioh. 5. 16.
because God the Father and Son both are thereby also desperately opposed.

6. About these at large see Hornebeck, Danaeum, de haeret. Paraeum, Iunium,
etc. Anatomy of Socinianism. Ostorod. Catech. Cracov. etc.
Against his Office and Function of All-sufficient and only Mediator, for his
peoples Salvation, move First, All the former Heretics in denying his Deity or
Humanity, his Parts and Person. Secondly, All such who mangle the said Function
as the Socinians, who deny the need and use of his satisfaction for sin.
Thirdly, All such who divide his Mediation work, ascribing part thereof to
Saints and Angles, as the Papists with fond distinctions. Fourthly, All such as
put the said Mediation into the Virgin Mary's hand, calling her Queen of
Heaven, See Bellarmin. Council. Trident. Becan, etc.
entitling the Psalter to her, placing her name instead of the Lords name in
the said Psalter, giving her Authority over Christ her Son in Heaven, promising
and expecting more from her often then from Christ, Chemnit. Exam. Chamier.
Panstrat. Ames. Bellar. Enervat. Willets Synops. Nouveaute du Papism. Pard.
Moulin. Mystery of Iniquity by Mornay, Rainold, Whitaker, Fox Monum. Pagets
Heresiogr. See the Quakers Books and Confutations.
as much at least, and telling doctorally that God has divided his Mercy and
Justice, giving her the Throne of Mercy, and reserving himself the Throne of
Justice, etc. as the said Papists. Fifthly, All such who pretending to sinless
perfection and selfish Righteousness do frustrate and nullify so far his
Mediation, as the Quakers, and such monkish Pharisees.

To suppress the violence of this poisonous stuff, Heb. 9. 22, 23.
the Grace and Knowledge of Christ improved, Heb. 9. 23.
will show us clearly still the necessity of Christ's satisfaction and Al
suffiency of his Mediation, that without the shedding of this blood there can
be no remission of sin. That No Righteousness but that of God-man could
satisfy divine Justice. That without satisfaction there could be no
Reconciliation of God to man, that without Imputation thereof to many there
could be no discharge of man's Debt. ons of the Leapers cleansed, and the living
and dying bird mentioned, Levit. 14. 5, 6, 7. etc. and the two propitiatory
Goats, the one dying, the other escaping, Lev. 16, 7, 8, 9, etc.
That no purchase could be made of eternal Life and divine favor, but by that
infinite Price paid by Emmanuel. That without such purchase orderly applycable,
there could be no salvation for lost man. That Christ's mediation alone is
All-sufficient to all those purposes, and needs no partners in any share
thereof, either for Impetration or application. That to give the least part
thereof to any mere Creature, whether in Heaven or Earth, can be no better then
Idolatry. That no Palliation or shifts by distinctions of Dulia, Hyperdulia and
Latria can cover this Blasphemy, no more then Adams figs leaves could cover his
nakedness. That there cannot be on earth in any mere man a sinless perfection,
Ioh. 6. 53, 63.
and if it could be had, yet it could not satisfy for the evil past in the
least. Heb. 7. 25.
That the best are but unprofitable Servants. Esa. 63. 3.
That the payment of a farthing due, cannot satisfy a thousand pound debt in
Arrears. Lev. 16. 17.
To signify emphatically the due application and Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness unto Believers, The Grecians had propitiatory Oblations by
devoting of men, called therefore Obominals to expiate for the peoples sins,
the Devil being still Gods Ape in counterfeiting and spoiling his Worsip by
humane Inventions and mimical innovations among Pagans and Papists. Luke 17.
10. God would have but one Altar and one Door, to which Sacrifices should be
brought, Lev. 17. 3, 5.
the Scripture calls Ier. 23. 6. (...) The Priests were to put* off their own
Garments, and put on that sacred Vesture which was to serve all the Lords
Servants successively, typifying Christ's Righteousness, coming into his
special presence for Acceptance and Oblation. Christ's Oblation is called (...),
the Mercy-seat or Propitiation that must cover our best Duties and Works. Ier.
33. 16. The Church being the Spouse and Body of Christ, leaves her own name to
borrow his.
him Jehovah-Tsidkenu, the Lord our Righteousness, repeating that name again in
the great Promise of Restoration to be afforded to his Israel by virtue of
that Righteousness made theirs, whence Christ's name is Synecdochically and
Metonymically ascribed to the new Jerusalem. To that import the Lord Jesus
incorporates his name with a Christians Propriety into one New name, framed by
his own Spirit, which Paul expresses by his being made unto us of God, 1 Cor.
1. 30.
Righteousness and Redemption, and our being made 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gods high
Priest alone was to enter into the most holy place to explate and Intercede.
the Righteousness of God in in him, as he was made sin for us, who knew no
sin, which must needs be understood by way of Imputation, there being no sin
inherent in Christ.

7. His Priesthood is opposed. first, By all the formerly named Errors.
Secondly, by the Papists, in making new Priests daily, About this read you may
Bellarmin. Council. Tridentin. Gratian. Lombard. Aquinat. Becan. Chamier.
Panstr. Chemnit Exam. Ames, Bell. Enerv. Willets Synops. Armachan. Nov. Bishop
Potter, Bishop Davenant, is hitaker, Rainold. Bishop Jewel. Jun. Not. Antibell.
Calvin. Institut. Luther in Gal. etc.
and a new propitiatory Sacrifice, called incruentum, to be offered by them for
the living and dead. Secondly, In joining man's merits to his, and thereby
patching up a mongrel Righteousness for themselves and others. Thirdly, In
pretended Works of supererogation which are imputed to others by way of
Indulgence out of their Churches imaginary Treasure. Fourthly, In denying the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness for the pardon and Justification of his
Members. Fifthly, In giving to man's Righteousness, dipped in Christ's blood, a
meriting value and virtue to satisfy and pacify Gods Justice, and to procure
his Mercy. Sixthly, In making Christ's Merits to be but the remote and mediate
cause; but man's Merits to be the immediate Proxime cause of the pardon.

Thirdly, About this you may see Davenant, Wootten, Bradshaw. Burges, Baxter,
Downam.
By such who sever his habitual and his active Obedience from his meriting
Oblation, given to God for his people, and imputed to Believers, reckoning only
his passive Obedience to be so meritorious and imputative for the reconciling
of Man to God. Fourthly, By Quakers and others, who find no need of, and little
regard an high Priest in Heaven.

Against such mortal wounds, Quisquis domus partem super arena fundat, totius
ruinam certo periclitatur; ipsius etiam partis quae rupi videbatur affixa.
the Balm of our Christian Gilead will afford healing virtue from the due
review of his Grace and Knowledge. We shall find thereby, that Christ Jesus by
his personal Righteousness, by that one Oblation has for ever perfected those
that are sanctified, once for all. That a new order of Priests brings a new
Law, and nuls the former. That it was an imperfect Priest and Sacrifice
typically ceremonial that needed renewing. Heb. 10. 14, 18.
That to give to a mere Man, suppose a Mass Priest, the power of making and
renewing a propitiatory Oblation at his Will upon his intent of consecrating,
Heb. 7. 12, 23, 24.
is to set him in Christ's room, yea above Christ, and to deny Christ come in
the flesh by unavoidable Consequence. 1 John 4. 2, 3.
The Oblation of Christ had not been complete, Totus Christus Salus nostra,
adae ^uatum fidei Objectum; totalis obedientia Christi, propitiatio adae quata
ad illam complendam Solutem. Ioh. 10. 17, 18 good works are well styled via
R^gni, non causa regnandi.
if it had not been active as well as passive, and habitual as well as actual;
Heart-Obedience being the root and life of all other. Redemption is indeed
frequently ascribed to his blood and death, but its by a Synecdoche, including
the rest of his whole Obedience whereof his death was the complement and
utmost. His whole life was a continual passion, and he was most active in his
most passive Obedience. He laid down his Life of himself-freely, and showed his
active Power in his giving up the Ghost. That perfection of his Merits excludes
the least Ingrediency of man's Merits. Our Obedience is required indeed and
rewarded of Grace, not for its worth or proportion. The Child's duty is
required, not to merit his Inheritance by, but to show his Ingenuity. The
Beggars reaching of his hand is a condition, yet no merit of the Gift. You may
see for this Concilior. Tom. Bellarmin. Baronii, Annal. Chamier. Chemnit. Exam.
Beckmans Exerc. History of the Church. Calvin. contr. Fanat. Hist. of Famil.
Hornbeck de haeret.


8. His Prophetical Charge is undermined. First, By the Errors forenamed.
Secondly, By the Popish pretenses of Infallibility in their Church, Pope or
Council. Thirdly, By the immediate Revelations and infallible Oracles of
Enthusiasts, Quakers, Behmenists, pretending extraordinary acquaintance with
God and Spirits, besides, above and against his Word. Fourthly, By the
Perfectionists of diverse sorts, who pretend to a sinless state, wherein they
need no further teaching. Fifthly, By such as despise Christ's Prophets and
Apostles, Pastors and Teachers, extraordinary and ordinary Messengers of his.

AGainst such a disease, Authority, Impartialty and Infallibility, the
properties of a supreme Judge, belong only to the Lord, the Spirit, and to his
Word, Heb. 12. 25, 26.
improve this Antidote to vindicate the Lords Infallibleness, and to detect the
cheats of all Impostors pretending thereto. You will see thereby that Christ's
Spirit alone is the supreme infallible Judge, speaking to us by his written
word, e Cathedra coeli. That we need no other infallible Judge on earth. That
every Christian in his place, whether private or public, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, has a Judgment of discretion to regulate him in his own Acts
by the Scripture Rule. 1 Cor. 10. 15.
That Churches and Counsels have an Authoritative Judgment of direction to the
several members under their respective Charges, 1 Cor. 5. 12.
still in subordination to Christ's written Word. Act. 15. 28.
That yet there is no need of any Infallible, Act. 16. 4.
immediate and sinless assistance, or spirit in any mortal man now since the
Canon of Scripture our perfect Rule was completed by John the Beloved Apostle.
Rev. 22. 18, 19.
That all pretenders to such infallibility since the Apostles days, have
successively bewrayed their notorious Impostures and contradictions, both
notionally and practically. That Popish Bishops and Councils, Enthusiastical
Behmenists and Quakers, have hitherto been found guilty of such absurd
falsehoods and blasphemous extravagancies, that they sufficiently confute
themselves. 2 Cor. 13. 12.
That Paul himself after all his Raptures knew but in part, Gal. 2. 11.
complaining still of his own and others weakness and insufficiency; Phil. 3.
12, 15.
That Peter himself failed, and was reproved by him openly. That there is
indeed a perfection of sincerity and Truth begun below in the Regenerate, and a
perfection of Growth, Heb. 12. 23.
which is comparative and progressive: But that a sinless perfection of fullness
is reserved for the Glory of Ioh. 15. 15.
Heaven, Ioh. 20. 31.
not enjoyed before man's dissolution. That Christ therefore is the grand
Prophet, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12.
who teaches his people still by his Word and Spirit, Ioh. 1. 18.
the Will of God for their Salvation gradually. 1 Ioh. 2. 20, 27.
That being taught all needful things by his Anointing, who writes his Law upon
their heart, Ier. 31. 33.
they need not to be taught by any Sect-master in a Pharisaical way, so as to
pin their faith upon any man's sleeve upon his own credit; but must attend
Christ who teaches from Heaven by men and Means. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, 20, 21.
That no mere man's word is to be believed upon his own credit, Heb. 12. 25, 26.
but that all Doctrines must be examined by the Scriptural Teachings of Christ.
Mat. 10. 40.
That those spirits and persons who pretend to bring Infallible Oracles and a
new Gospel, Luke 10. 16.
are cursed of the Apostle, Gal. 1. 7. 8.
for shaking off Christ and his Gospel. Act. 3. 22, 23.
That all Christ's servants are to be heard so far as they keep to his
scriptural Commission but no further. Mal. 2. 7.
That Christ himself is received or rejected, Ephesians. 4.
so far as his Ambassadors, following his Instruction, Luke 10. 16.
are owned or slighted. Its the common and ominous Symptom of Error to despise
the Ministers of Christ, though Godly and Learned, and prefer their own
Imaginations before the plain Word of God. The Gospel is to us the only Glass
of Heaven, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
wherein the Glorious Revelations of Gods Image are made out, to transform us
into the likeness thereof gradually through his Spirit.

9. The Kingship of Christ is much abused, 1. by the Errors forenamed. For this
read Hist. of Germ.
2. By Libertines and Ranters of all sorts. 3. By the Pontifician Supremacy,
pretended to be over all things and persons in the Pope, Anab. Pagets
Heresiogr. Danaeus de haeret. Chamier. Panstr. and Supplem. The Books against
Quakers. Subject. to Christ by Thom. Sheph. Downam de Antichrist, etc.
as Peter's Successor. 4. By Quakers and others slighting the Christ above under
pretense of a Christ within. 5. By sensual pretenders and abusers of a fifth
Monarchy.

Against these Rebellious Tenets, Rev. 19. 16.
the Grace and Knowledge of Christ will satisfy us, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, etc.
that Christ Jesus is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Luke 19. 27.
who must Reign even in the midst of all enemies, till they be made his
footstool, Esa. 33. 22.
That he will destroy all such who refuse to stoop to his Golden Scepter, Esa.
32. 1. 2.
but choose to live in the kingdom of Darkness under the Rule of sin and Satan.
1 Cor. 15. 25.
That Conscience is his seat Royal in man's soul, Act. 15. 15, 16.
which is by Sin, Ezekiel. 21. 27.
Satan and self usurped from him. That he will surely recover his Right, Hag.
2. 6, 7.
if not in mercy, yet in his just wrath. That pretense of conscience to shake
off his Rule, is the highest Treason under his Pavilion. That to shelter any
sin or Error under that covert, is but to cloth Traitors in his robes of
state. That he will not save where he does not Rule, and will not be our Priest
if he be not our King. That to desire or plead Liberty to sin, is to set up
Hell in Rule among men under the habit of Heaven. That the more of Christ is in
any soul, the more obedience in true faith and Love is given to him. That to
set up a Pope or any other mere man for a supreme Head over the conscience, is
to set up a sinful wretch in the Throne of Christ. That his Jealousy will not
endure long such a Rebellion. That Peter never had any Supremacy of Power or
Authority, what ever priority of Order and Age may be granted by some. That
Peter's being at Rome is very uncertain, and yet to be proved, though many
affirm it. That if his being there were fully granted, yet his fixed charge and
continuance there shall need as much proof. That upon supposal of his settling
there, yet must it be showed that he acted there such a Supremacy. That if that
also were clear, it must be showed also, that his full power was made over to
his successors there, more then to any other Minister of Christ at Antioch, or
elsewhere. That in case that should be proved likewise, they must demonstrate a
clear succession from that time till now, which is impossible. And if that
could be, yet they must evince their succession in Doctrine also; 2 Thessalonians. 2.
3, 4, 7, 8.
else all the former will only prove Papacy to be the Man of Sin got into Gods
Temple: 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, etc.
the grand Antichrist, and the scarlet Whore riding on the Beast by this
usurped Supremacy. When all that is dispatched, Rev. 13.
we shall have more work for them, to clear their Antichristianism in ruling by
their own, Rev. 17.
not by Christ's Scepter; by their will, Rev. 11.
not by his: which they have taught their mongrel Brood quaking among us, Rev.
12.
to spread under disguises, their chemical sublimations of old rotten Errors.
As for the fifth Monarchy, its a point needing much sobriety in the sense and
use thereof. Christ indeed has a kingdom in this world, though not of this
world; and his work is to Reform Rulers and people, not to confound his own
Ordinances.

10. See to this purpose the several places against Quakers, Familists, by
Gataker, Featly, Rutherford, Burges, Baxter, Farmer, The New Castle Ministers,
Paget, Baily, etc.
Christ's humiliation state is opposed much, as 1. by the former, so 2, by many
Novelists who make light of it, accounting it but a type and figure of what was
to be done within them. Christ's Incarnation, Life and Passion are with them but
stories and shadows; the Life and substance is all within them. There say they,
lies Christ very deep in every man's heart, covered with earth, to be born and
raised up, to live and die, to do and suffer. As for the Christ that died at
Jerusalem, many do slight him, and many that seem to own him verbally, yet
renounce him effectively. 3. By our late Quakers who have revived those rotten
drugs from the Familists dunghill, Beckmans Exercit.
adding a new dress and access thereto, as Paracelsus and David George, Baxter
of the sin against the Holy Ghost. Compare them with the relation given of the
old Valentinians, Basilidians, Gnostics, Carpocratians, etc. by Epiphan.
August. Eusebius. Socrat. Sozomen. Theodoret. Magdeb. Centur. History of the
Church, etc.
Swenkfield and Battenburg, Manno and Jacob Behmen with their German followers;
So do our Modern Enthusiasts rake up the kennels of old fanatic Dreamers, with
disguises and additions of their own.

Against this Venom, spiritual Growth will help, that we may know Christ, as
the great Apostle did labor for, in the fellowship of his sufferings. It will
inform us of his wonderful abasing of himself in every step from his first
conception till his resurrection. Phil. 3 10.
It will show us the absolute need all his Elect had of his miraculous
Incarnation and Birth, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Life and Death, Burial and abode for three days in the Grave. It will make us
feel the effects thereof in our very souls, that his Transcendent Love in
stooping so low, and parting withal, may direct and press Returns of the like
to him and for him. That experience will engage our hearts to that Christ
above, Romans 6. 10.
who died once for sin, The Greek word (...) is very emphatical, signifying the
most rational way of deliberation and determination upon the due consideration
of all things. This is the most divine Arithmetic, and a sure computation.
but can die no more, living unto God, that we may likewise reckon our selves
to be dead to sin, but alive to God through him. That Knowledge of Christ will
teach us aright how to distinguish of the Person of Christ that once suffered
for us: and of the Grace of Christ, which is by his Spirit formed within us in
Regeneration. Christ Personal, is the God of Heaven, that eternal Creator; But
his Grace in us which seems sometimes to be called by Christ's Name, (as the
Church is also by a Metonymical Metaphor, and Synecdochically,) is but a finite
creature, a spiritual quality, not subsisting by it self, but inhering in a
subject humane. Scripture says indeed that Christ is within us, dwelling in us
by his holy Spirit. But may not he work within our heart by gracious
communications without a personal fixation there? The Sun conveys Light and
Life by his Beams to all parts, yet his substance abides still in Heaven. 1 Cor.
12. 12.
There is indeed a spiritual Relative union between Christ and the Regenerate,
Romans 8.
set forth in Scripture by diverse Emblems. Ephesians. 1. 22.
The Natural union between the Head and Members; Ephesians. 5. 32. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21.
the civil union between Husband and Wife; the artificial union between
Foundation and Building set it forth. But we must not strain figurative
speeches beyond their scope. This union is Real, yet mystical, full of
mysteries. Deus est Circulus, cujus Centrum ubique circumferentia nusquam, said
the Philosopher.
There is no confusion nor composition, no Transmutation nor Annihilation here.
Our persons are still distinct. Christ's Godhead is indeed a Circle, whereof the
center is everywhere, the Circumference nowhere. He fills all places, comprised
in none. Hell it self feels him, though with little comfort. But his manhood is
not Infinite, being a creature, though wonderfully glorified by assumption and
hypostatical union unto the Godhead in the second Person. Christ as Savior
must still be considered in both his Natures, Divine and Humane, subsisting in
his own Person. Thus considered, he dwells not in us personally. The person of
the Husband is one with the Wife Relatively, not personally. Christ's manhood
cannot be personally within us. Act. 3. 21.
The Heavens must hold, The word (...) Emphatically signifies to embrace and
retain.
as they received him, till the Restoration of all. He dwells in our hearts by
Faith, and we in him mutually, as the Root in the Branches, and the Branches in
the Root by Relation and communication. His whole Humiliation was for us, and
his Spirit enables us gradually to conform thereto by a fiducial Improvement
thereof. John 15. 2, 3, etc.
Thence he is said to be formed within us, to be in us, (or among us (...)
inter vos, among you, as the same phrase imports, 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders (...)
among you.
) the hope of Glory, to live and act in us, Ephesians. 3. 17.
etc. Hence the sufferings of Paul are called Christ's sufferings, Romans 6. 3, 4,
5.
not personally, but causally; because they are for his sake through his Grace
undergone. Col. 1. 27.
Its a sad abuse put on Christ and his Word, thus to slight and destroy Christ's
personal Humiliation whereon depends all our Salvation. If Christ suffered not,
then he rose not again; and then are we still in our sins, and of all men most
miserable. But Christ is as effectually Risen as he effectually suffered. That
effected Redemption by price in Impetration, this by Power in application. Thus
it became him to suffer, and so to enter into his Kingdom. How far the Justice
of God, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
absolutely considered, may be thought to require such satisfaction in order to
pardon, we need not controvert. Luke 24. 26,
It suffices that upon supposition of his purpose and Engagement, this way is
of absolute need. By this all his Attributes harmoniously concur to the
perfecting of his peoples Salvation.

11. About these you may see the many Books abroad, discovering the mysterious
designs of our Opinionists; by Mr. Baxter, the London Ministers and others; as
also the many detections of Jesuitick designs touched, by Iesuitic. speculum,
Histor. Jesuit. Mr. Prins books, Hornebeck, Some German Jesuits converted, etc.
Christ's Exaltation is also much abused, as 1. By the former Errors: so 2. By
our Modern Sadduces, denying the Resurrection of the Body, as some did at
Corinth. 3. By the Quaking Rabble, who own no Christ but what is within them.
4. By our Novelists who deny his Ascension, and his Session at the Fathers
Right hand. 5. In effect also by the Papists in their Impanation,
Transubstantiation, and such monstrous Doctrines. 6. The Vbiquitaries trespass
too much thereon, in diverse fond conceits, broached and increased after Luthers
death, by Brentius, Osiander, etc.

11. AGainst such Opposers the Knowledge of Christ is of Sovereign force.
Thence we learn to Believe according to Scripture, the several steps of his
Resurrection and Ascension, of his Session and Intercession. It teaches us to
improve the many Arguments so cogently pressed by Paul on the Corinthians as on
the Romans. 1 Cor. 15.
Thence we learn to know Christ as the Apostle did, Romans 6.
more experimentally in the power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3. 9, 10.
being made conformable to his death. So it became Christ to suffer and enter
into Glory. As by Humiliation he wrought out our Salvation by Price in way of
Impretation; So by his Exaltation he works it out by power in a way of
Application. 1 Cor. 15.
The many cavils objected against it, Paul fully confuted over and over. The
Popish pretenses for their Transubstantiation, have been from Scripture
sufficiently taken off by many choice Pens. That Capernaitical conceit Christ
himself took pains to refute. John 6.
It much wrongs the Glory of Christ to bring him again from Heaven to earth,
daily to mangle and abuse him by the hand of their Mass-Priests, and expose him
to shame and suffering again. Though they call their Mass an unbloody
Sacrifice, yet do they make themselves the Butchers and Executioners of Christ,
in pretending to offer his corporal flesh and blood. Scripture indeed calls the
Bread and Wine his Body and Blood, so does it call Christ the Door, See for
this Chamier. Calvin. Anatom. of the Mass, with the joint forces of our many
writers. Creed, and manducasti, was the famous Axiom of St. Augustine in this
case.
the Vine, etc. by the like Metaphors; yet is not Christ turned into a Door nor
Vine; no more are the Elements turned into his Body and Blood. Christ explains
the meaning of those phrases, and so does his Apostle to the full. As for the
Vbiquitarians conceit, to make Christ's Body present corporally with the
Elements and everywhere, the absurdity thereof abuses grossly Christ's Exaltation
in his humane Nature; and their Consubstantiation is refuted with that
Scripture Reason that dispels the Popish Impanation. Their straining of
figurative speeches beyond their scope, fetches Blood out of Scripture by
dreadful violence and absurd consequence. Yet will they admit figures in many
other places not controverted. Heretics of old are thus set out by Epiphan.
Augustine. Ierom. Irenaeus. Cyprian. Eusebius. Socrat. Tertul. etc.


12, The Word of Christ suffers much likewise, 1. From the forenamed Tenets. 2.
Formal Antiscripturists, old and new, quite denying the need and use thereof;
and questioning the purity, sufficiency, clearness and divineness of it. 3. By
Papists, See Bellarm. Council. Trid. Becan. Tolet. Staplet. Maldon. Gordon. etc.
confuted by Chamier. Panstrat. Rainold. Whitak. Bishop Jewel. Downame. Potter.
Morton. Davenant.
charging it with obscurity, corruption, insufficiency, defectiveness and
needlesness. They keep it from the peoples common use, unless licenced,
teaching that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. They prefer their vulgar
Latin version before both Originals. They equalize their unwritten Traditions
therewith, and the Church commands: yea prefer them often before it. They bind
all to receive its Interpretation only from their mouth. They patch to the
Canon many Apocrypha's and spurious books, stored with lies and contradictions,
absurdities and fables, ascribing thereto the like divine Authority. 4. The
Quakers join with them in slighting Scripture, Field. Willet. Ames. Paraeus.
Calvin. Luther. and multitudes of Protestant Writers. Witness the many books by
them and against them, besides their flying papers and daily speeches. Beckmans
Exercit. Erastus against Paracelsus. Zuinger. Gesner. and others have
particularly detected the sad affinity of Behmens Doctrine with Paracelsus his
Chemical delusions; Mr. Baxter in his late tract of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, from page 146. 147. he gives direful hints of this.
equaling their pretended Revelations therewith, abusing the words thereof to
contrary senses, wresting it to the disguising of their gross Errors, giving to
their pretended Light within that Infallibility which the Papists give to their
Pope and Council; 5. The Behmenists and Notionists that turn it into Allegories
and uncouth Eictions; changing Realities into shadows, and the substance of
Scripture into Chemical Fumes, witness Paracelsus, Wigelius, Behmens several
Books, which are stored with nonsense and vile blasphemies; bold Intrusions
into hid Mysteries; all under specious colors with bombastical words.

AGainst these woeful Drugs, the Knowledge of Christ will be successfully
improved, showing us the Excellency and Necessity, the sufficiency and purity,
the clarity and utility of Scripture. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
It will take off all the mistakes, objections and cavils made against the
Divinity and right use thereof. Psalm 19.
It will clear it to be the sole and sure Standard and Rule of Religion; Psalm
119.
being the full Declaration of Gods Will and Mind, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21.
the Fountain of all Goodness and Truth. It will show the need that all have to
study it day and night, Esaias 8. 20.
and observe it in all things. John 5. 39.
It will detect their folly who add thereto their unwritten Traditions,
additions and Revelations besides, above, or against it as abominable to God.
It will discover their madness, who pretend to speak and write as good
Scripture, and will not own the Bible to be the Word of God. It will show that
all Scripture was written by Inspiration from God, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
and is sufficient to complete the Man of God to every good work. That it came
not by the will of man, but that the men of God writ as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21.
That the abuse of it by some must not prejudice the right use thereof;
corruption Optimi pessima; that if he be hid, its to them that perish. 2 Cor. 4.
3, 4.
That the Word is Light, and gives Light. That the Spirit of Christ still
speaks in his Word whether to Life or to Death, Prove. 6. 23.
being inseparable from it. Esaias 59. 21.
That its never a dead Letter, though it be sometimes a killing Letter. 2 Cor.
2. 15, 16.
That Translations are but the Taps of Scripture, to broach those full vessels,
which therefore should be fitted to the use of all, and are so far to be owned
as they agree with the original sense. That the sense of Scripture is
Scripture, though it may be variously expressed. That no man's Interpretation is
to be received further then it agrees with the whole Scripture. That all
seeming contradictions therein are easily cleared by comparing of Scriptures,
minding the context and scope in a sober humble manner with studious diligence.
That the sense of Scripture Translations when dark, must be brought to the
Original Light. That all things absolutely needful to Salvation are clearly
laid down in Scripture. That Scripture Consequence is Scripture. That some
things are obscure therein to exercise our sobriety and industry. That its so
fitted to every man's condition, that the simplest may reap the benefit thereof.
Esaias 8. 20.
That Christ bids all search the Scriptures, and sends them to the Law and
Testimony for decision and prediction still. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10.
That the wisest Christians are most studious of Scripture, 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14,
15, 16.
finding still most need of it, being most sensible of their remaining
Ignorance. That pride and blindness make men to conceive so highly of their
knowledge, as to think themselves wise enough without it, Gal. 6. 3.
or as wise as it. 1 Cor. 3. 18.
That they are foolish self-seducers, who thus think and say. That God indeed
spoke to our Fathers (...) in diverse parts and manners, Heb. 1. 1.
by piecemeal as it were; but he has now contracted all, in speaking to us by
his Son. That therefore having closed the Canon, and sealed up those Records by
his Sons Apostles; who ever adds to or detracts from it, Rev. 22. 18. 19.
is liable to that sentence there denounced by the Lord himself. That the Lords
Will revealed in Scripture obliges all, being the Beck and hint of our
Sovereign, who can becken us all into nothing at his Will. That since the
completing of Scripture, immediate Inspirations are expired, being needless,
the divine Rule of all being perfectly given out. That all pretended
Enthusiasms not agreeing with the Word, must be suspected to be from evil
spirits. The several Errors of the Apocrypha are discovered by Scripture Light,
and have been abundantly confuted by many worthy hands. The abuse of Scripture
by feigned Allegories, is thereby detected also, when men will be wise above
what is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6.
giving heed to Jewish and Chemical Fables, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
yea to Magical Notions and Fictions, as Paracelsus, 1 Timothy 4 7.
Behmen, etc. they are justly given up to believe those lies, Tit. 1. 14.
deceiving, and being deceived. The Scripture indeed sometimes Allegorizes and
teaches the use of Tropes and figures by the best Rhetoric. 2 Pet. 1. 16.
We must therefore be sure to keep close to it, 2 Timothy 3. 13.
least we turn substantial Truth by Chemical Evaporations into Notional smoke.
Witness Sprig. Erbury. John Sedgwick Salmon. etc.
Too many of late have followed those woeful courses of enervating Scripture by
Allegorical strains, till they had lost Reason and Religion at once. Such
Paracelsian Fumes quickly Intoxicate men's Brains, breeding the Giddiness, and
then Convulsions to extremity.

13. See of this the Writers formerly named, those also hinted by Mr. Baxter in
his Book of the sin against the Holy Ghost, with diverse others sufficiently
known.
Christ's Ordinances, by his Word appointed, are not spared, but are opposed
too. First, By the forenamed deceits. Secondly, By our modern Seekers and
Familists, as by the old Gnostics, accounting them but childish weak things,
fit only for inferior Christians in their lower form. Thirdly, By many
Lukewarm Laodiceans of this Age, of a neutral indifferent spirit toward
Christ's Instituted Worship. Fourthly, By all Papists and Traditionists, who set
up ways and parts of Worship of man's devising: as religious use of Images,
prayer for the dead, Invocation of Saints and Angels, Veneration of Relics,
sale of pardons and Indulgences, Fictions of Purgatory and Limbus patrum, and
infantium; Prayer in an unknown Tongue by roat upon Beads, vain Babbling and
Tautologies repeated over and over; superstitious uses of Crosses and
Crossings; Altars and Tapers; Vestments and Dressings; Mimical Gestures and
ridiculous Stage Plays in Worship: corrupting of every Ordinance by many
foppish additions and tricks. Fifthly, By Ranters and Quakers, who jeer and
blaspheme Christ's Institutions, as our sad experience testifies in all places.

AGainst such gross Evils, Romans 12. 16.
the right Knowledge of Christ will arm us, 1 Cor. 1, 21.
and prove that they are but fools who think themselves too wise for Christ's
School. Paul for instance in all his Epistles.
That the highest Christians have always used them, and pressed all others
thereto with all diligence. That they are the Charets and Conduits of
communication between the Lord and us. That they are all suited to the case of
all Gods people on earth. That we should live above them in the use, not in the
neglect of them. That our bodies shall cease from needing food, when our souls
shall cease to need Ordinances. That Christ promises his presence therewith to
the worlds end. That he meets his people with a choice Blessing, Exodus 20. 24.
where ever he records his name, Psalm 105. 4.
and therefore bids them seek his face evermore. That therein our Homage is
paid unto him in a special manner. Esaias 64. 5.
That the Lord will be sought and found in all his ways. Prove. 3. 6.
That his familiarity is to teach us manners, Job 42. 6.
not sauciness. That to be neutral and meteor-like in the Lords worship, Genesis
18 27.
is sad and sinful in a high degree. Mat. 26. 30.
That Prayer and Singing are jointly prescribed and directed to for spiritual
use. Mark 14. 26.
That the abuse thereof by any, A^. 16. 25.
should not, cannot excuse us from our duty. 1 Cor. 14. 15.
All are bound and bidden to use them, yet none can use them spiritually but by
a special Grace. Ephesians 5. 19, 20.
That a moral performance of Duty is better far then nonperformance. Col. 3.
16.
That men are to serve God as well as they can, 2 Chro. 29. 30. Ezechias and
the Lords servants commanded that they should sing in the words of David and
Asaph. All men are bid and bound to serve God morally, that they may learn to
serve him spiritually.
still learning of him how to serve him better. That God is ready to give more
still to such as improve what they have received. That its better to serve
Christ outwardly, then to serve sin and Satan by omitting good, or committing
evil. That the preaching and hearing Gods Word, requires of necessity
meditation and repetition, reading and studying thereof. That Christ will be
honored in every Relation by every one, without exception, as in public and
secret, so likewise in our several Families. That he threatens a curse to such
Nations, and such Families as know not, and call not on his name. That his
morning and evening Mercies challenge good manners in duty from us. Psalm 33. 8.
That Christ himself taught how to pray and praise on the solemn use of the
Lords creatures. Psalm 67. 3, 4, 5, 7.
That to rest on Duties is Idolatry, Act. 17. 30, 31.
and to neglect the same is Rebellion That all mixtures of humane Inventions do
but soil and deface the Lords pure worship: Ierem. 10. 25.
that therefore all Romish Innovations are sufficiently confuted by the bare
rehearsal. Psalm 14. 4.
That Will Worship can never please him who will be worshipped in Spirit and
Truth. 1 Timothy 4. 4.
That the Heathens pleaded the like excuses for their superstition and
Idolatry, Matthew. 15.
as the Papists do for theirs. Matthew. 26.
That a great part of the Pop^sh trash is but borrowed from Pagans with
disguises. Luke 21.
That in many Mark 14.
Ioh. 4. 23, 24.
Matthew. 15 9.
Col. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
See the full parallel thereof in the Isle of Man, by Mr. Bernard in the charge
drawn against Papistry.
things they renew those Rites, which by Christ's coming were to have an end:
that vows contrary to Scripture-Duty, can show little savor of
Scripture-Verity: that the ready way to obscure our Light, is to besmear and
and paint our Windows. That Scripture-simplicity loves not the dressing of a
pompous whore. See Mr. Daille right use of the Fathers.
That a fair Complexion needs no painting, and truth has most power when most
purity. That Antiquity pleads not at all for their grossest Tricks. Rivet.
Critic. Censur. patr. Perkins Problem. and all our Divines on that Subject.
That in the things wherein some of the Fathers seem to plead for them, there
is much mistake and much forgery. That however, Truth is the eldest, and he
wants no Antiquity that wants not Scripture-Truth. Many words were innocently
used by the Fathers as Merit, Altar, etc. which are turned quite into another
sense among Papists now. Many worthy Pens have largely confuted all
Anti-Sabbatarians, witness. Dr. Twiss, Dr. Baily, Mr. Palmer, and Caudry, Mr.
Shepherd, Mr. Lestrange, Mr. White, Dr. Ames, Mr. Garter, etc.


14. Christ's Holy Day, his Sabbath of rest, suffers peculiarly, as, 1. From the
foresaid Enemies of Truth; So secondly, From too many seeming friends, some
wholly rejecting, some mangling of it, and some indifferent to this or to that.
Thirdly, By Quakers and all Enthusiasts, who slight all, or most of Christ's
Ordinances, and this especially.

Against such mistakes and abuses, the knowledge of Christ will teach and
enable us to observe his day as becomes a Sabbath. Its called (...) the Lords
Day, to express his special property therein, and sanction thereof, as the
Eucharist is called the Lords Table and the Lords Supper (...). Revel. 1. 10.
The Command enjoining it, Exodus 20. 10, 11, 12.
is placed in the heart and Center of the Decalogue; with a signal Memento
prefixed. Its largely expressed, The Particle ha, is not always Emphatical to
notify a particular; and if it should be so taken here, it may notify
proportion, as well as Order.
both positively and prohibitively. In the precept and close he names the
Sabbath, though in the amplification he mentions the seventh day, or a seventh
day. He adds strong Reasons to enforce it from his Propriety, Example and
Blessing, as also from the Equity thereof. By this one Command, he often
expresses his whole Worship, He couples it sometimes with one Precept of the
first Table, and after with one of the second Table to signify the great As
Esaias 56, 4, 5, 6, 7. Exodus 31. 12, 13, 14, 15, etc. Levit. 19. 3, 29, 30.
Influence it has into the observance of both. Its abundantly confirmed,
enforced and renewed in every part of Scripture, old and new. The reason that
enforced the use of the seventh day Sabbath extends as fully to the first day
Sabbath. That was the Lords rest day from his Creation-work; This is his rest
day from his Redemption-work. The change of the day in its quando, made by God
himself, alters not the force of the Command, but ratifies it. He only could do
it that is the Lord thereof. Matthew. 12. 8.
There is no change made in the quamdiu and continuance, nor in the quoties and
frequency of the same. The whole Precept being moral, in part naturally, in
part positively, is perpetual therefore, and not to be altered by any Creature.
That some special time should be observed for Gods solemn worship, is moral
natural. That it should be such a proportion in such a Revolution, is moral
positive. That the duty should be moved from the seventh to the first day of
the week, makes no substantial change therein, but only directs to the season
thereof upon pregnant ground. Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Paul clears this by a large demonstration. The first day Sabbath was eminently
typified in the most notable Providence of the old Testament. Genesis 1.
On the first day Light was created, Genesis 8.
Noah's Ark rested, Circumcision was first ordained, Israel was redeemed from
Egyptian Bondage; Genesis 17.
on the same day Christ's Law was first given by himself to Israel on mount
Sinai; Exodus 12.
the cloud of his special presence first rested on them, the Tabernacle with
his pertinances was reared, Exodus 19. c. 20.
Aaron and his Children first executed their Priesthood. Exodus 30.
On that day his fire from Heaven first came down to consume the Sacrifices to
make them acceptable in Christ by his Spirit. Exodus 40.
The Israelites were first solemly by the Lord himself blessed; Levit. 9.
their Princes first publicly offered to the Lord. Levit. 9. 24.
So for the new Testament, Christ thereon first showed his Miracles in Cana,
Numb. 16.
he first rose and appeared to his Disciples; Numb. 17. 1.
the Saints that slept then rose out of their Graves; John 2.
the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles solemnly met, Luke 24.
and thereon still they met for divine worship. John 20. 19.
When the Jewish Sabbath ended by reason of its Typicalness expiring with
Christ's death, Matthew. 27.
then began the first day to be the Christian Sabbath, Act. 1.
Christ sanctifying it Act. 2.
1 Cor. 16. 1.
Act. 20. 7.
to that end by his resurrection, honoring it in a special manner, which is
the ground given by God himself for the keeping of a Sabbath. Exodus 20.
So careful were Christ and Christians of it, Matthew. 24.
that he bids them pray, that their flight be not in the winter, nor on the
Sabbath, lest it should distract their bodies and souls. Numb. 15.
Profaning of the Sabbath has ever been threatened and punished signally,
Ezekiel. 22.
as the due observance of it has been choicely encouraged and rewarded in all
Superiors and Inferiors. Ezekiel. 20.
Its the Lords court-day wherein he expects due Homage and Rents from all his
Tenants. Ezekiel. 23.
Its his Musterday for all his Christian Soldiers. Nehem. 13. 17, 18.
Its his solemn Feast Day to welcome all his friends. Exodus 31. 14, 35, 2.
Its his weekly Market for the getting in of all heavenly provisions. Ierem.
17. 27.
Its his Chancery-day for the sealing and grant of his deeds of Favor. Carnal
Protestants have learned of the Paganish Papists to profane the Sabbath, making
it rather Diabolicus quam dominicus dies. Like their Pope Sylvester, who
commanded the alteration of it, and Thursday to be observed in lieu thereof, as
Hospin relates, de fest. Christ.
What enemies are they to his honor and man's good, who slight and abuse that
Heaven upon earth! Its the beginning of an eternal Sabbath. All Cavils against
it have been fully dispelled by many choice pieces. When Paul condemns the
distinction of days, his meaning is cleared by the Context, to speak of Jewish
Ceremonials, not of Christian Morals. The neglect and abuse of the Christian
Sabbath has been observed formerly and lately to be still the Inlet to all
other errors. Englands prosperity began in Queen Elizabeth's time, when the
Sabbath began to be duly maintained by Authority. The troubles of England began
afterward, when the Sabbath was publicly by Authority profaned, and by the
same party. * Witness Afred, Ivan etc. in Saxon and English History by Braiton,
Britton, Fortescue, Bacons History of English Government.
The famous Kings and Witagen Mots among the Saxons, still; renewed strict Laws
for due observance of the Christian Sabbath. Romans 14.
Gal. 4. Col. 2. The first and great Blow given to the German Churches was upon
the Sabbath Day which they had so notoriously profaned. On that day Prague was
taken by the Papists


15. Many Champions of Truth have contributed much to this Subject, as the
former Reformers and Ancient Fathers; So of late, Mr. Burges, Mr. Rutherford,
M. Paget, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Cobbet. Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Hooker, etc.
The Law of Christ is variously abused, 1. By the the foresaid Errors. 2. By
Antinomians, denying the Obligation of a Christian to the moral Law. 3. By
Papists in mangling of it, and dispencing therewith at pleasure many ways. 4.
By Quakers, and other Innovators, joining too much with Papists. 5. By
Socinians that rest thereon, teaching people the like, and so making it their
satisfaction to justice and their Salvation.

AGainst such evils, Scripture-knowledge of Christ will help us to see the need
and use of that Law of Christ. Genesis 1. 26, 27.
As he printed it on man's heart at first, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
so does he by his Grace renew it there gradually. Col. 3. 10.
He published it himself from Mount Sina to his people, adding the Ceremonials
and Judicials afterward, Ierem. 31. 33.
as fit accommodations of that moral Law, Ierem. 32. 39, 40, 41.
suited to the Jewish Church and State. Ezekiel. 36, 26, 27,
The Decalogue then is the sum of that Law, Act. 7. 37.
which obliges all men without exception. The sevetal Explications and
Applications thereof we find through the Old and New Testament. Matthew. 5.
Christ ratified the same from Mount Zion also, Romans 7. 12, 14, 22.
in taking away the Pharisaical Rubbish, 1 Cor. 9. 21.
which their false Glosses had cast about it. The Apostles further clear and
confirm it in their several Epistles and Writings. Iam. 2. 8.
Where the Scripture seems to speak against the Law, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.
the sense is cleared by viewing the Context.

1. Gal. 2. 16.
They speak against the justifying Power of the Law, through man's weakness
since the fall, Gal. 3. 10, 11
none being able to keep it without fault, or to make amends for his breach
thereof. Thus by the Law can none be justified, and the regenerate are not
under it to get pardon and salvation by a Law of works. The Pharisees thus
pressed and owned it, and were confuted by Christ and his Apostles. Thus also
do they sin, that do rest upon any Gospel-duty, making it to themselves thereby
a Law of Works. Romans 6. 14.
Secondly, They speak against the condemning effect of the Law, which the
regenerate are freed from by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them. They are
not under the curse of it, having their sins pardoned by Christ's satisfaction,
Romans 3. 25.
made theirs actually through faith in his blood; though their sin deserves the
Curse, Romans 5. 1.
yet that reatus and guilt does not redound upon their persons, being taken off
by Christ. Act. 15.
Thirdly, They speak often of the ceremonial Law as not obliging any Christian
since Christ, though it was used indifferently for a while to bear with tender
Converts then unsatisfied about the abrogation thereof. Fourthly, They still
own the royal Law of Liberty, Iam, 2. 8. 12.
that moral Law which is the Transcript of Gods holy Will for the Rule of man's
Duty in conformity to Gods Image. Its called therefore the Law of Christ, the
perfect Law, and the Law of Truth, which men do well when they observe, and ill
so far as they neglect it. God indeed writes his Law on his peoples heart, but
gradually and variously; that is, to them an internal Principle of Obedience,
Romans 7. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
which is still attended by the Law of their Members in opposition thereto.
This Principle moves them still to observe that Law which God has given to be
their standing Rule, perfect and unchangeable. Men are as far from his Grace as
they are from observing his Law. God never leaves his Children without Rule. He
that breaks and nuls any one part willingly, is guilty of all. The Papists
guilt is great in hiding the second Command from the people in their vulgar
Liturgies, leaving it out, and making a gainful Trade of dispensing with
Incest, undutifulness of Children, Fornication, etc. How great is their guilt
then that take away all the Commands at once, leaving man to his own deceitful
heart under pretense of a Light and Law within? to be lawless, is to be
godless,; For what is Gods Law but the declaration of Gods Will requiring man's
Duty? who ever opposes the Princes order, does so far oppose the Prince
himself. Atheism is the Source and Sum of such Antinomianism.

16. Worthy pains have been taken by many of late, as by our former reformed
Divines, by Mr. Bulkeby, Mr.
The Lords Covenant in Christ is assaulted also, First, By the former Errors.
Secondly, By Socinians, Papists, Novellists, who deny his gracious Covenant
with Abraham, renewed with Israel in Horeb, in Moab, and so successively till
Christ's personal coming, who published a new Edition thereof. Thirdly, By
diverse Anabaptists, and other week Christians, who mistake and miscall that
Covenant many ways, Mr. Cobbet, M. Carter, Mr. Anth. Burges, Dr. Owen, Mr.
Blake, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Norton, etc. whose lesser differences are
composed with facility by the sober friends of Truth and Peace.
not distinguishing the substance from the manner of administering it,
confounding works and Grace, Law and Gospel thereby.

AGainst that Distemper, Gal. 3. 16.
our Antidote will give a sure Remedy, showing the right nature and use of that
gracious Covenant made of God in Christ with his people in all ages ever since
man's fall. Genesis 3. 15.
God made first an Overture thereof to our first Parents in the promised seed.
It was further cleared to Noah, and sealed to Abraham and his seed. At their
coming from Egypt he renewed it by the Mediators voice and hand. Act. 3. 37.
Gods Mercy engaged, engaging man's Duty in Christ and through him, Gal. 4. 4, 5.
is the sum thereof. Gods Mercy is expressed in every Promise, Exodus 19. 20.
man's Duty in every Precept. The Ceremonials and Judicials were the several
Garments of that Covenant, Deuteronomy. 26. 17, 18.
suited to their condition both in Church and State. By this Covenant they had
all good, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11.
and were freed from evil temporal, Psalm 89. 3, 28, 34.
spiritual, and eternal. It was a Parental and conjugal Covenant which the
godly did embrace spiritually, Psalm 105 8.
and other Professors but externally. Esaias 59. 21.
God owned them, whither Jews or Proselytes for his Children and Spouse, Zech.
9. 11.
so far as they owned it either externally or internally. Psalm 106. 45.
Because this Covenant was much mistaken and abused in their latter times,
Psalm 111. 5.
Christ came in Person to renew it evangelically. Thence the Gospel is called a
new Covenant, Ezech. 16. 60, 62.
because the old renewed in a fairer Print. Mic. 7. 20, 21.
Thus the old Command of Love being renewed is a new Command. Luke 1 72, 73.
Thus the old Moon renewed, is called the new Moon. Exodus 12. 48.
Thus an old Lease revived, is a new Lease. Its the old substantially, Matthew. 5.
its a new one circumstantially. The former Edition was more dark, Matthew. 26.
this more clear; that straighter, this larger; 1 John 2. 7, 8, 9. 10.
that heavier, this lighter: therefore the Gospel Covenant is comparatively
said to be better, Heb. 9, 17, 20, 22.
made on better Promises, Heb. 8, 6, 7, etc.
and more lasting, being unchangeable till Christ's last coming; whereas the
former is said to be grown weak and antiquated.

Thence the Gospel Ministry is comparatively called a Ministry of Life of
Glory, 1 Cor. 3.
of the Spirit, and abiding, whereas the former dispensation was more
accommodated to that Infant Age of the Church, and is said to have more of
death, of the letter, and less Glory. Thus the Scripture speaks often
positively of things understood comparatively. My Doctrine says Christ, is not
mine, John 7. 16. h. e. comparatively, not barely mine, but his that sent me.
That this Covenant must needs be substantially the same now, Levit. 13. 8.
as then, though now more plainly dressed, appears in the Author and Mediator,
the substance and scope, the parties and parts, the terms and conditions which
are still essentially the same. Its still of Grace and from Grace, Mr. Hobbs in
his Leviathan and other Books, has many gross Errors opposing this and other
Divine Truths dangerously. The Fathers of old, both Greek, Latin, and all
Reformed Divines since have cleared this Point to the full, being followed by
many Worthy Pens in our Age; English and French, Dutch and Danes.
for Grace, and through Grace in every branch of it. All cavils objected have
been abundantly refuted by others. These hints may suffice now to point at
those things which have been so fully and so frequently cleared by so many
Champions of divine Truth.

17. The Novelists follies have have been detected sufficiently also, formerly
and lately. Infant Baptism in its purity, Antiquity and Right has been fully
made out, as by all former Writers, so lately by Mr. Marshal, Mr. Blake, Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Cobbet, Dr. Winter, Dr. Featley, Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Sidenham. Dr Worth, and many others.
The Seals of Christ's Covenant are also abused: as 1. By the foresaid Evils; so
2. By the Papists defiling, mangling and corrupting them: adding five
Sacraments of their own Invention, viz. Penance, and Order, Confirmation,
Marriage and extreme Unction. 3. By Quakers and Notionists, who slight and
contemn them. 4. By the Anabaptists who deny Baptism to Christ's Infant Members,
the Believers seed.

AGainst those Maladies we find Sovereign Help from the Grace and Knowledge of
Christ improved. Thence we observe the Lords care renewed in confirming his
Covenant now, as he did of old by significant Seals called Sacraments, because
sacred Rights, confirming the Engagement of Christ's soldiers to him. 1 Cor.
10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
What the Manna and Rock, the Cloud and Sea, Circumcision and Passe-over did of
old ratify; the same is now consigned by Baptism and Eucharist. The Popish
Recess from Christ's Institution therein sufficiently disproves all their
Innovations thereabout. Matthew. 15. 9.
In vain do they worship him, teaching for Doctrines the commands of men. They
agree not among themselves, nor with Scripture of Reason, in the account given
of those five Sacraments they have superadded. Its pity that any friend of
Christ should join with them in slighting the purity and simplicity of Christ's
sealing Ordinances. There are extremes and abuses about both of them. The Lord
gave them for Pledges and Helps of Christian communion; Satan has abused them
to foment unchristian division. The great Reformation in Germany, Consult.
Sleiden, Alling, Hornebeck, Bulinger, etc. for the particulas.
Denmark and Sweden, has been sadly opposed and abused by Errors in these two
Seals. Rigid Lutheranism and fanatic Anabaptism have been the great stops
there, and the firebrarnds. Error has been acting in our parts also. Much
plausibleness from mistaken and misapplied Scriptures has been made use of to
palliate the sore. But the nature of Christ's Covenant sufficiently clears our
Infants Right to the Seal thereof, so far as capable. Interest in the Covenant
must needs import Interest in the Seal. Deuteronomy. 26.
They may have the seed of Faith, though the fruit appears not yet. Deuteronomy. 29.
10, 11.
They do virtually profess in their Parents though not actually. Genesis 17. 7, 8,
10
The Statute of Heaven that took them first into Covenant, was never yet
repealed nor expired. Our children are as much members of Christ's Family and
Kingdom as the Jewish children. Ezekiel. 16. 20.
Christ owns them and blesses them still as he did before. Matthew. 19. 13, 14,
15.
The Precepts and Promises concerning them have suffered no substantial change,
Act. 2. 39.
though Administrations be circumstantially altered. Heb. 13. 8.
The Blessing of Abraham comes still on the Gentile through faith in Christ, 1
Cor. 1. 20. Gal. 3. 8, 9, 14.
as it did on the Jews. What Infidel Jews lost, Believing Gentiles receive in
Root and Branch. Romans 11. 16, 17, 20, 23.
The Believing Isralites child could be no loser by the change of the Seal, his
Parent still abiding in Covenant. Look how the unbelieving Jews were broken
off branch and twig, so are Believing Gentiles graffed in Branch and Twig.
There is less said of this in the New Testament, because so much was said in
the Old. This Point was so clear then without opposition that a little
sufficed. The Believing Jews would not have been quiet if their children had
been shut out of Gods House, that made such stirs at lesser matters. Christ,
when a child, was Head of the Church; children then may be members thereof. He
calls them his Children, Disciples, Saints, servants in the same Relation given
to their Parents. Exodus 12. 48.
When Families of old joined to the Lord, children were not excluded; Act. 16.
31.
no more were they in Apostolical days. Luke 19. 9.
They that will deny Scripture-Consequence, must deny all Duties of
Christianity, none whereof can be performed without such Reasoning. Reason and
Religion they must at once gainsay, that gainsay Inferences orderly drawn from
thence. The Condition of this Covenant is sufficiently cleared by the Knowledge
of Christ both for Entrance and continuance, both Internally and Externally.
Christ invites sinners to come by Faith to him for all needful Grace. None can
come to him except the Father draw them. John 6. 44.
He gives to his Elect peculiarly, what he requires from all indefinitely. As
far as that Condition is performed either Externally or Internally, so far
reaches the Covenant privilege before God and men. The profession and outward
Privilege may be utterly lost by carnal hypocrites; but the distinguishing
Grace and internal privilege thereof cannot be totally nor finally lost by the
Regenerate, though they may be ecclipsed for a time.

18. About this Subject you may see most of our Protestant Divines, as the
Fathers also against schism, as Irenaeus, Austin, etc. More lately have written
Dr. Field, B. Jewel, Dr. Willet, and within these few years the Assembly of
Divines, Mr. Hudson, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Stone, Mr. Caudry, Mr. Cotton, M. Baxter,
etc. whose circumstantial differences are easily reconciled by moderate
Christians; who strive for Truth and Peace, not for contentious Victory.
The Church of Christ suffers much also, First, By all the former. Secondly, By
rigid Separatists of diverse sorts. Thirdly, By the Popish Apostasy and
Usurpations, assuming to themselves alone the Title of Catholics, and
unchurching all that jump not with them. Fourthly, By Quakers and Notionists,
who slight and abuse the communion of Saints multipliciously and nefariously.

AGainst such Disorders, Ephesians. 1. 23.
the gracious knowledge of Christ affords meet help. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Improve it to a right Union and Communion, both with the Head, Christ; and
with his Body. His Church is his House, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4 5, 6.
that cherishes Concord among Brethren of different sizes. Ezekiel. 11, 19.
There is but one God and Mediator there; there also should be but one mind and
heart. There are diverse Chambers and Stories therein, yet its one house. Though
different flocks under various Shepherds, John 10. 16.
yet are they all under one great shepherd. They that own Christ as Head,
should be owned of his Members. They that agree in the main, may bear with each
other in the means. Schism is a sinful separation that breeds a Convulsion in
the Body of Christ. Shame and Sorrow are the genuine fruits thereof, as Pride
and Ignorance the Parents of it. Romans 16. 17, 18, 19.
They bear most with others that know Christ and themselves best. Paul would
have them both marked and shunned that make divisions as selfish Christians that
know little of Christ and themselves. He would have us separate from evil, but
not from good, as himself does. 1 John 3. 3.
Christians and Churches must purify themselves as he is pure. 1 Cor, 5. 7, 8,
9, etc.
They should therefore labor more for verity and Unity in the way to purity.
They need all mutual help. Cant. 6. 10.
Orderly Union affords much Beauty, strength and usefulness. It makes Gods
people like an Army with Banners; such an Arch-Building is choice and sure. All
convulsions are painful and direful. Scripture represents this harmonious
composure by that which excels in all frams, natural, civil and artificial.
Romans 14. 19.
We should all labor then for things that tend to Peace for mutual edification.
Variety of helps he affords to that end. The Popish pretense is as injurious as
its ridiculous. They make a particular Universal, a Roman Cathotholick. They
first disown Christ in effect, and then must they disown and be disowned of his
friends. The Quakers follow them too closely in this, as in other things,
casting Odiums upon our reformed Churches, and rejecting them. Its sad to see
any of Christ friends, who seem more sober and serious, through
mis-interpretations and mis-applications of Scripture to imitate them in such
dividing ways. To divide and destroy is Satan's Motto, its his Method. We see
it, we feel it by woeful experience. We must learn of Christ Prudent moderation
in our zeal for Truth. Psalm. 34. 14.
Both his Body and Garment should be so tendered, Heb. 12. 14.
as not to rend the one by favoring the other. (...), follow hard after, as
with hue and cry, with utmost diligence.
Peace is to be pursued after as far as possible in consistency with Holiness.
Much labor and care must often be used in over-taking and preserving Peace,
still endangered by many enemies.

19. Augustine. Propert. and many other Fathers cleared this point of old. The
Reformed Churches have afforded successively many Champions thereto, as
Wickliff, Bradward, Calvin, Zanch. Paraeus, Iun. Chamier, Twiss, Pemble, etc.
Lately Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Resbury, Dr. Kendal, Dr. Prideaux, etc.
The Grace of Christ nearly concerns his Church, and meets with the
contradiction of sinners. His Electing Grace is much slandred by many. First,
By most of the forenamed Errors. Secondly, By Pelagians, Socinians, and others
denying it to be eternal. Thirdly, Papists and Arminians agreeing with the
Semi-Palagians in making it conditional, not absolute; upon faith foreseen or
on Good work, not of Gods free pleasure. Fourthly, By many of our Notionists
following of those blind Guides, in following the false Lights which
Paracelsus, and Behmen, Swenkfield and Wigelius, the Rose-Crucians and
Enthusiastical Recluses have racked out of old Dung-hils, and dressed anew.

AGainst such deceits improve the knowledge of Christ, that you may consider
him in a double capacity. 1. As God the Son, jointly with the Father and the
Spirit, choosing his people from eternity; divina opera ad intra sunt indivisa.
Secondly, As Mediator in Gods eternal purpose, Romans 9. 11.
in whom in all the vessels of Mercy were absolutely elected without any
respect to any thing in them, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6.
but according to the good pleasure of his Will, having predestined us to the
adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself before the foundation of the
world. There is a double Election also mentioned in Scripture. Romans 8. 28.
1. Eternal, which is to Glory. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
2. Temporal, which is to office. By eternal Election the Lords chosen flock
alone were foreordained to Glory through Grace. By temporal Election
reprobates as Judas may be chosen to office, John 6. 70.
as he was to the Apostleship. Gods electing Grace is called sometimes his
foreknowledge by an Hebraism, Romans 8. 28.
verbs of sense with them importing both affect and effect. Matthew. 25. 12.
Thus Christ is said never to have known the wicked, because he never owned
them for his. Ephesians 1. 5, 11.
This foreknowing Grace is called his Pleasure, his good Will, The Arminian
distinction of Gods Antecedent and Consequent Will, is found insufficient to
their scope, and cross to all Divine Attributes.
his (...), Amor Bonevolentiae, chiefly looking at the end, Gods Glorifying
himself by glorifying them in Christ. Predestination or fore-ordaining Grace,
pre-determining those Elect Persons so freely pitched upon by God* regards the
means leading to that end; therefore it fore-appointed them to Redemption and
Adoption in Christ by Grace toward Glory. Some being thus chosen, others were
passed by, and are therefore called Reprobates; and Gods purpose or council
about them is called Praeterition, Non-election, and non-predestination. God
was not bound to any, 2 These. 2. 13, 14.
and did choose and pass by of his own Will, independently, eternally,
distinctly, individually, certainly. Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
Those persons so passed by, considered in massa nuda, he did fore-ordain they
should be left to sin, Act. 13. 48.
and suffer for their sin; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
so considering them The Apostle, Romans 9. brings three signal Instances of this
great Truth for a sure demonstration; 1. In Jacobs Posterity, ver. 5. 6. 2. In
Abraham's seed, ver. 7, 8, 9. 3. In Isaacs family, ver. 10. 11, 12, etc. to take
off all mistakes, showing the first absolute Ground of difference between man
and man, to flow from Gods bosom, for ordaining the future state of all his
creatures, according to the purposed pleasure of his will. As for the execution
or Justice, or decreeing thereof, he delights not in the sinners death, but in
glorifying of Justice.
in massa corrupta, this Act of his purpose is called Praedamnation, 1 These. 5.
9.
being an Act of his Justice, whereas the former is properly an Act of
Sovereignty. Romans 9. 22, 23.
As Sovereign he passed by them absolutely, Jude. 4.
but as a just God, foreseeing their sin, Prove. 16. 4.
he fore-appointed them to Wrath. These various expressions denote one entire,
continued, perfect Act of the divine Essence, set out after our apprehension
diversely, and having distinct Denominations, but externally from its several
Objects, being still immanent in God from Eternity, non-transient. They all set
forth his Grace in the freeness and fullness, in the singularity and sureness
thereof. Thus Christ's knowledge improved, will vindicate his Truth from all
aspersions of injustice, unmercifulness and unfaithfulness. In all this he is
just, wronging none, being bound to none. He is merciful in choosing and
predestinating some. He is faithful and true, observing his word exactly.
Blind eyes cannot, sore eyes will not see this clear Truth with delight, but
fret at it as Cavillers in Paul's time, with heavy charges. But the Wisdom of
Christ must be justified of her Children now, Romans 9. 14, 15, etc.
as she was by himself and by his Apostles then. Romans 9. 19, 20, etc.
It must needs wrong the Grace of Christ much to make it depend upon the
foresight of faith, Iam. 1.
or any thing else in the Creature, and giving the Creature a priority at least
so far. 2 Pet. 2.
God first appoints what shall be, 1 John 3.
and so foresees that it shall be, else he were not the first and last. Romans
11. 6, 7, etc.
As God is eternal and certain, so is his purpose eternal and certain. Upon
this Text see Mr. R. Resburies Elaborate Lectures. Dei voluntas rerum
necessitas. August. de Genes. ad liter.
The figments of men's brains are loathsome Idols that would bring God down to
man's shallow reach, and fall as Dagon before the Ark.

20. Many choice Pleces of this Theme you may consult with, left by Augustine,
Propert. Bradward. Calvin, Luther, Paraeus, Zanch. Twiss, Chamier, Molin,
Downame and many more Ancient and modern. Dr. Owen, Dr. Kendal, Mr. Lyford, Mr.
Resbury, etc. have taken off many sad mistakes herein, in their late writings
against Arminianism.
Christ's redeeming Grace is much wronged. First, By the former mistakes.
Secondly, By Pelagians, Papists and Arminians; First, In extending it to all
and every man individually alike; so that Judas was as much redeemed as Peter
in their sense. Secondly, In restraining it to a mere salvability or putting
mankind into a Power of being saved, and acquiring to God a new Power of saving
men. Thirdly, in unsetling it, and making it an uncertain Meteor, wandering up
and down among men, waiting on their free Will to embrace or refuse it at their
List. Fourthly, In enfeebling it so as that it has with them no Power or
Efficacy to save those so redeemed, but that a person whom God in Christ did so
redeem, may perish nevertheless utterly. Fifthly, By diverse of late who appear
much more sober and godly, See the writings about them.
yet incline too much to those dangerous Errors. Sixthly, By the Socinians,
Familists, Behmenists, Quakers, who either wholly deny it, or pass it in
silence as needless and useless.

AGainst this Poison, Christ's Antidote improved will give singular help; it
will show the Al-sufficiency and Efficacy of Christ's oblation to all the Elect;
for whom he did foreknow, those he did predestinate, Romans 8 28, 29, 30
he called, justified and glorified.

The necessity and operation thereof it clears also. None but God man could
save lost man. Nothing but the full Obedience of him could satisfy infinite
Justice, and procure infinite Mercy. Act. 20. 28.
Christ had not died, had it not been of absolute necessity. Heb. 9. 22.
Without the blood of God there was no Remission. That blood must needs be
efficacious and saving to all redeemed by him. Romans 5. 8, 9, 10.
For if whilst we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by his death, much
more being reconciled, shall we be saved from wrath by his life. There is
indeed, First, An external and professed Redemption which is mentioned in
Scripture that proves ineffectual to eternal salvation. Thus Apostates deny the
Lord that bought them generally and professedly. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Thus he is said to redeem the whole Creation. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
It mentions in that sense a temporal Salvation generally, Psalm 36. 6.
for thus he saves both man and beast, All Apostates professed to be redeemed
by him, and they were outwardly redeemed from much gross evil. (...) Salvabis.
Septuag. thou shall save, answering the Hebrew.
Secondly, There is an eternal Redemption of Grace to Glory, peculiar to Gods
elect. This differs from that as far as Heaven from Earth. Christ the Redeemer
is indeed Lord of all, and makes use of all for the good of his redeemed ones.
The devils themselves and brutes are thus generally under his dominion, Romans 8.
28.
as all Reprobates. Yet it follows not that he died for them. Gods Elect are
the proper Objects of redeeming Grace; All things else below come in
accidentally, secundarily, subserviently and comprehensively under
consideration in Christ's Redemption, which makes them all to advance Gods honor
and his peoples good. There is a dubious Homonymy in this word ( Grace) which
occasions much mistake. Many take it generally for any favor showed by God to
man. But Scripture limits the sense thereof in most, if not in all places to
his peculiar favor showed to his Elect in Christ, reaching their Redemption
and Salvation efficaciously and infallibly. Other Creatures enjoy many gifts,
as Abraham's secundary offspring, but his Elect as Isaac alone his Inheritance.
This advances the Glory of Christ's Grace in every consideration. To make his
blood impotent and uncertain, cannot but much eclipse it. His freeness and
fullness, his sureness and choiceness appear orientally in this redeeming Grace.
Neither may any Creature complain of any wrong herein. Matthew. 20. 15.
Is not he free to do with his own what he pleases? Romans 11. 35.
Was he ever bound to any Creature? Does any suffer but for their sins? Does
not God make good every Word of his? Christ was never a half-Saviour. He came
not barely to make men salvable, Heb. 7. 25.
but to save effectually, and to the utmost. His Redemption is as absolute as
the Fathers Election, though the offers of Grace be conditional, indefinitly
tendered to all sorts. Christ came not to purchase any new Power to God, Luke
19. 9, 10.
but to fulfill his purpose in his effectual procuring of Salvation for all
his. Ioh. 10. 16, 28, 29, 30.
He came for his lost sheep whom the Father Gave him, to fetch them home
efficaciously. The Sons Redemption must needs keep parallel with the Fathers
election. Had salvation been intended to each man, what could have hindered the
effecting thereof? If Christ died for Judas as for Peter, then is Peter little
more then Judas beholding to Christ's Redemption. Its not Christ it seems that
makes the difference, but some thing else. If he died for them both, but not
alike, then was his death therein peculiar to Peter, which makes the
difference. Then was it impossible that Judas could be saved without that
special thing, and it was as impossible that he should have it, seeing it was
not intended to him. To what purpose then did Christ die for him? He was not
salvable it seems by the grant supposed. What else he had was common to him
with other Creatures, good in it self, but abused by man. That Christ came not
to restore whole mankind, appears in that every one is never effectually
restored to primitive state. Where the Scripture speaks of Christ's Dying for
all, for the World, for sinners, etc. the context still clears the restriction
of those phrases to all the Elect, both Jews and Gentiles, that are of all
sorts, and in all places and ages. Its a common phrase in every language thus
to speak of all for many of all sorts indefinitely, Matthew. 3. 5.
to be explained by the matter in hand. Col. 1. 23.
Thus all Judea came to be baptized. The Apostles preached to every creature
under heaven, yet still with limitation. The word [ World] in diverse places
cannot signify whole mankind, John 1. 29.
but must be limited to the vessels of mercy alone. Psalm. 32. 32.
Thus Christ takes away the sin of the world; John 6 33.
now blessed is he whose sin is taken away; 2 Cor. 5. 19.
every man is not so. Many are in Hell beyond possibility thereof; he gives
Life to the world, not to them in Hell. God was in Christ, reconciling the
world, not imputing their sin unto them: Is this every man's privilege to have
reconciliation and pardon? In other places, the World can signify none but
Reprobates, 1 John 5. 19.
that shall never be saved, that lie in wickedness, John 17. 9.
that Christ prayed not for, that die in their sins that cannot receive the
Spirit of Grace, Revel. 13. 3.
etc. Usually its signification is indefinite to be explained by the context.
John 14. 17.
But what must men blieve if Christ died not for every man? John 17. 25.
They must believe that Christ alone is the full Savior and Redeemer of his
people; 2 Pet. 2. 5.
that he that believes not shall be damned, that Believers are saved through
his Grace, He distinguishes the ^orld of the ungodly from the saved Ones.
etc. as the Scripture teaches.

Object. Bnt why is Christ offered to all then?

Answ. Because that he speaks to men by men, after the manner of men. His Elect
are to be gathered from among all sorts. The Gardener waters the weeds
secundarily, but the good plants primarily. The Sun shines on the blind that
cannot make use thereof.

Object. But is not Unbelief the great damning sin?

Answ. It is so, though not the only damning sin. Positive unbelief is worse
then negative and admits of Degrees too. All sin is Damnable, a deadly disease:
But Unbelief is the refusing, the rejecting of the only Remedy that shuts the
soul under its deserved death.

Object. But is not this Doctrine uncomfortable?

Answ. Its indeed to all unbelieving Imp^nitent sinners wilfully rejecting
Christ; Matthew. 5. 3, 6.
but its most comfortable to all humble self-denying souls, those poor in
spirit, that hunger and thirst after Christ's righteousness. Esaias 48. 22.
There is no comfort to the wicked from the Lord. Esaias 57. 21.
But much encouragement to every soul that is made willing to turn from al sin
to God through Christ. John 6. 37.
Such shall duly know that Christ died for them when they find him killing sin
in them, that they may live to him. A general Notion that Christ died for all
and every One, can give no more comfort to Peter then to Judas, till his heart
do feel the power of Christ's death. Is it not more comfort that Christ died to
save his Elect certainly, then that he died so indefinitely, that its uncertain
for all his death whether any shall be saved? If you grant he died absolutely
but for some; then its certain that only they shall be saved; and his dying for
the rest conditionally, will not make them salvable nor afford any comfort to
them. If any Inconvenience attend our Doctrine it must needs attend that also.
Act. 15. 18.
Yea, if Christ should have died for all alike, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
yet seeing all are not in the event saved, he must needs foreknow it, or not
be Omniscient; and fore-ordain it, or not be Omnipotent; and that certainly, or
not be Sovereign. The same difficulties will follow that way with many more.
Either God or the Creature must be Independent. It disparages not Christ's death
that its limited to the Fathers purpose, Its no disgrace to the sufficiency of
the Sun, that so many blind eyes share not in its Light. Some are wilfully, all
naturally, some judicially, many sluggishly blind in spirituals. All are born
blind; Satan blinds further, some fall asleep, others wilfully shut their eyes;
some are offended, others judicially blinded; There is no fault in the Natural
or Spiritual Sun, but in the creature: sin is from self, Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15. 22.
by his Intention and Execution. All Divine Attributes are wonderfully
magnified this way; his Wisdom and Power, Mercy and Truth, Justice and
Holiness, etc. The Parallel drawn by the Apostle between the first and second
Adam proves a parity and proportion of Christ's Redemption, extended to all his
spiritual seed; as the corruption and condemnation of Adam extends to all his
natural seed. But all men individually considered, are not Christ's spiritual
seed. The Elect are such intentionally before Conversion, and actually Become
such in their Conversion. All Adams children died by him, and all Christ's
children were redeemed by him. Its more to redeem one soul, then to destroy
all. Christ excels incomparably.

21. You may see largely on this Subject Augustine, Epiphan. Prosper, Chamier,
Magdeb. Centur. Calvin, Luther, Chemnit. Paraeus, Zanchius, Bradwardine, Ames.
Dr. Twiss, Anatom. and Histor. of Socinian. Trelcatium Vtrumque, Iun. Theses,
Davenant, Bishop Jewel, Rivet, Hornebeck, de Socin. Willets Synops. Dr. Owens
Display of Arminians, etc. Mr. Ant. Burges Lectures. Mr. Downams System. Mr.
Baxters Rest. Mr. Perkins, Hooker, Shepherd, Cotton, Dr. Preston, Sibs, etc.
See the Books about them.
Christ's renewing Grace is no less a Sufferer by, First, The former
Oppositions. Secondly, By Pelagians old and new, asserting man's nature to be so
restored in every man, that they are all born in Gods favor, continuing so
till they grossly abuse the Light given them, either natural or Evangelical:
making Grace as common as Nature, because its a gift, though diversifyed.
Denying Original sin and Habitual corruption before years of discretion.
Thirdly, The Socinians who following them, deny that special Renewing Grace,
and pretend the New Birth mentioned so often to be but a moral change upon men,
which their nature by a common help from God does attain unto in imitation of
Christ, whom they suppose to be a mere Pattern of Holiness, not the Internal
efficient thereof. Fourthly, By the Papists and Arminians who have learned of
them to advance man's self-sufficiency, free Will and Power by a common
assistance of Gods Light indifferently afforded to all sorts according to their
Improvements of the common Gifts received to accept or reject Christ at their
pleasure; and to cast away the best of his Gifts Received when they list. In
effect, placing a man's strength and standing, yea his chief All in his own
mutable will: making Faith but a common Assent given to Truth. Fifthly, By the
Quakers, Familists and Notionists, who carry too much compliance with their
Ghostly Fathers in these as in other things.

AGainst these Lethal Maladies, the knowledge of Christ improved graciously
will afford effectual Remedies. Thereby we learn to see by Scripture Light the
total corruption of man's sinful Nature; Genesis 6. 5.
the universality thereof reaching all places and persons: Psalm 14,
its closeness and adherence, its contagion and fruitfulness, Psalm 53.
its temptations and Rebellions, its policies and power, Ierem. 17. 9.
its fierce and inconsiderate madness; Psalm 51. 5.
its indefatigable unsatisfiableness, and its multiplicious propagation, not
admitting of remission or intermission: This fully manifests the insufficiency
and emptiness of man, his unskilfulness and aptness to any spiritual good.
Thence the necessity of a special Renewing Grace from above to work an
effectual change in all Gods Elect by an Almighty irresistible power, John 3.
3, 5. 6.
such as quickened Lazarus and raised up Christ Jesus from the Grave. Matthew. 18.
3.
This sanctifying Grace is considered in Scripture in the gradual Renovation of
man from his first conversion from Nature to Grace, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19.
unto his change from Grace into Glory. The product of this Renewing Grace is
called a new Creature, and a Translation from death to Life; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
a Turning of men from darkness to Light, 1 John 3. 14.
and from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26. 8.
by opening of their eyes and renewing their Will. Its expressed by taking away
the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
and giving a heart of flesh; in putting his Spirit within us, and giving a new
heart and a new spirit, in our special effectual Calling. Its said to be our
Regeneration and being born again, John 3. 3, 5, 6, 7.
absolutely needful to open an entrance into Gods Kingdom. Though there be some
Relics of natural and moral Endowments left in men since the fall in their
powers and parts, as appears by the Heathens Improvements: yet these only
testify the wofulness of man's desperate fall in ruining so glorious a Fabric.
Thence the blindness and perverseness of his mind and will are so aggravated,
Romans 2.
the crooked distortions of his Affections, Romans 3.
the searedness and corruption of his Conscience with the disorder of every
part, Psalm. 58. 3.
are set forth so Emphatically to convince every man. Ephesians. 2. 1 2, 3, 11, 12.
Thence men are said before Conversion to be Godless and hopeless, Ephesians. 4. 17,
18, 19.
because Christless. Thence is the wonderful operation of Renewing Grace so
extolled still in this new creation, Tit. 1. 15, 16.
bringing forth Light out of darkness, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
in making man partaker of the Divine Nature. This supernatural Work is carried
on rationally by the Spirit of Christ Act. ^4. 27. Act. 16. 14.
in a way suitable to man's rational Being. Genesis 6. 5.
He works strongly, yet sweetly; he opens their heart-springs with a special
Key of his own framing. Genesis 8. 21.
The Particle (...) in that speech of God, appears to be not causal as many
take it, but discretive, as (...), etsi, although, aggravating man's sinfulness,
as the Greek (...) seems to import, 1 Timothy 1. 13. where he does not extenuate,
but aggravate his sin.
This Renewing Grace runs parallel with the Fathers Electing and the Sons
Redeeming Grace; 1 Cor. 16. 9.
whom God did foreknow and predestinate, Col. 4. 3.
those he calls effectually, seasonably, savingly. Their corrupt nature does
much resist it till Grace prevails and conquers all its Forts. Romans 8. 28, 29,
30.
The outworks of the Mind and Judgment, John. 6. 37, 44, 45.
Christ's Spirit conquers first; thence breaking through the Iron Gate of man's
Will into the possession of all the powers and parts of the soul. Ezekiel. 36. 2,
26, 27.
Many sins remain still in every part like so many Cananites and Tories to be
gradually subdued. Ierem. 31. 33.
These Rebels being broken in their Head and Reign, Ier. 32. 39, 40.
Grace does orderly dispatch by mortifying exercise. Psalm 89.
The Spirit of Christ carries on his work in supporting and supplying still
those gracious Beginnings, Romans 7.
which are weak at first. By the Gospel Light he communicates his gracious
Life. Col. 3.
Thus he persuades and enables his people to embrace Jesus Christ upon Gospel
terms by a Covenant of Marriage and Adoption. Hos. 2. 14, 19, 20.
Thus is man's dunghill heart by Renewing Grace broken up and dressed into a
spiritual Garden sown and set with the fruits of his holy Spirit. Genesis 9. 27.
It differs exceedingly from common convictions and external Reformations,
(...) as the Hebrew reads Emphatically, God will efficaciously persuade Japhet,
enlarging the heart of Gentiles toward Christ; il a hirera en douceur, as the
French reads it. He will sweetly and surely draw them. Thence (...) persuadeo.
as earth differs from Heaven. That difference is still morally-specifical,
though it seems to be Physically, but Numerical and gradual. Its the same
Spirit that works conviction on the Reprobate and on the Elect, but not in the
same manner. He knocks at both, and is resisted. He leaves the Reprobate
justly; he opens the Elects heart mercifully and prevailingly. The Reprobate
may be externally and professedly sanctified in a partial superficial way. Gods
Elect are specially sanctified, universally in every part; and gradually
through every part. Man's free will by sin subjected to Satan, is through this
Renewing Grace set at liberty, Revel. 3. 21.
so far as Grace prevails. The unregenerate is free only to spiritual evil,
Romans 8. 7, 8.
being an enemy to spiritual good. Romans 8. 2, 9.
The Regenerate soul is so far free to spiritual good, Romans 7. 25.
as its renewed. When Grace is completed in Glory, the soul like good Angels
shall be free only to good. Necessity and liberty meet together in Heaven, on
Earth, yea in Hell itself.
The Nature of man's will is thus bettered by Grace; which was made a slave by
sin. The Devils and damned do freely will sin, so do unregenerate souls on
earth, yet necessarily. Thus necessity man stand with freedom both to good and
evil. By this Renewing Grace the regenerate soul is made conformable to Gods
Image, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and is so far called the new man, and gradually learns to be holy as God is
Holy. 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15.
That Seed and Root of Grace cast into it at first, grows up by degrees as the
grain of mustard seed, Matthew. 13.
as the corn, as the Light, as the living Child. Thereby the soul is enabled to
believe and Repent, Prove. 4. 18.
and further to actuate every sort of Grace, Luke 13.
being excited, corroborated and directed still by the same Spirit. Mark 4.
Thence is the conflict so continual between the spirit and flesh, Romans 7.
the Law in the members, and the Law in the Mind? Grace and sin, which ends not
till the death of sin in bodily death. Thus acti agimus: Implanted Grace then
co-works still with the Lords gracious Spirit, Phil. 2. 13.
who works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. This Grace
appears also most free and full, most choice and sure, to the glorifying of all
Divine Attributes. Man could not be conceived to have any skill, power or will
to procure the same. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.
By Grace the Lord calls unto Grace, and so to Glory. By Grace are we saved
through Faith, and that not of our selves, its the gift of God; not of works,
least any man should boast: Romans 9. 16.
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works: Iam. 1. 18.
so that its not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, Ephesians. 1. 6.
but in God who shows mercy: Of his own will begat he us by the Word of Truth,
that we might be to the praise of his Glory.

Object. But why then is man commanded to believe and repent, to change his
heart, etc?

Answ. Because as we hinted before, God deals with men by men, rationally,
orderly, to convince all of their Duty, and insufficiency, to humble and awaken
them, to put them upon all due means, to render the most inexcusable, and
moralize many: to convey his Grace into his Elect through those very means
peculiarly sanctified to the spiritualizing of their heart.

Object. But is not God partial in so doing?

Answ. No. For he is not bound to any further then he pleases, neither is he
led by any sinful respects which render men partial.

Object. But why does he yet complain of the Reprobates, if he give them not
sufficient Grace, as to others? how can they help it?

Ans. Men sin wilfully, though necessarily. Its a necessity conditional, not
absolute; It was contracted by a man's own fault; it opposes not his Liberty of
choice; whether in point of contradiction toward contrary acts; willing or
nilling: or of contrariety toward contrary objects good or evil. The sinner
chooses evil in refusing good, willingly without constraint. Gods Decree infuses
no evil into a man, nor his Providence. Psalm 58. 3. Job 14. 4. Matthew. 7. 16.
Luke 6. 44. Iam. 3. 12. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. (...) and partial acceptance of
persons, forbidden of God, is to be found only in debitis and matters of Duty,
not in Gratulties and things of free Gift.
God justly complains of the wicked for insolvency and squandring away his
goods wilfully and rebelliously, both in their first Father and by themselves.
They smart not but for their fault: their being Bankrupts is no payment, nor
discharge of their debts to him. He gives them more then they could expect or
make right use of. Though they cannot change their own heart yet they might use
the means better then they do; they are still wilfully negligent and selfish in
all they do and suffer justly for their demerits. Can the wicked say they sin
not wilfully? Will not their own conscience condemn them? Are they not all
corruptly estranged from the womb, and speaking Lies by time? Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? Can the Bramble bear figs, or a sinful man beget
a sinless child? Is not the spawn and brood of venomous creatures venomous
also? Can a dead corpse raise it self to Life, or a soul dead in sin contribute
ought to its own quickening? Yet is this no excuse for any sin, because man is
condemned for the abuse and neglect of that which is given him. The best of
them goes not so far as he might. Though he be spiritually dead, yet is he
naturally alive, and the abuse of natural parts is a sufficient condemnation to
every sinner, though variously appearing. Thus is God still just, merciful and
true, though man prove unjust, unworthy and false. He is still beforehand with
every man, though unfaithful servants who improve not the talent lent them,
charge him to be a hard master. As he is free in disposing of his gifts, so
will every abuse and neglect of each of them be duly reckoned for.

22. About this Truth, besides the Fathers Greek and Latin, and our former
Reformed Divines, you may consult with late Writers, as Dr. Preston, Dr. Ames.
Dr. Sibs, Mr. Bolton, Dr. Thom. Goodwin, Dr. Ward, Dr. Twiss, Bishop Davenant,
Bl. Morton, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Shepherd, Dr. Owen, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Burges Lectures, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Lyford, etc. Sleidan,
Cloppenburg. Becman, Hornebeck, Altingius, Bulinger, etc.
Christ's saving Grace is also abused, 1. By the former Errors. 2. By the
Pelagians and Socinians, ascribing man's salvation to his own merits, the fruits
of his own power and will. 3. By the Papists and Arminians sacrificing also to
their nets; some owning merits de congruo before Conversion; others only merits
de condigno, after conversion; either ex propria Natura, with some, or ex pacto
with others; very few of them are found more modest. 4. By the Quakers,
Behmenists and Notionists variously treading in their steps, and disguising
those old Errors with the colors of new Light of a Christ within, pretended
Raptures, Chemical dreams and Magical deceits. Their monstrously abstruse
expressions and Fictitious Raptures were much magnified in that German Tragedy
acted in various Scenes for many years, especially from 1522. til 1540. and are
now revived out of Paracelsus, Behmen, Wigelius, and the like by their
followers very perniciously now.

AGainst such a Poison the gracious Knowledge of Christ will fortify you by
Scripture discovery of the Nature and Cause, the Method and Means, the Subject
and Effects, of that saving Grace.

1. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5.
The Nature thereof is Gods Application of his special Favor unto his Elect,
Tit. 3. 4, 5.
Redeemed by Christ, saving them from all sin on earth Inchoatively, in Heaven
consummatively.

2. 2 These. 2. 13.
The Fountain cause thereof is his own pleasure: the final his Honor, exalted
in his Son, by his own Spirit applying the same. Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.


3. John 6. 37, 39, 44, 45.
The Method observed is gradually to show this favor, 1. John 10. 27, 28, 29.
Primitively in his Election and Redeeming Love. 2. Communicatively, in his
Adopting and Justifying, John 17. 2.
his supporting and supplying Love, from the beginning of Grace, through
perseverance unto Glory in Eternity.

4. 1 Pet. 1. 25.
The means appointed and employed therein are, 1. Christ the Principal: 2 These.
2. 13.
The Spirits Operation as efficient: and every Ordinance and Providence, his
Word especially, as Instrumentally blessed of him thereto.

5. The Subjects thereof are Gods Elect, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Redeemed by the Son, Renewed by his Spirit, whom he Adopts for Children,
justifying their persons, and keeping them through faith by his Power unto
Salvation; Phil. 1. 19.
supporting and supplying them still by the earnest and first fruits of his
Spirit, Phil. 4. 19.
til the full possession of all.

6. John. 1. 12.
The Effects thereof are, the gaining of their hearts by Divine Love to mutual
Returns, Act. 13 48.
to choose him in Christ by his Spirit for their chief good and sovereign Lord,
John 10. 3, 14, 15.
delighting in him, Tit. 2, 11, 12.
depending on him, closing with him, following of him, drawing all from him, 1
John throughout.
reducing all to him, loving what he loves, hating what he hates, with an
harmony of mind, heart and hand. And all for his sake and to his Glory, by his
strength according to his Will.

THis Light will easily dispel all Cavils darkning the truth. There are no
merits but in Gods Mercy. He rewards indeed, but its of Grace. He pardons sin
and does it freely. Yet he requires Faith and Repentance, not to merit, but to
receive it, emptying the soul of self, to fill it with himself, letting out sin
to let in Christ: casting out Satan to bring in his Spirit, Purging out
corruption by giving his Grace, preparing for Glory. He therefore bids them
take heed lest they fall, to keep them standing in the right use of Means. He
appointed the End and blesses the Means. He promises and assures their
standing, John 6. 37, 38, 39.
not by their own, but by his Might. Thus all that the Father gave Christ,
shall come to him, and him that comes to him, he will in no wise cast out,
because this is the will of the Father that sent him, John 10. 27, 28, 29.
that of all he has given him he should lose nothing. The father that gave
them to him, is greater then all; none shall pluck them out of his hand, Ergo.

Object. But may they not slip away?

Answ. Heb. 8.
Yea, if left to themselves as Adam was in the Covenant of Works. But he has
made a better Covenant with them in Christ, engaging his Grace to preserve and
save to the utmost all whom he chose in him, 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Redeemed by him, and sanctifyingly renews by his Spirit. This is all their
Hope and all their Salvation, Ierem. 31. 33.
though in a Winter of temptation it seems not to flourish. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
He therefore writes his Law in their heart, and puts his Spirit within them,
to cause them to walk in his Statutes, Psalm 73. 23.
that they shall keep his Judgments and do them. He will uphold them by his
right hand till he bring them to Glory. He will Crown his own Grace in them, 2
Cor. 12. 9.
and magnify his strength in their weakness.

Object. But does not this Doctrine lead to presumption and Libetinism? 2 Pet.
1. 5, 6, etc.


Answ. Not at all, though it may be abused as the best things are. Tit. 2. 10,
11, 12.
It leads genuinely to all Christian diligence and Grace, as the sure only way
to Glory. Mirae Gradationes in divina Catena, and inseparabiles! 1a. decretorum
This Assurance he gives not to all alike, nor to any alike at all times.
Though his weak children be sure in his hand, yet he lets them often stumble,
that they may know him and themselves better. The Riches of his Grace appear
still herein freely and fully, Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. 2a. Virtutum,
surely and choicely. What Is freer then pardon to an unworthy Rebel? That Christ
satisfied, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and that Faith is given to receive pardon, is not that free also? What Is fuller
then such a pardon, that justifies from all guilt Inchoatively, 3a. Officiorum,
progressively, consummatively? whether you say the pardon is Renewed, 1 These.
5. 17, 18. 19, etc.
or continued, or confirmed to the Regenerate, is it not still full? Does he not
blot out all scores and remit all faults by application of his Justifying
Grace? 4a. Privilegior. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
His correcting of them is the fruit of that Adopting Love which pardons them.
5a. Beatitudinum. Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 5. etc. Omnes isti Coelestes nexus sunt
firmiter contexti, and nulla vi aut fraud dissolvendi. Pendent enim omnes ab
Optimi Maximi Throne, and ipsius Omnipotenti manu connectuntur and conservantur.
Because they are children, they must have Physic and the Rod also. What Is
surer then this Grace, which engages the Trinunity in the clearest Bond, with
the surest Ties, with Word and Writing, with his Hand and Seal, with Promise
and Oath, yea with his own Blood to final performance on his side and theirs? 2 Timothy 2. 13.
They may break indeed, but he cannot break. Though they act faithlesly, yet he
acts faithfully. He cannot Deny himself nor them, because his in Christ. And
what is choiser then this special Grace, that saves his children when he
punishes others? What Is more precious then this Miracle of Grace that gives them
God in Christ and all things with him? Romans 8. 32.
What more singular then this mavelous Love, Ephesians. 1. 13.
who gives them his Spirit to seal and strengthen them, 2 Cor. 1. 22.
that they may close with him and keep close to him still? This is Grace indeed
not to be abused, nor to be opposed by any pretense. Its as complete as his
Salvation, which must needs be answerable to such a complete Savior. An
imperfect Christ is but an Idol of man's fancy, so is that Imperfect salvation
and ineffectual Grace which many dream of.

23. About this Subject you may read much in all Antiquity; and among Divines
and Civilians of late, especially in English you will find it handled exactly by
Mr. Cobbet of New England in 1653. and much in scattered places among Mr.
Baxters, and others Works, and in the Volumes of Sermons preached before the
Parliaments since 1640. to this day. You may see about it our Libertine
Schooled, lately published.
Christ suffers also in his Instruments, his Civil Deputies, in the Magistracy:
1. By the former evils. 2. By the Papists, who advance their Antichristian Head
into the Magistrates Seat, putting the civil Key into the Popes hand, and
loosening the Subjects from their Allegiance to such Superiors who do not
please him, encroaching much upon civil Affairs in their Cannon Law, as about
Marriage, Incest, Adultery, etc. obliging their Clergy to Foreign Supremacy;
forbidding the Magistrate his Duty about Externals of the first Table, etc. 3.
By Quakers and Notionists, who labor to bring in confusion, as the German
Anabaptists did. 4. Yea by many who seem more sober, yet deny the best part of
his Office: that special care of the first Table in its Externals, wherein he
is to do most for God. 5. By diverse infirm Christians that by mistaken
apprehensions of a fifth Monarchy do actually resist Christ in denying due
homage to such Powers whom hi Providence has set in Power.

AGainst these Oppositions, the Knowledge of Christ graciously improved will
sufficiently arm us, declaring from Scripture the Magistrates Duty and Dignity
in being most like God, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and doing most for God. His Power is Authoritative about the external man, in
all matters Religious and Civil, Politically to regulate, reward and correct
according to Gods Word for the Lords honor and the Public good. The Genus is
an Authoritative Power; the Object is the external man, expressed by word,
sign, or deed; the Subject is all matters of the first or second Table,
religious and civil. The acts of Power are to regulate, reward, countenance
good, and disown and correct evil. The manner of acting is Political, not
Spiritual; by civil Censures, not Ecclesiastical? The Rule is Gods Revealed
Will in his written Word, not his own Will or man's fancy. The End is Gods
honor as supreme; public good, as subordinate. Herein shines the Magistrates
Dignity in being thus employed as Gods Substitute, to look to his Law in
cherishing good, and suppressing evil. Herein Gods Vicegerent shall meet with
comfort in these Politics of Gods own giving. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
The Lord in all Ages has honored such who have thus labored still to honor
him. He requires it still, Romans 13.
and rewards it in a special manner. He gives many Instructions about it to
avoid error, 2 Samuel 23. 2, 3.
neglect and abuse. He still branded those that neglected it, Exodus 18. 21.
and set up themselves in slighting of him. Nehem. 3. 5.
They were threatened and punished sorely that would not and did not tender
Christ's Interest. 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 6, 7.
No Book of Scripture or humane Record but gives us signal demonstrations
hereof. Esaias. 49. 23.
The many Cavils obscuring this Truth easily vanish by the brightness thereof.
Ierem, 30. 21.
The Pontifician Crew by their encroachments have taught our Libertines very
sad lessons. Their Queries and Objections you find answered in our Libertin
Schooled briefly, more largely in other Authors.
Corah with his Partners acted once this part, as the German Rout did long
afterward from 1522 till 1534. Pretense of Conscience is much talked of, but
it covers often the abuse of Conscience. The Magistrate meddles not with
conscience, but with external evil, though pretending conscience. He is a
terror to all evil works whatever they be, wherever they appear, and a
countenance to good. That's his Office by Gods Commission for thy good; Romans 13.
2, 3, 4, 5.
Christ is King of Kings by whom they all Reign, Prove. 8. 15, 16.
who calls all to account. If sin and Satan possess a man's conscience that
should be Gods Seat, it cannot excuse their treasonable acts, but aggravate
them. Much care indeed is to be still used least this Power be slighted or
abused. Such Christians who appear truly conscientious are to be dealt with in
much tenderness. Yet cannot Conscience plead for any sin. Christ never intended
it to be Errors Sanctuary. He dallies with no sin, and would have his servants
like him. They that make no conscience of his Truth and Grace, nor of the
public Peace, show their conscience to be very unsound. The standing Rule of
man, whether high or low, Esaias 8. 20.
is not his Conscience, but the Lords Word. An evil Conscience is the worst of
evils, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21.
and the Nurse of all evil. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
Error is an infections Disease that spreads dangerously under the pretense of
Conscience still. Conscience must rule us so far as its ruled by Gods Word, and
no further. It cannot bind to, nor discharge any sin. Paul judges himself for
those very sins very hainously, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14.
which his conscience through mistake suggested to be his duty. Tit. 3. 3.
If a Christian suffer as an evil doer, Act. 26. 9.
though he pretend Conscience, he shall have little honor or comfort therein.
1 Pet. 2. 20.
The sin is aggravated that is committed by an evil of Conscience, the Presence
Chamber and the Royal Throne of our Sovereign Christ. The Magistrate therefore
should be most careful to see that all sorts enjoy the best Means of informing
Conscience about the Will of God, 2 King. 17. compared with 2 King. 19.
as Noble Jehosaphat did, that all good Laws may be duly observed. Then
Execution must be looked unto, the Life of the Law. Its the great mercy
promised to Christ's Kingdom, that Kings shall be Nursing Fathers to his Church,
Esaias 49. 23.
and contribute their utmost to the help thereof; Revel. 13.
whereas before they gave up their power to the Antichristian Beast. Revel. 17.
Christ himself is wronged, when his Lieutenant the Magistrate is taken off
from his Work or disturbed therein. All Arguments used against the Magistrates
Power in Religion are still under-charged or overcharged; either they prove
only that Conscience is not to be forced, and that Christians should begentle
and meek, bearing with each other in things indifferent, which is not denied;
or if there were any force in them to disprove the Magistrates dealing with the
first Table, the same force would reach further against the second Table also.
So that they would make his office needless, striking at Christ through his
vicegerents Loins to bring in confusion and Anarchy, by exempting from his
Cognizance whatever things may pretend Conscience. What evil so horrid that may
not be covered under such a mask? Has not experience seen it fulfilled in the
predigious Ranters are Quakers of our days? Christ's Interest in the good of
men's souls is still the best part of the Magistrates care; they must needs be
sadly injurious to both, that would deprive them of that choice Garland, and
that signal work.

24. This Theme has been frequently and fully handled in all Ages, and in ours
by the Assembly of Divines, the Ministers of London, by Mr. Shepherd, Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Gilespy, Mr. Norton, Mr. Cotton, etc. who
harmoniously agree in the substantials, though they sometimes vary in
Circumstantials of Order Ecclesiastical.
Christ is opposed likewise in his Servants of the Ministry, as, First, By the
former Errors; So, secondly, By the Socinians, Seekers, Behmenists,
Revelationists, Quakers and Libertines who deny, corrupt and oppose it.
Thirdly, by the Papists, who set up an Antichristian Head, and Hierarchy,
mangling and perverting it woefully. Fourthly, By Innovators, who exalt a Power
therein above others unknown to Christ, and others slighting what Christ has
set up.

AGainst these various Evils, the Knowledge of Christ improved graciously will
fence our Judgments, and make us to see the excellency and perpetuity, the
necessity and utility of his Gospel Ministry. It was his care of old to set it
up in his Church for their common good, that the Priests lips might preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7.
because he is the Messenger of the Lord. The first Insurrections against it,
(which assaulted also the Magistracy by a strong levelling party under holy
pretenses, Number. 16.
) were dreadfully rebuked and plagued by an extraordinary hand from Heaven.
Number. 17.
The Lord made also Aarons Rod to blossom and fructify miraculously, Number. 31.
30, 47.
that he might ratify this great Ordinance of his to all Ages. Number. 35. 2, 8.
He appointed the Levites to be therefore settled in all the parts of Israel,
Genesis 49 7.
that every one might be provided with ministerial Help. Deuteronomy. 33. 9, 10. their
scattering was for the public good.
Himself promised in a peculiar way to be their best Portion, and took a
special care, Deuteronomy, 12. 19.
that among their Brethren they might never want a plentiful portion. Ezekiel.
44. 28, 29, 30.
From time to time did he renew that charge, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
and sharply visited for the neglect thereof. He honored and prosper'd those
Princes and people that did carefully observe his Will therein. 2 Chro. 30. 22.
His Magistracy and his Ministry went still hand in hand, Ezekiel. 48. 10, 11, 12,
13.
both in doing good and suffering evil. This Prophecy from the 40th. Chapter
of Ezekiel. is Evangelical, though set out by Mosaical Expressions, as the whole
scope demonstrates, and Expositors harmoniously agree.
Moses and Aaron in all their Successors were still duly observed by God and
good men. The Jewish Church and State declined together by their sinful
neglects of Christ's Institutions. Christ therefore came at last himself
personally, that he might repair those woeful Ruins. The vile abusing of his
Ministry brought on them first a Babylonian yoke, and afterward a Roman
slavery, after many Persian and Grecian Oppressions. The Revolts of Jason and
of Onias, with their Anti-temples in Egypt and Samaria, brought in many more
confusions then both on Church and State. Their corrupt opposings of Christ's
Ministry cost them very dear. When Christ came in the flesh, the many disorders
of the ministerial Office and persons had disordered all. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
His great care was then to rectify things in the best method. See Josephus
his Antiquity, and of the Jewish wars.
An end of all shadows he made in himself by his own Ministry, and settled
himself a substantial Ministry that should continue unto the worlds end. His
great business still was to purge his Temple, and to commission his ministerial
Servants for the successive building of his house. His twelve Apostles and
seventy Disciples were to that end succesfully employed by him. John 2. 14, 15
16.
When he ascended and triumphed over all, Matthew. 21. 12.
he bestowed then Coronation Gifts of a choice Nature. Luke 19. 45, 46.
Then gave he Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists in extraordinary, Pastors and
Teachers in ordinary for Ambassados, Luke 9. 1, 2, etc.
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
building up of his body, Luke 10. 1, 2, etc.
until we all come to the full stature of the Son of God. Thus Christ settled
this ministerial function with spiritual Authority, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11.
by setting apart in a regular Call, persons by him duly qualified to the full
employment of the Ministry. The Circumstantials of the ceremonial Law he pared
off thereby, and settled the substance of his will therein in this solemn
office for his special honor and his peoples good. The Father and Spirit joined
with God the Son in the Commission given from above to settle this Office, and
assure thereon a signal Blessing till the end of all. As the Son gave these
Residents of his to his Church below, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
so did the Father set them in the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29.
and the holy Ghost still makes them overseers thereof. In the renewing of
their Commission he enlarged it unto all Nations, Act. 20. 28.
gave them the keys of his Kingdom to act under him as Deputy-stewards; Matthew.
28. 18, 19, 20.
Titles of Honor he gives them many, Ioh 20. 22, 23.
fit Emblems also of their weighty work. They are his Agents and the peoples
Guides, Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24.
Shepherds and Rulers, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.
Angels and Leaders. Elders they are and Overseers, as Ambassadors acting in
his name. Revel. 2. and Chap. 3.
As he taught his Apostles the things of his Kingdom, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
so were they careful to instruct the rest. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus are a directory for all Church Affairs. 1
These 5 12.
The Apostles needed extraordinary Gifts, as did the Prophets and Evangelists
in the first planting of Churches everywhere. That work being done, then ended
with them their immediate infallible Call. Extraordinaries are but for a time
to make sure way to Ordinaries. Act 14. 22.
Snccessors they had in the substantials of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 22.
though not in all their Circumstantials. Paul in his progress having showed
the way of ordaining such, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
gave Timothy and others further Rules still to prosecute that work. Tit. 1.
Pastors and Teachers must abide in charge, Ephesians. 4. 13, 14.
whilst there is one soul to be brought to Christ and built up in Christ.
Revel. 1. 20.
These stars are kept in the Lords own hand, being the Lights of his own
setting up. Many Ministers and Churches may perish for their Apostasy, as they
of Asia, Revel 11.
but the Ministry in the Church of Christ shall be sure to stand. These
witnesses of his may be much abused to the very Death, but they shall rise
again very speedily to the confusion of all enemies. Lest they should grow
proud and usurp Lorship, Christ charged them timely to act as Servants in his
name and work. About this you may see much in Smectymnuus, in Wa^o Messalinus,
in Salma sii libro de primatu Papae; In the London Ministers, Jus Minist. and
Presbyt. in Gilespie A-Aarons Rod Blossoming; where the Fathers, as Iren.
Justin. Tertul. Austin, Ierom, etc. are quoted to your hand. See also Centur.
Magdeb. Calvin's Institut. All our Divines about Church Order. Myster. Inquit.
Morn. etc. Revel. 13. Revel. 17. 2 These. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Revel. 11. Revel. 12. Revel. 13. Revel. 17.
His word holds forth all Elders equal in ordinary, since extraordinaries
removed from men. Some priority of order and age the Primitive Churches thought
fit to admit. Pride and Ambition corrupted the same, adding Jurisdiction and
Power thereto. At first they did choose a Moderator, who might be Speaker in
their regular meetings. That was first elective, and then became fixed, and
gradually did degenerate. Under fair colors many did encroach, and subjected
Elders to Bishops Power. Thence did Archbishops and Patriarchs rise with other
Limbs of that Hierarchy. By Princes bounty too sadly abused, this evil did
rise, and brought forth a Pope. That Antichristian Beast with his double horn,
speaking like the Lamb, acted Dragon-like. He gradually subdued Christ's
Magistracy and Ministry by usurpations of the double sword. That Pestilential
Wen grew so fast on the Church that it did overspread and consume it in its
noblest parts. Many Excrescences did rise under it as their Cardinals,
Archdeacons, Chancellors. Thence a further Rabble of Commissaries, Porters,
Acolyths, Subdeacons, Exorcists. Thence also their Monks, Friars, Eremits, Nuns
and Jesuits swarming everywhere. Thus gradually did Abaddon prevail to waste
Christ's portion for a thousand two hundred sixty years. The witnesses whilst
prophecy in Sackcloth, the woman is fed in the wilderness. See Bishop Usher de
Antiq. and success. Ecclesiar. Centur. Magdeburg. Catalog. Test. veritat.
Myster. Inquit. Morn. Histor. of the Church. Chemnit. Exam. Field of the
Church. Jewels Apolog. Whitaker, Rainold, Ius divinu^. Minist. Evangel. Fox.
Monuments. Spelman de Christ. Relig. in Britan. Isaak's Chronology, Speed, etc.
Voet. Desperata causa papat. page 405. The Romish usurpations were vigorously
opposed in England from time to time, witness Eademer, Hist. Nov. Seldom,
Speed, etc.
Yet did not Christ forget his Interest, but in the worst time maintained his
Ministry. Britain, Ireland, Germany and France show large Catalogues of
undoubted Truth to verify it. Waldus and Wicklef, John Hus and Jerome with many
thousands testified the same. The Reformation by Luther and Calvin was but a
more solemn carrying on of the Work. We have antiquities of approved credit,
showing Successions of faithful Ministers from the Apostles time all along to
this day, as in other parts, so in these Nations. The Scriptures are not the
worse, nor the Ministry, for passing through the hand of Romish Antichrist.
Gold loses not its worth for touching a leprous hand, nor Gods Temple by the
sitting of the man of sin, when their pollutions are but once removed. If any
defilment be proved to attend our Ministry, we are ready to yield and remove
the same. When the Wen is cut off, and the body cured, health being restored,
is to be improved. If any will still lord it over Brethren we shall disclame
such usurpations. Christ's Ministry is to feed and teach, to rule and to cure
Ministerially. Our weapons and work are spiritual, not Political, nor
Monarchical. As Nurses appointed for the Childrens good, its our desire to
attend Christ's house. An orderly Call unto this office as he does appoint, so
will he still bless. How shall men believe, if not preached to? How shall men
preach right, if they be not sent? Internal gifts are very needful, yet not
sufficient to make out this Call. No man self-called is owned by God, no more
then Corah and Jeroboams Priests. A Soldier, though able, without Commission
shall never be owned for an Officer. A person of Parts without Authority cannot
act the part of Justice or Judge. Every Christian is to improve Gifts, but
within his place and fit relation. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
Gods word does appoint an orderly way of Calling persons into the Ministry. 1
These. 2. 7, 8.
They must be well proved and approved of, Heb. 5. 4.
then chosen and ordained to a proper charge. Romans 10. 13, 14, 17.
He that hears and receives persons so called in the name of Christ, Ierem. 23.
21, 22, 32, 38.
hears and receives Jesus Ierem. 29. 31. Numb. 16. 1 King. 12. 30, 31. 1 King.
13. 34. 1 Timothy 3. Act. 14. 22. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16.
Christ himself by his own witness. He that abuses and rejects such, abuses and
rejects the Lord Christ thereby. If any be bad, let them be questioned, and
reap their deserts. We pretend to no Infallibility, but would be tried still in
Doctrine and Life by the word of Truth. Matthew. 24.
Christ's work its we are sent about; 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
the devil would mar it by slandering tongues. False Christ's, false Prophets
are now very rife. Sick brains are heaping Teachers to themselves to please
itching ears. Ierem. 23. 32.
They that thus run before they are sent, shall not profit, but deceive the
people. The chief rage of Foxes and Wolves disguised, will still be bent against
the Shepherds. 1 King. 17. 18
Jeroboams Priests with his Golden Calves brought in division, deceit and ruin.
If the Lords Mercy do not prevent it, our sin and sorrow will be too like
theirs. The Cavils pleaded against this clear Truth, have been fully dissolved
again and again. It was Julians attempt to starve the Ministry and Schools, as
the sure way to ruin Christianity. The like design is revived of late to the
same end. 1 Cor. 9. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc
The Laws of Nature and of Nations, as well as Gods positive Laws, are brought
in by Paul to prove the just Rights of Ministers maintenance. The Corinthiane
are blamed for putting him to shift and work with his hands. He commends them
highly, that had been free toward his relief.

25. Many choice Pleces are extant of this Subject by the Ancient and Modern in
all Nations; About these see Picus Mirandula, Perkins, Mr. Gauls
Magastromanier. and Spanhemius, etc. Cornelius Agrippa himself, once a great
friend hereto, saw at last the great danger thereof, and discovered it to
others.
Christ suffers also in his Providence, as by the former Errors;

So first, By Atheists, Stoics, Epicures that ascribe events to fortune, fate
or chance.

Secondly, By Diverse Jesuits and Arminians, charging his purpose and execution
with Contingency and Dependency.

Thirdly, By Star-gazers and Astrologers who pretend to divine of humane Events
by their judicial Prognostications.

AGainst this Malady the gracious Knowledge of Christ improved will give us
still a Soveraing Remedy. It shows by Scripture Heb. 1. 2, 3.
Light, that the hand of Christ, who first made the world, Amos 3. 6.
does uphold it still with Rule and Order by the word of his power. God^ not
the Author of sin, though active about sin in his decree and execution. Therein
he acts 1. as the supreme Mover, man as the proper subject: 2. God as the
Author of Nature, man as a moral Agent. 3. God by a pure Rule, man against Rule.
His eternal purpose he still executes in doing of good, and overruling evil.
What evil of sorrow, that the Lord sends not? What evil of sin, that he limits
not? What good temporal or spiritual, that comes not still from his Providence?
His Rule is so sweet and so sovereign, that all fulfill his Will in fulfilling
theirs; what ever opposes his revealed Will, is still overruled by his secret
Will. The Will of his purpose men do then fulfill, when they disobey the Will
of his precept. The Instance of Joseph and Jesus suffice to demonstrate Christ's
Sovereign Rule. Things most contingent as to men and means, do yet come to pass
by a necessary and sure providence. The very Sparrows fall not to the earth,
nor the hairs of man without Gods special hand. Astrologers sin is so much
condemned by Scripture, Reason and Experience, that they should not proceed any
further, seeing their folly is made so manifest. Genesis 50. 20.
Some use we grant of Astronomy, Act. 4. 20.
if modestly handled; natural Astrology may hint at some things, Matthew 10. 21.
though very uncertainly. But that judicial Astrology which pretends to foretell
the success of affairs acted Esaias 47. 12, 13.
among men, Deuteronomy. 18. 9, 10, 11, 12.
is an Errand cheat and dreadful Imposture: such an Art descends from old
Magicians, that learned of Satan among the Nations. 2 King. 17. 17.
Caldeans and Diviners with all South-sayers are noted in Scripture with
Aegypts Magicians. Ierem. 14. 14.
Indian Gymnosophists, Ezekiel. 12. 24.
Brachmans and Pawawes, the Druids of Gaul, the Bards of Britain, Ezekiel. 13. 6,
7, 22.
the Dervis's of Turkey are of the like Act. 16. 16. The chief Heretics who
troubled the Church most in all Ages, have been great promoters of this black
Art, as Manes the Priscillianist, the Simonians, Menandrians, Marcionists, Mark
confuted by Irenaeus. etc.
school. The rules of this Art are certainly known to be most absurd, vain and
uncertain. Mirandula and Perkins, who searched into their depths, discovered
fully their juggling Impostures, as their Writings testify. Some profound
Scholars, who had curiously pryed into their secrets, The Laws Imperial,
Ecclesiastic and Municipal have been zealous in all Ages against it, both
among the sober Pagans and all Christians. The notorious Lies and Impostures of
the prime Astrologers stand on Record in History. Tully shows how horribly they
cheated Pompey, Crassus and Caesar. Alapide upon Act. 19. declares their horrid
deceits in Rome. See their lives in print by several Authors, and many
Histories to that purpose in the Records of all Nations and Ages. Job 9. 9.
Job. 38. 31. Amos 5. 8. If the (...) coeli may have a little Influence upon
(...) corporis, it has less upon (...) Ingenij, if any, least of all upon
(...) Rationis in such a multiplicious variety of millions of men in all places
and ages. How great then must needs the uncertainty be, and how fallacious the
Conjectures, that poor sinful worms below are put upon by judicial Prognostics
from thence? Woeful was the Catastrophe of Ahab and Iezabel, Balak and Ahaziah,
Haman and Belshazzar harkning thereto. In Malach. 4. 2. Christ is elegantly
compared to the Sun to set forth his Divine Perfections, represented to the
Life by that abstract of Natures Wonder in its Essence and Attributes,
Properties and Effects, Accidents and Adjuncts. Thus a spiritual use may be
made of the Caelestial Bodies, besides the natural and moral. But that horrid
abuse of their lying Vanities, and juggling Impieties, who pretend to divine
future events of Contingent affairs and humane transactions, has been still
branded as the servant of Satan.
came off with remorse and abhorrings thereof. This Profession has been in all
ages justly detested by the wise and good. Such Affinity it has had still with
Satanical Oracles, that its unsufferable in a Christian State. There is virtue
indeed in heavenly bodies; But who can find out the same distinctly? An
Apollonius, Faustus, or Hildebrand may pretend somewhat from Satan's teaching in
this black study: But shall Christians go to the devils school to learn Christ's
mind? Starry Constellations have their Influence on sublunary bodies, but they
cannot reach the souls and Acts of men. How far they may affect this earth,
none can know; but that our Reason and humane Events are beyond their reach, is
easily known. The Constellations of Christ's Providence compared with his word,
are the proper Rules of our Prognostics, personal and public. Thence should
Christians cast a divine figure to find out a true scheme of their State and
Acts. Learn we to calculate our spiritual birth, and observe the positure of
souls under Chris* thence all conjunctions and oppositions, total or partial,
will rightly mark out what our case will prove. The Sun of Righteousness
passing through our houses will carry Light and Life into every part. His
Aspects direct, oblique or opposite, signify Influence benign or malign,
according to the station of things about it. When the Lord ascendent does rule
all the rest, it prognosticates all propitiousness. If quaking Saturn, and the
ranting Mars, if notional Mercury, and ambitious Jupiter, if unstable Luna, and
voluptuous Venus come to cross this Sun, what can men expect but a Combustion?
Wandering Planets, and floating Meteors are still overruled by his fixed
motions. He is regular in his Light and heat, the only fountain of benign
Influx. He is no Retrograde, but still in progress to dispell darkness and
death from his friends. Would men study him in his word and works, they would
soon banish sinful Astrology. The commendation given to the ancient Magi or
Wise men by Caelius Albertus, and other learned men, has no color of plea for
our divining Astrologers what was commendable in the Chaldaean (...), as in the
Grecian and (...) and (...), for natural and moral Philosophy, should not
patronize any Juglers Tricks, or Satanical Divinations. The Chaldaeans and
Phenicians had opportunity to learn much from Joseph, Moses, Daniel, David,
Solomon, and the other wise men of Judea; which the most of them corrupted, and
so transmitted to the Greeks and Romans, Romans 13. 3, 4, 5, 6.
His Law and Gospel suffer so much by it, that no wise Christian should plead
for the same. Was there ever a great Astrologer that has not bewrayed some
Satanical cheat? May not London speak loud in this case, if late experience be
but testified? We may challenge all Records divine and humane to show any good
Prince or State owning it. Who ever were found harkening thereto, history
brands them by Tragical ends. Oh That great Britain would consider this, that
Satan may not fix his Throne among us! Christ will not endure so ill a
Neighbor, nor suffer this Trade to go unpunished. Compacts with the Devil,
though but indirect, do challenge both frowns and Judgments from above.
Superiors must act under Christ for him to punish this great evil with suitable
Wages. If men be so bold and presumptuous, Powers are ordained for terror to
such. They are errand cheats, or Conjuring knaves that fortell events of humane
matters by their star-gazing. Esaias 8. 19, 20.
If men slight Gods Law and testimony, to follow such peeping, muttering
Wizards, What is objected by some from the Star observed by the Wise men,
Matthew. 2. is impertinent to this purpose. That case was transcendently
extraordinary, and miraculous in every part thereof, as all learned
Commentators observe. The Star it self was of a nature, motion, appearance,
seat and rest quite different from all the Caelestial Stars. The Persons being
wise Chaldaeans surnamed Magi in those Eastern Countries, had been instructed
by many Prophesies of the Messiah coming at that season and of his Star.
Besides Balaams Prophecy, Numb. 24. 17. of Great repute with them; they had
the Sybils Oracles, particularly that of Sybilla Erythraea which writ very
plainly of Christ's Birth and Life. They had especially the Jewish Instructions
received from Daniel and others successively, and most especially the Greek
Translations of Scripture very frequent In all those parts, which foretold
plainly the time, place and all Circumstances of his coming, which was then
generally expected, not by the Jews only, but by all Nations also who minded
Oracles and Prophesies. Cicer. 2. lib. de divinatione, Calcidius Platonicus in
Timaeum Platon. and diverse others both of the Gentiles and Jews give pregnant
testimony thereof. Hence the inquisitive Greeks had received so much of
Scripture-truth, which they disguised under multiplicious fables; (...), was
Apollos Oracle.
its because there is no Light in them. Christ will right himself for all such
Affronts cast upon his Word and his Providence. The Lord awaken all concerned
herein, that we repent not when its too late.

II. IMprove this Antidote against Apostasy the woeful Issue of dreadful
Errors. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Lot him that does stand, take heed lest he fall. Let none therefore stand on
his own strength. Be we of Paul's mind in studying Christ, to account all loss
and dung for him. Be we found in him, not in carnal self; stripped off our
Righteousness, Phil 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc,
and clothed with his. Let Us know him still more fiducially, more improvingly
in the power of his Resurrection, and in the fellowship of his sufferings,
conforming to his death. This will hasten our pace to the Resurrection that
will make an end of sin and sorrow. We are not yet perfect but must press
forwards with Christian bearing and forbearing still. Heb. 3. 12.
Beware we Brethren, lest in any of us be found an evil heart of unbelief, to
make us depart from the living God. Heb. 12. 15.
See to it with all care possible, that none of you come short of that Grace of
God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled. But exhort one another daily whilst its called to day, Heb. 3. 13.
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 12. 14.
And follow Peace with all men in the pursuit of Holiness, without which none
shall see the Lord. Matthew. 5. 9.
Blessed are such Peacemakers, especially in this dividing age, for they shall
be called the Children of God. About this blessed work of Christian
Peacemaking we design another Piece, (if the Lord give strength and time) to
stir up all Gods people thereto in this selfish generation, that we may all be
effectually helped thereto, and preserved from the woeful delusions and
divisions now so prevailing. Be we all so much the more pressed to grow in
Grace and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be
Glory for ever, Amen.

(...). Romans 16. 27.


FINIS.

