THE FORT-ROYAL OF CHRISTIANITY DEFENDED.

OR, A demonstration of the Divinity of Scripture, by way of excellency called
the Bible.

WITH A Discussion of some of the great Controversies in Religion, about
universal Redemption, Free Will, Original Sin, etc. For the establishing of
Christians in truth in these Atheistical trying times.

By THOMAS GERY, B.D. and Rector of Barwell in Leicestershire.

All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, etc 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1.

London, Printed by T.C. for Nathanael Web, and William Grantham at the sign of
the black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door of Paul's,
1657.

THE AVTHOR's Preface TO THE READER.
THis plain and course Treatise, that was penned above 30. years since, at the
motion of a great Earl of this Francis Earl of Rutland.
Land; (who asked of me this question, and desired a resolution of it in
writing; namely, which way a man's conscience might acquire best assurance that
the Bible is God's own Word) is now at last exposed to open view, through the
encouragement of some persons that are fast friends both to the truth of
Religion, and the Church of England: Who taking the pains to read it, and
knowing that the very life and power of Religion consists in the firm belief
of that point of Religion, which is here demonstrated, did entertain some hope
that the publishing of it might conduce to the conviction and satisfaction of
some men's consciences about this particular Article of Christian belief; and
thereupon have prevailed with me to adventure this publication of it; though
there be no worth in it, more then this, that it is rational and Orthodoxal. If
this apology will not excuse my temerity herein, (the world being now so
glutted, and ready to nauseate and surfeit with the superfluity of Printed
papers) I humbly beg that my good intention herein, may excuse the rashness of
the fact; who endanger to blemish my self, in hope to do others good.

TO THE REVEREND, and his worthy Friend Mr. GERY, RECTOR of Barwell in
Leicestershire.
SIR, as I am rejoiced to see the late works of your reverend brother in law my
honored Friend, Doctor Sanderson; So for our mother Cambridge sake, I count it
among my felicities to find our Countryman, Dr. Hall.
and by much our elder brother in that Arcademy, (a modern right Reverend
Father of the Church) still increasing his voluminous, sweet and pious
writings, and like a true celestial plant, bringing forth more fruit in his
age; And that comfort is increased by beholding you also (though constantly
employed upon a Cure) so enabled to afford the world such a testimony as these
papers present of solid Theology; amongst which after my perusal of the great
pains and methodical clearing of that subject concerning our last resolution of
faith divine, into Divine Scripture; and your collection to that end of so many
and so convincing arguments, I could not refrain my Pen from gratulating to you
this work, so highly conducible to the glory of God, in the exaltation of his
holy Word; and to the edification of millions of souls, who shall enjoy the
happiness of being much confirmed and comforted in their most precious faith,
by those assistances in your Book: for the speedy Edition whereof I do not only
hereby solicit, but charge you on the behalf of our only Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, and of his Spouse the Church of God our dear Mother; assuring my
self that as thereby you shall distribute blessings, so many blessings from
others shall redound unto your self, both in reputation and in their prayers,
and thanksgivings to God for you.

We deny not what they of the Roman persuasion say, That the tradition of the
Church is a great testimony; yea, take the universal Church in all ages,
including that of Christ and his Apostles, and plain reason and experiment will
enforce all men to acknowledge that a Divine testimony. To which when that key
has let us in to the Scripture it self, we find a light which manifests both
it self and other things, and so we have a second testimony internal and both
Divine.

The fallacy then is found in making the Churches inducing testimony to be the
only or the principal, and then in affirming this attestation to the present
Church of Rome; from whom we must (if they may prevail) receive these two
things on trust. That first, theirs is the Catholic Church; (as mere a Bull as
that Tiber is all Rivers, or a whole Palace is in one room.) And secondly, that
he who must be the head of the Church (though sometime confessed to be no true
member) is absolutely infallible.

Concerning which pretended infallibility so long time contended for (though
doubtless their learned men hold and know it a point ridiculous, for in time
of three Antipopes at once, chairing themselves at Rimini, at Bologne, and
Abignon, about 1429. to which head was then this biggen of Infallibility
bound?) it has now pleased God in this last age to produce amongst us such
worthies, as have beaten down this Babel of papal pride, and levelled it with
the ground. I mean this chiefly, by that monumental piece The conference of
Bishop Laud with Fisher, and Mr. Chillingworth's Book against Knot, another of
the Jesuits: On both which one made this Epigram; Two little Wills, Both
understandings great,
Did fond Infallibility defeat.
That Supreme Sconce, called Fisher 's folly won
Next Knot their gordian knot was quite undon


And for a further manifest of this, I refer you to a book of Hugh Paulin de
Cressie, once a Dean in Ireland, and Prebend of Windfor, who is gone over to
Rome and published the motives of his conversion. I read his book newly extant
in Essex, from the hand of a very worthy Matron, Ms. B. a zealous Papist, and
showed her therein where he openly confesses That infallibility is a word
unfortunate. That Mr. Chillingworth has combated against it with too too great
success. He wishes the Word were forgotten, or at least laid by: That we
Prorestants have in very deed very much to say for our selves when we are pressed
unnecessarily with it; and advises his Romists, that we may never be invited to
combat the authority of their Church under that notion; And professes no such
word as Infallibility is to be found in any Council, etc. Magna est veritas etc.

We and they must of force yield to that of St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.8. We were
darkness (in the abstract) and all our light in Dom. are now light in the
Lord. But how? Certainly that Oriens ab Alto; that great Bishop of all our
souls, does baptize all true believers with the holy Ghost, and with the
celestial fires of his Grace: But since this Arch-prelate and universal
Superintendent (for properly all cure of souls, all Baptism and confirmation is
from that our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, and he) is in heaven, and his
spirit must descend to and into us; which is the Aquaeduct, the ventiduct, the
Luciduct; which way does Christ in his spirit and graces convey this holy
water; this gentle air, this blessed light to our spirits?

Why, look back to the Creation; How came light at first? First the spirit
moves and broods over that which was a depth and darkness; and then his mighty
Word, Fiat Lux. He spoke, and it was Light; then when all was dark, he made
material light: and Christ Jesus is the word, (...); for as speech is the image
of the mind, so he the brightness of his Father's glory, and the express
image of his person, Heb. 1.3. The immaterial and eternal light of light, that
was never made. And the Divine spirit goes that way still, by the Word: His
word is, and makes light. This world is God's great book, wherein as in a
glass of wonders, we discern him. But his word is the true myrror of his mind:
And as God engraved his form on his Son before all worlds, so what that Son is,
and what the father is to us in him, the spirit proceeding from both delivers
in the book of his word. The Sun guilds and enamels clouds and streams and hill
tops with his rays, but thrusts his own pure light, his own living fires
through the bodies of the stars; so other authors can but yield a faint
reflection of that beam which here is native and direct; The very Law God styles
a flaming light; the Prophesies a more sure word, to which we do well to attend
as to a light shining in a dark place, till the day dawn, and the day star
arise in our hearts. But the Gospel is called his mavelous light: He brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And in Acts
26.16. I have appeared to thee, says our Savior to that choice vessel of his
grace and name to make thee a Minister, and a witness, etc. And now I will
send thee to the Gentiles: To what end? for a glorious end: To open their eyes,
and to turn them from darkness to light; from the power of Satan unto God. And
acordingly speaks that Apostle, If our Gospel be hid (2 Cor. 4.3, and 4.
verses) it is hid in them that perish, in whom the god of this world has
blinded their unfaithful minds, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of
Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine unto them. And in the 6.
verse, he shows the walk and circuit of this light: God who commanded light to
shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, (there first, and then the
casting of the beam) to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus. Does not S. Paul say, It is both the wisdom and
power of God to salvation to every one that believes? and is not that enough
to give all men full satisfaction and acquiescense? what a large field lies
open for the further clearing this truth, in those assertions in the fathers.
Saint Chrysostom calls the holy Scriptures Lamps of Verity before our eyes.
Hom. 23. in mad. Sermon de Temp. 237.
And S. Austin, ad Lucernam Scripturae ambulaing. Gregory of Valentia a Jesuit
consesseth as much and diverse Pontificians in plain terms, as Holcoth and
Bellarmine himself cries up the Scripture with a nihil notius, nihil certius;
Bell. de verbo dei, lib. 1. c. 2.
and cries him down for the veriest fool who believes not their testimony; and
in the 2 cap of the same book is in his superlatives, with Scriptura certissima
and Tutissima Regula credendi. He trouble you but with one more, but one instar
omnium. It Is he that in a traitorous itch of wit, took on him purposely the
wresting and profaning of Scripture, that so he might lewdly abuse our Princes
and our Church? Yet mark, (as God compelled the Devil to testify of Christ)
what he is forced to say, and sure it is worth our observation, The book is
Latin and called the Queries.
If I diminish him not in my English; There is in Scripture (says he) an
Invisible Majesty; an hidden splendour; a glory unperishable; a wisdom
inexhaustible; the solace of humane and the beginning of a divine life; made by
the holy spirit, and making our spirits holy; compared with which the Egyptian
Sages will look pale and poor; the Chaldee impure; the Grecians blockish;
Plato, no body; and Philosophy it self a fool; it is the print of Heaven on
Earth; and if any where the joy of Paradise, or at least a brave resemblance of
divine light be showed; it is in Scripture containing all that is severed from
the actual vision of God himself: Again, The paper burns me not, yet am I all
enflamed in reading it; it is no composure, no artificial tread the Scripture
uses, yet am I drawn and wrapped to follow her, and she lifts me up beyond my
nature; so that I am no more mine own, but with a sacred violence and new fire
I am consumed, and compelled to acknowledge the voice of God that speaks
therein. Thus far that Papist, and finally both Fathers, Schoolmen and later
Pontificitians, freely confess a double means to know the authors of divine
Scripture; one ecclesiastic, i.e. perpetual Church story, Hal. 3.978. m. 2.
which introduces Faith, says all, Hales, as the Seta does the third; and the
other totally divine, which lib. 2. d. pt. divine leg.
Junilius and Institu. l. 1. c. 16.
Cassiodor, reckon ipsius Scripturae veritas, ordo rerum, consonantia
preceptorum, modus locutionis, etc. And Scotus of 10. arguments, takes diverse
from the internal matter and majesty of the Books. But Sir, I intended but a
letter, and I find my style wandered into a little Homile. It is time to end
with my apprecation for a blessing on your labors, and to let you find it
under my hand, That I am Your

Obliged Friend and Fellow Servants in the Gospel of Christ, THO. PESTEL.
From Leicester, Nov. 1. 1656.
Errata.
PAge 24. Line 20. for inseparable read insuperable, p. 94. l. 7. for bluts r.
blunts, p. 102. l. 1. for of r. and, p. 104. l. 4. for and r. But p. 113. l.
13. for religionis r. religioni, p. 126 l. 2. for quod r. quam, p. 129. in the
margent, for these r. Jesus. In the Title of the second Treatise, for decission
r. decision. In the Preface to the Reader, before the same Treatise, a little
after the middle of it, for falcyes r. fallacies.

An Index or Table representing the Contents of this Treatise; the parts
whereof are two. 1. A doctrine propounded and proved; which is this, That
Scripture is God's own Word. 2. The application of it to certain special Uses.
1. Part.
Scripture is proved Gods Word by arguments drawn 1 From without it selfewhich
are 4. 1 By testimony out of the Church, page 3. 2 By miracles in the Church,
page 18. 3 By the death of the Martyrs of the Church, page 24. 4 By the
wonderful preservation of it against all adverse power that did rise up to
abolish it, page 27.
2 From within it self, which are 8. 1 By the majesty of it, page 30. 2 By the
purity of it, page 33. 3 By the profundity of it, p. 37. 4 By the harmony of
it, p. 46. 5 By the prophecy of it, p. 48. 6 By the repugnancy of it with
man's nature, page 56. 7 By the impartiality of the Penmen of it, page 58. 8
By the power of it which is manifested by four effects, p. 60. 1 By revealing
thoughts, p. 60. 2 By terrifying consciences, p. 62. 3 By converting souls p.
63 4 By comforting souls and consciences in deepest misery p. 65




2 Part,
The application consists of 2 parts. 1 of consequents deducted for
information: which are two p. 76 1 That therefore no man may dare to dispense
with any of the precepts of Scripture; because it is God's Word, page 76. 2
Therefore its of supreme authority to the present Church-militant p. 78
2 of practical inferences, which are applied to 3 sorts of persons p. 82 1 To
all in place of Magistracy to enduce them to defend Scripture p. 82 2 To all in
the office of the ministry to induce them to dispense it p. 88 3 To all of all
sorts to enduce them to these four duties. 1 To learn it p. 94 2 To believe it
p. 105 3 To embrace that religion which holds best correspondence with it 110 4
To obey it p 131




THE FORT ROYAL OF CHRISTIANITY DEFENDED.
ITs a confessed maxim, a known and received truth in Theology, that the seeds
of all sins are transmitted and propagated into the nature of every son and
child of Adam, who descends from him by the common way of generation, amongst
which the seeds of Atheism are not the least predominant; whence it comes to
pass that the heart of man is often solicited to doubt, whether the books of
Scripture be the very Oracles of God, or a humane invention to keep in awe such
protervious refractory and unruly spirits, as without these would no more be
awed by the laws of man then Job's Leviathan by the hook and line. To affront
and discountenance this suggestion, and silence these whisperings of
incredulity about this particular, that all doubting spirits may gain plenary
satisfaction in it, that will not wilfully shut the eye of their own reason,
nor damp the light of their own understanding, against the Sunshine of this
heavenly truth; I have selected or collected partly out of the writings of
Orthodox Divines, but principally out of Scripture it self, these ensuing
arguments. Some whereof are not only most probable, but (to a clear
apprehension) demonstrative, and so undeniable reasons to prove the Bible to be
Gods own book. And the structure of this discourse is framed and fashioned like
to Jacob's ladder, to lift up the imagination of man from-Earth to Heaven: and
to this end I have placed in it twelve arguments, as so many rounds or stairs,
whereby the minds of rational men may be raised up by each step and gradation
to a clearer speculation and view of that celestial splendor, which is
diffused throughout the whole region of Scripture, till at the length (namely
by such time as they have ascended to the top of this scale) they may be able
to discry and discern here in open view such radiant beams of divine light, as
will readily dispell and drive away all foggy mists of ambiguity and
hesitation, that ecclipsed and shadowed this light formerly from their sight.
These twelve staves of this scale, or twelve arguments, are digested into this
order. The four lowest (which are first s^t down) are drawn from without the
Scripture; and the eight highest from within it.

Those from without the Scripture are of two sorts, either from without the
Church, or from within it.

First, of the divinity of our Scriptures, and that both of the Old and New
Testament. And first, for the divinity of the Old Testament; I find a notable
testification thereof out of Josephus his History of the Antiquities of the
Jews: and that from diverse of the Heathen, with which therefore I shall content
my self, and I hope the Reader also. This Author says, Joseph. Antiq. said
lib. 12. cap. 2. in fine cap.
That after the translation of the Books of Moses Law into the Greek Tongue, by
the seventy two Elders of the Jews, was finished by the means, and at the cost
and charges of Ptolomy Philadelph, King of Egypt, the said King was highly
contented therewith, and took pleasure in reading the said Law; admiring at the
deep conceit and wisdom of the Lawmakers: And thereupon began to question with
one Demetrius, the Master of his Library, and the chief instrument by him used
to obtain of the Jews this translation of their Law, what might be the reason
that neither Poet nor Historiographer had made any mention thereof, considering
that in it self it was so admirable? To whom Demetrius returned this answer,
That no man was so hardy to touch that work, by reason that it was divine, and
every way venerable; assuring him also that certain men who had attempted to
set their hands thereto, had been punished by God: And thereupon acquainted him
how one Theopompus an Historian, intending to reduce certain contents of that
Law into his History, had been distracted in mind for more then thirty days;
and that having some intermission of his fit, he appeased God by prayer; as
having perceived this attempt to be the cause of his malady, and thereupon
desisted from his foresaid intention. He likewise certified him further, That
one Theodectes a Tragic Poet, intending to make mention in some of his Poems
of a certain History written in the sacred Scriptures, was stricken blind; and
acknowledging the cause thereof to proceed from his audacious presumption in
that intent, was restored to his sight after that he had appeased Gods
displeasure; meaning by his repentance and desistence from his said purpose. He
alleges there also to the King, in the former part of the forementioned
Chapter, a saying out of Haecateus Abderita, (who was a Philosopher, brought up
with great King Alexander, and writ a Book of the Jewish Nation) who affirmed
these Scriptures to be pure, and not to be uttered by impure lips.

Hence we have clear testimony that the Scriptures of the Old Testament were at
this time had in great reverence by the very Heathen, as sacred and divine; as
there also Demetrius is said to have told the King several times.

Secondly, For the Divinity of the Gospel; it may be proved from the atestation
or testimony both of the Sibylls, and the Oracles of the Heathen, and from
sundry of the Jews that were no Christians; who confessing Christ, do by
consequence confess the Gospel to be divine; for if the Gospel be no fiction
or humane invention in the principal matter and subject thereof, which is Jesus
Christ; but that there was such a divine person upon earth indeed, as is
therein described; then it follows by good consequence that the Story of Him
(which is the Gospel) is also divine.

About the Sibylls, it is fit to declare first who and what they were, and then
to rehearse their Testimony; which thereby will appear to be much more
ponderous and important. Lactantius says, Lactant. lib. de ira dei, cap. 22.
that the word Sibylla in the Greek Tongue is consignificant with Vates in the
Latin, which signifies a Prophet or Counselor to God; and that the Sibylls
were Prophetesses, in number ten, living in diverse Ages, and diverse Countries
among the Heathen* long before the incarnation of our blessed Savior. One of
them says of her self, Sibyll. Oracul. lib. 3. in fine.
That she was daughter in Law to Noah, and also of his blood. These writ diverse
Poems, both historical, agreeing with Moses, and prophetical, agreeing with the
Prophets of Scripture, in many particulars about Christ; and comprised in eight
Books still to be seen. And these in all probability were inspired by God to
foreshew Christ to the Heathen, (whose posterities were afterto be called to
the faith of Christ) as the holy Prophets were sent to reveal and foreshew him
to the Jews.

And of this opinion was both Lactantius before named, and that prime propugner
and propitious defender of the Christian faith, Constantine the Great, as he
openly professed in an Oration, that he made to certain Prelates of the Church,
which Eusebius has rehearsed in the story of his life, Eusebius. de Vita Constan.
lib. 4. cap. 19. in fine.
Where likewise it appears that these Sibylls prophesies of Christ took deep
impression in him, and were a means to confirm him further in the Christian
faith. Justin Martyr also, a learned Father, and a Martyr, that lived in the
next Age after the Apostles, was of the same opinion; affirming that these
Sibylls Oracles seemed most near the doctrine of the Prophets, and that they
were inspired from above. Justin Mart. in Admonitor. gentium, lib. in fine.
S. Augustine also mentioning and commending some verses of Sibylla Erythraea,
does affirm of her, that she seemed to be esteemed of the number of those that
appertain to the City of God. August. de Civit. dei lib. 18 cap. 23.
Neither may this seem any whit improbable, that Almighty God should vouchsafe
this divine illumination to these Heathen, considering we read in Scripture of
his saving graces conferred upon diverse of them; as the Egyptian Midwives,
Rahab, Job, Naaman, before Christ came; and of divine revelations imparted to
others of them at the birth of Christ; namely to the wise men that came from
the east to worship him, Mat. 2.1, 2. verses.

And this is the more likely both from the matter and the manner of the Sibylls
verses; from the matter, in that it is sacred, and not at all scurrilous or
profane; which induced St. Augustine to have that good esteem of them before
mentioned, as appears in the said place of his works before named. And from the
manner, in that they aver, and that sundry times, (as did the Prophets in
Scripture) that they were inspired by God from above, to foreshew such occult
and hidden things to come. Now the testimony which they give of Christ, is
wonderful and strange; for they reveal many more particulars to be done by him
then the Prophets did, and have therein jumped with the very words of the
Gospels, which record the very same particulars to have come to pass. Amongst
a rapfody of their Verses, I will rehearse the contents but of a few; for a
drop of the sea water is enough to give us a taste of the whole Ocean. And
because I would not vary a syllable from the Greek Copy it self, I will render
them in prose. Thus one of them writes. Sibyl. Oracl. lib. n. in fine.


When a voice shall come by the way of the Desert, crying unto men to make
their paths straight, to cleanse their hearts, and baptize their bodies with
water, that being born from above they may transgress no more; and that a
barbarous man ensnared with dances, shall give this voice slaughtered for a
reward of iniquity; then the good stone preserved shall come from Egypt, at
which the Hebrew people shall stumble; but the Gentiles shall be led by his
conduct, and come to know the highest God by him, for he shall show eternal
life to men elect, but he shall add fire for ever to the disobedient. And then
he shall heal the diseased, whosoever believe in him; the blind shall see, and
the lame shall go; the deaf shall hear, and the dumb shall speak; he shall cast
out devils, and there shall be a resurrection of the dead; he shall walk upon
the floods, and in a desert place shall feed five thousand with five loaves and
sea fish, and the remainders of these shall fill twelve baskets.

These and many more specialties about Christ his death and resurrection, are
added to the end of the book, agreeing in every particular with the Evangelical
story.

Another Sibyll called Erythraea (who lived in the sixth Age after the flood of
Noah, as she reports her self) has made a staff of Acrostick verses of these
six Greek words, (...), which Englished are, Jesus Christ, Son of God, Savior,
Cross; where there be so many verses as there are letters in these six words;
and the first letters of all the verses read together in order, as they are
placed one under another, make the aforesaid six words. And the subject of them
is the description of Christ, most sweetly conspiring with holy Scripture: I
will here set down only the two last verses, as which are sufficient for the
present purpose, which are these. (...),
(...),
that is, He who is now described in these Acrostick verses, is our God, an
immortal Savior, a King that must suffer for us.

There remains one thing to make these testimonies authentical and creditable;
and that is to make proof of these Sibylls verses, not to be adulterine
forgeries, (as some have been of opinion) but to have had precedence before the
Gospel, wherewith they so conspire and accord. And this is very evidently
proved by the aforenamed Emperor Constantine, and cleared from all suspicion in
his foresaid Oration; where he produces as most sufficient witnesses hereof,
sundry famous writers. As first, Marcus, Varro, a learned Roman, (who lived
above a hundred years before the publishing of the Gospel) who makes frequent
mention of them in his History; and withal how they were gathered from all
parts of the world where they were heard of by the Romans, with great care and
diligence; and were laid up in their Capitol, as writings most precious and
momental. Secondly, the famous Orator Cicero (who lived in the time of Marcus
Antonius, which was above forty years before Christ) mentions these Sibylls
writings in diverse places of his works. Cicero, lib. 2. de divina. and lib. 1.
Epist. ad Lent. Epist. 7.
Yea, Constantine affirms that the former Acrostick verses were by Cicero
translated into the Roman Dialect, and at that time to be seen in his works,
when he made this Oration. Thirdly, the renowned Poet Virgil (who lived
immediately after Cicero, in the beginning of the reign of Augustus Caesar)
rehearses diverse verses out of Sibylla Cumaea, and records her very name.
Virgil, Eglog. 4.
To these I will add but one record more, which is out of the learned
Aristotle, who lived many years before any of these yet named; namely under the
great Alexander of Macedony, who writes thus of one of the Sibylls, Cumae in
Italia ostenditur quoddam (ut videtur) conclave subterraneum Sibyllae vatis;
quam diutissime vixisse, and virginem permansisse perhibent: quae esset
Erythraea; sed a quibusdam Melanchraena vocaretur. Aristot. de mirabil. Narrat.
At Cuma (says he) in Italy, is showed a certain subterraneous conclave or
cave in the earth (as it should seem) of a Sibyll Prophetess, which (men say)
lived very long, and continued a Virgin; which should be Erythraea, but of some
she was called Melanchraena. Plato also (who was Aristotle's Master) makes
mention of this Sibyll. Plato in Phaedro.
And Justin Martyr (that ancient father before mentioned) reports that he was
at this Cuma, and saw the Temple where this Sibyll uttered her predictions
arithmetical; and therein (as a special monument of her) a brazen vessel,
wherein were kept certain of her relics. Justin Martyr in Admonitor. Gentium
libro in fine.
So that hence its cleared from all doubt, that the Sibylls verses, (at least
some of them which spoke of Christ, which is sufficient for the present
purpose) were no forgeries, but prophetical Poems for certain written long
before the Gospel, if any humane testimonies may be credited; and so are
potent proofs of Christ, and consequently of the Divinity of the Gospel.

It follows now to speak something of the Oracles likewise (which were nothing
else but deluding Devils, speaking out of Heathen Images) and these also gave
many attestations of Christ, especially that notorious one of Apollo at Delphos
in Greece. And for proof hereof I will allege only one speech of Porphyrius a
great worshipper of these Oracles, and an arch enemy of Christians,
(Constantine called him The sworn adversary, and deadly foe of divine service)
Socrat. Histor. Eccle. lib. 1. cap. 6.
who upon meditation of diverse speeches uttered by the Oracles concerning
Christ Jesus, breaks forth into this confession; It is exceeding wonderful
what testimony the gods (so he styled the Oracles) do give, of the singular
piety and sanctity of Jesus; for which they avouch him to be honored with
immortality. Porphyr. in Libr. de Laud Philosoph.
So that the Scripture (we see) has implicit testimony, and by consequence to
be divine, from the most livid and professed enemies of it, according as we
read also in the Gospel; where the devils themselves were often enforced to
confess Christ to be the holy one of God.

Lastly, For the testimony of the Jews, which were no Christians, concerning
Christ, I will produce only two, but those Classical writers, and most famous
of all other of them for their learning; namely Josephus before mentioned (who
was born, if not before our Saviors passion, yet within a few years after) and
one Philo, who was a Coaetan with our Savior, and was sent Ambassador to Rome
in behalf of the Jews the same year that our Savior was baptized by John. Both
these in sundry places of their Histories make mention of our Savior Christ in
such sort as gives proof sufficient that what is written of him in the
Scripture, is no feigned story, but a known and confessed and undoubted truth;
for brevities sake I will rehearse but one of their testimonies, but it is so
punctual and illustrious, that it may stand in stead of many. Thus Josephus
Joseph. Antiq. Jud. Lib. 18. cap. 4.
writes of him; At that time was Jesus a wise man, (if it be lawful to call
him a man) for he was the performer of diverse admirable works, and the
instructor of those who willingly entertain the truth: And he drew unto him
diverse Greeks and Jews to be his followers: This was Christ, who being accused
of the Princes of our Nation before Pilate, and afterward condemned to the
Cross by him: yet did not those who followed him from the beginning forbear to
love him, for the ignominy of his death; for he appeared unto them alive the
third day after, according as the divine Prophets had before testified the
same, and diverse other wonderful things of him. And from this time forward the
race of the Christians, who have derived their name from him, has never ceased.

This spontaneous, perspicuous and ample confession of Christ, proceeding out
of the mouth of an adversary, (for he that is not with Christ, is against him,)
Luke 11.23.
speaks so peremptorily for the truth of the History (and so consequently for
the divinity) of the Gospel, that it admits no exception.

Thus much for the first argument, to prove the sacred authority of Scripture,
which is the testimony that has been yielded by many out of the Church, either
explicitly or implicitly, of the divinity of it, which is not a contemptible
argument, but very prevalent to sway the conscience of any intelligent man to a
credence of this truth. Now follow those arguments which are drawn from within
the Church, but from without the Scripture; which are three.

First, adversaries is an argument of great validity, to convince the most
incredulous person in this point, if he will but hear reason. Now confessions
hereof we find exceeding many, from our professed adversaries in Religion. And
first to begin with the miracles which Moses wrought in Egypt before Pharaoh;
they are reported by diverse Heathen Authors, as namely by one Demetrius and
Eupolemus, two Greek Historiographers; and by one Artabanus, who writ a History
of the Jews, wherein he speaks thus of Moses; (as witnesses the noble French
Author, in the Margent) Morn. de Verita. Christ. Relig. cap. 26.
This Moses, says he, was occupied in continual prayer to God for the
deliverance of the people; and one day as he was earnest in praying, there
issued a fire out of the earth, where was no combustible matter; and a voice
told him that he should deliver the Jews, and bring them into their Country:
whereupon without raising any force, he (by the counsel of his wives father)
declared the will of God to the King of Egypt; who forthwith commit^ed him to
prison; but the prison doors were opened unto him by miracle, and he went to
the Kings bed side, and summoned him again to obey God: and when the King had
asked him the name of the God, Moses told it him in his ear; whereat he fell
into a swound: But Moses raised him up again by the hand; and the Priests that
made a scoff at it, died incontinently. And afterward this Author declares
how the King required signs, and that thereupon Moses turned his rod into a
Serpent; and so in order records almost all the wonders which Moses wrought
in Egypt, that are mentioned in the Scripture.

The miracles that were wrought by the prophet Elias, (as that of obtaining
rain by prayer after a great drought, in the days of King Ahab, with some
other) are reported by one Menander an Ephesian, in his Tyrian History Mor.
ibid.


The miracles of our Savior are avouched by a number, and that both in general
and in particular. In general, both Josephus in the place before cited, and
also Mahomet in his Alcaron, confess our Savior to have wrought many
miracles, though Mahomet denied him to be God, and affirmed that Christ had a
check for it when he came to Heaven; as Mr. Parsons has it in his book quoted
here in the Margint. Pason Resolut. part 2. cap. sect. 2. consid. 3.
In particular, first, the supernatural eclipse of the Sun at the passion of
Christ, is recorded by an old Astronomer called Aesculus, who proves by the
aspect and posture of the Sun and Moon at that time, that that eclipse could
not be natural, because all natural eclipses of the Sun are precisely at the
change of the Moon, and this was about the full; for it was two days before
Easter: which solemn feast was always kept by the Jews in the full of the Moon,
as both Scripture testifies, and that learned and credited Author before
mentioned, Philo Judaeus. Philo de Vita Moysis, lib. 3.
Of the truth of this miracle also I find a pregnant proof in an Epistle of
Dionysius Areopagita to Polycarpus, where Dionysius affirms that he and one
Apollophanes being together in a City called Heliopolis, at the time of this
eclipse, observed two supernatural occurrences in the same: First, they
observed the Globe of the Moon to fall first upon that part of the body of the
Sun which is toward the East, and to proceed to a total obfuscation or
obscuration thereof, and then to withdraw it self back again, which it never
does in natural eclipses; but beginning to enter upon the Western surface of the
Sun, procreds to the Eastern, where the eclipse cease. Secondly, they
observed again, that by nine of the clock at night, the Moon was withdrawn to a
diametrous opposition to the Sun; which by course of nature could not possibly
come to pass in that space of time, being but six hours. And this miracle
Dionysius entreated Polycarpus to urge Apollophanes withal, to win him to the
Christian faith, in regard himself was an eyewitness thereof. Again, the
resurrection of Christ has open acknowledgement, both from Josephus, in the
place twice above mentioned; and from Pilate himself that put him to death, by
a Letter that he writ to his Lord Tiberius, then Emperor of Rome; wherein he
certifies him how the Soldiers (who were suborned and hired by the Jews to say
that Christ's Disciples came and stole him away in the night) had confessed the
plain truth unto him; namely, that Jesus was risen indeed to life again out of
his Sepulcher; and withal he sent to Tiberius the particular examination of
diverse other persons, which he had taken about the same business, who avowed
that they had seen and spoken with such persons as were risen from death at
that time with Jesus; which said persons assured them also of his resurrection.
This Letter of Pilate's was laid up amongst the records of the Romans; as
witnesses both Aegesippus in his History, (who lived in the next Age after the
Apostles) and immediately after him Tertullian in his book against the
Gentiles, where he professes that upon his own knowledge such a Letter there
was to be seen amongst the records of the Romans. This Tertullian might very
well know, in regard he was a pleader of causes in Rome diverse years before he
was a Christian. Parson. Resol. part. 2. cap. 4. sect. 2.
I might hereunto add sundry other testimonies out of Authors of adverse
professions to Christian Religion, to prove the truth of the miracles done by
our Savior and his Apostles for confirmation of the divinity of the Gospel;
but these are abundantly sufficient.

And therefore I hasten to the next argument of this sort, Macchabees, written
by the aforenamed Josephus, and usually annexed to his other books, agreeing
with the 6. and 7th. Chapters of the second Book of the Macchabees, at the end
of the Old Testament, a story it is worth the reading; perhaps it may extract
some tears, (which I speak out of experience) but yet they may happily be
sweetened with a mixture of gladness, like those which dropped from Joseph's
eyes, at the sight of his brother Benjamin. I will rehearse but one speech of
the first of nine Martyrs there mentioned, named Eleazar, who when he had told
the savage Tyrant Antiochus (that instigated him to renounce Moses law) that no
torment should make him forsake Gods word, and his Religion, with undaunted
courage and constancy, turns himself away from him, and addresseth his speech
as it were to his Bible, after this manner, O sacred Religion, I will never
violate thee; the foundation of my salvation, the defense of the believer; the
ground of faith: Never will I lift up my hands contrary to thy precepts; never
will I believe any thing to be just, which is repugnant to that which thou have
taught me. And whilst he spoke thus (says the story) he was haled to the
torments.

For the Martyrs of the New Testament, they are numberless, and almost in
every Ecclesiastical History; as in Eusebius, Socrates, Evagrius, Sozomen, and
many others, who have recorded not only their sufferings, for their witness
bearing unto the Gospel of Christ, but the manner thereof to have been in such
sort, that is, with such innocence, hilarity, courage, patience, humility and
comfort, that their blood in this manner shed in the Gospels cause, seals unto
us their successors the infallible certainty of the Divinity of it. It Is not
denied but that Heretics have dared to die for defense of their erroneous
opinions; but never did any of them suffer with those apparent characters and
impressions of God's divine Spirit upon them, that were now before mentioned,
nor in that infinite number that the Martyrs of the Gospel have done; for they
so shined throughout the world in their afflictions (says Eusebius) Eusebius.
Histo. Eccles. lib. 8. cap. 12. in fine.
that the beholders wondered at their patience and noble courage; and that not
without cause; for they expressed and showed forth unto the world special and
manifest signs of the divine and unspeakable power of our Savior working by
them. I might here illustrate and amplify this point by innumerous instances
of Martyrs, both out of all the forenamed Historians, and out of Mr. Fox his
book of our own late English Martyrs, in the days of Queen Mary, who by the
virtue and splendency of their divine graces in suffering, namely, innocence,
alacrity, courage, patience, and humility, so blanked and amated their
persecutors, that they converted many of them to the Christians faith; yea, so
far forth they prevailed with some of them, that they induced them to suffer
Martyrdom with them as Eusebius testifies Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 9.
and lib. 8. cap. 9.
But I will spare this labor, as hoping it may be an allurement unto the
Reader to peruse some of the now named Authors for further satisfaction in this
point.

I come now to the last external Argument, preservation of Scripture, against
the iniquity and enmity of all times, which have been so malevolent and violent
against it, that it could never have been preserved hitherto, but by the hand
of Heaven; for all the impetuous power and policy of man; and the precipitant
stream and strength, yea and fury of the whole world has invaded it to
extinguish and suppress it sundry times. Antiochus, a cruel Tyrant, and
successor of great Alexander, getting domination over the Jews, cut in pieces
and burnt all the books of the Law, which he could find; and followed his
intended mischief so malevolently and violently, that all those with whom any
such books were found, were put to a most cruel death. Machab. 1.59. and
Joseph. Autiq. lib. 12. cap. 7.
Dioclesian also Emperor of Rome, a savage and belluine persecutor of the
Christians, sought by all means possible to obliterate and abolish the holy
Scriptures; and for that end caused his Edicts to be published everywhere
throughout his Dominions; in which it was commanded, That all the Christian
Churches should be demolished and made even with the ground; yea, and the very
foundations thereof to be dug up; and that the holy Scriptures should be all
burned, and so be utterly extinguished. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. 2. and
3.
Which mischief has been intended and attempted also by many other nefarious
and wicked instruments of Satan often times: yet has it ever been preserved
whole and entire, and continued in the Church unto this day, yea, even in the
original Tongues wherein it was first written, which is verily a miracle. And
therefore we may fitly apply unto this miraculous preservation of it, that
acclamation of the people, Great is the truth, and prevails. 1 Esdras 4.41.
And the words of the Psalmist, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous
in our eyes. Psat. 118.23.


I have done with the Arguments from without the Scripture, which may move any
man's mind very prevalently, to entertain a belief of the Divinity of this book,
and yet they have showed him but (as it were) the out side of it. Let me now
lead the Reader a little higher and nearer to it; as namely to open it, and
look within it, and then he shall see (as the Jew says very truly) God's own
hand, God's own characters, yea, God's own sign and seal, and subscription upon
the paper: For as corporal light reveals to the bodily eye both other things
and it self too; so does Scripture, as a true spiritual and heavenly light,
both reveal the way to Heaven, and make ostension also of it self to be a light
of Heaven. Particularly there be to be discerned in it these eight sparks or
beams of divine authority.

First, That never man spoke like him: Joh. 7.46.
Nor with that authority: Luke 4.32.
So may be said of this Book of Christ) never book spoke like it; that is, in
such a superlative and high strain of authority; there is such an august,
majestical, and venerable state in the words, and such steps and prints of
divine excellency displayed in it, as neither man nor Angel could or durst
express, and such as never was nor will be found in any other writing; for it
breathes divinely in every part and page. Let any man parallel this Book among
humane Authors for heavenly majesty in the sayings and sentences thereof, and I
will sample him the Sun amongst lucid bodies for radiant luster in the light
and shine thereof; for the Sun is not more gloriously lightsome above all other
Stars, then this Scripture is divinely majestical and glorious above all other
writings. To which purpose St. Augustine speaks thus, August. de Civitat. Dei
lib. 11. cap. 1.
Scriptura summae dispositione providentiae super omnes omnium gentium literas,
omnia sibi genera ingeniorum humanorum divinis excellens authoritate subjecit.
The Scripture (says he) being by the disposition of the highest providence
above all the literature of all Nations, excelling in divine authority, has
stooped all kinds of humane wits unto it self: And as in many other Texts, so
in Deuteronomy. 32.39, 40, 41, and 42. verses, there be such sublime and majesticall
expressions, as neither man nor Angel durst utter. For there we have these
sayings uttered from the mouth of God, I, even I am he, and there is no god
with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any
that can deliver cut of my hand. For I lift up my hand to Heaven, and say, I
live for ever, etc. Thus no man nor Angel ever did speak, or dare speak.

There have been indeed some men in former Ages, so advanced and exalted in
their own thoughts, and transported with vain glory (having been mounted to the
highest stair of honor and authority here upon Earth) that they have
ambitiously affected to be called gods, and to be reputed to descend from more
then humane race and parentage; yet never durst any of them personate the God
of Heaven, to call themselves Jehovah, or Elohim. But this is often the
affirmation of the Author of Scripture, as is evident both from the Text last
named, and from many other; of which I will rehearse but these four, Exodus
20.12. And God spoke all these words saying, I am Jehovah thy God. Isa. 52.6.
Therefore my people shall know my name; therefore they shall know in that day,
that I am he that does speak, Behold it is I. Ezekiel. 21.17. I will also smite my
hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest, I Jehovah have said it. And
again in the last verse of the same Chapter, Thou shall be for fuel to the
fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land, thou shall be no more
remembered; for I Jehovah have spoken it. Whereas therefore the Author and
Inditer of Scripture calls himself Jehovah, the true and very God, (which title
no mortal man durst ever yet assume to himself) it is an undeniable inference,
that therefore God was the Author of it, and no man on earth.

Now as this celestial splendour and brightness, and purity of doctrine therein
contained; for such a description have we of Gods word in Scripture; it is said
that All the words of his mouth are righteous; there is no lewdness nor
frowardness in them: Prove. 8.8.
And that his statutes are right, and his commandments pure: Psalm. 19.8.
And like silver tried in the fire. Psalm. 12.6.
So that if men will but acknowledge that there is a God, and that he has
revealed to man his will by word (which who says not that is a Christian, nay,
an intelligent man? for this is a thing needful, wherein God never fails, as
the Philosophers say of nature) and it cannot be denied but that this is that
word of his; for there is no word written nor unwritten, that can so deservedly
claim him for the Author; none that is ( ex omni part) every way, and so
exactly quadrate and proportionate to his nature and holiness: For no picture
can more lively express the portraiture, lineaments and feature of any man,
then this word does resemble the nature and properties of God; for (as is said
of the substantial word of God, so may be said of this vocal and written word)
it is the very character of his person; Heb. 1.3.
It Is the very model, idea and graphical picture of his divine attributes; for
it is no accepter of persons, regards not rich more then poor; is no willer of
wickedness, nor does any evil dwell with it: As it is said of God in the same
Scripture, in the Texts quoted in the Margint. Ephesians. 6.9. Job. 34.19. Psalm, 5.4.
So like God is no other word, neither written in paper, nor in the fleshly
tables of man's heart; nor proceeding from the mouth of man, be he the holiest
upon Earth; so impartially reproving sin, and in such an authoritative form of
increpation, and in all sorts of persons, from the King that sits on the
Throne, to the beggar that lies on the dunghill; and so fully and fairly
unmasking sin, and stripping it of those specious dresses of virtue, wherewith
it usually vails it self, and displaying it in its own dusky infernal colors,
that the u^ly shape thereof may be seen, and so abhorred. This of all other,
either word written or continued by tradition, aims not at all in any part of
it at sinister respects; but ascribes to God his due glory in all things; and
discovers to man his sin and shame and just demerit; which attestation has
ever been confessed to be a divine truth; and that by the most callous and
cauterized consciences that ever were; for an open confession of it we have
from the most remarkable and notorious exemplar for obstinancy and obduration
in ungodliness since the world began, from hard hearted Pharaoh himself; The
Lord (said he Exodus 9.27.
is righteous, but I and my people are wicked. Again, this of all other
delivers the most undoubted way to salvation, for it teaches such a way
thereto, as is most consonant and suitable to God's holiness, justice, and
mercy, and yields best satisfaction to man's conscience. And no other has so
heavenly a subject, nor so heavenly an end; that is, God's glory, and man's
salvation, so purely and sincerely set forth as this; and therefore this and no
other is God's own Book, which only thus truly describes him, reveals to man
the most certain and safe way to him; and ascribes to him his due glory in all
points, without the least diminution thereof.

In the third place, As the majesty and purity of this word argue the divinity
of it; Paul speaks of to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 2.10.
And here also Abyssus abyssum invocat, (as the Psalmist speaks Psalm. 42.7.
One deep calls another, till there be so many deeps multiplied, that shallow
man is easily absorpt and swallowed up in them. Of this Book (in this respect
especially) may that be more truly and deservedly affirmed which Seneca said of
Quintus Sextius his book which he affected, applauded, and admired; Vivit viget
liber est supra hominem est. Sen. Epist. 64. ad Lucil.
The Scripture is a living Book, (or a Book of life, as it is called Revel.
21.27.) a Book of strong lines, a Book indeed, above the reason of man to
understand, and above the reach of man to comprehend; for though in it God does
set before us wisdom and heavenly manna, and true treasure, yet all are hid;
The wisdom is hid. 1 Cor. 2.7.
The treasure is hid. Mat. 13.44.
The manna is hid. Rev. 2.17.3.16.
For it is full of mysteries, yea, great mysteries. 1 Timothy
And therefore it is said of it in the same Book, That no man in Heaven nor in
Earth was able to open the Book, nor to look thereon. Rev. 5.3.
And to it may be applied that which is said of widome; Eccles. 7.26.
It is a profound deepnesse, who can find it? This made the Apostle Paul cry
out as one confounded and overwhelmed with the contemplation and meditation of
those profundities; O the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and of
the knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? Romans 11.33.
It Is possible (if I be not mistaken) to canvase any mere man's writing so
thoroughly, as to scrute it to the bottom; but here is no bottom to be found
in this writing, no not by the Angels of Heaven themselves; as is colligible
from that place of Peter; 1 Pet. 1.12.
where he tells us that the Angels had a desire to look into certain things of
Scripture; namely, the accomplishment of the predictions of Christ's sufferings
and glory; where the Original Greek word which he uses to express their
introspection, (...), in the genuine and proper sense signifies a stooping to
behold some thing hid, which imports that they were ignorant of the full
meaning of these prophesies, till they were fulfilled and revealed by the
Gospel. And if to Angels the depth of this divine mystery be inscrutable, much
more to man, who therefore is commanded very often to read, study, and search the
Scriptures, which precepts stand in force to the end of man's life, yea, to the
end of this world; and therefore necessarily imply, that as there must be no
end of searching, so neither can there be any end of finding, but that a man
may find more where he has found much before, and yet leave much unfound
still, when he has searched what he can. And to this truth the most
accomplished Divines of former times have afforded their suffrage. St. Augustine
says, In ipsis sanctis Scripturis mul^o nesci^ plura quam scio August. Epist.
119.
in the holy Scriptures I am ignorant of much more then I know. And again he
says, Mira profunditas eloquiorum tuorum (Deus meus) mira profunditas; horror
est intendere in eam, horror honoris, and tremor amoris Aug. Confess. lib. 12.
cap. 14.
There is a wonderful profoundnesse in thy word (O my God) a wonderful
profoundnesse, it makes a man quake to look upon it intentively; to quake for
reverence, and to tremble for the love thereof. And a greater Divine then he
says (speaking to God himself thereof) Thy knowledge is too wonderful for me,
it is so high that I cannot attain unto it Psalm. 139.6.
And therefore prays to God in another place to open his eyes, that he might
see the wonders of his Law Psalm. 119 18.
Hence then I infer that if neither man nor Angel can wade into the depth of
Scripture already invented and set forth; then neither man nor Angel could be
the inventers and Authors of it but of necessity a superior intelligence to
these, which can be no other but God himself. Neither let any here think that
this argument any whit favors the tenet of the Church of Rome, which charge
the Scripture with obscurity; for though it be replenished (and thereby indeed
richly imbellished and beautified) with variety of mystical difficulties, so
as some things be hard to be understood, as St. Peter confesses 2 Pet. 3.16.
yet is it apert and perspicuous also in many places, where the necessary way
to life eternal is delineated and described; and in so many places perspicuous,
as are sufficient fully to instruct men in all points of absolute necessity to
be known and believed unto salvation. And agreeable hereto is that speech
uttered by wisdom her self Prove. 8.9.
All the words of my mouth are plain to him that will understand, and straight
to them that would find knowledge. So that in it is propounded both milk and
strong meat; that for babes which are unexpert in the word of righteousness;
and this for them that are at age; which through long custom have their wits
exercised to discern between good and evil Heb. 5.13, 14.
And hence have sundry of the fathers compared it to a River, where there is a
shallow ford for the Lamb to wade in, and a profound deep for the Elephant to
swim in: And least any should suspect our modern Divines to be coiners of this
distinction, hear what the ancient Orthodox Fathers have taught us about it,
even from primitive times. S. Chrysostom thus speaks; Omnia clara sunt ac
plana ex Scripturis divinis; quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt.
Chrysostom. in 2 Tessal. 2.
All things are clear and plain out of the holy Scriptures; whatsoever things
are necessary are manifest. S. Augustine thus; In his quae aperte posita funt
in Scriptura, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi,
spem scilicet and charitatem Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Amongst those things which are apertly (or apparently) set down in Scripture,
are all those things found, which contain faith and good manners, as namely,
hope and charity: Irenaeus long before them thus, (as Chemnitius has it, Chem.
exa. deer. Conci. Trid. part. 1. in loco de Epist. Apost. prope finem.
Licet multa sunt obscura and parabolica Scripturae loca; regula tamen ipsa
veritatis in Scripturis sacris in aperto posita est. Albeit there be many
obscure and parabolical places of Scripture, yet the rule of truth it self is
clearly set down: Nay, the Apostle Peter himself lays down the ground of this
distinction in the place before cited 2 Pet. 3.16.
where he says of Paul's Epistles, that in them some things are hard to be
understood; for this of necessity implies that some things again be easy.

I had now done with this Argument; but that meeting with Mr. Parson the
Jesuit his approbation of it, as a most evident declaration that God was the
Author of holy Writ; I thought I might do well to give notice of it. His words
are these (as they are expressed by one Mr. Bunny, who published a Treatise of
the said Jesuits about Christian Resolution) Parson Resol. part 2. cap. 2.
sect. 3. in 7. proof of Scripture.
These Doctrines and many other contained in the Bible, being things above man's
capacity to devise, and nothing agreeing with humane reason, most evidently do
declare, that God was the Author and Inditer of the Scriptures; for that by him
only and by no other, those high and secret mysteries could be revealed. Where
it is to be noted that he affirms the mysteries of Scripture to declare, not
only evidently, but most evidently that God was the Author of them. Which
assertion infringeth the doctrine of the present Church of Rome taught by
Bellarmine formerly, who affirms, That it cannot be sufficiently known from
Scripture alone, that there is any divine Scripture Bellar. de Verbo Dei lib.
4. cap. 4. arg. 4.
And of late by one Mr. John Fisher a Jesuit, in the frontispiece of his book
against Dr. White, dedicated to King James where he toils himself to prove,
That the highest ground and final resolution of faith about this point is the
tradition and testimony of the Church; which must needs be otherwise; if the
high and hidden doctrines of the Scripture it self, do most evidently declare
the same, (as Mr. Parsons there affirms very truly) for the most evident
declaration of a truth, must needs be the highest ground thereof.

I thought it not impertinent to mention this sentence of Mr. Parsons as
speaking for the truth in this controversy between us and the Church of Rome,
to be defended on our part, when so approved and aplauded a Doctor of their own
gives his suffrage with us; which I shall further and more fully manifest by
other sayings of his, and those more punctual and express to this purpose, in
the fifth internal argument of this ensuing Treatise; whereby all devout Roman
Catholics with us (who have many a smooth tale told them by Priests and
Jesuits, of the unity and consent of all approved Doctors of the Church of Rome
in all points of faith) may see apparently that this it a false ostentation,
and a transparent untruth; discovering it self also in many other points
controverted between us and them, and so may deservedly suspect them to be but
seducers, or at the best but self-seekers in their pretense of the Catholic
cause.

I come now to a fourth evidence of the divinity of Scripture from within it
self, That through the name of Christ all that believe in him shall receive
remission of sins Acts 10.43.
And also the unanimity and concordance of all the Amanuenses and Penmen
thereof, being so many, and yet all yielding their suffrage and approbation
each to other, as they succeeded one another, without either detraction from
one another persons, or confutation or contradiction of one another writings.
This heavenly harmony (I say) suggests to the ear of an indifferent man, that
reads without prejudice, that these holy men of God (as S. Peter calls them) 2
Pet. 1.21.
the Penmen of Scripture were God's notaries, and both spoke and writ as they
were actuated and moved by the holy Ghost, and that these their writings were
the very dictates of that same spirit, that search^th the deep things of God 1
Cor. 2.10.
In which respect both Theodoret In prefat. in Psalm.
and S. Gregory Grego. in prefat. in Psalm.
have fitly termed the tongues and hands of all the writers of Scripture, the
pens of the holy Ghost; for such an agreement was never heard of amongst
several Authors writing of the same subject since the beginning of the world.
But the contrary has been most apparent among all sorts of humane writers,
every one hunting after his own praise by another disgrace, whereof I might
produce numerous instances. Whereas here we have all the Canonical books of the
Old Testament, namely, of Moses and the Prophets, and the Psalms, approving
each other, as they follow in order; and all approved of in the New Testament,
both by our Savior, John Baptist, the Apostles, and the Evangelists, and all
these also giving, testimony and approbation each to other at all times upon
just occasion, as all, though but slenderly versed in the reading of the
Scriptures undoubtedly know. Add hereunto (that which will drive this nail to
the head) the miraculous agreement of all these books together, not only in the
main point and drift of all, which is the salvation of mankind by the alone
incarnation, death, and suffering of Christ; but also in all other points, yea,
and in all circumstances; as many learned Divines have sufficiently declared,
by clearing, solving, and reconciling all knotty doubts about this question,
and seeming contradictions whatsoever throughout the whole Scriptures, that
ever yet have been moved or mentioned.

Fifthly, said prophesies were uttered before the events, and were not any
supposititious or counterseit writings published since the events, to delude
the world; which I shall undertake to clear by undoubted testimony; for that
such prophesies must needs be truly divine, no man can deny; according to that
in Isaiah, where God himself provokes the Idols of the Gentiles, to stand to
their cause, and to declare things to come, that thereby they may be known to
be gods Isa. 41.23.


Now the precedence of these predictions both in the Old Testament and in the
New before their events, I thus demonstrate. First, For the Old Testament, I
will omit those many predictions which were fulfilled within the time of its
own durance and continuance, as not demonstrative to mere reason, that they
were by divine inspiration; and insist only in the prophesies about our
Savior Christ's incarnation, miracles and passion, and the vocation of the
Gentiles to the Christian faith, which were fulfilled in the time of the
Gospel; which being proved to have been fulfilled a long time after their
prediction by the Prophets, is an undeniable demonstration that they were
uttered by inspiration from God himself. Now that they were fulfilled a long
time after their prediction, and that the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and the
Prophets (where these predictions are recorded) were extant before the events,
we have many pregnant proofs from the testimony both of Jews and Gentiles; and
those such as lived in the very interval of tiem between the prophesies and
their accomplishment; Amongst which the most remakable and famous is the
Septuagints Translation of the Old Testament into the Greek Tongue still
extant; which was done by the means, and at the charges of Ptolomy Philadelph,
a King of Egypt (as before has been mentioned) near upon three hundred years
before our Savior Christ, and there laid up in the King's Library. The History
whereof is set forth by one Aristaeus a learned Gentile then living, and highly
in favor with the said King; and the book is still to be seen. Which Aristaeus
together with one Demetrius Phalereus Master of the said King's Library, was an
especial instrument for the procuring of the said Translation to be done by 72.
Elders of the Jews, out of every Tribe six: Which was doubtless purposely
brought to pass by God's all seeing and all-swaying providence, to take away
all suspicion of contriving the prophesies of Scripture after the events.
Another witness of this Translation is Philo Judaeus; Philo de vita Moysis
lib. 3.
who lived in our Savior Christ's time, as before has been said. And a third
witness is Josephus in his forenamed History of the Antiquity of the Josep.
Antiq. Jud. lib. 12. cap. 2.
Jews. So that from these Authors testimony (besides a number more that I might
produce) it is most apparent that the Old Testam^nt, and so consequently the
prophesies lapped up th^rein, were extant in their time, which was long before
their ev^nt, and therefore were not forged since.

Now for the predictions of the New Testament, I shall make it most clear and
evident, that they also did precede their event, so many of them as are
fulfilled. And omitting many other for brevities sake, I will instance in some
few best known and confessed of all to be fulfilled. First, Our Savior Christ
foretold the siege of Jerusalem, and the destruction and subversion both of it
and the Luke 19.43, 44.
Temple; and the calamitous and distressed estate of the inhabitants of that
City at that time, to come to pass before one generation should pass Matthew.
24.34.
away; and the dissipation of the people of the Jews from thenceforth among all
Luke 21.24.
Nations. The former of these Josephus, a Jew before named and no Christian,
reports that he saw come to pass with his own eyes, in a lamentable History
which he has written of the wars of the Josep. de Bella Jud. lib. 7.
Jews. And every Nation in Europe sees likewise the fulfilling of the other,
over all which, and many more Countries also, the Jews are all now dispersed and
scattered. Our blessed Savior also foretold, that the Gospel should be
preached to all Nations before the final Mark. 13.10.
judgment. The accomplishment of which prophecy, having had its beginning in
some measure in S. Augustine's time, is noted by him as a special mark and
cognizance of the Divinity of Scripture; his words are these, Ex uno homine
(quem primum Deus condidit) genus humanum sumsit exordium secundum sanctae
Scripturae fidem; quae mirabilem authoritatem non immerito habet in orb
terrarum atque in omnibus gentibus, quas sibi esse credituras, inter caetera
quae dixit, vera divinitate Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 9. in fine.
praedixit. From one man (whom God first created) mankind derived its
beginning, according to the testimony of the holy Scripture; which has
admirable authority in the world and among all Nations, and not without cause,
in that among other things, which it has divinely foretold, this is one, That
all Nations should believe it. And we our selves also see it to be daily
fulfilled still more and more; for both the Indians from Spain, and the
Virginians, and other barbarous people from England have of late years received
the Gospel.

The Apostle Paul prophesied of some that should teach doctrines of Devils by
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from 1 Timothy 4.3.
meats. This prophecy was fulfilled in the next succeeding age, about 90 or
100 years after; for then arose the Here^icks, Marcion, Tatianus, and Montanus
(and diverse others discipled by them) who taught that marriage was to be
abhorred, and commanded abstinence from living creatures; that is, from eating
Iren. advers. Haere. lib. 1. cap. 30. and Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 27.
flesh. Now that the New Testament was written, and so these prophesies extant
before their accomplishment, we have a cloud of witnesses. As Clement S. Paul's
disciple; Justin Marryr (of whom Tatianus had sometime been an auditor and
disciple, who also writ a book against Marcion) Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap.
11.
Aegesippus, Papias, Polycarpus, Ignatius, with many others, who writ books in
their time, wherein they quote the Scriptures of the New Testament; and were
all living in or before the time of the aforementioned Heretics, which undeniably
demonstrates the Gospel to be written, and so these predictions to have had
precedence before the event.

S. P^ul also foretold of the conversion of the Jews to the Christian faith, in
several Romans 11.20. and 2 Cor. 3.16.
places; now this (for ought we know) is not yet ful^illed, but undoubtly shall
be in its due time; which when it comes to pass, shall cry down the
incredulity of all such doubting spirits, as will not receive the knowledge and
love of this truth of the divinity of Scripture, that they might be saved.

I have been long in this argument, and yet I have not done with it; for now
again Mr. Parson's applause of the prevalent force of this argument, as
irrefragable and above all other for undoubted confirmation of the point in
hand, comes in my way, and may not be omitted. Who in the place formerly
mentioned (not very many lines intervening) speaks thus; This alone (meaning
the accomplishment of prophesies in Scripture) does convince most apparently
(all proofs and reasons and other arguments laid aside) that these Scriptures
are of God, and of his eternal and infallible Pars. Resol. par. 2. cap. 2.
sect. 3. in 7. proof of Scripture.
spirit. And again, afterward he affirms, That these prophesies being
fulfilled, are sufficient to establish any man's faith in the Idem e^dem ca. 4.
Ser. 1. in 4. consid.
world. These sentences of Mr. Parson's do give his fellow Fisher such an
affront, for teaching the point formerly mentioned in the third internal
Argument, that (I am confidently persuaded) the most acute, polite and
refinedwits in all that Fraternity will never be able to reconcilethem

Sixthly, Let the whole form and frame of the doctrine of Scripture, self in
any place to humor man and please his corrupt nature. But contrarily lays
open the baseness of his birth, and the foulness of his sin and shame (which
every man naturally desires to conceal and cover) crosses his desires,
frustrates his hopes, records accusations, indictments and restimonies
against him, and finally denounces judgment and condemnation against him, in
that way which seems good unto him, Prove. 14.12.
and in that course of life which he best likes and loves. Who then can imagine
this to be man's devise, or composed by him? which is so derogatory from his
estimation, whereof he is so tender, and so averse from his humor and
disposition to which he is so indulgent, especially considering with what
earnest and vehement asseverations the positions and doctrines of Scripture are
a vouched and avoived to be divine truths. If indeed this book did seem to be
composed but jocose, and not in earnest; as that does which Erasmus writ in the
praise of folly; or to be penned for ^stentation of eloquence and ingenuity;
like Craneades his second Oration, which he made before Cato the Censor in
dispraise of justice; having made one the day before in the high commendation
of it in the same place. Then there might be some ground for surmise and
suspicion, that some man might be the Author of it: But seeing neither of these
can be collected from the context, and that the whole scope and drift of the
book throughout is truly and verily to abase and humble all men before God, it
cannot probably be reputed to be any man's work.

In the seventh place, first, from the books which Moses writ, wherein he has
reported not only the cruelty of his grandfather Levi, to the discredit of his
own birth; but also openly confesses his own sin, and how much the Lord was
offended with him for it several times; so as he was therefore debarred the
entrance into the Land of Numb. 20.12.
Canaan. This truth also appears from the Gospel of S. Mark; for there S.
Peter's sin in he denial of his Master, is more expressly set forth and
aggravated then in any of the other Gospels, and yet was it penned, if not by
the dictation of S. Peter, (as some report) yet by his approbation at least, as
says Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Eusebius. Lastly, the Apostle Paul likewise rips up his own faults, and
notifies them with aggravation; I was (says he) a blasphemer, a persecutor,
and an 1 Timothy 1.13.
oppressor. This argues strongly that these men were set on work by God, and
guided by him, and not by their own fancies and affections; in that they were
so far from flattery, connivance or partiality, that they spared not themselves
at all, nor regarded their own disgrace and infamy, so that thereby glory might
accrue to God.

In the eighth and last place, Psalm 14.1. where it speaks thus, The fool has
said in his heart there is no God. Which affirmation imports, that the Inditer
of the Psalms was privy to some thoughts in the hearts of fools, which none but
God himself can discern. Nay, Scripture reveals some such thoughts, as man
himself without the light of it would searely ever have espied, as that All the
thoughts and imaginations of man's heart are only evil Genesis 6.5.
continually. And that concupiscence is sin, which Paul confesses he had not
known, if the Law had not said thou shall not Romans 7.7.
lust. And therefore this word which pierces thus deeply as to the rifling of
the very cogitations of man's heart, must needs be of God, whose alone property
it is to search the heart; and least through the propensity of man's nature, to
slight those things which belong unto his peace, we should neglect or overslip
the observation of this, as a note of the divine power of Scripture, it self
rounds us in the ear in two places (if not more) and gives us intelligence and
notice of it. In one place it tells us, That the word of God (speaking of this
written word) is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then a two-edged
sword, dividing between the soul and the spirit, and the joints and marrow, and
is a disceruer of the thoughts and intents of the Heb. 4.12.
heart. And in another place it says, That the illiterate unbelieving person,
having the thoughts of his heart made manifest by prophecy (that is, by the
word preached) will fall down on his face, and worship God, and report that God
is in the 2 Cor. 14.25.
Preacher. Where it gives us to understand, that the discovery of men's thoughts
by the preaching of the word, shall extort from them this open and ingenuous
confession, that verily God speaks in them, and that the word is his which is
published by them.

Secondly, the supernatural power of Scripture appears, in that it shakes and
terrifies the consciences of wicked men, even the greatest upon earth, of Kings
and Princes, and that in such a sort, as is impossible for the word of any
mortal to do. That it does so, is clear from these instances in Scripture: It Is
said of Saul King of Israel, that he was so affrighted with the Prophet Samuel
his reproof of him for his disobedience to God's word, that he confessed his
sin to Samuel, which he had denied before; and sued to Samuel for favor with
all Sam. 15.24.
submisnesse. It Is said also of Felix (who was a Viceroy) that he trembled
when he heard Paul preach of righteousness and the judgment to Acts 24.26.
come. Now that man's word should be thus formidable to Kings and Princes, it
cannot be imagined, because no man has coercive or compulsive power over the
King; and where such power is wanting, menacies from thence are no more feared
then the crack of a paper gun; at least not in that manner and measure that the
affrighted consciences of men do fear the thundrings and threatenings of the Law
in Scripture. And therefore that word which strikes such deep horror and
amazement into the hearts of men, yea of Kings, (who fear no man's word, because
no man has coercive power over them) must needs be more then humane.

Thirdly, It usually prevails against the enemies and haters of it (such as all
men are by nature) to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and to win them to a love and
liking of it self, which is an effect proper only to divine power. That it does
produce this effect, I presume no Christians will deny; whence it testifies of
it self, that it converts Psalm. 19.7.
souls; and is the power of God to Romans 1.16.
salvation. And that it is mighty through God to cast down strong holds; casting
down the imagination, and every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
Christ. This is a supernatural effect, and wrought by the power of this word;
and therefore it necessarily and concludingly follows, that it is not man's word;
for that cannot work above the strength of nature of or by it self, neither can
win the affection of him that hates it, without a change or variation of it
self; which yet this word does. If it be objected that it is not the power of
the word, but the power of God's spirit that produces this effect. I answer,
that it is true indeed; that God's Spirit is the principal efficient cause
hereof, but the word is the instrumental; and so the concurrence and
cooperation of the Spirit of God with this word, speaks it to be his own
ordinance, for else God would give no such blessing to it.

Fourthly and lastly, It ministers comfort above the power of nature to a
depressed and distressed conscience, in the greatest extremities and pressures
of afflictions that are incident to this present life; yea, and in the very
hour of death, against the fear both of death and hell, and condemnation, when
all humane comforts shake hands with us and forsake us. And therefore extending
it self beyond the power of nature also in this particular, it is apparently
divine. That it does minister comfort to wounded and distressed consciences
needs no proof; it is confessed of all without contradiction, as having been
proved by examples without number in all Ages: And that nothing else can either
heal or comfort a wounded and perplexed conscience is as true too. Mirth and
passime, with such like avooations, and the society of friends, may allay the
smart of this wound for a time, but cannot possibly heal it. It Is this balm of
Gilead, this rod and this staff of God (which comforted Psalm. 23.4.
David, and but for which he had perished in his Psalm. 119.92.
affliction) which alone (and nothing else) comfort all that make a right
use of it, in their deepest misery. And this is one and a principal end for
which this word was written; namely, that it might minister comfort to us in
this present life, by breeding in us a steadfast hope of a better I^f^ to come.
This S. Paul teaches, where he says, that Whasoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our instruction, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have Romans 15.4.
hope.

And now that I have led up the Reader to this highest stair of this gradation;
whence he may contemplate the glorious beams of divine luster bespread
throughout the whole region of Scripture; I shall beseech him to stay here his
thoughts and to demur and pause a while upon this last reason or Argument,
drawn from the power of Scripture to prove the divinity of it; for it is a very
valid and powerful argument indeed, a most evident eviction of the point in
hand, making it conspicuous to the eye of reason it self; for here he may see
God himself bearing witness of this Scripture to be his, by four visible seals
which he affixeth unto it; which are these four supernatural effects now
mentioned. Having therefore so many broad seals of Heaven appensed unto it, it
must needs hold forth from it self, the highest and surest ground of
credibility, that it is of God and not of man.

I confess this has sealed to my own conscience, both that the Scripture is
God's true word, and that the Church of England is God's true Church, (I mean
one member and branch of it) for in it I see (and so may all that are in it, if
their eyes be not holden with prejudice) these wonderful and divine effects now
mentioned, wrought ordinarily by the ministry of this Word in deed and in
truth, and that without number; which could not possibly be so, if either the
Word or the Church were not God's: For if the Church were his, and not the
Word, the Church should receive a blessing from him, but not by the Word: And
if the Word were his, and not the Church, the Word should be glorified, but the
Church should not be blessed or bettered by it. If all such as now separate
themselves from this Church, as if it were none of God's (whether Papists or
Anabaptists) would mindfully consider this, and lay aside their prejudice; I
cannot see what should withhold them from a speedy and joyful return to it
again.

And now I am in good hope, (the promises being well considered) that the
Readers, who before took the Scriptures for God's word upon the credit of the
Churches testimony will now (looking more inquisitively into them themselves
then heretofore) say to the Church as the Samaritans said to the woman that
told them of Christ, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have
seen it our selves, Joh. 4.42.
and know that this is indeed God's own Word: Yet I would not here be mistaken,
as if I meant that every one that looks into Scripture might presently espy
this at the first sight; for I confess that the sight and certain knowledge
thereof (which is to be attained by this introspection into it) is not obvious
to every eye that looks upon it; but my meaning is, that this truth is evident
in Scripture in it self, and to the humble intelligent and inquisitive Reader,
whose mind is also prepared by the knowledge of the grounds and principles of
the Christian faith, and in some measure enlightened from above.

Neither do I here slight or undervalue the Churches testimony; for I
acknowledge it to be very important and useful for this purpose, as being a
prime inducer, and as it were a paedagogue to usher in and conduct us to the
principal teacher of this truth, which (next after the spirit of God himself)
is the heavenly light of Scripture it self; but it is neither last nor best, nor
highest, nor surest ground and proof thereof: And therefore I desire the Reader
to take notice, that though I have not alleged the Churches testimony by it
self as a particular argument to prove this truth, (because the drift of this
Treatise, is to show the Scripture it self best to do it) yet is it involved
and lapped up amongst the external and less principal proofs, namely, in the
second and third arguments. And whereas Papists glory much in that saying of S.
Augustines (which is often set down in his works) Ego vero non crederem
Evangelio, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas: That is, I would
not believe the Gospel, but that the authority of the Catholic Church moved
me: As if this saying of his favored their Tenet in this controversy between
us and them: It appears clearly to the contrary from another saying that he
has in his Tractate upon the Gospel of S. John, where he speaks thus, upon
those words before mentioned of the Samaritans to the woman; Now we believe,
not because of thy saying, for we have seen it our selves. Primo (says he) per
faeminam, postea per praejentiam; sic agitur hodie cum eis qui foris sunt, and
nondum sunt Aug. in Joh. 4. Tract. 15.
Christiani. That is, first by the woman, then by his presence; so fares it
now with them that are without, and are not yet Christians. And the words
following in the same place show plainly his meaning to be this, That as the
Samaritans believed in some measure that Jesus was the Christ, by the report of
the woman; but afterward more undoubtedly when they came to enjoy his
presence, to have the sight of him, and conference with him: So the unbelievers
which are out of the Church, are first induced to believe in some measure that
Scripture is God's word, by the Churches enunciation and report; but afterward
they believe much more firmly and undoubtedly when they come to enjoy the sight
and knowledge of the Scriptures themselves. So that the most that can be
gathered from that speech of S. Augustines is but this, That the testimony and
tradition of the Church is usually the first inducement to men to give credit
to the truth, and so consequently to the divinity of the Gospel, which is not
denied. But then this credulity is afterward corroborated and more fully
settled and confirmed by more evident, certain and infallible groundsout of
Scripture it self; discovered especially by the help of divine grace from the
spirit of God; which of all other says Amen to this truth, and sets the surest
seal thereof upon the soul and conscience; as our Savior gives us to
understand, when he says, If any man will do God's will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of Joh. 7.17.
God: That is, he shall know best and most assuredly; as having information and
attestation thereof from the Spirit of God. Yet always God's spirit tells the
conscience this out of Scripture; for as it suggested and dictated the
Scripture at the first, so it whispers in the ear of the soul the same note
still, and has no discrepant voice or suggestion from it; but whatsoever it
testifies, it suggests the same not by any secret instinct and spiritual
insusurration different from the written word (according to the vertiginous
fancy and dotage of the Enthusiasts, the family of Love, (as they are phrased)
and some other of the Anabaptistical sect) but by a still voice out of and
according to the Scripture. Whence is that saying of St. Chrysostom, Frustra
jactat se Spiritum sanctum habere, qui non loquitur ex Chrysostom. de Popu.
Antioche. Homil. 50.
Evangelio. In vain does he boast to have the holy Ghost, that speaks not out
of the Gospel. And therefore we read that when our Savior enlightened his
Apostles understandings, it was That they might understand the Luke 24.45.
Scriptures. And that when he promised to send the Comforter unto them to teach
them all things, he adds, Whatsoever I have said unto John 14.26.
you; which intimates that he should teach them no new doctrine. So that we are
not to believe an Angel from Heaven, if he preach any other Gospel then that
which the Apostles have Gal. 1.8.
preached; which we have written in the New Testament, And so it was said
always of old, To the Law, and to the Testimony; If they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in Isa. 8.20.
them.

Thus then I conclude, That the conscience may be verily resolved, and a
rational man compelled to acknowledge and believe with an acquired historical
faith, that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are divine, by
convincing arguments and evidences apparent even to reason, and that from
Scripture it self especially. Nor am I single in this opinion; for I find in S.
Augustine the like conclusion, who speaking of the Penmen of Scripture,
delivers this sentence; Vere illos magnos and divinos fuisse, and legem illam
Dei jussu and voluntate promulgatam esse credo; and id quamvis perpauca illorum
librorum sciam, facile persuadere possum, si mihi adhibeatur aequus and non
pertinax Aug. de Vtilita. tecredendi cap. 5.
animus. Verily (says he) I believe that they (the penmen of Scripture) were
great and divine men, and that that Law was promulgated by the commandent and
will of God; and this (though I knew but a few of those books) I am able easily
to persuade, if I meet but with an equalminded man, that is not pertinacious.
But to believe this with a divine faith (without which it is never soundly and
perfectly embraced) must be a work of God's Spirit only, from whom alone all
such faith proceeds. And so I end the first part of this Treatise.

The second part of this Treatise, which is an application of the Doctrine
proved to certain special uses.
HAving now laid a sure foundation of this truth (that Scripture is God's own
word) which cannot be shaken; it behooves me to superstruct upon it, lest that
aspersion be cast upon me, which the improvident builder is blemished withal in
the Gospel; This man began to build, but was not able to make an Luke 14.30.
end.

This doctrine then is useful both for theory and practice; both for
information and for exhortation.

First, For information of the understanding, two inferences or conclusions are
deducible from it.

First, That no man may presume to dispense with this word, because it is God's;
for being his, none but he has authority and power to exempt any man from
obligation to it, or any part of it. This is a conclusion undeniable, and
therefore speaks the practice of some late Popes of Rome, to be very culpable
and inexcusable, who have presumed to grant dispensations for marriages within
the degrees forbidden in this word of God; and to exempt subjects from
obedience to their lawful Sovereign, strictly commanded in this word. This has
been practiced by the Papal power of late years here in this Nation. And it is
the more inexcusable, in that they undertake to justify it. This I find in
Cardinal Bellarmine's works, who to prove the Popes Supremacy, draws an
argument from his power to grant dispensations; and then does instance in a
dispensation which Pope Gregory granted to the English about marriages within
the degrees Bellar. de Romano Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 19.
forbidden. And I can here produce a credible Author, who affirms, that diverse
of the Church of Rome have not blushed to defend openly, and that under their
hands, that the Pope has power to dispense [Contra ius divinum, contra
Apostolum, contra Novum Testamentum] against the law of God, against an
Apostle, and against the New Favor. Antiquit. cap. 6. paulo post medium.
Testament. But I am persuaded that now (since the reformation has detected
many of their gross hallucinations) the wise and learned among them do distaft
and disclaim all such blaspemous and unsavory assertions.

A second consequent or conclusion, that I deduce from this truth, That
Scripture is God's own word, is this, That therefore it is of superior and
greater authority then the present Church militant. And this I prove from hence
by two reasons.

First, Because the present Church Militant is holy and divine, but only in
part, and after a sort; and in this regard is subject unto error; whereas the
Scripture is simply and totally divine; for All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, says 2 Timothy 3.16.
S. Paul; and therefore must needs be most authentical.

A second reason is this; That which sanctifies, is greater then that which is
sanctified by it; so our Savior himself argued against the Scribes and
Pharisees; Ye fools and blind, whether is greater the gold or the Temple that
sanctifies the gold? But the word sanctifies the Church; so says our Savior,
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is Joh. 17.17.
truth: And again, Now are ye clean through the word, which I have spoken unto
Joh. 15.3.
you. And says S. Faul, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of water, through the Ephesians. 5.20.
word. The word therefore, communicating sanctity, and so therewith authority
unto the Church, must needs precede and excel it in both.

If any ask against whom I take up this weapon, seeing the Church of Rome seems
to disclaim and disavow this Tenet: For the Rhemists in their Annotations on
Gal. 2.2. affirm the disputation of this question to be superfluous, and the
comparison to be altogether unfit to be made; I answer in the words of the
Apostle, So fight I, not as one that beats the 1 Cor. 9.26.
air. I do not with the foolish Affricans called Psylli (as Gellius reports)
take up Arms against the wind. For besides diverse others hereafter mentioned,
the said Doctors (who would seem to decline this opinion, and this unseemly
comparison) do in the very same place depresse the Scriptures, and make them
inferior to the Church in four respects: 1. In respect of Antiquity; in that
the Church was before them. 2. In excellence of nature; in that the Church is
the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of God, and the proper subject of God and his
graces; for which Church the Scriptures were, and not the Church for the
Scriptures. 3. In power of judging; the Church having judicial power to
determine of doubtful questions touching the sense of the Scriptures, and other
controversies of Religion; of which judicial power the Scriptures are not
capable. 4. In evidence; the definitions of the Church being more clear and
evident then those of the Scriptures. Now if by the Church they understood the
whole Catholic Church (and so included all the Patriarks, Prophets and
Apostles, by whom the Scriptures were penned) the contestation between us and
them would not be so irreconcilable. But their drift is to entitle the present
Church Militant (which is but one small part of the whole Catholic Church) to
those glorious prerogatives which belong not unto it. And that it is this Church
which they so strive to advance above the Scriptures, it is more then manifest
outof the writings of many of their Authors of special note amongst them; as
namely out of Pighius, Melchior Canus, and Stapleton: All which in their
writings quoted in the margent Pig. de Hierar eccle. lib. 2. cap. 2. Can. loc.
com. theolog. lib. 2. cap. 8. Stapl. Doctr. princip. lib. 9. cap. 12.
here, attribute authority to the present Church Militant above the Scriptures.
And Cardinal Bellarmine writes after their Copy; affirming That the strength
of all ancient Councels, and of all opinions in doctrine does depend upon the
authority of the present Bellar. de effectu Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 25. in fine.
Church. Whereas therefore the forenamed Doctors of Rhemes, did one while
affirm all comparison between the pre-eminence and authority of the Church and
Scriptures, to be unfit to be made; and anotherwhile spin out a tedious
comparison between them about the very same particular, they bewrayed both
their personal weakness, and the weakness of the cause, which they intended
to strengthen; by stating and discussing that question, which with their
tongues or pens they had before disallowed to be disputed of.

Hitherto of the Theological conclusions inferred from this principle, That
Scripture is demonstratively divine. Now it follows to speak of some duties for
practice, that may be raised and urged upon all sorts of persons from it; and
namely, both upon Magistrates, Ministers and People.

First, This challenges from all Christian Kings and Princes (who are God's
Viceroys upon Earth) all honorable respect, patronage and possble protection
of this holy word of God, against all religions and opinions in Religion, which
are repugnant unto it; and against all persons, that either in word or deed,
doctrine or life, slight or dishonor it. For they sustaining the person of God
here on earth (for which they are dignified with the title of gods themselves
in this Psalm. 82.6.
word) do owe this reciprocal respect to him whose Vicegerents and Ministers
they are, to see (as much as in them lies) all due observance, honor and
obedience to be exhibited to this his sacred Word. Thus did the good King
Josiah; for when the Book of the Law (which was known to be God's Book) was
found in the house of the Lord, and showed unto him, he presently summoned all
the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem to appear before him; and then himself
rehearsed in their ears all the words of God's Book; and made a Covenant both
for himself and all the people, that they should keep the Commandments, and
accomplish the Covenant written in it; and suppressed all religions which did
impunge it, and removed all occasions and instruments of Idolatry, and
whatsoever else was adverse to the contents of 2 Kin. 23.
it. Yea further it is said, that he caused all that were present in Jerusalem
and Benjamin to stand to 2 Chro. 34.32.
it. And thus have all good and godly Princes ever done, both under the Law and
the Gospel: And it is great reason they should, for the Scepter of Christ's
Kingdom (which is this word of his) is a Scepter of Psalm. 45.6.
righteousness: And a rod of Psalm. 110.2.
strength. And when Kings Scepters uphold it, then it defends them; like the
roof of a building, either of wood or stone; and the walls or pillars thereof,
which afford a reciprocal and mutual aid and benefit each to other; the pillars
or walls support and uphold the roof; and the roof does protect, consolidate,
and corroborate them.

Thus the Scepter was never taken away from the Kings of Israel and Judah, so
long as they swayed it for the defense of God's word; but while they were
observant of it, God was propitious to them.

Nor does this duty lie solely upon the highest powers, but upon all secondary
and subordinate Magistrates, both Counselors of State, Nobles, Judges, and
Justices, whom god has advanced to such high places of honor, and put into
their hands the sword of justice, for this very end primarily, that they might
weild it according to his word, and for it; according to the directions and
rules that he has inscribed in it; and for the support of the honor and
authority of it, by punishing and suppressing all impious scorners, prophaners,
and transgressors thereof. And verily when they do thus execute justice by the
word of God, and for it, and without connivence or partiality; then are they
the very nerves and sinews of the body of the Commonwealth, and bring both
strength and glory unto it. When Ptolomy King of Egypt enquired once of the
Roman Ambassadors that came to his Court, about the estate and government of
the great and famous City of Rome, he received this answer from them; That at
Rome, the gods were honored, Magistrates reverenced, the good rewarded, and
the bad punished. This they spoke to magnify the glory and flourishing estate
of their City. And indeed when the Chariot of a Christian Commonwealth is
moved upon these four wheels, and they also turn upon the axle-tree of holy
writ, we may fitly apply unto it that laudatory congratulation wherewith the
Psalmist salutes the Church, Ride prosperously because of truth and meekness,
and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things; thine
arrows shall be sharp in the heart of the Kings Psalm. 45.4.
enemies. For this verily comes to pass, when superior Powers make God's
written word the rule and level of their Government, and the honor and
observance of it the aim and end of the same. Whereas on the contrary, when
such higher Powers slight God's word so far forth as to omit to execute justice
by the right rules of it; and in room thereof dare substitute their own private
thoughts and affections as the balance by which to measure it forth; then are
they the very bane and blame, and shame of a Commonwealth; and like a canker
in a tree, which both disgraceth the beauty of it, and also corrodeth to the
utter mortification and destruction of the whole body of it, except it be pared
away. I have read, that ever in the first and best Councels (as in the Councels
of Chalcedon, Nice, and Ephesus) the holy Orthodox Fathers and Bishops were
wont to have the Bible placed on a desk, or such like convenient supporter in
the midst of the room before them, that by the sight thereof they might be put
in mind to conclude and determine nothing against the honor and contents
thereof. It were to be wished, that all in place of Magistracy and Judicature
would be pleased so far forth to follow the example of these grave and reverend
Fathers, as to have this Book of God, if not in their hands, or before their
eyes, yet at least in their minds and memories at all times, when they are
employed about the administration of justice and judgment; that it might be a
remembrance unto them to do nothing against the contents of it, as they desire
to escape the curses that are denounced in it against such as violate the
sacred laws and rules of it.

Secondly, As Princes and Rulers should protect, so Ministers should preach
this word, because it is God's; yea, Be instant in season and out of season,
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and 2 Timothy 4.2.
doctrine. For If the Lord God have spoken, who can but Amos 3.8.
prophecy. When the chief Priests and Rulers of the Jews forbad Peter and John
to teach any more the Gospel of Christ; they answered, We cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and Acts 4.20.
heard: The reason is premised in the precedent verse; namely, because they
were so commanded of God. For Apostles and Ministers their successors, are
Ambassadors for 2 Cor. 5.20.
Christ; And therefore may not unfaithfully conceal their embassy; but A
necessity is laid upon them; and woe is unto them if they preach not the 1 Cor.
9.16.
Gospel. And they are disposers of the mysteries of God; and it is required of
the disposers (says S. Paul) that a man be found 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
faithful. And great necessity there is of the faithful dispensation of this
Word by the Ministers thereof; as in regard of their duty to God who sends
them, so in respect of the good of men to whom they are sent. For it is the
food and physic of their souls, by which the spiritual life of grace is first
inspired, and ever after conserved in them. Hence is that speech of Moses to
the Israelites, Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you
this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do; all the words
of this law: For it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your Deuteronomy.
32.46, 47.
life. So that there is the same necessity of it to the conservation of the
life spiritual, as there is of food and physic to the maintenance of the life
natural: For though the words of men be but wind, and so can feed neither the
body nor the soul; yet God's words are both spirit and Joh. 6.63.
life; and so have an occult and hidden power in them above all other words,
enabling them to feed not the soul only, but even the body also, and that to
life eternal; and therefore are compared both to 1 Pet. 2.2.
milk, and strong Heb. 5.12, 13, 14.
meat; fit food both for young and old. Whence also is that sentence of the
wise man, The lips of the righteous feed Prove. 10.21.
many; that is, with God's word. And that saying in the Prophet Jeremiah, I
will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and Jer. 3.15.
understanding. And for this cause both our Savior charged Peter very strictly
to feed his John 21.15, 16, 17.
sheep, meaning with God's word: and S. Paul to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, Take heed (says he) unto your selves, and to all the flock over the
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own Acts 20.28.
blood. And S. Peter also those Elders to whom he writ, Feed the flock of God
which is among 1 Pet. 5.2.
you.

And again, though the words of men cannot heal, yet God's word can and does;
so says the Psalmist, He sends forth his word, and heals Psalm. 107.20.
them. Yea, The word of the Lord heals all things, says the wise Wisd. 16.12.
man. Which the Centurion believing said therefore to Christ, But speak the
word only, and my servant shall be Matthew. 8.8.
whole. I aim not here to prescribe one manner and measure of preaching to all;
for some are endued with more ample and excellent gifts, for the performance of
this work then others, and therefore have a greater task enjoined them then
others; For unto whom much is given, of him shall be much Luke 12.48.
required. But this I urge with the Apostle Peter, Let every man, as he has
received the gift, minister the same one to another, as good disposers of the
manifold grace of 1 Pet. 4.10.
God. For, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord Jer. 48.10.
negligently. And the unprofitable servant (who hides his Lord's talent) shall
be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Mat. 25.30.
teeth. I confess there be some such now in these times, as God himself
complained of by his Prophet Jeremiah, who ran about this important business
before they were Jer. 23.21.
sent; and so going without their errand, do ventilate their own fancies and
dreams, instead of preaching God's word. To these my exhortation is not
directed, as who need no spur to hasten them into God's house, but rather a
scourge to drive them out; as our Savior did with the money changers, and such
as bought and sold in the John 2, 14, 15.
Temple. But my desire is hereby to quicken both my self and other my fellow
laborers in the work of the Ministry, about our heavenly Father's business.
To which I will add but this one needful caution; which is, that we be careful
and watchful to preach both verbo and vita, both ore and opere, as well by the
example of our lives, as by the doctrine of our lips; according to the charge
S. Paul gave to Timothy and Titus, two Bishops of his own ordination; his
charge to Timothy was this, Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an
example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in 1 Timothy 4.12.
purity. And such like was his charge to Titus, In all things show thy self a
pattern of good Tit. 2.7.
works. This if we do not, we shall not only prefer and multiply new
indictments against our selves by every Sermon, (and so give the Lord numerous
evidences and testimonies from our own mouths, whereby to condemn us) but shall
bereave others also of the fruit and benefit of this divine ordinance; for who
will not nauseate and despise the counsel of that man, who acts contrary to the
advice and counsel that he gives unto another? And this our Savior intimates,
where he says, How will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out
of thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast
out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out
the mote out of thy brothers Mat. 7.4, 5.
eye. It Is out of question that the vigor and prevalence of preaching depends
much upon the good life of the Preacher, as which sets an edge upon that sword
of God's Spirit, and makes it more powerful to cut down the strong holds of
sin. And so on the other side it is as true, that the loose life of some
Preachers so dulls and bluts this sword, that it prevails little or nothing at
all against our spiritual enemies, sin and Satan, against which it is
brandished, but rebounds back and hurts themselves, like arrows shot at the
Sun, which wanting force to carry them to the mark intended, fall down again
upon the heads of them that shot them.

Thirdly, This doctrine urges upon all people in general a fourfold duty.

First, Seeing this Word is God's; therefore all should be studious of it, and
careful to learn it; for can we have a better teacher then God himself? or can
any instruct with better principles then he? For, The Lord gives wisdom; out
of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding, says the wise Prove. 2.6.
man. Hence is that commendation which Moses gives of God's Law to the
Israelites, to induce them to the study of it, and obedience unto it; Behold
(says he) I have taught you Ordinances and Laws, as the Lord my God commanded
me; keep them therefore and do them, for that is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these statutes,
and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people: For what
Nation is so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this
Law which I set before you this Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 8.
day? Hence did David learn to be wiser then his enemies, and to have more
understanding then his Psalm. 119.98, 99.
teachers. And hence are those earnest exhortations in it to the study of it;
as that of our Savior, Search the Joh. 5.39.
Scriptures. And that of the Apostle Paul, Let the word of Christ dwell in you
plenteously in all Colos. 3.16.
wisdom; with many such like. But most ample and emphatical are the wise
Solomon's descriptions of the excellency of this knowledge; and most plausible
and powerful his reasons to allure all to the study of it; and most
transcendently high his commendations that he gives of it, in the eight first
Chapters of the Proverbs; which because the Reader may easily find forth of
himself, I will omit to rehearse, and will allege only some reasons collected
thence, and out of other passages of Scripture, to manifest the great necessity
of learning and knowing this blessed Word of God, and to excite all persons of
all degrees and conditions to the serious and sedulous study of it. First,
Because this learning is the only true wisdom; for it, and only it, is able to
make a man wise unto 2 Timothy 5, 15.
salvation. Nay, it is life John 17.3.
eternal; and there is no wisdom without it. For so says the Prophet, The
wise men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken; lo they have rejected the
word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in Jer. 8.9.
them? Yea, all other wisdom is but foolishness to this; and all other
learning without this does but make men the more unhappy in the conclusion:
Whereas this sanctifies all other wisdom and learning, teaching men a holy use
of them both, and how to be bettered and benefitted by them. Hence is that
profound saying of S. Augustine, Infaelix homo, qui scit alia omnia, te autem
nescit; beatus autem, qui te scit, etiamsi illa nesciat; qui vero and te and
illa novit, non propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatus Aug. Confess.
lib. 5.
est. He is a miserable man (says he, speaking to God Almighty) that knows all
other things, but knows not thee: But he is happy who knows thee, though he
know nothing else. And he, who knows both thee and them, is not the happier for
them, but is only happy because he knows thee.

Secondly, Here is set up the Christians staff of comfort in the time of
trouble and in the hour of death; and which can be met withal nowhere else.
This is my comfort in my affliction, says David speaking Psalm. 119.50.
hereof: And again, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I
will fear no evil; for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort
Psalm. 23.4.
me: By which is understood this written word. And says the Apostle Paul,
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have Romans 15.4.
hope. And hence is that advice of the Prophet Isaiah to the people, to suck
the breasts of Jerusalems Isa. 66.11.
cousolations: For these breasts of Jerusalem are the two Testaments, the Old
Testament and the New; which are called the breasts of her consolation, because
they yield consolation to all such as suck the knowledge of them by reading and
meditation. And therefore as people would be comforted in poverty or
persecution, or in any trouble of this life, especially in the hour of death,
when it is most needful, it concerns them to be well versed in Scripture, for
it is the only storehouse of comfort; there is no true and lasting comfort to
be found but in this well; for here are those wells of salvation out of which
(it is said) we are to draw the waters of Isa. 12.3.
joy. Great need therefore have all Christians to be well acquainted with that
which must be their only comfort, when they stand most in need thereof.

Thirdly, Scripture is a Christians best piece of armor to defend him against
all the assaults of his spiritual enemies, sin and Satan, and all his band of
Heretics, and other nefarious and wicked men; For the Apostle setting down the
panoply or complete armor of a Christian, (wherewith he had need to be at all
times appointed) reckons up this as one principal part thereof; and calls it
the sword of the Ephesians. 6.17.
spirit. The wise man also in the Proverbs notably sets forth the usefulness
of it in this respect; says he, When wisdom enters into thine heart, and
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee; to deliver thee from the way of the evil man,
from the man that speaks froward things, who leaves the paths of
righteousness, to walk in the ways of Prove. 2.10, 11, 12, and 13.
darkness. Herewith our blessed Savior foiled Satan sundry Mat. ^.4, etc.
times. And herewith the Prophet David fenced himself against sin; so he says
himself, By the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the Psalm.
^.4.
destroyer. And again, Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin
against Psalm. 19.11.
thee. We therefore being in continual warfar, had not need to have this our
principal weapon to seek; for what else makes many take the foil so often? but
because they are unskilful in the word of righteousness.

Fourthly, By this Book we shall all be judged at the last day; and therefore
it concerns us to be well acquainted with the principal contents of it. That we
shall be judged by it, is affirmed by our Savior; He that rejects me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him; the word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge him in the last John 12.
day. And by the Apostle Paul, At the day when God shall judge the secrets of
men according to my Romans 2.16.
Gospel.

Lastly, Without some competent knowledge hereof, we can never have Christ, The
day star and Sun of righteousness (as he is 2 Pet. 1.19. Mal. 4.2.
called) arise in our hearts; for as before the Sun arises, it first sends up
its bright beams of light, as the harbingers of its approach; so before Christ
Jesus come into our souls, he first enlightens them with the glorious beams of
the knowledge of his Word; according to that speech of Peter, We have also a
more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star
arise in your 2 Pet. 1.19.
hearts: And that also of S. Paul, God that commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus 2 Cor. 4.6.
Christ. The Scripture is full of proofs for this, that Christ's Word must
first be in some measure learned of us and entertained by us, before he will
condescend to dwell with us: It Is therefore a most opacous error of an ungodly
assertion, to affirm that ignorance is the mother of devotion; which in
Scripture is so much condemned, and is made both the mother of error, Ye err
(says our Savior to the Sadduces) not knowing the Math. 22.29.
Scriptures, and the mother of many other sins: For S. Paul affirms that his
sins of blasphemy and persecution, and oppression of Christ's Church before his
conversion, were the product and brats of his ignorance; I was (says he) a
blasphemer, a pe^secuter, and injurious: But I obtained mercy, because I did it
1 Timothy 1.13.
ignorantly: And he informs the Ephesians, that the Gentiles were alienated
from the life of God, through the ignorance that was in Ephesians. 4.18.
them. And by experience it is found to be the mother both of will worship and
superstition. This Paradox some of the Church of Rome in former ages have not
blushed to utter for truth; and though now of late they would seem to disclaim
this irrational Paradox, yet covertly they adhere to it: For the Rhemists, in
their front of their Preface prefixed before their translation of the New
Testament, affirm it to be an erroneous opinion to hold that the Scriptures
were ordained of God to be read indifferently of all: And therefore the Council
of Trent took order, which was confirmed by supreme authority (say the same
Doctors in the same place, within a few lines after) that the holy. Scriptures
might not be read indifferently of all men, nor of any other then such as have
express license from their lawful Ordinary; Whereby it appears that they seek
to detain the Scriptures from the vulgar people, purposely to keep them in
ignorance: And to put a little gloss and color upon this their in justifiable
opinion and practice, the said Doctors afterward yield this reason for it;
Because presumptuous Heretics, mistaking or depraving in many places the true
sense of Scripture, draw from thence many pernicious errors; and many other
that are unlearned and unstable, pervert the same to their own destruction, as
S. Peter 2 Pet. 3.16.
teaches. And how weak a ground this is for them to presume from hence to
restrain the common reading of Scripture, I declare these two ways.

First, This Argument takes for granted, that the abuse of a good thing by
some, nulls and takes away the lawful common use of it from others: But this is
nothing so, for the word preached as well as read, is abused by many through
their corruption; and so becomes the savor of death unto death unto 2 Cor.
2.16.
them; and an occasion of their greater sin, as our Savior says, John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they
have no cloak for their sin. And yet this hinders not but that it must be
preached unto all, as our Savior has commanded; Go ye (says he to his
Apostles) into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every Mark 16.15.
creature. If indeed the Church knew who would pervert the Scriptures, she
might with better reason withhold them from such, but this she knows not, and
therefore is tied to hold them forth indifferently unto all.

Secondly, As all should learn, so all should believe this word, yea all this
word, because it is God's; for therefore every tittle of it must be John 17.17.
truth; and hence is it often called The word of truth, both in the Old Testament
and in the Psalm. 119.43. and Prove. 22.21. and Ephesians. 1.13. and Col. 1.5.
New: So that Till Heaven and Earth perish, one jot or one tittle shall in no
wise pass from the law, till all be Mat. 5.18.
fulfilled. The sons of men indeed are liars; so says the Psalmist, Surely men
of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the
balance they are altogether lighter then Psalm. 62.9.
vanity: So that there is neither any sure hold of their words, nor any certain
truth in them, that we may securely rely upon: But in God's word we may trust,
as altogether infallible; for it is impossible that he should lie or Heb. 6.18.
deceive. I will here omit the dilatation and enlargement of this point; which
I might enter into by the quotation of those many Texts of Scripture, which
yield very copious testimony to it, and will only endeavor to fasten this
exhortation upon all, with these two reasons. First, we see by experience of
the time past, that all things are fulfilled, and still come to pass daily
according to this word, and agreeably to the voice and tenor of it; which
therefore urges upon us a belief of the whole contents of it concerning things
yet to come; for if the event has proved it to speak truth in all things that
it has foretold should come to pass; then even common reason binds us to
believe it to utter the truth in all things also that it foretells are yet to
come: As (we see) experience of man's mortality by the extinction of former
generations, makes all undoubtedly believe the truth thereof for all succeeding
ages. Now that Scripture predictions have at all times come to pass in their
seasons, I could produce numerous attestations both out of the Old Testament
and the New; but because the most of them are well known of all, I will
rehearse but only two of special note; one of Joshua, and another of King
Solomon. Joshua in his time speaks thus to the children of Israel; Behold this
day I am going the way of all the Earth; and ye know in all your hearts, and in
all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the
Lord your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one
thing has failed Josh. 23.14.
thereof. This Joshua spoke purposely to fasten upon them a stable belief of
the fulfilling of such Scripture predictions as then were to come; as appears
from his words following in the next verse, where he adds these words,
Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are come upon you,
which the Lord your God, promised you; so shall the Lord bring upon you all
evil things, until be have destroyed you from off this good Land, which the
Lord your God has given you. The like attestation here of gave Solomon in his
time afterward; Blessed be the Lord (said he) that has given rest unto his
people Israel, according to all that he promised; there has not failed one
word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his 1 Kin.
8.56.
servant. Another reason that should urge all men to believe this Word is this,
because he that believes it not makes God a liar, so much as in him lies; in
that hereby he denies in his heart the truth of that which God has spoken: So
says S. John, He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record that God gave of his 1 John 5.10.
Son. And this is a grievous sin by God's own testimony, The house of Israel
and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, says the
Lord: They have belyed the Lord, and said it is not Jer. ^.11, 12.
he. Let men therefore take heed how they remain incredulous of this Word, or
any part of it, seeing it is a sin so dishonorable and offensive to Almighty
God: How weakly then do those men project for themselves, who believe so much
of this word as they like, so much as is pleasing and plausible to their carnal
desires and fleshly wisdom; namely all the gracious promises of mercy and
forgiveness of sin; but as for the conditions of these promises (which are
upon condition of repentance and faith in Christ, and new obedience) and the
judgments threatened against impenitent sinners, (wherein the Scripture is very
copious) which arride not their fleshly palats; these they reject, and put out
of their belief: But I beseech all such to consider that hereby they do by
consequence condemn themselves; for their apprehension and belief of the
promises of mercy, are a silent confession of their credence, that Scripture is
God's word; and this confession is a clandestine self condemnation for their
incredulity of all the other parts thereof; for the Scripture being God's Word
must necessarily speak truth in one part as well as another.

Thirdly, Seeing we are sure that Scripture is Gods word, it is wisdom for all
persons to join themselves to that Society of Christian professors which most
honors it, and holds best correspondence and agreement with it. Now because
the main controversy is between the Roman and the reformed Christian
professors, I will (as compendiouslly as I can, and as truly as I have read in
approved Authors of both sides) open and declare which of these ascribes most
honor and reverence to the Bible of God, and best accords and conspireth
with it. And first, For the honor done unto it of both: The reformed Churches
acknowledge it a most perfect and absolute rule of life, both for faith and
manners; to which nothing may be added, and from which nothing may be
detracted; according to the sentence of the holy Ghost in diverse places of the
same Book: Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from Deuteronomy. 4.2.
it. And again, Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a Prove. 30.6.
liar. And again, I testify to every man that hears the words of the
prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any man shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things which
are written in this Rev. 22.18, 19.
book. Again secondly, They acknowledge it the supreme judge under the holy
Ghost himself to decide and determine all doubts and questions in Religion; and
give it pre-eminence above all other sayings, writings, books or traditions:
And lastly, affirm it to be absolutely necessary in the Church, ever since the
first writing of it by God himself; as being that foundation whereon the Church
is built, as the Apostle teaches the Ephesians. 2.20.
Ephesians: And in these respects ascribe many glorious and magnificent (yet
decent and deserved) titles to it, which they learn and gather out of it; some
whereof I will mention: They call it, The Oracle of God; the Breath of the holy
Ghost; the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom; the Touchstone of truth; the Lanthorn
of Israel; the Mystery of Godliness, and the Lamb's Book; with many other such
like: Now by all this it appears that they give that due and condign honor,
veneration and observance to the sacred Scripture, which becomes the true and
sincere professors and defenders of it. See now on the other side, what honor
the Romanists exhibit to it, and in what estimation they have it: Sometime
they celebrate it with due veneration, and call it The true word of God, and a
most certain and safe rule of faith; so Bellarmine speaks of it, and affirms it
to be the mind of the Catholic Church, and the Council of Bell. de verbo Dei,
lib. 1. cap. 1. and 2.
Trent: Sometime again they undervalue and depress it, and detract from its
sublimity and excellence very indignly; and namely in these four particulars.

First, They teach that the proper and principal end of Scripture was not to be
the rule of faith, but to be a useful monitor (or remembrancer) to conserve and
nourish the doctrine received by preaching: This is out of Bellarmine word for
Bell. de verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 12.
word; And Pighius delivers this contumelius speech of Scripture to the same
purpose; Apostoli quaedam scripserunt, non ut scripta illa praeessent fidei and
religionis nostrae, sed potius ut subessent: The Apostles (says he) have
written certain things, not that their writings should be over our faith and
Religion, but rather that they should be under Pigh. Hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 2.
them: This is strange new divinity; for of old the Scripture was held to be
the rule, and Religion the thing ruled by it, both in the old Isa. 8.20.
Testament, and in the Mat. 22.29. and 2 Pet. 1.19.
New; and in the primitive times next after the Apostles, as were easy to
demonstrate, both out of the Fathers and Church-Histories: And therefore to
make Religion the rule, and Scripture to be ruled by it (as the Romanists now
of late times would have it, as appears by the forementioned sayings, and many
other such like, published by diverse of them) is an uncouth contumely and an
indigne disparagement to it, and an egregious derogation from the
super-excellency and majesty of it, and has indeed been the unhappy means of
the suffocation of a great part of God's truth in that Church.

Secondly, They affirm that the whole Christian doctrine, which is necessary to
be known either for faith or manners, is not contained in the Scriptures; and
that therefore there is required an unwritten word also beside the written
word; that is to say, Divine and Apostolical traditions, to be added to the
written word, to make it a perfect Bellar de verbo Dei lib. 4. cap. 3. and 4.
rule: And so they condemn the sacred Scripture of imperfection and
insufficiency. This assertion is repugnant to several assertions in Scripture;
for S. John says, That so much is written in Scripture as is sufficient to
work faith in us, and to bring us to everlasting life through the name of John
20.31.
Christ: and then surely there needs no more; for everlasting life is the
highest degree of perfection, that any creature can attain unto. And S. Paul
says, That the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto 2 Timothy 3.15.
salvation; and to make him perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good 2 Timothy
3.17.
works; Whence it follows, that seeing they make men perfect, they must needs
be perfect themselves; for no imperfect thing can perfect another: And our
blessed Savior himself has denounced a dreadful judgment against any that
shall go about to add unto it, as if it were not perfect; I testify (says he)
to every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this Book; If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this Rev. 22.18.
Book: as before was rehearsed.

Thirdly, They equalize Traditions with the holy Scripture, and dignifie them
with the same authority and reverence, so teaches the Council of Council. Trid.
decr. 1. session, 4.
Trent: And Melchior Canus says, That Traditions have greater force to refel
Heretics then the Canus loc. commun. Theo. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Scriptures. And Eckius says simply, That they are of greater efficacy,
without any limitation to that particular Eck. de fide and. justif. cap. 13.
effect: And yet we find in Scripture, that all humane traditions are to be
examined and tried by it, (as was declared before) and are all to be disallowed
and rejected, which hold not correspondence with the same; as is evident from
our Savior's reproof of the Scribes and Pharisees, for presuming to dispense
in some case with this written commandment, Honor thy father and mother; for
thereupon says our Savior unto them, Ye have made the commandment of God of
none effect by your Mat. 15.6.
tradition; and again he says, In vain they do worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of Mat. 15.9.
men: In both which sentences our Savior gives the written word pre-eminence
and authority above all traditions.

Fourthly and lastly, Bellarmine denies the Scriptures to have been simply
necessary or Bell. de verbo Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4.
sufficient: This if he had spoken in relation only to the time before the Law
was written by God himself, we should not have contested with him; but by his
further dispute about it, he declares his meaning to extend to the written word
since that time; which he manifests by a saying that he utters afterward,
(which I have truly transcribed to a letter, without either addition,
amputation or alteration of the least sylable thereof) Sane (says he) credere
historias Testamenti veteris, vel evangelia Marci and Lucae esse canonica
scripta, inno ullas esse divinas Scripturas, non est omnino necessarium ad
Bell. de Eccles. militant. lib. 3. cap. 14.
salutem: Surely to believe the hystories of the Old Testament, or the gospels
of Mark and Luke to be canonical Scriptures, yea that there be any divine
Scriptures, is not altogether necessary unto salvation. How dissonant this is
from the voice of Christ and his Apostle in the Gospel, is to be discerned in
many Texts, whereof I will recite but three. First our Savior commands to
search the Scriptures, because in them (or by them) men think to have eternal
John 5.39.
life. This he spoke in approbation of men's esteem of the Scriptures as the
means to bring them to everlrsting life. And S. John says, These are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through his John 20.31.
name. And S. Paul says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is
the power of God to salvation, to every one that Romans 1.16.
believes. From those Texts I reason thus, against the former affirmations of
Bellarmine; The means ordained and designed by God to any end, are altogether
necessary, in respect of us to the attaining of that end: But the Scriptures
are the means ordained and designed by God of faith and salvation, as the
former Texts declare; and therefore are altogether necessary in respect of us,
unto faith and salvation, and so consequently necessary so to be believed of
us; which refels the foresaid affirmations of Bellarmine, and declares them to
be very contumelious to the blessed Bible of God. Now in and for all these
forenamed respects, diverse great and esteemed Champions and propugners of the
Roman faith have not refrained to blemish the Bible with sundy inglorious and
ignominious titles: Eckius calls it a black Gospel, and an incky Eck. Enchir.
cap. 4.
Divinity. Pighius calls it a nose of Pigh. Hier. lib. 3. cap. 3.
wax; others a Lesbian, or leaden rule, an abbreviated word, the weak and false
castle of holy Brislow, Motive, 48.
Scripture, with other such like indecent epithetes: The^e the modern writers
amongst them seek to varnish over (as knowing it must needs blemish the purity
of their profession and verity of their Religion, thus to vilify God's most
holy Word) but the color and complexion which they daub them withal is so thin
and transparent, that it cannot hide the indecency and unseemlinesse of them
from a weak sight.

Now if the truth of Christian Religion may be judged by the honorable respect
yielded by the professors thereof to the rule of Christian Religion, which is
the Scripture, (as the Romanists confess after a sort, as has been already
declared) then does it appear by what has been said and proved, that the
Reformed Protestant Religion is the truest Religion, as which ascribes most
honor thereunto: For as when two women claimed the motherhood of one child,
wise Solomon quickly sifted out the truth, which was the true mother of it, by
the tender love and affection which the one showed unto it more then the 1 Kin.
3.27.
other. So in like manner may any wise man find forth by the same rule, which
is the true daughter of holy Scripture; whether the Roman or Reformed
Religion, (seeing both of them claim it as their mother) namely, by the tender
respect and due observance, wherewith it is followed by the one more then the
other.

In the next place; as the Reformed Religion is owned by the Scripture as the
genuine daughter thereof, by the due reverence and honor which it exhibiteth
unto it; so also and more especially, because it holds forth such doctrine as
is most consonant and agreeable thereunto: For (to omit the disquisition of
particular controversies between the said several professors, which would
require vast volumes to lay open) the Reformed Churches refuse not to be tried
by the splendent light of the written word, in any point of Religion
whatsoever. And this our blessed Savior makes a signal demonstration of the
professors of the truth; for (says he) He that does truth comes to the light,
that his deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought in John 3.21.
God: And that by light here our Savior means the Scripture, many other Texts
make it unquestionable, where this epithete is given unto it. David says of
it, Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my Psalm. 119.105.
path. Solomon says, The commandment is a lamp, and the law is Prove. 6.23.
light. S. Peter says, We have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark 2 Pet. 1.19.
place. Now on the other side the Romanists decline the decision and
determination of many points of Religion, that are controverted between us and
them, by Scripture, and fly to Tradition: And some of their writers in plain
terms confess, that some of their Tenets are such as cannot be defended by
Scripture: So says Canis. Catechis. cap. 5. de praecept. Eccles.
Canisius; and of this sort he reckons up these, the worship of Images, set
Fasts, Lent; the Mass, and Prayers and Offerings for the dead, with others
more, which yet he does not nominate: But some other of them, and by name
Petrus a Soto (a famous Author of their party) in his book against Brentius,
reheaseth sundry other; as the invocation of Saints, the primacy of the Bishop
of of Rome, the seven Sacraments, communion under one kind, indulgencies and
Purgatory; the beginning, author and original of which, he confesses cannot be
found in the sacred Scripture; as witnesses the learned Doctor Whittak. de
Script. perfect. cap. 5.
Whittaker. Now though they allege Scripture for some of these, lest they
should seem too much to slight it; yet their chief ground for them is
Tradition: Whereas therefore they decline the trial of some points of Religion,
which they hold by the written word (which yet they confess to be a most safe
rule of faith, as before has been declared) it proclaims to the world that
they are not such fast friends to it as they pre^end, nor hold such
correspondence with it, as all true and right Churches ever have done; and so
consequently that they are neither the only true Church of God, (as they vainly
and most untruly boast) nor yet such a Church, wherewith it is safe to have
communion. And as it is not safe to join hands with these, so neither with the
newly upstart Sectaries the Anabaptists; for I will undertake to demonstrate
(if my genuis fail me not) that both these sorts of Christian professors are
express contradictors of Scripture affirmations in diverse particulars: And I Will
begin first with the Papists as the elder house.

First, Our Savior says, When ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was
our duty to Luke 17.10.
do. They say, that a man may supererogate and do more then is commanded; (I
need not quote any particular poof for this, for it is a common tenet among
them) and how cross and contradictory this is to our Savior's speech, every
ordinary capacity may easily discern.

Secondly, The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says, that Marriage is
honorable in Heb. 13.4.
all: And S. Paul says, It Is better to marry then to 1 Cor. 7.9.
burn. Bellarmine says, Vtrumque est malum, and nubere and uri; immo pejus est
nubere, quicquid reclament adversarii; praesertim ei, quae habet votum Bell. de
Monach. lib. 2. cap. 3.
sclenne. Both are evil (says he) both to marry and to burn; yea it is worse to
marry, whatsoever the adversaries say to the contrary, especially for the
person who has made a solemn vow. That which the Scripture says is good and
honorable in all without exception, Bellarmine says, is evil, and especially
in some persons he condemns it as evil without exception, and with an
aggravation of the evil of it in some persons.

Thirdly, S. Paul calls concupiscense or lust sin; I had not known sin but by
the law; for I had not known lust, if the law had not said, Thou shall not Romans
7.7.
covet: and four or fives time more afterward in the same Chapter he calls it
sometime sin and sometime evil; and speaks so of it, with reference to himself
then a regenerate person. The Council of Trent says, Hanc concupiscentiam,
quod aliquando Apostlus peccatum appellat, sancta Synodus declarat, Ecclesiam
catholicam nunquam intellexisse peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in
ren^tis peccatum sit; sed quia ex peccato est, and ad peccatum inclinat; Siquis
autem contrarium senserit, anathema Conc. Trident. de Peccat. origin. sess. 5.
cap 10.
sit. This concup iscense (says the Council) which the Apostle sometime
calls sin, the holy Synod declares that the Catholic Church did never
understand to be called sin because it is truly and properly sin in the
regenerate; but because it comes from sin and inclines to sin; If any man
think the contrary, let him be Anathema, or accursed. By which decree they not
only contradict the Apostle, but implicitly also gainsay themselves; for if
concupiscence be the fruit of sin, (as they acknowledge) then it must needs be
sin till it be wholly cleansed, (which cannot be done here on Earth) For a
corrupt tree cannot bring forth good Mat. 7.18.
fruit. If these be not insalvable contradictions of holy Scripture, I shall
ingenuously confess the shallowness and deficiency of my understanding and
judgment, when any shall make it appear to the contrary.

And as Papists, so likewise Anabaptists contradict Scripture in sundry points:
And I will charge them with no more then what I have heard proceed from their
own mouths.

First, Scripture abundantly testifies that all men since Adam's fall, are by
birth stained with sin, (Christ only excepted.) How can he be clean (says
Bildad) that is born of a Job 25.4.
woman? The wicked are estranged from the womb, says Psalm. 58.3.
David. And the house of Jacob is called a transgressor from the Isa. 48.8.
womb. They impudently deny it, and say that children are not born in sin.

2. The Scripture says that faith is the gift of God; so says S. Paul to the
Ephesians, By grace ye are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves,
it is the gift of Ephesians. 2.8.
God: And to the Philippians, To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his Phil. 1.29.
sake. Where both faith and patience are affirmed to be given of God: This some
of them cotradict, and say, Faith is not the gift of God. And to evade the
contradiction, they distinguish between the habit of faith and the act of
faith; and so say, That the habit of faith indeed is the gift of God, but not
the act: But this distinction will not salve the contradiction; for the Apostle
afterward affirms both the habit and the act also of all grace to be given of
God; It is God (says he) which works in you both to will and to do of his
good Phil. 2.13.
pleasure: And elsewhere he says, There are diversities of operations; but it
is the same God which works all in all. 1 Cor. 12.6.


Thirdly, Scripture says, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my Prove. 20.9.
sin. And If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in 1 John 1.8.
us. Some of them say that a believer is free from all sin; which they affirm
not only in respect of the imputation of sin (for that is agreeable to
Scripture) but in respect of the inherency of it; which contradicts the former
Scriptures, and many other And that they speak this of the inherency or stain
of sin, one Mr. John Eaton has declared; who affirms, That he who beliveth
that Christ has taken away his sin, is as clean without sin as Christ Honycomb
of free justific. by John Eaton, cap. 3.
himself. And also one Mr. Randal, who delivered in a Sermon the like
blasphemous speech; namely, that it is as possible for Christ himself to sin, as
for a child of God to sin; as it is attested by the whole body of the Ministers
of Testimony to the truth of these Chr. page 16.
London. And my self heard one of that sect fay of himself, that he had no sin.

I will wind up this point with a short advertisment, and a short advice. The
advertisment is this, I shall desire all persons ^ence to take notice, how
signantly and notoriously false that arrogant ostentation is, which both these
now mentioned Sects blush not to ventilate; in calling themselves the only
Saints and Church of God upon Earth; for it was never heard nor read that God's
Church and Saints did gainsay and contradict his holy Word, as these do. The
Devil was the first that did so, as we read in the book of Genesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
verses.
Genesis; and some ungracious wretches in the Prophet Jeremiah's time did the
like, They belyed the Lord, and said it is not Jer. 5.12.
he. But God's Church and people in all ages and places have evermore assented
and submitted unto it.

The advice is this, That seeing Scripture is a most sure and safe rule of
faith; and that by the confession both of Papists, and the greatest number and
major part of Anabaptists; it is wisdom for all such as desire to walk by a
safe rule, to decline and desert all association and communion with either of
these Sects; as who gainsay and contradict it in diverse points of their faith,
as has been demonstrated; and to adhere to the professors of the reformed
Protestant Religion, and to hold communion with them; as who ascribe most
honor and reverence unto it, and hold best correspondence and agreement with
it, in all points of Christian belief.

Fourthly and lastly, This is not all that is needful, to know, honor and
believe Scripture, and profess the true Religion, which best agrees with it;
but we must sow the seeds of good works also in obedience to the precepts and
commandments of it, because they are God's commandments; or all the former
will be as fruitless unto us, as the husbandman's ground that is tilled and
dressed, but never sown; or the garment that is made, but never worn; or the
skill in humane arts and sciences, whether liberal or mechanical, that is
acquired, but never used: This practical part of Religion is so abundantly and
vehemently called for, as of absolute necessity to salvation in every leaf
almost of the Bible; that I will rehearse but these th^^re Texts; Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he
that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven; says our Math. 7.21.
Savior. And Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
souls; says Jam. 1.22.
S. James. And again, As the body without the spirit is dead, so the faith that
is without works is Jam. 2.26.
dead. I might amplify and adorn this point by the accumulation of a number of
elegant sentences to this purpose both out of Scripture, and out of the Fathers
and Philosophers, which both illustrate and necessitate the sa^e. Such as
these, Tantum scimus, quantum operamur; so much we know, as we practice; and
Non incepisse, sed perfecisse virtutis est: it is the office of virtue not to
begin well only, but to perfect what she begins. And Aristotle could say,
Virtus consistit in action; virtue consists in action: And again he says,
That man was born and brought into this world for these two ends, Intilligere
and agere; to understand and act; to understand what he should do, and to do
that which he understands; intimating thereby that knowledge is the inchoation,
and practice the perfection of the end of man's life; which drew from an Emperor
of Rome, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, this wise and gracious speech, That all his
ambition after learning, was but to make him wise; and all his desire of
wisdom, was but to make him good; meaning by the practice of it. But I know
it is the rationality and solidity, the strength and not the length of a
discourse, that best pleases, and most prevails: And therefore I will but
only propound certain rules necessary to be observed, that our obedience may be
an acceptable service to God, and profitable to our selves, and so conclude;
which I will reduce to these four heads.

First, We must see that our obedience be universal, an obedience to all the
commandments of God; this is everywhere called for, and inculcated both in the
Old and New Testament, so that I need not allege any proofs; and the reason
is, because all the commandments are so compiled and coupled together, and so
intricately employed and involved one within another, that whosoever violates
one, offers violence to all. So says S. James, Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of Jam. 2.10.
all. For as in a ship, or a net, or a fence, or a City wall, one breach made
is enough to endanger the loss of all that is contained in them, except it be
forthwith repaired: So is it with God's commandments; if we break through one,
we break out from God, and so rush into the snare of the Devil, who can hold us
too fast with one trap. The common objection of an impossibility to keep
perfectly all the commandments, is as commonly answered; that though legally
we cannot, yet evangelically we may: For out of the evangelical part of
Scripture we learn, that in and through Jesus Christ (by whom all our spiritual
sacrifices are made acceptable unto God, as the Scripture 1 Pet. 2.5.
teaches) the unfeigned purpose and sincere desire, and true endeavor, to
observe and do all that God commands us, is accepted of God for perfect
obedience; albeit we fail sometimes in some things beside our purpose, and of
infirmity: For as he lays no more upon us, in his great mercy then we are able
to bear, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.13.
teaches; so he looks for no more from us, then we are enabled to do by the
help of his assistant grace; but spares us as a man spares his own son that
serves Mal. 3.17.
him: who in his tender love to him, will require nothing from him above his
strength: According to that of the Apostle, If there be first a willing mind,
it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has
2 Cor. 8.12.
not.

Secondly, As our obedience must be entire and universal, so it must be
internal also and spiritual, as well as external and corporal; for God is a
spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and John 4.24.
truth: Humane laws look only at the external performance, and charge men no
further; so as if the outward act of obedience be done, the intent of the doer
is not questioned; as being made to rule only the outward man. But the divine
Law of God (the Apostle tells us) is Romans 7.14.
spiritual: and so requires the obedience of the heart, and of every power
and faculty thereof; as being made to order and moderate every motion of the
soul, as well as to regulate every action of the body; of many proofs for this
(that might be alleged) see these few. This day (says Moses to the people)
the Lord thy God has commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments; thou
shall therefore keep and do them with all thy heart and with all thy Deuteronomy.
26.16.
soul. And says Solomon, My son, forget not my law, but let thine heart keep
my Prove. 3.1.
commandments. And says S. Paul, The weapons of our warfar are not carnal,
but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down
imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of 2 Cor.
10.4, 5.
Christ.

Thirdly, Obedience must be spontaneous, a willing and cheerful service. It Is a
sentence of a learned Divine, Nemo invitus been facit, etiamsi bonum est, quod
facit: No man does well, that does any thing unwillingly, though that be good
which he does. We our selves dislike grudged service either from our children
or servants; and then God must needs be much more displeased with it from us;
because we owe him infinitely more obedience then we can here in this life
perform unto him; and therefore that little which we yield him, had need be
free and cheerful. We read in the Book of Exodus, that when God commanded the
Israelites to contribute to the building of the Tabernacle, Moses was directed
to take their offerings that gave them willingly with their Exodus 25.2.
hearts. This made David give this charge to his son Solomon, And thou Solomon
my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart,
and with a willing 1 Chro. 28.9.
mind: And himself to promise God, to sacrifice freely unto Psalm. 54.6.
him: And to profess his delight in his Psalm. 119.143.
commandments. This is often required also elsewhere in the word of God; If ye
be willing and obedient (says the Lord) ye shall eat the good of the Isa. 1.19.
Land: And God loves a cheerful giver, says the 2 Cor. 9.9.
Apostle.

Fourthly and lastly, Obedience must be constant, continued unto the end
without giving over, or it is frustrate and lost: so says our Savior, No man
having put his hand to the Plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of
Luke 9.62.
God: For the righteous bring forth fruit in old Psalm. 92.14.
age. Hence are th^se and many such like sentences of Scripture; Blessed are
they that keep judgment, and do righteousness at all Psalm. 106.3.
times: And He that shall endure to the end, the same shall be Mat. 24.13.
saved: And We are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we might
serve God without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days
of our Luke 1.74, 75.
life. I will close up all with that exhortation of S. Paul to the Corinthians;
Therefore my beloved brethren, be we steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, and so our labor shall not be in vain in the 1 Cor.
15.58.
Lord. So be it.

FINIS.
A DISCUSSION AND DECISSION OF SOME GREAT CONTROVERSIES IN RELIGION: BEING An
Antidote against some Erroneous Pamphlets.

Published of late, to the suppression of God's Truth; The Contents whereof
follows in the next Page.

By THO. GERY, B.D. and Rector of Barwell in Leicestershire.

Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1.
LONDON, Printed for N. Webb and W. Grantham. 1657.

The Contents.
1. Controversy. About God's election of men to eternal life and salvation;
whether or no it be grounded upon the foresight of their faith and obedience.
2. Controversy. About the universality of Christ's Redemption. 3.
Controversy. About the power of Man's free will. 4. Controversy. About the
Merit of good works. 5. Controversy. About Original sin. 6. Controversy.
About Tithes.
A Preface to the Reader.
HAving a Pamplet accidentally put into my hands, twisted of inconsequences,
incongruities, and misapplications and depravations of holy Scripture;
entitled (The order of causes; Of God's foreknowledge, election and
predestination; and of man's salvation or damnation) I thought I might do a
charitable work to detect the impostures of it; Especially considering that it
had gotten some entertainment with some persons within mine own charge and
cure. For albeit there be little hope of prevailing with these false teachers
(in these times especially, which have so long connived at their erroneous and
seditious courses) to renounce their errors, though never so fairly and fully
confuted; as who have resolved to hold the conclusion, whether the premises be
true or false; (which every Novice in Logic knows to be an absurdity to be
hissed at) yet may this detection of their falcies in some measure prevent the
further diffusion and spreading of their pernicious errors; which is the fool
end, wherefore these plain ensuing lines were hastily compiled and penned. And
in this regard the courteous Reader is entreated to vouchsafe a candid and
benevolent construction of them; as which, upon more mature deliberation, might
either have been kept private, or appearing in public, might happily have
been clad in a more sightly dress; which is the humble request of

A Friend and Servant to all that follow the truth in love, THOMAS GERY.

IT has ever been the artifice and deceitful dealing of Heretics, to pick
out some such Texts of Scripture, wherewith to cloak their errors, as by their
false interpretation of them (in not comparing them with other Texts of
Scripture treating of the same subject) might afford some color and
countenance unto them.

Thus the old Serpent (the first deviser of this fallacy) dealt with our
blessed Savior, when he tempted him in the Wilderness; he alleged a piece of
Scripture out of Psalm. 91.11. where it is said, He shall give his Angels charge
over thee, to keep thee, and skips over the next words, in all thy ways, and so
goes to the 12. verse, as knowing that the words which he left out, would
quite alter the Text from that purpose for which he alleged the same. And thus
deal the Heretical Sectaries and Separatists that are of late started up; They
allege some sayings of Scripture, which, (considered by themselves without any
reference had to other Texts of Scripture, which afford light to the right
meaning of them) seem at the first superficial view of them, to speak something
for them, about some of their erroneous Tenets; whereas compared with other
sayings of Scripture, where the same point is more fully and plainly expressed,
they make nothing at all for proof of that for which they are alleged, as
shall be discovered in some particulars in this ensuing Treatise.

Amongst a Fardle of their palpable and prodigious Errors (some whereof are
utterly unworthy the refutation, being manifest contradictions of holy
Scripture; As their denial of Faith to be the gift of God; which I have heard
to proceed out of the mouth of diverse of no small esteem amongst them with
incredible impudence, I have here undertaken the confutation of these six, (of
which some are Popish) which I find in the fornamed book, and in another which
I shall hereafter mention.

1. They affirm, That God's election of men to salvation, is from his
foresight of their Faith and Obedience: Or (as some of them phrase it) from
his foresight of their Sanctification and Good Works. 2. That Christ's
Redemption is universal, extending it self to all men in the World,
indiscriminatim, indifferently. 3. That men have Free Will to repent and
believe, and so may be saved if they will. 4. That Good Works, or Obedience,
are meritorious causes of salvation. 5. That children are not born in sin. 6.
That the payment of Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel, is not agreeable to
Scripture.
Now that these are false Tenants, not justifiable from Scripture, but
repugnant unto it; I shall (I hope) make manifest to all that are not biased
with prejudice.

And because I am not to enter the Lists and contest with pertinacious
Adversaries, who sometime will neither hear right Reason, nor yield to
Scripture, but as they themselves shall expound it: It will be expedient for me
to premise certain Theological conclusions or principles (which all Orthodox
Divines, unanimously and univocally have acknowledged to be undoubted Truths)
as Praecognita, and Canons to have recourse unto, for the decision and
determination of any Controversy as need shall require; which if they deny to
assent unto, they are not to be disputed with, as the proverb speaks, Contra
negantem principia non est disputandum: There Is no disputation to be held with
him that will deny the principles of Art.

The Principles I think fit to premise are these four:

1. That the Canonical Scripture is (...), that is, authentical and creditable
of it self.

2. That there is no contradictions in the Canonical Scripture.

3. That the same makes (and so by consequence allows to be made) distinction
between things that sometime in Scripture have the same denomination. This
appears by many instances in Scripture, whereof I will name these three, Fear,
Faith, and Sorrow.

First, About Fear; the Scripture mentions a fear which is gracious and godly
(which the learned have termed Filial;) and a Fear which is graceless (which
the learned have termed Servile;) of this we have an example in 2 Kings 17.33,
34. where it is said of the Babylonians in the former verse, that they feared
God; and then in the latter verse, that they feared him not. Whence it is
evident that a distinction must be made of the fear of God; whereof some is a
Gracious Fear, and some a Graceless; otherwise there would be a contradiction
between the two verses, which Scripture admits not.

Secondly, About Faith, The Scripture does distinguish it into these two sorts,
namely a Faith that has Works, and a Faith that is without works, which it
also calls a dead faith, James 2.17. Faith, if it have no Works, is dead
being alone.

Thirdly, About Sorrow, The Scripture speaks of a godly sorrow for sin, and a
worldly sorrow, in 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation,
but the sorrow of the World works death. Hereby it is clear, that a
distinction is sometimes to be made betwixt things that have the same
denomination.

The fourth Principle which I shall premise is this, That seeming
contradictions in Scripture are so to be expounded by help of other Texts
(either speaking of the same point or otherwise) that they may symphonize and
accord together. Which help the Scripture affords in one place or other.

If our Adversaries will yield to be tried about the forementioned
Controversies by these old Canons (which have been universally received for
undoubted truths by all Christian Churches in primitive times, when the waters
ran clearest from under the Threshold of the Sanctuary) I shall adventure to
bear the disgrace, if I do not convince them of error about each Controversy,
that I have before named.

The first Controversy handled. About Election.
THeir first Error that I shall undertake to confute, is their assertion, That
God's election of men unto salvation, is grounded upon his foresight of their
Faith and Obedience, or sanctification and Good Works; That is, that he
electeth such and such men to life and salvation, because he foreseeth that
they will believe and walk in obedience to his Commandments.

This Assertion I shall prove to be an error by these four Arguments.

The first Argument. If men shall therefore believe, because they are elected
and ordained to eternal life, then they are not elected and ordained to eternal
life because they will believe. This consequence cannot be denied by any
intelligent man.

But men shall therefore believe, because they are elected and ordained to
eternal life; and therefore are not elected and ordained to it, because they
will believe.

The Assumption I prove out of Acts 13.48. where it is said, That as many as
were ordained to eternal life believed. Here Faith is made the fruit and
effect of election to eternal life, and therefore cannot be the cause of it;
for nothing can be the cause and effect too, of one and the same thing.

My second Argument is this. If men be elected or chosen that they may be holy,
then their election must needs be the ground and cause of their holiness and
sanctification. But men are elected that they may be holy; so says the
Scripture, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. Therefore
Election is the ground and cause of holiness or sanctification, and not
holiness the ground and cause of election.

The third Argument. If the good pleasure of God's will be the ground and first
cause of men's election and predestination to salvation, then God's foresight
of their Sanctification and Good Works, cannot be the first cause and ground
thereof. This consequence is undeniable.

But the good pleasure of God's will is the first cause and ground of men's
election and predestination to salvation.

Therefore, God's foresight of their sanctification and Good Works cannot be
the first cause and ground thereof.

The A sumption I prove from these two Texts of Scripture, (passing by many
other to the same purpose) Romans 9.11. S. Paul there affirms, That the purpose
of God, according to Election, stands not of Works, but of him that calls.
Where works are denied, and Gods will affirmed to be the cause of election, And
Ephesians. 1.5. and again verse 11. the good pleasure of God's will, is made the
ground and cause of men's election to salvation. The words in the fifth verse are
these; Having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. And the words in the 11.
verse are these; In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things after the
council of his own will.

If the Adversaries answer, that Election may be according to the good pleasure
of God's will, and yet the good pleasure of his will may not be the cause of
Election.

To this I reply, That the Apostle makes it plain in the 11. verse, that he
speaks of the good pleasure of God's will, as the cause of Election, by the
addition of these last words in the verse, Who works all things after the
counsel of his own will. For if he works all things after the counsel of his
own will, then Election is necessarily one of those things which he works
after the council of his own will; and therefore the counsel of his own will
must needs be the cause thereof.

The fourth Argument is this, If Good Works be no causes of salvation, then
neither of election unto salvation; this is plain, because Election is the
cause of Salvation.

But Good Works are no causes of salvation, and therefore no causes of Election.

The minor Proposition or Assumption is proved by Ephesians. 2.8, and 9, verses,
where the Apostle says, By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast.

And again, Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy Ghost.

The Advesaries answer, That these and such like Texts are spoken of works
before regeneration. To which I reply, that in Tit. 3.5. the Apostle expressly
nominates works of righteousness, and denies them to be any causes of
salvation; but there be no works of righteousness before regeneration; for
then an evil tree should bring forth good fruit, which our Savior denies,
Matthew. 7.18. And therefore even good works after regeneration are in Scripture
denied to be any causes of salvation. Hereof I shall have occasion to speak
more largely hereafter; and therefore will not insist any longer in the
illustration of it.

Before I proceed to the next Controversy, I will display the weak
argumentation of Mr. Henry Haggar, for defense of election from foreseen
sanctification; by his straining Scripture from its proper sense, and in not
comparing it with other Scripture, where the genuine and proper sense is
clearly explained. He toils himself to prove the said point, because it is said
in 2 These. 2.13. that men are chosen to salvation through sanctification of the
Spirit; and therefore thence collects that they are not chosen before they are
sanctified by the Spirit, which is a very inconsequent collection; for it does
not follow, that because men are choto salvation through sanctification of the
Spirit, that therefore sanctification of the Spirit is the cause of their
election, or that therefore it precedes their election; but that therefore
sanctification is a necessary antecedent, way and means, through which they
must be brought to salvation, whereto they are elected: as the way to any
place, is not the cause of a man his coming thither, but only a necessary
requisite to be observed of him. And thus this Text fitly agrees with other
Texts of Scripture, as that before mentioned, Ephesians. 1.4. where it is said, That
we are chosen, that we should be holy; which Text he has waved and never
mentioned at all; but as Satan alleged the words of the Psalmist, leaving out
a part, as knowing it would disclose his wresting and perverting the true sense
of the other Text which he alleged. And so he neglects the premised rule of
expounding Scripture by Scripture; which is of necessity to be observed to find
out the true sense and meaning of any Text that is ambiguous, or may be
variously expounded.

He alleges also the 1 Pet. 1.2. where it is said, That men are elected
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
Spirit; Whence he collects, that God knows men first before he does elect them.

To this I answer, First, That God's prescience or foreknowledge of men, and
his election of them, are in him together, and one and the same act; for all
his attributes are himself, and whatsoever is said to be in him is himself, as
it has ever been acknowledged by all learned Divines. But in humane
apprehension of them, his decrees precede his prescience, for he does not
decree things to come, because he foresees them, but foresees them because he
has decreed them; as is colligible from S. Paul's speech before named, Ephesians.
4.11. where he affirms that God works all things according to the Counsel of
his own will; whence it is manifest, that his own will is the first cause of all
his works, and not his prescience, though his prescience do concur with his
will.

Secondly, I answer, That the foreknowledge of God there mentioned is a
foreknowledged with approbation; for the original word, which is (...) properly
signifies fore knowledgement; (as all men of learning know) which implies a
concurence of his election and approbation with his foreknowledge of men; and
not any precedence of his knowledge before his approbation and election of them.

And this affords an answer also to that place which is brought by some of the
adversaries for defense of election from foreseen faith and holiness; in Romans
8.29. where it is said, that whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son; where the Greek verb, which is (...)
signifies properly foreacknowledged; which intimates an election either with it
or before the foreknowledge; and besides the words following lead to this
sense, in that the Apostle expresses that the predestination which he
mentions as a sequel of God's foreknowledge, is a predestination to be
conformed to the image of his Son, that is, to be holy as Christ is holy. A
predestination to holiness cannot be a predestination for holiness, as was
showed before. He alleges but one Text of Scripture more about this point
(which is in the fourth Page of his discourse, and which he abuses very
sufficiently as he does the two former) and that is Ephesians. 1.11. and 12.
verses; where the Apostle speaks of himself and others, that they were
predestined, that they should be to the praise of God's glory, who first
trusted in Christ. Whence he ridiculously collecteth, that they did first trust
in Christ before they were predestined. Whereas the priority or precedence of
their faith there mentioned by the Apostle, has no relation at all to their
predestination in Grammatical construction; but to the faith of the Ephesians,
that were Greeks or Gentiles, and called to the faith of Christ after Paul and
the other Apostles that were Jews; as appears evidently by the next verse,
where the Apostle adds, In whom also ye trusted after that ye heard the word of
truth. As if he should have said, In whom we trusted first, and then ye
afterward; which agrees also with other Scripture, as Romans 1.16. where the
Apostle says, that the Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

The second Controversy. Of the Universality of Christ's Redemption.
TO decide and determine this controversy, I must first state the question
aright between us and the adversaries.

To speak nothing of the word (All) which sometimes is put for all sorts of
men, and sometimes for all particular men of all sorts. Seeing we acknowledge
that Christ died not only for all sorts of men, but for all of all sorts, that
do repent and believe.

The controversy depends upon these three Quaeries. 1. Whether Christ died for
unbelievers at all or not.

2. Whether he died for them in as full and ample sense as for believers.

3. In what sense he died for them; and in what sense he died not for them.

To the first quaery or question, I answer affirmatively (for my part) that
Christ died for unbelievers in some sense.

To the second I answer negatively, scil. that he died not for unbelievers in
as full and ample sense as for believers; which I prove from Scripture three
ways. First, Because it is said sometime in Scripture, that he died for many as
well as for all; as Isa. 53.12. He bare the sins of many. Matthew. 20.28. He gave
his life a ransom for many. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many. Which expressions import, that he died not for all alike; but for
many in one sense, and for all in another; or else the expression of his dying
for many were needless, in that it is so often expressed that he died for all.
Secondly, Because it is often said, that he died for his Church; as John 10.15. I
lay down my life for the sheep. Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives, even as
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Which imports also that
he died for all men in one sense, and for his Church in another. Thirdly,
because the Scripture has (in terminis) in express words, put a difference
between his being a Savior to all men, and his being a Savior to them that
believe; as in 1 Timothy 4.10. We trust in the living God, who is the Savior of
all men, specially of those that believe. From whence I argue thus; Christ died
for all men, as he is a Savior of all men; but he is a Savior of all men in a
different sense and sort; namely generally of the universality of men, and
specially of his Church; (witness the distinction made by the Apostle in the
forecited Text) Therefore he died for all men in a different sense and sort;
namely in one sense and sort for the universality of men; and in another sense
and sort for the particularity of his Church.

To the third Quaery I answer; That he died for all wicked men and unbelievers,
in these two senses according to Scripture. 1. As suffering a satisfactory
punishment for the sins of all the men in the world, so as they are not left
destitute of the means of remission of sins and of salvation, according to the
words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.6. There is one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, a testimony in due
time. And again, Heb. 2.9. the Apostle says that He tasted death for every
man. 2. He died for them upon condition of their faith and obedience, according
to these Scriptures, John 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And Heb. 5.9. He became the author of eternal salvation unto
all them that obey him. And so in like manner it is the affirmation of sundry
other Texts of Scripture.

But then he died not for them with an intention and purpose to give them grace
to repent and believe, and so to bring them to salvation; which appears by
Scripture to be a clear truth these two ways. 1. Because Scripture has
revealed abundantly God's purpose to the contrary, namely to save some men, but
not all; The proofs whereof are so numerous, that I need not quote any. 2.
Because if Christ died for all men, with an intention and purpose to save all,
then either all shall be saved (which is contradicted by a hundred places of
Scripture) or else Christ's purpose may be altered: But his purpose cannot be
altered or disappointed; and therefore he died not for all, with a purpose to
save all. That his purpose cannot be altered I prove, both because he can
neither alter it himself, nor can any other alter it. That he cannot alter it
himself is often taught in Scripture, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Jam.
1.17. With him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Neither can any
other alter it, for his purpose is immutable, and his will irresistible, Isa.
46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And 43.13. I will
work, and who shall let it? And Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his will?

Thus then from the premises already sufficiently proved, I conclude and
determine the controversy thus: That Christ died for all the men in the world
in these two senses. First, As paying by his death a sufficient ransom for the
sins of them all; which the Scripture calls (...), a price of redemption
several times. Secondly, That he died for them all upon condition of their
faith and obedience; but died not for all men with purpose to bring all
actually to salvation. And so the old distinction of Christ's dying for all
men, either sufficientur or efficaciter, sufficiently or effectually (as it may
be understood and applied) stands still upon its basis and feet; and
challenges all the desertors and rejecters of it to frame a more fit and
proper distinction between Christ's dying for all men, and his dying for his
Church. Seeing a distinction between them is to be made (as has been already
declared) by testimony of Scripture.

The third Controversy, which is of all other the most difficult and knotty.
WHether an unregenerate man has power to repent and believe, and so be saved,
if he will.

Mr. Haggar answers hereto in the affirmative, in Page the 25. of his
forementioned discourse. I answer to it in the negative; denying that a
natural man has power to repent and believe by the energy or strength of his
own free will, but needs the help of the special preventing grace of God, ere
he can be converted, or he cannot convert himself.

For the fuller opening and enodation of this controversy; and because therein
I have more learned adverseries to deal with then Anabaptists, I will first
speak out what the will of an unregenerate man is able to do toward his
conversion, without the help of God's special efficacious grace, or preventing
grace (as the learned call it.)

And then secondly, How far it cooperates with God's grace in his conversion.

About the first, notice is to be taken of a threefold liberty of Will; namely,
The liberty of Nature, the liberty of Grace, and the liberty of Glory: Of
which, though these two last we lost by Adam's fall, yet the first was not
lost, but remains still; so as by virtue thereof the Will has liberty to will
or nill without compulsion or constraint, and that not only in natural and
civil actions, but also in moral and ecclesiastical. In moral actions to
practice virtue, as Justice, Temperance, Liberality, etc. And so to do some
things commanded in God's Law, as both experience shows, and Paul testifies,
Romans 2.14. where be says, That the Gentiles did by nature the things contained
in the Law. In Ecclesiastical actions an unregenerate man has liberty also,
namely, to perform the duties of God's worship and service for the outward act;
as to come to Church, hear and read the word of God, pray, partake of the
Sacraments, do works of charity, and confer about Religion and the doctrine of
faith, as common experience shows; all which are good preparatives to, and
ofttimes efficacious means of regeneration and conversion. Yet must this
liberty of Will about all these actions, either of doing them, or leaving them
undone, be understood with this caution; so far forth as God shall be pleased
to afford both the concurrence of his general and divine providence, (which
enableth all creatures to motion and action) and the concurrence of his common
restraining grace, which in some measure, more or less, he affords
promiscuously to all sorts of men, both regenerate and unregenerate.

Thus far an unregenerate man is able to move and bend himself toward the work
of his conversion by the natural liberty of his will.

About the second, namely, How far forth man's will co^perates with God in his
couversion: I will first rehearse the Adversaries assertion, (amongst which the
Papists are chief, and leaders to the rest) and then the assertion of the
Reformed Churches. The Papists say, That the will of man before regeneration
can by the help of the exciting grace of God (though not without it as Pelugius
said) will its own conversion; and either accept or reject God's grace of
internal vocation; and so cooperates with the grace of God in the first act of
conversion. So teaches the Council of Trent, and Bellarmine in his book de
gratia and libero Arbitr. lib. 6. cap. 15.

This opinion the Reformed Churches disrellish and reject as dissenting from
holy Scripture, and assert the point thus: That the will of man is a mere
patient, and not agent at all in the first act of conversion; and God's grace
is the sole efficient cause thereof; and the will but subjectum recipiens, the
subject receiving the grace of conversion. But in all other good acts following
the first, man's will so renewed cooperates with the grace of God. And this was
the learned S. Augustine his assertion, as it is expressed (in the 17. chap. of
his book, de gratia and libero arbit.) in these words, Vt velimus, Deus sine
nobis operatur; quum autem volumus, and sic volumus ut faciamus, nobiscum
cooperatur. To will God works without us; but when we do will, and so will that
we act, God coworks with us.

That this latter assertion is the truth, I shall make it appear by these three
Arguments.

The first Argument.
AS is a dead man in his Revivification or Restoration to life, so is a
natural man to his Regeneration or Conversion; which is his Restoration to
spiritual life.

But a dead-man can be no cause of his own Revivification or Restoration to
life.

And therefore a natural man can be no cause of his Regeneration, or
Restoration to spiritual life.

The assumption no man that has reason can deny; for there is an impossibility
that a dead man should cooperate to his own Revivification. The major, or first
Proposition is justified by those many Texts of Scripture, where it is affirmed
of men unregenerate, that they are dead in sin; as Luke 9.60. Let the dead bury
their dead; id est, The dead in sin, their bodily dead. And Luke 15.24. This my
Son was dead, id est, in sin. And Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were
dead in trespasses and sins. And Col. 2.13. And you being dead in your sins,
and the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him,
having forgiven you all trespasses.

And this very argument (though not in the same words, yet to the same purpose
and effect) Bellarmine uses against the Pelagians in his Lib. 6. and cap. 5.
De gratta and Libero Arb. adding only this clause to the Assumption, That a
dead man neither does nor can dispose himself to life, unless he receives some
vital power from him that revives him; which (it appears) he therefore added,
lest the argument should reflect, and so be retorted upon himself; who
afterward, in the 10. Chapter of the same book, attributes power to man's will
to work with God in his first conversion: the will being but first aided and
excited by the preventing grace of God; by which he means (as it is there very
evident) a grace preceding the work of conversion. But that the argument, which
he there uses against Pelagius, does confute himself; in that the clause which
he has added to the Assumption, does not turn away the edge of the argument
from himself, I make it plain thus; A dead man can receive no vital power from
him that revives him, till he have first received soul and life, because there
can be no vital power but in a living subject; it being a proper adjunct of a
living subject quarto modo. If then he must receive soul and life before he can
have any vital power, then cannot his vital power cooperate to his
revivification, but must of necessity be a consequent and an effect of his
enlivening. And so in like manner the case is the same with a man spiritually
dead: He must first be revived by God before he can have any vital power in him
to work with the grace of God; and therefore can be no cause at all of his
revivification and conversion, in respect of the first act thereof.

The second Argument.
IF all the powers of man's soul be so depraved, that even the chiefest of them,
namely, his Wisdom (a power consisting both in the understanding and will) be
opposite to the Will of God, and the Law of God; and so opposite that it cannot
be made conformable and subject to the Law of God, while it is the wisdom of
the flesh; that is, till it be renewed and changed from fleshly wisdom to
spiritual wisdom; then can there be no power in man's will whereby to co-work
with God in the first act of his conversion.

But all the power and faculties of man's soul are depraved, etc.

Therefore there can be no power in man's Will to co-work with God in the first
act of his Conversion.

The consequent in the first Proposition is clear to any intelligent person,
for if the wisdom of the flesh (which leads and guides the Will) cannot
conform and be subject to the Law of God, while it is the wisdom of the flesh;
then cannot the will, which is guided by it, cooperate with the will of God
while it is the will of the flesh; and therefore by undeniable consequence must
be renewed before it can cooperate with his will.

And the Assumption is the express affirmation of Scripture, Genesis 6.5. Every
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil continually. And Romans
8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not subject unto
the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

The third Argument.
MY third Argument shall be the quotation of those many Texts of Scripture,
where the cooperation of man's Will with God's Grace in the first work of
regeneration is clearly excluded; and the work attributed to God alone. For
brevitie sake I will quote but some of the clearest and most convincing proofs;
and omit the rest, which are very numerous.

John 1.13. The Spirit of God speaking there of regenerate persons, affirms
that they are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. In which words the Spirit of God expressing a perfect
distribution of all the powers and forces that are or can be in man, excludes
them all from this work, and ascribes it to the alone will of God; for it
neither proceeds from the blood of man; that is, from any prerogative of
natural propagation or generation, which was wont to be the Pharisees vain brag
and oftentation, We are Abraham's peed; for a which they were sharply reproved
by John Baptist, Matthew. 3.9. Nor does it proceed from the will of the flesh;
that is, from the natural strength of man's corrupt will: nor yet from the will
of man; that is, of such a man, whose corrupt will is corrected, bettered and
amended, either by the help of the common grace of God, or by the acquisition
of humane learning, or by his own wise observation and experience; (for this
force the Greek word (...) carries with it, which is here used; and so in like
manner does the Latin word uir, by which it is also translated in the Latin)
from none of these forces in man does this work proceed (and these are all the
forces in man's will) but they are all excluded, and God alone is made the
Author and Procreant cause thereof.

A second testimony that I shall produce for proof of this Truth, is in Ephesians.
2.8, 9, and 10 verses, where the Apostle speaks thus to the Ephesians; By grace
ye are sa^ed through faith; and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God:
not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. In which words the Apostle strives to annihilate our selves about
this work, and to take away all pretenses of our cooperation with God therein.
For first, He says, It Is not of our selves; and then he says, It Is not of
works, lest any man should boast: but there were matter of boasting, if our
selves were co-workers with God herein. And then he adds (to remove all
scruple about it) that we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. Where note, that he does not say, his workmanship renewed or
repaired (though that be true too) but his workmanship created. The Apostle (as
it may seem) did pick out this word on purpose (which he again also uses,
speaking of this work in the 4 Chapter following, and 24. v. his words are, Put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness;) that he might altogether exclude all cooperation herein with God on
our part; for to create is the proper act of God; and no creature can have any
hand therein.

There be many other pregnant and punctual proofs of Scripture for this point:
As Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you a heart of flesh. If God make all new, and take away all the old, then is
there none of the old left to help to make it self new.

Philip. 2.13. It Is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure. Therefore the Will works not, till God first work upon it.

2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God. If we be not sufficient of our selves to
think that which is good; then not to will it, for, Voluntas sequitur
intellectum; the Will follows the Thought.

Jam. 1.18. Of his good will begat he us by the word of truth: If of his own
will, then not by help of our will.

But to avoid prolixity and tediousness (which I ever disliked) I will rest
satisfied with the quotation of those few proofs of Scripture which I have
already cited, pretermitting a number more of like sort, as hoping they may
satisfy the unprejudiced Reader, because they are so clear and convincing.

I have not yet done with this Controversy, but have something more to say
about it: And that is, to invalidate the main Argument or objection which is
brought by them of the Adversary part against this truth, (for I read of no
other of any force) which is this:

It Is said by them, That men are called upon in Scripture to turn to God very
often; which if they have not power of themselves to do, the commandment is
unjust and needless; for Nemo tenetur ad impossible.

To this I return a five-fold solution or answer.

First, That though we have no power so to do now, as we are fallen in Adam;
yet did God give us so much grace in our first creation, as would have empowered
us hereunto, if we our selves had not lost it: And therefore is it no severity
or injustice for God to require that at our hands, which he once gave us power
to do, though now we cannot do it, because we our selves have made our selves
unable to do it, and not God.

And here I desire the Reader to take notice, how unfit a comparison one of our
Adversaries (in this point) has used; (though cried up for a man of learning)
who charge God with as great severity, bidding us to turn unto him, if we
have not of our selves now freedom of will so to do, as for a man to cut off
another man's legs, and then bid him run; But by his leave (for all his great
learning) the case is not alike, but varies and fails in the main point of all;
which is this, In that God gave man legs to run the ways of his commandments
before he bad him run; which he has cut off himself. God gave man power to do
all that he requires at his hand, and man has bereaved himself thereof. And
therefore it is neither injustice nor severity in God to require of man what he
once gave him power to do, though now he be unable; because he has disabled
himself. If God had made man unable, the comparison might have held; but seeing
man made himself unable, the comparison halteth.

Secondly, I answer, that God's commandments do not always import what we can
do, but what we should; they do not always argue our ability, but our duty. As
for example (to instance but in one particular of many) We are commanded to
love the Lord our God with all the heart, and with all the soul, and our
neighbors as our selves: This we cannot do in that fulsse that the Law
requires, yet it is not severity in God to require it of us, because he once
empowered us unto it, namely, in our first creation. And the case is the same
about our conversion.

Thirdly, I answer, that God requires it, though we cannot of our selves do it,
that we may be put in mind to crave his aid, who only is able to make us to do
it. This reason is given by S. Augustine in these words, Jubet Deus quae non
possumus, ut noverimus quae ab illo petere debemus. God commands us what we
cannot do, to intimate unto us what we ought to crave of him; namely, what we
cannot do of our selves. And hence are those many prayers of several sorts of
persons in the Scripture; as Psalm 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O Lord,
and renew a right spirit within me. And Jer. 31.18. Convert thou me, and I
shall be converted. And Lament. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee. O Lord, and we
shall be turned.

Fourthly, I answer, that God commands us this, though we cannot do it of our
selves, that we may be excited to use such means as are by God's ordinance and
appointment conducible and available thereunto, and which we have of our selves
power to use, which are Prayer, the Word and the Sacraments; for his calling to
us to repent and return unto him, is a provocation or calling to us, to use
such means as he has appointed to produce the same in us.

Fifthly and lastly, I answer, That such commands aim not only at our first
conversion, but at our secondary and subsequent returns to God; when after our
first conversion, we prevaricate and digress from him; in which secondary
return man's will cooperates with the grace of God, as formerly has beeen said.
And therefore God's invitation of men to these returns, wherein their wills
have some ability to cooperate with his grace, is not vain or needless, but
very efficacious to allure and induce them thereunto.

Not to tire the Reader with any further dispute about this controversy, I
will close it up with the addition of these two reasons to the former
Arguments, to induce all persons to adhere to this opinion as the safest, which
I have here asserted, First, because this opinion makes a clearer
reconciliation of those Texts of Scripture which hold forth a seeming
contradiction about this point, then the other does; for according to the other
opinon, they are not reconciled without some scruple. Secondly, because this
opinion ascribes most glory to God, to whom all glory belongs; wherein there is
no danger, though men detract from themselves. For to detract from nature, and
give to grace is no danger; but to detract from grace, and give to nature,
cannot but be dangerous. This was the saying of Peter Lumbard: and is of all
acknowledged and owned for truth.

The fourth Controversy. About the merit of good works.
THe Papists opinion about this, and Mr. Haggar's, in affirming good works to
be causes of salvation (which both they do and he also in the 9. page of his
forenamed discourse) has so little appearance of truth, that it deserves to be
exploded, rather then refuted: And I have good ground for what I affirm. First,
Because it is so apparently repugnant to Scripture; as to Ephesians. 2.8.9. where
it is said, By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God: not of works, lest any should boast. And Tit. 3.5. Not by
the works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us. And whereas to salve up the discord between Paul's affirmation and
theirs, they make a distinction of good works; of which some (say they) go
before justification, and some follow after it: and St. Paul (they say) speaks
of those that go before; but they speak of such as follow after; and therefore
they do not contradict him; I have formerly declared (namely in my 4th.
Argument; about the first Controversy, in page the 20.) that the Apostle
speaks of the same good works which they speak of; namely, of good works after
justification and regeneration: And therefore they are herein contradictors of
holy Scripture.

Another ground for what I affirmed before, is this, Because I never had
conference with any Papist yet (and I have conferred with many in my time) but
they all disclaimed the merit of their own works, when upon occasion of
discourse I have charged them with this gross Tenet.

I have yet a third ground for what I said; and that is, because I find
Bellarmine their Arch champion, after his affirmation of the merit of good
works, and that they are true causes of salvation, and that some confidence may
be placed in them (in his book of Controversies, namely, Libr. 5. cap. 7. de
Justificat.) to give men counsel, within ten lines after, to put no confidence
in their merits, but in the alone mercy and benignity of God, as the safest
way. So that there is no great necessity to confute this opinion of the merit
of works, seeing themselves do distrust it, and after a sort desert it.

But yet some short confutation of this palpable error I will deliver; which (I
hope) shall sufficiently convince it: And the first Argument I frame thus.

Argument 1.
IF eternal life or salvation be Gods gfit, then it is not merited by man's
good works; so the Apostle argues, Romans 11.6. If it be of grace, it is no more
of works. But eternal life is God's gift; so says our Savior, Luke 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your Father's pleasure to give you a Kingdom:
where note, that it is said to be a gift, and from no other motive, but from his
own good pleasure. And John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me; and I give unto them eternal life. And says S. Paul, Romans
6.23. The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Therefore
eternal life is not merited by man's good works.

Argument 2.
IF all the good works which possibly we can do, be due debt to Almighty God,
then can they not merit Heaven at his hand; for merit and debt cannot stand
together; a man cannot be said to merit by paying that which he owes.

But they are due debts; so our Savior teaches, Luke 17.^0. When ye shall
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants; we have done that which was our duty to do. Therefore they cannot
merit.

Argument 3.
IF our good works be not properly our own, but proceed from the grace of God,
which works them in us and by us, then can they not be said to merit from
God, though they may merit from others; because we return no more to God, then
what we have received from him; we give him but a cluster of grapes out of his
own Vineyard, and water out of his own Fountain. If any man discern not the
necessity of this consequent, it is for want of perspicacity in his own
understanding, and not for want of truth in the consequence: And Bellarmine
does acknowledge it in Libr. 5. cap. 15. De Great. and Lib. Arb. Good works are
not properly our own, but proceed from the grace of God, which works the same
in us and by us; so it is said, Isa. 26.12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us;
for thou also have wrought all our works in us. And Phil. 2.13. It Is God that
gives to will and to work of his good pleasure. Therefore the conclusion is
true.

Argument 4.
IF our good works be not every way responsible and suitable to the Law of God,
which requires them at our hands; then can they not be meritorious; this is
clear. But they are not so. Therefore they cannot merit.

That they are not answerable and agreeable to God's Law, is most evident,
because they are imperfect and defective; whereas the Law of God is perfect; as
David affirms, Psalm 19.7. Now that they are imperfect and defective, it is
diverse times affirmed in Scripture, Isa. 64.6. All our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags. Romans 7.18. To will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good, I find not. And again in the 21. verse, When I would do good,
evil is present with me.

Argument 5.
IF there be no analogy and proportion between eternal life and our good works,
then cannot our good works merit eternal life. This consequence is a clear
truth in reason; for a reward is to be adequated and proportioned unto the work.

But there is no analogy and proportion between eternal life and good works;
for the reward of eternal life is infinite, but man's good works are finite;
and (finiti ad infinitum nulla est proportio) between a finite thing and an
infinite there is no proportion. Therefore the Conclusion holds, That eternal
life cannot be merited by men's good works.

I will answer the main Argument for the merit of works, and so I will conclude
concerning this Controversy.

It Is alleged for defense of the merit of works, That the Scripture affirms
that they shall be rewarded with eternal life, and that very often, as Matthew.
5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, etc. Rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Luke 14.14. When
thou make a feast, call the poor, etc. and thou shall be recompensed at the
resurrection of the just. Heb. 11.26. It Is said, That Moses esteemed the rebuke
of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt, because behad respect unto
the recompense of reward. And often elsewhere eternal life is called a reward,
which (say the Adversaries) imports the merit of good works, because (merces
and meritum) reward and merit are relatives.

To this I answer, That there is a double reward: 1. A reward of merit or debt;
and 2. A reward of mercy or favor. And this distinction is not devised or
coined by man's wit, nor hewn out of the quarry of his brain; but is framed by
the holy Ghost himself, Romans 4.4. where it is thus written, Now to him that
works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt; where he bath made an
apparent distribution of reward in these two sorts. 1. A reward of grace: and
2. A reward of debt. Now eternal life is a reward of grace, mercy, or favor;
and not a reward of debt or merit, as the Texts before quoted demonstrate;
scil. Luke 12.32. John 10 28. and Romans 6.23. In all which places it is called
the gift of God: and a gift proceeding from his own pleasure, and therefore can
be no debt that God owes to men for their good works; for a gift and debt are
so dissentaneous, that they cannot consist together, nor be predicated of one
and the same subject.

And hence it is, that though God has often promised to reward such as do good
works with everlasting life, (that he may provoke all men unto them) yet it is
nowhere said, that they shall be rewarded for them, (for that might have been
interpreted to have intimated and imported some merit in them) but the
Scripture in mentioning God's reward of good works, uses this phrase, That
they shall be rewarded according to their works; which intimates the reward to
be given of God's mercy, and not to be obtained by man's merits. Thus it is
expressed Psalm 62.12. Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy; for thou renderest
to every man according to his works. Matthew. 16.27. The Son of man shall come in
the glory of the Father with his Angels; and then he shall reward every man
according to his works. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the tribunal
seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. Rev. 20.12. and 13. verses: It Is twice said of the
dead, that they were judged according to their works; and in Chapter the 22 and
verse the 12. Beheld, (says Christ) I come quickly, and my reward is with me,
to give to every man according as his work shall be.

This is the constant expression of Scripture in speaking of the reward of good
works, to phrase it (according to works) and no where (for them) lest men
should presume to ascribe some merit unto them.

And this makes it evident, that the Popish distinction of the merit of
condignity, and the merit of congruity, is but a mere gingle and shift to evade
the force of the former Arguments against the merit of good works; for the
merit of congruity (which they attribute to good works) proceeds from mercy (as
they confess themselves) and therefore cannot properly be called merit; for
mercy and merit are contradistinct and inconsistent, it is the very affirmation
of Scripture, Romans 11.6. If by grace, then it is no more of works; otherwise
grace is no more grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more grace;
otherwise work is no more work. Here the Apostle makes a flat opposition
between grace and works; and there is the very same opposition between mercy
and merit; which has forced that confession from Bellarmine, (which has often
dropped from his pen in his book of Controversies) Merita nostra sunt Dei
munera. The like was S. Bernard his confession to Almighty God; Meritum meum
est misericordia tua, my merit is thy mercy. Both which are agreeable to the
sentence of S. Augustine in his Book of Homiles, (in Homil. the 14) Quum bona
^pera nostra remunerat Deus, non merita nostra, sed sua dona coronat; When God
rewards our good works, he crowns his own gifts, and not our merits.

From this premised discourse I deduct this corolary or capitulation of the
causes of salvation, as they are in order manifested in Scripture.

First, God's free grace and love is the primary and principal efficient cause
of election unto salvation. This is justified by these Texts, (beside many
other) Romans 11.5. Even so then at this present time also, there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.

Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. And again in the
11. verse following of the same Chapter; In whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him who works
all things after the counsel of his own will.

Secondly, Christ's obedience, active and passive, is the meritorious cause of
salvation, and of all the means conducting thereunto. So Colos. 1.14. We have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. And 1 John 1.7. The
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. And 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot;
with many such like Texts.

Thirdly, Faith is the instrumental cause, that is to say, the instrument
whereby we receive Christ, and apply his merits to us; so John 1.12. As many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. And Ephesians. 3.17. The Apostle says, that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith. And hence it is our righteousness is called,
both the righteousness of faith, Romans 10.6. And the righteousness, which is by
faith, Heb. 11.7. And the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9.

Fourthly and lastly, Vocation, and Justification, and Sanctification, and good
works, and eternal life and salvation, are the joint fruits and effects of the
aforenamed causes, successively following one another. Vocacion, Justification,
and Sanctification, and good works are the first fruits and effects of the
foresaid causes brought forth here in this life, as numerous Texts of Scripture
testify, which I need not recite, because they are familiarly known, and
because I have mentioned diverse of them formerly. And Eternal Life and
Salvation is the last fruit, the consummation and ultimate end of all, as it is
very often taught and testified. Romans 6.22. Being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto heliness, and the end
everlasting life. And 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls.

These are the links of the golden chain of salvation, and the order of the
causes thereof; as they are annexed and held forth to us in the word of God.
And in Romans 8.30. they are summed up together, though in fewer words: Whom he
did predestinate, (says the Apostle) them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

And hence is Mr. Haggar's gross error, in his concatenation of the causes of
salvation, detected and confuted; In that he makes sanctification and good
works causes of salvation; which are but fruits and effects of God's election,
and the merits of Christ apprehended by faith, for they go before salvation
only as necessary antecedents, and as the appointed way to lead us to
salvation, and as preparatives for Heaven; (as has been already declared) but
not as causes thereof. 1. They are, Via regn^, but not, causa regnandi. So that
as the way to any place, is not the cause that brings any man to it, though he
must needs pass through the way, to come to that place; but the cause of his
coming to it, is his own will and motion. So sanctification and good works,
though they be necessary antecedents to salvation, so that we cannot pass to
Heaven, but through them; yet they are not the causes which brings us thither;
but the causes thereof are the mercies of God, and the merits of Christ
apprehended by Faith. And so I end this Controversy.

If now I have not untied the Gordian knots of these long debated
Controversies, so fully and openly as to give satisfaction to all whose
thoughts have been formerly puzzled about them (as I believe I shall not) yet
my labor will not be wholly lost in these regards: First, Because I have
hereby declared my willingness to do the Church service to my power, by
putting my hand to the supportation of the truth of the gospel; which these
stormy times have so impetuously and vehemently shaken. Secondly, Because what
I have delivered may happily give satisfaction to some, and let them loose out
of the briers of their hesitation, that were doubtful before what opinion to
incline to. Thirdly, Because this Essay may happily be an occasion to invite
and induce some more Logical and Learned pen to publish a more Scholastic and
plenary solution of them.

The fifth Controversy. About Original sin.
THat I may the more fully discover and confute this error, I will unfold these
four points about the sin of our natures, the sin wherein we are conceived and
born; which therefore all Orthodox Divines have fitly and properly called
Original Sin.

First, I will render a reason of the epithete, why it is called Original Sin.

Secondly, I will give a definition of the Sin what is.

Thirdly, I will allege some of the evident proofs of Scripture for the
justification of it.

Fourthly I will frame some irrefragable and convincing arguments drawn out of
Scripture to prove it, by necessary and undeniable consequence.

The first Point opened.
THe sinful corruption or corrupt disposition of man's nature from the womb,
has many epithetes or names given unto it in Scripture, which denote and
declare that it has its original and beginning with man's conception and
birth; and therefore is fitly and properly termed Original Sin, and so ever
has been for above this thousand years, by all sound and learned Divines both
ancient and modern. For though it be not in terminis, in these very words so
called in Scripture; yet has it diverse other epithetes and names there given
it; which are consignificant, and import and imply the same sense and meaning,
with these words Original Sin, amongst which take notice of these:

Romans 6.6. It Is called, The old man, and the body of sin.

1 Cor. 5.7. It Is termed, The old leaven.

Romans 7.17. The sin that dwells in us.

Romans 7.23. The law in our members.

Romans 7.24. The body of death.

Gal. 5.16. The lusts of the flesh.

Jam. 1.14. A man's own lust: In which Text in the next words following, it is
punctually distinguished from all actual sins; as being expressly affirmed to be
the procreant cause of all actual sin; for the cause and the effects cannot be
one and the same.

The second Point opened; what original sin is.
ORiginal sin is a pravity, vitiosity, or vicious habit, or corrupt disposition
of man's nature from his first conception; as a just punishment of all men's sin
in Adam; whereby they are born the children of wrath, and become subject to
death both of body and soul; and also become prone to commit all actual sins.
Or thus,

Original sin is a pravity of man's nature from his first conception; whereby
he seems to be prone to all sin; as a just punishment of Adam's sin or
transgression, whereof all men are guilty; and for which all men are exposed
and subjected to death both corporal and eternal.

Both these definitions have one and the same sense. And from them ye may
observe that there be three things in Original Sin, or three parts of it. The
first is the guilt of Adam's sin, whereof S. Paul speaks, Romans 5.19. where he
says, By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.

Secondly, There is the defect and want of original righteousness; whereof he
speaks, Romans 3.23. All have sinned and come short of the glory of God; i.e. of
God's image, which was in man's first creation stamped upon him. And for this
exposition I have warrant from 1 Cor. 11.7. in that the Apostle there joined
these together as synonimas, image and glory, when he says, That man is the
image and glory of God.

Thirdly, There is the succession of a vicious habit and corrupt disposition in
man's nature in place of his primitive righteousness, whereof we read Genesis
6.5. where God himself witnesses, That the whole imagination of the thoughts
of man's heart was only evil continually. And Psalm. 14.2, and ^. verse, David
says, That the Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see
if there were any that did understand and seek God. They are all gone aside,
they are altogether become filthy.

And here I desire the Reader to consider how these three parts of this our
native sin do produce and bring forth one another; the first, namely the guilt
of Adam's sin, being the sole cause of the other two; as these Texts (beside
many other) declare, Romans 3.23. All have sinned (that is, in Adam) and come
short of the glory of God; i.e. come short of that glorious image of God, by
reason of that sin of Adam's, whereof all are guilty. And Romans 5.19. By one
man's disobedience many were made sinners. By which one man, Adam is understood
(as all acknowledge.) And so these two Texts make it clear, that childrens want
of Original or Primitive righteousness, and the inquination and depravation of
their natures, do both flow from their guilt of Adam's sin, and are the sad
consequents of it.

The third point opened. The evident proofs of Scripture for it.
BEsides the Texts already named, it is plentifully taught elsewhere, Genesis 5.
the 1, and 3. verses compared: In the first verse it is said, that Adam was
created in the likeness of God. And in the 3. verse it is said, that He begat a
child in his own likeness, after his image; which imports that he begat not a
child in the likeness of God, which consisted in holiness, but in the
likeness of himself who then was stained with sin.

Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth: Which Text
is rendered by Junius and Tremellius, The imagination or frame of man's heart
is evil from his childhood. Now children are free from actual sins; and
therefore the evil of their hearts must need be Original; because all evil of
sin is comprehended under one of these two sorts.

Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Which is
spoken in reference to man's birth, as it is there most apparent in the first
verse.

Job 15.14. What is man that he should be clean? or he that is born of a woman,
that he should be righteous. And again, chap. 25.4. How then can man be
justified with God, or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?

The interrogations in both these Texts imply an impossibility that any woman
should bring forth a child free from the pollution and tincture of sin in the
ordinary way of conception and parturition.

Psalm. 51.5. Behold, (says David) I was shapen in iniquity. If David, then all
others but our Savior only, whose conception was not after the ordinary
manner, but by the miraculous and incomprehensible operation of the holy Ghost.

The Anabaptists (to avoid the repugnancy between their Tenet and this Text)
have devised this shift. They say that David spoke this of his mother's sin in
his conception, and not of his own fin. But this is so weak a subterfuge and
evasion, and so dissonant from the scope and purpose of the Psalm, that I
should think that any judicious man (that seeks the truth) should blush to own
it; for this is one of David's penitential Psalms, wherein he makes humble
confession of his own sins to God, and not of his mother's; and makes earnest
request and supplication for the expiation of them, as all the precedent verses
declare. And again, though the latter words in the verse might be wrested to be
spoken of his mother's sin, as well as his own, because mention is made of her,
yet the first words which are these, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, must of
necessity be understood of himself, and can have no reference to his mother,
without violence to the Text, and wilful wresting of it.

Psalm. 58.3. It Is said, That the wicked are estranged from the womb. And the
like place is in Isa. 48.8. where the Lord calls the house of Jacob A
transgressor from the womb; which is as much to say as a sinner by birth.

Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, and 6. verses, Jersalem's nativity is affirmed by God to be
polluted; and he says, That he saw her polluted in her own blood; which Text,
though it should be granted to be allegorical (as some Interpreters would have
it) yet inevitably concludes man's birth to be unclean.

Joh. 3.6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, says our Savior, that
is, is sinful. For when the flesh is opposed to the Spirit (as it is here in
this Text) it usually denotes, and is put to signify the pravity or
sinfullness of nature: as Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to another.

Roman. 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so
death pasled upon all men, for that all have sinned. If all have sinned, then
have infants sinned as well as others; for we do not find them any where
excepted. Now infants have no actual sin, while they are infants, and
therefore that sin, which they are said to have, must needs be original; all
sin whatsoever being comprehended under one of these two kinds, as was said
before.

The fourth Point opened, namely, Arguments drawn from Scripture to prove
original sin by necessary consequence.
Argument 1.
IF children be not conceived and born in sin, then is there no need of their
regeneration or second birth to their salvation, before they have made
themselves sinners by actual transgression; for nothing hinders from salvation
but sin.

But children have need of a regeneration or second birth to their salvation,
before they have committed any actual sin; as is clear from our Savior's
words, twice affirmed with vehement asseveration John 3.3. and 5. verses,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. And this is spoken without any exception of Infants, either
there or in any other place of Scripture, and is also proved by our Savior in
the verse next following to concern Infants, as well as men of years; because
whatsoever is born of the flesh (that is, of fleshly and sinful Parents) is
flesh, that is, is fleshly and finful; for so we find in other places of
Scripture, (as was said before) that where the flesh and spirit are opposed one
to another, (as they are in this verse) there by spirit is understood the
regenerate part in man, and by flesh the unregenerate part, as (beside the
former Text quoted, Gal. 5.16, and 17. verses) is to be seen in Romans 8. several
times; verse the 5. They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the
flesh; but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. And in the
next verse, To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is
life and peace. And in the 9. verse, Ye are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit. And again in the 13. verse, If ye live after the flesh ye shall die,
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
In all which places (as also in most other in the New Testament where the
Spirit and the flesh are set in opposition one to another) there by flesh is
meant the unregenerate part in man; unless some circumstances in the context do
necessarily require that such places should be otherwise understood. Hence
therefore it follows undeniably, That children are conceived and born in sin;
namely, because they stand in need of regeneration to their salvation.

Argument 2.
THey that are subject to diseases and death in their conception and birth, are
in their conception and birth sinful; for these, namely, diseases and death,
are affirmed to be the fruits and effects of sin in Scripture very frequently;
Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the World, and death by sin; and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is
death. So that where we see death or sickness sieze upon any young or old,
there we may surely conclude, that sin has gone before: But Infants are
subject to diseases and death in their very conception and birth. Therefore
they are in their conception and birth sinful. To evade the force of this
argument, one of note amongst the Anabaptisie (n^mely one Mr. Brown, in a
Treatise which he has penned and published, entitled Scripturerede^ption
freed from restraint, and in page the 7. of the said discourse) restrains the
death mentioned in the forenamed Texts to a bodily death only; affirming that
Adam by his sin exposed himself and his posterity, not to eternal or the second
death; to the death of soul and body both; but to bodily death only. Yet lest
he should seem to contradict Scripture (which everywhere affirms all sin to
provoke God's anger, and to deserve death, and to bring forth fruit unto death)
he confesses, that any sin deserves death, but not every kind of death. His
words are these, I grant (says he) that the wages of sin is death, but the
wages of any sin is not every kind of death. And so denies that Adam incurred
any other death by his sin then the death of the body.

Touching this answer and this exposition of the foresaid Texts of Scripture; I
desire the Reader to take notice of these two failings and falts therein.
First, it extenuates the hainousness of sin, and minceth and diminishes that
just demerit and penalty of it, which throughout the whole Scripture is
denounced against it; which is death both of body and soul. Secondly, It Is a
concession and confession in effect, that children are by nature sinful, born
with fin upon them, and in them; for if the wages of any be death (which is
truth, and he ingeniously affirms it) then where there is any death, there must
needs be some sin; or else the wages and penalty of sin should be inflicted
where there is no sin.

Whereas therefore some children suffer in their infancy some kind of death,
namely bodily death; they must needs be guilty of some kind of sin, otherwise
they should be punished with bodily death undeservedly (which to affirm were
blasphemy) But they can have no actual sin (as is confessed of all men) and
therefore the sin which exposes them to death must needs be some latent sin,
wherewith their natures are stained from the womb (as the Scripture speaks)
which is that which we call original. And so ye may see that his answer to the
argument is in effect a concession of the unaswerable force of it, and of that
which he would seem to deny. But I will display Mr. Brown his gross error
about this point yet a little further.

He confesses in the same place of his book, that actual sins in men deserve
eternal death, though not origin all sin. Now I would know of him, whether
Adam's first sin was not actual sin. This I am sure he cannot deny; Nay a very
heinous actual sin it was, as might be laid open by many circumstances. This
then being granted; I demand of him, why actual sins in us should be
punishable with eternal death, and not this first heinous actual sin of
Adam's? I dare answer for him, that he cannot tell. For if our actual sins
deserve eternal death, much rather that of Adam's, as who had greater light,
and more grace, and less temptations then we have. All which considerations are
so many aggravations of his sin.

Lastly, to trample this vile error yet once more under foot, that it may
never lift up it self again, I demand of these Anabaptists whether Adam did
not by his sin divest and disrobe himself of that glorious image of God after
which he was made; which consisted especially in righteousness and true
holiness; as the Apostle has declared Ephesians. 4.22.23. and 24. verses; for there
he exhorts to put of the old man; by which he means the vitiosity and
sinfulness of our natures, transmitted and propagated into us by old Adam: and
then to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and to put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness; which implies, that
Gods image, after which man was first created, did consist in righteousness and
holiness.

Now if they deny, that Adam by his sin deprived himself of God's image,
consisting in righteousness and holiness; they must deny the 5. chapter of
Paul's epistle to the Romans to be Canonical Scripture, for there the Apostle
affirms several times in the five last verses that by Christ we regain both
righteousness, and life; which Adam lost. And again the word ( renewed which
the Scripture uses in speaking hereof) implies a deprivation of that which was
before: for nothing can properly be said to be renewed, but where there has
been a precedent deprivation of that which is renewed.

Again on the other side; if they confess that Adam by his sin deprived
himself of God's image, then they confess (by conseqvence) that his sin
brought upon him spiritual death; (which is a further penalty then corporal
death, and so impugneth their tenet, that Adam incurred by his first sin no
other death, then the death of the body) for as the soul gives natural life
to the body, so the image of God, namely righteousness and holiness, gives
spiritual life to the soul; and without which the soul is spiritually dead,
as Ephesians. 2.1. and Colos. 2.13. and diverse other Texts of Scripture witness,
where mention is made of a death in sin: You that were dead in your sins and
the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened, etc. whence by undeniable
consequence it follows, that where there is a deprivation of the spiritual life
of righteousness and holiness, there must needs follow a spiritual death in
sin. Now if they deny grace, righteousness and holiness to be the life of the
soul, I refer them to the view of these three Texts of Scripture (omitting many
other) where it is expreslly asserted, Prove. 3.21, 22. Keep sound wisdom and
discretion, so shall they be life unto thy soul. And Romans 8.6. To be carnally
minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life. And Romans 8.10. The
spirit is life, because of righteousness: that is, The soul is alive
spiritually, because of righteousness.

Argument 3.
THey whom Christ came to save are sinners: So says our Savior himself,
Matthew. 9.13. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And
S. Paul, Romans 5.6. Christ died for the ungodly. And 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ Jesus
came into the World to save sinners. And this must needs be so in reason; for
where there is no sin, there is no need of a Savior. But Christ came to save
Infants as well as men of years.

Therefore they are sinners.

Now that Christ came to save Infants as well as men of years, appears by
Scripture these two ways. 1. Because he died for all men, as often the Scripture
affirms; 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself a ransom for all. Heb. 2.9. He tasted
death for every man. For whether (all) in these and the like Texts of Scripture
be taken for all sorts of men only, or for all of all sorts, Infants must needs
be included amongst them, for they are one sort of men. 2. Because he invited
children to come unto him, or to be brought unto him, as is said, Mark 10.14.
which intimates, that he came into the world to save them, as well as men of
years.

I will add one argument more for proof of this point; to which the wit of man
(though prompted by the cunning suggestion of the old serpent) cannot devise a
satisfactory answer.

Argument 4.
THey which are by nature children of wrath, are by nature sinners.

But all men are by nature children of wrath, so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3.

Therefore all men are by nature sinners; and so consequently Infants.

The first proposition is all that I have to prove; (for the assumption is S.
Paul's own affirmation) And I find it the constant doctrine of holy Scripture,
both in the Old and New Testament, which evermore teaches sin to be the only
cause of God's anger and wrath; And this in reason must needs be so, because
all things else were his own works; which were all good, yea, very good, (as we
read in Genesis 1.31.) And sin only was the Divel's work, the enemy of God and all
goodness; and therefore sin only is said to provoke God's anger, and wrath.
The testimonies of Scripture are so numerous for this, that I will name but
this one of a thomsand, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. And how often God is said in
Scripture to have been provoked to anger by the sins of the people of Israel
none can be ignorant.

I will add but one thing more about this argument, and so I will conclude it.

The forenamed Text in Ephesians. 2.3. with what is deducible from it (where it is
affirmed, that we are all by nature the children of wrath) puzleth the
Anabaptists not a little, and puts them to their shifts to frame such an
exposition thereof as may not impugn their own false Tenet about original sin.
This may appear from that exposition, which the forementioned Mr. Brown has
made of that Text, in the 6. page of his book that I named before, where he
thus expounds it: By nature (says he) is understood, first the matter and form
of our bodies, which are good; and principally the light that God has placed
in man.

Now that this is a novel, false, and irrational interpretation of this Text, I
thus discover. If by nature here be understood nothing but what is good:
namely, the matter and form of our bodies, and the light that God has placed
in us; then how can it make us the children of wrath, as here it is said of it?
for nothing that is good can make us children of wrath. It Is sin only, (which
was first brought forth by Satan) and nothing else, that provokes God's wrath,
as formerly was proved. By nature therefore in this place, of necessity must be
understood something that is sinful (for else it could not make us children of
wrath, as has been showed) which can be nothing else but that vitiosity,
pravity and corrupt disposition, which from our first birth and being is
propagated into our bodies and souls by natural generation.

For though it were granted, that by (nature) here be meant the substance of
our souls and bodies; yet of necessity it must be also granted (as has been
now proved) that it is meant of them, not as pure and free from any sin; but as
vitiated and depraved therewith from their first union and conjunction together
into one individual.

It remains therefore a sure and sacred truth, inviolable and infringible; and
not to be contradicted, but by obstinacy or impudence it self, That children
are born in sin.

The sixth Controversy. About Tithes.
THere is an obsteperous clamor raised against Tithes by the Anabaptistical
teachers, who yet (for the most part) lay as heavy a burden upon their
disciples, and put them to as great cost and charges as is equivalent to
Tithes: And this (in all probability) they have broached and ventilated to get
the better morsel for themselves. For this they find by experience, that the
way to insinuate with the common people, and to wind themselves into their
bosoms, is to preach pleasing things unto them; and especially such as sound
for their profit, be it right or wrong.

To stop their mouths, (if it may be) if not, yet to justify the practice of
paying and receiving Tithes. I will first make it appear, that it stands with
equity and justice, that Ministers of the Gospel have allowance and recompense
for performing their work of the Ministry; and such an allowance as may afford
them a competent and comfortable livelihood and subsistence.

Secondly, I shall make it appear, That it stands with equity and justice, that
they have Tithes for their allowance.

1.
The former I shall prove both by Scripture and force of reason.

By Scripture I shall prove it both in the Old Testament and in the New.

First, In the Old Testament: God commanded that the Levites, who were the
persons set apart to attend upon the service of God in those times under the
Law, as the Ministers of the word are under the Gospel, should have allowance
both by Tithes, and other emoluments and profits out of sacrifices and
oblations; (as every one knows) and moreover they had given them by God's
appointment 48. Cities with their suburbs, and land annexed and appropriated to
every one of them, extending in quantity to 2000. Cubits of ground round about
every City; as it is recorded in the 25th. Chapter of the Book of Numbers, and
the first verse, and so forward.

Secondly, In the new Testament, our Savior Christ sending forth his 70.
disciples to preach the Gospel, bids them take neither bag, nor scrip, nor
shoes, but to eat and drink with those into whose houses they entered; for the
labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.4, 5, 6, and 7. verses. S. Paul also
justifies this at large, and several times in 1 Cor. 9.9, 10, and 11. verses,
He writes thus, It is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Does God take care for Oxen? or
says he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt this is written;
that he that ploweth, should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? And then he adds in the
23. verse, Do you not know that they which minister about holy things, live of
the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with
the Altar? even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel. Here is no ambiguity nor obscurity in this Text,
but a plain and punctual affirmation, that they which preach the Gospel should
have their maintenance and livelihood for preaching of it. But see yet further
proof hereof (to beat down (if it may) that unreasonable and unjust desire that
is in some niggardly people, who would have Ministers do all their work and
labor for nothing) Gal. 6.6. The Apostle gives this precept, Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches, in all good things. And
again, in 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. verses, Let the elders which rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor; especially they who labor in the word and doctrine.
For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the
corn; and the labourer is worthy of his reward. Here then is plentiful proof of
Scripture for the justification of this point.

But now see it proved also by force of reason, which I have learned out of
Scripture also; namely out of 1 Cor. 9.7, 8, 12. here the Apostle reasons after
this manner, Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a
vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? or says not
the Law the same also? And then in the verses following (rehearsed before)
applies it to the Ministers of the Gospel. As if he should have said, Every
vocation and profession, from the highest to the lowest, from the King to the
day-labourer, affords some emolument and recompense to them that labor in
them; this cannot be denied. And therefore, if all other men live by their
functions and callings; it is just that Ministers also should also live by
theirs.

Again, I read in Scripture; namely, in 1 Timothy 3.2. That a Bishop should be
hospitable. Now if people should afford him no allowance and compensation for
his labor and pains, but rather subduct that which has been formerly given
both by God (as I shall make appear hereafter) and devout men, to the support
of the Ministry; I demand, (which I know cannot be rationally answered) by what
means a Bishop should maintain hospitallity? So that very reason, equity and
justice, claim an allowance to be yielded to the maintenance of the Ministry.

2.
Now I shall prove, That it stands with equity and justice, That Ministers have
Tithes for their allowance.

And this I prove four ways, or by four Arguments.

Argument 1.
First, Because God himself appointed this payment of Tithes, first to his
Ministers the Levites (as was mentioned before (in way of compensation for
their work of the Ministry: And therefore it stands with equity and justice,
because it has him for the first Author, who does all things justly.

Argument 2.
Secondly, Because the payment of Tithes has been used and continued here in
England many hundred years, by the appointment of the supreme Magistrates from
time to time without any interruption, and has been also confirmed and
established by sundry laws under the Saxon Kings of this Realm long before the
Conquest; and by many Acts of Parliament since in their several Ages, which
never yet were repealed: Who herein have followed the pattern which God had set
them; so that to charge them with injustice herein, is both against Reason,
Religion, Duty and charity. From whence it is clear, that Beneficed Ministers of
the Church of England, in their several respective Incumbencies, have as full,
just, and legal title and claim to their Tithes, and as much right thereunto,
as any Lord of a Manor, Freeholder, or other person has to any of the Lands
or Goods whereof he stands possessed; to wit, Per Leges and Consuetudines
Angliae.

Wherefore seeing it is evident out of the Chronicles and Histories of the
Politic Government of this Nation, that Tithes have been so long alienated
from the Layity, and dedicated and given to the maintenance of the Ministry, by
those persons in supreme power, from whom Laymens title to their Lands, and to
the other nine parts of the increase and fruits of the same was derived; it is
therefore contrary to all equity and reason, that they should claim any
property or interest in Tithes now, who have been so long time out of
possession of them, and divested of all interest and property in them.

Argument 3.
Thirdly, Because Tithes are assigned to the Ministers in England by the
peoples own consent and Vote in Parliament: For the Parliaments Vote is their
Vote, the Parliament being the Representative body of all the people in the
Land.

Furthermore it is also to be considered, for the defense of the justice of the
peoples payment of Tithes to Ministers; that seeing it is not nominated in the
New Testament (where a compensation is allowed and enjoined for the work of the
Ministry) what or how much this compensation or allowance shall be, therefore
there was great equity that the supreme lawful Magistrate, and the Parliament
should determine and appoint what it should be, as being the fittest
intermediate Judges between the Ministers and the People: For it was neither
fit that Ministers should have what they would demand, for then (it is probable)
some would have too much, nor yet that people should give them but what they
pleased, for then (it is more then probable) they would give too little.

It remains therefore that the payment of Tithes to Ministers (as the case
stands here in England) is both equal and just; as being justified both by the
Law of God and man, and by the peoples own assent and Vote in Parliament. And
that therefore all Opposers of the same, are by necessary consequence Opposers
both of the Law of God and the lawful Magistrate, and their own Vote.

Argument 4.
I come now to a fourth and last argument for proof of this point of the
Clergies just title to Tithes; which (though it will be most cavilled at by
Gainsayers, yet) to such as are truly religious, and not possessed with
prejudice, it will be of very great force to bend and bind their consciences to
a free and a full acknowledgement of this truth.

I find in Scripture, by comparing one Text with another, that God himself, in
his first general Grant to Adam and his posterity, of a Sovereignty over, and a
free use of these inferior creatures (mentioned Genesis 1.28. did reserve a Tenth
out of the fruits of the land to himself, which afterward (namely when he had
instituted a Ministerial and Sacerdotal function, for the performance of the
public duties of his own worship and service) he gave to those that did
officiate therein. And therefore to that Function they belong still, and are
not alienable from it by any power on Earth, because annexed, appended and
appropriated to it by a Divine Donation.

To make good this Argument, I have two things to prove. First, that God
reserved to himself a Tenth out of the increase and fruits of the Earth, when
he conferred upon Adam a power and property over these things below. Secondly,
that he assigned and gave the same Tenth to the Priesthood, for the support of
his own Worship and Service.

For proof of the former, I bring these three Texts of Scripture. The first is
in Genesis 28.21, 22. Where I find the Patriarch Jacob vowing these two duties to
God. 1. His faith and affiance in God, in these words, Then shall the Lord be
my God. 2. His payment of Tithe to God, in these words; and I will surely give
the tenth unto thee. By which latter speech it appears, that the Tenth of his
increase was due to God. For if it be objected, that the payment of the Tenth
to God might be a voluntary oblation, and not a due or duty formerly belonging
unto God. To this I answer, that the former branch of his vow being a necessary
duty which he did owe unto God; it is very probable that this latter branch
(which is coupled with it) should be a voluntary oblation; but most probably
that it was a duty of right appertaining to God as well as the other.

The second proof of Scripture which I produce is in Levit. 27.30. Where the
Lord himself speaks thus to Moses; All the Tithe of the land, whether of the
seed of the land, or the fruit of the tree, it is the Lord's, it is holy unto
the Lord. Here we have a special and peculiar appropriation of Tithes to
Almighty God signified from his own mouth.

The third proof is in Mal. 3.8. where God again speaks after this manner; Will
a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me; but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee?
in tithes and offerings.

This appropriation of Tithes to God in both these latter Texts, argues
undeniably a more special and peculiar right and property in them, then
appertains to him by his general right of creation, which (in all probability)
was a reservation of them to himself; when he granted to man a Lordship and
property in and over these sublunary and inferior creatures. And these he
reserved (as appeared by his disposal of them afterward) for the maintenance
and support of his own solemn worship and service, as foreseeing how
penurious, tenacious and strait-handed people would be in contributing to the
support and furtherance of the same.

And that this is so, may more clearly appear these two ways, or by these two
considerations. First, Because this claim was made by God, before his
institution of the Levitical function, to which he gave the Tithes afterward;
so that God could not then claim them in any reference to the Levites (as
otherwise might have been supposed) because they were not appointed to their
Sacerdotal office till afterward, as is manifested by the story following in
the first and third Chapters of the book of Numbers, where their first
institution is recorded.

2.
Secondly, Because God could not have claimed them as his own in this distinct
way and sense from the rest, if he had given them before to Adam: And therefore
this peculiar claim and property, which God challenges to Tithes (which is in
effect a denial of them to belong to man) speaks his reservation of them to
himself, when he first passed his original grant of all things here below to
Adam.

2. Secondly, I have yet to prove that God gave these Tithes (which he had
reserved to himself) to the Priests and Levites. And this I prove by three
Texts of Scripture.

First, I read in Genesis 14.18.19, and 20. verses, That when Melchi-zedek the
Priest of the most high God, had blessed the Patriarch Abraham, he gave him
Tithes of all; that is, Abraham gave Melchi-zedek the Priest the tenth of the
spoils that he had gotten in a battle, as it is expressed Heb. 7.4. This we may
not imagine to be done by Abraham without special warrant from God (though the
Scripture makes no mention thereof) as who is so highly commended in Scripture
for his faith and upright walking with God.

And by this fact it appears, that God appointed Tithes to be given to his
Priests; this being the first mention that is made of them in Scripture.
Secondly, It Is clearly proved by a manifest of God's donation of Tithes to the
Levites, in Numb. 18 21, 24, 25, and 26. verses, where the Lord tells Aaron
three several times, that he had given the tithe of the children of Israel to
the Levites.

Thirdly, It Is affirmed by the Apostle, Heb. 7.5. where we find it thus
written; And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office
of the Priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according
to the Law.

Now from the premises I collect, that Tithes are due to God's Ministers by
divine right; as who have a just title unto them by a special donation and
grant from God himself, to whom they primitively belonged, as has been
demonstrated. And that therefore to alienate them from the Ministry, and to put
them into the hands of the Laity, is apparent and manifest sacrilege.

I will make a short answer to the ridiculous objections of some irrational,
unjust and covetous people against the payment of Tithes, and so conclude.

1. Objection.
First, Some say that Ministers should take nothing for their labor; because
our Savior said to his Apostles, Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat.
10.8.

1. Answ.
To this I answer, 1. That our Savior spoke these words to his twelve
Apostles, to whom he gave commission and command to go and preach the Gospel to
all the world, as it is recorded Mark 16.15. So that they could have no leisure
to stay in any one place so long as to gather Tithes, having so great a journey
to travel.

2. Answ.
Secondly, I answer, That he bade them not only to preach, but to heal the
sick, raise the dead, and cast out devils; and then said, Freely ye have
received, freely give: because to do such miraculous works, as to heal their
sick, and cast out devils, and raise their dead, he knew that the people would
be hasty to give large moneys; and therefore he commanded his Apostles to do
such miracles freely, lest through avarice they should abuse his free grace to
their own private gain. And that he meant not to forbid them to take any reward
for preaching (though they took nothing for working miracles) is apparent from
the two next verses following, where he subjoyns these speeches; Provide
neither gold nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip for your journey,
neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves; for the workman is worthy of
his meat. By which speeches he approves of their receiving of meat and other
such needful things before named, from such to whom they preached the Gospel;
for otherwise he would not have forbidden them the provision of such
necessaries, without which they could not subsist.

2. Objection.
Some again object and say, That Ministers should not preach for money.

1. Answ.
To this I return a double answer also. First, I say, that yet they are not
bound to preach for nothing, unless they could live (like Chamelions without
meat.) This I have sufficiently proved before.

2. Answ.
2. I answer, That in some sense they are not to preach for money; that is, as
the only and chief end of their preaching; for the chief end of preaching is
the glory of God, and the edification of the body of Christ, and the salvation
of men, which every faithful preacher especially aims at. But yet in some
sense again they may preach for money; that is, as deserving and expecting
money, as a due reward of their pains, and the means of their maintenance and
subsistence.

Having now finished what I propounded to discuss and debate; I will tire the
Reader with no farther discourse, but wind up all with an apology for my self,
in presuming to publish this plain and impolisht canvise, and discussion of
these old controversies, (now newly revived) which have been so largely and
learnedly disputed and discussed by many great Scholars, and Divines of
exquisite and profound learning in former ages.

All that I have to plead for my self (besides that I premised in my Epistle
to the Reader) is this, That by the mouth of more witnesses, every truth may
still be more established.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are now to be sold by Nathanael Web, and William Gratham,
at the black Bear in St. Paul 's Churchyard, near the little North-door, 1657.
Books in Quarto.
MAster Isaac Ambrose, Prima, media and ultima, [First Middle, and Last things]
in three Treatises, of Regeneration, Sanctification, and with Meditations on
Life, Death, Hell and Judgment, newly published with large additions, in 4.

Mr. Richard Vines A Treatise of the Institution, Right Administration and
Receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; delivered in twenty Sermons at
St. Laurence Jury, in 4. Newly published.

Mr. Nathanael Hardy, Several Sermons preached upon Solemn occasions, collected
into one Volume, in 4.

-- [The first Ep. General of St. John] unfolded and applied, in 22. Sermons,
in 4.

[History surveyed in a brief Epitome: or, a Nursery for Gentry] comprised in
an intermixed discourse upon Historical and Poetical Relations, in 4.

Mr. William Nicolson's full and plain Exposition of the Church Catechism,
newly published, in 4.

Dr. Stoughton's 13. Sermons, being an introduction to the Body of Divinity, in
4.

Dr. John Preston, [A position delivered in Cambridge, concerning the
irresistiblenes of converting grace, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Cradock, [Gospel-Liberty] in the Extention and Limitation of it, in
4.

Mr. John Browning, [concerning public Prayer, and the Fasts of the Church]
six Sermons, or Tracts, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Parker, [The Visions and Prophesies of Daniel expounded] wherein
the Mistakes of former Interpreters are modestly discovered, in 4.

Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum ex Authoritate primum Regis Henrici 8.
inchoata, in 4.

Mr. George Strode [The Anatomy of Mortality, divided into eight Heads, (viz)
1. The Certainty of Death. 2. Meditations on Death. 3. Preparations for Death,
etc.] in 4.

Dr. Daniel Featly [The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away
the Sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lord's Table] in 4.

Mr. Ric. Lewthwat [Vindiciae Christi and obex errori Arminiano; A Plea for
Christ] in three Sermons, in 4.

Welsh Common Prayer, with the Singing-Psalms, in 4.

Mr. John Lawson's [Gleanings and Expositions of some of the more difficult
places of holy Scripture] in 4.

Mr. John Cotton [The way of the Churches of Christ in N. England] in 4.

Mr. Edward Thorp [The New Birth, or Brith from Above] in 4 Sermons latly
published, in 4.

Mr. John Vicars [The Schismatic sifted, etc.] in 4.

[Coleman-street Conclave visited and that grand Impostor, the Schismatics
Cheater in chief, truly and duly discovered] in 4.

Roberti Heggi Dunelmensis aliquot Sacrae Paginae Loca, Lectiones, in 4.

Mr. John Jews [Contemplations upon these times, or the Parliament explained
to Wales] in 4.

[The Beacon flaming, with a non obstante against those that plead for Liberty
of Printing and publishing Popish Books] in 4.

[The Ranters Reasons resolved to nothing, or the Fustification, instead of the
Justification of the mad Crew, etc.] in 4.

Mr. Nath. Stephens [A precept for the Baptism of Infants, out of the New
Testament] in 4.

Mr. Josiah Ricraft [A Nosegay of Rank-smelling Flowers, such as grow in John
Goodwin's Garden, etc.] in 4.

Dr. Sam. Anesly [The first dish at the Wiltshire Feast] a Sermon preached
before many worthy Citizens of London, born in that County, in 4.

[Communion with God] in two Sermons, preached at Paul's before the Lord Major
of London, lately published, in 4.

Mr. Edmund Calamy (The Monster of sinful Self-seeking Anatomized) A Sermon
preached at Paul's before the Lord Major of London, lately published, in 4.

Mr. John Warren of Hatfield-Regis in Essex [The Potent Potter] A Sermon
preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

-- [The unprofitable Servant] A Sermon preached at the Assize at Chelmsford in
Essex, lately published, in 4.

(Man's Fury subservient to God's Glory) A Sermon preached before the
Parliament at Margarets Westminster, Feb. 20. 1656. being a day of public
Thanksgiving, newly published.

Dr. Robert Gell, A Sermon touching God's Government of the World by Angels,
preached before the Astrologers, in 4.

Dr. Joh. Whincop [God's Call to Weeping and Mourning] A Sermon preached at a
Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. George Walker, A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Richard Meggot [The Rib Restored] or the Honor of Marriage: A Sermon preached
in Dionis Back-Church; occasioned by a Wedding the fifth of June, 1655. newly
published.

Mr. Valentine, A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. William Good [Jacob Raised] A Sermon preached at a Fast before the Lords
in Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Thomas Goodwin [The great Interest of States and Kingdomes] A Sermon
preached before the Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Samuel Kem [The King of Kings] His privy marks for the Kingdoms choice of
new Members; A Sermon preached upon the choice of Burgesses for the City of
Bristol, in 4.

Mr. Ben. Hubbard [Sermo Secularis] Or, a Sermon to bring to remembrance the
dealings of Jehovah with this Kingdom of England, in 4.

Mr. J. P. A Sermon preached upon Matthew. 22.21. wherein is set forth the King's
Due in part, and the Peoples Duty, in 4.

Mr. Ambr. Stavely (Iudex Expurgatorius: Or, a short Examination of the
doctrine of Purgatory) A Sermon lately published, in 4.

Mr. Peter Sterry [The Clouds in which Christ comes] A Sermon preached before
the Parliament, in 4.

-- [The teaching of Christ in the Soul] A Sermon preached before the
Parliament, in 4.

Mr. Robert Wild (The arraignment of a sinner at the Bar of Divine Justice) A
Sermon preached in St. Maryes in Oxon, at an Assize there, the 5th. of March,
1655. newly published, in 4.

Mr. Giles Firmin, Stablishing against shaking, or a discovery of the Prince of
darkness (Scarcely) transformed into an Angel of light, powerfully now working
in the deluded people called Quakers, in 4.

Mr. Stephen Marshall, The Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion
vindicated. A Sermon preached before the first Parliament on a Monthly Fast
day, newly published.

Mr. Simeon Ash, Good courage discovered and encouraged. A Sermon preached
before the Commanders of the Military forces of the City of London, in 4.

In Octavo large.
Mr. Robert Young (A Sovereign Antidote against all Grief, with the Victory of
Patience) in 8.

Mr. Ben. Needler (Expository Notes, with Practical Observations upon Genesis)
lately published, in 8.

Octavo small.
Mr. George Hopkins (Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ) or the Doctrine of
Sanctification, which is the greater part of our Salvation, founded upon
Christ, who is both the Meritorious and Efficient cause of sanctifying Grace,
purchasing it for working and perfecting it in his people, etc. newly
published, in 8.

Mr. John Thrap, Theologia Theologiae, the true Treasure, or a Treasury of holy
Truths, touching God's Word, and God the Word, in 8.

Bp. Davenant (An Exhortation to Brotherly Communion betwixt the Protestant
Churches) in 8.

Bp. Cooper (The Triumph of a Christian) in three excellent Treatises; 1.
Jacob's wrestling with God, etc. in 8.

The Bee-Hive of the Romish Church) A work of all good Catholics to be read,
and most necessary to be understood, in 8.

Mr. John Simpson (The Perfection of Justification against the Pharisees, the
Purity of Sanctification against the Stainers of it, the Unquestionablenesse of
Glorification against the Sadduces) in 8.

Mr. Hall (The Loathsomeness of long hair) A Treatise wherein the question is
stated, many arguments agaimst it produced; with an Appendix against Painting,
Spots, Naked Breasts, etc. lately published, in 8.

-- (Vindiciae Literarum, The Schools Guarded) or the excellency and
usefulness of Arts, Sciences, Languages, History, and all sorts of Human
Learning, in subordination to Divinity, with an Appendix in Answer to Mr.
Webster, lately published, in 8.

Mr. John Warren of Hatfield in Essex (Principles of Christian Practice)
Illustrated with Questions and Scripture-answers; lately published, in 8.

Mr. Daniel Evans (A Baptismal Catechism) showing unto what persons, whether
of riper years, or as yet Infants, the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be
administered according to the Scriptures, lately published, in 8.

Twelves large.
Mr. Thomas Gery, The Fort Royal of Christianity Defended: Or a demonstration
of the Divinity of the sacred Scriptures, with a discussion of the great
controversies in Religion, about universal redemption, free will, original sin,
etc. in 12. newly published.

(The Practice of Christianity) or the Epitome of Mr. Rogers seven Treatises,
in 12.

Mr. Yhomas Jackson (The true Evangelical Temper) wherein Divinity and
Ecclesiastical History are interwoven and mixed, etc. in three Sermons, in 12.

Twelves small.
Mr. Mullard (Celestial Soliloquies) composed of several divine Meditations and
Prayers, drawn from the holy Scripture, in 12.

Francis Thin Esquire; (The perfect Ambassador) treating of the Antiquity,
Priveledges, and Behavior of men belonging to that Function, in 12.

FINIS.

