THE Libertine Schooled, OR A VINDICATION OF THE Magistrates Power in Religious
matters. IN ANSWER TO SOME FALLACIOUS QUAERIES Scattered about the City of
Limrick, by a Nameless AUTHOR, about the 15th of December, 1656.

And for Detection of those Mysterious Designs so vigorously fomented, if not
begun among us, by Romish Engineers, and Jesuitick Emissaries, under Notionall
Disguises.

Published, By Claudius Gilbert, B. D. and Minister of the Gospel at Limrick in
IRELAND.

Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Let every soul be subject, etc. Zech. 13. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6. And I will cause the Prophets and unclean spirits to pass out of the
Land, etc. Isa. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy uursing Fathers, etc. (...)
Magistratus in terra, Coarctionis haeres, quodvis improbum pudefaciens, Judic.
18. 7. (...) Dei timor Principium Sapientiae, (Politicae uti and
Ecclesiasticae. Axiom. Arabic.

London, Printed for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet. 1657.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord HENRY CROMWELL Commander in Chief of the Forces in
IRELAND. And to the Right Honorable HIS Highnesses Council FOR THE Affairs of
IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
THe Glory of the latter days consists very much in their godly Magistrates;
and the Glory of those Magistrates in their promoting of Christ's Glory. When
the Lords Spirit would give an abstract of heaven on earth, Isa. 49. 23.
he promises Kings and Queens for nursing Fathers and Mothers to his Church.
Thus Portion and Protection are assured to his people, on the most honorable
and happy terms. Psalm. 82. 1. (...)
The Lord himself is pleased to put his own Name upon those persons to whom he
gives a providentiall Commission to act in his Name, Psalm. 82 5. (...)
with civil Authority in the managing of his interest on earth. He has said Ye
are Gods, by a providentiall voice, that ye might act like God, and for God, in
subordination to his providence. Psalm. 47. 9.
Such Shields of the earth belong unto him in a peculiar way, which are made by
him, and must act for him in a peculiar manner. He needs no instruments about
any work, yet is he pleased to honor instruments about his greatest work. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Its Your Honor to be employed by him, he makes it Your Happiness to be
faithful to him. That he will employ Ministers of his Word to instruct his
Church, it is from his Grace; that he does entrust Magistrates with his Sword
for the protection of his Church, it is for his Glory. Both Jewel and Case,
man's Soul and Body were framed by him, as God of Nature; both Soul and Body
were by his Son redeemed, as the God of all Grace. Both the internal and
external man do need his Spirit for the good of both: Magistrates and
Ministers are called to Office, Ezra 1.
and blessed therein, by the same Spirit. Ezra 2. etc.
Moses and Aaron were joined of old in ordering Christ's Law: Hag. 1.
Zerubabell and Joshua were not severed in the restoring thereof. Zech. 1.
Though Primitive Churches wanted, Zech. 3.
for a season, the Magistrates help, yet in due season were they made partakers
of that Royal favor. Zech. 4. 10.
They wanted them first, that Gods glory might not, on mistake, be given to
man; they had them again, that the same Glory might not be still abused by man.
No sooner did Antichrist make encroachments on Christ's Ministry, but he usurped
as fast on his Magistracy; he swallowed up that, Rev. 13. 1, 7, 8. Rev. 13. 11,
12.
as the two horned Beast, Ecclesiastically; and he subdued this, as the ten
horned Beast, Politically. Christ recovered both from Antichristian Yoke in his
great Reformation, as both had been usurped from him, by Antichristian
defection. When he took care to purify his Church in its Ministry, he showed
no less care about the Magistracy. As some of both sorts have witnessed for him
in a sackcloth condition; so some of both sorts shall witness of him in a
seasonable ascension. Rev. 11. Jer. 3. 14, 15. Jer. 30. 21.
When he gives his people Pastors after his own heart, he gives them Rulers to
govern in his ways. Thus he acts by men after the manner of men, because he
deals with men in the things of God. The world is his great house that must be
well taught; but it is through sin, a discomposed house that needs a good
Rule. Gods interest is such in faithful Rulers, that Satan will be still
attempting all means to blast their faithfulness; if he cannot keep them from
doing Gods work, he will use instruments to mar that very work. Much of it
appeared in former experiences, and we see it too sadly in these latter days.
Good men shall be seduced to betray Gods work, yea and persuaded that it is
Satan's work. That which the Lord does tender with most zeal, Error will
persuade to slight with most neglect: If God put much stress on the first Table
of his Law, Error will take it off from the Magistrates care. What many other
parts have sadly bewailed, we find now much cause to bemoan afresh. That
spirit that once disturbed Germany, is gotten too deeply into our bowels.
Christ's Ministers were first struck at by that hand, which reached the next
blow to the Magistrates. Those Foxes and Wolves that would worry Christ's Flock,
cannot bear good will to faithful Shepherds. They would first debauch the
spirits of men, and then their bodies will be surely theirs. The Ministers
first shall be Antichristian, Sisidan. Comment. Bullinger. Cloppenburg. Guy de
Bres.
and the Magistrates shall bear that title next. Munster had once many fair
warnings, but the things of their peace were hid from their eyes. If we gain
wisdom by our neighbors harm, it is a mercy of the choicest kind. That good
hand of heaven that brought Your Honors into this wilderness, has much to do
here for you, and by you. Isreal's condition in their wilderness, is a most
lively parallel of this Land. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
They had Christ present in his Ordinances, Psalm. 106. 13.
but wanted a heart to improve the same: Signal redemptions the Lord wrought
for them, but his wondrous works they had soon forgotten: Numb. 16. 3, 4 16. 25.
Magistrates and Ministers he provided them, but they slighted and scorned the
one and the others: Holy profession God called them to, they soon abused it to
self-exalting: Moses and Aaron were easily despised, when Corah and his crew
had once got their hearts. When Divine Ordinances were counted humane, Psalm.
106. 19, 20, 28, 29.
humane presumptions were counted Divine. Their Levelling spirits that would
equalize all, soon met with a check from their Superior. They sank alive into
the earths bowels, Numb. 16. 32
that bid defiance to the God of heaven. Psalm. 106. 17.
The Lords jealousy maintained his servants, who had zealously maintained his
Name. Numb. 16. 35.
They were soon consumed by fire from Gods house, Psalm. 106. 18.
who made it their work to fire Gods house. They regarded not his daily
provisions, Psalm. 106. 15.
and they paid dear for foolish desires. When the Lords servants were doing
them most good, they were then plotting to do them most evil. Thus are they our
glass and our pourtraiture, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11
that we may the better learn to mend our faults. Moses had to do with a
froward people, Your Honors charge here looks too much like them. Joh. 1. 14,
16. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
The wisdom and zeal He received from God are stored up in Christ for all Your
supplies. That Christ who was all to Him and to them, Ephesians. 1. 23.
is ready to give all to You and to us. His Substitutes You are, who is our
Sovereign; that His work in Your hands may be prosperous, is our ardent prayer.
The Magistrates Right is the scope of these Papers; duly therefore presented to
You, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Exodus 19. 5. (...)
to do their homage. They speak Your Honor and Your Happiness, in Your
honoring and serving the Lord. His Jewels on earth he trusts with You, 1 Pet.
2. 9. (...). 2 Chro. 15. 2.
that his Worship and friends may be Your Jewels. The Lord is with You, whilst
You be with Him, if any forsake Him, such will He forsake. The glorious
characters of His presence with You, to this very day, may much revive Your
hearts, and strengthen Your hands. He has been with You as the Lord of Hoasts,
He will be Yours still, as the God of Peace. That You may do much, expect much
from Him, so shall Your Returns answer Your Receipts. Those unclean spirits
that are now raging shall soon be cast out by the Prince of Peace. Hag. 2. 6,
7, 8.
He does overturn and shake all Nations, Ezekiel. 21. 27.
that Christ the desire of the Nations may come. Heb. 1^. 26, 27, 28, 29.
That King of Nations shall regain his right, Jer. 10. 7.
which as King of Saints he will still improve. Revel. 15. 4.
Your Honors daily work is multiplicious and momentous still; Exodus 17. 11, 12.
Aarons and Hurs hands must be subservient to uphold your own. It Is our delight
to serve You cordially, that You may serve Christ most effectually. I dare not
presume any longer on You than to signify my zealous ambition, to be and
appear in the work of Christ,

Your Lordships humbly devoted Servant, Claudius Gilbert.
From my Study in Limrick, December. 22. 1656.
THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THe Civil power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion is a weighty Point
much controverted in these days, as it has formerly been upon several
accounts. The Champions of Truth have been put upon it in all ages to vindicate
this part of Christ's interest, against the renewed assaults of numerous
adversaries. The sophistical mistakes of its oppugners has drawn them and
their followers into dangerous absurdities and contradictions therein. Very few
of them, if any, have labored to state the question aright, that they might
debate it methodically. Many outcries we indeed meet with against compulsion of
conscience, but very little of sober discourse about the Magistrates Civil
power in Religious matters, where it crosses the pretense of conscience. That
no violent force should or can be put upon men's consciences, being granted to
them, most of their Arguments fight with their own shadows: Some would seem to
oppose all kind of Magistraticall power in any part of the first Table,
Besides the Greek and Latin Fathers, See Bullinger, Paraeus, Calvin, Beza,
Tossanus, Marlorat, Muscul. Snecan, etc. Mr Tho. Cobbet of N E 1653.
pleading for a licentious liberty of all sorts therein. Others admit of
limitations and several distinctions therein, and yet the strength of their
reasons, complies with the former, when duly weighod. Many worthy Pens have
taken very commendable pains in stating and vindicating of that legal Right,
which the Lords Magistraticall substitute is entrusted with as Custos and
vindex utriusque Tabulae: Specially Mr Thomas Cobbet in 1653. N. England, has
found abundant cause to praise the Lord for the due exercise and vindication of
that Power, the neglect and opposition whereof was like to have proved their
overthrow in Civils and Ecclesiasticals. The same spirit of Error has
struggled there so hard for Libertinism, has gotten too much strength and
favor in these Nations. The like design has been therefore vigorously drawn
on, to take off the Magistrate from that part of his work which is the most
noble and most needful in such a season: Various interests have joined forces
herein, yea diverse good men have been ensnured into it at unawares. There is a
fallacious plausibility in many things said therein, which takes easily with
the weak and credulous Christian, as in all other doctrines of Error. Some
would promote it, that they may promote and shelter at pleasure, their
Levelling, Ranting and Quaking principles. Others favor it for fear of being
restrained in some things which the Magistrate cannot but see just cause to
take cognizance of for regulation. What rank our Querist is to be numbered in,
we cannot certainly say, his Paper not being subscribed by any, though his
drift may be easily guessed at: It grieves our hearts most, to see any of
Christ's professed friends taking part in such a quarrel with the common enemy
of his Word and Ordinances. The sad consequent of sinful separations from the
Reformed Protestant Churches, appears much in this, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
as in other things. When the unity of the Spirit that should keep the bond of
peace in the unity of Christian Faith and Baptism within Gods house, comes into
disregard, it cannot but prove fatally ominous to the ushering in of those many
evils, which have still been concomitants thereof. The Primitive times afford
us many woeful instances of it, and Germany with other parts has verified it
by sad experience ever since the great Reformation begun. Schismatic
rendings of the Church of Christ were very seldom free from heretical
Apostasi^s Had we no Record, Divine or Humane, Ancient or Modern to testify
this truth, the posture of persons and things among us would demonstrate it too
abundantly. Yet would not we be mistaken in showing the bitter fruits of
sinful separations, as if we disowned all separations. There is a good
separation from evil, required of God; as there is an evil separation from
good, forbidden by him. Romans 16. 17, 18.
A separation from the man of sin, and from the sin of man, is a Christians
duty, Revel. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 18, 19. Isa* 52. 11. Jud. 19.
Jer. 51. 6. But separation from the Church and good Ordinances of God is an
unchristian sin. Christ owned the Jewish Church in its public Ministry and
worship, though distempered with many corruptions in every part thereof; whilst
they retained the fundamentals of Religion, he still entertained communion with
them. As long as that first administration of the Lords gracious Covenant
lasted, both he and his Apostles maintained correspondency with that visible
Church of his, whilst they did most keenly rebuke the members thereof for their
several enormities: yea, and after their setting up of that Evangelicall
worship (which as the second administration of the Lords gracious Covenant, was
to make an end of the Ceremonials, and continue to the worlds end, Heb. 9. 10,
11, 12. Heb. 12. 26, 27. Matthew. 28. 21. Matthew. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 26.) yet were
they so shie of rending the Garment of Christ's body, his Church, that they did
for a long time bear with the Jewish outrages, laboring by all means to keep
fair with them, and broke not off, as long as they could hold with them in the
great foundation of Religion. The like course was taken by God and his servants
toward Israel and Judah, before their Babylonian Captivity. The Kingdom of the
ten Tribes (often called Israel, Ephraim, Samaria, etc. by way of distinction)
revolted from Gods worship, under Jeroboam and his successors, corrupting the
same, perverting the Ministry, advancing the lowest of the people to the
Priesthood, joining Idolatry of several kinds thereto, etc. yet were they
still owned, and called the people and spouse of God, and communion with them
kept by the Prophets till their Captivity. So when the Kingdom of the two
Tribes, 2 King. 17.
called Judah and Benjamin, did gradually apostatize from the purity of Gods
worship, joining often Idolatry and gross evils thereto, yet were they still
honored with the Name of Gods people, his Portion and Church, Jerem. 50. 7.
Jerem. 51. 5. Thus in former ages, though corruption did increase apace in the
Christian Churches beginning in the Apostles days, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and successively spreading till the Man of Sin got into Christ's Seat, 2 Timothy 4.
being ascended to his Meridian of Supreme Power, Dan. 11. 36, 37, 38.
infallible in Ecclesiasticals and temporals; yet were the Lords servants in
all their vigilant and zealous Vindications of his Truth, very careful still
to maintain the Unity and Peace of the Church to the utmost, till the Whore of
Rome by separating from Christian Fundamentals, Rev. 18. 4.
had necessitated them to separate utterly from her Communion. Zech. 8. 16, 19.
Truth and Peace are so dear friends to Christ, that his friends cannot but be
friendly to them both, as far as their power reaches. Those faithful
defenders of the Truth who were driven away into the wilderness of America, by
a turbulent party (visibly then complying with the Roman Antichrist) did still
testify their care of preserving that Christian unity, in all their
contentions for verity and purity. Though they desired much and prayed
earnestly for further Reformation in the Parish Churches of England, yet did
they still own their Church state, and Communion therewith. Thus sober
Christians will still be manifesting their love to Christian peace, in their
hottest pursuits after Truth, whether in their own or others societies. The
fire of Christian zeal is of singular use, when it keeps within its proper
place and season. But when it is scattered, and gets into the thatch, the
mischief thereof is unexpressible. What dreadful Convulsions and Inflammations
has not such a rash zeal caused* among us, both in Church and State? When
Christians cannot discover and mend faults without unchristian separations from
the Church, and unchurching of it, it must needs prove the ground of many sad
effects: It did so in the primitive days, it has done so in ours. In stead of
an amicable debate of things controverted, bitter contests, and woeful ruptures
have attended such courses: In stead of amending one fault, more are created
afresh; in stead of recovering one Truth, many errors are easily let in.
Romish Engineers are always at hand, to blow the bellows and widen
differences; taking part now with one, new with the other, under a disguise,
that their designs may be carried on. They fish best in all such troubled
waters, and improve the opportunities of gaining by our losses. This has been
one main cause of so many outcries for general tolerations, under the fair
colors of Liberty of Conscience, that every one might follow his own list. The
Magistrates power has been so often cried down and exclaimed against, lest
error and sin should be any way curbed or checked in their unlimited unruly
power. Some well-minded Christians have been that way so extravagant through
mis-applications and mis-interpretations of diverse Scriptures, that they have
too often pleaded the devils cause, in thinking to plead the godlies interest.
Some would give too much to the Magistrate, and others too little. Some would
destroy Ecclesiastical Government by advancing the Civil: Others would destroy
the Civil by exalting the Ecclesiastical. These two powers which God has
appointed for the Churches good in their respective capacities and motions,
some would confound, others would destroy, and others would make them to
destroy each other. Thus varieties of peccant humors breed still varieties of
diseases, in all sublunary subjects, when they break their bounds limited to
them by the Supreme Disposer of all. To avoid all extremes in this affair, we
find our selves obliged by Scripture and reason to own a Magistraticall power
authorized by Gods Word to act officially about sacred things in a civil
manner, either in commanding, forbidding, or punishing the external man,
according to Gods revealed Word, for the Lords honor, and man's good: A power
we say authorized, not a private charitative act; Magistraticall, not
Ministerial; acting officially, not indifferently; about sacred things of the
first Table, in a Civil manner, not by Ecclesiastical censures: concerning the
external man expressed in words or deeds, not the internal expressed by
thoughts; according to Gods revealed Word, not his own fancy, or any man's
will; for Gods honor and the public good, not for any selfish ends. Thus we
have the subject and matter, the Author and form, the manner and Rule, the
object and end of this Magistraticall power, so needful, so useful. How much
is said for demonstration hereof by the reason of God and of man, is touched at
in the following Tract, having been fully made out by the Learned in all Ages.
All godly Princes, Jewish and Christian have been rendered famous, more or less,
according as they more or less tendered Gods interest in this eminent charge. If
any object, that the Jewish Princes were Types of Christ therein; We answer,
The Scripture expresses two sorts of Types: There were also some mixed Types in
moral things, which were occasionally Representers of Evangelicall substance,
as David's and Salomons acts of Justice, Piety, and authoritatively done, which
having a Moral ground, Rule and end, are still to be imitated in the like
case, as the Scripture clears, both in first and second Table; as Psalm. 69. 9.
with Joh. 2. 17. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. compared with Exodus 20. Genesis 18. 18, 19,
etc.
Some properly for adumbration or representation; thus the High priest and
Sacrifices typed out Christ, Heb. 10. 1, 2. Others for imitation and direction,
thus Gods dealings with Israel were Types, (...), or examples, 1 Cor. 10. 6,
11. The former Types were to expire, the latter to endure: Now that power used
by Jewish Magistrates had nothing of a shadow, but much for example, being so
commanded and commended of God therein, in performing a Moral, not Ceremonial
duty. If any object, It was part of the Judicial Law: We answer, 1. Let it be
proved wherein it was peculiar to the state. 2. If that were granted, yet the
equity of those Judicials is still in force, and imitable now as occasion
serves; its not now unlawful, though all Judicials be not always expedient:
Guildas. Dr Ushers British Antiquit. Nath. Bacons Hist. of Engl. Govern.
Gods Law is the best Rule of our Judicials, as King Lucius the first Christian
Monarch of Britain, learned of Gods Word, confirmed to him by Letters from
Eleutherius and others, in the second age from Christ, which he also followed;
as did Alfred the mirror of Princes, Bedae Histor. Matthew. Westminster. Matthew. Paris
Engl. Histor. Fox. Monum. Council. Tom. Morn. Myster. Iniquit. Magdeburg. Centur.
and other successors, of their valor and virtue. As for Christian Emperors,
History is full of their noble Acts in this way for Christ, approved and
applauded by all wise Christians, in their Synods and Councils Provincial,
National, and Universal. The Greek and Latin Fathers agree in this thing
very harmoniously. The very light of nature taught all sober Heathens to
observe this very thing as a special help to man's well being, both for
temporals here, and a better state beyond death it self. (...). Plutarc.
Riligio propugnaculum potestatis, legnm and honesta disciplinae vinculum. Plato.
Their famous Legislators, Charondas, Solon, Licurgus, Zaleucus, Plato, etc.
their learned Philosophers, Aristotle, Socrates, Seneca, Plutarch, etc. their
chief Poets and Orators, Homer, Tully, Hesiod, Virgill, etc. have many passages
to that purpose; they could not but observe the influence which Religion
carries into the actions of men, and how much providence has been found in all
Ages, smiling upon those Persons and Societies, who made conscience in a
constant tenure of piety and justice, of tendering and promoting the will and
honor of the supreme God. Many hints thereof they have gathered out of holy
Writs translated into Greek (before that famous version of the LXX, Hnmanae
societatis fundamentum, Religio. Cicer.
under Philadelphus) and much used in Alexandria, whither Plato, Heu! primae
scelerum causae mortalibus a gris naturam nescire Dei, Silius Italic. Clem.
Alexand. Stromat.
and other Philosophers frequently resorted. The Egyptians also, and
Phaenicians, and other neighbors of the Hebrews, had learned much of the
Patriarchs and Jews successively, which they communicated to other Nations, as
appears by their Poetical disguises of Scripture stories, so abundant in their
Works. The several Churches reformed in France, Holland, Switherland, etc. in
their Confessions and Writings, have unanimously owned this power of the
Magistrate, as of singular conducement to the suppression of evil, and
encouragement to the good. Many of the Learned Papists J. Parisions. Victoria.
themselves, (though the Jesuits ascribe so much to the Pope and Councils, as
opposes it diametrally) have in their sober mood acknowledged the foresaid
Magistraticall Powers upon the said reasons to be very excellently useful.
Widrington.
Thus the clear light of this Truth extorts acknowledgements from the very
adversaries. It Is so much the more sad a judgment to see so many professors of
Truth prove opposers thereof. These spiritual judgments so common among us,
are the worst of all, and usually attended with temporal plagues. When there
was no King in Israel, no Magistrate, no heir of restraint to put the wicked to
shame, as it was at Laish, Judge. 18. 7. so it fared with Gods own people, they
were soon exposed to desolations of all sorts, Judge. 17. 6.
2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 4, 5. whilst every one did what was good in his own eyes,
Judge. 21. 25.
very few could be found doing what was good in Gods eyes. For want of such a
Kingly exercise in the seat of judgment, to scatter all evil with his eyes,
Prove. 20. 8. All kind of evil gathered so fast, that many a storm followed
those dark clouds. The power ordained of God for thy good, says the Apostle
(without exception) Romans 13. 3, 4, 5. is also a revenger of every evil,
(without exception, for which the Law distinguishes not, we may not
distinguish, and if you except one sort of good or evil, you may as well except
the other, and so null the Text) and a terror to all that do evil, so that we
must needs be subjects, not for wrath only, but also for conscience sake: The
conscience you see is bound, though it be not forced to such an obedience. As
the Magistrates conscience is bound in his charge as Gods Deputy to regulate
and promote every good of the external man in Religion; so is he bound in
conscience to forbid and punish evil therein, according to its degree. As thus
his conscience, so is the subjects conscience bound by the Divine precept; as
the one in commanding, so the other in obeying. If any object, this will bring
tyranny and slavery: Answer, Where Gods Law is the Rule, as here it ought to
be, there can be neither tyranny nor slavery. 2. By the same reason you might
deny his power about the second Table for fear of tyranny, and so make him a
Cipher. If you say, there is an Ecclesiastical way of dealing with Christians:
We answer, 1. All are not Christians. 2. All Christians regard not Church
censures. 3. Christians are to be dealt with by the Church in matters of the
second Table also; Will you deny the Magistrates cognizance of that therefore,
that he may be vox praeterea nihil? 4. The Church deals with offenders in its
way Ecclesiastically, the Magistrate in his, Civilly (without interfering) with
their respective members. If any pretend conscience against either, the Word of
God is the Regula regulans that rules conscience, and all things else.
Conscience is but Regula regulata, which obliges not against Gods Word, nor
excuses from sin: David and Paul acknowledge their sins of ignorance, and
against a good conscience, and very great, Psalm. 19. 12, 15. Act. 26. 9, 10,
11. If a man suffer with an erroneous conscience, its for sin, not for
conscience. Is was and is still the great sin of unregenerate conscience,
that it cannot be, its not subject to the Law of God, Romans 8. 7. even the
(...), the wisest and sublimest conscience, and judgment before conversion, is
thus fleshly; and some of it remains in the best, as far as unrenewed. The
dictate of conscience cannot be plea for any sin, though sometimes it may
lessen it, it never can null sin. Neitheir can any erring conscience discharge
any from his duty required by Gods Word, it can make none lawless as it self
may not be (...), 1 Cor. 9. 21.
without Law. None therefore should plead for a general Toleration of
conscience, because most men's consciences being wholly corrupt, Hi da liberta a
mala conscientia, da licentia a l'humo furioso e pestilente. Axiom. Italic.
Tit. 1. 15, 16, 17. and the best retaining much corruption, this were to plead
for sin, yea to give public allowance to sin, it were to proclaim
rebellion against God, to set up a Traitor in Christ's seat, to set up man's
fallible conscience for an infallible supreme Judge; this were to invite the
worst of men and spirits to settle among us, under pretense of conscience: What
mischief so horrid in opinion, affection or practice, that such a Toleration
would not countenance? What if Moses by Gods command, did tolerate Divorce, for
the hardness of their heart? Christ tells us, Mark 10. 5. When David was forced
to suspend the punishment of Joabs and Abishai's murder all his life, it was
because the sons of Serviah were too strong for him; as they often prove too
hard for good men and good Laws.
it was their sin occasioned it; the supreme Lawgiver may dispense therewith
at his pleasure, so may not any inferior person. We should not indeed be the
slaves of men, as Paul forbids, 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23. but to have our conscience
bound to Gods Word, and our external man bound to the Magistrates Rule, which
still is to be ruled by the Word, this is to be the servants of God in perfect
freedom. The Magistrate is bound to use all fit means of satisfying and
rectifying men's consciences, especially in things less clear to some, but he
must not neglect his duty, because some will still be unsatisfied, no more than
the Church is to neglect theirs. It Is the snare of an erroneous conscience,
that it sins either way, it cannot avoid sin; there is so much the more need
that all means be endeavored for the purging and clearing thereof. It behooves
the Magistrate as well as all other superiors, not to make himself guilty of
other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
by neglect of his own duty. 1 King. 11.
Solomon is charged for going after Ashtaroth, because he gave his wives leave
to do it, and joined therein afterward himself. The Toleration of the
High Places (though they were for worship to God only, 2 Chronicles. 33. 17.) yet it
was the sin of those Princes that suffered it a long time, being contrary to
Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 12. 11, 12, 13. God charges it, even on godly eminent
Reformers, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, etc. till Josias. Gamaliels counsel, pleaded by
some, will prove a poor shelter of fig leaves to cover such a sinful
nakedness, of permitting known evil with such a neutrall spirit. What
wickedness might not be pleaded for by the same reason? A Christian indeed
should be meek and patient, 1 Cor. 13. in a good way; but not to the neglect of
his duty against evil, which was Eli's great sin, who therein honored his sons
more than God, 1 Samuel 2. 29. it cost him, them, and all Israel dear, for a
warning to us all, Eccl 8. 11. Sinful Tolleration brings woeful augmentation
of evil still. We must do to others, it is true, as we would be done to, so that
Gods will, and man's duty be not neglected. The Law indeed is not to the
righteous, or against the righteous, 1 Timothy 1. 9. (...).
as righteous; but it is laid against all unrighteousness, whether reigning or
remaining in any; Paul himself was not without the Law, but under the Law to
Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 21. Jam. 2. 8. We should have a tender care of tender
consciences, but a most tender care of Gods pleasure and honor, the sole rule,
and source of man's duty and good. Unfaithful tenderness is cruel pity, both
to the patient and others. The Magistrate is Lord of the external man, for
good; though not of any man's faith; man's soul being above his reach, whereof
faith is a special act. He infringes no Christian liberty, when he checks
sinful Libertinism, miscalled liberty: prosecution of evil is no persecution
of good. If Papists and others take occasion to abuse any from hence, so do
they abuse and pervert Scripture, and all good things. We must not think to do
Jews or others good, by doing or tollerating evil. Gods cause needs not be
beholding to the devils help, nor will it be furthered thereby. White witches
are always most mischievous in the conclusion. The Magistrates authoritative
owning of the truth, is not like to hinder the progress thereof; he may
possibly mistake, and therefore needs all meet help, being accountable to God
for the matter and manner of his work. What other Objections are moved against
this Truth, may be more fully answered in the following Resolves.

December. 22. 1656. C. G.

THE Libertine Schooled, OR A VINDICATION OF THE Magistrates Power in matters
of RELIGION. IN Answer to the Fallacious Queries of a Nameless Author, lately
spread about the City of Limrick. For Detection of those Mysterious Designs so
vigorously fomented, if not begun among us, by Romish Engineers, and Jesuitick
Emissaries, under Notionall Disguises.
Thus begins our Querist.
Qu. 1. WHether it be not better for us that a Patent were granted to
Monopolize all the Corn and Cloth, and to have it measured out unto us at their
price, and pleasure, which yet were as intolerable, as for some men to
appoint, and measure out unto us what, and how much we shall believe and
practice in matters of Religion?

Ans. 1. The whole may be granted without danger as it is expressed. 2. If we
may guess that their meaning by their scope, is to show by this comparison, the
unreasonableness of the Magistrates enforcing in Religious matters; then we
answer by showing the fallacy of the comparison, in setting forth the true
parallel. The Lord is the absolute Sovereign of all things Civil and Sacred;
man is not so in neither, yet is the Magistrate the Lords servant to enforce by
Civil power the disposal of things in both, as God has appointed in his Word:
For things Civil, it is easily granted; for Sacred matters, besides many other
signal instances given in both Testaments, by way of precept and promise,
prefiguration and president, see Deuteronomy. 13. 5. Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ezra 6.
11. 12. Ezra 7. 6, 11, 25, 26, 27. compare those verses together, proving the
Kings grant to be an answer to Ezra's request, for constituting Magistrates
with coercive power, in Religious things, in Gods Name, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Zech. 13. 3 4, 5, 6. a Prophecy of Gospel times: 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Isa. 49 23.
applicable especially to later days.

Qu. 2. Whether there be not the same reason that they should be appointed by
us what they shall believe and practice in Religion; as for them to do so to
us; seeing we can give as good ground for what we believe and practice, as they
can do for what they would have, if not better?

Ans. It Is not reasonable that either they or we should appoint to each other,
what is to be believed or practiced in Religion; but it is most reasonable that
Christ's Law given to us both, should be enforced by the Magistrate, the Civil
substitute of Christ. The former proofs do fully clear this, and many other
such places, as also, 2 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2, 3, 4, etc. 2 Chronicles.
34. 4, 5. Neh. 13. 19, 21, 22, etc. We might easily bring in many instances for
each command of the first Table, how the godly Magistrates acted for God
according to his command, were it necessary.

Qu. 3. Whether they that would force other men's consciences be willing to have
their own forced?

Ans. No man may or can force another man's conscience; but the Magistrate is
bound by his Office as the Lords Deputy, to oblige and force the external man
to the observance of Gods will manifested in his written word, though he be
unwilling and pretend conscience. Besides the former proofs clearing this, see
1 King. 18. 40, 41, etc. though Baals Priests pleaded conscience for Idolatry,
yet were they put to death by Elijahs command, which execution was attended
with special blessings, Joh. 16. 2. They that plead conscience for putting
Christians to death, it excuses not, but they should suffer for it, according
to that indispensable Law, Genes. 9. 6. Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4. commanded all to
seek the Lord, and to do the Law Nehemiah contended with the Nobles, and
threatened strangers about their abuses in Tithes, and the Sabbath, Neh. 13. 11,
17, 19, 21.

Qu. 4. Whether Christ has said he will have an unwilling people compelled to
serve him?

Ans. Though he has not said those very words, yet has he said in effect so
much in those many Scriptures that testify the Magistrates duty, to that end,
either by precept commanding it, or by presidents commended for it, or rewarded
in it; or by the contrary forbidden, reproved, threatened, and punished for
neglect, contempt, or abuse of that duty. The Scriptures forementioned do fully
prove this, as also very many more, were it needful to quote them. It was the
commendation of Asa, and his people, 2 Chronicles. 14. 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 15. having
been stirred up by the Prophet, they acted further, verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
putting down the Idolatrous Queenmother with her Idol, for which they were
signally blessed.

Qu. 5. If a Father or Magistrate have not power to force a Virgin to marry one
she cannot love; whether they have power to force one where they cannot believe
against the light and checks of their own consciences?

Ans. 1. The Discourse hitherto has been concerning acts of the outward, not
of the inward man, whereof Believing is one, wherein the Magistrate has no
power nor authority, neigher (...), nor (...), as is confessed by all: So that
the question as worded, is but captious and impertinent. Yet if by Believing
the Querist means profession of faith, or practice of religious duties required
of the outward man, it is answered, That though a Father or Magistrate have no
power to force a Virgin to marry one she cannot love, yet has the Magistrate
power to force one, where he cannot believe, though against the light and check
of his conscience. Because, 1. A Virgin before contract is not bound to any one
person for a husband, but every soul under Gospel-publication is bound to own
Christ for a husband, and his Word written for the Rule of their faith,
profession and practice.

2. Though God allows Virgins to choose their husbands, yet does he not allow
men to choose any Religion besides his own.

3. As the Magistrate has power to restrain forcibly all women from
fornication and adultery, and punish them for it; so may and should he restrain
all persons from spiritual fornication and adultery committed by the outward
man, and punish them for the same, though the light and checks of their
consciences should erroneously justify them in their said fornication and
adultery; seeing no plea of conscience can be on any account, a sanctuary to
any sin, or breach of Gods revealed will. The Scriptures formerly named do
sufficiently clear this truth.

We meet next with an Objection proposed by the Querist to be answered by
himself, drawn from Luke 14. 23. which being but a man of clouts for himself to
skirmish withal, and not so pertinent to the point in hand, as more weakly
asserting the Magistrates power, we wave, that we may come the sooner to more
express matter for demonstration, by this Querist cavilled at.

Qu. 6. Whether the servants of the Lord are not forbidden to strive, but to be
gentle toward all? 2 Timothy 4. 2.

Ans. 1. We readily grant it; and that it was of force of old when
transgressors of the first and second Table were most severely dealt withal.

2. The Scripture quoted says nothing for their purpose, in that, 1. It speaks
not of Magistrates, but of Ministers duty properly, as appears by the whole
context, directed to Timothy a Minister of Christ, as a directory for the
Ministry. 2. Though it should be applied to the Magistrate, yet will it not
exclude his civil Jurisdiction, and power, as it excludes not the Ministers:
the scope of the place signifying to us, that none of the Lords servants should
strive for any evil matter, nor in an evil manner, (though for good) but
against evil in a good manner, as Jud. 3. 4. Gal. 2. 11. Neh. 13. Romans 13. 4,
5, 6. For this they are commended, Rev. 2. 2, 3. For the neglect thereof they
are rebuked, Rev. 2. 14. 20, 21. Rev. 3. 13, 16. To this duty they are also
often stirred up, both in their civil and spiritual relations. It becomes not
Christian Magistrates to be cowed in Christ's Cause, nor to betray the same by
cowardliness, or by respects, Prove. 20. 8. Exodus 32. 20, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Romans 13. Zech. 13. 2, 3, 4* 5. Rev. 17. 16.

Qu. 7. Whether the Saints weapons against errors be carnal or no? 2 Cor. 10.
4. or whether the semi-independents were of that mind in the Bishops days?

Ans. 1. To the first part, Ministers weapons (of whom the text properly quoted
speaks) are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty through God; of this mind
were judicious Christians (whether nicknamed Independents or others) in the
Bishops days, as they are still.

2. If we should grant it, to include the Magistrates weapons, we deny them to
be sinfully carnal, though we grant them to be civilly carnal, and yet
according to Gods Ordinance, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

Qu. 8. Whether it be not in vain for us to have Bibles in English, if even
against our souls persuasions from the Scriptures, we must believe as the
Church or Parish believes?

Ans. 1. This Question is impertinently proposed to Protestants, who deny
either Church or Parish to be the Rule of their faith; however it may be among
the Papists, and all Pharisaicall professors of implicit faith, and blind
obedience.

2. The Scripture must therefore be translated into all Vulgar tongues, that
every man may thereby learn to know and discern, what the Church and we ought
to believe, and to conform his belief thereto. Veritas Index ac Judex sui and
obliqui.
Conscience is to be enlightened and quickened by Gods light in Scripture, that
our faith may not be pinned upon any man's sleeve; but that all, as the noble
Beraeans, Act. 17. 11.
may try all Doctrines by the Word, bringing all to the Law and to the
Testimony; 1 John 4. 1.
that thereby their dark mind may be gradually directed, Isa. 8. 20.
through that light which shines in the Ministry of Christ and the Church, 2
Cor. 3. 18.
and their mistakes rectified. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
Wherein their judgments may possibly differ, they are to enquire soberly,
Romans 14. 19, 20, 21, ^2.
diligently, and submissively, till satisfaction be mutually given and
received. But this takes not off the Magistrates power in commanding the
outward man about things clearly revealed in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
witness Peter, Paul, Romans 13. 5, 6.
and all the Scriptures before quoted.

Qu. 9. Whether our Magistrates and Governors be not wronged, to give them the
Titles of Civil Magistrates only, if their power be spiritual?

Ans. 1. The Magistrate is not wronged thereby, seeing his Power is not
spiritual, but civil, though sometimes employed about spiritual things.

2. Our Magistrates are truly called Civil, because the means and manner of
executing their Office, their Laws and Arms, their Proceedings and Courses,
their Rewards and Punishments, are all Civil only, Romans 13.
and not Spiritual or Ecclesiastical. Though their object is sometimes
spiritual, as in things of the first Table. So that its their duty to reduce
all to Gods honor, and therefore to maintain and observe his will revealed,
being Custodes utriusque tabulae, uti and Vindices; Keepers and Defenders of
both Tables, Circa res Ecclesiasticas, (...). Eusebius.
to regulate the external man accordingly. They act, politically, about
Ecclesiastical things, as Constantine the Great said of himself, and as
becomes the Nursing-Fathers of Gods people. Their charge is to be the
Shepherds of Nations, as that great Prince is styled in History. Their Power
therein is Directive, (...).
and Protective; Remunerative and Cumulative; not destructive, but edificative,
as all former Texts clearly demonstrate.

Qu. 10. Whether compulsion of conscience was ever in practice among the
Nations or Churches, till the times of Antichrist?

Ans. Conscience cannot, must not be compelled forcibly by man, yet is it no
protection from that sword, which is a terror to every evil work, Romans 13. 1,
3, 4, 5, 6.
and requires obedience from every soul. Heresies are such evil works of the
flesh, called evil deeds by John, Gal. 5. 20.
whereof he would have no Christians to partake, 2 John v. 11. 2 John 11.
Errors destructive of fundamentals are properly called Heresies, Tit. 3. 10.
especially, when obstinately maintained. That very sword is also the Lords
servant for good, Rom 13. 4.
without exception. There were many Christian Magistrates before the Roman
Antichrist gat up into Christ's Throne, as Constantine, the Theodosii, Marcian,
etc. by whose signal Orders were kept the four General Councils: Anno 330.
1. That of Nice, against Arius, for denying Christ's Godhead, under
Constantine. 2. Anno 383.
That of Constantinople, against Macedonius, for denying the Spirits Godhead,
under Theodosius senior. 3. That of Ephesus, Anno 440.
against Nestorius, for dividing Christ into two persons, Anno 454.
under Theodosius junior. 4. That of Chalcedon, against Eutyches, Council. Tom.
Eusebius. Chron. Socrat. Zonar. Myster. Iniquit. Morn.
for confounding both Natures in Christ, under Marcian. Those godly Princes
convened Synods, presided therein, assisted, protected, and quickened them in
their several consults, owned their Resolves, and promoted them to their
power, giving up therein their Scepter unto Christ, according to those famous
Prophesies so gloriously expressed concerning them. Isa. 60. 3, 10, 11.
They counted it more honor to be membrum Ecclesiae, Isa. 62. 2.
a member of the Church, as Princely Theodosius said, Rev. 11. 15.
quam caput Imperii, than Head of the Empire. It was Antichrist that usurped on
them gradually, and by getting into the Magistrates seat disabled him from
doing his Homage to his Sovereign Christ. Thus the faithful Rulers are
honored in Divine Records for their singular care of his interest. David and
Solomon, Asa and Jehoshaphat, Ezechias and Josias, Zerubbabel and Nehemias,
with diverse others, have signal monuments erected to their same, by the Lords
own hands upon that account: Yea, Pagan Princes were so far owned of God, as
they owned him in that way; witness Nebuchadnezzar, sent to learn that lesson
among Bruits, Dan. 3. 29.
in seven years schooling there, Dan. 4. 36.
because he would not learn it to purpose before of God, Ezra 6. 7.
by man, for all Daniels teachings. Thus Darius, Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.
another Darius, and diverse more, are memorably recorded for this. Those
Princes were still rebuked and plagued that slighted and abused the same,
Nehem. 1.
as Jeroboam and his successors in Israel; Ahaez and others in Judah, besides
many more, that might be named.

But the Querist subjoyns Reasons to strengthen his doubt.

R. 1. The Sichemites, says he, used no compulsion to Jacob and his sons,
during their abode among them.

Ans. The Sichemits case is absurdly quoted. Nihil ad Rhombum. They were
Heathens, who neither owned God, nor his will revealed. Jacobs family were no
subjects of theirs, no disturbers, no opposers of Gods Will and Worship. They
were neighbors entering into league, which was afterward wickedly broken by
Simeon and Levi. Our Querist, it seems, is hard put to it, being forced to call
in Heathens for his Rule.

R. 2. The Israelites, says he, when a Captivity, yet enjoyed their
consciences.

Ans. The Israelites in Captivity enjoyed their conscience, so long as they
kept to their duty, according to Gods will revealed to them: But that cannot
plead for Tolleration of any thing contrary to Gods revealed will. When false
prophets did then arise to seduce and corrupt, they met with their due wages
from God and from man; witness the juggling prophets, Zedechias and Ahab, Jer.
29. 21.
burnt with fire by Nebuchadnezzar, for that sin common among our Libertines,
Community of Wives. Socrat. lib. 2. c. 22.
As Manes the seducer was afterward flead alive by the Persian King for his
Impostures.

R. 3. The Romans, says he, bore with the Jews in their Religion, though a
Tributary Nation.

Ans. The Romans instance is little to the purpose, who were Pagans, strangers
to Gods Word, and minded nothing but their worldly interest, to keep all quiet
under their Empire. Yet did many of the Jewish false prophets suffer under and
by them; Joseph de bell. Judaic.
witness Josephus their great Historian and Patriot. It was the Jews following
of seducing Impostors which made them rise against Magistracy and Ministry in
their pretense of the light within, and brought both their Church and State
into confusion, and themselves to ruin by the Roman power, and their intestine
discords, as the said Josephus clears at large. Much after the same manner was
that Tragedy, which was re-acted by those monstrous Impostors of Germany,
Munster, Leyden, Amsterdam, Switzerland, etc. in the years 1522, 1523,
Eresbach. hist. Annal. Sleidan. Bullinger. Melancthon. Luther. Bledisk, etc.
1533, 1534, etc. Stock and Muncer, John Becold and Knipperdoling, Skicker and
Battenburgh, with many more representing the like sad spectacles, upon the like
pretenses of Christ's Kingdom, and Liberty; witness so many Authors of approved
fidelity, living about those places and times.

Qu. 11. What would become of the Protestants of France, who live under Popish
Magistrates, if they should appear for compulsion of conscience?

Ans. Calvin. contr. Libert. Beza de haeret. pun. Junius, etc.
As for the French Protestants, their Doctrine agrees harmoniously with ours in
this, as in other points of Religion, witness their prime Authors. With them
accord the Divines of Germany, Switzerland, Netherlands, etc. Yea, the very
Lutherans in the case of tumultuous Heretics, Sleidan. Comm. Hornebeck, de
haeretic.
(though they have seemed most favorable toward those more quiet ones, that
stirred not then so openly, as many did.) Servetus suffered death at Geneva for
Blasphemy, Guy de Bres. contre les Anab. Cloppenburg. Began. Anabapt. Spanhem.
disput. contr. Anabapt. Bulling. adv. Anab.
by the Senates order, and with the approbation of the Protestant Cantons and
German Divines, who were first consulted with. Neither is there any compulsion
of conscience in this, but punishment of wickedness, on such who subvert their
own and others consciences, in the ruin of all Truth and Peace. Good men need
not fear the Powers, Bledskin. Hist. David Georg. Apocalypse. Haeref. arch. etc.
but evil men must and cannot but dread them. Such a Liberty of Conscience is
desired among us and them, as may prove freedom from sin, the liberty of
heaven; not freedom to sin, the liberty of hell. It would be their joy and
ours, as it is our joint desire and prayer, that all Magistrates may so study
their power in Divine and spiritual things, as to countenance all good, and
discountenance all evil. If they mistake in the application, that is man's
fault, not the rules. None must neglect their duty for fear of mistakes, but be
so much the more diligent and vigilant therein. As we may not do evil, that
good may come of it: so may we not neglect the good, least evil should come.
Man should mind Gods work, and trust him for help and success. The Protestants
of France have found the good experience thereof hitherto, under varieties of
dispensations.

Qu. 12. Whether does not the practice of compulsion of conscience among
Protestants, greatly harden the Papists in their Inquisitory practices? and
whether so long as they are hardened and confirmed by us, there be any
likelihood that the Gospel should take footing in Spain or Italy?

Ans. Our Doctrine and practice are no encouragement to Spanish and Romish
Inquisitions, no more than the execution of Justice upon Malefactors may be
called encouragement to the bloodiness of wicked men, against honest righteous
persons. Let Justice be done, Fiat Justitia and ruat Caelum, aut pereat mundus.
Ferdinan.
what ever become of it, said that famous Emperor, upon good ground. The great
favor showed to the Irish Papists against the Laws of God and man, before the
late unparalled Rebellion, did no good, but much hurt to all sorts. The
pampering of a foul body, is no good way to the curing of it, but effectual
physic, diet and dressing. Evil men will take advantage from, and offense at
the best things, See Engl. Hist. Camden. Elizab.
as good men will extract good out of the worst. Spain and Italy were awed in
Queen Elizabeth's time, when good Laws were vigorously prosecuted against
perverters and pretenders of conscience, who carried on hellish designs, under
specious disguises. See their Letters, Courtiers and Councils in several books
abroad, pictured out, to the life, out of their own papers, and bosom
Favorites. Parliaments Remonstr. Ro^es Masterpiece Popish favorite. Cabala,
Scrinia sacra, Motus Britaun. Engl. Histor. The Romish superstitions stirred
then apace, as you may see in Clav. Apocalyp by a Germ Author. Rev. 12. 14.
Med. Clav. Apocalypt. Brightman, etc. Myster. Iniquit. Morn Carrion* Chron.
But the sinful compliances of King James and King Charles Courts, though from
pretended depths of politic interest, proved fatal to all, as in these
Nations, so in foreign parts. Thereby were very many thousands of Protestants
betrayed and deserted in Bohemia and the Palatinate, in France and Germany, in
Denmark and Hassia, etc. Thereby were these Nations almost enslaved under
Romish and Spanish tyranny, and the Reformed Religion brought to its last gasp,
if an extraordinary hand of heaven had not made way toward our hopes of
recovery in the several parts of Europe. Spain and Italy have been the Mother
and Nurse of Antichrist from his first rise hitherto, which way soever you
please to reckon it. Some begin about Anno 396. at the division of the Roman
Empire (after the death of Theodosius the Great) between his sons Honorius and
Arcadius.

Others begin about Anno 408. Then was Rome taken many times in forty years
space and the state altered. Revel. 13. 1, 2, etc. Revel. 13. 11, 12, etc. Dan.
11. 36, 37, 38, etc.
when the Empire was torn into ten parts, by the barbarous invasions of the
Huns and Goths, Vandals and Franks, Heruls and Burgundians, Alemans and Jepids,
etc. which gave rise to that ten-horned Beast in Politicals; and to that two
horned Beast in Ecclesiasticals.

Others rather begin it about Anno 607. when Mahomet did rise in the East, Then
the Romish Prelate rode in State, like the scarlet whore, upon all Power, and
revived the Image of the first Beast for future adoration.
and Bonifacius the Romish Prelate in the West, first obtained the Title of
Universal Bishop from bloody Phocas, who gave it him to gain a friend in the
West, who soon overtopp'd all. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, Bonifacius
his Predecessor, had declared a while before, the Patriarch of Constantinople
to be the forerunner of Antichrist, for usurping that Title of Universal
Bishop.

The Italian and Spanish Churches did suck in apace the multiplicious Errors
and Idolatrous Superstitions, Milan. Ravenna.
which did from time to time infest Christianity, witness the many Councils and
Synods of Rome, See Histor. Council. Centuriator. Magdeburg. Binium. Baronii
Annals. Armach. de succes and stat. Eccles.
Braga, Toledo, Sevill, and of other Cities of Spain and Italy in their
successive progress. Since the setting up of the Austrian family, first in the
German Empire, and in the Kingdom of Spain, both Italy and Spain have been
twisting into one Antichristian interest (though some particular States and
Princes of Italy sometimes be overruled by their own proper byas.) And the
Jesuits of all Nations have learned to center all their designs, in the
advancement of the same, Campanell, de Monarch. Hisp. Contzen. Polit. D. R.
Interest of Princes. Histor Jesuit. Specul. Jesuit. Specul. Europ.
for the framing of a new European Monarchy, under an Austrian Head, and the
Popes guidance. All their mysteries of State, their Arcana Imperii move toward
this Head-plot, in every Nation. They have knit so fast into mutual intimacy,
that what the one gains shall help the other. Thus were Navarre and France,
England and America given up to the Spaniard by the Popes bounty, under
pretense of executing his Holinesses decrees. There is therefore little hopes
of doing them any good or expecting converts there. Their doom seems to have
been signally foretold, Rev. 16. 9, 11.
That they should not repent, neither by fair nor foul means, whilst the
judicial Vials of Gods wrath are pouring forth upon that Antichristian Sun,
the Austrian family; and on Rome it self, the Metropolitan Seat of that
Antichristian Beast. Engl. Histor. Camd. Britann. Duke of Roans Interest of
Princes.
This our brave Queen Elizabeth, with her wise Council, did still well observe,
maintaining all in a flourishing state, by keeping the Spaniard and Pope, at
the swords point. They clearly discerned the interest of England to lie, in
uniting of all Protestants, and keeping all close to the truth and ways of
Christ, against the renewed combinations of Spain and Rome. Some few
sprinklings of converts have indeed formerly been found in those places, as
Zanchius, Peter Martyr, the Noble Marquess Caracciolus of Vico, etc. But of
late they have been much rarer, since the desperate Inquisition, (the Spaniards
right eye, as he calls it) has been so exquisitely cruel and tyrannical. Thus
the nearer they draw to their dregs, the worse they prove. Rev. 18. 15. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
It Is observable, that the great Merchants of the Beast, the Spanish and
Italian Grandees, are not amended by her ruin, but only cast into despairing
horrors and lamentations. So that little hope is left us of doing them good, 1 Timothy 4. 2, 3.
upon any terms, though we be still bound and ready to pray for them, and
further their good who may be found there to belong to God, so far as we may
go, without neglect of our duty, and without breach of Gods Law, which has
been sufficiently cleared, as to the Magistrates charge, in the preceding
Discourse.

Qu. 13. Whether it be wisdom and safe to make such Judges in matters of
Religion, and to follow their dictates, who are not infallible, but as subject
to errors as others?

Ans. In this our Querist begins more overtly to open his Romish pack, and
usher in a Popish infallibility from the triple Crown, for supreme Judge of all
Controversies. This insinuation would make Protestants believe that there is
neither wisdom nor safety in their Religion, and consequently that they must be
looked for from that Church alone, where they pretend that Judge to be found,
that is in their own. Thus the Papist and Quaker do boast of that most whereto
they are the greatest strangers ( viz.) Perfection and Infallibility. We indeed
confess our selves (at the best) subject to error, and pretend not to be
infallible Judges. We would not seem wiser than Paul, Jam. 3. 2.
who knew but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. or better than James and John, 1 John 1.
8, 10.
who tell us, that in many things we sin all, both in opinion and practice. But
what then? Who shall be Judge of the meaning of Scripture? We answer: 1. The
Spirit of truth speaking in his Word, is the supreme infallible Judge. 2. Where
he seems to speak obscurely, his words in the context, scope, and other places
must be compared to clear his meaning to our shallow judgments. 3. Much
industry, study and sobriety are required to attain thereto in sundry places;
yet the Fundamentals of Religion are plainly laid down for the meanest
capacity. The Lamb may wade where the Elephant may swim. 4. He has appointed
his Word to be a convincing, converting, and confirming light to all his
people. Psalm. 19. and Psalm. 119, etc. having promised to lead them thereby into
all needful truth, gradually and proportionably, Joh. 16. 13. 1 John 2. 20,
28. 5. He has appointed the Ministers of his Gospel to be the isntrumental
lights to guide his people thereto, Matthew. 5. 14, 16. assuring them of his
presence, and special blessing to the worlds end, Matthew. 28. 20. Luke 10. 16.
Matthew. 10. 40. till all his elect be completed in the measure of the fullness
of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. and ordained a way of a successive communication
thereof, 2 Timothy 2. 2. by the solemn calling of persons qualified and duly
approved of into the Ministerial Office, according to his rules, 1 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 1 Timothy 5. 22. having appointed them to be the
Stewards, Shepherds, Guides and Rulers of his flock in their several
capacities, Act. 14. 22. chapter 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Jer. 3. 14, 15.
and this to be the ordinary means leading to their salvation, Romans 10. 14, 17.
6. Because they are weak fallible men who are to succeed the Apostles, Prophets
and Evangelists (more extraordinarily called, gifted, and assisted with a
measure answerable to the foundation of the Gospel, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 3.
9, 10, 11.) he bids Christians not to neglect prophesying; yet so, as to try
all things, as to take nothing without trial, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1 John 4. 1, 2. and
to redeem all opportunities of receiving and doing good mutually, that they may
grow in grace and in the knowledge of Christ, Heb. 10. 23, 24. 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Thus his servants are made subordinately Ministerial Judges, by way of
declaration, and every particular Christians judgment is, as unto himself, the
Judge of discretion, ultimately to determine the application of Gods will so
revealed to him, to the discharge of his duty. So far then as any man keeps
close to Gods Word so declared to him, so far is he infallible, whether he be a
Magistrate, a Minister or private Christian: herein lies our wisdom and safety,
but not in the pretended infallibility of a Romish supreme Judge, who does so
often contradict both the truth and himself; witness the many Schisms by
Antipopes among them, In Baron. Annal. Platin. de vit. Pontific. Magdeburg.
Centur. Catalog. Test. Veritat. Myster. Iniquit. Morn. Disputat. inter Dominic
and Jesuit.
to the number of twenty seven at least at several times, sometimes three at
once, and a fourth Pope set up by putting down the rest; witness the gross
heresies, horrid prophanesses, desperate sorceries, etc. acknowledged by their
own authentic records to have been among so many of their Popes and Prelates;
witness the many contests, oppositions and contradictions of their own
Councils, Popes and chief Doctors to this very day. From what has been said it
appears that we make no man supreme Judge of truth: but give to every man his
judgment of discretion for his own practice, and among the rest to the
Magistrate, as in his private, so in his public capacity, of both which they
are accountable to their own Master.

Qu. 14. Whether Laws made concerning Religion, and proclamation for people to
come to their Town or Parish Church, have not always catched the most holy and
conscientious men: witness Daniel and the three children: and the rest will be
of what Religion you will?

Ans. As for an orderly bringing of people to the public place where the
Minister of Christ duly authorized is to dispense the Word, the thing it self
is very needful and useful. If any particular branch of our Law be found less
expedient, that concerns our Lawgivers to look to, so that no conscience truly
tender, and truly enlightened, may suffer; and no licentious person may be
suffered to spend those precious seasons, and lose the opportunities of his
eternal welfare: when godly, able Preachers are settled in all Parishes, there
will be less excuse to idlers and wanderers. Till that can be obtained, the
nearest may be attended. If any scruple it upon sufficient ground to be soberly
rendered to the Magistrate, he may be excused from that penalty, which the lazy
and careless neglecters may be obnoxious to through their default. If good men
have suffered sometimes by the wresting of a good Law, or executing of an evil
Law, shall it be a disparagement to good Orders and Laws? What is there so good
but may be abused? Corruption optimi, pessima. Shall men for bear their food,
because many surfeit and riot? Shall there be no wine in use, because some will
be drunk? This a mad Seyth, in Plutarch may think well of, but a wise man will
improve the good and watch against the evil. Are not Magistrates Nurses to
their people, Shepherds to their flocks, Parents to these children? Should they
not then provide for their good, and labor to remove and prevent all evil,
both spiritual and temporal in their proper places?

Qu. 15. Whether freedom of censcience will not join all sorts of persons,
soldiers and others, to their Officers and Magistrates, because each shared in
the benefit?

Ans. Would you explain what conscientiousness you mean, and what freedom, we
might answer more distinctly and effectually. Christian liberty is indeed a
choice jewel, purchased by Christ, and given by Gods Spirit to all his Elect,
in their Regeneration: Thereby they are freed from the guilt of sin in their
justification, Romans 3. 15. chapter 5. 1. and chapter 6. 2. From the power and pollution
of sin, in their redemption and sanctification, Act. 26. 18. 3. From the
remainders of sin gradually in their progressive renovation. 4. From the
deadly fruits and effects of sin, the curse of the Law, the wrath of God, the
loss of all good, and infliction of all evil in their improved adoption. 5.
They shall be freed from all fear of future evil, to enjoy eternal good in
their last dissolution from Grace to Glory, Heb. 12. 22. 6. Their Christian
liberty makes them free to all spiritual good in the right use of every
creature and Ordinance, so far as their mind and heart are graciously
renewed. But for a sinful liberty to abuse our selves, or any creature and
Ordinance, either in committing evil, or omiting good, it is a Satanicall
liberty, it is none of Christ's purchase nor gift. Will any sober conscientious
Christian plead for it? Surely no. Those are the vilest drudges that have most
of that freedom. Do you desire freedom to say and do what you will? Is it not
the high way to hell? The ruin of Church and State? The confounding of all
things? But you plead conscience: Why, what do you mean? If it be a pure
conscience it will thus act by faith in love to good, against evil, 1 Timothy 1.
5. If it be an erroneous conscience, or scrupulous, or dubious in lesser
things, there is a Christian way to satisfy such with tenderness, prudence and
fidelity, to the rectifying and settling of them prescribed, Romans 14. Phil. 3.
15, 16. Gal. 6. 1. But if it be an evil conscience, a corrupt, a seared, a
blind conscience, that is a dreadful evil indeed, Tit. 1. 15, 16. 1 Timothy 4.
2, 3. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Such are not to be dallied with, no more than
the leprous, poisoned and ulcerous bodies, that call for purging, dieting, and
looking to narrowly, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Tit. 3. 10, 11. Can you think a
licentious liberty profitable to any man? Is it for the Patients good that he
be forsaken of his Physician or Surgeon, and left alone undressed, unlooked
to? Is it profitable to any family or society, that the members thereof should
be left in a disordered, disjointed posture? Is it for the profit of Church or
State, that their several members should be left to their own fancy and will,
to move as they list? Will not such dreadful convulsions prove most deadly
symptoms in the Body Politic and Ecclesiastical, as they do in the Body
Natural and Oeconomicall? Is this your egregious method of joining all
Inferiors to their Superiors? Is such a confusion the way to settlement? Is
this Libertinism the way to any true good, spiritual or temporal? Are not
Officers like to command bravely when their soldiers must be left to their own
will? Are not Magistrates like to speed well, when their subjects shall own no
Law, no Rule, no Charge, but as they think good? Are not Parents and Governors
of families in a hopeful case, when the reins are laid on the neck of children
and servants? Is not every man naturally full of evil, and bent to evil, empty
of good, and backward thereto? Are not the best still minded of their
emptiness, insufficiency, selfishness and unworthiness? that Paul himself is
feign to cry out, Romans 7. 21. Oh miserable! etc. No wonder if the world be set
on fire, when young giddy Phaeton gets into his fathers seat. Could your
Rhetoric prevail, what a Metamorphosis should we have in every relation and
condition? How soon should we see the liberty of Christianity turned into the
liberty of Bestiality? first persuade men that darkness is light, and hell
better than heaven.

Qu. 16. Whether those States, as the Low Countries, who grant such liberty to
soldiers and others, do not live quietly, and flourish in great prosperity?

Ans. Your last shows more of the Scorpions tail in your Serpentine eloquence;
you spread your poisonous spawn in plausible Queries still. Later anguis in
herba. Thus the old Serpent began and ended with our first Parents to delude
and destroy them. You would fain make us believe that your pretended liberty is
the way to quiet, to flourishing, to prosperity. Ad populum phaleras. Do you
think so indeed? Why then do not your ghostly Fathers in Italy and Spain study
to promote this excellent art? Do they want contrivers and engines, that have
so many thousands of Jesuits in every corner? that can spare such swarms of
unclean spirits and Romish locusts, to darken and devour all the budding hopes
of Truth and Peace among us? Do they want a mind to attend their own interest,
who spend all their skill and strength about it? No, no, they know the nature
and issue of that forbidden fruit, as the devil knew it in persuading Eve on
the like account. It will teach you the worth of good things by the loss
thereof: you shall see your nakedness and shame by sad experience. Have you
forgot what Amsterdam, See also Hist. of Netherl. Slcidan. Comm. Bullinger. Guy
de Bres. Hoornbeck. Cloppenbur. etc.
Arnheim and other Cities of Holland were like to have gotten by such a liberty
in 1535. a while after Munsters Tragedy? Were not those famous places like to
have fared as bad as Munster it self, by the prodigious excess of the fanatic
Anabaptists, if the wisdom and extraordinary care of their Magistrates had not
prevented it? If you doubt of it, read Conrad. Erestachii historiam
Anabaptist. cum notis Theodor. Strackii, and Lambert Hortens, Amsterod. 1637.
Did you never peruse the woeful Tragedies that were acted in Germany and
Switzerland, from the year 1522, till 1534, to the destruction of 50000 (say
the least) of 100000 (say many) of 150000 (say others.) If you doubt of the
truth thereof, read your friend Cassander, confirming what Bullinger, Sleidan,
Nicolas Blediskio, in histor. Davidis Georgii: Guy de Bres. Cloppenburgius, and
other godly discreet Writers have recorded of those times and places wherein
they lived. Were not those superlative villains the fruits and effects of your
desired licentious freedom? Do you long to try it and put us on the trial?
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

But Holland flourishes yet, say you, under such a liberty. If they flourish,
the more beholding are they to that Divine providence who preserved them so
wonderfully from that ruin threatened in 1534, 1535, and other times by
stirring up their Rulers in a singular manner to watch against the pernicious
issue of the liberty then too much indulged. They have smarted deeply of late,
and are like to smart more yet: God has not done with them: Neither is that
liberty pretended such there in all parts, as you would make us believe: But if
we should grant you all, were it not a sad reasoning to argue from an external
accidental prosperity to the good estate or well-doing of the persons? Might
you not as easily prove the excellency of the Mohammedan Religion, of the great
Mogul, or Tartarian Prince, because of their great pomp and victorious success?
Do not the worst of men enjoy often most of the world, being fattened for the
slaughter? Confusion and desolation are the genuine fruits of Libertinism,
promiscuously granted in Religious mattters, as well as in Civil; if it be for
a while retarded, it will but aggravate sin and judgment. Stoppage will be
found no payment at the last reckoning.

After the captious Queries answered, we meet next with more insinuating
Questions about the toleration of Quakers, first, generally expressed thus,
Whether imprisonment or other corporal punishment may be inflicted upon such
as hold errors in Religion? and whether that be the best way to prevent their
increase and recover them?

Ans. This next Enquiry is it seems about the Quakers, the most notorious
Impostors that ever appeared, whose principles and practices are sufficiently
discovered, Emmot, Gilpins, Norman, Hawkins, etc. Mr Prins book. The perfect
Pharisee, written by the Ministers of Newcastle.
as by their actings, so by their multitudes of railing blasphemous Libels
scattered daily in all parts. What desperate mysteries of iniquity they drive
on, has been abundantly demonstrated; 1. By the recantations of diverse of
them. 2. By the several discoveries in every part of these Nations, witness
the Magistrates and Ministers in every County, as you may see particularly in
the many Books printed of that subject; the sum of their Religion being
Popery and Paganism, The mysteries of godliness and ungodliness, by Mr Farmer
of Bristol. Stablishing against Quaking, by Mr Termin.
yea Atheism refined, is on design driven on by numerous Jesuits, Friars, and
other Romish Engineers to make a distraction and party fit to serve their own
ends, that having lost our Truth and Peace, we may be fitted for their will.
The many Jesuits and Friars that have been already detected under various
disguises, testify so much, as Ramsey of Exham near New castle, the Anabaptist
Teacher, circumcised at Rome, and pretended here to be a convert Jew. Coppinger
the Franciscan Friar in his discovery to Mr Cowlishaw of Bristoll. The Northern
blast. The Quakers Catechism, by Mr. Baxter. With diverse others.
Some lately imprisoned; some executed in England: Others in Spain having
declared so much to English Merchants. Thirteen of them sent out of Portugal
two years ago to that purpose, well known to a Merchant then in those parts:
Six at another time discovered teaching among the Quakers, being their prime
Leaders, etc. Yet such diabolical jugglers can find Patrons every where, One
of them lately affirmed (to a Person of honor here) their party to be strong
enough to procure their will by arms, if they listed.
yea thousands of followers; themselves having reckoned a while ago 30000 in
their list, having account of their party in every Town, a public Treasury,
(as we understand from good hands) Agents beyond seas with the common enemy,
laboring to debauch our Army from their Officers, the subjects from their
Magistrate, the people from their Ministers, (whom they most stomach at, as the
Wolves do at the Flocks Guardians.) Thus the old Serpent, Proteus-like, changes
his shape, though not his nature. What he could not effect by the Popish and
malignant sword, nor by the Prelaticall Cassandrian compliance, he hopes now to
gain by universal Toleration, the grand Idol and Image of jealousy, which our
age is to abhor most, if they desire to avoid the consuming wrath of our
jealous God. The footsteps of that Serpentine deceit, we may trace from age to
age, from the very Apostles days. Diverse Learned Pens have taken pains to
demonstrate it; and Mr Baxter lately in his Unreasonableness of Infidelity. The
wretched opinions and courses of the old Gnostics, Carpocratians, etc. were
renewed in Germany when the Reformation went forward there in Luthers time, and
are again broached out to the very dreggs among us. Yet some difference appears
in the dressing; least this Crambe recocta should nauseate; These methods are
refined and sublimed, that such spiritual extracts may be most quick and
operative. The gross parts of Popery, Paganism and Atheism, like the Caput
mortuum, are now laid aside, that the Mercury, Sulphur and Salt thereof may be
more effectually improved, sutably to every ones condition. This Prince of
darkness would scare people, were he not transformed into an Angel of light.
His ministerial engineers must therefore appear under a Pharisaicall Monkish
Garb, pretending much to external righteousness, and self-denial, that their
plausible colors may disguise their horrid inside. Were not the Ratsbane well
sugard, For larger particulars of this nature, read Mr. Baxter of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, Printed 1655 page 146, 147, 148, etc. Beckmans
Exercitations.
it would not so easily take. What could not be done by Seekers, Levellers,
Arminians and Ranters, shall be now better carried on by Quakers, the sublimat
of them all. What Stock and Muncer, John Becold and Knipperdoling, Ba^tenburgh
and David George, Hophman and Menno, Paracelsus and Jacob Behmen did but
attempt in Germany, these expect now to perfect among us. What the Italian and
Polonian Socinians did but scatter in few places, shall be now commonly
divulged and readily promoted, as the only truth and light, Hoornbeck, de
Haeretic.
though it be old abominable darkness. A pretended Christ and light within
shall serve their turn to disgrace and destroy Christ and light above, Calvin's
Psychopannychia, etc. Erastus contrae Paracels. etc.
as far as they can. Therefore Jacob Behmens books so mysteriously monstrous,
and the Socinian bewitching pieces must be Englished for the Vulgar; the Press
must be crowded with multitudes of direful Libels without control, and when
their denying of Scripture will not carry on the work, now they will own it,
and seem most for it, but so ambiguously, that every part thereof shall be
wrested, Quien te haze fiesta que no lo suele hazer, o te quiere engannar, o te
ha menester.
and their meaning not known. If their former way of cursing and railing serve
not, they will now grow mild and gentle, to insinuate the more effectually.
Thence so many are gained to them, either common Atheists, or carnal
hypocrites, A Spanish Proverb too much verified in them.
or at the best young Christian novices, that were never soundly principled. I
need not repeat what has been so sufficiently cleared by so many faithful
pens of late, about this quaking generation. But may not something be pleaded
for them? yea very much, the worst of evils never wanted Patrons, witness our
Querist in these following insinuations.

Qu. 1. Whether the Scriptures appoint any other punishment to be inflicted
upon Heretics, than rejection and excommunication? Tit. 3. 10. When Hymeneus
and Alexander made shipwreck of their faith, Paul delivered them to Satan, 1 Timothy 1. 20. There was no Writ Capiendi granted, or any compulsion by the Civil
Magistrate?

Ans. 1. This fallacious sophism concludes from a particular affirmative, to an
uuiversall negative, against all rule of Scripture or reason. Heretics are to
be punished by rejection and excommunication, Tit. 3. 10. granted; this is the
Church-censure upon their members Ecclesiastically dispensed: Hymeneus and
Alexander made shipwreck of their professed faith, and therefore were delivered
to Satan by Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 20. granted: this was an Apostolical censure.
There was no Civil Magistrates censure then could be had, therefore there
should be none where it may be had: This is a non consequence. And what other
punishment does the Scripture appoint for Heretics? What Laws about them? very
many, both in the Old and New Testament, as you may see fully demonstrated by
all our Reformers on this subject, as Zanchy, Calvin, Beza, Polanus,
Chemnitius, etc. and lately by the whole Synod of New England, in their
Resolves 1646. and by Mr Cobbet, in his solid Tract of the Civil Magistrates
power, Printed Anno 1653, besides many others. Do but examine those pieces and
judge: if your leisure serve not, then do but view what has been said already,
and confirmed by Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 1, 2, etc. Josh. 22. 12, 13.
and 2 Chronicles. 15. 2 Chronicles. 17. and 19. chapter 15. Dan. 3. Nehem. 13. Zech. 13. 3,
4, 5. Romans 12. 1, 2, 3, etc. wherein you have the authority of the Magistrate
to command, forbid and punish by civil censure, and rule the external man
(whether in speech or action) in all things clearly declared by the Word of
God, and that for a godly peace. Christ gave by his own practice, Joh. 2. 17,
18. a sufficient intimation to all Christians in authority, what care they
should have of purging out and preventing corruption in worship, and he
repeated it with renewed rigor, Matthew. 21. Mark 11. Luke 19. in the first
execution he throws out the buyers of Oxen and Sheep, in this second the
sellers also: at first Dove sellers were gently spoken to, to carry away their
truck, but at last their seats also are overthrown. Christ says at first, You
have made my Fathers house an house of merchandise: but at last, Ye have made
it a den of thieves. Thus the zeal of Gods house, that inflamed David the Type,
had now eaten up Christ the son of David, the grand Antitype. Therein (as the
learned Beza, Melancthon, Paeraeus, Snecanus, Ainsworth, Dike, etc. observe)
Christ acted extraordinarily, because the ordinary help was neglected by the
Magistracy and Ministry, as for the manner: yet in effect he did show what
should be done in the like case by the Magistrate in his place, as also by the
Church in their place, as in the case of Phinehas, Numb. 14. of Elijah, 1 King.
18. 40. of Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. 33, etc. those malefactors were extraordinarily
executed by the Lords servants for breach of the first and second Table,
because the Magistrates duty was neglected therein.

2. That Law of Christ which authorizeth the Magistrate to act for him, under
him, and like him, in punishing the breaches of every command, whether of the
first or second Table, does also regulate him in that execution. 1. Declaring
his power to be Civil, not Ecclesiastical, by civil orders, proceedings and
censures, not by such means as he appoints to his Church. Indeed the Magistrate
may also be a Churchmember, but in this he acts not as such, but as a civil
Officer, yet under Christ. 2. His power reaches to things that concern the
outward man, whether verbal or actual, not mental and secret.

3. In those externals he must have a clear rule of Gods Word, either expressly
or by sure consequence, not his own conceit, or any man's will.

4. Therein he must proportion the punishment to the nature of the
transgression, whether lighter or heavier, for matter or manner, to avoid
foolish pity and rigorous cruelty.

5. His end must be a godly peace, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
1 Timothy 2. 2. that thereby all may be quickened to a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: Thus the Magistrate is given as an Ordinance of God,
Romans 13. 12. being a power ordained of God for a terror to all evil works, v.
3. yea, the Ministry of God for man's good, v. 4. and that for conscience sake,
v. 5. to be done and obeyed. Thus acted pious Job, chapter 29. declaring corruption
of worship in covetous idolaters to be punishable by the Judge, Job. 31. 24,
28, etc. Thus Moses the Magistrate, by Gods command, punished the breaches of
the Sabbath, abuse of Gods Name, Idolatry, etc. Thus Joshua that noble
conquering Protector of Israel, resolved himself, and advised others, Josh. 22.
and 23. and 24. chap. Thus Abraham that faithful Prince ordered his charge,
and was so favored of God for it, Genesis 18. 18, 19. Thus victorious David, wise
Solomon, valiant Asa, zealous Jehoshaphat, heroical Josias, noble Nehemiah,
acted Gods part, in ordering the affairs of Gods house, directing his people,
punishing the abuses of his worship, etc. which the Lord records for a monument
and Crown of glory to them. Thus for the New Testament God himself promises,
Isa. 49. 23. to give such nursing fathers and mothers of a Royal blood and
spirit, who shall instrumentally build up Zion in mercy, and pull down Babylon
in justice, Rev. 12. compared with Rev. 17. chapter 18. and chapter 19. When Christ is
General of the field, his followers, Jews and Gentiles, the two Armies
portraied out, Cant. 6. 13. Zach. 12. 6, 7, 8. shall be more zealous for his
house, than for their own. But our Querist pekes.

Qu. 2. Whether persecution for conscience does not harden men in their way,
and make them cry out of oppression and tyranny?

Ans. Persecution of good is evil; but persecution of evil is good. 2. A good
conscience must be preserved, an evil conscience must be renewed. 3. A godly
conscience will abhor every evil, but a pretended conscience will plead for
evil. 4. A true conscience will thank the Physician that cures it, though with
smart; a false conscience will cry out against the Physician and smart, to
retain its evil. 5. A wise conscience will cry up the judicious care of Gods
servants, for good, against evil; but a foolish conscience will cry down both,
for evil, against good. 6. God gives not over his care of men's souls, for
causless outcries; neither will his servants neglect their duty for groundless
calumnies.

Qu. 3. Whether to convert an heretic, and to cast out unclean spirits, be
done any other way than by the finger of God, by the mighty power of Gods
Spirit in the Word?

Ans. 1. Heresy is described, Tit. 3. 10. to be a self condemning error,
perverting Gods truth, and men's souls. What course is to be taken by the Church
with a member pertinaciously offending, Galat. 5. 22.
is there also declared: It Is a work of the flesh, Romans 13. 3, 4, 5
and what course is to be taken with a member of the State by the Magistrate
for such an evil work, Zech. 13. 3, 4, 5.
we read also. Heretics in all ages have troubled the Church, and very few
were ever reclaimed. For 300 years after Christ, See Eusebius. Socrat. Sozomen.
Zonar. Epiphan. Augustine.
Satan employed many such Engineers to undermine Religion and disparage the
profession of Christ. Thus Simon and Cerinthus, Menander and Ebion, disturbed
the Apostolical days. Sabellius and Marcion, Priscillian and Samosatenus,
Arrius and Macedonius, Nestorius and Eutyches, with many more, succeeded them
in opposing the Person and Office, the Nature and Grace, the Spirit and Truth,
the Sabbath and Ordinances of Christ. The Roman Antichrist contracted the
substance of all them; and no sooner did Reformation dawn, but all parts of
Europe were infested anew with that poisonous vermin. Man's dunghill heart
yielded still matter and help to such a hellish brood. What the Gnostics did
of old, and the ranting crew of Germany in the last age, we find sadly revived
among us now. The conversion of such is very rare and difficult, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7,
8, 9, 10.
witness the Apostle; such being given up to the reign and vigor of delusion.
(...). 1 John 5. 16.
Those spiritual judgments that give up men's consciences to that efficacious
power of hell, are the most dreadful judgments, bringing most of them to that
sin unto death, which puts them into an impossibility of repentance and
salvation. It Is indeed the finger of God, by the mighty power of his Spirit in
his Word, that must do the work, when ever its done. There is the more need
therefore that all means should be used with diligence, in subordination to
that powerful Spirit and Word of his. Thereby some German and British
Jesuits have been converted, and Indian Witches. See N. Engl. Hist. Relat.
Jud. v. 18, 19.
Pawawes, reduced to Christian faith. The Magistrates help has often been
found very effectual thereto, if not to convert the seducers, yet to prevent
their infection from spreading, and plucked many as brands out of the fire.
Their mouth is to be stopped from biting, and their hands to be kept from
abuse, whilst their frenzy rages and ranges like a gangrene. A Bedlam may
cure many such mad pranks, or at least tame them. The prudent zeal of one
Magistrate does often in such a case more good than the labors of many
Ministers. To be plucked out of the devils snares is a mercy that God affords,
2 Timothy 2. 26.
by blessing the endeavors of his servants, Zech. 13. 3, 4, 5, 6.
as by his Word, Ecclesiastically; so by his Sword, Magistratically. Such
seducers being reclaimed by those censures sanctified to them, will bless God
and man for these healing wounds received in the house of friends.

2. Unclean spirits denote in Scripture, sometimes devils, sometimes wicked
men, the devils instruments; sometimes wicked men's lusts, Rev. 16. 14.
serving the devils purpose. All societies are too often pestered therewith,
and their ejection is chiefly to be minded. The principal efficient of that
cure, is indeed the mighty Spirit of God: His powerful Word is the principal
Instrument. Yet are men and means appointed and blessed of God in subserviency
thereto. Christ himself told his Disciples, that their unbelief hindered such a
cure from being perfected, Mark 9. 29.
upon that famous patient; Matthew. 17. 20.
some of them being so tenacious, that they go not out, but with prayer and
fasting. It Is dreadful to see men's bodies possessed with such guests, but
their souls possession more frequent and terrible, is not so much dreaded,
because less sensible. The sad symptoms of such a Possession are so woefully
manifested in the Quaking crew, that it infests all parts among us. It concerns
all sorts among us, if ever, to observe Christ's method for their ejection. They
fume and foam, they range and rage; tossed they are from one extreme to
another; sometimes cast into the fire, then into the water; first ranting, then
quaking. The filthy excrements of these unclean spirits boil so excessively
within them, that they do enormously work out at every part of their bodies.
Their feet ramble, their tongues rail, all the faculties of their souls
testify the strangeness of their inmate. He that but observed within these few
years, what horrid things have appeared before multitudes of people, from that
miserable generation, cannot but wonder at Gods patience, the devils malice,
and those wretches woeful state. The poison has seized on their brains and
spirits, as the pestilence is wont to do, and casts many into Phrensies, others
into Lethargies. The Ranters were merrily, the Quakers are melancholically mad:
those had more of the fire, See Gesuer. Zuinger. Eraestum. Beckmans Exer.
The Legions that possess them show varieties of tricks, and are shifting
daily, that they may best suit the various complexions of men and seasons.
Ranting Paracelsus and fanatic Behmen are out stripped in their horrid
jugglings, by these up-start disciples of theirs. David George and the rest of
those German Impostors came short of these. See Legend. Aur. de vit. Sanctor.
Histor. Indiar. Quien a su enemigo popa^, a sus manos muere. Adag. Hisp.
The great Patrons of Quakers, Mahomet with his Dervis in the East; the Romish
Dominick and Francis, Benedict and Ignatius; Katharine of Siena, and Bridget in
the West, can hardly parallel them: Yea the Brachmans of the Eastern, and the
Pawawes of the Western India's can hardly out-match them. When so many spirits
are abroad to represent the Tragedy of hell let loose, does it not concern all
Superiors in civils and spirituals, to look narrowly to themselves, and to
their respective charges? Should not that warning be cautiously improved, which
Christ himself gives in such a juncture? Rev. 16. 14, 15
They are indeed spirits nimble and supple, shifting and active, crafty and
restless; hardly discerned, but woefully felt; easily piercing, hardly removed;
soon infecting, difficult to cure: But they are unclean spirits, bearing their
fathers image; See the Relations and books of the Quakers in all parts.
lying spirits in every word and act; As the devil of old by his Pythons and
Oracles: so do these still speak ambiguities. Slippersy spirits, that easily
shift off the strength of Scripture and reason, by equivocations and roving
about: Scarce a Scripture word do they understand in a Scripture sense, but use
that language only to deceive the simple. Their Christ, their light, their
heaven and hell, their perfection and righteousness, when brought to the touch,
prove but Chimaera's, and fanatic conceits. That pure convincement of the
Ranters (as the Quakers call it) of God being all things, and all things God,
appears to be their grand Principle, but trimmed anew, to please the better.
They find no fault with the Ranters principles, though they blame something of
their practice; witness their books, complaining that they had a pure
convincement, but they sank in the flesh, and grew too loose. Atheism, in a
word, the bottom of all evil, is the spawn and substance of these unclean
spirits. Their venom, like that of the An Italian vermin.
Tarantula, kills suddenly, in the midst of pleasing dreams, making their
disciples dance about the brims of eternal woe. What think you of these things
ye sober Christians? do not these Nations need good Physicians, and utmost care
to prevent the subversion of all? Do not our State-Physicians find work enough
among such a variety of Bedlams? Is not this Calenture to be looked after with
all diligence? Are not we all bound to solicit heaven day and night, that such
unclean spirits may be cast out? From Anno 1520, to 1540.
Could you but conceive what direful spectacles the stage of Germany felt and
saw, at the breaking loose of such a hell among them for near twenty years
space, you would fast and pray to better purpose, than you have hitherto done.
These unclean spirits do most storm at those spiritual Physicians, that would
gladly be helpful to them. What hope then of a cure that way? They will not,
they cannot hear them with sense, patience, or manners. What hopes of help
below, but in a Bedlam or Bridewell, for such? Who can tame these, but the
Magistrates power, under God? In bodily phrensies, we find still hard usage to
be the best means of cure to the patient, and safety to the rest. The like has
been found often in this very case, About 2 years ago.
witness that blasphemous villain of Andover, who styled himself the
Bridegroom, and his Trull (enticed by him away from her friends) Mary the Lambs
Wife. The Justice of the Bench, and the executionlash reclaimed them out of
their madness, by the sense of shame and pain, to bewail their folly, and
publicly curse their seducers. To be sure, Prove. 10. 13.
if the Magistraticall Rod, appointed for the fools back, do not convince their
folly, and teach them; it will teach others wisdom, and prevent that horrid
confusion, which otherwise is like to overflow all our banks. If these Bears
cannot be tamed, they had need be chained, except we love to see them do
mischief.

Qu. 4. Whether, if no Civil Law be broken, the Civil Peace be hurt or no? Romans
7.


Ans. 1. 1 John 2. (...).
Where there is no Law, there is no transgression: For sin is opposition to the
Law, both privative and adversative, habitual and actual. The Law of God is the
revelation of the Divine will touching man's duty. The Civil Law then must be
the rule set among men, by authority, in conformity. That is understood in its
large signification, comprising all sorts of humane Orders; See Codic.
Justinian. Bracton. Brito. Mirror of Engl. Laws. Gildas. Tacit. Fortescue.
Coke' s Instit. Reports. Sr Nath. Bacons Governm. of Engl. Sr Fran. Bac. Romans
5. 1. Hos. 2. Fleta, Littleton, Seldom, ^ Matthew. Westminster.
for in a strict sense, the Civil Laws signify the imperial Law, called Civil,
in distinction from our Municipal Law, which is either Common or Statute Law,
the standard of good manners in this Commonwealth. This Law of ours, being the
quintessence and extract of the best Laws known among the Britains and Romans,
Saxons and Normans, refined for English use by the Saxon Wittagen-Mots (or
General Assemblies) and English Parliaments, is indeed the choice Rule and
Fountain, the Mother and Nurse of our Civil Peace, when execution answers their
Institution and Constitution. Peace in general sense, is the harmonious
agreement of things, attending their orderly composure and motion. Peace with
God (by Christ conjugally embraced) produces peace of conscience in man, and
civil peace among men. Our civil peace must still then have reflection upon our
Civil Law, and that upon the Divine Law. Whilst the Law is thus kept, peace is
not hurt; so the Querist is answered. But would not he insinuate, that the
Quakers and corrupters of our Religion break not the Law, and therefore not the
Peace. Ingenuity it self can make no other construction of his dubious Query,
compared with his title and scope: If so, then we Answer:

2. Our Lawyers can more exactly acquaint him with the many branches of our
Common and Statute Laws, which are continually broken by this lawless brood.
They that make so light of the Divine Law indicted by the Spirit of God, penned
by the Prophets and Apostles of Christ, and given to man for his eternal good,
in conforming him, through grace, to the Lords Image (whose extract and
representation it is) are not like to be very careful of men's Law, in any
sense. The beams of that good, Romans 7. 12.
just and holy Law, which do shine through the several parts of our English
Laws, carry too much light for such birds of darkness, The histories and books
of the Quakers fully clear all these things particularly.
who can like and will own none, but their light within. The light above and
about them is so offensive to them, and so little valued of them, that the
brightest beams of Scripture light find no credit nor favor with them, if not
suited to their fantastical light. Their own light is their Law, as it is their
God, their Christ, their perfection, their righteousness, their All. All the
Laws of God and men must be reduced to that standard. They judge themselves
still observers of the Law in the most egregious breaches thereof: for indeed,
what Law can they break, whose will is their only Law? Sometimes they pretend
that Will in them, not to be their own, but Gods Will. But that easily appears
to be but a cunning shift, to father their will on God, as they do their light
and all. As then their Law is in their breast, though they be daily convinced
(by every one that speaks with them, who has not lost his reason and Religion
at once, and particularly by Authority) of their foul transgressions, yet are
they still faultless. They witness perfection. You do but mistake them. They
cannot sin. They cannot break the Law. All Authority is tyrannical, that
humors them not. The best Ministers are fools and knaves to them. None knows
and keeps the Laws but themselves and followers. Dare you then after this,
charge or punish these men for breach of any Law? No, by no means. They are but
misunderstood. Their railing and cursing, their slandring and wandering, their
idleness and irreverence, their disobedience and seducing, their errors and
blasphemies against God and Christ, against the Divine Trinity and holy Spirit;
against the Scriptures and Ordinances of the Gospel; their contempt and scorn
of all goodness and good men (not dancing after their pipe,) These are no
breaches of Law, but degrees and signs of their perfection. Their pride and
passion, their malice and hatred, their choler and rage, their Atheism and
ignorance, their deceits and charms are but conformities to the light within.
Yea their Pharisaicall abstinence and fastings, their formalities and
ostentations, their disorderly speeches and carriage, their opposing of Orders
from God and his servants, their self-conceitedness and self-confidence, must
not be thought breaches of Law, but fulfillings thereof. In a word, if you
think they can break the peace, by breaking the Law, you are much mistaken, for
they are a Law to themselves; and the utmost mischief they can do to us all,
(that comply not with them) is but the fulfilling of that Law.

Qu. 5. Whether corporal punishment, either by imprisonment or otherwise, for
errors, is not a means sometimes to destroy men's bodies, and possibly prove a
prevention of their conversion, seeing some are not called till the eleventh
hour, and if they be cut off the seventh hour for their errors, how shall they
come in? Matthew. 20. 6.

Ans. Error is a crooked deviation of a man's judgment from the Truth of God.
That Truth is considerable, either in the Divine Being, or in the Emanation
thereof.

Truth in Gods Essence, is Essentially and Personally considered. Essential
Truth is God himself, in the eternal Unity of his Divine Excellency. 1 John 5.
6, 7, 20.
Truth Personally expressed sets forth each of the three Divine Persons,
subsisting in the Divine Essence, distinguished by their personal properties;
the Father is Truth Begetting; Joh. 15. 26.
the Son is Truth Begotten; the Spirit is Truth Proceeding from the Father
and from the Son.

Truth in the Emanation of the Divine Being, or the Truth of God, is the
conformity of Gods expression to himself; which is considered Intentionally,
Verbally and Actually, in his Thoughts, Words and Works.

I. The Truth of his Thoughts is called his Purpose and Decree, Ephesians. 1. 5, 11.
pleasure and good will to signify his eternal Council fore-ordaining all
future things. Romans 9. 11.
This is an absolute, entire, perfect and unchangeable Act of the Divine Will,
Act 15. 18.
about the good and evil of future Beings, as of themselves, especially about
rational creatures, men and Angels. This Divine Truth, or Act, as it respects
evil, is called Permission and Regulation; as it respects good, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
it is called fore-ordination. As it respects the objects of Divine Benevolence,
1 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
it is called Election and Predestination: Act. 13. 48.
Election, choosing them in Christ to glory: Predestination, fore-appointing
them to conformity and Adoption by Christ: Romans 8. 28, 29, 30.
Election, called also his foreknowledge (which in the Hebrew imports affect
and effect) regarding chiefly the End, and Predestination the Means to that
End. That eternal purpose, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.
as it regards the objects of Gods disowning, is called Reprobation and
Predamnation. Reprobation, being properly an Act of Sovereignty, (we cannot
speak of God, but after the manner of men, with distinctions and denominations
extrinsecal, though he be one pure Act, all the change being in the creature)
Romans 9. 12.
is also called Preterition, non-Election, 1 Thessalonians 5. 9.
and non-Predestination, properly regarding their State and End absolutely. 1
Pet. 2. 8.
Predamnation being an intended Act of Justice properly, Jud. 4.
considers the Means with tendency to that End, viewing such under the
consideration of future sinners. The like denominations may be given to Divine
Purpose, 1 Timothy 5. 21.
about Angels, consideratis considerandis. Thus of Intentional Truth.

II. The Verbal Truth of God is called his Word, which is the declaration of
his Mind and Will, revealed to man, concerning himself and all his creatures.
This he did manifest to Adam in his Creation, writing it upon his soul in the
characters of his own Image (in perfect knowledge, Genes. 2.
righteousness and holiness) and by positive significations of his pleasure.
Col. 3. 10.
After his fall, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and successively to others, this Truth of God, about the salvation of his
Elect, in and by Christ alone, with all things else needful to be known, he
did variously reveal unto men by Inspirations, Heb. 1. 1.
Dreams, Visions, Oracles, Paternall Traditions, etc. and from Moses time saw
it fit to give it in writing (for a sure Record to all Ages) by inspiring and
inditing the same upon the Spirits, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
and by the Pens of his holy. Prophets and Apostles, successively, in an
immediate, infallible and extraordinary manner. Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21.
Thence are we said to be built upon their doctrinal or Scriptural foundation,
1 Cor. 3. 10, 11
holding forth Christ, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
(as we are properly on Christ himself, the personal foundation, held forth by
them.) These Writings are called the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, Psalm. 19.
containing all things needful to the salvation of Gods Elect, Psalm. 119.
and the common good of man, called therefore his Laws and Statutes, Ordinances
and Precepts, Testimonies and Judgments, etc. being the perfect Rule of Truth
and Grace, faith and obedience; Gods mercy and man's duty; Veritas mentis, oris,
operis.
requiring from man, truth mental, oral and actual, i. e. a due conformity of
every thought, word and work, to that truth of God declared.

III. The Actual Truth of God is manifested in all his Works of Creation and
Providence, carrying on a constant, perfect conformity to Gods intentional
Truth, as also to his verbal, in order to his supreme End, his own glory; by
the seasonable and admirable dispensations of all his Attributes, Matthew. 10. 19.
especially mercy and justice, Psalm. 145. 17.
toward men and Angels, in the most wise, holy and powerful preserving of all
his creatures, Psalm. 104. 14.
and all their Isa. 28. 29.
actions, Heb. 1. 3.
as they were all created of nothing by the Word of his power, Genesis 1, and 2.
in the space of six days, and all very good.

Error then being a crooked deviation of man's judgment from the truth of God
revealed, will admit of several degrees and considerations, according to the
varieties and imports of that truth, and man's deviating from it. Some truth is
natural, some moral, some spiritual; about external, internal and eternal
things. Some are Fundamental of salvation, some supra- fundamental, Deuteronomy. 32.
4.
(or juxta) others more circumstantial and superficial. 1 John 5. 7.
Errors in Fundamentals, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
about the perfection of God, Joh. 3. 3, 5.
the Trinity of Divine Persons, Christ the Mediator, God-man, 1 Cor. 15.
the fall of man, his forlorn state, his absolute need of regeneration, Matthew.
18. 3.
faith, repentance, obedience; as also of the sufficiency of Scripture, of man's
eternal state, etc. are properly called Heresies, which if obstinately
persisted in, after due means used of reclaiming such, render men unfit for
Christian communion. 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14.
Supra-fundamental Truths are the next built on them, which admit of various
debates among the Learned. Errors against them are dangerous, but not so
pernicious as the former, 1 Cor. 10. 23, 24.
especially if the person erring be humble and teachable. Romans 14. 1, etc Gal.
6. 1, 2.
Such are many points of worship, discipline, etc. Circumstantial Truths are
more external, about place and time, 1 Cor. 8. 7, 8, 9.
order and manner, etc. expressed in that usual Verse, 1 Cor. 9.
Quis, quid, ubi, quibus anxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando. Errors against these
are bad, but nothing like the former.

This needful explication will clear and answer to the Query. The punishment
for error is not to exceed the nature of that error, and the manner of
holding it; whether Ecclesiastically, by the Church; or Civilly, by the
Magistrate. The truth of God gives a rule for all such cases, either in express
words, or in clear consequence, to be exactly studied and observed, by all
persons concerned, so that the ends of that punishment be attended, viz. Gods
honor, and the public good; with the parties also, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18.
as far as may be. The Church meddles not with Civil censures, such as
imprisoning, having its proper way of Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication,
etc. for its offending members. Imprisonment and other corporal punishments for
errors require a sufficient cause, Romans 13.
as in case of herefie endangering men's souls, disturbing Gods service and the
public peace, etc. A godly Magistrate will be heartily glad never to meet with
such occasions; but when he does, as he cannot but be often forced to in this
revolting age, Crudelis morbus crudelem facit medicum. Prove.
it concerns him to attend those forementioned ends with zeal and prudence,
lest foolish pity spoil the City, and lest seeming gentleness prove real
cruelty to many. Destructive errors, specially blasphemous ones, are the
malignant humors of men's consciences, which endanger them and thousands
besides, in their eternal state. Les cousciences Libertines sont de vrages
bestes saenuages, Adag. Gallic.
Such persons, especially if obstinate, are the very plagues of the body
Politic, endangering the whole. What mischiefs may not such Pests procure, if
without restraint? as sad experience showed in the Familists crew, whereof
Henry Nichols was leader, followed by Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington; See
Engl. Hist.
till Hackets execution and Arthingtons recantation had repressed the fury
thereof in Q Elizabeth's time. The Grundletonians in Yorkshire, acted diverse
such mad pranks, as Valentinus, Basilides, and the Carpocratians of old were
wont. Out of the North have we had the like Impostors of late, to confirm the
Proverb, Omne malum ab Aquilone. Such phrenetick persons had need be closely
kept and looked to, for their own and others good. Such mad folks cannot be
kept from hurt, but by being kept from company. If restraint may seem to
endanger their bodies, they must thank themselves, so long as care is taken for
suitable accommodations. It were to be wished that fair means might prevent that
rigor, but if the Patient, by his folly, necessitate his Surgeon to bind and
wound him, who must be blamed? If such belong to God, he will bless that very
dressing to the humbling and healing of them, whether in the seventh or
eleventh hour; he best knows how to order it, to the fulfilling of his eternal
purpose, on such vessels of mercy, to be prepared for glory, through grace.
Thus Manasseh that bloody wretch, 2 Chro. 33. 12.
was changed in his prison, and not till then. His heart was there broken and
cured wonderfully. Eccl. 12. 11.
The hammer of that weighty punishment drove home to the head into his heart
the many instructions of Gods Word, which he had so long heard and despised,
being guided by the hand of Christ's Spirit. Thus the believing thief repented
at his execution. Luke 15. 17.
The prodigal child came not to himself, till his misery, justly procured, was
sanctified of God, to the opening of his eyes. La coz de la Yegua no haze mal
al potro. Adag. Hispan.
England has had experience of some late Quakers, horriby blaspemous, much
reclaimed by the prison and lash; and Ireland knows others of that tribe, who
are come back again to sobriety, by the sense of that poverty, whereinto their
idle courses and ill companions had reduced them. But if any such grow worse
still, as is the usual lot of such seducers, by a dreadful judgment of
heaven, it will fall on their own heads, and that penalty will do others much
good, if it do them but little. It may deter many from the like excess, so that
paena ad paucos, Miedo guarda vinna y no Vinnadero. Hispan. Prove.
proves terror ad omnes. It keeps them from doing more mischief, and from
increasing their sins and eternal sufferings thereby. Though Lions and Bears
nature be not changed by their chains, yet is their mischief restrained
usefully thereby. Better have the devil bound then loose, though he will be a
devil still. Job 14. 14.
The duration of every man's life is certainly fore-appointed of God, Job 7. 1.
beyond which he shall not pass. This will not indeed excuse any man's wilful
neglect of himself or others, yet it may satisfy man's heart, upon the
unchangeable event of things. He that appoints the end, appoints indeed the
means subservient thereto: when therefore his providence indispensably
necessitates the defect of the means, it clearly signifies that it is Gods
purpose to have such a thing come to pass. Genesis 45. 5, 6.
Joseph comforts his Brethren on that consideration; though they had used ill
means, God overruled them to a good end. But if such malefactors hasten their
own end, by unlawful means (as A great Quaker.
Parnell lately in Colchester Gaol did starve himself to death, by fasting ten
days wilfully) and ill demerits, they can blame none but themselves.

Qu. 6. Whether compulsion of conscience do not make differences arise to a
greater height, which if men were left to their own light, what is not of God
would far more easily fall?

Ans. Conscience properly cannot be compelled, it being the Reflection of man's
judgment on himself, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
with respect to Gods judgment. Such is the nature of humane souls in their
intellectuals, that they cannot be forced, though they may be moved by external
objects. God alone is the Lord of conscience, he made it, and knows how to rule
it at his Will. Conscience is his Royal sear, Genesis 2.
his Throne of Majesty, his Deputy and Witness, Eccles. 7. 29.
his Recorder and Judge, his Teacher and Executioner in man's heart. It was thus
perfectly before the fall; but it is now corrupted by man's sin, and little
remains of that glorious fabric, but ruinous heaps, though enough to testify
the wofulness of that fall. In the most, it still lies under darkness and
death; the devil being gotten into Gods seat, by just judgment does usurp
further, Tit. 1, 15, 16.
in playing the pranks of a dreadful Jailer. In the Regenerate, conscience is
purified, and restored to its primitive use in part, Heb. 9. 14.
though much evil remains there, Heb. 10. 22.
as in other faculties to be gradually removed. Act. 24. 16.
Conscience then cannot be constrained, but the evil of a pretended, perverted
conscience may be restrained. If that Officer that should act Gods part in man's
soul, be bribed by Satan to take his part, through the compliance of inward
corruption, against God his Sovereign, he may surely be called to account for
it by men, as far as that treason appears externally. God judges of the outward
by the inward, man judges of the inward by the outward man. The Magistrate is
Gods external Deputy, Judge. 18. 7.
called therefore an heir of restraint, to put the wicked to shame. Judge. 17.
18, 19
The first and second Table of Gods Law are both committed to his charge, 2
Chro. 15. 3, 4, 5.
as to the externals thereof, as we hinted before. When that care was wanting,
Gods honor suffered sadly in all ages. Isa. 59. 2.
So far as conscience is corrupted, so far are the differences widened
between God and man, Jerem. 5. 26.
which increases differences among men. The way then to compose differences, is
not to dally with any corruption, (either of judgment, affection, or practice)
but to remove it effectually. Man can but use the means, and is obliged
thereto, specially the Magistrate in his place for God, as every one should do
in himself, and by himself, through Gods help. To leave every man to his own
light, is to leave a man's ground to it self without dressing. The most
consciences are but like the dunghill, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
as all are by nature, before conversion. The best are like a garden, Gal. 5.
22, 23.
wherein the Lord, through grace, has set and sown the fruits of his Spirit.
But if you let the dunghill alone, will it ever be better? If you let the best
garden alone, will it not soon grow worse, and will not the weeds spoil all at
last? Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Does not Christ himself press this parable to that end? What Is a man's own
light, before conversion, but the dim snuff of a candle, every moment ready to
go out in a stink, into utter darkness? Ephesians. 5. 8.
What will become of him and of his light, if left to himself? Matthew. 5. 21.
What Is man's light, after conversion, in the best, but a weak glimmering
candle, though snuffed and renewed by the Lords gracious hand, yet every moment
ready to perish in the storms of temptations and corruptions, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
if not continually revived, supported and supplied by the same Almighty hand?
How does God promise and use to effect this and all other favors, but in the
diligent use of the means, whereto he ties us, and whereby he conveys his
blessing? Is not man's heart full of corruption by nature? Genesis 6. 5.
Does not much of it remain in the best? Will not corruption increase, Romans 7.
14, 18, 19, 20.
if let alone? Try it in your sinks and kennels, if you be yet strangers to
your own heart, 1 John 1. 8, 10.
then answer this Query. What sad work would so many foolish heads, Jam. 3. 2.
like Sampsons Foxes, tied only by the tail of carnal interest, with burning
firebrarnds, make in Church and State, in following every one his own light? A
short portraicture may be seen of it in Whimses Island ( vulgo Road-Island near
N. England, the Receptacle of Notionists,) where confusion and profanness seem
to triumph over all order and piety, to say nothing of these distempered
Nations.

Qu. 7. Whether it be not the command of Christ, that the Tares ( i.e. they
that walk in lies,) and the Wheat ( i.e. they that walk in truth,) should be
let alone? Matthew. 13. 30, 31.

Ans. 1. No parable is to be strained beyond its scope: Scriptura parabolica
non est argumentativa. The scope of that Parable appears clearly in the (...)
and explanation thereof, Matthew. 13. 38, 39, 40.
given by Christ himself, where he omits that branch, of letting them alone,
and only mentions the event of the Tares and Wheat, following the purpose of
his Will, but nothing of the precept of his Will, concerning man's duty, in
point of obedience.

Ans. 2. Mind the particulars of that Parable. The Field is the World; the
Angels are the Reapers; the Wicked are the Tares; the Godly are the Wheat,
says Christ, describing the Tares to be such as offend and do iniquity; the
Wheat to be the children of the Kingdom. By Field, you may understand, either
the state of the Church visible, universally considered in the world; or the
world, wherein that Church subsists, from time to time. In either sense the
case will be clear.

1. If you understand it of the Catholic Church, considered in its succession
from age to age, it will signify the permission of providence, which suffers
some hypocrites still to remain therein, Matthew. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
even in the purest times; but it cannot be meant of Gods precept to man, to
let known wicked persons alone in the Church, seeing he has appointed censures
for such, commending the use; 1. Cor. 5. 7, 8. etc;
rebuking and threatening the neglect thereof.

2. If you understand it of the world it self, Tit. 3. 10.
among whom the Church lives, Rev. 2. 2, etc.
it must needs be meant of a providential Toleration of the Tares, for the time
of this life, in the general constitution of it, God forbearing long, and not
destroying the wicked suddenly, by his Angelical instruments, in the ordinary
course of dealing below; though some notorious ones be now and then pulled up
by eminent Justice. But it cannot be meant of man's duty, enjoined by Gods
Precept, to let every wicked man alone; for then should he cross the whole
series of his Word, which injoyns the Magistrate his duty so clearly, for
punishing sin, Exodus 20.
whether against the first Table, as perjury, witchcraft, Romans 13.
blasphemy, etc. or against the second, as murder, theft, Zech. 13.
threatening the neglect thereof.

3. Mind who are the Reapers, that receive the command, to let them alone: Mat.
13. 40, 41.
They are not men, but Angels, as Christ explains, who are providentially
ordered not to make use of their wonderful power given them from God, to
destroy all the wicked at once, which they might easily effect, if providence
should require it, 2 Chro. 31. 21.
as appears by the destruction of 185000 lusty men in one night, 2 King. 19. 35.
in Sennacheribs Camp, by one of them; they being all mighty in strength, Psalm.
103. 20.
whereby they instrumentally overruled all the world, Ezekiel. 1. 5, 6, 7, etc.
under God, witness the Prophet, where they are described at large, in their
properties, office, motions and effects, by the living creatures, whose spirit
overrules all the wheels of the Creation, in every part of the world, in
subordination to Gods will. But they are bid to suffer wicked men in all ages,
places and conditions, to fulfill their measure of iniquity, Matthew. 23. 10.
till it comes to be sealed up, Zech. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and they with it carried away by Gods executioners into the Land of Shinar and
confusion; as that of Zechary may be expounded, Psalm. 32. 1.
though some understand it of Christ's merciful act in covering sin. Micah 7.
19.


4. Mind what are the Tares that are let alone. In general, they are all that
work iniquity and offend, Matthew. 13. 30.
i. e. the multitude collective of reprobates, Romans 9. 23.
prepared for the fire, vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, in the complex
of them. The Angels have a providential command to let them alone, not to pluck
them all up at once by the root; for they being the most and greatest part of
the world, it would endanger the destruction of the whole world, and
consequently of the Wheat also, if all should thus suddenly be pulled up;
signifying, that he will suffer many wicked ones generally to abide in the
world, 1 Cor. 5. 10.
till harvest, Matthew. 24.
though he deals with some of them judicially now and then, Matthew. 25.
in that way which may help, and not hurt the Wheat.

5. Mind the Precept it self, Let them alone; which implies a sufficient power
in the instruments employed, were but Gods will signified, to take a speedy
course with all the Tares: A power proper to Angels, not to any man or men.

6. Mind Christ's reason subjoined, Matthew. 13. 29.
Lest you root up the Wheat, implying, such a total plucking up of the Tares,
as would prove the destruction of the Wheat; which must needs therefore be
understood in the sense fore-explained; for the punishing of one or few
offenders here and there, being so often commanded and blessed from God,
Praemium as paena bases humana societatis.
to the common good of the rest, and the very pillar of Church and State, in
genere mediorum, cannot be thought or found so prejudicially destructive to the
good.

This then is clearly the sense of these words, Let them alone; that it is a
Providential Command given to the Angels, not to destroy the whole race of the
wicked at once; and not a Preceptive Rule to men, for the not executing of Gods
will, upon this or that particular offender, whether in Civils or
Ecclesiasticals.

Qu. 8. Whether Scripture declares that the Saints should persecute others,
seeing Christ sent his as Sheep among Wolves, and not as Wolves among Sheep, to
persecute, kill and imprison? Matthew. 10. 16.

Ans. The Scripture declares the Saints to be the righteous fulfillers of his
revealed will, (...), ab a private. and (...) terra, i. e. a terra secretus.
in their respective stations and motions, toward God and man. Their name
(...), Saints, or separated persons, consecrated to God, imports so much. Their
copy and exemplar is Gods holiness, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15
which is magnified often in his zeal and justice upon offenders, Lev. 10. 3.
for breaches of the first, Exodus 20. 5.
as well as of the second Table. Romans 13. 3, 4, 5.
If he call a Saint to the Magistracy, he requires him to be faithful and
diligent therein, in terror to every evil work; if any called Saints, be fo
far given up to sin, as to abuse God and themselves, by external breaches of
his holy Law, God himself will not dally with such, and the Magistrate is the
Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil. This is
prosecution of evil, not persecution of good. Profession of holiness was never
intended by God to be a Sanctuary to any sin. Christ's Disciples were indeed
sent as Sheep among Wolves, not as Wolves among Sheep. John 10.
They should be qualified like the Lamb of God, their grand Shepherd, in
meekness, innocence, usefulness and obedience; and not resemble the wild and
mischievous nature of brutish men, beasts of prey, living at their will,
following their own pretended light, abusing them that are not like them in
evil. Mat. 7. 15, 16.
But are not these Christian Sheep directed also to be as wise as Serpents,
Matthew. 10. 16.
to discern and repel all wolvish seducers coming in sheeps clothing? Rev. 5.
5.
Is not Christ himself that Lamb of God, Jud. v. 3, 4.
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that roars out of Zion against all wickedness?
Does not he command his servants in all ages and places, to contend earnestly
for the faith, once delivered to the Saints; 2 Cor. 7. 1.
to cast out and keep out all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.
especially in external breaking forth? Shall the ravening Wolves, that watch
for men's souls, be cherished and owned, because they have got on the garb of
Sheep? Are not such Foxes and Wolves most mischievous under that Cant. 2. 15.
disguise? Does not Christ, with his Spouse, command his servants in the
Magistracy, to take up the Foxes, yea, the little Foxes, that spoil the tender
buddings of his Vineyard? Was there ever more need of that watchful care, than
in this age, and in these parts? wherein the Romish Cubs swarm round about us,
under the mask of Notions and new Lights? Should not a Sheep of Christ be like
himself, a Lamb to God, and a Lion to sin? If wretched seducers will be so
desperate in the devils service, as to venture all to promote his interest,
shall Christ's friends be the less zealous and active for his honor, and the
salvation of souls? If wicked men will dare both God and man in their
destructive courses, and meet therein with the wages of sin, shall they blame
any but themselves? who will spare them, that so wilfully suffer for evil
doing? 1 Pet. 3. 20.
What glory can such expect from God or man, that refuse all the fair means,
which might prevent such evils of sin and sorrow?

Qu. 9. Whether he was not reproved, that would have fire from heaven to devour
those that rejected Christ? Luke 9. 54, 55.

Ans. 1. That we mistake not Christ's meaning in this and other Scriptures, we
must wisely compare the context and scope, with the Text and other Scriptures;
for through ignorance and unstableness, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
Scriptures are wrested to men's perdition. The scope here appears clearly to be
a condemning of the Disciples rashness, whose blind zeal would have carried
Christ beyond his present work, in that state of humiliation, for the
conversion of souls.

2. Distinguish between Christ's humiliation and exaltation. In the former he
acted as the son of man, Heb. 4. 15.
in all parts of humane weakness conforming to us, Phil. 2. 4, 5, 6.
sin only excepted. Therein was he to act as a servant, Isa. 42. 2.
not intending to take on him the Magistrates Office, in any such cases, Luke
12. 14. nor was it fit that harsh means should be used to those strangers, at
his first coming, which might have scared them away from Christ and his
salvation. Rev. 19. 16.
But in his state of exaltation he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; Prove. 8.
15, 16.
by him Kings reign, and Princes execute justice, who has all power given him
in heaven and earth; and he gives his Witnesses (whether Magistratical or
Ministerial, Rev. 11. 5.
or both) power to consume his enemies with fire out of their mouth.

3. Distinguish between Samaritan strangers, and Jewish rebels; between the
grossly ignorant heathens, and the wilfully obstinate Christians. Matthew. 22. 7.
Against Jewish rebels the Lord sent his Armies to destroy the destroyers and
abusers of his Ambassadors; though he would not fetch fire from heaven against
the mongrel heathenish Samaritans.

4. Distinguish between Magistratical and Ministerial censures on offenders.
Christ would not have his Disciples and Ministers to usurp the Magistrates work
in civil bodily censures, but to keep within their sphere, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
with spiritual weapons, such as are answerable to the nature of their
Ministry, as admonition, etc. toward their members ordinarily. The case of
Ananias and Sapphira was extraordinary, Act. 5. 2, 3, 4.
was extraordinary, as also was the Call, Abilities and Work of Apostles. The
Civil sword still being left to the Magistrates right use, who is regulated
about it so frequently in the Old and New Testament.

Qu. 10. Whether it is not a burden enough for the Magistrate to govern and
judge in Civil causes, to preserve the subjects right and safety?

Ans. 1. The Magistrates burden is great indeed; Honos and Onus, Honor and
Burden ever went together. Providence orders all things so wisely, that they
who have most from God, should be obliged to do most for God. Act. 20. 35.
It Is more Royal to give, than to receive, in Christ's account. Magnates are
Magnetes, Great Men are Precious Loadstones: They should be Optimi, that are
Maximi, to answer Gods Title and Nature, whom they represent. The highest
Spheres of heaven carry the most influence of light and life to all inferiors.
Magistrates have a greater burden of care and trouble, of danger and account,
to make them the more humble and holy, the more diligent and self denying, the
more active and zealous in their places.

2. The choice part of the Magistrates business is to be most for God, in being
most like God, whose substitute and Vicegerent he is. What the Lord tenders
most, should be most rendered by him. God begins still at his Glory, in the
matter and means, in the manner and time of his Worship. The first Table
therefore should be the Magistrates first care. Those that honor him, 1 Samuel
2. 30.
he will honor; but they that despise him, though never so great, Vilescent
(...)
shall be vilified. Is it not most rational, that the best things should have
the best care from the best men? Does not Gods honor deserve the preeminence
still? Ezra 6. 12.
Does he not still appear against the neglecters and slighters thereof? Ezr. 7.
23, 26.
Even Pagan Monarchs could easily discern it. Dan 3. 35.
Observe the special working of Gods Spirit, Dan. 2. 47.
directing Ezra to request, and the King to grant that Magistratical power of
corporal punishment against offenders of his worship, (...). Arist. Polit. 7, 8.
by comparing Ezra 7. 6. with Ezra 7. 11, 27. How little beholding is the Lord
to those Rulers, that care more for their honor than for his, that defend
their Word more than his; that will not suffer personal injuries, but regard
not what affronts are put on Christ! They that tender not his Name and Truth,
his Worship and Ordinances, are like to smart dearly for it, at last. Can you
think that those persons will spare you, that spare not what is dearest to God?
Will they honor you that vilify God? Remember Eli's case, that you may
repent, who have made light of Christ's great concernments! Did not Solomon find
it the best way to Wisdom and Glory, to peace and plenty, thus to begin with
God? A Jove principium, was the great Maxim, even of Heathen Schools, to the
shame of most Christians. Is not Christ's interest the best way to settle yours?
Can you be safe when that miscarries? The Lord awaken all our Magistrates to
mind this in earnest. This Principium is certainly dimidium totius, yea,
dimidium plus toto. Will not the late experiences of our English Worthies, with
those of the former Champions of Christ, demonstrate fully this? Was it not
their zeal for God that made them great before God and good men? Consult all
Records, Hebrew and Greek, Latin and French, German and English for proof. Our
famous Alfred, our conquering Edward 3d, in the very heat of continual Wars
made it their chief work to prefer Christ in all, and to cast all their
Crowns at his feet. Their glorifying of him so eminently, made them truly
glorious in their own and future ages. Such a Whet will never prove a Let to
any, from any true good. Are not the subjects right, peace and safety, the
proper gifts of God? Can we find out any better way of procuring or preserving
them, than by keeping close to him, and being active for him? Whilst we
cordially mind his interest, will not he surely mind ours? If we forget him,
can we look to be remembered of him?

Qu. 11. If Magistrates must judge and punish of matters of Religion, the
Magistrate must ever be troubled with such persons and such causes: and if
after his conscience be convinced, he had no such power, what horrors of
conscience is he like to possess?

Ans. The Magistrate is the Lords Shepherd, Isa. 44. 28.
as he calls Cyrus, and must look for contest against Foxes and Wolves, Matthew.
7. 15.
from time to time. He is Gods Lieutenant, that must still be in a posture of
war against his Sovereigns enemies. John 15.
He is Pater patriae, the Father of his Country, Isa. 49. 23.
who cannot but be often taken up in composing the differences of that great
Family. He is the Lords Gardener, and will not think much to be still troubled
with weeding work. He is a Nursing father, and knows what renewed troubles
attend that employment. All his Titles of honor mind him of duty and trouble.
But his great comfort is, that God himself takes the best share thereof, in
whose stead he acts. To act for God, and with God, like God and through God, is
his honor and happiness. Christ himself suffered much more than all that comes
to. But what if his conscience should afterward check him for mistakes
therein? The sure way to prevent horrors of conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
is to be diligent in the Lords work, that our respective Callings do challenge
from us. Sin is the great disturber of conscience, Prove. 15. 15.
especially that darling sin, (...) Cor, vel conscientia bona, convivium
perpetuum.
which hinders from Gods work, by taking from our heart what is due to him.
Every trouble proceeds from the want of Gods grace given or manifested. He
meets them that rejoice in working righteousness, those that remember him in
his ways. Retort the Query you may thus then; Isa. 63. 5.
What horrors of conscience shall that Magistrate feel, that has minded
himself in neglecting God? that has been zealous for Civil affairs, but frozen
to the Lords interest? that has done much for the world, but little for
heaven? that has been careful of the subjects bodies, but careless of their
souls? that thought no cost too dear for their earthly privilege, but every
little too much for spiritual help?

Qu. 12. Whether imprisonment or other corporal punishment would not make
thousands in England, Scotland and Ireland, face about to any Religion, yea to
Popery, as it did in Queen Mary's days?

Ans. What of all this? because many have their Religion to choose, shall not
the Magistrate discharge his duty for their good? Is there not so much the more
need he should be so much the more watchful against juggling Mountebanks,
because so many are so easily fitted to their baits? A cavallo ceme dor,
Cabistro corto. Fro Hisp.
The corruption of man's heart, that disposes him to evil and indisposes him
still to good, should be the more carefully looked after, for restraining of
that which cannot be renewed. External Reformation is better than none at all;
though the chief part of Gods sacrifice is still the heart of man, yet is it
not much better, that God should be publicly owned than disowned? Mat. 7. 13,
14.
The greatest number will be the worst still, Luke 13. 21.
till the great restawration come. Yet when the leaders do bring their people
to solemn owning of God, he takes it kindly and rewards it. Was it not so in
Josias and Edward 6th time? 2 Chronicles 34.
a form of godliness is good, though formality be naught. Jer. 3. 10.
If the generality be brought to the means of grace, they are in the road of
Christ's blessing. Had not the poor man waited long at the pool of Bethesda,
John 7.
he had not been cured: It Is good being in the Lords way, when he passes by to
give out his doles. How many thousands were the better for crouding after
Christ and his Apostles, though most for the loaves, or novelty sake? But let us
hear what the Querist Objects to himself.

Obj. 1. We would willingly suffer the Truth to be preached, but those that we
persecute do teach erroneous doctrines, which hazard the souls of men.

Ans. He answers, The guilt thereof lies upon the Teachers conscience, not on
the Magistrate, or any other, as Matthew. 5. 19. Whosoever shall teach men so, he
shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven.

Reply. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Is not he also guilty that prevents not evil, when he may? What else means
that of Paul, Be not partaker of other men's sins? Are there not sins of
omission, when we reprove and discountenance not evil? The very light of nature
taught the Heathens to say, Qui non vetat peccare, dum potest, jubet. Had not
Austin just cause to complain so much of his other men's sins? Is the Physician
guiltless, August. Confess. Ephestions Physician lost his life for neglect of
his patient, who died also.
that willingly suffers his patient to be poisoned by Mountebanks? Is the
Watchman blameless that warns not and keeps not the thief off? Is the Gardener
faultless, that suffers carelessly the weeds to choke the good plants? Is that
Officer faithful that lets an enemy wittingly to debauch and ruin his
soldiers? Quint. Curt in vit. Alexandr. Plutarchus.
Is that Magistrate faultless, that suffers his people to be seduced by
pernicious Praters, without check? Will Christ excuse the rest, when he
condemns the false Teacher? Does he absolve the accessory, that punishes the
Principal? What shall he be in the Kingdom of hell, that teaches men to break
the greatest commands, if he shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven, that
teaches men to break the least of them? Is not he a breaker of Gods command,
that gives free license to the notorious transgressors thereof? Matthew. 12. 50.
He that is not with me, is against me, says the Lord himself. Luke 11. 23.


Obj. He Objects to himself again, The Kings and Governors of Judah compelled
men to serve the Lord, therefore Kings and Governors may now compel.

Ans. 1. He answers, They that lived under the Jewish worship were compelled
only, strangers were not.

Reply. We reply, As the Jewish worshippers, so now the Christians are then
obliged to the Law of that worship they profess. Indeed, for Jews, Turks and
Pagans, the case may differ somewhat. Yet, though strangers were not compelled
to the worship, they were to be restrained from abusing it any way; Exodus 20.
8, 9, 10.
witness the fourth Command, that injoyns all superiors to see that the Sabbath
be not profaned by the stranger within their gates. Deuteronomy. 5. 13, 14.
Nehemiah that zealous and truly Noble Governor, threatened the
Merchant-strangers with imprisonment, Neh. 13. 21.
if they came again to profane the Sabbath, though but without the gates. But
what means this kind of answer? Speak plain, Do you disown the Name and Worship
of Christ, as too many of your comrades do in effect deny his Person and
Office? If you think much of being Christians, tell us plainly what you are,
whether Jews, or Turks; Heathens, or Atheists, that we may know what to say to
you.

Ans. 2. He answers secondly, They were not compelled to any thing, but what
they knew and confessed to be their duty, 2 Chronicles. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Reply. We reply, Solomon indeed and their faithful Rulers knew and confessed
their own and their peoples duty, in the great matters of Gods worship. A good
pattern for all Christian Rulers, to study it and profess it solemnly, that they
may as effectually engage their people to God, and God to them. He requires not
a blind and lame sacrifice of implicit faith and obedience; Malac. 1. 8, 9.
yet were still too many of that people ignorant in too many things, though in
the gross they owned Gods appointed worship. They needed still teaching and
quickening means, as our people do still now. Therefore godly Jehoshaphat made
it a chief part of his Reformation, 2 Chronicles. 17. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
to send abroad Teachers into all vacant places, and with them his Princes to
countenance them, and to cause them with vigor and comfort to teach (as the
Hebrew elegance imports) the good knowledge of the Lord. (...)
When they had been orderly instructed, then did he send Judges in their
circuits, 2 Chronicles. 19.
to proceed further in that great Work, as that juncture of affairs required.
It will be the joy of all Gods friends to see more of the like among us. Their
success mentioned so remarkably in the context, will not be far from us, 2 Chronicles. 2.
whilst we keep close to God in their way. But how far are our Querists
friends from following that good example! Do they labor still to disgrace and
discourage faithful Magistrates and Ministers from promoting it? Is it not
their business day and night, every where, to obstruct and disturb it, what
they can? If they seem of late, to be grown more mild and reserved, we may
thank the care of such Magistrates, who have given them cause to fear the
deserved lash. Their poison is but refined by this change, and made more taking.

Ans. 3. He answers again, The Kings of Israel had extraordinary Prophets to
direct them infallibly. Our Kings and Governors have none such to direct them.

Reply. We reply, Though many of them had such, yet even then the Standard of
all Doctrine and Worship, Isa. 8. 20.
was the Law and the Testimony; Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
thereby all spirits and pretended Prophets were to be tried: The like have we
now in Gospel-daies, Deuteronomy. 17. 1, 2. etc.
even a more sure word of Prophecy, a word surer than the greatest Revelations
mentioned in that context of Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20.
a word sufficient every way to complete the man of God in the knowledge 2 Timothy
3. 15, 15, 16, 17.
and doing of his will. This is our Doctrinal foundation, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20.
our infallible Judge, whereby all spirits and Doctrines are to be tried: 1 John 4. 1, 2.
If any teach otherwise, though he should be an Angel from heaven, Gal. 1. 8.
he is accursed. We need then no infallible Prophets or Apostles, seeing we
have that sure word of theirs, which the Spirit of Truth spoke and writ by
them, confirmed by their miracles, and has infallibly made the perfect rule of
our faith and life: Isa. 59. 21.
all differing interpretations thereof may and must be reconciled by the light
of that unerring spirit, which is inseparable from his Word: Though fallible
men mistake often, yet the sense of Christ's Spirit in his Word is clear and
sure still. Though blind eyes see not at all, and sore eyes see but dimly;
Malach. 4. 1, 2.
though blood-shot eyes will see amiss, the light of that Sun is always clear
and sure. Though some expressions may seem obscure, yet the rest duly compared,
will sufficiently clear them. Though the self-conceited and proud will wrest
and mistake it, Psalm. 25. 9, 12.
yet the humble will God teach. Though a corrupt mind will extract poison, as a
spider out of flowers, error out of truth, by poisoning it, yet Christ's Spirit
will lead his people thereby into all Truth, Joh. 16. 3.
needful for them to know. 1 Cor. 14. 38.
Though the carnal heart will still be ignorant, yet the teachable heart, by
that anointing from above, will be taught all things gradually, 1 John 2. 20. 28
proportionably and seasonably, so that he shall not need to be taught by any
Sect master, or Pharisaical Teacher, or infallible Pope, as too many have been
and are still. Though this Gospel be hid to them that perish, whose eyes are
blinded by sin and Satan; 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
yet is it plain to him that understands, Prove. 14. 6.
and is tractable in the School of Christ. Though it may prove a savor of
death to reprobate consciences, yet is it still the sweet savor of Christ to
his Disciples. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16.
Though worldly spirits will slight and abuse the simplicity thereof; yet
spiritual hearts will admire and improve still the Majesty of it. Though the
perverse mind will account it a self-contradicting word, yet the rational
Christian will find it still most harmonious in its whole composure. Though a
vain soul will find it to be a killing letter, yet the wise heart will find
it experimentally to have a most quickening Spirit. Though the superficial
Reader will find its shell and bark to be hard and knotty, yet the studious
Christian will taste the sweetness and tenderness of its kernel and marrow.
Though deluded Impostors will pervert it still to the taking off the Magistrate
from his duty about the first Table, yet the Lords servants shall find every
part thereof to be an eminent motive to quicken, direct and enable all
Superiors to the faithful preserving and vindicating of it.

Ans. 4. He answers fourthly, The Kings and Rulers of Israel did not imprison
Schismatics, Pharisees, Herodians.

Reply 1. The Law of God directed his servants then to dispense all censures,
in a way proportionable to the nature of the offense, and condition of the
offender, which faithful Magistrates observed, Deuteronomy. 17. 17, 18.
as hundred instances might demonstrate. The King to that end was commanded to
have a Copy of the Law by him, to direct him still daily.

Reply 2. As there were diverse sorts of Heretics, which the Lords Word bound
over to just penalties: so was there variety of Schismatics, raised up by
Satan to rend the Church, as the Heretics work was to poison it, for a just
execution on the spirits of such, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10.
as had not received the Truth in the love thereof, that they might be saved;
God gave them up to strong delusions, to believe lies, as he does daily.
Because they voluntarily separated from God, and his Truth, to give up
themselves to the service of sin and Satan; he justly gave them up to a
perverse spirit, to break them into fractions and factions, both in Church and
State, even as he does now by sad experience. Because they would not be
separated from the evil of men, he permitted them to follow those seducers,
that drove on their own interest, Isa. 66. 4.
by separating from good men. Does he not so still? Because they wilfully chose
heaps of Teachers, self-called, to serve their fancies and lusts; God also
chose their delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10.
to give them up to the efficaciousness of deceit. Is it not so still? Because
they refused and abused the lights of his own setting up, (...).
was it not just with him to leave them in darkness, to abuse themselves and
others, even as it is now? Thus Gods refusals are still the devils choice, Psalm.
48. 11, 12, 13.
and they that forsake his ways cannot escape the devils crooked paths: Whilst
Authority kept all in their places close to the Word and Psalm. 101.
Ways of God, Psalm. 122.
Jerusalem the Metropolis of Church and State, was a glorious and harmonious
City. Psalm. 133.
But as fast as they declined in their zeal of Gods house toward worldly
Politics, they ushered in as fast all sorts of discords and discontents, Civil
and Ecclesiastical. Josephus their Historian, and many others compared with
Scripture Records, will fully demonstrate this to the judicious Reader. As
before their Babylonian Captivity, so after it, they gradually lost Purity,
then Peace, inclining still toward Error and Discord. Thence the direful
separations of Pharez and Sadock, the Ringleaders of so many Myriads into
Pharisaism and Sadducism, followed close by the Monkish Essens, and the
Politic Herodians, those State separatists. The like befell the Christian
Churches in the very Apostles days, and successively more and more. The
sinful separations of the Novatians, Acesians, Donatists, etc. with the
multiplying Heresies and Blasphemies of that monstrous brood, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which swarmed every where, 1 Timothy 4.
made way for that grand Apostasy of the Roman Church, Rev. 13.
and advanced that man of Sin into Christ's Throne, to make him and his the sons
of perdition, (...). Was not the like course revived by Satan ever since the
Reformation was revived by Christ, formerly and lately? Our woeful experience
will give a sad, though clear answer thereto. Omenezados pan comen. Pr. Hisp.
Is it not high time then for all Superiors and others, to hearken to Christ's
voice speaking from heaven to us, Rev. 2. 5.
as he did to languishing Ephesus? Remember we now, before it be too late,
whence we are fallen, and repent, lest our Candlestick be removed suddenly. If
our complexion be still Laodicean, Rev. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, Eusebius.
what is our condition like to prove, but like to theirs? They were overthrown
with an Earthquake that despised Christ's warning; if the quakings of Church and
State, prognosticating the like now, effect not our overthrow, the treasures of
Divine grace will be the more magnified.

Obj. 3. The Querist objects again to himself, Then every one may live as he
lists?

Ans. He answers, Had he not as good live as he lists, as live as you list?

Reply. Man's List is not his Rule, but Gods revealed Will in his Word of
Scripture. By that measuring line of the Sanctuary, all men and all their
actions are to be measured. That is the perfect Copy, Zech 2. 1.
that Gods people in all ages have learned to write after. Rev. 11. 1.
That Is the balance of the Sanctuary, that must weigh us all. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16, 17.
That Is the Touchstone, that will try our Alloy. By that Standard godly
Magistrates have been in all ages taught to govern happily, Isa. 8. 20.
in promoting good, and punishing evil. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20.
So far as they keep close to that Rule, No prophecy is (...), but generally
applicable to all ages. Romans 13. 5, 6. Like the Atabantes, that fiercely shoot
their Arrows at the Sun, for scorching of them.
all their commands are to be obeyed for conscience sake, in matters of
Religion, as of Morality. That Is the bridle of evil, and the spur to all good.
Libertines therefore in all ages have showed most spite against it, by
reproaches and gross abuses thereof. The Roman Antichrist, to set up his own
Traditional List, blasphemes it many ways, charging it with imperfection,
obscurity, defects, insufficiency and corruption. The Quaking Libertines, their
bastard brood, has done what they could to defame, deface and destroy it. At
their first stirring, they wholly denied the need and use thereof. But because
they lost credit thereby, Plinius. Plutarch See Bellarm. Stapleton.
on a sudden in all places, they agreed upon the owning of it, at least,
verbally, that they might the better abuse it, and others by it. That sudden
change, observed by the Judicious, Stcuch. Gretzer. Gordon. Becan. etc.
so unanimously carried on in all parts, may discover much of that strong
design, which is so notably fomented, if not begun among them, by the
Pontifician brats. Now that in words they profess to own the Scripture, how
deal they with it? Just as the Romanists, that give it as little credit as they
can. Both Originals, Hebrew and Greek, must be slighted and slandered as
corrupt; the Vulgar Translation exalted above them. Then there is no absolute
need of it, they can live well enough without it, by Traditional and
Enthusiastical help. Then it must have a Competitor, the Popes infallible
Chair, or the Councils determination, and the Quakers Oracle, written, or
verbal. Then it must be wrested to patronize their grossest and wildest
extravagancies. No blasphemy so horrid, no Ceremony so ridiculous, no Doctrine
so vile, but a Scriptural varnish must be got to set it out. But what is the end
of all? That man may not be taught or ruled as God lists, but as they list.
Thence such specious Pleas against the need and use of the Ministerial
Function, under many taking pretenses, That Gods Will may be determined by
every ones list: Thence such reasonings with plausible Sophisms, against the
Magistrates power in Religious matters, that they may be taken off from
attending the Lords Will therein. Thence also such painted Arguments drawn from
the very dregs of Pelagianism, (revived by Popery and Arminianism,) for the
sufficiency of the light within, that all things, at last, may be brought to
their list.

Obj. The Querist again Objects to himself, Then it seems Errors may be
suffered.

Ans. He answers, If truth may be suffered also, it will prevail against
Errors: It Is no more in your power to binder Errors, than it was in the
Prelates to hinder preaching, speaking and writing against them. If you can
hinder Satan's suggestions, and the vain imaginations of their hearts, and
expel the darkness in men, and place light in stead thereof, and hinder men
from speaking to each other, then you can suppress Error, else not. The Lord
alone by the mighty power of his Spirit with his Word, can suppress Errors;
and we believe he will certainly do it in his time, to his glory and the
comfort of his people. Amen.

Reply. This is the upshot of our Querists attempt in this Serpentine way of
ambiguous Queries, pleasingly dressed for the stomach of this Libertine age;
Veritas magna and praevalebit.
for answer whereto, we grant, That truth will indeed prevail against errors,
as surely as God the Author thereof, is sure to prevail against Satan the
father of errors. Truth will seasonably prevail, whether suffered or opposed,
Curvata resurget. Plin. Diosc.
it being still like to the Palm tree, that will not be suppressed, though much
oppressed. But is suffering of errors a good way to that end? Is the Patronage
of lies a friendly help to Truth? when Truth does rife, it will be with the
fall and ruinous shame of all its oppressors, wherein neutral spirits will
find little comfort, and as little excuse. Are not errors the diseases of
men's souls; and is there no way to cure them, but by letting them alone? Your
instance from the Prelates is to little purpose, unless you intend to plead
their cause, or can demonstrate the case in hand to be like theirs. It Is not
our work to revive now that Controversy, which so many able pens have
sufficiently cleared from mistakes. Their Persons we leave for account to their
only Judge. Their Ministerial Office, though corrupted many ways, we can own
so far as therein they owned Gods institution, whilst we sever from it all
humane inventions and corruptions. Their Lordly Pomp and Tyrannical carriage we
heartily renounce, hoping that all good men among them have done the like.
Their usurped Jurisdiction and self advancing Authority above their Brethren of
the Ministry, we also find in Scripture, Reason and Antiquity sufficient cause
to disclaim. The many endeavors of many among them to obstruct the Truth, and
abuse her friends, we suppose to have been one chief means of hastening their
ruin. Too many of them showed too much compliance, if not cordial friendship,
to the Popish Arminian errors, which are now put into a more fashionable garb,
by our Notionists, Seekers and Quakers. As then the friends of Truth prevailed
at last, though after much ^ugging, against that Vanguard of the Romish Camp;
the good hand of heaven seuding them a strong Reserve of the Magistratical
power, duly dispensed In the great Parliament.
. We have likewise ground to hope that the followers of Truth, in this season
also, may obtain a favorable success, against the recruits which that old
enemy has rallied again, under new Colors. Yet dare we not limit our General
Christ, in the time or manner of relieving us. Possibly our hour of Temptation
is not yet over; we may happily undergo yet longer the contradictions of many
sinners, as our former Worthies did, in their opposing the Romish Invasions.
Our encouragement is, that Truth will prevail to Gods honor and to the shame
of error. It becomes therefore all Christians to be more zealous and faithful
in their several places, for Truth against Error. Magistrates and Ministers
being Officers of note under the Lord of Hoasts, should be most forward
therein, as becomes their several Functions, that Satan's suggestions may be
hindered, and the vain imaginations of men's hearts: That darkness may be
expelled thence, and light set is stead thereof. That great God, who has
promised to bring this about eminently in the later days, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
by the powerful Word of his holy Spirit, Romans 8. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34,
etc.
that the Purchase of his Son may be completely applied to all his Elect,
according to the eternal purpose of his glorious grace, has also promised to
bless the labors of his servants in subordination thereto, within their
several capacities. Blessed are those servants of his, whether Superior or
inferiors, whom their Master coming shall find so doing. It concerns every one
to begin at our own hearts, that Satan's suggestions may not be yielded to, but
that Christ may garrison them effectually, against all the black Regiments of
hell. We must look therefore more watchfully to the suppressing of those vain
imaginations in our hearts, which are still acting against the Crown of Christ,
2 Cor. 10. 5.
by corresponding treacherously with the common enemy. Ephesians. 5. 8.
We are naturally darkness, and retain too much of it, at the best; the more
need have we to attend the light of his Truth and Grace, that we being made
light in the Lord, may walk as children of light. The sensible experience of
that gracious work will render us more capable of furthering it in others. To
effect such a cure, all impediments must be removed, former causes prevented,
and suitable means used, as in Ecclesiastical, so in Political relations, by
the Lords peculiar servants, appointed to that work. If Seducers be active for
evil, we have much more cause to be active for good. Up therefore and be doing,
for this work will be rewarded. 2 Chronicles. 15. 6, 7, 8.
The Lord teach and enable our Magistrates thereto, who are entrusted with so
much of Christ's interest in these three Nations, that their comfort in the
blessed issue may be answerable to their trust. All mountains shall casily
become plain before our Zerubbabels, Zech. 4. 10.
when their hearts, heads and hands do harmoniously concur in this great
enterprise. Let Us pray and believe, 2 Chronicles. 19. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
wait and labor for it, and the Lord shall be with the good.

Postscript.
IN the close of our Querists Paper, we meet with a Postscript, written with
another hand, which was thought fit to be inserted here, that they might not
miss of their own, nor complain of suppressing any part. It runs thus,

The main end of the Proposer in these modest Questions, is to assert Christ to
be the sole Lord and Ruler in and over the Conscience, who obtained the same by
virtue of his Death and Resurrection; for to this end says the Scripture,
Christ died, rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and
living, and that every one might give an account unto God and Christ alone, as
their own Master, unto whom they stand or fall in judgment; and are not in
these things to be oppressed and brought before the Judgment seats of men; for
why should thou set at naught thy brother in matters of his faith and
Conscience, and herein intrude into the proper Office of Christ? since we are
all to stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, whether Governors or
governed; and with his Decision only, are capable of being declared, either in
the right, or in the wrong.

This specious Conclusion deserves a few Animadversions.

1. He would insinuate thereby, whoever be the Author, that all this labor
tends to the Vindication and advance of Christ's Prerogative; whereas their
desire, if obtained, would prove most destructive thereto, as we have
demonstrated sufficiently in the preceding Answers.

2. He proposes his desires so generally, for Universal Toleration in all
matters of Worship, that the vilest Blasphemies, the grossest Idloatry, and
most desperate Heresies are not to be excluded from it.

3. He would persuade that the Scripture is altogether for it, whereas it is as
diametrally opposite thereto, as heaven is to hell, as has been cleared.

4. He strives to strip the Magistrate of the best Jewel of his Crown, and the
chiefest part of his Authority, wherewith he is entrusted by Christ, in his
stead; the preservation and promoting of his Worship, according to his own
written Word.

5. He opens a gap thereby to the greatest flood of Infidelity and wickedness,
that ever can be imagined, to the swift and desperate overwhelming of Truth and
Peace, both in Church and State.

6. He sweetens this poisoned Cup with a handful of Scripture quotations, and
plausible expressions of Gods Word, but miserably wrested and misapplied, as
will appear to the Judicious peruser thereof; for instance, 1 Cor. 14. 9, 10.
the words of Scripture he uses, we find them in Paul's Epistle to the
Corinthians; whereas as its most clear, by comparing them with the context and
scope of that Chapter, that there is no discourse of the Magistrates power
there (sufficiently cleared elsewhere) but of every Christians liberty in
indifferent circumstantials, and particularly about Jewish meats, drinks and
days, wherein he would not have them to offend, nor take offense, by rashness
of judging; nor remain unsettled in their conscience about the same, showing
that the Kingdom of God consists not in meats, drinks, Romans 14. 17.
or any such externals, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
That therefore they should use Christian wisdom, tenderness and diligence
toward each other, for their mutual edification. There was then a special
ground moving thereto, because the Jewish Worship having been so long in force,
and being but lately removed, many of the Christian converts, (the Jews
especially) thought themselves bound still to the observance thereof, which
offended others, who were better informed. Therefore the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1, 2,
4.
(who became all things to all in such indifferent matters) did use much
compllance and forbearance in this case toward weak Christians, Act. 18. 18.
pressing others to do the like, Act. 21. 23, 24.
as in other places also, yea himself made use sometimes of those Jewish
Ceremonials, having circumcised Timothy, shaven his head, made vows, etc. to
win the more upon the Jews his Countrymen, who were so desperately incensed
against him for his leaving their way. Thus the Ceremonial Rites were gradually
to receive an honorable burial. They had been Salutiferi and precious means of
grace under that Mosaical dispensation of the Lords gracious Covenant, each of
them holding forth something of Christ, being the bark, the shell and garment
of his substantial grace, clothed therewith. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
They began to appear mortui, and expire after Christ's death, Coloss. 2. 14.
having been nailed to his Cross, as being a Law of Typical Ordinances, John
19. 30.
which were to end, at his accomplishment of all things. Yet some time was
required to satisfy the Jewish converts therewith, before the total removal of
them all. Whence that famous Synod of Jerusalem, Act. 25. 21, 22, 23, 24.
found it needful to indulge some of them for a while; yet when many Seducers
began to press the necessity of that Ceremonial Law, teaching them to rest
thereon also for righteousness, at Colossus in Galatia, etc. then did Paul
appear expressly against them in his Epistles, Gal. 2. 11.
yea he resisted Peter to his face about it. That Apostolical Synod also,
proceeded formally against them, and so settled the Christian Worship, Act. 15.
allowing a solemn funeral to those Ceremonial Rites, which afterward became
Lethiferi and deadly, in the abuse thereof. The sense then of this whole
fourteenth Chapter to the Romans being so clear, it is a gross perverting
thereof, to persuade thereby an universal Toleration of all irreligion and
baseness, if it be but mantled with the pretense of conscience.

7. Observe a cozening Paralogism, and false arguing running through every vein
of this close, as of all the Queries; concluding from a particular affirmative,
to universal negatives, pleading for a Toleration of all things, in all
persons, in point of Religion, because some, in some Circumstantials were to be
born with by private Christians, and to forbear each other in their judgment
thereof.

8. If any of these Arguments should have any force to disprove the Magistrates
power, in ruling the externals of man by Civil Laws and penalties, according to
the clear Word of God in the point of Worship, (which is the thing controverted
here, if any) it will be as effectual against every power of the Magistrate,
about the second Table also, there being no evil so great, but it has been and
may still be disguised, under pretense of Conscience, witness the Ranting and
Quaking crew of Germany, in the former Century; and their disciples now among
us, as James Nailer, George Fox, etc. So that the Magistratical Office will be
wholly taken away, and that grand Ordinance of heaven, appointed so eminently
for Gods honor and man's good shall be enervated and nullified.

Whilst I was perusing of the forenamed Papers, I was occasioned to review a
Book, Printed 1644. by Mr Charles Blackwood, Entitled, The Sterming of
Antichrist in his two last and strongest Garrisons of Compulsion of Conscience,
and Infant Baptism, and find these Queries to be extracted out of that Book, at
least a full agreement therewith almost in every word, if not altogether. Many
Books of the like nature, as the Bloody Tenent, and other Pamphlets, have been
scattered up and down these Nations within these twelve years, as the like were
in Germany and Poland formerly: The point of whose Reasons are so unhappily
bent, that if it prove any thing, it will prove the subversion of all
Magistratical power. It Is a Levelling principle of so sad a consequence, and
the ground thereof so laid upon a continued mistake of Scripture and Reason,
that it nearly concerns all Christ's friends, and all true Patriots to detect
and disclaim the fallaciousness thereof. As for Mr Blackwoods piece; his second
part about Infant Baptism was abundantly confuted, with all the Books of the
like import, by many choice pens. In 1654. Blake his Antagonist, printed a full
answer thereto, which was succeeded by Mr Marshals Vindication, Mr Baxters, Mr
Sydenhams, and others in England; as in Ireland by Dr Winter, Dr Worth, etc.
Who have maintained this sort of Christ's Kingdom against all the assaults of
dissenters. And for his first part about compulsion of conscience, it labors of
the same mistakes that we have observed in our Querist all along, besides
several self-contradictions. Mr Thomas Cobbet answered Mr Blackwood and his
consorts about Infant Baptism long ago to the full; and has answered all
opposers of the Magistrates Power, in his late piece printed 1653. most
substantially. When those solid pieces of his and others, about these points,
are answered to the purpose, dissenters may be further heard. Till then, we
shall have little reason to regard, what shall be said or written by any of
them in their ranewed cavils, touching the same, so fully consuted already.
It Is the fatal lot of Arguments mounted against Truth in our late
controversies, especially about the Magistrates power; that either they are too
weakly or too strongly charged, either saying nothing, or proving more then
they would grant themselves: either they charge not to any purpose; or else
they over-charge, and break, doing mischief to purpose.

I have been persuaded to publish these hints for a caution to all in these
slippery days, wherein so many professors are ready to slide into gross errors
before they be aware. My heart cannot but bleed at the sensible review of our
unchristian Apostasies from the Will and Ways of God. The woeful distractions
of Gods people, and the multiplied delusions of seducers among us, could not
but move my pen after the moving of my heart. The crouding of Quakers into
these parts, especially into this In the beginning of December. 1656.
City, has been a great occasion of these lines. The forenamed Quere
clandestinely sealed up and superscribed to Colonel Henry Ingoldsbey, our
Vigilant Governor, to dissuade him from that noble Work, whereto he found
himself eminently obliged for Christ and the public in the discharge of his
great Trust here. The tumultuousness of the Quaking rout had several times
disturbed, both the Worshipers of God, and the public Peace. They had ensnared
many of our soldiers, infected diverse of our Citizens, gathered many disciples
in the Garrisons and Country, and railed most vilely at the Magistrates and
Ministers of Christ. They had spread multitudes of Pamphlets, Libels and
Papers, full of their sad stuff, and by all possible ways labored to gather a
strong party, desperately engaged to their way. What the drift and issue thereof
might prove, the Judicious might easily guess by such demonstrations. Diverse
Papists among us began to like their way, finding it so like to the Monkish
course of their Friars; many ignorant and unstable souls were daily ensnared
and endangered, public Out cries were made by their party against our faithful
Governor and other Magistrates, especially against the Persons and Office of
the Gospel Ministers, as also against Christ's Ordinances, his Word, Sacraments,
Prayers, Sabbath, etc. They molested us daily from several parts of Ireland and
England. Being turned out, they returned again with their old tricks renewed.
Our watchful Governor could not be quiet for them, nor any of the Lords
faithful servants, Francis Hogil, and Edward Borough John Perrot and Cornet
Cock, Humphrey Norton, and William Ames, Barbary Blaydon, and Sarah Bennet,
with diverse others of that Gang, have been so extremely troublesome, that our
Governor was forced to take the best course he could for their conviction and
others safety. I my self had spent diverse hours, at diverse seasons, with the
chief of them, and perused their Papers and Books, full of absurd and vile
Notions: No means attempted could do them any good. Their sugard stuff was
easily swallowed down, by such whose mind was seeking still where to settle;
their Circean cup pleased distempered Palats. To take of the zeal off our
Rulers, if they could, the aforesaid Queries were secretly dispersed here, the
perusal where of stirred up my Spirit to the detecting of that cheat.

I had also thought to have answered the Quakers Queries sent me before, which
they importunately pressed in to their usual Rhetoric, Prove. 26. 4, 5.
having an eye to that of the Wise man, of answering a fool, effectually,
though not in his way. But finding the said Queries to be the very same in
substance, if not verbatim, which as a common Babble, they had formerly been
sent to Mr Eaton, Mr Baxter, Mr Farmer, and others by their consorts, already
fully answered, I desisted not willing to mispend so much precious time; The
multiplicious Work, whereto I am necessitated in this City, by my Ministerial
Call, affords me not many hours of respite, and may sufficiently Apologize for
any defect in this book, whether for matter, method, or expression; yet could
not my heart rest till it had breathed forth its oppressing troubles in this
weak manner, that all such who own the Lords honor and the Public Weal, might
have this warning to awaken. The noise of a few despised creatures were once
instrumental to the saving of a famous State, by saving their Capitol. Tit.
Live. Flor.
The sounding of Rams horns, by Gods appointment, was instrumentally blessed
from above, Josh. 6. 20.
to the pulling down of Jericho's Walls: Hebr. 11. 30.
Maximus Deus, et in minimis. A weak crooked tool in the Lords hand may serve
his turn, for the greatest work at his pleasere. If either by this or any thing
else any benefit accrue to Christ's friends, let him have the Glory, and forget
not in thy best Addresses him, whom the Lord has made in any degree
serviceable to thy good. It Is his hearts desire to be made faithful to God and
his people that he may spend and be spent a^ight in the finishing of his course
with joy. That Christ may be All in All things to thee, is his longing desire,
and shall be still his constant prayer.

December. 30. 1656.
n sph the, di Iesou christou, dxa es tos ana. mn.
FINIS.

