Animal Cornutum, OR The Horned Beast:

Where in is contained^,

1 A brief Method of the grounds of Astrology,

2 A Description of each Planet and Sign,

3 The way to erect a Figure of Heaven,

4 A Narrative of what visible Eclipses (both of Sun and Moon) will appear in
our Horizon, for these 15 years yet to come, with the month, day, and hour when
they happen.

Whereunto is annexed,

An Examination of a spurious Pamphlet (entitled, Astrology proved to be the
doctrine of Demons) laying open the Antagonist's malice, and folly; with a
refutation of his Errors, by an Astrological Example, in Figure, and Judgment.

Composed for the benefit of all those that are desirous to exercise themselves
herein,

By J. Gadbury, a lover of the Celestial Sciences.

Card. 1 Seg. Apho. 5.

Stulti negligunt and contemnunt Astrologiam, qui contradicit ambitiosus est,
qui maledicit, fatuus.

1 Cor. 6.5.

I speak it to your shame, is it so, that there is not a wise man amongst you?

LONDON, Printed for William Larnar, and are to be sold at the Blackmores head
near Fleet-bridge, 1654.

In praise of the AUTHOR.
A Strology is underprop'd
By thy diviner pen,
And Tares from Wheat have thou here cropped,
God send us more such men.
Hypocrisy thou do unveil,
And lay'st it open to view,
The Envious man thou do assail,
And show what is his due.
Let Envy rage, and Malice bark
At this thy Art so high,
The wise will cherish this thy Lark,
What though fools pass it by?
What shall I speak unto thy praise
For this rare work of thine,
Crowned art thou with thine own Bays,
Not with these words of mine.
Steven Rogers.

To his Ingenious Friend, the Author of this Work.
NOr Gold, nor Gems, nor any thing of worth,
Can I bestow, to set thy labors forth,
Only some rude (at least) unpolished lines,
To feed the giddy humors of the times,
Who would dismember the The harmony of the universe.
Creator's glory,
Of which (dear friend) thou'st penned an ample story.
Let Zoilus storm, let Momus envy thee,
Thou'st charmed their follies here sufficiently.
Rare soul, go on, let not their louder threats
Silence thy pen, it is baseness fear begets:
Thou have a Milk-white This by, that is within thee,
will bear thee up, when all the world's again thee.
T. Perkins, Philo-Math.

To his loving Friend the Author.
LEt Momus carp, and Zoilus tear,
Thou art got so high, thou needst not fear
Their Envy, since thou art
Above their reach, and no part
Of their loose Directory can tell,
Whether thy knowledge is of Heaven, or Hell.
Yet they will continue bawling: but's no matter,
Let Jack-daws prate, and Mag-pies chatter:
Go thou on stoutly, that the world may see
Thy sober Truth consute their Heresy.
T.B.

To the Reverend Father in Presbytery, Mr. Thomas Gataker, B.D. -- I. Gadbury
dedicates these his virgin labors.
Grave Sir,
I Know no one so worthy of (so fit for) this my dedication, as your self; it
is the usual way of those that make books, to choose a Patron that does affect
the Subject, but contrary to that custom, have I shrouded this my little Lark,
under your protection, not doubting but you will trim his feathers, (whether be
have need or not;) what though you have prosessed your self an utter enemy to
the Subject I treat of, yet my more Christian thoughts will not suffer me to
conclude, the Sun shall set, before your wrath be over; you being a Minister of
Antiquity cannot be unacquainted with the Apostles, saying, let not the Sun go
down upon your wrath, it was the vigilance of Anthony the great (who when he
had seen the Soldiers qarrelling one with another, not to suffer them to part
enemies, he would persuade them with these words of St. Paul, Sol non occidat
super iracundiam vestram.)

Charity will not suffer me to speak beyond the bounds of Christianity, in
whose bounds I hope you are confined; it is true, you did (in a rage) rail
against Astrology, and its harmless Professors, Card. Seg. 1. Aphor. 24.
who never did you wrong, mean while, you came under Cardans lash, viz. Stulti
negligunt and contemnunt Astrologiam, qui contradicit, ambitiosus est, qui
maledicit, fatuus, but not long after, (the galld horse back being touched must
wince) when we thought your rage to be over, in an unadvised manner did you
show your self to the world in a more ugly shape than ever, never considering,
Coelum est instumentum, quo inferiora agit, impellit, regitque, the Heaven is
Gods instrument whereby he works, enforces, and governs all things; but
what your madness could not vent in your clumsey Annotations, you thought your
malice should in your buzzardly Vindications, with thanks to Mr. Calamy for
allowing them the press.

Is it not written, that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, Seg. Card.
Aphor. 146.
why should you then, being a Priest, instead of so doing, endeavor the
contrary? hear Cardan again; Q^i Artem aliquam destruit, long deterior est
imperito, nec vacat men's illius malitia, desidia and ignorantia.

Certainly, had you the consideration of humanity or Christianity before your
eyes, you could never have thus transgressed your bounds, so far, as to The
Godly man is like God, kind to all, loving to all, merciful to all, even to the
ungodly. Mat. 6.
rail at, speak evilly of, the Person, Principle, or practice of any one, who
bears Gods image, as you have in that ever-envious Vindication of yours; I am
sure Christ is no precedent for you, in this, and he ought to be the precedent
of Gospel Ministers) nay Gamaliel (though a Heathen Doctor) was fuller of
humanity. See Acts 5.

And now Sir let me tell you, by your writing thus for ostentation, you have
bel^hed forth such horrid imprecations, which have wholly extenuated your
veneration, in so high a manner, that were you young again, your writing nor
preaching could never gain your lost commendation, your Pen has made you so
contemptible.

What scurrilous language has dropped from your Pen St. Paul came not with a rod
but in the spirit of meekness. Caveat Presbyt. Ioh. 8.
against men you know not, as wizards, witches, dealers with the Devil,
helhounds, Sicophants, with a thousand more non-Gospel phrases, which I should
have concluded had dropped from tht mouth of one of hells firebrarnds, and not
from the pen of a Gospel-Minister, had not I seen your name to the Book?

Suppose some Astrologers had erred, were you the man that was so righteous as
durst to fling a stone. O Hypocrite pluck out first the beam, and then may you
epsy the more the better, what if the Art happen to be abused by some spurii
(non very silii) artis, is your Divinity wholly free? nay, it has the same nay
the very same fortune, and here the common proverb may well be noted, viz. All
Note, Professors of any Science the most guilty, else why are Christians now a
days led into such doubtful disputations, when love and peace are the pathway
to Heaven? Romans 14.
Sciences have their imperfections: some pretended Divines are not so good as
they should, that makes the Gospel thus neglected, which gave occasion to Mr.
Powell (in his Sermon to the Parliament) to say, that generally they minded
their wages more than their work.

Nay, I believe, all pretenders to Astrology are not so honest, as I could
wish; but what is this to the purpose, are all to be blamed for some men's
Errors? no wise man will so determine; it may be upon better consideration, you
may see your error, and be sorry, to the end you may, I will give you notice of
one shrewd slip, in your Vindication, in p. 57. you give us to understand, you
made your abode at the House of a virtuous Gentlewoman in Essex, when you were
young, whose Husband did (as you pretend) invite you thither to teach him
Hebrew, yet in p. 33. you profess to have but little skill therein your self;
were I your Antagonist, I should make this construction, viz. seeing the
contradiction in your own words, that your residence there, was not so much for
the Gentleman's instruction, as for the virtuous Ladies (and your own)
satisfaction, for sure I am, the unhallowed Priests were no more privileged
from the sin of Lechery, than was the righteous Judah, see Genesis 38. in
earnest, what ever else you had put in the room, you had better have kept this
out; but its not my work to teach you, the oversight it self may make you more
careful hereafter.

Now I come to tell you the reason of my dedication, and that is this, all along
in your Vindication you desire to be better informed concerning Astrology,
that you might not die unsatisfied (you being ancient) I have taken pains in
the subsequent trackt, (presuming Mr. Lillye's Introduction never came to your
hand) to fulfill your desires, if you deem it (by reason of brevity)
insufficient, I refer you to Mr. Lilly's Introduction, where (unless Pharaoh's
curse hangs on you) you may be fully informed of the Principles of this
much-honoured (but by you despised) Art. I conclude, desiring you (if your
malice will not permit you read this little tract) yet (seeing it is yours by
dedication) lay it up in your study among your other books, among whom I assure
you, you have none (for I think you had never the like honor done you)
dedicated with more good will; Dyonis.
that you may now cast off your envious robes, they being like Apollo's cloth
of gold clothing, nec estati nec hyemi vestis haec convenit, not sit to be
worn neither in Summer nor winter, shall be the earnest desire of him, who upon
the like occasion will be sure to make use of you for a Patron.

I.G.

THE GROUNDS OF Christian Astrology.
IF ever thou intend the study of Astrology, thou must use a Method, and for
the more regular proceeds herein thou must first know, that there are seven
Planets, which are called ( sicllae erraticae) or wandering Stars, and
Astrologers do characterize them thus, viz.

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury Luna. Drag. head. Drag. tail.
There are also 12 signs through which these Planets continually move, and
they ^

Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittary Capricorn
Aquarius Pisces.
Planets in these signs make their aspects one to another; before I tell you
how, it is requisite to tell you how you may know them: there are 5 aspects,
viz.,,,,. A Conjunction, (though improperly called an aspect) is when Planets
are in one sign, degree, and minute.

, a Sextile is 60 degrees distant, or two signs, as in the 10th of, in the
10th of.

, a Square, or Quadrate, is 90 degrees distant, or 3 signs, as in the 10th of,
in the 10th of.

, a Trine is 120 degrees distant, as in the 10th of, and in the 10th of.

An Opposition is when Planets are 180 degrees distant, as in 10 degrees of, an
in 10 degrees of.

Astrologers tell us (and that truly) that these aspects are of contrary
qualities, which you may thus know:

A Conjunction with the good is good, and with the bad is bad likewise.

A Sextile is always noted to be good; but

A all Astrologers conclude an aspect of imperfect Enmity, yet with other
helps, may be good.

A Trine is an aspect of perfect amity, love, and concord.

A Opprsition never does good, without a miracle, for in my practice I find it
to be the worst of aspects.

There are many other things to be noted, as the Planets dignities, debilities,
but I shall in order take occasion to speak of them, before I have done; I must
show you now the use of an Ephemeris, which is no more than a Diarie, or
Day-book, which contains the Planets motions both in longitude and latitude, as
also the Dragons head: Usually you shall find ten Columns in the left hand page
of an Ephemeris, the first contains the days of the month, the second the
days of the week, the 3d the motion of Saturn, the 4th the motion of, the 5th
of, the 6th of, the 7th of, the 8th of, the 9th of, the 10th of Dragons head.
As the latitudes of the Planets vary, so you shall find them by these Letters,
M. S. D. A. which are to be understood thus, A Planets latitude noted with M.
A. tells you he has Meridional or South latitude, Ascending; If S. A. then tells
you he has Septentrional or North latitude, Ascending. But if you find with M.
or S. the letter D. affixed, it denotes the Planet is then Descending in
latitude.

To know what latitude a Planet has, it is but casting your eye to the foot of
the page, and there you may see it for every tenth day. Thus much briefly, for
the explanation of the left hand page of an Ephemeris, it being no intention of
mine, to write an Introduction to Astrology, else I should have been more
copious.

The right hand page unfolded.

There are 8 Columns in this page, the first is fitted for the days of the
month, the other 7 are ordained for the containing the aspects of the Moon to
Planets, and the Planets aspects among themselves, as over the 6 equal Columns
you shall see written The Lunar aspects, and over the last great Column you
will find these words viz. The Planets Mutual aspects. You must know that
Astronomers begin their day at noon, and end the next day at noon; so that what
aspects do fall out between those times, you shall find under the respective
Columns: for instance,

In Mr. Lilly's Ephemeris 1654. in the 6. Column I find Venus placed, and the
first day of January the Moon salutes by a friendly Trine, which by the figure
10 I find to fall out at 10 a clock at night, or 10 h. P. M. for Astronomers
reckon always from noon so many hours.

Again, The 6 day of January by the same Ephemeris, I find under the Planets
mutual aspects this, 19. which tells me, that on that day the Sun and Mercury
are in Conjunction 19 h. P. M. or 19 hours after noon, which does not fall out
before 7 a clock the next day; thus may you do in all the rest, and never fail,
if the Astronomer has rightly computed them.

The Planets are sometimes said to be oriental, and other times said to be
occidental, which you may find by the next line under the Planets Characters,
as in the aforesaid Ephemeris you have under these letters, orient. which tells
me is then oriental. Under Jupiter are these Letters, occid. which denote to be
occidental. The Sun has never any of these titles, because it is by the
Planets motions round the Sun that they become so; for a Planet rising before
the Sun is always oriental, and a Planet setting after the Sun is termed
occidental.

An ingenious head-peice will easily find out the rest, if he be once versed in
this.

Having thus far directed you, you will now come to want a Table of Houses,
without which you can never learn to erect a Figure, and that you may find in
the aforesaid Ephemeris, which contains 12 great pages, the first of which is
known by Sol in Aries, the next in, and so till you come to in order, and by
this means you may learn thus to erect a Figure.

What a figure is.
celestial figure

A Celestial figure (which shows the face of Heaven to our view in plane) was
wont to be erected diversely of Astronomers, some bagan at the ascendant, and
divided the Zodiac into 12 equal parts, by circles meeting in the poles of the
Zodiac; others divide the Equinoctial into 12 equal parts, by imaginary
Circles drawn from the Poles of the world; other some divide the vertical
Circle of the East into 12 parts, but that is held to be the most rational,
which divides the Equinoctial into 12 equal parts by Circles meeting at the
intersections of the Meridian, and Horizon; but for the order of houses all
agree, beginning the first house at the East, calling it the Ascendant or
Horoscope, and so proceed under the Earth, and the rest in their order, by the
Imum Caeli, unto the Descendant, and thence by the Medium Caeli, to the
Ascendant as in this figure.

Now I come to show you how to erect a figure, which is easily done, if the
foregoing Rules be heeded.

Having drawn your figure, seek the place of the Sun in your Ephemeris, for the
time you would erect your figure; having so done, enter the Table of houses, in
that sign wherein the Sun is, and the degree in the Column of the 10th. house,
against which in the first Column you will find certain hours, minutes, and
seconds, which you must always add to the time afternoon, and if the aggregate
exceed 24, you must throw away 24, and the remainder you must seek in the first
Column, entitled [ time from noon] and directly against that in the Collateral
Column, you shall find the signs and degrees that are to be placed on the
Cuspis of the 6 oriental houses, namely the 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, as is seen in
the upper part of the Table, the other 6 houses have opposite signs, but the
same degrees that the former 6 houses had, the houses and signs are thus
opposed, viz.

Opposite houses
opposite signs. 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3,,,,,,, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.,,,,,.

But that the way may be easy (even to this Arts greatest Enemies) I will give
you a very plain example. I would know in what manner the Heavens are posited
at the middle time of that great Eclipse of the Sun, which will happen the 2
day of August 1654. I find the Suns place to be (by Mr. Lilly's Ephemeris) 18
d. 41 eighteen degrees, 41 minutes of Leo, with which sum I enter the table of
houses under Sol in Lee, and against the Suns place, viz. 18 degrees, 41
minutes, I find 9 h. 25, 44, viz. nine hours, twenty five minutes, forty four
seconds, to which I add the hour of the day (or middle time of the Eclipse)
viz. 21 h. 28, twenty one hours, twenty eight minutes; both added together make
30 hours, 53 minutes, 44 seconds, thirty hours exceeding the whole Circle, I
must therefore cast away the whole Circle, and enter the Table of houses, in
the first Column under time, from noon, with the remainder, which is 6 h. 5344,
which I find in the fourth great page, and the houses toward the orient offer
them thus to my view.

The opposite houses have opposite signs.

10 house 12 4 house 12 11 house 20 5 house 20 12 house 17 6 house 17 ascendant
9 descend. 9 2 house 2 8 house 2 3 house 2 9 house 2

The signs and degrees thus found, are to be placed on the cuspis of each
house, as in the following Figure.

Now come we to enquire for the Planets places, with the Dragons head and tail,
which in the aforesaid Ephemeris are thus, (with reduction.)

28 22 12 19.33 8 17 25 25

You must know the head and tail of the Dragon are always opposite.

The Planets places being thus found, place them in a due order, in your
figure, always observing if your Planets place be more degrees than the Cusp of
the house, he must be placed beyond the Cuspis, if lesser, he must be placed
before the Cuspis, as in this Figure.

astrological figure The true face of Heaven, for the Middle time of that most
conspicuous Eclipse of the Sun on the second day of August 1654.



Hitherto has the Lord helped us, and we have not used the help of the Devil
(or Satan) as Mr. B. does simply affirm.

Nor have we used Conjuration, or Necromancy, as Parson Gataker dreamed of.

But because our ancient Antagonist shall not die unsatisfied, I will discover
something more, which shall be the shape and description each Planet gives, as
also the signs; this being but the spelling part of this Noble Science, I wish
Astrology's detractors (if they would learn to put rogether) to apply
themselves to the Introduction to Christian Astrology, composed by the
ingenions Mr. W. L. where they shall not only learn, how they are governed by
such and such constellations; but also, what dull, and heavy, lumpish stars,
have (by some cross configurations) blinded their choicest speculation, leading
them captive into the inner Court of Doctor Ignorance, where they have a long
time layn in the fetters of self-conceit, imprudence (or impiety rather) being
their chiefest Jailer. But to return from what I digressed.

What Shape and Manners every Planet gives.
Of the Planet Saturn.
Saturn (being Superiorum altissimus) generally gives a body of a middle
stature, complexion pale or muddy, little eyes, looking downwards, broad
forhead, dark hair, great Ears, lowering Eyebrows, etc.

Of the Planet Jupiter.
Jupiter (a juvando dictus) fignifies an upright and tall stature, a ruddy and
lovely complexion, an oval visage, somewhat fleshy, high forehead, large gray
eyes, a solt hair of a lovely brown color, etc. Monstrum horrendum) a Minister
and not covetous) when ill, a very Hypocrite, of a dull capacity, a mere
Sceptique, Atheist, or Scorner.

Of the Planet Mars.
Mars (Superiorum infimus) generally endues men with strong able bodies, big
bones, but of a middle statute, brown complexion, ruddy color, round visage,
the hair red, or sandy-flaxen, cirsping, a piercing sharp hazel eye, a
confident countenance, one of a bold and undaunted spirit, fearing nothing.
sleights and derides all things in comparison of victory; when ill disposed, he
is a pratler without modesty, or honesty, a lover of quarrels, murder, theft,
an Highway thief, a perjured turbulent fellow, neither fearing God, nor
reverencing man. --

Of the Sun.
Astrologers say, the Sun is placed in the middle of all the Pianers, that he
may the better give light unto them, and by his access unto us, and departure
from us, he does vary the seasons of the year, from whence came this Axiom.

For Phoebus running his Ecliptique ring,
Does make both Autumn, winter, Summer, Spring.
But to our purpose, the presents one of large corporature, a safron
complexion, a large forehead, goggle eyes large and piercing, a yellow hair,
body fleshy, a bountiful, honest, wel-minded man, one sufficiently spirited,
not loquacious. Sun is well seated, then is the Solar man faithful, and
punctual, but very desirous of Sovereignty, he is prudent, and of incomparable
judgment, he is courteous, affable, and very humane to all, cannot suffer a
sordid thought to enter his hear; when ill, then is the Solar man proud,
restless, troublesome, domineering, cracking of his pedigree, a spendthrift, a
mere vapor, and hanging on men's charities, thinks all men bound to him,
because a Gentleman born.

Of the Planet Venus.
Venus bestows a comely middle stature, lovely complexion, round face, handsome
eyes, light brown hair, a cherry lip, and decent mouth, a body very
delightful, and of admirable shape.

Of the Planet Mercury.
Mercury (dictus stillion) denotes one of a high stature, straight body, long
face, high forhead, long nose, fair eyes, thin lips, sad brown hair, almost
black, long arms and hands, complexion of an olive, or chestnut color. able by
his own Genius to produce wonders; when ill, a troublesome wit, a liar, a
boaster, pratler, a busie-body, an author of strifes, a pretender to all manner
of knowledge, but guilty of no lolid learning; if a Divine, then he is a mere
verbal fellow, more in show than in substance, one of no Judgment, easily
perverted --

Of the Moon.
Luna (or the Moon,) generally presents a man of fair stature, round face, gray
eyes, one eye bigger than the other, much hair, but the color according to the
sign she is in, or Planet she is with, the whole body is plump, corpulent, and
flegmatique.

Thus have I journeyed through the shapes and manners each Planet (under God)
gives; I come next to the Signs, where I shall make use of as little
conjuration, as hitherto I have done: if I write any thing that should favor
of evil, let it be detected, and me for so doing convicted, by those that
understand it.

A Description of the 12 Signs.
Aries gives a dry body, not high, lean or spare, but lusty bones, strong
limbs, long visage, black ey-brows, a long neck, thick shoulders, the
complexion duskish brown or swartish.

Taurus presents one of a short, but of full set and strong stature, a broad
forehead, great eyes, big face, large, strong shoulders, great mouth, and thick
lips, gross hands, black rugged hair.

Gemini imports an upright, tall, straight body, either in man or woman,
sanguine complexion, not clear, but dark and obscure, long arms, but many times
the hands and feet short, but very fleshy, a dark hair almost black, a strong,
active body, a good piercing hazle ey, and wanton, of perfect sight, one of
excellent understanding, and judicial in worldly affairs.

Cancer denotes one of a low stature, generally the upper parts of the body
bigger than the lower, the visage round, sickly, and pale, a whitely
complexion, the hair a sad brown, little eyes, prone to have many Children, if
a Woman.

Leo signifies one of a large and full body, more than of a middle stature,
broad shoulders, narrow side, yellow, or dark flaxen hair, much curling, or
turning up, a great round head, big eyes, starting or staring out, or goggle
eyes, quick-fighted, a fierce countenance, but ruddy, high sanguine complexion,
strong valiant and active.

Virgo; personates a slender body of mean hight, but decently composed, a ruddy
brown complexion, black hair, wel-favoured or lovely, but no beautiful
creature, a small shril voice, all members inclining to brevity, a witty
discreet Soul, judicious, and excellently wellspoken, studious, and given to
History, whether man or woman, it produces a care, understanding, if be there,
and in, but somewhat unstable.

Libra gives a well framed body, straight, tall, and more subtle or flender
than gross, a round, lovely, and beautiful visage, a pure sanguine color, in
youth no excess in either white or red, but in age usually some pimples or a
very high color, the hair yellowish, smooth, and long.

Scorpio presents a corpulent, strong, able body, somewhat a broad or square
face, a duskish muddy complexion, a sad dark hair much and curling, an hairy
body, somewhat bow-legged, short-necked, a squart well-truffed fellow.

Sagittari imports one of a stature somewhat above the middle size, a
well-favoured countenance, somewhat long visage, but full and ruddy, almost
like Sunburnt, the hair light Chestnut color, a conformity in the Members, and
a strong able body.

Capricorn denotes one of a dry body, not high of stature, long, lean, and
slender visage, thin beard, black hair, a narrow chin, long, small neck, and
narrow breasts.

Aquarius signifies a squat thick corporature, or one of a strong well-composed
body, not tall, long visage, sanguine complexion, if who is Lord of this house,
be in or, the party has black hair, and distorted teeth, otherwise of a white
and clear complexion, flaxen hair, a very pure skin.

Pisces personates one of short stature, ill composed, not very decent, a good
large face, palish complexion, the body fleshy or swelling, not very straight,
but incurvating somewhat with his head.

Thus have I given you a brief description of the Signs.

The signification of the 12 houses of Heaare expressed in these two verses.

1 2 3 4 5 6 Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Genitor, Nati, Valetudo, 7 8 9 10 11 22
Uxor, Mors, Sacra, Religio, Benefactaque, Carcer.

There are many other divisions of the signs, as into common, fixed, moveable,
Diurnal, Nocturnal, Masculine, Feminine, Northern, and Southern, Fiery, Airy,
Earthly, and Watery, Bestial, Prolifical, Barren, Human, Feral, Mute; which are
treated of at large in Mr. Ls. Introduction, as before mentioned, to which I
refer the Reader; I have been larger than I intended, but I am the more larges
in that I would not have Mr. G. of R. to die unsatisfied in this point, nor Mr.
B. to think but that the ground of this Art is real, substantial, and deduced
from no Heathenish or Diabolical grounds, as is sufficiently proved, in my
examinations of his Pamphlet belchd out against Astrology.

Of the Passions of the Luminaries 15 years yet to come.
Of the Solar defects, or Suns Eclipses.
IN the year of our Lord 1654, will be a visible Solar Eclipse, upon the 2 day
of August, at nine a clock in the morning, were Mr. B. an Abbot in Italy, this
might prove inimical to him, but he being a Priest in England it relates not
publicly to him.

In the year 1655, on the 27 day of January, at 2 a clock in the afternoon,
will be a small Solar defect, but will hardly be conspicuous to the eye.

In the year 1656. on the 16 day of January, at 1 h. 45, viz. at forty five
minutes after one in the afternoon, will appear a great Solar Eclipse, there
being 8 digits, one third part of a digit of the Suns body obscured, the
Eclipse falls in the ninth house in the ascendant of Swedland, Muscovia,
Westphalia, etc. If Religion make those Countries as mad, as it has done the
English, I cannot help it; I say this Eclipse falls in the 9th house in, an
aereal sign, I fear not only a famine of the word of God, but a Famine of
bread, and sickness to boot; For an Eclipse in the,,, (says Proclus) imports
Famine, great Sicknesses, and pestilential Diseases, etc. but this is not my
intent to write of the effects of Eclipses, therefore I will keep to my text.

In the year 1659. on the 4th day of November, will appear a great Eclipse
about 3 a clock in the afternoon in the sign Scorpii, the most vicious of all
the twelve.

In the year 1661. on the 13th day of September, at 11 h. 44 A. M. viz. eleven
a clock forty four minutes past, will the Sun be, in a manner, totally
obscured, the defect happens in Virgo; I pray God bless my friends in Greece,
and be merciful to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

In the year 1666 on the 22th day of June, about 7 a clock in the morning, will
the Sun be obscured in the Tropic: Mote vengeance threatened to Holland, and
Scotland, the Lord avert it. And thus have I spoken of the Solar Eclipses which
will be visible in England, I come now to the Lunar defects.

Of the Eclipses of the Moon which will appear visible in our Horizon, for
these 15 years yet to come.
IN the year 1654. (will the Moon suffer an Eclipse) on the 21 day of February,
about 6 a clock in the morning.

In the same year, on the 17 day of August, at 10 a clock at night, will the
Moon be Eclipsed, but not very much, therefore not of much consequence.

In the year 1656. on the 1 day of January, at 7 a clock at night, will the
Moon be almost totally darkened, this defect happens to the Moon in her own
house, viz., you will hear of its portents when the year comes.

In the year 1657. on the 15 day of June, at 7 a clock at night, will the Moon
be totally Eclipsed, it happens in: Has Spain been quiet too long, I fear some
strange Mutations there.

In the same year happens another Elipse of the, (but not central) on the 10
day of December, almost at 6 a clock at night to be seen at London.

In the year 1659. on the 26 day of April, at 5 a clock at night will the Moon
be Eclipsed.

In the same year on the 19th day of October, at 11 a clock at inght, will the
earth shroud her again from the Sun's brightness.

In the year 1661. on the 28 of September. at 1 a clock in the morning, will the
Moon be Eclipsed in the regal sign.

In the year 1663. on the 12 of February, will the Moon be Eclipsed at 2 a
clock in the morning.

In the month of August the same year, and 8th day of that month, at 6 a clock
at night, will the Moon be deprived of her borrowed light wholly.

Besides these two Eclipses of the Moon, there happens an unusual conjunction
of and in the sign: Spain has but been jested with hitherto, let them look to
it now in earnest, assuredly a great change will be wrought among them; Let God
be glorified.

In the year 1665. on the 21 of January, at 5 a clock in the morning, will the
Moon suffer an Eclipse, but 'twill not contain two digits, therefore no
Memorables are signified by it.

And thus much for Eclipses, both Solar and Lunar, I mean as many of them as
will be conspicuous in our Horizon, for 15 years yet to come.

All Authors conclude Eclipses to be the Antecedents of great changes, as well
in private genitures, as public Inthronizations, Institutions and Elections,
etc. though Mr. Gataker deem an Eclipse of no greater moment, than the
black-fac'd night, but should any defect in either of the Luminaries chance to
fall in his ascendant, or mid-heaven, it would go near to give him his pasport
into another world, and not give him time to repent his folly, unless God were
the more merciful to him, let not him, nor any else (therefore) Momus-like)
bark at the Moon, or carp at the signs of Heaven; for Coeli enarrant Dei
fortis, and opus manuum ejus indicat expansum little, Psa. 19. v. 1.

SInce Mr. G. has in so foolhardy a manner slighted Eclipses, and their
effects, I will show to the world one admirable Prediction, caused principally
by that Eclipse of in August 1645. so exquisitely handled by Mr. Lilly in his
Starry-Messenger, p. 33. viz. When I see ( says Mr. Lilly) descending in the
fourth, and the Dragons tail so near the Cuspis of that house, and retrograde
in the 7th, a fixed sign, what assurance have I, that the most stately building
of this Kingdom shall escape ruin, etc.

If your Envy will suffer you to speak, contradict this so admirable a
Prediction, Say, Mr. G. are not antientest buildings of this Kingdom in a
great measure decayed? where are the quondam Princely Palaces become? not only
the Kings Manor-houses are neglected, but the Prelates lofty Towers are even
dis-respected, and to what they have been formerly, are ruined, spoiled,
utterly defaced, witness Lambeth, London, Durham Houses, etc.

Envy Dissected, OR, An Examination of a spurious Pamphlet (entitled,
Astrology proved to be the doctrine of Demons, etc.)
Prooemium.
QUilibet praesumitur esse bonus, dum contrarium probetur, Every man is
presumed to be good, until the contrary be proved; thus, and no better, fares
it with Parson Brayn, who, while he followed his study of Divinity singly, no
one had ought else to say of him, but that he was a good and godly man, zealous
for God, painful in the Gospel, etc.

But Mr. B. no sooner falls from his Divinity, (unto Astrology) but presently,
instead of making himself honorable therein, misses of the true Key, and
indeed, like the Fox in the Fable, slights his Art, and foolishly reproaches
it, which we had not so plainly known, had not his pen been the bewrayer of his
folly, and indeed the production of the contrary of what he was formerly
presumed to be.

The change being sudden, makes us the more wonder at the reason of this
Gentleman's deserting his quondam affected studies, it may be presumed 'twas
gain made him kick against Astrology so, and not the evil of the Art, as he
pretends, (for the Art is laudable, as I shall before I end prove) To Astrology
belongs no Tithes, I confess, therefore to Mr. B. it may be evil; neither does
there appertain to it any Livings, amounting to 200 or 300 or 500 or 1000 l.
per annum, had there been any of this to have been had, it had not mattered
what the Art had been; no wonder now, that he should say the Art's evil, and
unchristian, for indeed in these days the most Christian Arts are those that
bring in most money, be they what they will, and I presume not long since gave
a worthy Gentleman occasion to say, Angels of Gold please the Saints on Earth,
etc.

But whither am I transported? I must contract, what I now intend, into a
method, and that will be by way of Examination of a Pamphlet, Entitled,
Astrology proved to be the doctrine of Demons, set forth by Mr. J. B. a
quondam pretended Minister of the Gospel. As some Philosophers divide the Soul,
so shall I divide this Gentleman's Pamphlet, viz. into Passion and Reason, and
these two grand Sections I shall again subdivide, that I may examine them apart
the better. The first Section is the Passionate part, which in order I shall
thus examine.

The first part of his passion examined.
IN the beginning of this Tragi-comedy, I find a mass of Hypocrisy, covered
under these words, viz. I write not this (says he) for any offense taken,
neither to give offense to any one, etc.

Sir, this covering is too narrow for you, we can notwithstanding this, espy
your great Hypocrisy, and the way you use to shroud your self from the eyes of
the world, let me a little reason with you from your own words, If you have not
taken offense or intended any, why do you use such deriding language, as to
call Christian-Astrology the doctrine of Demons And never explains the word
which signifies no more than an Angel or Spirit.
, and Christian-Astrologers Idolaters, etc. when it plainly appears they disown
all such superstitious courses, and hate Idolatry with a perfect hatred, never
professing any thing more, than in Christianity they can be countenanced, else
the learned in (all ages, as well as) these last days have been misled,
especially the reverend Divine R. Gel. D. D. who has honored the Society of
Artists so much, as to preach two several Sermons in the praise of that
Science, as also Mr. Reeve, and Doctor Swaddling, eminent learned men, have not
mincingly set forth the lawfulness of the Art, but eminently, whose (never to
be forgotten) works, are as so many Judges sitting in Divinities vinities
highest sphere, judging, arraigning and condemning Mr. B. libiduous pamplet,
which has endeavored to divorce the Heavens from the Earth, in taking away
the operation of the Planets, Constellations, and Angels, from the inferior
world, breaking Homers golden chain, measuring and limiting all Sciences, nay
the word of God it self, according to the model of his own understanding: But
Astrology is a traditional thing (says he) it is true, and may therein be
opposed to his Divinity, for are not the fires of Divinity, as well as
Astrology, maintained by the fuel of tradition, viz. the works of ancient and
modern writers, but for experiences, set him quote such as may out-vye
Astrology if he can, but alas since the Gentleman spoke, what he spoke in
passion, I shall pass it by the easier, and conclude,

That if Preachers (as well as Astrologers) should have nothing to say, Nota.
but what they receive by inspiration, (throwing Tradition wholly aside) they
would make as mad a harmony in their Pulpits, as the men of Bedlam do in their
common chat.

Some of late have leapt out of the broad Sea of Authors, into the narrow Brook
of inspiration, but were glad at their hearts to retreat, and indeed I judge
the Gentleman is departed from the truth, and does not deal honestly, if he
deny tradition to be his only friend: For as Tieho, Albumazer, Ptolomy, etc.
are by their works the friends of Astrologers, so Sc. Augustine, Gregory,
Jerome, Basile, and Thomis Aquinas are the friends of Divines.

But if my Antagonist should say, I do not say but that God may work
miraculously in the hearts of men, as of old he did, but he does not so
frequently now.
he can by inspiration preach and exhort without such and such like authors, I
say he must first be conversant in them, or else he cannot; For can any man
learn to read English well, and not begin at A, B, C? if they cannot, neither
may the other, unless he first read preaching and expounding Authors.

By this it appears, my Antagonist is more passionate than rational, for let
any man but look into the book of reason, and (by inspection only) he may
easily see that Divinity as well as Astrology, have their rise from one spring,
and the light they have is fed and nourished by one spirit, or matter, viz.
Tradition, though they appear to us in several Dialects.

Thus have I plucked off his vizard of Hypocrisy, under which has lain this
strange kind of passion, viz. he has not taken offense, neither does write to
give offense to any, but yet belches forth execrations against an honest Art,
that he (like a bungler) having the knowledge (as he pretends) of the oriental
tongues, could not be master of, the fault is more in the Foxes inabilities,
than the Grapes highness.

The second part of passion examined.
A Saint seemingly is my Antagonist, else his words would not have been so
holily methodized, for mark, he has written here, as if he had been lighted by
Candela Domini Gods own Candle; I have writ (says he) out of unfeigned love to
God, and the Gospel, as if he should have said, since the Art of Astrology
(which is one of the Liberal Sciences) is thus frequently professed, the love
of God and the Gospel, is fading, and dying, and like the leaves in Autumn
falling quite away, in and from the hearts of Christians, and now there is no
body left to love unfeignedly God and the Gospel; thus my Antagonist; but I
would ask him one question, viz. whether the Astrologers (who have decry'd the
Knaveries of some spurious Divines) have not in a more immense manner,
manifested their unfeigned love to God and the Gospel, than those spurions
Divines, who make it their chief work to bring railing accusations (such as
Moses durst not bring against the Devil) against all sorts of persons, as well
as Astrologers, who will not conform themselves to their Dagon.

But ah alas! the Gentleman may here be excused, since it may be presumed he
intended well when he took these words into his mouth, or such a task upon him,
as to pretend love to God and the Gospel, but in earnest I think, if the Gospel
of God had no better lovers than such as would willingly obliviate all humane
excellencies, 'twould be as slenderly loved, as Mr: B. loves Astrology, again

If he had born any love to God and the Gospel, he would not have envied that
which is better Gospel, than he may be supposed to be acquainted with, nor have
appeared like Janus the two-faced God, with a plausible outside to the
ignorant, and as notorious Hypocrisy to the Intelligent.

For his equivocating with God, I leave him to God to be dealt with, but for
his Hypocrisy to the Gospel, and Liberal Sciences, he does deserve to have a
reward answerable follow him, the Gospel indeed is little beholding to him for
his love, as in some after particulars shall appear, but to conclude this part,
I shall instance but one saying in Zanchius, which I presume to be Christian,
which makes not a little for the truth of Astrology and the Christianity of it.

Hic ergo est usus verae astrologiae, Zanc. 119 de Astronom.
ut multorum effectuum qui in terr^s fiunt causas qua in Coelo sunt, agnoscat,
aliquando etiam antequam fiunt, ipses essectus in suis causis praevideat.

This therefore is that true use of Astrology, to understand from it, the
causes which only are in Heaven, of the many effects which are on earth, and
sometimes long before they come to pass, that we may prevent the effects
themselves in the causes.

I hope Mr. Brain will not term this diabolical, for this is a Christian
saying, and no one will deny, unless wholly given up unto such a state of
Reprobacy (as the Prophet Esaias speaks) as to call Good, Esaias 5.
Evil, and Evil, Good; or as Doctor Gell of the Sect of Balaam speaks, Number. 22.
v. 23.
That force the Ass against the Angel. Meditate on this Mr. Brain, and consult
the other saying of Zanchius with it, and then you will draw better conclusions
than ever you have done, you will then say (instead of Astrologies choking the
good seed of God in men's hearts) that Astrology is rather a friend, than an
enemy of the Bridegroom Jesus Christ; for Hanc unam scientiam esse viam and
semitam ad sciendum Deum altissimum. This Science, says Ptolomy, is a way and
path to know the most high God.

Then let not Mr. B. nor any other of Astrologies Antagonists, suggest an evil
done to God or the Gospel by Astrology, (as they practice it lawfully) for
there is none, there may be an apprehended evil in them indeed to the Priestly
function, in that they have showed their profound natural skill in purging the
sulphurious stomachs of the Clergy (in these late years especially) with which
they had almost infected the whole Nation: It is the spurious party I speak of,
the orthodox Divine hates such folly.
Priests were always contentious, full of strife, so that I may without hurt
or offense, conclude them not illegitimate, in that they take it by succession.

The third part of Passion examined.
NOw to salve over all his maliciousness, he makes a large discovery of a
Christian care he is possessed with for the good of our souls, and this was one
main thing that prevailed with him to dehort us from the study of Astrology.

For his care of our souls good, we thank him, but in earnest had as lieve he
had let the care of them alone, for nothing wrongs poor souls more than a
pretended care; but whither am I ranging? care for our souls did he say? the
more presumptuous he, may I say, for to care for souls is too high assumption
for mortals, and none but the presumptuous Pope does assume that honor to
himself; I hope he will not give me cause to think him one of his derivases
I Will take this to be uttered in passion, for it is the Passionate part I am yet
upon.

Poor man! in this thou art too weak, What is the Creature, that he should
intermeddle with an increated substance? for man to do so, is it not to throw
down God, and set up himself as God? Who, I pray, can of right care for souls,
as God can, whose Essence they are? truly I think no one; for if God be the
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls (as St. Peter says) then God is a better
protector of our souls than Mr. Brain, or the Pope either.

If he, viz. Mr. B. has received any special commission to take care of our
souls, he had best produce it, otherwise I will not believe him; for verily I
am of a more Christian belief, than to think God would give the care, or charge
of our souls, to any particular man, (or men) for should it have so been,
'twould have grieved me fore to think how sluttishly our souls (which are of
Gods own Essence) would be looked unto.

But stay, can he be thought a good cafor our souls, that would robb us of what
should do both souls and bodies good? let him read Ovid, and he will tell him,
why God has made us in his own Image, viz. That in our aspect toward heaven
we may behold his divine Majesty; for, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, and ercetos ad sydera tollere vultus.
God with a lofty look did man indue,
Commanding him both heaven and stars to view.


Now Mr. B. can you deny Coelum est instrumentum quo inferiora agit, impellit,
regitque, the Heavens to be Gods instrument, whereby he works, enforces, and
governs all things? can you deny, the knowledge of these heavens (which God
uses as Instruments) to be lawful? For the sayings of the Ancients they are
not in any esteem with this Gentleman: Which spring feeds his
almost-extinguished lamp.
Aristotle's Academies he cannot away with, that is a deceit, and indeed so are
all Arts and Sciences too with him, and that is the reason of his caring for our
souls; chiefly to make us his proselites, viz. barkers at the Moon,
Momus-like. Sir, your Net is too narrow, it cannot overspread us in this; for
do we not read wiser, and more learned Authors, (fuller fraught with reason)
who say, Stulti negligunt, and contemnunt Astrologiam, qui contradicit,
ambitiosus est, qui maledicit, fatuus, Fools neglect and despise Astrology, and
he is ambitious that gainsayes it, etc. And again, qui artem aliquam destruit,
long deterior est imperito, nec vacat men's illius malitia, desidia, and
ignorantia, He that destroys any Art, is far worse than he that is unskilful,
for his mind is neither empty of malice, deceit and ignorance. Mr. B. let it be
your study to contemplate these sayings of the Ancients, and then I am sure you
will have no need to trouble your self with our souls; I have been the larger,
because I would take you off this care.

But God give me grace to trust my soul to his care, for he does provide for
his servants souls Angels to attend them, (not Priests) which shall be careful
to bear them up in all good things, and to make them flee evil things. And for
this cause would I advise my Antagonist to address himself to God, for a
speedy care of his own soul, not to trouble himself with the souls of others,
it being so poor a kind of employment, he is like to merit not so much as
thanks for his labors; and thus much for this piece of passion.

The fourth part of Passion examined.
MY Antagonist is still an Apologizer, for now he desires, as he has writ
without prejudice, so we would read it.

If you have writ without prejudice, what need have you to apologize for your
self? but Sir, on the other side (I must tell you) I had not known (nor any
else) any prejudice you had taken but by your writing, so here is a plain
self-contradiction, for had you had no prejudice by the Art, or lovers of it,
'twere a fond thing in you, to prejudice that, which did not prejudice you: but
to be short, it appears the Art was your prejudicer, and you to make amends,
would prejudice it again, a good requital, but not like Paul's rule in the
Romans.

The prejudice in writing is a demonstration of your prejudice in reading,
therefore do not flatter, but deal honestly, and then we find nothing but a
prejudice taken against this diviner Science.

O Sir was it not the Soul-sorrow of Hermes Trismegistus to lament the
condition of Egypt in so bewailing a manner, viz. Egypt, there remains only
the stories of learning in thee, the Divinity of Sciences is returned into
Heaven, and only perverse and ignorant men shall abide on earth, insomuch that
he that would apply himself to the true study of learning, shall be punished
with death, etc.

Implying a paucity or dearth of the true learning, or learners was to befall
the Agyptians, whom the Father of the faithful, and Moses a servant of God, and
many others, as Josephus reports, had labored (by their sublimer skill) to
instruct them in.

And shall it not be the curse of our Enlish Nation, to have the Schools of
Literature broken down? I mean the useful of all humane learning, viz. the
subject of this discourse, which Mr. B: would have roured out of the hearts of
men, and Hear the holy man's dissimulation.
yet he has written against it without prejudice, a likely thing, he can do
so, and yet rail Learned men esteem Learning of greater worth.
against all humane learning, and Aristotle's Academies, in so many places as
he does, I may not, I cannot believe him, in this, though he be a Minister of
the Gospel.

But again, he has not writ out of a bitter spirit; his Ipse Dixit cannot
command my credence here; for I may not in this believe him neither, unless he
can assure me of the constant sweetness his spirit is possessed with, (which
few presbyters are now a days) if he cannot do so, I may conclude his spirit,
Rev. 10.
(I am sure his words are) as bitter as the Book that John eat. But what may be
the reason of this Gentleman's passion? Sure I believe, he had Aries the
day-house of is naturally choleric.
Mars horoscopical at birth, which makes him thus exceed in choler; that he may
not write out of a bitter spirit next time he writes, I advise him to consult
his Ephemerides, A choice Election of time is a jewel of inestimable value.
and see what aspect the Moon has to, or whether transit the degree of his
birth, and if he see his significator free, and the ascendant also, I warrant
him then he writes not so passionately next time.

If the Gentleman write so passionately, and write but seldom, I wonder how he
does preach, sure as furiously as Jehu drove; I wish I lived a little nearer
him, that I might sometimes hear how waspishly he endeavors to beget souls
to God; but I descend.

The fifth part of Passion examined.
NOw Mr. B. begins to descend to particulars, and says, That Jupiter and
Mercury are the Demons the Scripture speaks of. True it is, the Scripture
makes mention of the Lystrians love to gods Servants, viz. Paul and Barnabas,
and how they were reputed Gods (comparatively) for the good tidings they
brought them, but what of this? suppose they had bowed the knee before them,
nay, heart and all, are they therefore Demons? no wise man will so determine.
Instance -- Mr. Brain being a Divine, has For to pretend to the Theory, and
not be capable of the Practick, is a sign of a Bungler, and not an Artist.
studied Astrology, is Mr. B. therefore an Astrologer? No, this will not follow
as a necessary consequent, unless he had studied it, as to have practiced it
too. Now to Mr. B's argument, viz. The Lyst^^ans call Paul and Barnabas, and;
therefore and are the Demons the Scripture speaks of.

A Gentleman of Utopia says Mr. B. being a Priest, must therefore be a
Tithmonger; then by this rule all Priests are Tith-mongers, which assertion is
absolutely untrue in many godly Divines in England, who Preach often, and yet
receive no Tithes at all, nay, I warrant Mr. B. himself would be ready to call
it a non-sequitur, though I dare hardly do it as to him.

Now I pray let this be considered in reason, and we shall quickly see, how
little reason Mr. B. has to call or Demons, for the Ly^^ans kindness to Paul
and Ba^na^as: Were it a fault in the Lystrians (as indeed I dare not excuse
them) yet I believe Mr. B. is, or has been guilty of such kind of Heathenism;
for Mr. B. was one of Canterbury's adopted striplings, and assuredly, formerly
has made as great Idols of the King and the little Bishop, in his Prayers to
his Sermons, as the Lystrians could of Paul and Barnabas, I must judge
charitably; for the Heathen are Christ's heritage.
nay I believe the Lystrians in this point may take the upper hand of our
Presbyters; for these being in the mist of ignorance, could embrace a clearer
discovery of God, and repute the Ambassadors gods, comparatively, for bringing
them such glad tidings, confirmed with miracles, whereas our Presbyterian
Zealots ignorantly established a Religion, brought out of Scotland in a
cloak-bag, and never stood to search or examine its bottom, or foundation,
where it is to be supposed these Lystrians would, had not Paul and Barnabas
confirmed their doctrine with miracles.

Lystrians ought not in conscience to be vindicated for embracing a ground so
sure? and our Zealots condemned, for receiving a form of Religion, and not to
sift it at all?

Lystrians may not be termed the more godly, for honoring Gods Messengers? and
our Antagonist ungodly, for terming them Heathens?

Nay (I believe) should our State confer on this our Priest a Benefice of 3 or
400 l. per annum, he would think it no branch of Heathenism to do them the like
(if not more) Honor.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, Romans 2.
do thou commit sacrilege? do thou preach a man must nor steal, and do
thou steal? Mr. B. learn to know, that he that is no good pattern, can never be
a good Pastor.

The sixth part of Passion examined.
HEre my Antagonist will prove himself a Zoile, or Momus, a barker against the
Moon.

The Moon (says he) is the Goddess of the Ephesians; which neither tradition
nor experience reaches him, neither gives he any reason at all for it, but A
female reason, God knows.
because she is by some called Diana, as if there were no more Diana's but one:
this is a mere non sequitur, and among Schoolboys deserves the lash. But to my
examination.

The is sometimes called Luna, by some Cynthia, and Phoebe, and by others
Lucina, Here a little Logic would have stood my Antagonist in steed.
and Latona, and by many Noctitura and Proserpina, she has all these names,
and more, as well as Diana; but all these do not make her Goddess of the
Ephesians.

The truth is, she has all these Feminine names given her, because she is a
Feminine Planet; but they will not (as I said before) make her Goddess of the
Ephesians, and for these reasons:

1. First, the Goddess of the Ephesians stood up in a Temple made with hands,
and was adored beyond the Moon, while she kept her horned mutations, moving
about this massy Globe of Earth (whose Planet she is) but Diana of the
Ephesians was kept like St. Coneve^f in France, only something more honorable;
for this Diana had a Temple very glorious, and alone, in which she stood, and
the other, viz. St. (...), stood in a Church among other Statues, having only a
shrine before her; therefore was not that Goddess.

2 Secondly, this Diana was a Customer to Demetrius, and the crafts-men, who
made silver shrines for her, but I never heard, nor read, that Demetrius or any
other made any for the Moon; for she never had shrine before her; sometimes the
Earth is a shroud unto her, and hinders her from the Sun's glory, as at an
Eclipse; but no shrine at all has she, therefore is not the Goddess of the
Ephesians.

3 Thirdly, the Moon was no Goddess (unless men would be such Idolaters to
call her so) made with hands, so was this Diana of the Ephesians; Acts 19.26.
for Paul preaching them to be no Goddesses that are made with hands, gains the
ill will of Demetrius and the crafts-men at the 27 verse, who are there crying
out, Our trade is not only in danger, but also the Temple of the great Goddess
Diana, whom all Asia, and the world adoreth; therefore the is none of this
wooden Goddess.

Poor Gentleman, that should heap up Errors for Truth! what, a Minister of the
Gospel, and no better reason? in earnest he appears a diminisher of it rather;
for Ministers usually write or speak rationally, but this man Cu^us contrarium;
I am bold to speak it, if he be a Minister, he is so singular, that I know not
where to parallel him, and yet I know Oxford.

The seventh part of Passion examined.
THis is so intolerable a piece of folly, that I am ashamed almost to take
notice of it, but since he has writ it for so absolute a truth, in
vilification of the Planet Mars, I shall insert his fiction, and then examine
it.

Athens, i. e. the City Athens, was Mars, hill, says my Antagonist, and this
he urges (for it comes not kindly of it self) from the 17 of Acts, ver. 22.
That Athens is hill, is as true as the Moon, is goddess of the Eph^sians, and
both alike demonstrable. I cannot but grant this Athens (being a great City)
might probably have such a place as hill in it, If ever my Antagonist commenced
Master of Arts, he must know there can be no Art without Reason.
o^ a place called hill, (for so some translations render the words there) what
then? does it follow that all Athens must be hill therefore? no, it does not:
For to instance in a like thing, here is London has a place in it called
Snow-hill, shall it, or can it handsomely be inferred, that London is Snow-hill,
when we know that Snow-hill is but a little part of London?

It Is impossible to me that the greater should be comprehended of the lesser,
but for the greater to comprehend is no rarity; but this Mars hill as Paul
spoke on, was more properly called the Court of the Areopagites, for so the
Margin reads it.

I doubt my Antagonist wanted the help of a pair of Spectacles, to have given
him sight, for his eyes were dim; I wonder a Minister should write thus
illogically: I refer him to Mr Cokes Book of Art Logique against he writes the
next heap of Nonsense. And thus I leave his seventh part of Passion.

The eight part of Passion examined.
MY Antagonist faults the Athenians (...) calling Paul's preaching, a setting
forth of strange Demons, so do I, (for Paul's Doctrine was not backed on with a
frozen Presbyterian zeal) fault worthy they are, but if those who were
Heathens, be thus to be blamed for spurning against that, which to them was a
fallacy, though true in it self, May not my Antagonist (and the rest of his
function) be likewise blamed for committing the same error?

The Athenians call Paul's preaching a strange thing to them ('it is like so it
was) our Some of them, others are more wise.
Priests of our time call Gods coming in any way but the Pulpir road, a strange
thing to them, all ways contrary to their ways are false ways and Diabolical,
if they have not the power to lead men about by the nose, then they roar, if
any Christianlike Art flourish besides theirs, I grant Divinity to be the first
Christian Art.
then they bellow.

Every thing is an ignis fatuus, but their preaching (and that is not always
Gospel) all is Diabobical that is not as they would have it, but nevertheless
I will ask one thing of them, and the resolve of this will discover which is
generally most honest, the priest or Artist, viz.



viz. A fore-warning is a fore-arming? And has not the Artist's predictions
been an Antidote against the evil the Priests Consult M. Love's Uxbridge Sermon,
tongues (like Trumpets) had broached, yet will they always be meddling, let
them alone with Ephraim, if happily they may repent?

If you wonder at that word strict Preachers, you may take notice, that some
were more godly, though not so strict; i. e. not so full of persecuting zeal,
of which party are many worthy Divines, The reverend orthodox Divine is worthy
of more honor ^h^n Mr. C^lamies Elders.
whom I reverence with my heart, among whom are Reverend Doctor Gell, a
Reverend Orthodoxal Gentleman, and may equal the gravest Presbyter for
learning, even Mr. Gataker of Redriff. A second is Mr. R^eve, who was a right
bred Scholar, consult his Sermon, entitled, The now Jerusalem, else. A third
is Doctor Swaddling, an admirable, and very ingenuous Gentleman. All these, and
many more, are as great-sticklers for Astrology, as the grave Mr. Gataker, and
furious Mr. Calamie, and the rest of the Brethren in persecuting zeal are
carpers against it; But what are these carpers? truly such that cannot choose
but broach their malice against what they are not affected with; Are they not
therefore like Lovesick people are always passionat.
people in love, who are led more by affection, than reason? surely yes, if so,
then those that are led more by reason, than affection, are to be trusted unto
before them.

Wherefore will I believe these forementioned ingenuous Gentlemen, before the
other, and desire Mr. B. to find three such among his whole society of
Brethren, of the like conversation for Doctrine and example, and this shall be
his reward, E^t mihi magnus Apollo, as great Apollo he shall be to me, for
these are men hating covetousness, fearing God, not in verbis, but in rebus;
here are qualifications worthy of double honor, had Mr. B. had these, I should
not have found him a Detractor from the worth of so noble a Science as
Astrology, etc.

The ninth part of Passion examined.
MY Antagonist now is passionate to purpose, hitherto he has but carped at
men, but now in this strange passion at the Savior of men, even our Lord Jesus.

Heavens protect us, that this Atheistical tenet have no influence on us, for I
am sure by every honest Astrologer, it is exploded, as diabolical, and
blasphemous, and diabolical, because blasphemous; the thing in it self is so
horrid, that my Conscience tells me, it is almost a sin to name it: but seeing my
Antagonist has endeavored to make Astrology the father of it, 'twill not be
amiss to set the saddle upon the right horse, viz. these Men-gods had their
Stars (says he) which they were supposed to be in after death, and thereby to
act on men while they were alive, and having no ground in Judicial Astrology to
back on (or countenance) his Heathenish opinion, endeavors to prove it by
Matt. 2. verse 2. Where is he that is born King of the Jews? we have seen his
Star, and are come to worship him; from these words he argues thus,

The King, says he, is distinct from the Star, so that there is the Demon, or
Hero his Star, the doctrine of the Demon and the Asterisme so prove one
another, that the one being granted, the other cannot be denied.

Oh profound Logician! Jesus Christ is the King of Glory; and therefore no
underprop to the Demon doctrine.
but surely had he been disputing with any Christian Astrologer, he would hardly a
granted him either, his argument is stated so illogically.

The King (that is our glorified Savior) is distinct from the Star; If by this
he means, That Christ, as King, is distinct from the Star, I deny his
assertion, and he himself cannot prove it. For Christ as King, is no ways
unlike the Father; the Father is omni-present; Ergo, Christ the King is not
distinct from the Star, but as he is the bright and morning star, is in union
with all stars and beings, created and uncreated. Christ the child, as born of
a Virgin, considered in his humanity, may be said to be distinct, but
improperly because the brightness of the Fathers glory rested on him. Now Sir,
your major being thus denied, if you now cannot make it good, Christ shall he
present, when Mr. B. shall be the preterperfect lense.
your Conclusion falls immediately to the ground.

But it is a main argument, this my Antagonist was disputing by himself, having
no opposer, but his Conscience, (and that was seared) else sure he would never
have gone about to have eclipsed the omni-presency of our blessed Savior: I am
afraid this savours something of Julian's apostasy, I advise him therefore to
take heed how he spit against Heaven, lest it fall into his own face; I hope
this is no sin against the Holy Ghost, but sure I am, it is a sin that carries
much guilt along with it, and if Gods mercy be not the greater, it may sink a
man even to the lowest pit.

But to our discourse, we say that God did never show any wonderful sign in
heaven, but it was the premonstrator of most eminent changes on Earth, as to
imstance in that most incomparable sign of Heaven 42 years before the Birth of
Christ, in the time of Augustus Caesar; some thought it to be the clear Comet
which should establish the Kingdom of Peace; others took it to be that Star, in
which Sybilla Tyburtina showed Augustus Caesar the Image of a beautiful Virgin,
holding a boy in her bosom, and saying, This Child is greater than thou,
worship him. All conclude it to be a sign of our Saviors coming, and
undoubtedly so it was; Else why should Mantuan, (speaking of the forementioned
Sybill) press it so home to Augustus Caesar? viz.

Augustus Caesar let thy haughtiness
Be la^d aside, what though thou rul'st the earth,
Thou must remember that thou art much less,
And art his That is Christ's Vassal.
vassal, brag not of thy birth,
His power is infinite, and rules on high,
All things are under his authority.
But to come nearer home to our remembrances, what strange Mutations have we
had in England, since the great conjun^tion (...) Saturn and Jupiter, in 1642/3
to let alone the Comet in 1618, and many impregnab^^ proofs which we could, if
need were, insert, but that unusual conjunct^^^, ^^th some Eclipses of the
Luminaries ^^^^e, have turned England upsidedown, and what think we? has the
Eclipse of (...) Sun in March 1652, and the Comet in December the same year
effected nothing? Surely Envy cannot be so blind, as not to take notice of it:
for compare but the writings of Astrologers, and the times together, and see
how like they look, as like as twins that came out of the same womb.

But that my own Ipse D^xit may not pass, I shall tell my Antagonist what a
Divine says of the prodigies of heaven, Molineux de Praecognos, ch^n. 7 page
160.
Non est negandum, and coelestia vel acria ostenta saepe fuisse praenuntia
calamitatum, We may not deny, says he, but that Celestial or a real prodigies,
are many times the messengers of Calamities. But further,

Nec est quisquam, nisi cujus animus ab religione plane obrubuit, qui ad
fulmina and fragorem tonitruum, aut cruenti Cometae aspectum, non tangatur
metu; Cometem qui dicitur Xiphias portendere bella experimentis comprobatum
est, Pogoniam praesignificare mortem Regum; qu^m ominosa fuerit Stella Cririta
1607. testantur tot calamitates urbium, Ecclestarum projecta cadavera. Nor is
there any, unless such a one who has no Religion, who is not affrighted at
lightning, and crashing of thunder, and the sight of an horrible Comet; A Comet
like a Sword, we find by experience signifies War, A Comet with a beard
portends the death of Kings; how ominous that blazzing star in 1607 was, so
many calamities of Cities, and desolation of Churches well testifies. He says
not here the prodigious signs of Heaven are the foundation of the Demon
Doctrine, nay, but rather that they are the Messengers of Calamities and
wonderful mutations.

To any rational man I presume it is cleat now (from what has been said) that
the signs of Heaven are the precursors of earthly changes; its apparent now
that my Antagonist has urged false assertions from the holy text in Matthew, I
will refer him to the works of two learned Gentlemen, viz. Dr. Gell and Dr.
Swadlin, who have learnedly explained the words, but draw no such conclusions
as M. B. does, they make a more transcendent harmony,

Therefore I desire all to take notice, that it is nor the Demon doctrine
Astrologers worship, or adore, some there are ('it is like) that are too
superstitious in the practice of the Art, all Artists, and Art too, ought not
to be blamed for this, for if the honest Art happen to be abused by some spuru
(non very) filii Artis, it has but the same fortune Divinity has, and the
abuse of an Art ought not to nullify the use of an Art, and herein the Lawyers
rule is to be considered as true, that Abusus non tollit usum, but I have been
too long upon the passionate part, I am come now to the second Section, which I
called his rational part, which I shall briefly examine and so conclude.

The first part of his Reason examined.
AMonstrous offense is here taken by my Antagonist, he is offended because the
days of the week, hours of the day, etc. are called after the names of the
Planets. I know no reason he has for it, for if they were not called by the
Planets names, they must be called by some other names, but in earnest I know
no names so proper for them, as those they are called by, for in the Latin
Lingua the days of the week are known by the Planets names and no other: as Die
Solis Sunday, Die Lunae Monday, Die Martis Tuesday, Die Mercurii Wednesday, Die
Jovis Thursday, Die Veneris Friday, Die Saturni Saturday, it is so in all
languages, why then should they suffer a change? verily I wonder what names my
Antagonist would give had he the rebaptizing of them, if he be offended, Let
him give them better if he can, if he cannot, let him not discover his folly,
for I am confident, those that called the days of the week and hours of the
day, (first) after the names of the Planets, knew them more deserving of that
honor, than a sneaking Tith-monger is of a fat benifice.

But the drift of Mr. B. is to nullify our wholesome orders (I presume) and
pretends this is the way to Saintship, but if this be his way, I assure you he
shall not have any company with him.

For I had had rather enjoy the God of peace in order, than to be Sainted in
Mr. B's Confusion is a road too common, and lies not near the narrow way, but
leads men even the pathway of destruction.
confused manner. But its Heathenism and indignity to God to call any of the
Planets Lords, as the Astrologers do in calling them the Lords of the
Genitures, of Ecclipses, of Houses, etc. (says my Antagonist) but out of what
Apocripha he learnt it, he satisfies not his Reader, I am sure he has no
Scripture for it, neither do I believe it to be any more Heathenism, nor so
much as 'twas to call a man a Lord-Bishop, which was governed by them (as a
secondary cause) for which is more honorable, my pen that is guided, or my
hand that guids it.

But to come closer to the matter, it is Heathenism to call any one Lord, but
God only, for he is the Lord of hosts, and the only ruler of his People.

There are Gods many, and Lords many, but to us there is but one Lord, etc.
Will any one be so impudent as to confine or limit the Holy Ghost in this
Expression, when he says, There are Gods many, and Lords many? does he mean,
that there should be none called Lords but God alone? or does he mean, that
none should be called Lords and worshipped like God who is the true Lord? I
believe it is not the name Lord as the Holy Ghost in, Paul was troubled (I speak
after the manner of men) but the idolizing of any one like a Lord is condemned
there, and not the former; for if it were idolatry to call any one Lord, then
have all London been Idolaters many years, in calling a man their Lord Mayor;
and Sarah was likewise to be blamed for calling Abraham Lord and Master; nay,
Daniel the servant of the most high God was misguided, in calling
N^buchadnezzar (which was a Heathen) Lord and King.

Nay, I do believe Mr. B. cannot excuse himself from this kind of Idolatry, but
be it far from me to think that Idolatry should consist in this, I cannot be
yoked with M. B. here. But further, let us consider what the word Lord imports,
in the Latin it is Here Mr. B. wanted a Dictionary.
Domine, and has a double signification, and does serve for the
courtesiecomplement, viz. Sir, as well as Lord. What abundant reason has he
then to find fault with this? sure this is but a project come into his Brayn by
the by. I would have him answer two Quaeries, viz.



more than the word Lord. If the word Lord imports a Ruler, and no more, then
the Astrologers have not erred in calling the Planets Lords, for if he be a
Saint at one time or another, he may sind them Lords too, if he have not a
care, for that of the Poet is a true saying, viz.

The Stars and Planets often smile and lour,
They heal, and hurt poor mortals every hour.
Now Mr. B. I would have you to acquaint your self more with the virtues of
Planets against your next Herculean task, for I am sure Saturn had no hand in
this, for he usually effects matters more solid like him. This is something of
silver-wing'd Mercury, mixed with Mars, which made you so weathercock
Choleric in these absurd reasonings. But I journey hence to your second step
of reason.

The second part of his Reason examined.
HEre it will not be amiss to note one smooth contradiction; seeing we have
begun, we are resolved to track him, for we have been blinded by smooth tongues
too long; The very scope and drift of my Antagonists Bamplet, is to prove
Astrology a fable, a deceit, and that the World has been By the Priests, is he
had said 3000, he had not lied.
deceived by it 300 years; yet a little further does ingenuously confess, That
the Stars (which are the Artists guide) have an influence upon these Earthy
bodies of ours, as to change them from health to sickness, and from sickness to
health again; Nay, says my Antagonist, the earthy part of a A pure piece of
Nonsense from a Priest.
Saint is not free from their influences, but they are also changed by them. If
this latter be a truth, as he confesses, (or else he must have said nothing)
and I affirm, then is not Astrology a deceit, a fable, for I would know by what
means a man can come to know the times and seasons, unless by Astrology: the
saying of Zanchius will be found true, Zanc. de Astronom. 118.
viz.

Videmus enim effectus multos hic in terra, quorum Causas ignoramus, beneficio
autem vtrae Astrologiae, causam suam at originem supra nos in Coelis habere
cognoscimus: We see many effects here on Earth, whose causes we are ignorant
of, yet by benefit of true Astrology, we know they have a cause and production
above us in the heavens.

If Astrology can satisfy us in the causes of those various effects we see on
earth, Astrology is not a deceit, but can do more than the bulk of Divinity
that dwelt in the brains of the late Synod, or Mr. B. either, but Astrology can
satisfy us in the causes of those various effects we see on earth (says
Zanchius) Ergo,

Again, if Astrologers, or men by Astrology, can show the times of sickness, or
health (as the Lord has written them in his heavenly Book) either in the
bodies of Saints, or carnal men; then is not Astrology a deceit, a fable; but
Men by astrology may foretell the times of sickness and health (Deo
permittente) even in the bodies of Sains: Therefore Mr. B. is in the dark, and
Astrology is no deceit. Scotus lib. 2. de gene.
You shall hear what Scotus says to this, which I presume to be a man
transcending Mr. B. in natural reasonings, though Mr. B. it is like may be the
greater Saint.

Hoc modo etiam innotescit, quod qui sciret virtutem signorum, and stellarum in
eu positarum dum nasoitur res aliqua, posset prognosticare de tota vita rei
generatae licet hoc necessitatem non poneret, quia posset impedire per
accidens. By this Speaking of Astrology.
mean it comes to pass, that he who knows the virtues of the Signs, and the
Planets therein placed, may foretell (if he knew when any creature was born) of
the whole life of it.

Now you may see what a shaken reed my Antagonist is, that turns his head every
way, he will sometimes make a Saint an entire piece of holiness, and sometimes
he will make him subject to a deceit; but I am really persuaded, That the real
Saint is neither subject to deceit or conceit, for if he should, 'twould slain
his robs of righteousness. Do you not think now, that my Antagonist is not a
fine converter of sinners to Saints, that would make Saints the worst, (or as
bad as the worst) of them; What? a Saint, and subject to a deceit? It is no
wonder now to me, that he cries out against all humane Arts, as Astrology,
Philosophy, Logique, Aristotle's Accademies, and the like; for by his writing he
should not only be innocent (but ignorant) of them.

But why Astrology, or how Astrologers has deceived the world this 300 years,
I cannot gather; unless he Here the Priests shoo pinched him.
means by the word World, the Priesthood; for God be thanked it has pretty
well deceived them, and in so doing undeceived the Commonalty; and in this kind
of deceit, I think there is no sin at all, For to deceive a deceiver is no
deceit: But if Mr. B. means that Astrology has generally deceived the World, I
deny his assertion, and can find in Scripture but two sorts of general
deceivers, and neither of them Astrologers; but the Priest is primus here, and
will take the upper hand, though the Lawyer may well be secundus, and go along
for company.

Did Astrology deceive the world, when the Priests eat up the fat things of the
Land, as you read in the story of Bell and the Dragon? or did not rather that
divine Astrologer, viz. See the divine Presidents of Astrogers.
Daniel, who discovered the Priests knavery, undeceive them? Mr. B. read the
Story, and contemplate it. Again, was it the Astrologers that had so fiery a
zeal to ravish a Daughter of Israel; nay 'twas the I hope Mr. Calamy has more
godly ones.
Elders rather, whom our Divine Astrologers so justly condemn, read the story
of Susanna impartially with the forementioned story of Bell and the Dragon, and
you will see it is not the Astrologers but the Priests do excel in Lust and
Luxury: but I have been too large, I must be briefer in the rest.

The third part of his Reason examined.
THe Zeal of my Antagonist has devoured his reason, else he being a Minister
could not be unacquainted with what God condemns, for it is condemned of God as
superstitious, to name the names of the Planets (says he) but how he proves
it, I cannot tell, if God condemns it in Mr. B. and no where else, I shall take
it to be one of his frolicks to belie God, for what God has condemned as
superstititious, he has condemned in Scripture, but God has not condemned the
naming of the Planets names as superstitious in Scripture, therefore God has
not condemned it.

I am sorry that the name of God should be brought along to accompany untruths
so frequently as Mr. B. brings it, the Lord in mercy pardon the Offender.

I had thought Superstition had not consisted so much in word as Observation,
and this is Paul's definition of it, Acts 17. v. 22.
Ye men of Athens (says he) I perceive that in all things ye are too
superstitious. he does not say in words, but blames them for their
Superstition, it being a Custom with them all, either to tell or hear some new
thing according to their way of Worship, for at the 16 verse the Spirit of Paul
was stirred up, when he saw the whole City was given to Idolatry; Idolatry,
what is that? why the Margin resolves it, the whole City was full of Idols,
and for men to worship Idols, or to acknowledge them Gods that are made with
hands, by their bowing the knee to them; this is Idolatry indeed, and no other
kind of Idolatry do I read of, in the Book of God, or the works of ancient and
modern writers, but for to name the name of a Planet I find no evil therein. I
pray God give us all a true understanding of the names and natures of them,
that (under God) we may know their powers, influences, and so be able to divert
them, as they shall come to us either for good or evil, for The Stars and
Planets, often smile and lowr,
They heal and hurt poor Mortals every hour.


In earnest I cannot believe Mr. Bs. fancy here, I rather conclude, that God is
more clearer seen in a Star, 1 Cor. 15.
which he says is evil to name, than in such a dark Lanthorn as he is, for the
Stars are glorious, and so is that Art which discovers them: but Scientia non
habet inimicum (...).

The fourth part of his Reason examined.
NOw my Antagonist lays the Axe to the root of the Tree, questioning the body
of the Art, feigning Astrology to be the Father of his innumerous rout of
Errors, the Cabal of that Christian Science is nothing but Heathenism and
Idolatry, Ipse dixit, but brings neither Scripture (truly opened) nor reason
for the proof of his envious assertion.

The Planets, Motions, Aspects, Retrogradations, and most eminent
Configurations are nothing to so witty a Person, never considering the
excellent saying, viz. Omnia propter ^ominem, Homo propter Deum (i. e.) All
things for Man, and Man for God; if all things are for the use of Man, why not
Astrology, if men using it do not transgress their bounds. The truth of
Astrology is evinced by experience.


But by reason of my promise I forbear farther proof, and refer the Reader to
Mr. Li^^ies introduction, where he may find, Answers in experiments, to more
learned objections than Mr. B. is able to bring, Experience being a principal
Master, and fitter to be trusted than all the tradition fancies in the world,
which makes me resolve to believe such a Master in Astrology, before all Mr Bs.
fancies in his pretended Divinity.

For in the grounds of Astrology, I find a reason, why such things are, but no
such in Mr. Bs. traditional Divinity objection.

What Is the reason a ground cannot be produced in Divinity as well as
Astrology, seeing both are alike traditional? answer first Negatively,

B. in this point be too weak.

Esa. 57.
must not have it; so that by this Argument, it is none but rich men must go to
Heaven, and poor men somewhere else, when Christ discussed the matter 'twas
otherwise.

viz. Astrology; but if Mr. B. and his associates had not something to say, how
should they maintain their Diana whom they worship, viz. Tithes: Pardon (good
Reader) this by-talk, I descend.

The fifth part of his Reason examined.
A Spirit, says Mr. B. The Priest is guilty of the sin of lying, the Lord
forgive him.
is required, and nothing is to be done in Astrology without it: What he means
by this, I cannot discover, unless it be such a spirit as our Pharasaical
Priests require in their proselytes; that by it they may bind them over to an
implicit faith, and a blind obedience, which after they cannot get free from.

This might have been ranked among his Passions very well, for the reason it
has in it, for Astrology disowns such tyranny; for how many hundreds of
disaffected people, do daily make their addresses to Astrologers for several
things of contrary qualities? yet the Astrologers value not the spirits of the
people.

For have not they, think you M. B. a desire to follow their sensitive
appetite, generally more than they have to be guided by sound reason? This
considered, the artist need not value what spirit his Clyent is of, so he be
not of so base a spirit as to belly him when he is gone from him. Again Sir, you
must know Astrologers will not maintain any thing oraculous, or positive; for
that were to robb, God of his perfection; -- Scorus 2 Sent. Did. 4.
but what says Scotus, Astra inclinant voluntatem, in nullo tamen necessitatur,
accidit tamen frequenter Astrologos vera prognosticare de moribus hominum,
propter pronitatem eoorum, ad sequendum appetitivum sensitivum, (i. e.) The
Stars (says he) incline the will, but in no wise necessitate it, frequently it
comes to pass that Astrologers fortell truths concerning the manner of men, by
reason of their pronesse to follow their sensitive appetite. Nor are the words
of divine Dr. Gell Stella Nova.
Doctor Gell to be disrespected, There is (said he) id Bruti in men, that they
live so much by sense, that it is almost a strange thing the Astrologer should
predict false: Here Is no enjoining a spirit at all; This is another of M. B's
spurious brats, which he would father upon Astrology: an example in Astrology
will prove this so silly an absurdity; that 'twill be a shame for a Priest to
own, which example you shall find annexed to the latter end of my Book.

The sixth part of his Reason examined.
THe Pamphleter keeps a hideous noise, like the clattering of empty pitchers,
about the powers of the air: he must and will have a distinction between the
powers of the air, and Gods powers, although the powers of God be like him,
viz. Omni-present. But admit of this nicety, viz. that the Devil governs the
powers of the air, and that God and the Devil have their powers distinct, and
opposing one another, are they so much out of man, as in him? no such thing,
but my Antagonist having studied the Macrocosm so much, has left the Microcosm
unstudied; so that he may well say, I have done those things I ought not to
have done, and left undone those things I ought to have done.

I am persuaded God governs the world by harmony, and not confusion; but it is
the Element of air he carps at, and says, (God does not, but) Satan does
direct That Is the aerie powers.
them; which cannot enter in my belief: for I rest confident that that power
which rules in heaven and earth, rules in air also; for if God be Omni-present,
his power must be so too, else his power must be cut off, and if you take away
his power, you may as well take away him; for every thing, both visible, and
invisible, is supported by power: but this being so orthodoxal a Tenet, there
is none but Madmen My Antagonist is hoodwinked, and Aristotle will not help him.
will deny it. Why should any one limit Gods power, and make it distinct from
him, when as it is clear there is no place empty of God, see Psalm. 139. Job
says, God hangs the Earth upon nothing. I believe it is a truth to man
generally, because it is a paradox to him: but really the earth, as the Heavens,
is hanged upon the power of God; this being as nothing in the esteem of some
men. But again, This Earth, as it is hanged upon nothing, could not exist
without the power of God in the other Elements, for all the other are as
correspondents with it; the Water that refreshes its thirsty jaws, the Fire
that does warm its benumbed limbs, and the Air does gently breath upon it; this
Element of the Air is the surrounder of the Earth, and one power governs both;
for, as it is impossible for Mr. B. to live without air, so it is impossible to
make these Separatists.

Let Mr. B. but open his mouth, 'twill be full of air presently, his head was
full of nothing else when he writ against Astrology, there is no such jarring in
the Elements, as is among Which made Mr. Erbury in his late Dispute in
Lumbard-street conclude them Beasts; from which conclusion I called my Book,
Animal Cornutum, it being so infrequent, a thing in England, to see a Beast
without Horns.
Clergymen, let Mr. B. say what he will of them, I really believe Mr. B.
wanted air, when he urged this whimsey for reason, he was almost smothered with
Envy's soultry heat, and the sweet air of Charity was absent. What shall I say
to this University Weathercock? even this, Gods power is not to be rashly dealt
withal; neither is foolishly to be separated from God; for To make God and his
powers twain,
Bold person, you attempt in vain.


The last part of his Reason examined.
AStrologies antiquity is questioned now by the Antagonist, he is resolved now
to cut it up by the roots, affirming it to have beginning but in Nebuchadnezars
days.

But Sir, I would have you know, Astrology is of a more longer and stronger
growth, and will not be so easily cut down. That Astrology began but in
Nebuchadnezzars days is false, and all Writers that do write any thing of this
Subject contradict it; for Though Mr. Gataker slanderously calls him
counterfeit.
Hermes (an ancient Philosopher) a man long before Moses (therefore longer
before Nebuchadnezzer) was an admirable proficient in the Sciences of
Astrology: this is enough to refute his falacy; but Josephus reports, Josephus
lib. 1. chapter 3. de Antiq. Jud.
that Abraham the Father of the Faithful instructed the Egyptians in this
Science of the Stars, that they became excellent therein: The same Josephus
reports, how the Sons of Seth invented this Science of the Stars, and that it
might not be kept from succeeding ages, they made two pillars, one of Brass,
and the other of brick, to the end it might be preserved from the violent Waves
of the Flood, that was to come, that this famous Art (or Science) of the Stars
might not perish, to which Divine Dubartus seems to allude, when he sung.
Phalec and Heber, as they wandered, fand
A huge high pillar which upright did stand.
And afterward another nigh as great,
But not so strong, so stately, nor so neat.
For on the flowery sield it lay all flat,
Built but of Brick, of rusty Tiles, or Slat:
Whereas the first was builded fair and strong
Of Jasper smooth, and Marble lasting long.


Any one may see now how this Gentleman has launched into the lake of Liars,
for Astrology is more honorable, more ancient than his envy could report it,
nay it was so honorable in old time, none were created Priests without it,
none so honorable with their Kings as they; while these Arts flourished, the
World was like a little Heaven, Kings (which of later years have become
vicious) were then virtuous by their sublimer studies; in those days all adored
the magnitude of their Creator, and the God of Heaven was admired, and
worshipped in the Orders of the Heavens; but since the Priests have ruled the
roast, there have as many ways been taught to Heaven, as Tailors have found
fashions to set forth Women's bodies. Here you see now that in the old time, no
Art was in such esteem as this one was. In the beginning of the glorious Gospol
of our Lord Jesus, the Wisemen of the East came to Christ by a Star, whereupon
Gregory the Great says, Deuc accommodate ad eorum scientiam docuit, ut qui in
stellarum obsorvatione versabantur, ex stellis Christum discerent, (i.e.) Very
fitly did God enable the knowledge of those wise men, that they should learn
Christ from the Stars, who were versed in the observation of them.

If all ages have honored this Science, let not us be Bastards, and dishonor
the Art, lest after-generations curse us, and find us to be the unworthiest of
all mankind. Did not Adam lose enough? shall we still fill up the measure of
our Fathers iniquities? No, let us rather by this Science of the Stars, find
out the way to the bright and morning Star, not Venus, but Jesus, where I could
willingly meet my Antagonist, were the time come; till then I leave him;
desiring him, as he pretends to Saintship, to cleanse his heart of all
carnality, and then will his spiritual eye be opened in him, so that he will
see the Star of life drawing near unto us in the book of the Creatures, as well
as the Scriptures. But I conclude. I shall only make good my promise, and
insert an Astrological example; and forasmuch as his scoff was concerning a
woman with Child, I insert an example equivalent.

Deo Gloria.
NOw I come to make good my promise, the Example promised is this following
Astrological figure, etc.

astrological figure If the querent was conceived of a male or female.

December 1651.

28. D. 20. H. 40 P.M. Die. Dom. Hor.


a ad:



Accidentally happening in the Company of a woman (on the 29 day of December in
the morning) who being no small kin to unbelieving Thomas, in a scoffing manner
was I asked by her the forementioned question, she knowing me to be a lover of
the noble Science of Astrology; whereupon I took some notice of her proposal,
and considered the position of heaven, which fell out as aforesaid, and finding
my figure radical, and exactly corresponding with the moles and scars of her
body, I adventured judgment, and told her she was conceived of a boy; Well,
she derided me for my pains, and thought I had spoke at random, as many
pretenders now adays do, she, it seems, having buried a girl lately, and a boy
living, thought that God and Nature had been enjoined to have given her a girl
for what she lost; at the length she gave me her judgment, (though not worth a
Louse) That no man was able to tell such a thing as that was, she was
confident: I was much more confident, and told her, That a man by a Celestial
figure might tell much more, being confirmed my self in some experiments I had
lately made.

It Is no more in Astrology than this, the greater number of testimonies
concurring, and indeed a man of a slender capacity, at first sight of such a
figure, might resolve the question absolutely.

I resolved the doubt by inspection only, but for satisfaction to my self and
Readers, I thought it requisite to draw forth the reasons according to rules of
art, which thus judge.

Evidences of a male Child.
1 in aspect to masculine planers, 2 the sign of the fifth, masculine. 3 Lord
of the fifth, in aspect to a planet masculine. 4 a planet masculine possessing
the ascendant. 5 ascending masculine. 6 Lord of the ascendant, masculine. 7
Lord of the hour. 8 in a masculine quarter. 9 in a house masculine. 10 in a
sign masculine. 11 Lord of the fifth, in a masculine quart. 12 All the angles
and principle houses of the figure masculine.
Arguments of a female.
1 Lord of the fifth, his propinquity to feminine. 2 Lord of the fifth, in a
feminine house. 3 in a feminine sign, viz.. 4 in a quarter feminine. 5 Lord of
the ascendant and hour, in a house feminine.
Here you see the male testimonies are most powerful, not only in number, but
in operation, and made me confident what I had judged was true; a little time
produced the certainty of my prediction; for it was (not full) four months
afterward that she was (by the help of a Midwife) delivered of a Male-child,
which made the Woman (not for want of ignorance) grieve for a Girl very much,
but there was no way then to ease her grieved Soul, but when she was well to
endeavor for another.

This may give the check to Mr. Brains fiction out of Eusebius. and charm him
henceforward for such insolency as to adventure to belch forth imprecations
against an Art which can bring to the test (if occasion were) hundreds of
impregnable proofs to assert the validity of it. But I retract, the preceding
discourse, may better inform his Judgment, if he heed the directions therein
contained.

Noverint universi per praesentes, that I write not this for any to think me an
Idolizer of that Art, which made me judge thus true, (no I do not, I hate
Idolatry with a perfect hatred; I wish Astrologies Antagonists did so to, if
they did, they would not magnify one of the Liberal Sciences above another,
but they are at present so wedded to Idolatry, they cannot but be partial) to
return, as before, so again I say, I do not Idolize the Art that made me judge
thus true; for, Humanum est errare, but thus, that young Artists may not be
discouraged with the babbling of envious Priests, which may in some measure vex
the weaker Tiroes, for men are more generally led by tradition, than experience.

FINIS.

