A GENERAL OR, NO GENERAL OVER The Present Army OF THE Commonwealth: In
Twenty Two QUERIES Briefly Handled.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A General, Or, no General, etc.
I.
Whether the Army at this Juncture of time do Wisely, Prudently, or according
to their Duty, to Impose, Urge, or Desire any thing more of the Parliament,
then what the Reasons of State before them, together with their Wisdom, shall
lead them unto?

II.
Whether that the Parliament did not much like a prudent Council, in taking
into their own hands the giving of Commissions; since that it is so easy for a
General to form an Army of Persons Diametrically opposite to the Interest of a
Parliament: As was sadly experimented upon the Nation by that Usurper, General
Cromwell; Who by that means became able to give Laws to his Superiors,
together with three Nations; became Supreme whilst he lulled a company of
Stupid Soldiers, by a pretense of Piety and Godliness?

III.
Whether those inconsiderate Officers of the Army do not know how easy it is
for a General of an Army to make himself Protector, or King, or Emperor?

IV.
Whether that in their Crying, viz. C. F. to be General, be not intended J. L?

V.
Whether these sordid, rash, undigested, Undertakings do not render us lesle
formidable, and more weak, in the eyes of foreign Nations?

VI.
Whether, that considering our divisions, in respect of Religion and Civil
Interest: it will not better become us to unite, that thereby the practices of
the Church of Rome, by the Jesuits their Emissaries, may be prevented?

VII.
Whether or no, that if the Parliament had refused to pass Commissions for any
Temporizers in the former Changes; they ever should have had cause to fear such
underhand practices?

VIII.
Whether that the difficult obtaining Grants for Commissions, for faithful
Adherers to, and Assertors of, the Liberty of a Commonwealth; was not the
Symptom of another intended single Person?

IX.
Whether it becomes an Army, that waged War against a King, and executed him,
and that did drive out his Posterity, and immediately declared for a
Commonwealth; to set up, any of their own Members, by the Name of General,
Protector, Emperor, or any other Name or Title whatever?

X.
Whether that by setting up a General now, contrary to the sense of the
Parliament, be not the most dangerous Undertaking that can be adventured upon;
and the Consequence nothing less than Confusion, and nothing of more advantage
to the common Enemy?

XI.
Whether that those that break the Ise in that so dangerous an Undertaking,
have not in their Eye Advancement and Preferment, if they obtain Supremacy, and
addition of power to those whom they cry up?

XII.
Whether those they cry up for to be invested with absolute power in the Army,
have more Religion and Piety, or can pretend to more, than O. C. did?

XIII.
Since all men are Liars, and the heart of man is deceitful, and that there is
none righteous no not one: If so, Whether then it be not the duty of the
Parliament, to prevent any man or men whatsoever, of so great a Temptation as
Absolute Power, by which means (for the most part) is shown the vileness that
is in the hearts of the Sons of men?

XIIII.
Whether an Oligarchy would not be dangerous now, since men in greatest Trust
demonstrate so much Ambition, that they cannot be stayed Six Months from a
ravenous persuite after Power and Honor?

XV.
Whether such Persons as desire to be Uppermost, be profitable Members to the
Commonwealth?

XVI.
Whether the pulling down of Richard the lame Protector, was any other then a
design to set up others in his Room?

XVII.
Whether the Calling this Parliament was intended for any thing else, then a
Curtain or Vail to the former indirect Actions?

XVIII.
Whether if the Army had any Commonwealth Principles, the honestest of them are
not bound faithfully to adhear to the Parliament.

XIX.
Whether there can be any Action so Impious, Foolish, Sordid, and to be scorned
of all men; yea, of all Ages: If the Army should have any hand in forceing or
imposing any thing upon the Parliament: since it was their own work of calling
them to fit again, and since have owned their Power by not a few public
Actions.

XX.
Whether it will not argue that they have very short memory, since it was but
the other day that they bewailed their Apostasy, in declining the lawful and
just power of this Parliament; and adhered to the base, self, unrighteous, Ends
of unworthy and ambitious minded men?

XXI.
Whether it be possible, by any single Person or other Council, the Interest of
the People of God, of different persuasions, can be so well secured as by the
present Parliament.

XXII.
Whether it does not behove the present Parliament to put their Authority to
trial, by calling to their aid, such as shall adhere to them, in opposition of
those that shall dare impose any thing upon them, against the Wisdom, Policy,
and Resolution; and nor stoop to receive Laws from the Servants of the
Commonwealth?

POSTSCRIPT.
It is not to be feared that C. F. ever will usurp supreme Power, his Honesty
and Integrity is such.

NOTE
That the same Persons that desire him to be General, also desire a
Protestorian Instrument of Government-Maker to be Lievt. or Major General:

Smell out the rest.

FINIS.

