A General Cry: FOR THE KING To come sit with his PARLIAMENT IN HIS Former
Splendour, Honor, and Royal Majesty; or the Kingdom is undon, etc.

GEN: 49. 9. 10. Judah is a Lions Whelp, from the Prey, and as an old Lion: who
shall rouse him up: the Septer shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver
from between his feet.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A general Cry: for the King to come sit with his Parliament in his former
Splendour, etc.
THe general Cry has been a Personal Treaty, and is now aaking, aching, The
King must come home to sit with his Parliament in his former Splendour, Honor,
and Majesty, or the Kingdom is undone, His Person is no ways liable to
Justice; for he is the Lords Anointed, His Person is Sacred, the Kings of
Izraell were so, they were immediately set up by God, and he only has power to
pull them down; It is granted that the Kings of Izraell were tipes of our Lord
Jesus, the King of the Church, and in that respect were only Anointed, and
Sacred; but not as his Anointed ones, whom Jesus Christ has made Kings and
Priests (or Princes) unto God, and his Father, Rev. 1. 6. concerning whom God
says, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not mine Anointed, nor
do my Prophets no harm: Nay Kings shall be given for them, and these Kings of
the Gentiles, were immediately constituted and set up by the people. And thus
the Kings of England have received their ancient Splendour, Honor, and royal
Majesty, and have been interressed, entrusted, and absolutely authorized, and
empowered, with the execution of Law, both for their own, and the public good,
and safety of the people, that all, being regulated, and protected, might be
every one contented with their own propriety, and right, the Person of the King
being subject to Law, and all his actions ruled by it. Thus the Kings
Prerogative is the bounds of liberty, and the peoples obedience declares their
allegiance, they may not contest one against another. The Kings power does not
extend to act any thing contrary to Law, nor has he power to make Laws, that
has been always reserved unto the people, as their principal Prerogative,
inherently in themselves, and the only means for the public good, and safety
of each, and every of them; but wholly committed at all times unto their grand
Trustees. Next under God, the high Court of Parliament, the heads of their
Tribes, the Kingdom representative, persons chosen from among themselves, who
should be of singular wisdom, and integrity, Exodus 18. 21. such as fear God, men
of truth, hating covetuousnesse, and well acquainted with the peoples
necessities, that they may thereby be able to make good, and suitable Laws, for
the good and relief, of all and every one, the King by his Office, and his Oath
being only bound to confirm and maintain, all those Laws so made, in a
Parliamentary way, for the public good and safety of the people, this is the
supreme rule, all Laws are derived from hence as their Fountain, and end in
this as their proper Center. All Actions that oppose this rule are against Law,
and the eminency of the person so acting, agravates the offense, and declares
the fowlnesse of the Rebellion and treason, nor ought any such to be protected
in life, limb, or Estate; but whosoever shall any ways contrive or endeavor
to subvert the fundamental Law of the Land, by acting in an arbitrary and
destructive course, shall suffer for it as the highest Treason, because it is
against the public good and safety of the people: this was the Earl of
Straffords, and William Land Arch Bishop of Canterbury their Case, who were
adjudged, condemned, and executed for it. But it is well known, that the King
has done far worse then they did, not only endeavoring, but with a high hand
practicing the subvertion of the fundamental Laws of the Land, and the
destruction of the Kingdom, not only for many years together in the times of
peace; but at last by setting up his Standard, and proclaiming open War upon
his Parliament, invading the Kingdom and people, and fighting against them so
long as he was able, persisting in full opposition to the Parliaments humble
suits, and Declarations made unto him, showing the manifest danger he would
expose his person and people unto, when he should so do, and that therefore
they were bound in duty and Conscience to defend the Kingdoms, against him and
all his wicked Councellers and adherents, most traiterous proceedings against
their lives, Estates, and liberties, whenever he should make War upon the
Parliament, who proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of his
Kingdoms, and the performance of their duty and loyalty to his person, (and
therefore) that whenever the King makes War upon the Parl. it is a breach
of the trust reposed in him, by his people, contrary to his Oath, and tending
to the dissolution of this Government, that whosoever shall serve and assist
him in such War, are Traitors by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and
have been so adjudged by two Acts of Parl. and ought to suffer as Traitors,
(Parl. Declara. 20. May 1642.) 11. Rich. 2. 1. Hen. 4. And yet the King did
proceed in seting up his Standard, and waging an open War upon the Parl. and
against all his good and loyal Subjects, contrary to his Oath and duty, not
regarding their public good and safety, and thereby put them out of his
protection, and dissolved their allegiance to him. And this may be one reason
the right Honorable, Sir Thomas, now Lord Fairfax, his Excellency, and the now
Army took their Commissions only for the defense of the Kingdom and Parl. and
have done most righteously in it, God sealing unto it, by his blessing, in
giving them extraordinary, and unheard of success, to the subduing of all
those traytorous forces, and captivating the King, so that we see by the Parl.
Declarations, and the Kings practices compared, that the King is wholly elapsed
in his Splendour, Dignity, Honor, and Majesty, and stands guilty of all the
precious blood shed in these 3. Kingdoms, besides all the rapine, and ruins,
of milions of people, now providencially confessed by him, in his signing the
preamble and the first Proposition, fully justifying the Parliament, of
performing their duty, in all their proceedings, in defense, and for the safety
and preservation of the Kingdom and people, and has made himself culpable in
the eye of the whole world; surely then it is but a foolish thing to think he
shall ever be granted a negative Vote, that were to take away the privilege of
Parl. for making any Laws, but such as the King wills, be they never so
useful for the people. And to grant him the Militia were to arm him with power
to wreake, his wrath upon all that have opposed the pernicious courses of him
and his adherents, and to exclude the Parl. and people in the future, from all
means of defense, when their enemies shall invade them in their rights; what
reason is there then that the Parl. shall protect the King from Justice, and
bring him home to sit among themselves, seeing he has rejected their wholesome
advice and Council, humbly offered unto him in due time, even as Sihon King of
the Amorites, rejected the Council, and Messengers of Jeptha, and Izrael,
humbly offered unto him, he not regarding them; but dissolving all amity with
them, did fight against them to the loss of his life and Kingdoms. Our King
being much more bound in duty for the public good and safety of his Parl. and
people, (then Sihon was to Jepthae and Israel) yet dissolving all bonds of
duty, he perpetrated an unjust and wicked War, to the incredible destruction
of his most faithful people, and quite contrary to his many Oaths, and
protestations made to the contrary. Nor has he ever manifested any sign of
repentance by setting against his wicked Councillors, and adherents, desiring
they may be brought to condign punishment, nor showing any grief for his great
offense committed against the Majesty of God in thus setting against the
public good and safety of the Kingdoms and people. Again, what reason? of his
former liberty to sit and act with the Parl. he being at their dispose, is this
the way to secure themselves and the people (who have always stuck to them,
and suffered with them) from all future dangers, will not a poisoned Fountain
corrupt every stream, and rivellet it can have access unto, if it be not cut
of. Again, if you say he is their Father, and Husband, and they are his wife
and Children, with whom he ought to have cohabitation, and Communion, as the
only means to cure all distempers in the Kingdom: Argue rightly, the Husband
has adultrated his bed, and spent his strength, with harlots and strangers,
having exposed himself by a loathsome and poisonous sickness unto death, the
Father has murdered a multitude of his best Children, and would gladly kill
the rest, being a prisoner for it, is it therefore fit he should have
cohabitation, and Communion with them. Can this be the only means, to cure all
distempers in the Kingdom, esspecially now he has dissolved his interest of a
Father, and Husband, almost to this great Families destruction, but irreparable
loss

Again, consider with what expense of blood, loss of friends, Estates, and
hardship, the faithful of the Land, have by Gods singular goodness unto them,
at last overcome Giants of difficulties, and now being at some rest, quietly
possessing and enjoying their lives, liberties, Estates, and Laws, anciently
and naturally inherent in themselves, and now theirs by right of Conquest also.
How can they now surrender themselves, and all they enjoy, (in a most slavish
manner) unto their conquered enemy and prisoner, that he may possess all as his
own, and rule them at his pleasure and will. You know that Jeptha and Israel
would not part with that right which God had pessest them of, not full 300.
years, unto their then enemy, but not conquered prisoner, the King of Amon, and
yet it was not theirs, but the Amorites, by original right, they only wan it,
and did wear it by the Sword, and Gods goodness to them. Judge. 11. 19. 20.
etc.

Again, consider how the Kings personal presence with his Parliament can
produce personal unity, seeing the Lord has said, the soul that sins, it
shall dye, Zek. 18. 20. by this means they may bring not only his sin, but all
Gods righteous Judgments belonging to the King upon their own heads; for thus
says the Lord, because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed
to utter destruction: therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people
for his people. 1 King. 20. 24. May not God most justly say this unto the
Parliament, if they let him go free.

Again, the eminency of the Kings person, and sin, does no ways extenuate but
agravate his judgment, and makes him successes, it was Conjas Case. As I live
says the Lord, though Conja the Son of Iehojakim, King of Judah, were the
Signet upon my right hand, yet will I pluck him thence, Ier. 22. 24. 30. read
the place. And again, write him a man that shall not prosper all his days.
Will it not then agravate the Parliaments Judgment, and make them succeslesse,
if they make themselves partakers of his sin, in not executing Judgment. But we
hope better things.

Again, is not the Parliament very sencible of Gods righteous hand, in blasting
all the Kings designs when hatched, and his Counsels, though laid as low as
Hell, delivering his person into their hand, and will they not execute Judgment
upon him: that Gods blessing may be continued upon the Kingdom, with them and
their posterity, and will they not expel from their fellowship in both Houses,
all such as they can discover, to have undermined their proceedings, and to
have been underhand friends to the King, that they may be able to act freely
for the Kingdoms, in Judgment and righteousness, without interruption, or
opposition of the wicked. Wisdom is better then weapons of War, but one
sinner destroys much good. Eccles. 9. 18. How much more may many Achans among
them destroy 3. Kingdoms (which God forbid) if Law Justice, and Judgment, be
not executed.

Again, let the King in his person be where he will, have not the Parl. the
King Authoritively with them, in his royal Power, Office, and Capacity, to
maintain Law, and execute Justice upon the wicked* they have his Sword, his
Scepter, and his Seal, that they may do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly
with their God. Mica 6. 8. And is it not in this sense, the King cannot deceive
nor be deceived, never dies, can neither do, nor take wrong, and is it not in
this sense, we have fought for the King and Parl. though the King was in
personal opposition to both, what necessity is there then that he must sit in
person with the Parliament. We know, that neither policy, open War,
Treachery, great and small Guns, all kinds of practices, and Counsels, with
Pikes, Swords, etc. could formerly reach them, in many years, yet now more
privately short daggers can, or may do it, suddenly, surely, and is it not the
time of the personal Treaty: this personal treachery has been perpetrated,
in a most butcherly, and bloody manner, upon Col. Rainsborough, a principal
Heroy, and faithful Member of their own House, and Servant to the Kingdom, Did
ever any Treaty, end without Treason, acted by the Kings party, Did ever any
man thus perish, being at rest in his quarters, and in the midst of your own
forces; for whom let every faithful one lament, as David did for Abner,
saying, how dyed he as fool, his hands were not bound, nor his feet put in
fetters, (there was no cause for that, he was no Delinquent, nor conquerred
prisoner) (he fell) as a man falls before (Children of iniquity) wicked men,
and is there not a conspiracy, (in the midst of us, against all the most active
men in both Houses, and the Army, who if now dissolved the Kingdom is ruined,
and may you not all fall, if you do not timely Justice, upon your, and Gods
enemies, the chiefest and fatest of them. Ought Agag, to be spared; if you
would have your selves and the Kingdom sure settled, and secured from
destruction by their enemies, read) 1 Cron. 10. 13. compared with 1 Samuel 15. 9.
etc. and 22. 23.

But to conclude, though many have added unto all their sins, this evil to ask
them a King, (not one as Saul was then, without blemish, when first appointed
of God to satisfy their vain desires, they trusting in a King more then in
God.) But one worse then Rebellious Saul, when Afterward corrupted, stained,
and rejected of God; for his transgression was only in sparing Gods enemies,
which may possible be the Parliaments sin and confusion, if they be not zealous
and faithful unto the Lord; which God forbid, but the Kings transgression is
in destroying and ^uting of the Lords dear friends, his first borne, his
peculiar Treasure and Jewels, those that are so tender to him, that he that
touches them, touches the apple of his eye, God has reproved Kings for their
sakes, saying, touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm, John 15.
Exodus 4. 22. and 19. 5 Zec. 28. Psalm. 105. 14. 15. here then you see therefore
the greatness of the Kings sin, and suitable is their sin who ask such a King,
and this, even this sin, have they added unto all their sins, as if that God
had said, there is none of all your sins like unto this sin, it is a seminary
of sins, and has its womb full of the greatest sins, and Judgments conceived
in it, and to be brought forth together, and although there be many that have
done all this wickedness^, and turned aside after vain things, yet know that
the Lord has promised, for their encouragement and comfort, that he will not
forsake his people for his great names sake, because it has pleased the Lord
to make you his people: Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, withal
your heart; for consider how great things he has done for you, 2 Samuel 12. 22.
24. Had ever any Parliament the like experience of Gods goodness; and is it
not, that you may settle and secure every one in their rights, privileges,
lives, and liberties, that they may live a peaceable and godly life, under you,
being freed from all Tyrants, and oppressors hands, is not Gods glory, in the
public good and safety of the people, your principal aim and interest, that
all things may be reformed according to Gods Word, we beseech you then, set
that pattern before you, without any fear or amazement; for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Joshua 1. 5. so that we may boldly say,
the Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.
6. Now if any of you will not walk in Gods way and Council, according to the
plain truth, sincerely set forth unto you; but if we shall still do wickedly,
ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King. Sam: 12. ult.

FINIS.

