THE FIRST LECTVRE, Concerning NAVIGATION.

Read Publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbier's ACADEMY, AT Bednall-Greene.

September20th.1649.

LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, 1649.

The first Lecture concerning NAVIGATION.
AS the Deep declares at all times the mervellous wonders of that great Author
guider, and preserver of all things, can it be otherways, but a mavelous
occup^tion? and can it be but glorious to the mind of the creature to exercise
it self on that whereon the spirit of God was pleased to move, before all
things were?

Certainly, Navigation (whereof we shall now treat) cannot but afford a
glorious delight to the minds of lovers of knowledge as the Seas affords a
world of wealth to those that make Navigation their Trade.

Is it not as rare as it is wonderful? That with an Instrument so little as an
Astralabe is, and ^ith that called a Sea Compass: By the first, to measure the
Circles of the Heavens the height and distance of the Sun and Stars; by the
second (which has neither mouth, tongue, legs, nor hands) man is told, guided,
and shown where East, West, North, and South is (not only) in the stediest
case a vessel can be, but when the moved waves tosseth the same as toward the
Clouds, and thence lets it reelas into an Abisme) No wonder Solomon the wisest
of all men said, that the hardest to be found, is the way a Ship makes through
the Seas. And is the wonder not the greater, that it finds the straight course
thereof through that vaste perpetual moving and removing body, as exactly when
the firmament app^ars as black as Inck, and all the lights of Heaven are
covered with the Night (as with an estinguisher) as well as at the clearest day.

Is it not a wonder above wond^rs that after so many months Navigations, and
that after such varieties changes of Winds, intermixture of ^tormes; the
violence of tides so constantly changeable, a Vessel arives to the mouth of an
Harbor, as straight as if it were a Ferryboat drawn by acord fastened from one
shore to the other.

With the ^oyall Prophet David, let all men say, Qui descendunt mare in
navibus, facientes operationem in aquis multis, ipsi viderunt opera Domini, and
mirabilia ejus in profundo. Dixit, and stetit spiritus pr^cella: and exaltati
sunt fluctus ejus; Ascendunt usque at coelos, and descendunt u^que ad abystos:
anima eorum in malis t^b^scebat: Turbati sunt, and moti sunt sicut eb^ius; and
omnis sap^entia eorum devorata est. Et clamaverunt ad Dominum eum
tribularentur: and de necessitatibus eorum eduxit eos: Et statuit procellam
ejus in auram: and siluerunt fluctus ejus; Et laetati sunt quia siluerunt: and
deduxit eos in portum voluntatis eorum, confit^antur Domino misericordiae ejus
and mirabilia ejus filiis hominum: That is, They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, that do business in great Waters; These see the works ^f the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep: For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which
lifts up the waves thereof; they mount up to the Heaven, they go down again
to the depths; their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel too and fro,
and stagger like a drunken man* and are at their wits end. Then they cried unto
the Lord in their distresses: He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves
thereof are still; Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he brings
them unto their desired haven: Oh, that men would praise the Lord for his
go^dnesse, and for his wonderful works to the Children of men. Psalm 106.

Let u^ then take profit of this present meditation, wherein we shall find the
great benefit of the Art of Navigation, in that it does not only serve for the
transportation of men and goods, from one part to the furthest of the world,
and toward the which God was not pleased to prescribe any high ways for Carts
nor Horses, but to make m^n acquainted with all such parts, in which God does
man^f^st the varieties of his power, and of his bottomless treasuries, so with
Nations; in some of which his divine fath^rly mercy is glorified, and his
justice made more apparent, rendering man also more capable to participate of
those numerous riches, (...) what the Ind^an precious shoa^es are garnished
with, by all the golden bowels of the Earth, where nature by the Sun beams is
made capable of suc^ productions, by what the Mother w^mbe pearls is possessed
with by that wherewith Aarons breast was made so sh^ning gl^rious, man loads his
Vessels as freely, as Carts on other grounds with the most ord^nary fruits and
production of the Earth, Spices, and Balms, for the preservation and
restoration of man; and in that plenty, as common fields in other parts
produce Pease and Turnips, Flax, and Trees for T^rp^ntine.

Navigation, therefore may well be said to be for man, a Science the most
profitable of all Arts; if man can make that use of it, as may justly draw
blessings unto him; which is to be compast by doing that so earnestly wished by
the aforesaid King David. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,
and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

And by being as ready to labor in his cause (in which no soul can suffer any
shipwreck) as to hazard life, ship, and goods, for transitory things.

We shall begin with the Sea, and say, first, what it is? and why it is called
Ocean?

Concerning Navigation.
THE Sea is all the vast extent of Water which environs the Earth.

The Water has been created by God; in principio creavit Deus Coelum and
Terram, and Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas. In the beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth, and the spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters. This is confirmed by the writs of Moses in his Generation or offspring
of this World.

The water does engender and maintains it self in the Sea; the Rivers come from
it, and return to it.

The Egyptians have made four Elements; of each one whereof they have made
two. The one Male, and the other Female: They do believe that the Air which
engenders the wind is the Male; and that which is laden with clouds, and
which does not stir, to be the Female. They call the Water of the Sea Male,
and all other water Female.

They say, that the Fire (the flame whereof burns) is Male, and that which
shines (without doing harm) is the Female. They do believe that the hardest
Earth, as the Stons and Rocks are Males, and do give the name of Female to
that which is maniable.

It is called the Ocean Sea, by reason of its quick and continual motion: for
Oris in Greek, is to hasten, or else its called Oceane, quasi Cianeus; for it
embraces the Rivers of the Earth.

It receives diverse names, according to the diversity of places, by the which
it passes, as the Sea of China, India, Persia, etc.

The Sea has no color, for our sight does not remain on the superficies of
the water, but descends lower, and at a great distance, its color is like that
of Heaven; when it is disturbed by the Winds it is suscep^ible of diverse
colors.

The Sea ^^ses increasing seven days, which is called quick wa^er, and seven
other days it retires decreasing, which is called dead water. Aristotle treats
of the causes of the incre^sing and decreasing in the second of the Meteors; as
also Hipocrates in the Book of the Air and water: where he says, That there
is a proper cause of Astrology, viz; by natural virtue, the Moon has on the
waters; therefore as the Moon increases, and ^ecreaseth; so likewise does the
Sea:

The increasing and decreasing of the Sea shall be more at full discoursed of,
in his proper time and place.

How the Sea belongs to the perfection of the Wo^ld, and that the World would
have perished without it; and how it engenders water.
THe world could not have been perfect without the Sea; forasmuch if there were
no beginning of water, there would be no water simply, and if there were no water
simple also there would be no mixed; and thus there could not be any thing of
that which is engendered by water; also there would be no body continued, and
conglutinated to be found if there were no water.

Generation would be destroyed, and consequently all the Wo^ld, if there were
no beginning of waters, as also there could not be found all the assemblings of
contraries, which are possible.

Thus nature would fail to that which is unavoidably necessary, and failing to
the same, the water would be hindered in the action: Whereof it would happen
(there being no beginning of waters) that the workmanship of nature would
perish, and consequently the world.

Aristotle in the second of the Meteors says that the waters of the Seas
engender in Septentrion: he will say that the greatest part of the waters of
the Sea ingenders in Septentrion, as the great Albert in the second of the
Meteor* sixth Chapter decla^es, where he says that the Sea runs from
Septentrion to the Meridian. The cause thereof is, that its higher in
Septentrion, then toward the Mer^dian; and the reason wherefore it is higher,
is, because that the cold of the Septentrion engenders more water then the Sea
could contain in the space, distance, and height of its coasts; The water which
is in the Meridian consumes and deminish^s by the heat of the Sun; therefore
one part of the Septentrion water drives the other back toward the lowermost
side; yet nevertheless does move acci^entally from the place of its
generation; because that it being moist, runs to be retained in the dry.

The reason why the water consumes it self so much in the Meridien part, is
because that the Sun turns always in his excentrique circle; its cen^er being
not the same with that of the Earth: so that if the Diameter of the Circle of
the Sun were passed between its center and that of the Earth; the greatest part
of the Diameter would be at one side, and the lest at the other, in the
consideration of the Center of the Earth.

Its shown by Geometrical reason, that the greatest length of Diameter is
near the twent^eth degree of Gemini, and that the least length is at the
twentieth degree of Sagitarius, opposite sign. It appears (...), that the
Sun approaches more nearer the Earth, in the Meridian Part then in the
Septentrion: thus by its approaching heats in such a manner that it consumes
the water and burns the Earth, which he does not at the Septentrion.

Wherefore the water of the Sea is Saltish, and and that it is the best for the
Navigati^n.
THe matter which causes the S^a to be Saltish, is because that there are two
sort^ of vapors, viz. Hot and Moist, and Hot and Dry. The one whereof
evaporates from the superficies of the Sea, and the other rai^eth it self from
the bottom by force of the Suns heat, and that of the Stars, which are
efficient causes of its vapors, and because that the vapor of the water is
very subtle between these two; therefore it elevates its self in the air, and
is consumed by the Sun, and there rema^neth nothing else but the exhalations of
the earth, the which are dissipated, extended, and mingled among the water, as
appears by the example of eating; for the disgeasted meat spreads and divides
it self through the members, and all the gross and undigested substance
remains in such a manner also the V^pour of the Earth spread, remains amongst
the substance of the water of the Sea; and the coldness of the water p^shes in
such coldness, and consumes it self by coldnes^e; because of mingling by
Antiperistacis, which is to say, for two contrary things joined together, which
becomes stronger then before; for the heat of the exhalation which issues from
the bottom of the Sea, fortifies it self by the virtue of the Sun with its
contrary, which is the coldness: and thus the Heat overcomes, which is that
which is required in the generation of the saltish taste.

It is also more convenient for Navigation, that the water be saltish then
fresh, for the saltish water is heavier then the fresh: That it is so, its
proved by many experiences, whereof the one is. Take fresh water and mingle it
with a good quanti^y of salt, so that the salt melts, and be disolved in water;
then take a fresh Eg, and put it on the mixtioned water; the thickness of the
water which proceeds from the mixtion of the Salt, will bear the Eg by its
thickness, and will swim over it, the which in the fresh water descends to the
bottom. By this same experience is also demonstrated, that a Vessel will sinck
sooner in fresh water then in salt water; for the fresh water divides it self
sooner, and closes more lightly then the salt water.

Of the different Motions which are in the Ocean Sea.
GReat part of the water is engendered in Septentrion, and runs from S^pten^rion
toward Meridien, as aforesaid, when the tide increases we do see the Sea move
at one side, and when it decreaseth it moves quite contrary, it begins first
to decrease where it has had the first increase.

Thus it appears that the Sea has contrary motions, and different the one
from the other.

Seneca says, that there is no cause of the of the course waters from one
place to the other, then the high and low places; Except that only motion by
the which the Sea increases, and decreaseth; For as aforesaid) it follows the
order of the Moon, For the water of the Sea increases and decreases in all the
parts of the world, that is to say, in Orient, Occident, Septentrion and
Meridien, and also it decreases in all the said parts, Therefore the Sea has
no proper place where it begins its increasing, or decreasing; And thus the
water does move by accident from one part to the other, except toward the
bottom, for such a Motion does not happen by accident, but by the proper
essence agreeing to its Form.

Wherefore the Sea does not overflow, augment, nor enlarge.
THe cause wherefore the Sea does not overflow, augment, nor enlarge, though ^o
much water ingendreth in it and that it does continually receive so many rivers
and fountaine^, Is that the Sea is the natural receptable of all the waters,
and their retyring place, and therefore it does not overflow nor enlarge, for a
place cannot drive back nor hinder the en^rance of the thing which by nature
ought to be in her, since naturally the place ought to conform it self with
that which it incloses, as the Sea which is capable to receive in her all the
Rivers, and nevertheless ought not to overflow, nor augment, for their
entrance, Also the Sea does not overflow, because it is of such a vast extent,
that the Rivers are as nothing in consideration to it, its also because the
heat of the Sun and the Air of the Wind consumes such a quantity of water, that
though the Sea continually eng^nders, and that the Rivers incessantly enter
into it, God has ordained that it should not lessen nor augment, as it is
written in Job, Lord, thou have set a Limite the which it shall not pass. The
H^ly Writ says in Genesis, that the water of the Deluge did rise 15 cubits
over the highest Hills under the Heavens, in so much that all the Earth was
covered with water. But though this increasing of water was so great, yet
nevertheless the Sea did not overflow the earth, going out of its Limi^es, and
bounds.

The increasing of the water did proceed of two causes, the one wa^ that the
Windows of Heaven were opened, as the Text says, and it rained on the earth
forty days, and forty nights exceedingly, the Fountains, Rivers, and
Currents did overflow, in so much that the earth was covered therewith, as
beforesaid, every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the
ground, except Noah, who only remained alive, and they that were with him in
the Ark, and afterward the same Text says, That God made a wind to pass
over the earth, which abated the water, The rain from Heaven was also
restrained, and the earth returned in its first being.

Of the Antiquity of Navigation.
GOD the Creator of the universal world, did ordain ^he making of the first
Vessel, a^ it is written in the six chapter of Genesiis, that God commanded
Noah to make an Ark of Gopher wood, and to pitch it within and without with
pitch, The length of the Ark was of three hundred cubits, the breadth of it
fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

Those of Lydia were the first inventors of making of vessels, but they had no
other invention then to join one beam to another well nailled, and well
caulked.

Afterward Epaminondas did set forth the vessels in perfection to Navigate.

The famous Captain Bias, was in the war of Peloponesse, with Ships, Carricks
and Galleyes.

S^lomon King of Jerusalem, did send Vessels into Tharsis which went and came
each third year, and brought Gold, Silver, Ivory, and diverse other things.

Julus Solinus says, that all the Meridien Sea which embraces Africque, was
navigated from the Indies to Spain.

Pliny writes in the second Book, threescore and seven chapter, that in his
time all the circuit of Spain and France was navigated and of all the Occident.

From the Isle of Cadiz which is at the entry of the Gibraltar straet to the
Est Indian, was navigated before Plato's time.

When Tiberius Caesar did govern the Empire, there were seen in the Arabian Sea
Ensigns of Vessels which the Spaniards had lost.

In the time of Augustus Caesar the greatest part of the Ocean Sea was
navigated.

When Selucus and Antiocl^us did reign all the coast of the Caspien Sea was
navigated and known by the Macedonian Armies.

The King of Switzerland gave to Metellus some Indians, which navigating with
Marchandiz^s, were driven by a Tempest from their Country to Germany.

In the time of the Teutonickall Emperors, there were Est-Indian Ambassadors,
found on the German coast, which were driven thither by the force of the wind.

Some Authors write of great number and multitude of Ships which were in the
anc^ent times, as those of the Assirians, Persians, Grecians, etc.

Homer writes that the Grecian Navy which came to Troy, had one thousand, one
hundred and fourscore ships.

Xerces King of Persia, came with five thousand five hunderd Ships, seven
hunderd thousand men, and three hunderd thousand of his Friends and Aliens to
the Grecians destruction, and when he came to the Ponticke Sea he made a Bridge
of Ships over it, on the which he passed with his Army.

The next Lecture concerning Navigation, will be of its use, How to foresee
storms by the signs of the Sun, and the Moon, of Fires which appear when there
are storms at Sea.

What the wind is, and its qualities, how it is engendered, what the 32 points
of the Compass are, to know by the Moon, at what hour it does flow or is full
Sea. And how to Sail by the Globe, etc.

Saturday next, God willing, there shall be a Lecture of Fortification.


