The true and perfect SPEECHES Of Colonel JOHN GERHARD UPON The Scaffold at
Tower Hill, on Monday last, and Mr. Peter Vowel at Charing Cross, on Monday
last, being ^he 11 of this instant July, 1654.

With their Declarations to the People touching the (...) of ^ts* their
Protestations sealed with their blood; and their pray^e^s immediately before the
fatal stroke of Death was struck.

Likewise, the Speech of the Portugal Ambassadors Brother upon the Scaffold,
his Acknowledgment and Confession; And the g^^a^ and wonderful Miracle that
happened upon ^he putting of Mr. Gerard into the C^ffin.

Taken by an Ear witness, and impartially communicated for general
satisfaction.

Imprinted at London for C. Horton, 1654.

The true and perfect Speeches of Master Vowel Col. Gerard, and the Lord
Ambassadors brother, at the places of Execution on Monday last, at
Charing Cross, and at Tower Hill.
Gentlemen,

I Am this day brought hither to suffer as a traitor, upon an Impeachment of
high Treason, a thing which I was never guilty of, and in the presence of God I
here speak it, never did my thoughts in the least ever center upon any such
thing; though the High Court of Justice were pleased to affirm, that I had
endeavored to make the Lord Protector odious to the people, in turning the
Design unto him by a Lybel, which was scattered up and down London, that his
Highness and the Army had a design to massacre all but their friends in all
parts of England; and for endeavoring to bring in my master the King, for
whose Ca^se I am here brought to the place of execution, to s^ffer upon the
Cross, as my blessed Lord and Saviou^ has done before me. And truly Gentlemen,
though my Death be an untimely and ignominious Death, yet it seems not in the
least either dreadful or terrible; for, blessed be the Name of the Lord, that
has taken away the sting thereof, and ind^ed me with his holy and divine
Spirit, whereby I am supported with those inward Comforts, that so soon a^ I
have submitted my neck to the Rope, and received the fatal Turn, I shall then
arrive at the Haven of Happiness, there to participate of those eternal
felicities, prepared for all those that live and die in Christ Jesus, through
whose merits, and by whose passion, I do absolutely believe to have a general
remission of all my sins and transg^essions.

As for those things laid to my charge before the High Court of Justice, I do
utterly protest against them, having not in the least acted any thing, and
withal being de^ied that which every freeborn Englishman may claim as his
sole and only birth right, that is,

Magna Charta.

So that being over awed by my Judges, I here dye innocently before my Equals,
being leer and free from the guilt of any Treason in the least.

And I do her^ protest in the presence of Almighty God, that it is for no other
thing that they thirst after my blood, but my Loyalty to the King, (as it
appears to me) whom the great J^h^vah preserve, keep, and d^fend And truly
Gentlemen soldiers, to you I now speak, that I can do no loss then tell you,
that you are all deluded, misled, and blinded; --

but being interrupted by the Sheriff, he was not permitted to speak any
further in that particular.

Well then, I have done, it is for my Royal Sovereign that I am h^^e to
sacrifice my life, therefore I beseech you G^^tlemen le^ no man be d^nted or
dismayed at my death; for I bless God I have not the least fear of terror
within, but am confident that I shall have a smile in heaven, when some may
receive a srown: And so the Lord bless, keep, and preferve you in the pure and
unspotted bonds of true friendship and Loyalty

After which, the Executioner put the Rope about his neck, and prayers being
ended, he did his office.

And when he had hung about the space of half an hour, he was then cut down,
and carried to the sign of the Bell, where many friends met him, and from
thence carried him in a Co^ch likewise to Islington, where a great funeral is
prepared for him.

His death is much lamented by any, being a Gentleman of exquisite parts, and
of singular knowledge, more fit indeed for a Councellor, then a War^ike Officer.

About five of the clock in the Afternoon, Col. Gerard was guarded from the
Tower to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, being accompanied by the Lieutenant, and
diverse other Gentlemen; but coming to the stairs, he nimbly ran up, and smiling
saluted Col. Barkstead with a cup of Sack, and then walked up and down the
scaffold with an undauted spirit. After which, he called the Executioner to
him, desiring to see the block, which he took in his hand, and saluted it: Then
he went to the head of the Scaffold, and putting off his hat to the Auditors
spoke as follows:

GENTLEMEN,

PRovidence having allotted me the time of my death, the manner of my death, and
the hour of my death, I am bound out of Christian Duty, and a Loyal Conscience,
to acknowledge these singular favors, and to return all due honor and praise
for these his great mercies; but for what I stand impeached for by my Judges,
in reference to high Treason, my innocence therein does justly acquit me of the
guilt thereof; so that I cannot but make this inference and construction upon
the Judgment passed against me in Court, that I was not thought worthy to live,
because I lived to love the King my Master. And thus much I do here ingenuously
declare, that if I had as many lives as hairs upon my head, willingly should I
sacrifice them in his Cause; and under his Banner, my Loyalty shall now issue
sorth with streams of blood, being assured, that after my passing through the
violent Billows of this raging sea, I shall then arrive at the eternal Haven of
happiness, and there sing hallelujah with my glorious father in heaven, who is
the most high and omnipotent Protector, of all the low and inferior Protectors
here on Earth. And after some conference and prayer with the Minister, with an
affable countenance, he cast off his Doublet, and putting on a white Wastcoat,
and a linen Cap, he then went to prayers, where immediately after taking leav
of his friends, he prostraced himself before the block; and laying his head
down, rose up again, and said, Gentlemen, when I am dead and gone, remem^ber
you have a Royal Sovereign; and the Lord unite your hearts and affections unto
him After which, he willingly submitted himself to the block, and the
Executioner coming to him, to ask forgiveness, and know the sign; He replied,
the Lord forgive thee for I cannot. But when I lift up my right hand, do thy
office;

and accordingly the sign b^^^g given, the Executioner did his office, and at
one blow severed his head from his shoulders; which being done, the head and
the body were both put into a Coffin, and so carried off the Scaffold.

Then the Portugal Ambassadors brother was guarded up to the Scaffold, being
extremely dejected in spirit, and in a mourning Gown, where he endeavored (by
way of speech) to plead innocence; and then by his Interpreter to impute the
chief Cause of the Riot and Murder to the English; but this was only grounded
by the way of excuse; so that such circumstances proved superfluous; and after
his Confession to the Priest, the absolving him of his sins, and the resigning
up of the Crucifix, he likewise submitted to the block, and at two blows, and a
race, his head was severed from his shoulders.

One thing more is observable, that these two Gentlemen, which this day
underwent the fatal stroke, were the first that began the d^spute at the
Exchange; and moreover, that Mr. Gerards hands when he was in the Coffin, were
seen to move, and lift up the Lid thereof.

FINIS.

