Abuses discovered, whereby the Creditors are merely cheated, the Officers of
Law, and Goalers are unjustly enriched, and the poor Debtor and their families
Tyrannically destroyed.
AMongst many the Considerations I have had of the oppressions common amongst
men, this has seemed to me none of the least, That one man is suffered to
devour another, and that by color of Justice, as in the case of Arrests of
men's persons by color or debts, before Judgment, or Legal conviction. And
hearing of your pious endeavors to beget a Law for Redress of such heavy
Oppressions and Cruelties now used in that kind, and the Reforming the Ancient
Common Law of England in that particular, Do in my Zeal and Sense of other men's
Sufferings (and that diverse times very unjustly) represent to your view some
former Collections of mine, of the many inconveniences which attend such
Restraints, before it does appear that there is a clear and just Debt.

In the first place therefore, I take the Law to have bin fundamentally, That
no man's person was liable to Arrest at the Common Law for Debt, no not upon
Execution; which you may see 13. H. 4. Fol. 5. That the Statute of 25. Ed. 3.
Cap. 17. was the first Law that subjected the Person to Arrest, in case of
Debt, the Process before that Law, being Summons, and Capias against the Lands.

The Abuses and Oppressions introduced since that Law, and under pretense of
Justice, are numberless.
1. That many have bin, and are daily Arrested upon feigned Accounts, where no
debt is due at Law: And this is a common thing in London; and other
Corporations. 2. Upon Specialties for Debt forged and feigned. 3. Upon Sleeping
Specialties, that have long before bin discharged, but the Bond not given in,
nor cancelled, as they ought; which daily experience shows upon Bills in
Equity for relief in that particular. 4. Upon Specialties lost or miscarryed,
and come to the hand of Strangers, who feignedly take Administration. 5. Upon
pretended Debts and Promises. 6. Upon Accounts for 1000. l. whereas the debt is
not an hundred.
Upon all which, or any of the said Accounts, the party that is arrested must
be answerable to the Action, be the debt never so small true, or false, and
must therefore ly in Prison until he put in bayl: which if in a Corporation, or
otherwhere, will be hard for the party Arrested to procure, if not impossible,
without troubling his Security for the same debt, binding his hands, to free
his heels. Besides, the charge of his Habeas Corpus, in such cases, to remove
himself, and put in Bayl above; when as all this while it does not Judicially
appear whether the party arrested be really indebted or not.

By this means, the Law, (which truly was intended for Redress) becomes the
destruction and ruin of thousands of Families; and the support and maintenance
of under-Sheriffs, Sergeants, Bailiffs, Goalers, and Catch-poles; the latter of
which feed upon the miseries of honest men, or grow rich out of others ruins,
and the Debtor thereby more disabled to pay his just debts. And M. Horn in his
Mirror of Justice says, That by such Writs many are destroyed wrongfully: Fol.
233. a. And Fol. 64. b. he says, The Ancient Law of this Kingdom was, That no
Judge was to hear the Plaintiff in his cause, if he did not first put Sureties
to answer his Adversaries full damages if he complained of him wrongfully.

And the Ancient proceedings in Chancery was, that the Complainant upon
exhibiting his Bill, was to enter Bond to prove the Surmise thereof; otherwise
the Defendant was not compealable to answer the same.

Men are in danger of Arrest several ways and means. By Latitat out of the
Kings Bench into any County. By Capias upon Original in the Common Pleas. By
Capias upon the Exchequer. By Bill upon the Exchequer. By Bill of Middlesex. By
Sergeants of the Mace, in Corporations, Towns, and Cities. By Bailiffs of
Liberties. By Writs of Privileges, in nature of Muchmen out of the Chancery.
So that the Poor Debtor, nay the non-Debtor, est undique circumventus.

The Oppressions by color of Law, are intolerable.
By Arrests, The Sergeants in Corporations, and Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
Catch-poles, for making Arrests over and above Fees, take excessive Extortions,
as 10. l. 20. l. etc. much more for Arrests: Besides their cruel usage of the
Prisoner, his chargeable restraint for Diet, Lodging 2 s. 6 d. per night for
his bed, and running the Prisoner into extraordinary expenses for Tobacco, Wine,
Beer, Ale, which these Harpies will call for, doubling the debt, if little, and
enlarging of it, if it were great before. By Habeas Corpus. A man arrested here
in London, cannot remove himself by Habeas Corpus, from the Counter to any
other Prison of Kings Bench or Fleet, but it will cost him five Marks; or three
pounds from thence to Fleetstreet, to bring him to the Judges chamber. The
Judges Fee is (as I take it) 15. s. 4. d. and how many hundred there be of
these in a year, may be gathered.

If by Habeas Corpus the Prisoner be removed out of the Country Prisons, then
it will be chargeable to him; 10, 20, 40. l. and according to the distance of
the place from whence he is brought up to London.

Added to these, the Fees of Goalers, Keepers of Prisons, and Turn-keys, the
Marshal of the Marshalsie of the upper Bench, and Warden of the Fleet Fees,
according to the several qualities of the Persons.

Commitments, Of an Earl to the Fleet, 20. l. Of a Baron, 15. l. Of a Knight,
5. l. An Esquire, 5. Marks or 3. l. A Gentleman, 2. l. A Yeoman, 1. l. 6. s. 8.
The seveaal Rates of Chamber Rents, according to the Quality of the Person and
Chamber.
Some 20. s. per week, some 15. some 10. some 5. some 4. shillings per week.
And after the same rate for chamber rent a week in the Kings Bench. The Fees of
Commitment by Habeas Corpus to the Kings Bench, is chargeable to the Prisoner,
at least 4. l. 12. s. 4. d. Besides for outgoings upon day Writs, 8. s. per
diem, for out-going upon favor. And by Baston. And charge of Diet, which the
Prisoner has at great rates.
When all these charges are heaped upon a man under arrest (perhaps for no just
debt) it may be but for a small debt: what a heavy oppression is this to be
suffered in a Christian Commonwealth* A Man may call it a common misery. The
debt (if any) is by these charges trebled, the Prisoner, his Children, and
Family, dispersed and ruined, the Person himself made useless to the
Commonwealth, as being bur^^^ alive, and more disabled to pay or satisfy his
just debts and Creditors, then ever before.

Sir, I have known when many poor people have bin put to 10. s. for a supposed
debt of 3. s. 4. d. or a trespass of that value, being Arrested in the Country
120. miles hence, by a Latitat, to draw a Composition, which rather then the
poor man will travel to London to answer the Suit, submits unto: and this is
the ordinary use of Atturneys, which get by it 8. s. 4. d. or thereabout,
although the Action might be tried either in the Court Baron of the Manor, or
Country Court, for two shillings six pence Charge.

So that in Fees to Judges, Lawyers, Atturneys, Clerks; and others, and by the
oppression and extortion of Bailiffs, Sergeants of the Mace, and of Liberties,
Goalers and Catch-poles, there is exhausted 30000. l. per annum at the least,
out of the estates of Debtors, You may remember the Act this Parl. for taking
away the High Commission, and Commissary Courts, which was burthensom to the
Subject, in extorted Fees, 10000. per annum.
and poor Prisoners, not a penny of their debts paid, their estates ruined,
and their persons disabled for ever, which certainly was never the intent of
that Statute, to undermine the common Law, which had man's liberty in so light
an esteem, as if it were not liable to Arrest for debt.

Sir, I have credibly heard that there has bin ^^^sed 90000. l. per annum by
the profit of Imprisonment of Prisoners in the Fleet there. I pray what out of
the Prisoners of the Kings Bench, which has larger Rules? And what extorted by
Goalers, Sergeant of the Mace, in Corporations, by Clerks, and other Officers
of the Country, in London, and throughout the Kingdom? And all this out of the
livelyhoods, fortunes, and estates, of men in a miserable and wanting
condition. And surely, those riches cannot be said to be well gotten, which are
drawn from men in misery, which are always as ill spent, for it is informed,
that of the 90000. l. most thereof was sacrificed yearly for by Favors, etc.
and so de caeteris.

W. G.


