THEIOPHAPAKON.

A DIVINE POTION TO PRESERVE SPIRITUAL HEALTH, by the Cure of unnatural
HEALTH-DRINKING.

OR, An Exercise wherein the evil of Health-drinking is by clear and solid
Arguments convinced.

Written for the satisfaction, and published by the direction of a godly
Parliament Man.

By Jo: Geree, M. A. and Pastor of St. FAITHS In LONDON.

Esther 1.8. And the drinking was according to Law, none might compel.

Nullus in convivio cogat alium plus bibere, quam oportet.

Aug. de rect. Cathol. conversat. LONDON: Printed for George Lathum, at the
Sign of the Bishops Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL MY WORTHY FRIEND, HUMPHREY SALWAY Esquire.
Sir,
THough my occasions are many, yet I cannot be wanting to answer so pious a
motion as that of Yours, to give you my judgment touching Drinking of Healths:
desired, as I suppose, in relation to a mean for suppressing that unchristian,
yea unnatural custom. A custom which though it deserve rather flagella, then
argumenta. And is fitter to be expulst Christian society, (as Christ expulst
the Money Changers out of the Temple) with a whip, then with words; it is so
against Natures light. Yet because evil practices never want pleas: and
penalties are not only then most just, but most prevalent to restrain, when
they are accompanied with Arguments to convince. I shall briefly draw up an
Indictment against this Monster, wherein I doubt not to evince it in many
respects unworthy to live in a Commonwealth. But whether it be billa vera, I
shall submit to Your mature judgment: and rest,

From my Study in Ivy Lane: Febr: 1. 1647. Yours: To serve you in any thing
tending to the glory of our God: Jo: GEREE.

Q. Whether Drinking of Healths be Lawful?
AS we must distinguish before we define, so must we define before we dispute,
or else we cannot conclude with exactness and evidence, but shall be in danger
to fall into the fallacy Exignoratione elenchi. First then we are to inquire
what an Health is. And being it is no natural, but a civil (or rather
uncivil thing) we must fetch the definition of it from the most usual
practices of men; and although this monster appear not always clothed with the
same circumstances, yet from those circumstances which ordinarily are fixed when
others are various, we may define it thus.

An Health is a whole cup drunk in relation to the health of some person
usually absent, which is to be pledged by all in company with the head
uncovered. The Cup is sometimes bigger, sometimes lesser. The party is
sometimes of better condition, sometimes of worse, even sometimes so does lust
beset men to the devil himself, and brute creatures, etc. It is to be pledged
round, so that he that begins it not first, yet must give life to it not only
by drinking himself, but passing it to another, unless he fall out to be the
last man. The ceremony is sometimes of an higher degree, even to kneeling on
the knee, the gesture used in divine adoration. Now the worse the
circumstances, the worse the health. But take it at the best, as I have defined
it, I judge it unlawful, that is, sinful, leaving guilt upon the person
acting, as in diverse considerations transgressing the Law of God, the rule of
our life.

What is against nature is unlawful. To require all in company to drink such a
measure is against nature. Therefore it is unlawful. The major is clear for
the Law of Nature, is the Law of God, its of Gods imprinting. And therefore to
go against that is a sin, nay not only 1 Cor. 11.14.
a sin, but a great degree of sin, showing not only want of grace, but good
nature. The minor I prove. Drinking is an act of Nature to quench thirst, when
then all the company have not the same thirst, to compel all to the same
measure of drinking is not sequi naturam ducem, To f^llow the conduct of
Nature, and so to sin against Nature. Which may further appear in Brutes, who
having not a corrupt will to misse-draw Nature, they cannot be compelled to
drink what another drinks before them, but only the more or less as their
thirst is.

To set another end, rule, or use of a creature then God has appointed, is
unlawful. But to compel to drink such a measure for the health of another, is
to set another end, rule, or use of drinking then God has set. Ergo, such
compulsion in Healths is unlawful. The major is clear. Natural actions are in
themselves neither morally good nor evil, but as they are circumstanc't. Now
the main circumstances that determine them in morality, must be the end and
rule of them. When they are consonant to the Word, we do well in them. When
they are dissonant, we must needs offend in them. Now what is Gods end, or use
of drinking, and eating, but health and strength? Eccles. 10.17. And what is
his measure but satisfaction? Joh. 6.12. But now in health-drinking, another
man's health is made the end or use of drinking. And another man's humor, (and
that usually very extravagant) the measure, without respect of our own health,
or whether our thirst be before quenched or satisfied. Nay usually healthing at
Feasts begins after men be satisfied.

All corrupt customs, or fashions of the world, are forbidden Christians, as
contrary to the acceptable will of God, and so unlawful. But Health-drinking
is a corrupt custom of the world. Therefore it is forbidden, so unlawful. The
major is clear: Romans 12.2. And be not conformed to this world, etc. What
customs are the issue of humor, and fancy irrational and useless. Those
must needs be corrupt customs. But such is this custom of drinking healths.
What reason is there for? what use is there of drinking to another man's health?
especially in such a measure? Is he the healthier for such a draught? or are we
the better, and not usually burdened by it. And is it not irrational to do a
thing for an end, that we know it can have no influence to produce; to do a
thing for the health of another, that in that kind can do him no good, but
usually does the drinkers hurt; If this be not a fruit of wanton fancy, and
exorbitant humor, what is?

Infringing other men's just freedom, that have no dependence on us, is unjust
usurpation, and so both uncivil, and unlawful. But such an infringing of
liberty is in drinking Healths, when all must be compelled or engaged upon pain
of censure, and scorn at least to drink to such a measure with such a ceremony.
Therefore Health-drinking is unlawful. The major is clear. It Is a just freedom
that a man has from Nature to drink more, or less, as there is need, or use;
and besides it is a civil liberty that I sit, or stand, be covered, or
uncovered with those on whom I have no dependence. Then for any mean man to
start up in a company (as such tricks as Healthing usually arise from those of
least worth) and lay an injunction upon all to drink his measure, and in his
gesture, is malapert sauciness, and infringing just liberty, and so
usurpation: and all usurpation is a breach of the fifth Commandment.

Every voluntary action which always indangers, and often causes great
inconveniences in society, is unlawful. But Health-drinking always indangers,
and often causes great inconveniences to societies. Therefore it is unlawful.
The major is clear. For it is a rule in Divinity, That Commandment that
prohibits a sin, prohibits all the occasions leading to that sin. And its an
overruled case by the Apostle, that liberty in things indifferent may be
prejudged by inconveniences. 1 Cor. 8.13. The minor may be proved thus. Healths
always indangers among strangers, and often causes quarrels. For if the
Health be to a man that deserves no good wishes, neither out of our relations,
nor his own qualification, or be such an one, that any of the company hates, or
scorns to honor, as many times he is, and most commonly may be among
strangers; then usually quarrelling, or brawling follows. Again, if there be
any, whose heads by weakness, or bodies by unhealthinesse and obnoxiousnesse
to distemper; or though it should be lawful, yet their consciences through
weakness scruple it All of these are cast upon a temptation, of distempering
their heads (whence what evil may not follow?) or indangering their health
against the eight Commandment: or disquieting and wounding conscience, which is
both sin and misery, Romans 14. ult. Prove. 14.14. And in all these evils the
Health-drinker will be an accessory. The last of which the Apostle expresses
terribly, Romans 14.15. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat (is there not
the same reason of drink) now walk thou not charitably. Destroy not him with
thy meat (nor with thy drink) for whom Christ dyed.

That which is found in experience an apparent cause of great wast of good
creatures, and the overflowing of the g^^evous sin of drunkenness, that
undoubtedly is to be abandoned Christian society. But Health-drinking is a
great waster, and drawer on of drunkenness. The major is clear. All useless
waste should be prevented, that frugality we learn from our Savior, even when
creatures were multiplied miraculously: Joh. 6.12. and all causes of
drunkenness removed. He that would no evil do, must avoid what longs thereto,
says our Proverb. We are to prevent sins, not to occasion them: Ephesians. 5.11.
We must have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove
them. Now sure drunkenness is one of the unfruitful works of darkness; and
how can a man reprove it, and set on foot, or keep on foot healthing, which
draws it on as with cart-ropes? (to use the Prophets phrase) or how can such
quit themselves from all communion with it, that promote a custom that is so
direct a cause of it? Now that drinking Healths does cause needless waste of
good creatures is apparent: for what a great quantity of wine, and strong
drink do such full measures consume, especially in great companies? and this
generally wasted. It being usually burdensome, not refreshing to the company.
And what is such a shooing-horn to drunkenness as this Health-drinking? The
great masters of excess, when the sober minded would withdraw, what device
have they to hold them on till they be inflamed, and subject to a woe: Isa.
5.11? but by beginning an Health, and that upon pain of a quarrel, or
unkindnesse at least, they must not deny to pledge.

That custom which is condemned in Scripture, and the contrary commended: must
needs be sinful,and unlawful. But compelling others to drink more then they
have a mind to (which is practiced in Health-drinking) is condemned in
Scripture, and the contrary commended. Therefore Health-drinking is unlawful.
The major is clear, because the Scriptures hold forth to us what is that good,
and acceptable will of the Lord. The minor is proved by Hab. 2.15. Woe unto him
that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottles to him, and make
him drunk also. Which words whether they be taken properly, or figuratively,
they prove the evil of compelling to drink; for if they be taken
metaphorically, yet the metaphor is drawn from compelling to drink, which
unless it be vicious, the metaphor wou^d be frigid and non-significant: and
though all compulsion in Health-drinking be not to drunkenness or
intoxication, yet it is to ^xcesse, which is a step to it, and so a step to sin
which is over-shoes, though not over-boots, as our English Proverb speaks. And
as compulsion to drink is condemned, so is the contrary practice commended in
Scripture. Esther 1.8. And the drinking was according to the law, none might
compel: for the King had app^inted all the Officers of his house that they
should do according to every man's pleasure. Which whether it were out of love
of sobriety, or to prevent broils in so great a meeting, the holy Ghost
registers it with approbation.

Such customs as are Heathenish, and unsuitable to Christians are to be
abandoned Christians society, but such a custom is health-drinking. Therefore
its to be abandoned as sinful. The major may be cleared from that, Mat: 6.32.
For after all these do the Gentiles seek, wherein is coucht an argument of
dissalowance, so 1 These. 4.5. and Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Christians should do nothing
which are not convenient for them, or misbecoming Saints. The minor may thus be
made good. It was the custom of heathens to drink to their Emperors health,
they knew no better: but Christians have the Spirit of Zech 12.10.
prayer, and are 1 Timothy 2.1, 2
taught to pray for their Governors, and friends, and their prayers ye know
will promote health of others, not their drinking, and therefore drinking to
the health of great ones is heathenish, not becoming Christians, which are
Saints. Besides Christianity teaches sobriety and mortification; 1 These. 5.8.
Let us who are of the day be sober. So Titus, 2.12. And therefore carowsing
whole cups is a thing unseemly for them.

That custom that is no ways necessary, and has been declaimed against by the
ancient Fathers reverened on all sides for piety and learning, is to be
abandoned the society of Christians as scandalous, and so unlawful. But the
custom of Health drinking, drinking ad Equales calices, that is, all that same
mea^ure, has been declaimed against by the ancient fathers. Therefore to be
abandoned as unlawful. The major few will question, the minor is apparent in
the writings of the Fathers, but I need not trouble my self nor you with
quotations, since ye may see it abundantly done already by Master Bolton in his
Direction for walking with God, pa. 201, 202, 203, 204, 205. and in Master
Prinns Health-sicknesse.

Thus Sit I have, I hope, made good the indictment against Health drinking,
proving it many ways culpable enough to be ejected Chri^^ian society. And yet
I have taken healthing at the best; whereby the evils cleaving to it are
evident to be in in the nature of it, not in the abuse of it only. And if at
the best it be thus many ways, and in such a degree evil; How abominable is
it in the ordinary practice of the roaring crew, where all the evil
circumstances and consequents of it are raised to the height. Yet even this
has round some advocates, I will only take notice of such pleaes as to my
reason seem most specious, and apply a brief Answer to them.

First. some say why not as well drink to the health of a friend, as remember a
friend in drinking to him?

Ans. The reason of difference is apparent, for by drinking to him, I do renew
the remembrance of him, and manifest thereby some respect to him. But my
drinking to the health of another is no way, in no degree conducible to his
health.

But it may be replied under the name health, we intend only respect, and
custom has made healthing a sign of respect.

An: A sign it may be made, but a corrupt one, for how can drinking such a
measure be a good sign of respect. The respect is in the remembrance, and that
is done by mentioning him, not by the measure. If the measure thou drinkest
bear respect to thy friend, then it must be in doing something more then thou
are willing, or then thou do to gratify thy self, and so the respect shall
be grounded in excess, which is sin, besides why will thou engage others to
thy respect or thy measure, when thou know not whether they can bear the one
or the other.

But suppose it be but a little glass or cup, that it is likely will hurt no
body.

An: But therein thou breakest the law and rule of the measure of drinking,
which is strength, and satisfaction, not thy humor. 2. There be some bodies
and brains too, that will be hurt with least exceeding. Modicum non nocet si
non sumatur; A little hurts not if it be let alone, is indeed a truth. Besides
do not thou know, that little thieves let in greater, and little thefts make
way for greater; so do little Healths besides the evil that is in them,
countenance greater, and make way for greater: and therefore keep the soles of
thy feet out of the water of sin, for it is bitter water.

But suppose I force none, is there any evil in it then?

A. There be diverse degrees of forcing. The commands, expectation, frowns, yea
even the example of some men, that is, such as are of eminency either for
place, or grace, is in a kind a compulsion. What else is the purport of that
charge of St. Paul against St. Peter, Gal. 2.14. Why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as the Jews? Cogi dicit istos apud quos erat tantum
authoritatis Petri pondus, ut quicquid ageret praescribere caeteris videretur,
says Beza on the place. Paul says, those were compelled with whom the
authority of Peter was of such weight, that his actions were as prescriptions
to the rest. And usually if men do not compel to pledge when they begin
healths, yet they frown, or take it not so well, at those that pledge not, and
that casts them upon a temptation to wrong either health, or conscience. But if
men should leave it absolutely free, then it loses the nature of an Health,
and yet cannot escape censure, because it has the appearance of evil, and
gives countenance to the evil of healthing. It is indeed to healthing like a
minced oath to a bloody oath, as Slud, etc. and so is not without poison in it.

But some may say, I will not begin Healths, but may I not pledge them,
especially if I know the measure is not above my strength or need?

A. If healthing be in it self evil (as I have proved) then must thou have no
hand in it; remember that downright charge, Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Ephesians. 5.12. Besides
though thou do not begin the Health, yet by pledging thou do keep it up,
and thereby ingagest those that come after thee to the like practice; whose
need, or strength of body, or brain, if it be not answerable to thine, thou
occasionest their excess, or hurt in health, or wits: and therefore this plea
will not hold.

But what if the Health be to a Superior, it may be to the King, and it may be
my loyalty may be questioned if I refuse?

A. If Healthing be in genere malorum, a work of darkness, as I have showed,
then surely we may look on it as on the Idolatrous worship which the Papists
perform to deceased Saints, wherein they greatly dishonor them. And were they
sensible of it they would take it most ill; and were they capable of grief,
nothing would geieve them more then to think that they were made stales to rob
God of his due honor; See St August. de^emp seim. 231.232.
so it is a great dishonor to King, Parliament, etc. that their names should
be made use of to the occasioning, or countenancing of evil, and dishonouring
God by drawing on excess. 2. None can question our loyalty justly to any power
on earth, for any thing which we refuse out of enlightened conscience to the
supreme power in heaven. 3. We have other ways to express our loyalty, to
wit, hearty prayers for; and conscientious subjection to those that are in
authority.

But I shall be singular, none else refuses.

A. Whether is it better to be involved in the general corruption of the
world, or with N^ah to find grace in the eyes of God, and walk with him? Genesis
6.8, 9.11.

But I shall be scoft, and giered at.

A. Whether is worse, that men scoff, or God curse, if thou sin, God cursest?
whether is better, the praise of men, or the praise of God? Sure did thou
consider, Heb 11.26. Matt. 5.11, 12. or 1 Pet. 4.14. and many other such
places, scoffs would not move thee.

But I shall be counted uncivil, ill bred, and be cast out of society.

A. Whethers worse, to be counted uncivil, or to be ungodly? or whether is any
breeding better then that Ephesians. 6.4. which is in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord? which will teach us to avoid all sin. And if thou be counted unworthy
society, comfort thy self with this; Those that men cast out unjustly, Ioh. 9
35.
Christ will find. And those that men do so reject, God does most prize: and
while men count them, not worthy of the world, God counts the world not worthy
of them: Hebr. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy.

Et^amsi ad hoc ver^etur, ut tibi du^^etur, aut b^bas (...) Aug (...) Temp. 2
32.
But what if I be in danger, if I refuse?

A. In that case thou must not destroy thy soul to save thy body: and sin
destroys the soul. Excellently Augustine on this very point. Although it were
come to this, that it be said to thee, either drink (...) dye, it were better
thy sober body were slain, then that thy soul should dye by arm kennesse. Put
withal this is for the most part (as Augustine further inlarges his answer) a
false fear, for when men's heat is over, they will (...) thy resolution and care
to keep a good conscience. Cast thy self therefore on God, trust in him, and
ke^p in his way, and he will keep thee as the apple of his eye. To him be glory
forever.

FINIS.

