The true Relation OF THE ARRIVAL OF Thirty Flemish Ships, AND Six of those
that Revolted, before the Town and Castle of DEAL;

Wherein the Prince, the Duke of York, and many Soldiers are said to be
embarked for ENGLAND:

With the violent battery they made against the Besiegers, and the effects
thereof.

TOGETHER WITH The manner of the Siege, the progress of the Besiegers, and the
desperate carriage of the Besieged.

Sent in a Letter from the Leaguer in Upper Deal, 20. July, 1648.

Printed in the year 1648.

The true Relation of the arrival of 30 Flemish Ships, and six of those that
revolted, before the Town and Castle of DEAL.
SIR,
WIth my last, I sent you word of the surrender of Warmore Castle unto us, and
I might say much of the further particulars thereof, but that I doubt not but
ere this you have heard of it at large: Immediately thereupon we drew on our
Leaguer before Deal-Castle, where we now lie; and on Saturday morning the 15.
of this instant July, there appeared six men of War, (being part of the
revolted Ships,) before the Town and Castle of Deal, and by their churlish
tokens they sent us, made it appear to us what they were, for they shot very
near a hundred great Pieces at us, yet thanks be to the Lord, they did us
little harm; only two men were slain by their shot, and two more by the fall of
a Chimney which their Canon beat down; That very morning also the enemy sallied
out of Deal Castle, and intended to surprise our forlorn guard, which was
between three and four hundred yards of the Castle; but they were soon
discovered, and by a Reserve guard, (whom Captain Gayl of Colemanstreet
commanded) they were gallantly repulsed, and driven back to the very gate of
the Castle, and this with the loss of three of our men, and some few wounded:
As for the loss on the Enemies part, it is hot certain yet some of our
Soldiers observed about eight or nine of theirs to be carried off on pick pack.

The day following being Sunday, there appeared near about 30. Fleming Ships
before the Castle and Town of Deal, but are very quiet, and have not yet meddled
on either side, neither have the revolted Ships at all opposed us since the
arrival of the Hollanders, which encourages us to hope that they are rather
our friends then enemies. The Enemies in the Castle are madly desperate, and
our men very valiant and courageous. But in regard the two Castles of Deal and
Sandown are at such a distance that our small forces are not able to besiege
both at once, and yet so near that they may in some sort assist each other, we
are forced to keep our strength united as near as possibly we can, lest we be
made a prey to their frequent excursions on both sides. But we daily expect an
additionall strength to come to us, and then we hope we shall be able to bridle
their rage, and make them keep within straighter bounds. In the mean time our
Soldiers are very busy in making Canon baskets and such other necessaries for
our service, and we have begun to raise a new Battery between the Town of Deal,
and the Castle of Sandown, by which means we shall be able to command the Sea,
the better to keep off relief, and secure our selves from the annoyance of
those ships that shall attempt against us. In a word, every thing is preparing
for the Leaguer with all convenient speed that may be, and our stout Soldiery
will ere long be in action.

It is reported that the Prince, Duke of York, and many hundreds of Soldiers
are in the Revolted Ships, but there is very little reason for that opinion,
and not the least likelihood of the truth of it. But if they were, yet we fear
them not, they are like to have but a surly welcome on shore, if they come in
this posture; for we are resolutely resolved to oppose both them and all others
to the uttermost that come in such a way. In the interim, if the Lord will but
send us seasonable weather, our works will go on apace and be speedily
finished. As for Provision blessed be God, it is at a very reasonable rate.
This may suffice at present from.

Your friend and Servant, R. G.
From my Quarters in Upper Deal, July 20.1648.

