The FIRST LECTURE TOUCHING NAVIGATION Read Publicly at Sr. Balthazar
Gerbiers ACADEMY.

PSALM. 107. ver. 23.24. Qui descendunt Mare in Navibus facientes operationem
in aquis multis, ipsi viderunt opera Domini and mirabilia ejus in profundo.

Imprimatur,

Hen: Scobell, Cleric: Parliamenti.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1649.

HEVREVX QVIEN DIEV SE CONFIE



To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Vane junior One of the Members of the most
Honorable Assembly of Parliament, Council of STATE: And Treasurer of the NAVY.
Right Honorable,
AS I have presented both to the Right honorable Speaker Lenthall, and to the
Lord President of the Council of State, the printed Lectures which have been
read gratis on Cosmography, in the Academy which I have endeavored to Erect,
for the glory of God, the honor of this Nation, the general encouragement and
improvement of all Lovers of Virtue. In the same way of humble respect and
duty. I do also offer to your hands this Lecture touching Navigation; as most
fit and pertinent, for that your hands and cares are fixed on this grand Vessel
England; as your right pious, religious mind, is on him whose wonders you have
most fully seen in the Deep.

May those great and Indefatigable Indevours be so prosperous and so blessed by
that great Pilot, Guider, and preservator of all things, as that the Government
wherein so many Legions are comprehended, may be so well guided (even in the
greatest storms) from perishing, and live to praise his great and glorious
Name, which will ever be the prayers of him that by all acceptable services
will endeavor to approve himself

Right Honorable, Your most humble and obedient Servant,Balthazar Gerbier.
White Friars, this 28 of November. 1649.
THE FIRST LECTVRE TOUCHING NAVIGATION: Read Publicly at Sir Balthazar
Gerbiers Academy:
The Introduction
LIke as the Deep does at all times declare the mavelous wonders of that
great Author, Guider, and Preserver of all things; so it must needs be a
mavelous occupation; neither can it be but most glorious to the mind of any
creature, to exercise it self on that subject whereon the Spirit of God was
pleased to move, before all things were.

Certainly Navigation (whereof we shall now treat) cannot but afford a
glorious delight to the minds of Lovers of Knowledge; as the Seas afford a
world of Wealth unto those that make Navigation their Profession.

Is it not as rare as wonderful, that with an Instrument so little as an
Astralabo is, and that with a Sea compass.

By the first you may measure the Circles of the Heavens, the height and
distance of the Sun, and Stars.

By the second, (which has neither mouth, tongue, legs, nor hands) man is
directed, guided, and shown where the East, West, North, and South are (not
only in the steddiest case a vessel can be, but when the moved waves tosseth
the same as it were toward the clouds, and thence lets it reele as into an
Abyss) its no wonder then that Solomon the wisest of all men said, that the
hardest thing to be found, was the way a Ship makes through the Seas. And is
not the wonder so much the greater, that it finds its straight course through
that vast perpetual moving, and removing body, so exactly, when the Firmament
appears as black as Ink, and all the lights of Heaven are covered with the
darkness of the night, (like as with an extinguisher) as well as in the
clearest day.

Is it not a wonder above all wonders, that after so many months Navigations,
and that after such varieties, changes of winds, intermixture of storms, the
violence of Tides, so constantly changeable, that a vessel arrives to the mouth
of an Harbor, as straight as if it were a Ferry Boat drawn by a cord, fastened
from one shore to the other.

With the royal Prophet David, let all men say; Qui descendunt mare in
Navibus, facientes operationem in aquis multis, ipsi viderunt opera Domini, and
mirabilia ejus in profundo dixit, and stetit spiritus procella: Et exaltati
sunt fluctus ejus. Ascendunt usque ad Coelos, and descendunt usque ad abyssos,
anima eorum in malis tabescebat: Turbati sunt, and motisunt sicut ebrius, and
omnis sapientia e^rum devorata est. Et clamaverunt ad Dominum eum
tribularentur, and de necessitatibus eorum eduxit eos. Et statuit procellam
ejus in auram, and siluerunt fluctus ejus, and laetati sunt quia siluerunt, and
deduxit eos in portum volantatis eorum, confiteantur Domino misericordiae ejus,
and mirabilia ejus filiis hominam. That is They that go down to the Sea in
ships, that do business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord,
and his wonders in the deep; for he commands, and raises the stormy wind,
which lifts up the waves thereof; they mount up to the Heaven, they go down
again to the depths, their soul is melted because of trouble, they reele to
and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end; then they
cry unto the Lord in their distresses. He makes the storm a calm, so that
the waves thereof are still; then are they glad because they be quiet, so he
brings them unto their desired haven: O that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men, Psalm. 107.

Let us then so profit by this present meditation, wherein we shall find the
great benefit of the Art of Navigation, in that it does not only serve for the
transportation both of men and goods, from the remotest parts of the world, and
toward the which God was not pleased to prescribe any high ways, for Carts,
nor Forces; but to make men acquainted with all such parts, in which God does
manifest the varieties of his power, and of his bottomless treasures; even so
does he likewise with Nations, in some of which his divine fatherly mercy is
glorified, and his Justice made more apparent, rendering man also more capable
to participate of those innumerous riches; by all what the Indian precious
shoares are garnished with, by all the golden bowels of the earth, where Nature
by the Sunbeams is made capable of such productions, by what the Mother-wombe
of pearls is possessed with, by that wherewith Aarons breast was made so shining
glorious; men load their Vessels as freely as Carts on other grounds, with the
most ordinary fruits, and productions of the earth.

Navigation may therefore well be termed the most profitable of all Sciences,
and Arts, for mankind; if he can make that use of it, as may justly draw
blessings unto him; which is to be compast by doing that, so earnestly wished
for by the aforesaid King David; O that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

And by being as ready to labor in his cause (in which no Soul can suffer any
shipwreck) as to hazard Life, Ship, and Goods, for transitory things.

We shall begin with the Sea, and say first what it is, and why it is called
Ocean.

The Sea is all the vast extent of water which environs the earth.

The waters were created by God, In principio creavit Deus coelum and Terram,
and Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas. In the beginning God created the
Heavens and the Earth, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
This is confirmed by the writs of Moses, in his generation, or offspring of
this world.

The Water does engender, and maintain it self in the Sea; the Rivers come
from it, and return unto it.

The Egyptians have supposed four Elements, of each one whereof they made
two; the one Male, and the other Female: they believe that the Air which
engenders the wind is the Male, and that which is laden with clouds, and which
does not stir, to be the Female; they call the Water male, and all other
Waters female; they say that the fire (the flame whereof burns) is male, and
that which shines (without doing harm) is the female. They do believe that
the hardest Earth, as the Stones, and Rocks are males, and give the name of
female to that which is manuable.

The Sea is called Ocean, by reason of its quick and continual motion; for
Oris in Greek, is to hasten, or else it is called, Ocean quasi Cianeus, for it
embraces the Rivers of the earth.

The Sea receives several names from the diversity of places, by the which it
passes, as the Sea of China, India, Persia, etc.

The Sea properly has no color, for our sight does not remain on the
superficies of the water, but descends lower, and at a great distance its
color is like that of Heaven, but being disturbed by the Winds it is
susceptible, of diverse colors.

It Is to be noted, that the Sea rises, increasing seven days, which is called
quick water, and seven other days it retires decreasing, which is called dead
water. Aristotle treats of the causes of the increasing and decreasing in the
second of the Meteors; as also Hippocrates in the Book of the Air, and
Waters; where he says, that there is a proper cause of Astrology, viz. by the
natural virtue which the Moon has on the Waters; therefore we see all that is
in the Sea increases, and decreaseth, as the Moon does; for as the Moon
happens to rise on the Horizon, and that she touches the Sea with her beams,
so does she raise a surging on the Sea, which causes its increase, and
decrease; the which shall be more largely discus'd in its proper time, and
place.

How the Sea belongs to the Perfection of the world, that it would have
perished without the same, and how the waters are ingendered by the Sea.
THe World could not have been perfect without the Sea, for that if there were
no beginning of waters, there would be no simple water; and if there were no
simple water, there would be no mixed water; and so there could not be any thing
of that which is ingendered by water. And if there were no water found, nothing
consisting of a body could be continued, or conglutinated.

If there were no beginning of Waters, generation would be destroyed, and
consequently all the World. Neither without the beginning of Waters could all
the assemblings of contraries be performed; though they are possible.

Thus nature would be deficient in those things which are unavoidably
necessary, and conducing to the same. And its property, and virtue failing, the
waters would be hindered in their action, by which it would happen (there being
no beginning of waters) that the workmanship of nature would perish, and
consequently the whole World.

Aristotle (in the second of the Meteors) says, that the Waters of the Seas
engender in the North: He would say, that the greatest part of the waters of
the Sea are engendered in the North. As Albert the great declares (in the second
of the Meteors the sixth Chapter, where he says) that the Sea runs from the
North to the South, and the cause is, that the Sea is higher in the North, then
toward the South; and the reason why it is higher, is, because that the cold
of the North ingenders more water than the Sea can contain in the space,
distance, and height, of its coast there. The water which is in the South is
consumed and diminished by the heat of the Sun, therefore one part of the South
water, drives the other back toward the lowermost side, yet nevertheless
either moves accidentally from the place of their generation, because that
which is moist runs to be retained in the dry part.

The reason why the water consumes it self so much in the South, is, because
the Sun turns always in his excentrique circle: and that its center is not
the same with that of the Earth, so that if the Diameter, of the circle of the
sun were passed between two Diameters, its center and that of the Earth, the
greatest part of the Diameter would be at one side, and the lesser at the
other, in consideration of the Center of the Earth.

And thus it is Geometrically demonstrated, that the greatest length of the
Diameter is near the twentieth degree of Gemini, and that the least length of
it is at the twentieth degree of Sagitarius, its opposite sign. It appears
then, that the Sun approaches nearer unto the Earth in the Southern parts
then in the Northern; and thus by its approaching the South, heats it so
violently, that it consumes the water, and scorches the Earth, which it does
not at the North.

Wherefore the Water of the Sea is brinish and salt, and that such Water is
best for Navigation.
THe matter which causes the Sea to be brinish, and salt, is, because that
there are two sorts of vapors in the Sea, viz. Hot, and Moist; and Hot, and
Dry: The one whereof evaporates it self from the superficies of the Sea, and
the other raises it self from its bottom, by force of the Sun, and Stars,
which are the efficient causes of its vapors, and because that the vapor of
the water is very subtle, between these two, therefore it elevates it self in
the Air, and is consumed by the Sun, and there remains nothing else but the
exhalations of the Earth, the which are dissipated, extended, and mingled among
the water, as appears by the example of those who eat, for the digested meat,
spreads and divides it self through the members, and all the gross and
undigested substance remains: In the like manner also, the vapor of the Earth,
having extended it self, remains mixed with the substance of the Sea water,
and the coldness of the Water drives in so coldly, as it consumes it self by
its own coldness, because of its mingling by Antyperistasis, which is to say,
that two contrary things joined together, become stronger then before, for the
heat of the exhalation (which issues from the bottom of the Sea) fortifies it
self by the virtue of the Sun, with its contrary, to wit, the coldness, and
thus the Heat happens to overcome, which is the necessary operation toward the
begetting of the saltish water.

It is also more convenient for Navigation, that the water be saltish then
fresh, for the saltish water is heavier then the fresh: That it is so, is
proved by many experiences, as for example, this one: Take Fresh water, and
mingle it with a good quantity of salt, so that the Salt may melt, and be
dissolved into water, then take a Fresh eg, and put it on the mixed water, the
thicknes of the water (which proceeds from the mixture of the Salt) will bearup
the egg by its thicknes, and will cause it to swim over it, the which in fresh
water would descend to the bottom. By this same experience it may likewise be
demonstrated that a vessel will sinck sooner in Fresh water then in Salt water,
for the fresh water divides it self both sooner, and closes with greater ease
then the salt water does. So as by the driving of the egg on the salt water,
the argument may be likewise strengthened: That the saltishnesse in the Sea
water is not divided, but that the whole Sea throughout, its water is as well
salt at the bottom, and in the midst, as on the superficies; And therefore
the opinion of some Philosophers, that the sea water should be fresh at the
bottom, is frivolous, being that the Seafish is no more salt then those of
fresh water Rivers: And that the reason thereof should be, that the fish make
their litter and feed in the bottom, which being but a slight argument, it
will be necessary to say only this thereon.

That though the body of the Sea moves in an entire mass, by its ebbing and
flowing, yet since its a liquid body, it cannot choose (being so much agitated
by the winds) but be generally salt: And the which cannot be contradicted by so
weak a conceit as that the seafish are not salt, because they feed at the
bottom of it. God has given unto the Elements their due propriety, as well as
unto all the creatures, and likewise to all the productions, both of the earth
and sea: And there is no more contradiction of a possibility in Fish that live
in salt water to have a fresh taste, then that the moisture which proceeds from
the Muscadine Spanish grape, should be drawn from the same soil, whereon the
bitter Almond, Olive, and the balmish Nuts oil does grow, whose several
productions are according to that property which God has been pleased to
bestow on them.

The Earth it self is salt, which the Scripture notes, for if the earth loses
its Salt, wherewith shall it be seasoned; and yet the same earth produces
Sugar, though a Salt to preserve Fruits; and contrary to the Salt of the Sea,
etc. And likewise several other things, out of which though Salt might be
drawn, yet they have not the faltish taste, etc.

Of the different Motions which are in the Ocean.
GReat part of the Waters are ingendered in the North, and runs from the North
toward the South as aforesaid, (which is one of the Seas motions) When the
Tide increases, we see the sea mounts at one side, and when it decreaseth, its
motion is quite contrary, and it begins first to decrease where it had the
first increase; and thus it appears that the sea has contrary motions, and
different the one from the other,

Seneca says, that there is no other cause of the current of Waters from one
place to another, then the height and lowness of places; that only motion
excepted by the which the Sea increases, and decreaseth; for (as aforesaid) it
follows the course of the Moon, for the waters of the Sea increase, and
decrease in all the parts of the World, that is to say, in the East, West,
North, and South; therefore the Sea has no proper place from whence it begins
its increasing, or decreasing, but moves accidentally from one part to the
other, unless it be downwards toward the bottom; for that such a motion does
not happen accidentally, but by the proper essence agreeing to its form.

How it chances that the Sea does neither overflow, augment, nor enlarge it
self.
THe cause why the Sea does not overflow, augment, nor enlarge it self,
though so much water is engendered in it, and that it does continually receive
so many Rivers and Fountains into it; is, that the Sea is the natural
receptacle of all the Waters, and their proper retiring and resting place, and
therefore it does not overflow, nor enlarge it self; for that no place can
drive back, nor hinder the entrance of that thing which by nature ought to be
in her, since naturally the place ought to conform it self unto that which it
incloseth; like as the Sea, which being capable to receive into her all the
Rivers, and nevertheless for their entrance does not overflow, nor augment.
Also the Sea does not overflow, because it is of such a vast extent, that the
Rivers are as nothing in consideration to it. The third reason is, because that
the heat of the Sun, and the breath of the Wind, consumes such a quantity of
Water, that though the Sea continually engenders, and that the Rivers
incessantly run into it; yea God has ordained, that it should not lessen, nor
augment, as it is written in Job, Lord, thou have set a limit, the which it
shall not pass. The holy Writ says in Genesis, that the water of the Deluge,
did rise fifteen Cubits over the highest Hills under the Heavens, insomuch that
all the Earth was covered with water. But though this increasing of water was
so great, yet nevertheless the Sea did not overflow the Earth, by
transgressing its limits or bounds.

The increasing of those Waters proceeded from two causes; the one was, that
the windows of Heaven were opened, as the Text says, and it rained on the
earth forty days, and forty nights exceedingly; the other was, that the
Fountains, Rivers, and Currents did overflow, insomuch that the earth was by
them covered, as aforesaid, and every living substance was destroyed which was
upon the face of the ground, except Noah, who only remained alive, and they
that were with him in the Arc; and afterward the same Text says, that God
caused a wind to pass over the earth, which abated the waters; the rain from
Heaven was also restrained, and the earth returned to its first being.

Of the antiquity of Navigation.
GOd the Creator of the universal World, did ordain the making of the first
Vessel, as it is written in the sixth Chapter of Genesis, that God commanded
Noah to make an Arc of Gopher wood, and to pitch it within, and without with
pitch; the length of the Arc was of three hundred cubits, the breadth of it
fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.

The Lydians were the first inventers of Ships, but their skill only extended
it self to join one beam to another well nailed, and well caulked, with
which they ventured to Sea; afterward Epaminondas did set forth Vessels in a
greater perfection to sail withal, so that the famous Captain Bias was seen
in the Peloponensian War, both with Ships, Charricks, and Galleys.

Solomon King of Jerusalem, sent two Ships into Tharsis, which both went and
returned each third year, and brought Gold, Silver, Ivory, and diverse other
things.

Julius Solinus says, that all the Meridian Sea which embraces Africa, was
sailed about from the Indies to Spain.

Pliny writes in his second Book, the threescore and seventh Chapter, that in
his time all the circuit of Spain and France was sailed about, and likewise
all the West.

Before Plato's time, there were Vessels that sailed from the Isle of Cadiz,
which is at the entry of the Straits of Gibraltar, to the East Indies.

When Tiberius Caesar did govern the Empire, there were seen in the Arabian
Sea, ensigns of Vessels floating, which the Spaniards had lost.

In the time of Augustus Caesar, the greatest part of the Ocean Sea was sailed
through.

When Seleucus and Antiochus did reign, all the coast of the Caspian Sea was
sailed through, and known by the Macedonian Armies.

The King of Switzerland gave to Metellus some Indians, which sailing with
Merchandises, were driven by a Tempest from their Country to Germany.

In the time of the Teutonicall Emperors, there were East Indian Ambassadors
found on the German coast, which were driven thither by the violence of the
wind.

Some Authors write of great numbers and multitude of Ships which were in
ancient times, as those of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, etc.

Homer writes, that the Grecian Navy which came to Troy, consisted of one
thousand, one hundred, and fourscore Ships.

Xerxes King of Persia, came with five thousand, five hundred Ships, seven
hundred thousand men, and three hundred thousand of his friends and allies, to
the destruction of Greece, and being come to the Pontick Sea, he made a Bridge
of Ships over it, on the which he passed with his Army.

The use of Navigation
IS chiefly to descry the dangers which are by the way, as Rocks, Sands, and
such other like impediments, and to know how to avoid them: How far the places
are distant, what wind or point of the Compass serves to fail unto them; and
also when the winds fall out cross by the way, to consider how to direct the
Vessel, and to take the most advantageous course to attain unto the intended
Port in a convenient time. And if any storms happen by the way, to endeavor
the preservation of both Ship and goods, and to bring her safe unto the Port
assigned.

How to foresee Storms by the Signs of the Sun and Moon.
Several storms, both at high winds, and troubled raging Seas, often fall
out, whereby both the loss of ships, and peril of the Sea men's lives are
threatened, and other eminent dangers: We will declare by what signs they may
be foreseen; and first by observations on the Sun.

At the sun rising, if you perceive before it reddish Clouds, and that they
drive, some toward the North, and some toward the South, signifies winds and
great Raines.

If before the sun rising, you see some round clouds hover about it,
withdrawing toward the South after that the Sun is risen, it signifies great
cold, but if they do withdraw toward the Sun setting, they signify fair
weather.

When the Sun spreads its beams far through the Air, and that there seems to
be some hollownesse in it, near the middle of the Sun, that signifies Rain.

When ere the Sun rises, its beams are perceived, that signifies Raines, and
Winds.

When the Sun sets having its circle white, that signifies storms for the
night ensuing.

When the Sun is fair and clear, without casting any extraordinary heates at
its rising, that signifies a fair and clear day, If it seems to be yellow,
it then signifies rain and Hail.

Several signs by the Moon.
THe Egyptians observe the fourth day of the Moon, and if then she is
resplendent with a clear light, they infer then, that it signifies fair
weather.

That when the Moon is red, it then signifies winds.

That when she is brown, and darkened; it then signifies rain.

When at the Full Moon it is clear and bright in the middle; they say then
that it signifies Fair weather.

When at the Full Moon it has a Circle about it, Its then a sign, that the
wind will proceed from that part where she is most resplendent.

At the New Moon, and that her Horns are thick and dusky, that signifies a
storm.

If at the eleventh day of the Moons age, she appears with a flamy color, it
then signifies storms.

Certiane other signs by which storms at Sea are usually forefeene.
WHen from the top of woods or forests, a noise of wind is heard, and that
those who are out of the wood feel no wind, it signifies infallibly, a great
ensuing storm.

When the sea being calm, is heard to murmr within it self, it signifies
that great winds are toward.

When the Dolphins show themselves, and play above the waves, it is the sign of
an ensuing storm, which you must expect from that part whence the Dolphin first
appeared.

When the Sea Meews fly landward, and abandon the Sea, it is the sign of a
storm.

When the Rainbow appears in the South, it signifies great showers: Appearing
toward the West, its only a sign of Dew or Mists.

But being seen in the East, it is a sign of fair and clear weather.

What the wind is, its qualities, and how its engendered.
THe wind is an evaporation of the Earth, which asscends above the Air, whose
vapor is hot and dry, and the which pierces the Air by its subtilty, for as
the wind in its species is of a subtle vapor, and that the Nature of subtle
things is to ascend, therefore its ascents are made by the subtle vapors of
the Earth, from whence it is driven back again about the Earth, by the
coldness of the middlemost Regions air.

So that the Offspring and motion of the wind, proceeds from above, and its
matter from beneath.

At the beginning the winds have no great force, but the farther they blow, the
more they increase in strength, because of the new exhalations which are
mingled with them: As it happens in Floods, which though but little in their
births, yet do augment and continually increase by the reception of new
additionall waters.

When two contrary winds meet, the weakest always yields unto the strongest,
and this makes a whirlwind, which causes the loss of Ships, when they chance
to be under the power of such a Whirlwind.

The exhalations of which the winds are made, do not on the sudden yield to
the Clouds which they meet with in the Air; but strive to overcome them, and
so to force their passage for their ascent: and so it happens that ere they
blow here beneath; we see the Clouds above move, by the agitation of the winds.

And because the winds are composed of different matters, and qualities, to
those which form the Rain, they cannot last long together, but always
struggle and strive until they have overcome each other. And Rain most
commonly gets the better, unless the wind be provided with a great quantity of
matter and substance.

Nor can the winds maintain it self against the vehemence of extreme heats,
nor against the rigor of extreme cold: because the vehemence of heat
disperses, and dissipates it, and the rigor of the cold congeales and closes
it up with the Clouds, and afterward reduces it into Rain.

The Divine providence of God, in the creation and disposition of the winds, is
worthy to be admired; not because the ambition of men have made thereof an
Instrument, and scourge to ruin themselves, by abusing thereof, as most men
do, most imprudently, and vainly: As Xerxes King of Persia did; who though he
passed the Seas to go to Greece; yet could he not vanquish it, though he had in
a manner covered it with Soldiers.

So Alexander: who having passed the Indies, yet would have searched for
something more, even beyond the great Sea, and it greived him to hear that he
was at the worlds ends

But as for the incomprehensible bounty of God, who has disposed of the winds
into so many parts, for the preservation of the Earth, and Air in a sweet
temperance, for the bringing in of Raines, and afterward the driving of them
back, both for the nourishing of Fruits, Seeds, and all fruit Trees, which by
the agitation of the winds, and other causes, are ripened, giving likewise
nourishment to the Corn, which it ripens, and preserves from drying and
withering. Useful likewise to Man, toward the discovery of Foreign parts,
and remote Countries, unto which unless a man should travel, he should be
far more ignorant then many brute beasts, wanting the experience of diverse
things, which conduce toward the bettering of his understanding, etc.

The End of the first Lecture, concerning NAVIGATION.

