VINDICIAE VINDICIARVM: OR, A Vindication of his Vindication of
Infant Baptism, from the Exceptions of M. Harrison, in his Poedo-baptisme
oppugned, and from the Exceptions of M. Tombs, in his chief digressions of his
late Apology, from the manner to the matter of his Treatises.

By Io. Geree M. of Arts, and Preacher of the Word in S. Albanes.

ACTS 2.39. The promise is to you, and to your children.

Quod universa tenet Ecclefia, nee concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum
est; non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Aug. lib. 4.
contra Don. cap. 24.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

To the Worshipful the Major and Burgesses of St Albanes, with the rest of my
worthy and loving Auditors there, grace and peace.
My loving friends,
WHat S. James so long since asserted, that the experience of our times has
confirmed: Where strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3.16.
Amongst other evils to which our divisions have been the midwife, corrupt
opinions have been one most eminent, and amongst them, that which opposes the
birthright of Christian Infants to the Covenant, and seal of initiation, has
been broacht with that confidence, as though the abettours bad hope, that that
leaven would leaven the whole lump.

Not long after my coming to you, there was a book set forth by an ancient
friend of mine, which because it was adorned with much art and reading (things
formerly rare to be found in the writers for that opinion,) there was almost as
much triumph in it, as sometimes by the Philistines in their Goliath. And to say
the truth, the camp of Israel was not a little moved with it. Whereupon my self
(as having more leisure then many abler) was called upon by diverse friends to
stand up in the defense of truth. And others with my self quickly made it
appear, that the Author in whom there was so much triumph, had rather put a
better face on, then added any great strength to that error. For all the
arguments brought by him, save those that are ordinary in every
Anti-paedobaptists mouth, were easily enough, and utterly quasht. The
vindication of Infant Baptism which I first put forth: was partly
Cataskeuasticall to confirm the truth, partly Anaskeuasticall to refell the
objections of the adversary, My learned opponent has not yet published an
answer to either, only in an Apology for the manner of his writing, tanquam
canis ad Nilum, he has here and there given a little touch about the matter.
But a neighbor Minister has attempted the oppugnation of these six arguments,
which I made good for confirmation of Infant Baptism. His exceptions I here
refute, together with what M. Tombs has inserted material in his Apology.
And this Vindication of my former labor, I thought good to present to you.
That if providence should hereafter otherways dispose of me, this may remain
as a testimony of my thankfulness to God and you. That with you in the time
of Englands distraction, I found an haven of rest, with good help to a
comfortable subsistence. And that by it you may be the better guarded against
the Sophismes of those, that cease not to labor to draw Disciples after them.

The opposition that is made to truth, is to the conscientious lovers of it, an
affliction that is grievous. Therefore to make some spiritual use of it, is
not only a duty we owe to God, but a privilege, which we our selves have need
of to sweeten the bitterness of the cross: for a cross never seems
intolerable, after we find it medicinable. There be two special uses that may
and ought to arise from the controversy in hand.

First, to see further into the grounds of, and to be more settled in the truth.
The questioning of a good title, though it make it not more firm, yet usually
it renders it more clear, because the grounds of its firmitud^, are by search
found out and laid open. And so has it been, and so ought to be with us of
this present age, in this spiritual title of Christian Infants. And if any new
grounds or arguments be added to clear an ancient practice; In vain, and
unjustly is that pretended to disparage the antiquity of the thing, which is
vouchsafed of God as a fruit of the industry of his servants, whereof the
opposition of the erroneous is sanctified of God to be an occasion?

2. A second use of the opposition of truth should be. That as we hold the
right more firmly, so we should use it more holily, to cut off occasion from
those that seek occasion. Antipadobaptists do more oppose the use, by occasion
of the abuses of Infant Baptism. Were it performed with that holiness and
solemnity, that it ought, it would carry more beauty with it, and have less
opposition against it. We should therefore study by the opposition and
vindication of truth, to be excited to, and helped in an holy and honorable use
of that privilege for our children. The more the grounds and nature of
Infant Baptism are cleared, the better may we be enabled to use it in faith.
The more may we be moved to consider the woeful condition of our Infants, as
they are from us, and we from Adam; and so humble our selves the more, for that
corrnption, that is inharent in us, and propagated from us. The more may we see
necessity of virtue to flow from Christ to ours, to restore them to the favor,
and Image of God: and so to have this ordinance (of which only in infancy they
are capable) sanctified to them, which works not naturally by the deed done,
but morally by virtue of Gods blessing, which is to be procured by prayer. This
would not only quicken parents to cry for a blessing on this Ordinance to their
Infants: but engage them to choose the time of most solemn Assemblies for it,
when having the most and best prayers, they may more comfortably expect the
blessing of God on it. But I would not exceed the limits of an Epistle;
Therefore with my daily prayers, that God would bless this and my other
labors to you, and glorify his Word among you. I am

Yours in all Christian affection and service, JO. GEREE.
From my Study at S. Albanes, October. 14. 1646.
The Preface.
CHRISTIAN READER,
HAving some months since published a defense of Infant Baptism, by way of
answer to a Divine of note; It not long since met with an answer from an
obscurer Author: to which I presently drew a reply; But hearing a rumor of an
answer in the press by M. Tombs, which was expected to be of greater
strength; I withheld my hand from publishing my answer to the first: that I
might, if I saw cause, answer both together. But when M. Tombs his book came
forth, I found it for the most part an apology for the manner of his writing,
not a defense of the matter: and that chiefly against exceptions taken by M.
Marshall. And for the defense of the matter, that is promised, not yet
performed. I therefore thought it convenient to forbear the publication of my
reply to M. Harrison no longer: because he is a neighbor, and a great Leader
of the people.
Demagogue: lest by delay of my reply, the Author (as the disposition of such
persons is) take advantage to harden his proselytes in error, and reduce more.

VINDICIAE VINDICIARVM: OR, A Vindication of his Vindication of
Infant Baptism, from the exceptions of Mr Harrison, in his Poedo-baptisme
oppugned, etc.
CHAP. I.
Mr Harrisons Epistle to his Poedo-baptisme impugned, examined.

IN M. Harrisons book there is an Epistle prefixed to the Reader, wherein some
things deserve and need animadversion. For first he shows his confidence of a
thing as certain, whereof by his leave, he neither has nor does produce
certain ground, viz. That the end of the last times, 1 Cor. 10.11. are even at
our doort: for, for that prophecy, 2 These. 2.8. He that shall deny its
accomplishment in part in Luthers days, and so on, shall not only be
injurious to our worthies, but oppose manifest truth: and how long the
complement of it may be delayed now, Scriptures discover not so clearly, as to
give ground confidently to determine it.

From his assertion he infers a double duty. 1. To depart out of Babylon: which
is indeed a duty pertinent to all, since the first discovery of Antichrist: and
the more fully Babylon is laid open, and the nearer she is to her fall, the
more careful should we be to depart from her. But his proof from Joh. 4.24. is
ill applied, as well as weakly expounded. Since the scope of that place is not
against the traditions of men, but against the pomp and shadows of the law,
which had their rise from God, till Heb 9.10.
times of Reformation. Which being then at hand, Christ told the woman of
Samaria: That Christians were to perform worship spiritual without pomp, and
in truth without shadows.

His second duty inferd is, to impart to others what knowledge we have
received: which is also a Christian duty, so we take heed, that we communicate
not our own dreams for the visions of God. To the first of these duties (he
says) so far as through grace he had received, his spirit has freely
submitted without consulting with flesh and blood, (The too ordinary
hindrances to persons living by faith, etc. Wherein while he seems to declare
(that I say not boast) great integrity. I fear he does bewray no small
infirmity: for if in that expression of submitting without consulting with
flesh and blood, he, (as I conceive he does) allude to that of Paul, Gal. 1.16.
he dangerously misapplyeth that to himself, as a common duty, which was a thing
peculiar to the condition of S. Paul himself. Who in that chapter, afferting
the authority of his doctrine, affirms, that he had it not by the ministry of
man, but by immediate revelation, Gal. 1.11, 12, 15, 16. And so not conferring
with flesh and blood: (i.e. with any man to receive instruction from them) He
went into Arabia to preach, etc. Now hence for ordinary men, that receive
knowledge of truths by means, to avoid consultation with those men, that are
their superiors in grace and years, and run on in divulging novell opinions
upon their own heads, (a thing too common now adays) what is it but a plain
abuse of S. Paul's peculiar privilege, who having immediate revelation, was
without need of consultation with men, which we are not?

To the second duty mentioned, he makes this book a branch of his abedience,
submitting it to the balance of the Sanctuary, wherein if it be found too
light, he desires the reader to inform him. And that is the work that by Gods
assistance I shall now perform.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the 4. things premised, Chap. 1. Sect. 1. of my vindiciae, are
vindicated from Mr Harrisons exceptions.

MAster Harrisons Answer begins first with exceptions, against four things
premised by me in my vindiciae. The first whereof was, that a thing may have
testimony of Scripture for it two ways, implicitly, or expressly: this he
freely grants, page 1. The second was, that there is great difference between
an ordinance it self, and some particular circumstance or subject, to which
that ordinance is to be applied. Touching this second, he affirms there is
somewhat in it true, somewhat false: He confesses that is true, that there is
difference between an Ordinance, and some particular circumstance of it: But he
denies that the subject of Baptism is merely, or in any Scripture-sence
circumstantiall to it. Wherein he has first foysted in the word merely, to
wrest the sense of my words, to countenance his confutation. Secondly he adds
in a Scripture sense circumstantiall, as though this term circumstance were a
Scripture phrase, whereas it is a term of art. not used or defined in Scripture,
and so his expression of circumstantiall in a Scripture sense is improper,
unlearned, and absurd. Then for proof he gives the definition of a
circumstance, to be that which does not of it self destroy, or constitute the
substance of that whereof it is a circumstance. But this definition I deny,
unless he put in his own foysted word mere, or accidental: a mere
circumstance. For who ever doubted to call the person acting in any thing a
circumstance, as well as time and place? nay the person is the first in that
old verse, comprising several circumstances.

Quis, Quid, Vbi, Quibus auxiliss, Cur, Quomodo, Quando. Now in Baptism there
be two persons considerable: the person administering, and the person to whom
the administration is to be applied. Both these may properly be termed
circumstances, considerable in or about the action or Ordinance of Baptism;
Though the nature of the Ordinance be mard without them. And yet I say it is
not necessary, that the whole extent of either of these circumstances must be
expressed. Anabaptists must acknowledge it, touching the person administering; or
else Baptism by women, and men not in office, used by some of them, (wherein
they symbolize with Papists in the thing, though not in the ground) must be
left by them as an unwritten corruption. And I undertake to prove it in the
other. And that I meant a circumstance, in this sense he might easily have
perceived. First because I add, or a subject exegetice. And secondly because I
require for it implicit warrant out of Scripture, where as mere circumstances
of time and place require not ground of Scripture: the light of nature and
divine prudence, is sufficient to regulate them. And therefore what he has
discourst about circumstances, page 2. is false or misapplyed.

I added as for the Ordinance it self, as the setring up of Baptism as a
Sacrament of the Gospel Covenant, renewed by Christ. It requires express
warrant in the word, which I set down against Bellarmine maintaining the
contrary, lib. de saer. not. and defin. q. 2. Wherein my meaning is: That
Christians might not have made use of water, to sign parties to be initiated
into the Christian Church, as circumcision was in use in the Jewisn Church,
without express warrant from Scripture. But in deciding the extent of the
circumstance of the person or subject to be initiated under the Gospel; there
implicit warrant may suffice: for of the more weight and importance any thing
is, the more clear warrant are we to expect for it. Now the being of an
Ordinance in the Church is of more consequence, then a part of that subject to
which it is to be applied. And therefore his discourse about John the Baptist,
and page 2. is here uslesse, as in it self it is to me nonsense. Neither did I
add in vain: That when we have Baptism appointed as a Gospel Ordinance, to
whomsoever we find by ground in Scripture, that it does of right belong, there
we may apply it. This I say is not vain, unless he can p^ove it false, which
he therefore endeavors, page 3. Where he says by grounds and principles in
Scriptures, I mean such as are taken out of the old Testament. But he might
have remembered that of all the six grounds, brought by me to clear the title of
believers Infants to Baptism: only one of them is fetched out of the old
Testament, the other five are out of the New. Therefore I cannot mean only,
nor chiefly, grounds out of the old Testament: that was therefore but a fetch,
to put an ill gloss upon a good position; but I say indeed afterward, That
the Scriptures of the new Testament have a sufficieny to direct in Gospel
Ordinances, yet not without taking in some grounds and principles from the old
Testament, which M. Tombs acknowledges in the Christian Sabbath: but for
this, M. H. is confident to make me of another mind. But sure his confidence
does exceed his skill. But says he, this position is so derogatory from the
Kingly, and Prophetical office of Christ, page 3. But I would know of him
whether Christ were not a King and a Prophet to the Jewish, as well as to
Christian Churches? And whether that instruction that the Church had by penmen
of Scriptures under the old Testement, were not by virtue of Christ's mediation,
as well as that under the new? And if so, what derogation is it from Christ, to
take in some grounds out of the old Testament, since these former revelations
were from him also? And is not Christ a perfect lawgiver, if he add to the
Scriptures of the old Testament, so much as Gospel-administration does require?
Do the Scriptures of the new Testament give sufficient direction about usur^,
incest, etc. without taking in something from the Scriptures of the old? It is
therefore sufficient to make Christ a perfect Lawgiver, and as faithful as
Moses; that he has added in the Scriptures of the new Testament, whatsoever
was needful to be added, to his own revelations in the Scriptures under the
Old. And if he affirm that Christ cannot be accounted a perfect Law giver and
Prophet, or faithful as Moses, Unless all commands and Ordinances that
concern Christians, be as fully and plainly expressed in Scripture of the new
Testament, without any light from the Old, as the Ordinances of the Jews were
by Moses: Surely he will be found the accuser of Christ, not I. For, were the
pattern of the Gospel as full and plain as that of the Law, I say not, how
should the Assembly of Divines be so long in finding it? But how should those,
(that it may be you more respect) be so backward to give in their model? Sure
it would neither have required much time nor pains, to have given a model of
Leviticall Ordinances, order and Descipline. And therefore let M. Har. take
heed, lest by inconsiderate speaking for Christ, he lay down false grounds to
condemn him.

For proof of my assertion. That we must take in some ground, from the
Scriptures of the old Testament, for our direction in the use of
^ospel-ordinances. I instance in the Christian Sabbath, where M. Tombs
confesses it. page 28. He answers, he finds no such thing in that page of M.
Tombs his book. But (I say) it is for want of sight: for does not M. Tombs
distinguish there of Gospel worships or Ordinances, that some are positive
only, consisting in outward rites, and others are in part moral? And in these
later, they allow an institution, or command in the old Testament, as
obligatory to Christians. Is not this the thing which I affirmed? But now let
us see M. Har. plaster: He says it makes nothing for the purpose, whether we
consider a rule for one day in seven, which is natural and moral, instituted
in paradise. Where first he speaks unscholarly: natural, instituted in
Paradise: for natural and instituted worship, are two opposite things; If
natural, then it was not instituted: If instituted, then not natural. The
truth is, there is a double moral, 1. Natura. 2. Ex instituto. That time be
set apart for the Worship of God, is moral by nature; But that such a
proportion of time, as one day in seven be consecrated to God, that is moral
by institution, being instituted in Paradise, before sin or ceremony. But how
could we have known this institution, but by Moses his relation? So then we
could not know, that it is an Ordinance of the Gospel, to observe one of seven
holy unto the Lord, without that Ministry performed by Moses. Again, it being a
Cospel ordinance, that every first day of the week be kept holy to the Lord; I
would fain know of M. Harrison, where he can find direction for the manner of
fanctifying this day, without recourse to the old Testament? If not, I have
proved what I intended, that for direction in some Gospel ordinances, we are to
fetch light from the old Pestament.

My second instance is in excommunication, for which we have express warrant:
yet some circumstances, as, who may apply it, and to whom, are not so exoresse:
but they are colligeable from general grounds of Scripture. Here M. Harrison
says, page 5. He knows not what I mean by [so expresse] But he might know
that I am by this instance making it good, that express warrant in Scripture
is not requisite in all particular circumstances of Gospel ordinances, but
implicit from general grounds, may serve in some: herein paralleling
excommunication with Baptism, in the subject or persons to whom they are to be
applied. But he says, be shall easily prove, that Christ has left direction
sufficient for this particular, without sending us to Moses; He should have
said without sending us to the Scriptures of the old Testament, or rather have
expressed neither here, where indeed the question is only, whether Christ's
direction for the persons excommunicating, and to be excommunicated be
explicit? which if he can easily prove, notwithstanding the difference of men
so learned and godly about them, its pity he had not been Prolocutour of the
Assembly. But for the persons in whom the authority of convening, examining,
judging, admonishing, and excommunicating resides: our Savior, says he, has
determined to be, Disciples as Disciples. Why then are women to do all this,
sure they cannot do this without speaking, which is not permitted to them in
the Church: yet M. H. will not deny women to be Disciples. For the person to
declare it, (says he) it must be him whom the Chruch shall elect, as he says
appears from, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are
gathered together, and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ: To
deliver such an one to Satan. And now what express testimony is here for the
person declaring? Just none at all, yea indeed that one person declare the
sentence in the name of the rest, is an act of order, to which we are led by
the light of nature to avoid confusion.

For the persons to be excommunicated he finds, he says, two sorts. 1.
Persons after admonition persisting in scandalous sin; But first he must know
that we read of no admonition, appointed to be used to the incestuous person,
whence some gather, that some sins are so gross, that they deserve
excommunicanon ipso facto. Secondly he should remember the difference that is
about enumerating scandalous sins, and how that is to be determined by way of
collection. Secondly he adds such as after pains taken with them, to convince
them, persist peremptory, in holding and maintaining Haeresies Tit. 3.10.
(...) i.e. Qui novas sibi eligit opiniones, cum sundamento salutis pugnantes,
easque mordicus defendit. Pasor Graec.: Lexic. Now M. Har. can be content to
consult with flesh and blood, when he thinks it makes for him: for he brings a
sentence out of Pasor, where, says he, observe, etc. As though his
observations were out of the text, when they are but out of Pasers exposition.
I thought he would not have grounded his followers faith, on man's authority.
But what are his observations? 1. They must be fundamental errors: but as
Zanch. in 4. praecep.
able men as Pasor distinguish haeresies into such as are fundamental, and
such as are not fundamental. 2. They must be obstinately asserted. That is,
after the first and second admonition. 3. They must appear to arise from
choice, not weakness: but this is a weak observation: as though, what were of
weakness could not be of choice; Whereas many choose many things out of
weakness, and therefore this was but a poor collection, to exempt from censure
the grossest haereticks, Arrians, Antiscripturists, etc. If they hold these
damnable Haeresies, unless forsooth it appear they do it out of pravity of
heart and affection, they shall not be obnoxious to excommunication. That is,
they shall not enjoy that remedy to cure their infirmities. Is this sound
Divinity?

Thus I have cleared my second thing, premised from his exceptions. But I must
now a little look back, and take notice of some passages, not only false but
foul, that have slipped from M. H. page 3. Where he tells us, that the writings
of Moses and the Prophets, were as their Covenant was, at least the
administrations of their Covenant, faulty, imperfect at the best, abstracted
from the writings and administrations of the new Covenant. Were the writings of
Moses and the Prophets faulty and imperfect, without the writings and
administrations of the new Testament? Then they were so till the new Testament
was written, and the administration of it instituted. And what is this, but to
exclude all under the old Testament, from complete means of salvation, and so
from salvation it self: which how false, horrid, uncharitable, and popish is
it? Popish I say, for if this be true, the Saints of the old Testament could
not enter into bliss, till Christ were exh bited, and so must be imagined to
be in some limbo. Nay how apparently contradictory is his assertion, to many
dictates of the holy Ghost? Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect
converting the soul. Prove. 30.5. Psalm. 12.6. Every word of God is pure. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, etc, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost; and can these writings be faulty? Is not this to
charge the holy Ghost foolishly? which is no less then blasphemy. He says
also, that it could not be said of Moses, thou have the words of aternall life,
as of Christ, Joh. 6.68. I confess the Lord has somewhat peculiar above the
servant. But were not the Scriptures of the old Testament the words of life,
yea of eternal life? what then became of those that had no other means of
salvation, or what thinks he of that Spirit of our Savior John. 5.39? But M.
H. urges Heb. 8. 8, 9. where finding fault with them he said, behold the days
come says the Lord, when I will make a new Covenant with the house of Judah,
not according to the Covenant, etc. But the Covenant there faulted, is the
Covenant of works, the condition whereof, was the Law given on mount Sinai,
which typified the Covenant of works, Gal. 4 24. But had the Jews no other
Covenant thinks he, but that? Had they not promises and tipes holding forth
Christ? Had not Abraham the Gospel preached to him? Gal. 3 8. Did not Moses
know and suffer for Christ? Heb. 11.26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches: M. H. should therefore have considered, that not all that was
revealed by Moses and the Prophets was faulted, but the Covenant of works only.
They had the Cnvenant of grace also, which God promised at the exhibition of
Christ, to reveal more clearly, and dispense the grace of it more plentifully:
and this M. H. might learn, if he were as willing to receive instruction from
expositours on such places as this, as he was from Pasor, on Tit. 3.10.

My third thing premised, was to take the state of the question as M. Martial
stated it; In which M. H. r. says, he shall freely join issue. Though he
says, that it is a strange fallacy of the times to Baptize all infants, and to
undertake the defense of Baptizing some only: Nay, afterward he says, I
Baptize more then I am able to make good. But the truth is the stating of the
question, touching children of believers, is neither a fallacy, nor flows it
from disability, but to distinguish controversies, and facilitate the dispute:
for he knows well enough, that these are distinct disputes, whether children
of any believers are to be Baptized? and what profession of faith does make a
man so to be reputed a believer, as to convey this privilege to his children?
And the former controversy being ended, this later may have its due place: and
therefore what M. H. dictates here about fallacy or disability, is indeed
fallacious adfaciendum populum.

My fourth thing premised, that I must have liberty to choose and order mine own
weapons. M. Har. count^reasonable, and after sets down his purpose and method,
to answer me only in his own way, without reference to M. Tombs, whom he hints
to have a peculiar way of maintaining his tenent, and then that he will set
down the substance of each argument with its confirmation, and so answer it;
But I doubt he will be found more fair in promise, then in performance: but to
the trial.

CHAP. III.
Wherein my first ground for Infant Baptism, from Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Act
2.39. is cleared from M. Harrisons exceptions.

MY first ground for Infant Baptism was drawn from Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Act.
2.39. Whence he proposes the sum of the argument thus; To whom the Gospel
Covenant is extended in the Churches of Christians, to them the Sacrament of
initiation, appointed for that administration of the Covenant, ( viz. Bapt sme)
does belong, Act. 10 47. But to Infants of believing parents, the Gospel
Covenant is extended in the Churches of Christ, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Act.
2.39. This says M. H. is the sum, and what is further alleged in reference to
M. Tombs his assertions, that he says he will leave to M. Tombs to make
good. But M. H. should have taken notice of those things brought for
confirmation of this argument, that concern not M. Tombs in particular, but
all opponents in general, as what I deliver at large for the sense of that
place, Genesis 17.7. page 10, 11, 13, 14. Wherein I explain and confirm our sense
of childrens being in Covenant with their patents, which he has unfairly
passed by without taking notice of: but I will consider his answer which he
gives in diverse particulars.

First says he, I know of no Gospel Covenant, but that spoken of, Jer. 31.31.
Quoted by the Apostle, Heb. 10.16,17. But first what thinks he of that? Genesis
12.3. In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. And the places
cited by me, do not they speak of a Gospel Covenant at first? Genesis 17.7. I
will be they God, and the God of thy seed: Is not that a Gospel Covenant? No,
says M. H. page 8. There is nothing from the 6. to the 15. ver. of Genesis 17. of
a Gospel Covenant: but only apromise of Canaan to Abraham and his fleshly seed,
and a duty to be circumcised, as a token of that fleshly Covenant to be
submitted to on Abraham's part, and his fleshly seed. But is this confident
assertion true? Is not, I will be thy God, a Gosp^l-Covenant? Are they not the
same words which the Prophet uses in expressing the Gospel Covenant? Jer.
31.33. I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Again, is not the
Covenant with Abraham? ver. 7. the same with that, ver. 4. of the same, Genesis
17. and that a Gospel Covenant by the verdict of the holy Ghost? Gal. 3.8. As
Ames answers Bellarmine disputing just against all Protestants, as M. H. does
against me. Legimus Deum, etc. We read says Bellar. de sacr. essectu, Lib. ^.
cap. 17.
Bellarmine, that God when he injoined circumcision to Abraham, did promise
only earthly things, i.e. propagation of posterity, and the land of Palestine.
And again. Ibid.
Ero Deus tuus: I will be thy God, holds forth, says Bellarmine, only a
promise of peculiar protection. To whom Ames answers, proving from, Matthew.
22.32. I am the God of Abraham: And whence our Savior gathers the resurrection
to bliss, that in these words I will be thy God: there is a Gospel promise, or
Christ should have argue ^^ ut sillily from it. Again, is circumcision only a
token of a fleshly Covenant? How does M. Har. again join with Papists against
Protestants, nay the worst of Papists? for many Papists acknowledge
circumcision to be a seal of grace, but Bellarmine denies it of circumcision,
Bell. lib. 2. de essecta Sa^r cap. 13.
and all other Sacraments of the Jews, with whom M. Har. joins, in making
circumcision in the institution of it, only a token of a fleshly Covenant. Is
this to come out of Babylon, thus to side with Papists against Protestants in
the doctrine of the Sacrament? And how cross is this to the Apostle, making
circumcision a seal of the righteousness of faith? Romans 4.11. Yea, how plainly
does the Scriptures hint, that the circumcision of the flesh was the Sacrament,
sign or seal of the circumcision of the heart? See Deutronomy 30.6. Romans 2.28,
29. Col. 2.11.

Again, is nothing in Genesis 17. from ver. 6. to 15. spoken of, but only a
promise of Canaan to Abraham and his fleshly seed? etc. What thinks he of ver.
12, 13. where others then Abraham's fleshly seed were to be circumcised, which
had nothing to do with Canaan? And what says he of Ismael, to whom its
certain, the promise of Canaan did not belong? Its strange M. Har. will let
slip such gross things in a way, that he knows they will be scanned, and that
a man who in show is so against Popery, should broach so much of it, whether of
ignorance or choice, he best knows. Sure (me thinks) this should startle his
followers, to be misled into so apparent breach of their protestation, which is
to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery: yet here
and in other places following, they are taught to speak the language of Rome,
against the Protestant doctrine maintained in the Churches of England. But I
proceed: Neither were they, says M. Har. any otherways separated, but
externally, and typically. What, was there not still an election among the
Jews, that were separated internally as I showed page 11? Were not the Jews
separated to be Gods visible Church and kingdom, wherein the invisible Church
is contained as wheat and the chafe? and by their external separation were
they not accounted children, and partakers of all external Church privileges,
Romans 9.45. from which aliens were exempt and counted as dogs without? What is
more apparent in the face of the Scripture then these things? And is not thus
much held forth? Gal. 2.15. For was not a Jew then a name of Religion,
answering in that state of the Church to the name Christian now, as appears
plainly from Romans 2.28, 29? And are there not carnal and external Christians
now, as there were Jews then? as I have showed page 14. and you must confess,
unless you deny the Christian Church to harbor any hypocrites, or carnal
Christians contrary to daily experience, and diverse parables of our Savior
recorded, Mat. 13. These things I have proved in my Answer to M. Tombs, page
10, 11, 13, 14. And therefo^ to deny them without answer, and affirm the
contrary without proof, is very beggarly disputing.

Now let us see whether Deuteronomy. 30.6. be not a Gospel Covenant. Touching which M.
Har. first says, he never heard any account that a Gospel Covenant. But that
may be, because perhaps he accounts reading or consulting learned Divines,
consulting with flesh and blood, and so shuns it.

2. He says, If I had read over the first and second verses, and observed the
condition, I would have known it to be a branch of the Covenant made upon mount
Sinai. But I tell him more truly, that if he had considered the matter of the
promise, he might have seen clearly, that it is a Gospel promise, because it
imports renovation by Gods spirit, which Christ works on Christians, under, and
by virtue of the Gospel Covenant, Col. 2.10, 11, 12. Yea it imports the very
same thing with that in Jer. 31.33. which M. H. here confesses to be a Gospel
Covenant. Neither will his argument from the condition hinder, for he should
know that there was a double Covenant proposed to the Jews, as is apparent,
Gal. 4.17. the one of grace begun to Abraham, the other at mount Sinai 430
years after, and this later is styled by Divines, faedus subserviens, as he
might have learned from M. Tombs, page 102. A Covenant subservient to that of
grace, by discovering sin and misery, and so need of Christ, to draw or drive
us to him. So though God in the beginning speak after the phrase of the Law,
that was but to make way for the promise in the Gospel, which he adds in the
close above temporary blessings.

But now let us see what he says to Acts 2.39. He boldly affirms that the
promise to children is only with reference to calling, and so holds forth no
more privilege to a Christians, then to the child of a Turk. This is boldly
asserted, but with little proof, and with how little truth may thus appear:

1. The promise mentioned, must needs relate to some particular promise left
upon record in the Word, else Peter had spoken out of his own head, which the
Apostles neither did nor might do, Mat. 28.20. Act. 26.22.

2. The article (...), the promise, notes some eminent promise, and from the
scope of the Sermon, that promise is evident to be a branch of the Covenan^ of
grace.

3. That this promise did in a peculiar manner belong to the Jews, and to their
children. That is, they and their children were of those to whom the Covenant
did primarily belong, and to the Gentiles secondarily, when God should call
them according to that, Genesis 12.3. So then, the promise belonged to the Jews,
and to their children: They and their children were children of the Covenant in
act, and in regard of outward right, as it is, Act. 3.25, 26. To them pertained
the Adoption and the Covenants, Romans 9.4. And so shall the Gentiles when
called, as Zacheus, in joy the privileges of the children of Abraham. And thus
the Apostle laid before them a good ground of comfort, to find pardon upon
repentance, because by their present Church State, they and their children were
children of the Covenant, which God would make good, and upon repentance accept
them, so then, here is a privilege of children qua children, to be children of
the Covenant, (else they are to no purpose, nor with good sense here mentioned)
and that can be no other then to be faederati with their parents, which all
confess in some sense to be so under the old Testament, according to which
dispensation the Apostle there speaks.

But by the way, page, 7. M. Har. drops us a distinction; The Gospel Covenant,
says he, may be extended to persons visibly or invisibly; and he denies
Infants to be visibly within the Covenant. But I answer, if he mean by visibly,
knownly, or that which we know to be so by evidence of Scripture, then I say,
Infants are known to be within the Gospel Covenant with their parents, which I
have proved by those testimonies, that yet speak aloud for all his gag, which
was either too short, or too weak: but if by visible, be means that which is
known to the eye only: then his positions are false. For why should not any
demonstrations to reason, evidencing a persons being within Covenant; be as
good a ground for Baptism, as those that are ocular only? As for that which he
says, that Infants before Baptism, are not of the visible Church by
confession of all: Whence he would gather a contradiction in my words, page 7.
Its but a weak fancy, for all but Anabaptists acknowledge Infants of
Church Members to be of the visible Church in regard of right, and so the seal
may be challenged for them, as well as for those grown up that are converted,
to whom the Covenant belongs. Baptism being a seal to confirm that right,
which we are supposed to have, in and by the Covenant. And thus I have done
with M. Harrisons reply to my first argument.

CHAP. IIII.
Wherein the Argument for Infants Baptism from their being confederates with
their parents, is cleared from exceptions taken against it by M. Tombs in his
Apology, page 40. -- 47. and the expression of the directory vindicated.

BEfore I pass to the second argument, I shall think it needful to examine
some things published by M. Tombs in his late Apology, to puzzle this argument
drawn from those places that show children to be confederates with their
parents, page 40. to 47. Where M. Tombs affirms, that the argument which M.
Marshall, D. Homes, and M. Geree, being for Baptizing Infants, is either a
tautology, or equivocation; The proof he promises he eafter, when he shall
have liberty to examine their entangled discourses. Great words, but how just,
I shall show in my own particular, which will be a clearing of my brethren
also. Having page 10. produced the place, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations: for
an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee. To
find out the meaning of this place, I inquire first, what the privilege is?
Secondly, what the extent of it is? For the matter of the privilege I show out
of Calvin, that the Church was settled in Abraham's family, and the Israelites,
(Abraham's posterity) became the house, and sheepfold of God, and had the
privilege of adoption belonging to them in common, Romans 9.4. To whom pertained
the adoption: And so by a birth-priviledge they were severed from others, Gal.
2.15. we who are Jews by nature. But now among those that had this privilege
of common adoption to be reputed children; there were always to be some
separated by the secret election of God, made partakers of sanctifying, and
saving graces, and so really the children of God; In comparison of whom, the
other I sratlites are sometimes spoken of, as no sennes of Abraham, Romans 9.6,
7. though externally they were the children of the Kingdom, and in reference to
the Gentiles are so styled, Cant. 8.11, 12. So then, the privilege is, that he
would be a God to Abraham, and all the seed, in regard of external
denomination, and internal privileges of a visible Church, and to the elect
in regard of spiritual Adoption, grace and glory. After page 12. I examining
M. Tombs his exammation of M. Marshals second conclusion, which M. Tombs
desputes against as though it held forth, that all infants of believers, are so
in Covenant with their parents, as to have saving graces intayled on them:
which I say is not only against Protestants principles, but believed by M.
Tombs himself, not to be M. Marshals meaning from page 142. of his examen. And
then page 13. I plainly and distinctly lay open our meaning, when we say
children are in Covenant with their parents: That as it was with the people of
Israel by virtue of the Covenant made with Abraham: That the fathers with the
children became Gods visible Church, and so entitled to, and enjoyed the
visible privileges of adoption, oracles, seals, Romans 9 4, 5. And the elect
among them enjoyed the visible grace, which was to be presumed of all in
charity, till they discovered the contrary: So now we conceive that under the
Gospel, by virtue of the same Covenant, (into the participation of which
Christians are assumed) believers with their freedom ^ake up the visible
Kingdom of Christ, and enjoy outward Church Priviledges; And the elect among
them, enjoy those things in truth, which others only have externally, and in
profession. And this is to be presumed of all Infants of believers, till they
discover the contrary: And thus have they right to the seal of initiation. And
in this sense are you to take the passage quoted by you out of the Directory:
That the promise is to believers, and to their seed, etc. Thus were my
expressions in my vindiciae. Now I refer it to the judgment of the learned,
whether M. Tombs had any cause to complain for want of distinctnes in
expression, or whether he does deal ingenuously in taking part of my words? (
page 43. of his Apology) to make them found harsh and absurd, or had cause from
my words, to question whether making a Covenant were all one with a charitable
presumption; with such like groundles expressions, for want of solid matter of
confutation. Neither had be ground to say, that none would expound the words of
the Directory as I do, but he that would make men's words like a nose of wax:
if he take my exposition whole, as I have laid it down above; not lamely, as he
has unfairly represented it. For I conceive the expressions of the Directory,
were used with reference to the expressions of Scripture: Now the expressions
in Scripture, Genesis 17.7. Romans 9.4. to whom pertained the Covenants, Act. 3.25.
Yea are the children of the Covenant, must, and usually are expounded, as I
have expounded them. And then its no violent, but a charitable, yea a rational
interpretation of the words of the Directory, to give them that sense, which we
give to the places of Scripture whence they are drawn. The Covenant that the
Jews were under, none deny to be a Covenant of grace, and of a Covenant of
grace speak, Romans 9.4. Act. 3.25. and this Covenant being in these places
attributed to visible Churches, all were under the Covenant that is truly
styled a Covenant of grace; But all are not under it in the same sense, nor to
enjoy thereby privileges of the same quality: but some only externally, and
reputatively, and enjoy thereby external Church Priviledges, a name to be
sons, a name to live, Revel. 3.1. and others to enjoy inward graces really. And
therefore Infants of believers may be said to be under the Covenant of grace,
and yet no necessity to take it in that sense, that it is in regard of saving
graces. But in that sense as it would, and must have been taken, if it had been
uttered touching children of believing Jews, (when I think none would have
stumbled at it) that they are so under that Covenant, that is the Covenant of
grace, as to be reputed children, and to be accounted of Gods visible Church,
entitled to his seals and other external Church Priviledges. The Argument that
M. Tombs urges, to prove that the words of the Directory mean, that children
are so under the Covenant of grace, as to have a promise of saving grace. page
42. of his Apology, are as strong against the true, and necessary
interpretation of the Scriptures cited, therefore they be but mistakes. For
Genesis 17.7. is meant of natural seed, not soirituall only: and then God was in
one sense the God of Abraham, and in another the God of his seed, at least some
of them. M. Tombs confesses, page 76. of his Apology, that the same word is
used in diverse senses, Romans 11.17. and Joh. 15.2. so that the taking of one
word in diverse senses, in one and the same sentence need not so much offend
him. And the instruction for doctrine, and the instruction for petition may
well be thus accorded. That those to whom the Covenant of grace does externally
belong, for as they are reputed of the visible Church, and to have adoption
belonging to them, Rom 9.4. and so to have right to the seals, may by the
goodness of God in blessing his Ordinance, be really partakers of the saving
graces promised, and so enjoy the highest privilege of the Covenant of grace,
internally and really. But, says M. Tombs, the whole series of the direction
in the Directory carries the meaning thus, to wit, that the Covenant that
children are under, is the Covenant of saving grace.

I answer, Its true that the Covenant that belongs to children, is the Covenant
of grace, but so is the Covenant mentioned, Romans 9.4. Act. 3.25. But the query
is, in what sense, and in what respect they are said to be under this Covenant
of grace? that is no otherwise then Jewish children were, all to receive a
visible Church estate, to be of Christ's visible Kingdom: the elect to partake
of grace indeed. And therefore I see no cause why this part of the doctrine of
the Directory should cause disquiet to the Church of God: when the offense may
be removed by a fair interpretation: whereto good reason may lead us, and
charity bind us. I think with M. Tombs, that it is great honor to
acknowledge and amend errors that are indeed such. But this is an honor, that
I think few will conceive M. Tombs ambitious of, (not with banding his good
counsel to others) that shall read his Apology: wherein he shall scarce find
any acknowledgement of error in the manner of handling his controversy, though
I may boldly say, genera singulorum, if not singula generum (for he tells of
one in this Apology, page 16, that told him his sharpnes was useful) of such
as look into Books, judged him not a little faulty in the manner of prosecution
of this controversy with M. Marshal and others.

CHAP. V.
Wherein my second Argument for Infant. Baptism, from Romans 11.11, 12, 13, 17,
18. is cleared from M. Harrisons exceptions.

TOuching my second Argument drawn from Romans 11.11, etc. M. Harrison first
complains, that it is confused, not syllogisticall. Its rare for a man of his
quality, to complain for want of syllogismes, being usually they have the
better scope to evade. Then he examines my four principles laid down as the
ground of my argument thence.

First, That the Jews did once belong to God as his visible Church. This he
grants to be true externally: and that visible imports, for what is visible is
external; But why he adds typically I know not: if he mean it that they were
not so really, but a shadow of visible Churches under the Gospel, its
apparently false, if they were so really, though therein they were a type,
weakens not the edge of my principle at all.

Second principle, Though some elect among them, Ver. ^, 6. to 17.
(which were but a small remnant) obtained mercy, yet the body in general was
cut off, and cast out of the honor and relation, to be the people and kingdom
of God. This he grants.

Third principle, That the Believing Gentiles are received into the place of
the Jews cut of, and so taken into the fellowship of believing Jews, to partake
of their privileges, and to be Gods house and kingdom with them. This
pincheth, and here he adds qualifications.

1. That as all the fleshly seed of Abraham were with reference to Canaan,
externally the visible kingdom of God: so now all the spiritual seed of
Abraham with reference to the new Jerusalem, are spiritually the people of God,
and through profession of faith the visible kingdom of God, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.

But here first to let pass his expression, of visible kingdom with reference
to Canaan, and spiritually the people of God, with reference to the new
Jerusalem, which are new coined expressions, without warrant out of the Word:
as also his misapplication of 1 Pet. 2.5. to the visible kingdom, which
expressly note the spiritual house: to pass by these: I say, the verses
quoted by me, will make my principle good, for ver. 17. And if some of the
branches be broken off: and you being a wild Olive tree, were graffed in among
them, and with them partakest of the root and fatnes of the Olive tree, is
spoken to the body of the Gentiles, that visibly professed christianity, many of
which were but chafe with the wheat: how can he then say it constrains no
more, but that the spiritual seed are by profession the visible kingdom? Since
the chafe had the same external Church State with the wheat: that is, the
formal with the spiritual Christian. Its true that the spiritual seed by
profession of faith become the visible kingdom of God: but is it not as true
that among the Gentile, yea and Jewish Professors, there were many formalists,
yet they also were members of the visible kingdom with the spiritual seed?

His second qualification is, That as the Jews had right to their privileges
by birth, so now all the seed of Abraham, Jews and Gentiles, through faith,
have right to their privileges, not otherways. But this is a most false
assertion, for privileges of the seed of Abraham are either external, as to
be of Gods visible kingdom, and to have the outward seals, or internal, as
remission of sins, and the internal only they have by faith: the external
they have by profession of faith, as he himself confesses in regard of visible
Church State, here and elsewhere touching Baptism: now our dispute is about
external privileges, wherein his assertion is apparently, and by his own
principles, false.

Fourth principle, That the body of the Jews cast off, shall be graffed in
again, and enjoy their pristine honor to be the people of God, and the visible
kingdom of Christ, though not solely, yet as fully, nay more gloriously then
before, Hos. 1.10, 11. and Hos. 2.23. Romans 11.25.26. This he grants, but denies
the conclusions from it.

The conclusions are,

1. That when the Jews were in their first estate, their children were
comprehended in the Covenant with them. This first he grants, page 10. but
withsome addition, as they were a fleshly seed, they were in Covenant with
their parents: but this is a corrupt addition, for this makes the Covenant a
fleshly Covenant only, which is derogatory to it, and the Saints under the old
Testament.

2. Conclus. The Jews that obtained mercy kept their station, and so must needs
retain their privileges for them and theirs, ver. 17. That is, that they and
their children should continue the visible kingdom of God: Else a Jew should be
a loser in his seed, by the coming of Christ: for they that before were within,
should after be without, and denuded of that dignity which before they had.

3. Conclus. The believing Gentile succeeds the rejected Jews, and becomes one
visible kingdom with the Jews that kept their station, and so must enjoy their
privilege, to belong to God with their seed.

4. Conclus. The Jews called, recovering their pristine condition with
advantage, the promise will be extended to them, and to their seed, as Isa.
59.20. And so must it be with the seed of Christian Gentiles, else we make a
partition wall under the Gospel.

Now to the three last conclusions M. Har. answers together, by fained senses
which he knows I intend not, only to delude where he cannot answer: for why
should he inquire whether I mean by station, place and promise, Canaan and
circumcision, and other ceremonies, page 11. that were peculiar parts of the
Jewish administration? Whereas I have expressed their station, to be with their
seed the visible Church or kingdom of Christ, to whom pertains the adoption,
and to whom were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3.2. and to whom were
vouchsafed all other privileges of visible Church members. And such among them
as had the faith that they professed, enjoyed also the spiritual privileges of
remission of sins, and sanctification, etc. but not these only. And that the
Jews in part standing still, in part breaking of, and the Gentiles graffing in,
is meant of a visible Church State, to enjoy or loose visible privileges, in
becoming or ceasing to be of Gods visible Church, wherein the invisible is
comprehended, but not alone meant, may be evidently demonstrated.

1. The broken off only fell from being members of a visible Church, and lost
visible privileges only, Romans 11. God has not cast away his people which he
foreknew: for members of the invisible Church cannot fall away, they are built
upon the rock, against which the gates of hell cannot prevail: nor can their
peculiar privileges be lost? Such gifts of God are like the seed, 1 Pet. 1.23.
Immortal.

2. For the Jews that stood embracing the profession of Christ: many were but
carnal Christians, as appears in that the Churches received so much
disturbance from them, and so kept only outward Church Priviledges, not inward
graces.

3. The Gentiles admitted, were good and bad together, gathered by the draw-net
of the Gospel, who all were of Christ's visible kingdom, and admitted to outward
Church Priviledges, from which the former were fallen, but not all of them to
invisible graces: by all which it appears, how falsely M. Harrison affirms,
that here is nothing spoken or meant of outward birth privileges, and that all
is of such privileges as belong to the spiritual seed. Indeed there be
spiritual privileges belonging to the elect Christian, whether of Jews and
Gentiles, and so much the verses quoted by M. H. import, but that's not all, as
I have showed, neither should a Christian Infant only loose shadows, to be
expunged out of the visible Church or kingdom of Christ. Since they that are out
of that pale, are visibly without God, and without hope: a sad condition to put
Infants into, and to the Parents grievous.

Yet one thing more I must needs touch, and it is page 10. If he mean says M.
Harrison, that whereas before they were but externally Gods people and
children, now the external shadows, viz. Canaan being done away, they were by
faith partakers of the substance Christ, and so were the children of God by
faith in Christ Jesus: I grant they kept and bettered their station. Here M.
Harrison speaks as though the Israelites while Canaan and other shadows stood,
were but externally the people of God, nor were partakers of Christ the
substance, which is a most erroneous and heretical opinion, injurious to the
Saints of old, contrary to the express Word of God, that tells us that Abraham
rejoiced to see the day of Christ, John 8.56. And how but by faith? and so did
all godly Israelites: What faith was it, but a true, living, justifying faith,
whereby those worthies did so great things, and obtained a good report? And had
not many of the Jews, yea all that were godly, a justifying faith before Christ
was preached to them by the Apostles? who thereby had not wrought in them a now
grace of faith, but the faith they had, was new circumstanced, directed to look
to the person of Christ Jesus, as the true Messiah already come, whereas
before, they relied indefinitely on the Messiah promised to come, as is to be
seen in Lydia, Act. 16.14. So in Simeon and Anna, Luke 2. And therefore I shall
desire M. Harrison in such points to speak more truly, or more warily, or else
to forbear writing books, till he be better grounded in Divinity. And thus I
have cleared my second argument.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the Argument for Infant Baptism, from Romans 11.11, 12. etc. is cleared
from M. Tombs his exception, in his Apology, page 69-77.

MAster Tombs, page 69. of his Apology says, I go upon Romans 11.11, 12. and
somewhat more distinctly then M. Marshall, yet he complains for my want of
syllogizing from it. But that (methinks) is a needles complaint by a Scholar,
when fair mediums for syllogism are held out: neither do I think it needful,
so supersticiously to tie a man's self to rules of art, when by reason of
variety of mediums, various syllogismes must be made, which if needles, so much
time and paper may be spared: yet since he expects it, I will now satisfy his
desire. The conclusion which I say, (and he denies not) to be proved, was, that
the children of Christians, have the same privilege with children of Jews, as
they were comprehended so under the Covenant with their parents, as to be
reputed members of the same visible kingdom, and to be sealed with them, this
he denies: this I showed ground for by four clear principles and conclusions,
from that Romans 11.11. etc. from which I now syllogise thus.

That Church State. and those outward Church Priviledges which the Jews had by
virtue of a pure Gospel-promise, that the Christian Jews retained: but that the
Jews and their seed should be Gods visible Church, and enjoy cutward
Church Priviledges, was a benefit that they had by a pure Gospel Covenant. Ergo
the major is clear from ver. 17. of Romans 11. whence my second conclusion is
proved, that the Jews that obtained mercy kept their station. The minor I
prove. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed in their generations, Genesis
17.7. is a pure Gospel-promise. But by virtue of that, the Jews had this Church
state: that they and their seed were the visible Church of God, and injoied
outward Church Priviledges. Ergo.

Again thus: What Gospel-priviledge the nation of the Jews had before their
rejection, that they shall recover with advantage at their restoration. To
have their seed to belong to Gods visible kingdom with them, and enjoy outward
Church Priviledges: was a Gospel privilege belonging to the Jews before their
fall. Ergo, The major is clear from Romans 11.25, 26. Hos. 1.10, 11. and 2.23. By
which my fourth principle, which is in effect the major here confirmed.

The minor appears: For by being Gods visible kingdom, Christ and all his
benefits were off^red to them all, and made good to the elect: which ordinarily
were among them and none else, and therefore this was a Gospel-priviledge:
being it conduced to salvation.

Again thus:

What Church State, and privileges belonged to the Christian Jews in Paul's
time, and shall belong to the body of the Jews when restored, (degrees only
excepted.) That belongs to all Christian Gentiles. But to the former belongs,
to have the Covenant with them and their seed, so that the children belong to
the visible kingdom of Christ: Ergo. The major is my third principle, grounded
on Romans 11.17. And thus I have Answered M. Tombs his desire with syllogismes.

Now what says he to all this? why?

1. If I mean by the Gentiles assumed into the place of the Jews, out of the
same Church State, and by partaking of privileges, the privileges belonging
to the Church State, it is denied.

I Answer, I do mean the same Church State and Church privileges that are not
typical, and this is plainly-proved by Romans 11.17. they are in their place in
the Olive, and so must enjoy at least what they had: neither has he, nor can
he disprove it: for though he hold the ingraffing is more then into the visible
Church, yet he denies not that they had thereby a visible Church State too,
page 71. Neither says he, is a believing Jew a loser in his seed by the coming
of Christ: Since this was a peculiar privilege in the time of that
Church State, which now cease to be a privilege: which he says he has
further discust. Examen part 3.6, 11. which I have viewed again, and there
find that as here, so there he barely dictates without proof, which learned
men cannot count satisfactory, thus to defalk the Covenant of grace in the
extent of it in a thing where nothing typical is showed or can be.

For my fourth sectary, if it be understood of pristine Church state he denies
it, but he grants, the promise will be extended to them and their seed: as the
text imports, Isa. 59.20. Why then say I, he grants that now under the Gospel,
children shall be under the promise, (which is but a branch of the Covenant)
and what is this, but that which he has so stiffely denied, and which we
assert as the ground of the seal annexed to it. Neither (says he) will there be
two distinct estates, one of the Jews, of holy fathers and children: another of
Gentiles who have only personal privilege, none for their seed; But by his
leave this will follow, unless he grant that the promise or Covenant is to
Christian Gentiles, and their seed too: and if he grant that, whether the seal
of initiation will not follow the Covenant, I leave to be weighed by proofs set
down in their places. And unless he grant this privilege to Christian
Gentiles, there will follow a partition wall thus far, to make distinct
conditions of persons under the Gospel, contrary to Ephesians. 2.14. where Christ
has made Jews and Gentiles equal.

From me, M. Tombs proceeds to M. Marshall, page 7. Where he says, the chief
difference is, whether the ingraffing be into the invisible Church by election
and faith, as M. Tombs affirmed. To which M. Marshall replies, that if it be
meant of the invisible Church only, and all that are ingraffed in the Apostles
sense: whether Jews and Gentiles, are only elect ones. Then will he promise
never to plead this Scripture more for Infants.

This motion M. Tombs accepts: but in the repetition that the ingraffing is
into the invisible Church by election and giving faith, he leaves out the word
only, wherein the whole emphasis of M. Marshalls offer lies. He tells us
again, that the same people were ingraffed into the visible Church, but the
ingraffing is more then that which is into the visible Church by outward
profession and Qrdinances. But what is this, but what M. Marshall and my self
have again and again asserted, that its meant of making all to be of the
visible Church that profess, and those to be of the invisible Church that are
elect and truly believe? and this is enough to carry the cause, that at least
the elect Gentiles by ingraffing, obtained the visible Church State of the
broken off: and so they and their children are in Covenant as the broken off
were; And therefore I should not be so liberal in my grant, as M. Marshall to
M. Tombs, in this, wherein he is an adversary. M. Tombs brings many arguments
to prove, that the ingraffing is meant into the invisible Church by election
and faith, which I shall examine and discover, if he put in the word [ onely]
they are too light, if not, they reach not the question, the thing in question:
only first I will premise an observation. That it is an usual thing in
Scripture, when it speaks of visible Churches, though it is apparent they did
consist of good and bad: to give attributes that are to be understood only of
the elect, and invisible part: either because of the same profession of goodness
that all make, or synechdochically naming the better part for the whole, thus
in the inscriptions of S. Paul's Epistles. All the members of visible Churches
are termed Saints, and peculiarly, 1 These. 1.5. Knowing beloved your election
of God. So the seven Churches of Asia, are termed golden candlesticks. May we
hence truly gather, that there were none in any of the Gentile Churches but
Saints, and that all the Angels and members of the seven Churches of Asia were
golden? He of Sardis, and all that had a name to live and were dead, Revel.
3.7? Surely no, but those things are attributed to visible Churches because of
the elect among them, yet were not the elect only spoken to, or of: even so
many of the expressions from which M. Tombs argues, are peculiar to the elect,
not that no non-elect persons had among them a standing in the visible Church,
and not in the invisible: but the expressions are used synechdochically, the
more noble part put for the whole: but now to the particulars. That the
ingraffing is into the invisible Church only.

1. Because it is by Gods sole power, Romans 11.23. I answer, the ground is weak,
for no man can give a man power so far to believe as to profess, especially
one blinded and hardened of God, but God alone: and was not the visible
Church State of the Jews, when all other Nations were without an act of Gods
power only, nor could it be by man? So then also their reingraffing, though
many come to be members of a visible Church only.

2. He argues, because the ingraffing is called reconciliation, opposite to
casting away, ver. 15. which is called breaking off, ver. 17. But this also is
too weak for the casting away and breaking, being but a loss of what they had,
that is, visible privileges; the reconciliation might be, and in many Gentiles
was but a vouchsafing them a visible Church estate, no longer to be reputed
dogs as they had been.

3. He argues from ver. 20. By unbelief they were broken, but thou stand by
faith. I answer, The elect, by faith and profession, was both in the invisible
and visible Church: the formal, by appearance of faith stood in men's esteem,
and as members of the visible Church. And to this purpose Calvine, part of
whose speech you afterward applaud; Pracipue notandum Pauli sermonem non tam ad
singulos homines quam ad totum Gentium corpus dirigi, in quo multi esse
poterant frustra inflat, fidem potius profitentes, quam habentes.

4. He argues from ver. 17. That ingraffing is meant, whereby the wild O live
is copartner of the root and fatnes of the Olive tree, and then much stir is
kept what the root is? But I answer, If the Olive give fatnes, I know no other
Olive but he that is the vine, into whom all Christian Gentiles were ingraffed
by profession, and the elect of them by faith really also, and hence this
expression, ver. 17. in regard of what in profession and show belonged to all,
and in reality was verified of the better part, the elect.

5. He argues because the breaking off is by blinding, but that is weak, for
then ingraffing may be by illumination to profession, which may be without
election, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

6. He argues because reingraffing brings salvation, but that is to some of the
ingraffed, not all, unless he thinks at the Jews restoration, there shall be
none of them formalists and hypocrites.

7. He argnes because the ingraffing is by virtue of Gods election, his love,
his gifts of calling, ver. 30, 31, 32. But I answer the election, love, and
gifts being such here, as belong to bodies or nations: it is not such as M.
Tombs means, which is election unto salvation by faith; Since that belongs not
to whole bodies or Nations, or not to all of them, and so is attributed in
regard of the better part.

8. Lastly, because the ingraffing is the fruit of Gods mercy, and breaking off
by shutting up in unbelief. But neither is this last cogent, since there is
general mercy to make members of a visible Church, as well as special, to
make members of the invisible, and their unbelief was not only want of saving
faith, but historical faith to profess, which later if they had had, they had
not been broken off, and therefore they that have it are ingraffed into their
rooms, to enjoy that visible standing, which for want of it they lost. Thus M.
Tombs his army of arguments are routed, and it is to be observed, that in all
his conclusions he leaves out the word only, which is the binge of the
controversy, for we not only do not deny, but also positively affirm, that in
some the ingraffing was by faith and election into the invisible, as well as by
calling and profession of faith into the visible. So M. Marshall, page 137. and
138. of his defense; But where M. Marshall interpre^s it only of bare admission
into visible Church Membership, excluding the ingraffing into the invisible, I
profess I cannot find, and therefore believe M. Tombs has in that
imputation wronged him. For the places that M. Tombs makes parallel, 1 Cor.
12.13. Ephesians. 3.6. Gal. 3.14, 26 28 29. They are so far in my apprehension
from confirming his opinion, that they manifestly confirm my observation,
touching the expressions of Scripture, when they speak of the visible Church,
in which there are good and bad; they in regard of the profession of all, and
the reality in the elect, speak as though all were elect: but it is by a
synechdoche. For let M. Tombs tell me, does he think all and every particular
person Baptized in Corinth, or Galatia; were really ingraffed into the body of
Christ, or had put him on? etc. Yet this is spoken of all, in regard this was
true in all in profession and appearance, and there were some elect among them,
of whom it was true really: even so we do, and are to interpret many phrases
urged by him in Romans 11. in this present business.

The only objection of weight says M. Tombs is, that then some branches of
the invisible Church are broken off, and so election made revocable, and
apostasy from grace maintained. This is an objection of weight indeed, but not
the only objection: for there is another also as forcible, hinted also by me,
page 18. where I affirm, that the Apostle speaks not of particular persons, but
of the body of the Jews, and the body of the Gentiles that were Christians
collectively, received into the room of the Jews broken off: and the body of
the Gentiles that received Christ by profession, were not all elect, but good
and bad drawn together by the drawnet of the Gospel. But how does he answer the
weighty objection?

1. He boldly affirms, That the breaking off, was of the branches that were
truly such, and of the ingraffing that was truly such, into the invisible
Church. But may we not change the verse and say? -- Pictoribus atque sophistis,
Quidlibet audendi, etc. But he brings an allay, That by the branches are not
meant singular persons, but the people, why then the people that were ingraffed
into the invisible Church were broken off so yet the invisible Church was
prevailed against in his sense: therefore I know not what help this limitation
will do him. That which is said of people in a body, must be true in some
particulars of that body: so if the body of the people truly ingraffed into the
invisible Church were broken off, this must be true in some singular persons.
Besides, how apparently cross is M. Tombs his assertion to the Apostle, Romans
11.1, 2. Has God cast away his people? God forbid. God has not cast away his
people that he foreknew. So you see the people that make the ^nvisible Church
are not broken off. What M. Tombs adds afterward touching the body of a
people which were once the elect people of God, and ingrassed into the
invisible Church, because the generality were such, that it is no error to say
they are broken off from election.

I say first, it is not good sense to say the body of a people is ingrafted
into the invisible Church, whereas the invisible Church is comprehended under a
visible body, as chafe under wheat: and to say a Church is broken off from
that election which is special, and to grace which was once elect, and from
being the invisible Church that was once the invisible Church, is sure a most
grand error. For special election to grace and glory, which makes any people
of the invisible Church, is a foundation of God that remains sure, against
which, the gates of hell cannot prevail. The thing which occasioneth M. Tombs
his error, is want of consideration of a distinction, which M. Tombs very
well knows, but through eagernes to maintain his tenet (as I conceive) does not
consider. Election is either general or special: so is reprobation general,
election and reprobation is of bodies or societies: and this is only in
reference to visible Churches, in which is contained the invisible: thus God is
often said to choose the Nation of the Jews, Deuteronomy 4.3 7. and 10.15. That is the
body of his people to be his visible Church, in which indeed was contained the
invisible. Now opposite to this general election, is general reprobation,
whereby a people are cut off, or cast out of the honor of being Gods visible
kingdom, and so without hope to be of the invisible: so then the breaking off
of the Jews, was only from this general election, and their reprobation
general, to cease to be Gods visible people; But now there is a special
election of singular persons to be the invisible Church, and this is never
attributed to a visible body, (unless synechdochically) and often his we deny
the broken off to be partakers of, or to fall from. The Apostle, Romans 11.
divides the Church of the Jews into two bodies, one the people that God
foreknew, the other opposite: the one were of the invisible, the other of the
visible Church orly; Those opposite were broken off, the whole body of them,
but it is only from what they had, to be visible members, not from what they
had not, to wit to be of the invisible: and therefore here his argute simile
from the river Euphrates will not serve his turn, for we enquire not here what
the Israelites had been, nor have we to do with the species of Israel, but
with these numericall branches broken off; The numericall branches graffed in
mentioned by him: for proof, page 77. from ver. 23, 24. were not they graffed,
in his opinion, into the invisible Church, and then if in the same sense the
numericall branches be broken off, they be broken off from the invisible
Church, and then they fell from grace. The Apostle shows not there, that the
branches were broken off, from what the species of the people had had in former
times, but from what they had at the time of breaking off, and that was only a
visible standing in the Church, by virtue of Gods general election, which then
they lost: and by this distinction of general and particular election, used by
Calvin himself, lib. 3. cap. 21. instit. and Perkins on Revel. 2.9. you may see
the sense of your authors, they speak as you say of the body of Jews and
Gentiles, and so the election and reprobation which they speak of is general,
to be or not to be a visible Church, and so alterable: not that special
election and reprobation which is more immovable then heaven and earth, of
which the question is between you and us. And these words of mine will do you
as little good: that holiness, Rom 11.16. is meant of potentiall holiness in
regard of Gods election, for thereby I only understand Gods purpose revealed,
to take the seed of the Jews to be his visible Chur^^ once again, and no other
sense can it have, since the present (...) were so many of them unholy. Thus
have I answered M. Tombs his large dissertation, which I again seriously
commend unto him; being not a little grieved, to see so much ability and
industry cast away, to darken manifest truth in my apprehension.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein my fourth Argument for Infant Baptism frons Cor. 7.14. is cleared
from M. Harrisons exceptions.

MY fourth Argument ran thus. Saints under the Gospel, have right to Baptism.
Children of believers are Saints. Ergo, etc. Here M. H. puts in again his
distinction of visible and invisible Saints: But this I put by as before, by
informing him, that known is as much as visible, and therefore what a man may
challenge because he is visibly so qualified he may challenge, if his
qualification be known any other way; And therefore is a Saint judged to have
right to Baptism as a visible Saint, because by something discerneable to
sense, he is known to be a Saint, and then if by evidence from the Word any be
known to be Saints, they may be Baptized: but that Infants are, by 1 Cor. 7.14.
So unless M. Harrisons answer to the minor, be more solid then his denial of
the major, he must miscarry.

First, M. H. affirms, that the holiness ascribed to children, cannot be meant
of faeder all holiness: as the Nation of the Jews were holy, Gods visible
Church having right to Church Priviledges as I expound it. Let us hear his
reasons.

1. Because the wise is said to be sanctified to, or by the husband, as well as
the children: the word in the Original is the same: Now he thinks I will not
call the unbelieving wife a Saint.

I answer, The unbelieving wife is not said to be sanctified absolutely, but in
or to the believing husband, that is, (as he confesses) as meats which are not
made holy in themselves, but to the believer, and therefore cannot be called
holy. But the children are said not to be sanctified to another, but to be
holy, that is in themselves, as our Divine answers Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Bapt.
cap 4. With whom how often do you symbolize? But you say, the word in the
Original is the same, but that is plainly false, for the one is a verb with a
proposition, (...), that may and does signify an act on the unbeliever, in
reference to another: the other is an Adjective, a concrete word that imports a
quality inhaerent in the party, (...), So we want both truth and skill in this
assertion, that the Original word is the same. And so is the assertion
following false also, that we must admit many such, as the Infidel wife in our
National Church: for we neither must, nor do admit any, but those that
profess faith in Christ, no more then M. Harrison.

His second reason is, because the unbelieving husband can by generation
conveigh no more to his children, then to his unbelieving wise. But this is
just to beg the question, which we affirm, he barely denies: we give reason.
The Covenant is with fathers and seed, not with the husband and his wife: and
by virtue of that Covenant, the father that begets, conveigheth more to his
child then to his wife. But says he, let us seriously consider, does a
believer beget a child as a believer, or as a man? if as a man, then that is
born of the flesh is flesh: etc.

I answer, Did a Jew beget a child as a Jew, or as a man? not as a Jew: for
then only Jews could beget children? Yet did a Jew I hope by virtue of Gods
Covenant, conveigh to his child Church Priviledges: his child was a Jew by
birth, Gal. 2.15. So may a child by virtue of Gods Covenant, be reputed a
Christian by birth, in regard of Church Priviledges. But more closely: A man
corrupt does beget children as a man, or as a corrupt man: not as a corrupt
man, for then he could not have begotten children had he stood innocent: but if
as a man, whence is his child corrupt? The answer must be, by virtue of the
Covenant of works, under which Adam stood in Paradise as the head of mankind,
for breach of which every natural branch of Adam is now born corrupt, Romans
5.12. So though a believer beget a child as a man, nay more as one of the
corrupt issue of Adam, and so considered, the issue is corrupt: yet, as the
believer is under another Covenant, that imparts privileges to him and his
seed: his seed may enjoy that privilege which the Covenant contains, and so
may be reputed holy, belonging to the people of God, which an Infidels child
is not.

Next, M. H. gives us aj^june interpretation of his own, without proof: to wit,
That the children are holy to the believing party, as all other dispensations
of Gods providence are. Whereas here the children are not said to be holy to
the parent, but absolutely, that is, in themselves. And according to Romans 8.
which he quoteth for proof or illustration: things unclean, even the sins of
the called according to Gods purpose, are turned to good to humble them, and
fit them for more grace, and therefore this is too low a sense, and reaches
not the Apostles meaning. Thus has he deserted M. Tombs, who backed his
opinion with some probability, that he did errare cum ratione: and without any
answer to any of our reasons: he has rejected our exposition, and proposed one
of his own, which he has left to shift for it self without proof. Does this
become the considence M. Harrison has of his ability, to defend his tenet
against any opponent? Touching this place, M. Tombs in his Apology adds not
much, but only one crank he has, with which if every man were as well pleased
as himself, they would without doubt explode as he says, the exposition of 1
Cor. 7.14. of faederall holiness: but let us try the validity of it. If the
reason, (says he) p. 96. of the lawfulnes of two persons living together in
disparity of religion, be taken from the virtue of faith in the one party, not
from the relation of husband and wife, as M. Marshalls exposition makes it, The
medium of the Apostle to prove the lawfulnes of the living of a believing wife,
with an unbelieving husband, will as well prove the lawfulnes of the living of
a believing fornicatrix, with an unbelieving fornicator. I answer, if all the
reason of the lawfulnes of a believing wife with an unbelieving husband, were
from the faith of the believer, there were some strength in this consequence:
but that we make not all the reason, for the scruple was in the Corinthians,
whether notwithstanding their lawful marriage, they might lawfully live
together: yes says the Apostle, the unbeliever (in the use of marriage) for so
it must be understood, is sanctified to the believer: else, etc. so that
marriage is the groundwork, which satisfied not their consciences, for so were
they, Ezra 9. and 10. Yet was the holy seed polluted, but now says the
Apostle, the unbeliever is sanctified to the believer, etc. So then the parties
that may lawfully live together on this ground, are supposed to be man and
wife. And his major proposition must be: That man and wife may lawfully dwell
together: whereof one is sanctified to the other, and so his fornicators will
be excluded, not concluded. He says, it is not necessary to insert, being
husband and wife: since the sanctification is not ascribed by him to the
relation between them, but to the faith of the one. But I answer, this is no
good ground, for though the marriage be no cause of this sanctification, yet it
is a ground supposed to make the Apostles resolution true, and on that ground
it is made. There Is two things required, to satisfy spiritual conscience in
the use of a thing. First that it be lawful in it self. Secondly that it be
holy to us. The former is common to heathens and Christians, (in moral things)
The last is the peculiar of believers: if either be wanting, conscience is
defiled, and will be disquieted. Now the sanctification here to quiet their
consciences, is an addition to the law of marriage, common with them to
heathens, and so we ought not to sever the later from the former, which the
Apostle supposed. So this new argument is overthrown without denying bastards
to be faederally holy, where I should not have M. Tombs an adversary.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein my fourth argument is made good for InfantBaptisme, from Col. 2.11, 12.

MY fourth argument for Infant Baptism was. To whom circumcision does agree,
Baptism does agree: circumcision does agree to Infants. Ergo. The major is
proved, because Baptism does succeed circumcision in the same place, state,
and signification in the new administration, that circumcision had in the old,
Col. 2.11, 12. Here M. Harrison first denies, that circumcision and Baptism do
seal the same Covenant. I answer, circumcision was a seal of the Covenant made
with Abraham, and that is the same made with us Christians, or else how can we
by faith be made children of Abraham? And how could the Prophet argue from the
Covenant made with Abraham, that Christians are justified by faith, not the
works of the law, as he does, Gal. 3.16, 17. unless we had the same Covenant?
and of our Covenant Baptism is the seal. 2. He denies circumcision to be the
seal of remission of sin. But does not the Apostle say, that circumcision was
the seal of the righteousness of faith, and that implies remission of sins, as
he plainly shows in bringing, as proofs of justification by faith; Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven, Romans 4 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. M. H.
answers, it was to Abraham the seal of the righteousness of faith, but that was
peculiar to him. Wherein again, whether of ignorance or of choice, ( ipse
viderit) he jumps with Bellarmine against Protestant Divines, Bell. lib. 1. de
sacr. in grem. cap. 17. But as our Divines answer Bellarmine thus, he enervates
the Apostles argument from Abraham's example to us, which is not argumentative
in any thing peculiar to Abraham. Secondly I would know of M. Har. if
circumcision did not seal righteousness of faith, except to Abraham, what it did
seal to proselytes? Title to Canaan they had none: seal a blanke it must not:
therefore it sealed the righteousness of faith. Again there being in a Sacrament
an outward sign and an inward grace, and that under the old Testament as well
as the new, (as Protestants maintain against Papists) I would know of him
whether the circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 2.29. Col. 2.11. were
not the grace answering the sign in circumcision? and whether that did not
import the putting away the filth of nature by justification, and regeneration?
and so included remission of sins? M. H. proceeds, If I mean, that as
circumcision was a Sacrament of the old Testament, Baptism of the new, etc. I
answer, I mean as I say: Baptism was the Sacrament of initiation under the
New, as circumcision under the Old: and therefore as the one was set to all
(seleable) within Covenant: so the other. Yet will it not hence follow, that
children must therefore have the Lords Supper, because that is the Sacrament of
growth.

To the place, Col. 2.11, 12. M. H. says it does no more prove Baptism to
succeed circumcision, then Noah's Ark, or the red Sea. But he might have seen my
answer to M. Tombs, that there is not the same reason of these, for
circumcision was an Ordinance in ordinary use, of the same nature, virtue and
state that Baptism, in being the Jews Sacrament of initiation, and so is more
properly said to be succeeded by Baptism. But M. H. says, that the Apostle
speaks of circumcision, to show the Colossians that they were complete in
Christ by regeneration, etc. I answer, that is true, but that is not all: the
Apostle shows they needed not the elements of the world, whereof circumcision
was one: and why? not only because they had spiritual circumcision, but had it
sealed by Baptism; So Baptism is in the same state, and supplies the use of
circumcision, to seal and apply Christ to justification and regeneration: and
this is a manifest proof of my collection, from Col. 2.11, 12. and more to the
purpose then M. H. has or can answer.

For that proof of yours, that circumcision and Baptism were not to be applied
to the same subject, because John the Baptist would not Baptize those that were
circumcised without further qualification. I have answered already to M. Tombs
in page 10. It was because Baptism is a seal in a new administration: and so
parties to be Baptized, were to be under the new administration, as well as in
Covenant. And therefore neither John the Baptist, nor the Apostles, did Baptize
Jews, till by their doctrine they were brought under the new administration.
Thus it appears what a feeble answerer M. H. is still found.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein my fifth Argument for Infant Baptism, because the grace of the new
Testament is not less then under the Old.

MY fifth argument was framed thus. If Children of Christian parents be
excluded from the Covenant and seal of initiation, whereby their separation
from the world is manifested: then are the privileges under the new Testament,
less then under the old: But this is not to be affirmed. Ergo. M. H. returns
answer by a long fetch about, premising three things. 1. That the Covenant made
with the fleshly seed, as such, under the old Testament was merely fleshly,
etc. But I answer, there is no such Covenant extent: no distinct Covenant with
the fleshly seed distinct from the spiritual. His misinterpretation of Genesis
17. from ver. 7. to 15. for that purpose I have convinced of vanity in clearing
my first argument. There was a Covenant indeed that had diverse privileges
given to Abraham, and continued to a visible Church of his seed, wherein were
parties of different condition: Some carnal, some spiritual. Now to the
carnal, though spiritual things were represented and offered, yet they only
partook of carnal and external privileges: but the elect partook of the
spiritual privileges also. And so is it now in the visible Churches of
Christians, where are wheat and chafe, carnal and spiritual Christians.

M. H. premiseth. 2. That the Covenant made with Abraham, and renewed with
Christ in the Gospel, was never made with any fleshly seed, its wholly
spiritual: the sign and sanction spiritual etc. appertaining only to a
spiritual seed, etc. But this is a manifest untruth in part, and in part
misapplied: for is Baptism any more a spiritual seal then circumcision? Have
all that are Baptized put on Christ really, or many in profession only? Are all
Baptized (yea in an unquestionable way) spiritual ones? What was Simon Magus?
Are there not yet in visible Churches such a distinction of Christians and
Baptism, as there was of Jews and circumcision, Romans 2.38, 29? Do not Simon
Magus and daily experience show it? True it is, that those that are not by
profession only, but really by faith Children of Abraham, they are spiritual,
etc. but this is but the invisible Church under the visible, now, as it was in
Judaisme. M. H. himself sets Baptism to men, because they profess, not
because they believe, as the title of his book shows, and how often is profession
without faith?

M. H. premiseth, 3. That the Gospel Covenant is more glorious, etc.

Then M. H. answers, If he mean by privileges, fleshly, etc. which, [if] is
but to make way for an evasion. He knows I mean not a fleshly, but an external
privilege to be of the visible kingdom of Christ, of which he that is not, is
without: and in an ordinary way without God, and without hope in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. Of which to denude our children, and to make their condition as
hopeles as Turks, is a great discomfort, and a straitning the grace of the
Covenant: for tell me when a Jewish child did die; was there no more hope of
him then of a Canaanites child? See 1 Samuel 12.23. and whence that hope but
from the Covenant with the seed? Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And is that a carnal
privilege that gives hope of salvation? So then M. H. by denying Infants to be
within Covenant, defalkes or curtails the spiritual privileges of the
Covenant: and then his answer is demonstrated to be false.

CHAP. X.
Wherein my last Argument for Infant Baptism from the judgment of charity, is
cleared from M. Harrisons exceptions.

MY sixth argument was thus. Where we have evidence for judgment of charity,
that there is the grace of the Covenant: there we may set to the seal of the
Covenant.

That we have for Infants. Ergo. The minor I make good by three positions.

1. Children are capable of the grace of the Covenant.

2. Some are actually partakers of it.

3. Because the children of believers are externally under the Covenant of
grace.

Here M. Harrison answers not punctually, but in four particulars.

1. The judgment of charity must be guided by a rule, and he knows none, but
Mat. 7.20. By their fruits you shall know them. It seems he has forgotten 1
Cor. 13.5, 6.7. where he might have read many more rules of charity. It
believes all things, hops all things: that is, wherein there is any fair
ground, and that I have showed for the grace of the Covenant to be in Infants.

But says M. Harrison, The spirit blows where it lists, Joh. 3.8. Where it
is not limited to children of believers, more then unbelievers. Answ. The
spirit blows where it lists, does it therefore blow no more in the
ministry of the Gospel, then in Philosophical lectures? No more in the Church
then out of it? You will not say it; for the spirit that is free, has limited
it self by promise, to blow ordinarily more in one exercise then another, in
one society then another, and so to one seed then another, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Isa.
59.21. M. H. says, Simon Magus did appear a believer: but that hinders not my
assertion, viz. that profession is only a ground for judgment of charity, not
certainty, as appeared in Simon Magus, who by his profession in charity, was
judged to have what he had not.

For his second demanding proof, That the children brought to Christ were of
believing parents. Why else were they brought to Christ? would they offer their
children to Christ, that did not themselves believe in him?

That which M. H. says thirdly, Touching Christ's omnisciency, is besides the
point. Since we in admitting to ordinances, proceed not upon judgment of
certainty, but charity.

M. Harrison adds Fourthly, that though children had grace actually, (which
says he, why children of believers should have more then of unbelievers, I
know not, nor I am persuaded does M. Geree) why then there is no more hope of a
Christians child dying in innocence, then of a Turks, which I have showed both
false and dismal to parents: yet because they cannot act it by action or
profession, its no ground of administration of Baptism: wherein,

1. He differs from M. Tombs.

2. From the truth: for what is the real ground of claim to seals, but being
within Covenant, or having the grace to be sealed? Which if it come to my
knowledge any way by fruits, or testimony of Gods Word; Who can forbid water to
those that have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10.47. As the
Apostle argues from evidence of the grace of the Covenant there.

And thus I have cleared the sixth argument from M. Harrison, who in this last
answer does so needlessly inculcate the hopelesnesse of Christian Infants (for
grace and glory are connex) that if he have no more comfortable divinity, I
shall not envy, but wonder at, and pity the multiplicity of his followers.

M. Tombs takes notice of this sixth argument, page 101. and 102. And there
denies both the major and the minor: And denies Act. 10.47. to be a proof of
the major, which I have already made good to M. Harrison. The Sacrament is a
seal of the Covenant and the grace of it. Baptism is not to seal profession of
faith, but the righteousness of faith properly: and therefore I conceive the
true ground why Baptism was administered on profession of faith, because that
profession was an evidence of the righteousness of faith: and being in the
Covenant, which it is not in judgment of certainty, but charity: as Simon
Magus his case clears. If then by any other evidence we have cause to judge
in charity, that there is grace, and that they are within the Covenant: this
gives title to the seal, because it contains the ground, why profession of
faith gives claim to the seal. M. Tombs makes Gods revelation of true
sanctification a ground for Baptism, for this, he has neither precept nor
example in Scripture, for Judas might dee, all that they Act. 10.47. are said
to do. The ground of his assertion therefore I think must be, because true
sanctification is that whereof profession is an evidence, and that but
conjecturall or charitable, not certain, and such an evidence from other
grounds of Scriptures, Why should it not be of the same validity?

For M. Tombs his denial of my minor, he affirms:

1. That the judgment of charity is to be taken from a man's own actions,
because the Apostle says, charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. But how
these words prove his assertion (which I deny) I know not, but have showed in
answer to M. Harrison, rule for charity in this point from the following words,
hops all things. The ground of this judgment of charity, I draw not from any
one of my three grounds, mentioned in the laying down my argument: but from all
three together; Which M. Tombs says, can only produce conjecturall hope,
which often miscarryeth: and so much they do amount to, and that is the thing
that I assert, for the judgment of charity is but a conjecturall hope, being
opposed to demonstrative certainty.

Thus I have done with M. Harrison, whose book has given me fit occasion,
without digressing from the present matter, to answer all those passages in M.
Tombs his Apology for the manner of his treatise, where he takes occasion
largely and materially to defend the matter of it: For his boasts what he has
done in this controversy, without answering our reasons to the contrary; I hope
none will be moved with them, till they have tried them, by comparing writing
with writing, and reason with reason, and then I fear not the issue. Now that
he does make show of more then he performs: I will content my self to show in
one particular which is the first: and of no small consequence, it is in his
Epistle Dedicatory, and that to Parliament Men the Authorizers of the
Directory. To whom he says, that the truth has gotten so much ground, that
the doctrine of the Directory is disavowed by two of his most eminent
Antagonists: for which he has (that I know) no other ground, then because we
interpret the Directory according to the mind of the compilers; And not as M.
Tombs would have it, mistaking the words as (I conceive) to be understood in
that sense, which (I believe) he himself conceives was not in the intention of
the compilers. Sure I am, that many of the Assembly have assured me in private,
that they intended the expressions questioned by M. Tombs, in no other sense
then I expound them. Now I will not say -- Crimine ab uno, Omnia discite -- By
one crimination judge of all. But the carriage in this I hope will make all
more wary in giving credence to his other confident assertions. O that the Lord
would pity us under this saddest exercise of division of judgments, and make
us of one mind, one heart, one language, or make this sharp affliction as
useful to humble and mortify, as it is in sense bitter to a peaceable spirit.
Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
Errata.
PAge 4. line 28. dele and. p. 9. l. 8. for spirit, r. speech. p. 11. l. 5 for
at, r. (...). l. 24. dele and. p. 12. l. 21. for and, r. under. p. 15, l. 10.
for being, r. bring from the Covenant. p. 16. l. 2. for Cant. 8.11, 12. r. Mat.
8.11, 12. l. 24. for freedom, r. seed. p 18. l. 5. for for, r. so. p. 20. l. 9.
for constrains, r. contains. p. 26. l. 18. for Question. r. Quaesitum.


