Gospel-Revelation IN THREE TREATISES; Viz, 1 The Nature of God. 2 The
Excellencies of Christ. And, 3 The Excellency of Man's Immortal Soul.


By JEREMIAH BUROUGHS, late Preacher of the Gospel at Stepney, and
Giles-Cripple-gate, London.

Published by William Greenhill. William Bridge. Philip Nigh. John Yates.
Matthew Mead. William Adderly.


Let them praise the Name of the Lord, for his Name alone is Excellent, Psalm.
148.13.

My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10.

Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, Matthew.
10.28.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill, and Thomas
Parkhurst, at the three Crowns, over against the Great Conduit, at the lower
end of Cheapside. 1660.

Buroughs Gospel-Revelation.

A Testimony to the world concerning these Three Treatises contained in this
Book of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs.
Reader,
THese may assure thee, that whatever thou find here spoken, either of God,
of Christ, or the Soul, was taken from the mouth of that Reverend Author, Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs, as he preached them, and by the same ready hand that took
most of the former Treatises, as Gospel Worship, Contentment, etc. Now in Print.

William Bridge. William Greenhill. Philip Nigh. John Yates. Matthew Mead.
William Adderly.


THere is now published that much-desired Discourse of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs,
on the fifth of Matthew, being many Sermons preached at Cripple-gate, upon all
the Beatitudes, taken by the same ready hand, and published by the same
Testimony, viz.

William Bridge. VVil. Greenhill. Philip Nigh. John Yates. Matthew Mead. VVil.
Adderly.


To the Reader.
THou art here presented with the living Sermons of one who is fallen asleep in
Jesus, whose memory is sweet and fragrant unto the Saints; He was famous for
the Work of God and Christ in his Generation, and Instrumental for the
begetting of many spiritual Children unto the Lord Jesus.

The Author of these Sermons (Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs) like Abel, being dead,
yet speaks: And of that, which is not only our Duty to hear, but our
Privilege to be made acquainted with: for he Treats of God, of Christ, and
Man's Soul: three choice subjects. Knowledge is Pleasant, Prove. 2.20. but none
more pleasant than that is Divine. The knowledge of the holy God is
Understanding, Pro. 9.10. the knowledge of Christ is Excellent, Phil. 3.8. the
knowledge of both is Life eternal, John 17.3. And for the Soul, it is that
piece of Immortality which is of greater value than the whole world, Mat.
16.26. It is that which God challenges to be his, Ezekiel 18.4. and that which
the Lord Christ accounted not his precious blood too much to give for, 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. I shall not hold thee longer from the Work it self: But desire the
blessing of God to go along with it, and those that are exercised in it.

R. W.

The CONTENTS of the Treatise Of the NATVRE of GOD.
NAme of God, what meant by it. p. 2 A gracious heart p^aises God for himself.
p. 3 And loves God for himself. p. 4 Which is the difference between
sanctifying and Common Grace. ib. God is a most excellent Being above all
things. p. 5 Impossible it is to set forth the excellency of Gods Being. ib. 1
God is, and there is none else besides him. p. 6 Other beeings are but a shadow
to Gods Being. ib. 2 God is a present Being. p. 7 This Being of God is in
all places, God is in all places. p. 8 3 God is as much beyond every place, as
he is in every place. p. 9 4 God is a Being that is all-sufficient in
himself. 5 All the excellencies in the creature, are in God virtually and
eminently. p. 10, 11 6 All the scattered excellencies in the creatures are
united into one excellency in him. p. 13 7 All possible good and excellency is
in God. p. 14 8 All good and excellency in God is eternal in him. p. 15 9 And
not only eternally, but also immutably. ib. 10 All these are essentially in
God. p. 16 11 All excellencies are in God purely, and unmixtly, God has
nothing but excellency in him. 12 All excellencies are in God originally. p. 20
13 God is the fountain of all excellency to all creatures. ib. 14 All things
depend upon him. ib. 15 God alone is excellent in his operation, he does
whatsoever he will, in Heaven and Earth. p. 21 He does the greatest things as
easily as he does the least. ib. What is done in time, was decreed to be done
from eternity. p. 22 Act of Gods will that was from eternity is matter enough
to work by. ib. All Gods works add nothing to God. p. 23 16 God alone is
excellent in the manner of communication of himself. ib. God can let out as
much of himself as he will to any creature. ib. God has never the less for
what he lets out to the creature. p. 23 17 There is no comparison to be made
between God and any thing else. p. 24 18 God he is the highest end of all
things. p. 25 Use What cause we have to be ashamed of those low thoughts we
have had of God. p. 27 2 It shows the dreadful evil that is in sin, it being
against such an infinite God. p. 28, 29, 30 3 We see cause to be vile in our
own eyes. p. 34 4 Hence we may learn to know the vanity of the creature. p. 36
5 Let us labor to know God, to search into his excellency. p. 39 6 We are
taught from hence to labor to keep the sense of the infinite distance there is
between God and the creature always in our hearts. p. 40 Grace does cause this
the heart has a kind of infiniteness toward God. p. 41 7 If God be so
excellent, then Gods people are the most excellent ones. p. 43 8 See what ca^se
we have to fear this great God. from p. 45, to the end.
THE CONTENTS OF THE EXCELLENCY of CHRIST.
COherence of the words. 49, 50 Clearest Prophecies of Christ, when the Church
was in the greatest distress. 50 Four Reasons of it. 50, 51 Five notable and
famous Titles of Christ. 52 Doct. Christ is the great wonder of the world.
proved 52, 53, 54 Thirteen things, in, and concerning Christ, that are
wonderful. 55 1 He is wonderful in his Natures, God and Man. 56, 57, 58 2
Wonderful in his Natures. 59 Two wonders in Christian Religion. 59 The Lord of
mankind, the Son of man. 60 The knowledge of the union of the two Natures,
how a help to Faith. 61 3 Christ is wonderful in the manner of his Incarnation.
63 4 Christ is wonderful in his works. 65 What the work was Christ came about.
ib. Use of it. 67 Christ wonderful in his Offices; he was the Anointed. 69,
71. Wonderful in his Kingly Office. 69 He is King over all Kings. 71. His
power is universal. ib. He makes his subjects, his subjects do not make him.
ib. Subjects of this King are for him. 70 It is this King alone that makes Laws
ib. Qu^st. Can there be no Laws added for decency and order in the Church?
Answered. 72, 73 Christ is such a King, whose sovereignty is absolute. 74 He
has power to bind conscience. ib Christ's Kingly power reaches to men's hearts.
ib. Christ is wonderful in his Kingly office, in this he has A perfect
knowledge of all his sub^ects. 75 Is present with them in all administrations,
he overrules all the plots and counsels of his enemies, he is the King of
righteousness and peace. 76 14 Christ is wonderful in his Kingly office, other
Kings are born to be Kings, but Christ died that he might be King. 77 15
Christ is a King from everlasting to everlasting. 78 16 He sits at his Fathers
Throne now at this time. ib. 17 Christ will not only subject all enemies, but
he will put down all rule, and all authority. 79 18 Wonderful is Christ in his
Kingly office, for he makes all his subjects Kings with him, in a spiritual
sense. 80 Exercise of Faith aright is upon Christ as King. 81 Christ wonderful
in his Priest^y office. 83 1 Christ's Priesthood joined with Kingly power. ib. 2
All Priests in the Law did typifie Christ, and cease in him. 3 He needed not
to offer for himself. 4 Christ offered the blood of God. 83 5 Christ offered a
Sacrifice that was sufficient to satisfy God. 84 6 He is wonderful in that
he offered himself. ib. 7 Christ was not only a Sacrifice, but an Altar. 85 8
Christ offered but one sacrifice at one time. 86 9 His Priesthood indures for
ever. 87 Christ's Priesthood preferred before Aarons Priesthood. 88, 89 Christ
wonderful in his Prophetical office. 90 He knows all the mind of God
perfectly, therefore must be a wonderful Teacher. 91 2 Dullness of
understanding, weakness of parts cannot hinder his teaching. 92 How we shall
know whether Christ teach us. 93 3 Christ is wonderful in his Priestly office,
in that he is sent to reveal high and supernatural things. 94, 95 4 These high
things are not revealed to the wisest and great ones of the world. 96, 97 5 He
reveals these things (many times) suddenly. 98 6 Jesus Christ teaches the
heart, so he is wonderful. 7 Christ teaches immediately himself. 100 8 Christ
teaches infallibly, so he is wonderful. 101 Christ wonderful in his Miracles.
102 In the wonders that he wrought while he lived. 103 Christ wonderful in
his endowments and excellency of his person. ib. Fairer than the children of
men. ib. All the fullness of the Godhead in Christ. 104 This an Argument to us
to take heed of abusing the humane nature of our bodies. ib. Christ the
brightness of Gods glory 105 Christ has his excellency by virtue of the
personal union. 106 Christ wonderful in this, that all his personal
excellencies depend upon himself. 107 Christ becomes worthy of divine honor.
ib. Christ wonderful in this, that he is an infinite object of the delight of
his Father. 107, 108, 109 Christ wonderful in his endowments, in this, that his
excellencies are in him to be conveyed unto his people. 110 This should be a
strong Argument to draw our hearts to Christ. 111 Christ is wonderful in regard
of the glory of the Father that shines in him. 112, 113 First, The glory of
Gods Attributes shines in Christ, as for i^stance, Power. 11^. Wisdom. ib.
Holiness. 115 Justice. 115. Mercy. 116. Truth. 117 2 The glory of the great
counsel and works of God appears in Christ. 118 3 All the good from God in
order to Eternal Life is from Christ. 119 4 The glory of the Father is
wonderful in Christ in this, that by him he attains unto his greatest design
in making the world, and preserving the world. 120 What design. ib. 5 All the
services and praises of Gods Elect come to him through Christ. 121 Christ
wonderful in his Humiliation. 122 The first wonder in his humiliation is, that
all the sins of the Elect should be laid upon Christ. 122 A second, That he
that was so high, should be brought so low for the sin of man. 123 A third,
Christ is wonderful in his humiliation, in that he suffered in his soul. 124 A
fourth wonder in Christ's humiliation is, that he should suffer so much from
his Father. 126 A fifth, In that God does not spare him at all, but is the
executioner himself. 127 A sixth wonder of Christ's humiliation is, that God
should leave him. 128 A seventh, Though Christ sore-saw his suffering, yet that
he should willingly undergo it. 128 An eighth, That this should be the way of
saving men. 129 Use of Trial, whether Christ be revealed to us. 131 A ninth
wonder in Christ's humiliation is this, that God the Father should be pleased
with all this. 132 A tenth is, the efficacy of his humiliation is a wonder. 133
An eleventh, Christ's humiliation takes away the venom of all the Saints
sufferings. ib. A twelfth, Christ suffered as a common person. ib. A
thirteenth, another wonder is, that by such a way of humiliation Christ entered
into his glory. 134 A fourteenth, Christ's humiliation was a most wonderful
argument of Gods hatred of sin. 135 Christ's suffering, a pattern of
Self-denial. ib. Christ wonderful in his Conquests; what did he conquer,
answered. 136 Christ conquered death by dying. 137 Christ conquered in his own
power. ib. Christ conquered as a common person. 138 Christ wonderful in his
resurrection. 139, to 144 Christ wonderful in his ascension. 145 And sitting at
the righ^ hand of his Father. 144 Christ wonderful in his coming to judgment.
145 Christ wonderful in his working toward his Saints, and in their high
esteem of him. 146 In Heaven Christ shall be wondered at for ever. 147
Application.
1 Christ but little known in the world. 150 2 How vile a thing is it to prefer
a filthy lust before Christ? 151 3 It discovers the misery of mankind to be
exceeding great. 154 4 Hence then all believers have exceeding cause of
rejoicing, in hearing of what Christ is, what a wonderful Savior they have.
156 God has exceedingly honored Believers. ib. Jesus Christ a full Object for
their souls rest. 156, 157 God does intend wonderful things for the Saints.
158, to 163 The reason that Christians are so empty in their spirits and
conversations, is, because they know so little of the Mystery of the Gospel.
164 Duty of Christians to hold out the wonderful glory of Christ in their
conversations. 166 If Christ be wonderful here, every one that hears of Christ
should think it a dreadful thing to miss of Christ. 167 Lastly, Let us long for
the time when Jesus Christ shall appear in all his glory. 168, to the end.
The First SERMON ON The Nature of God.
THE last day, you may remember, we opened that Point of the condition that
men are in that live without a God in the world; It is evil to be without
bread, without friends, without outward comforts; how great an evil then to be
without a God in the world? and who they were that did live without a God in
the world, that knew him not, that had no interest in him, and the like; and
then was promised, Therefore seeing there are so many poor wretched creatures,
so many Families that live without a God in the world, that know nothing of
him, and live as if they expected nothing from him, and fear no evil to come
from him at all; therefore we promised to labor to set forth before you
somewhat of God that might help you to know him, to show you what he is: And
to that end turn to that Scripture, Psalm. 148. part of the 13. verse.

For his Name alone is excellent. Text.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of praise, praising of God for all the glorious
manifestations of himself in his great Works, and calling upon all creatures to
praise him, because he is glorious in every creature; but the Psalmist rests
not in this, in praising God for the glory of him that appears in the
creatures, but he rise^ higher, and takes indeed the rise from thence to
praise and bless God for what there is in himself, above that which does appear
in any creature. For so it is clear, that to this the Psalmist does arise in my
Text, Let them praise the name of the Lord: for his name alone is excellent,
his glory is above the Earth and Heaven. The Earth and Heaven, and all
creatures therein, are called to praise Gods name, and David praises the name
of God for what appeared there, but says he, Praise the Lord: for his Name
alone is excellent, and his glory is above the Earth and Heaven. His Name, the
Name of God is either taken for God himself, or for the manifestation of God;
often in Scripture for God himself, Prove. 18.10.
as, The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run unto it, and are
safe; that is, God himself, He is the strength and Tower, he is the object of
the trust of his people; and so other Scriptures; or otherwise, that whereby
God may be known; Psalm. 76.1.
His Name is great in Israel: And here we are to understand both; for his Name
alone is excellent, that is, God himself is excellent alone, the Name of him,
of him alone, is high, is lifted up, is excellent; and that we are to
understand by the Name of God here, God himself, as well as his Manifestations,
appears in the words at the end of the verse, His glory is above the earth and
heaven. Now Gods manifestation is either in heaven or earth. But there is a
further glory of God that is in himself, that is beyond all that is, or can be
manifested in, or to any creature; so that from the words thus opened, there
are these two doctrinal Points one (I will but only touch it) is raised from the
connection of the words with the former, and the other, that is, the substance
of the Text, that we shall abide a while upon.

The first is this, That a gracious heart is not satisfied with praising God
only for his works, but rises higher to praise him, and especially to praise
him for himself, for that that it sees in himself.

I say, a gracious heart does not stick in the Works of God; nor is it only
enlarged to praise God for what it sees in Gods works, but it will rise higher
than all the works of God, and praise him especially for that it sees in
himself; Thy self O Lord is excellent, the glory that is in thy self, it is
above the earth, and above the heaven. While we praise God for what we see in
his works, our thoughts and hearts are limited; for Gods manifestations of
himself are finite, and so there is not that spaciousness that a gracious heart
desires to let our its self in: but when it can rise up to God himself, and
look at the infinite excellency that there is in himself above all that does
appear in his works, then the heart enlarged with grace can expatiate it self
to the uttermost, and that is that which does delight him, then is a gracious
heart indeed in its own element, when it is expatiating it self even in God
himself.

And further God in setting himself before the soul in way of Covenant, Jer.
31.33.32.39.24.7. Ezekiel. 11.2^. Genesis 15.1.
he does not only tell those that he takes into Covenant, that he will do
such and such things for them, but he would have them to close with himself, I
will be your God. The Lord told Abraham that he would be his exceeding great
reward, but that would not satisfy Abraham, What will thou give me? Verse. 2.
having an eye to Christ, and the enjoyment of God in him; so let God say that
he will do never such things for a gracious heart, that is not enough, except
God himself be the portion of the soul, the soul cannot be satisfied with any
thing that God does; if God should say to one whose heart he has enlarged with
grace, I will give thee all the world to possess, thou shall have all the
glory, all the pomp, all the sweetness, all the comforts in the world; nay more
than that, I will make ten thousand worlds more, and give thee them all, and
they shall have all of them more excellency than this present world has; why
all this would not satisfy a heart enlarged with grace for the portion of it,
though such a one sees its self unworthy of the least crum of bread, yet it
cannot be satisfied with all the world, what then will satisfy him? only God
himself, for so God propounds himse f unto his people in way of Covenant, Psalm.
16.5.
I will be thy God, I will be your portion; And upon this, those that are in
Covenant with him, though they do rejoice to see God manifesting himself in all
his Names, they bless God for the beholding so much as they do of him in his
works; but the thing that their hearts are most upon; is God himself, the
excellency that there is in God above all his works.

And as it is in praising God, so also it is in other workings of the heart
toward God, as now grace does not love God so much for what God gives to it,
as for what God is himself; that is the difference between true sanctifying
grace, and common grace; common grace may make me love God for what I receive
from him, o^ for what I hope to receive from him; but sanctifying grace makes
me to love God for what is in himself, more than for what I receive from him,
or expect to receive; and so there may be the fear of God for some works of
God, when God does manifest his power and dreadfulness in his works, in
thundering or lightening, then the heart of a sinner may fear God, though there
be no grace; but now where there is grace, such a one fears God more, because
of that excellency he sees in God himself, than from any dreadful works of
God; and this would be a good rule to try your selves by: You say you fear
God, why? if you fear God, if it be the right fear of God, you will fear God
more for what you see in God himself, than for any works of God, than for any
works of his judgments, or threatenings, and the like: And so in the desires of
the heart after God, why, where the heart is gracious it works after God for
himself, and not for his gifts; It is an argument of a false love, a whorish
love, for the wife to love her husband for that she shall have by him, and not
to love his person more: And so it is a sign of a base slavish spirit for a
child to love his father because he gives him meat and drink, and clothes,
and will leave him an inheritance, and not rather to love the very person of
his Father; so the heart is but false with God that loves God, and that desires
after God, more for any thing that God does, than for what God is; and as these
workings of heart, love, and fear, and desire, are more in respect of God
himself, than of his works; so praises of God, and delighting in God, where it
is from true grace, it is more from what the soul sees in God, than from the
manifestation of all the glory of God in all his works, for, Praise the Name of
the Lord, For his Name is excellent, his glory is above the earth and heaven
(but we shall let this pass.) The main Point in the Text which we are to
pitch on is this,

That God is a most excellent being above all things.

This is the work that now I have to do, to endeavor to present God in the
excellency of his being to you, only you must by way of caution know before
we do begin, That God dwells in that light that is unapproachable, 1 Timothy
6.16. That it is but little that we do, or can know of God. And before we
begin to set forth the excellency of Gods being to you, you must know, that
there is infinitely more than either the tongue of Man or Angel can express;
when we have done all we can, there is more in God that is beyond what we
can say, or Angels could preach unto you; I say, more than the glorious light
of the Sun is more than a little glittering of a gloe-worm in the night, more
than all the Sea is beyond, and above a spoonful, a drop of water.

And further by way of Caution, you must know this, that it is impossible to
set before you the excellency of Gods being, and yet to speak so as every thing
should be plain to every one. Many things in the opening of Gods Nature to
you, must needs have some difficulty in them, because the subject that we are
speaking of, is so high above us; especially it must needs be difficult to
unclean spirits, to spirits that have always been grovelling below in the dirt,
to drousie spirits that think nothing to be excellent, but only to eat and
drink, and satisfy their flesh; when they hear the excellency of Gods Being
set out unto them, it must needs be an argument above their reach; it cannot
be expected that it is possible to speak so as their hearts should close with
what is said, to apprehend it.

But howsoever we do not know what God may do in going along with his word,
how he may come by his Spirit even to those that are of the weakest capacity,
therefore I shall endeavor to do that that is my work, that is, to show you
somewhat of God, what an excellent being he is, and so leave the work of the
Spirit of God to himself, to make known those things that shall be propounded,
and to settle them upon your hearts. Wherefore then God is an excellent being
above all things.

First, He is, and there is none else besides him. The truth is, we can
scarce say that any thing is but God, Exodus 3.14. When God came to Moses to
send him to Pharaoh, and Moses would know the Name of God, he bid him say, I
am that I am; I am has sent me; and God only describes himself thus unto
Moses, I am, I am a being; and so the name Jehovah is a name proper to God,
that signifies Gods being: Now might Moses say, Lord, is this a name that will
distinguish thee from any thing else, to say I am? cannot any man say so, I am?
but yet God gives this name of his, as his proper name merely, I am a being,
and I am that being that I am; and that is all the name God would tell Moses,
when Moses did desire to know so much of him, and how he might express him
that did send him, (...)
I am that I am:

Vt haereditare faciam id quod (...) est, from thence comes (...) essentia,
substantia.
For indeed Gods being it is that that is proper, and all other creatures in
comparison of this God, have but a shadow of being, therefore in Prove. 8.21.
says Wisdom there (that is Godliness) I cause to inherit substance, the words
are translated by the Learned, that which is Grace carries to God, and so by
Grace being carried to God, we come to inherit that which is, as if all the
while we inherited any thing in the world, we did not inherit that which is.
God himself properly is; So in Isa. 45.5, 6. I am Jehovah, and there is none
else besides me. There is nothing that has a being besides me (that is) not
such a being, as we shall further open, yea and in comparison no being;
therefore in Isa. 40.15, 17. We have a most excellent expression of the
excellency of Gods being in comparison of all other things, All the Nations of
the world they are as the drop of the bucket, and as the small dust of the
balance in comparison of God, Yea they are all nothing, less than nothing?
What an expression is here; take all the Nations of the world, put them all
together, they are all but as the drop of the bucket, that you shall see hang a
little at the bottom, but as a little dust of the balance; how soon may you
take your finger, and wipe off the drop of the bucket? why so even all Nations
of the world may as soon perish in respect of God; yea as if the Holy Ghost had
said too much when he compared the Nations of the world to God (as if he
should say) what, did I say they were as the drop of the bucket, and as the
small dust in the balance? nay, they are nothing at all; nay, and I must go
lower, they are less than nothing. And thus you see the Name of God is alone
excellent, because indeed he is such a being, as in comparison of him there is
nothing that is worthy of the name of a being. That 40. of the Prophecy of
Isaiah, when you come home, it will be a good Chapter to read in your
Families, to set out the greatness of God, for that is the work we are about
to show, you what a God you have to deal withal in all your ways, the Name of
God is excellent; Read that Chapter, and you will find Gods Name set out as
excellent indeed there. But that is the first.

In the second place, God, he is a present being, I am, says he, that is,
God injoyes himself, that infinite being of himself altogether, there is no
succession at all in the being of God, as there is in other creatures, the
creature injoyes but little of its own being; I beseech you consider the
difference between God and the creature in this, when (I say) he is a present
being, that is set forth in the words I am; I say the creature injoyes but very
little of its own being; why, because whatsoever is past, it cannot enjoy, and
whatsoever is to come it injoyes not; now all that it does enjoy of it self, it
is only what it has at an instant, this present instant what it has, that it
may be said to be; but now with God there is nothing past, there is nothing to
come; there is nothing past, I say, in respect of Gods being, there is nothing
to come, but his being is always present, he always says, I am; therefore
Christ speaking of his Divine Nature, in John 8.58. (...).
says he, Before Abraham was, I am; Christ does not say, I was before Abraham
was, no, but before Abraham was, I am. Certainly this had been no good English
to have spoken of any creature; If any man should say thus, Before such a thing
was, I am; if any Angel should say so, this were no proper speech; but Christ
says so, Before Abraham was, I am, because Christ in regard of his Divine
Nature has no succession of being at all; we cannot say that God has so
many years added to him since the world began, God was as eternal before the
world was, as he is now, or ever shall be; it cannot be said that he was,
not will be, but always it may be said I am; I am, was, and will be, the
difference of time, it is in respect of the creature, not in respect of God,
and that is the reason of those phrases in Scripture, That a thousand years
with God are ^s one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.
and one day as a thousand years; There is no difference of time with God at
all: And that is the second thing, therefore he alone is excellent.

Thirdly, This being of God it is in all places. His excellency it is every
where throughout the world, and that, first, Not virtually only, God is not in
every place only virtually by his power, Enter, praesenter Deus hic and ubique
potenter
that is, he works in every place, but he is in every place essentially.
Secondly, God is not in every place by motion, from one place to another, and
so gradually is in all places, but God is every moment in every place.

Thirdly, God is not in every place to fill heaven and earth, Deus est nullibi
inclusive, sed ubique secundum existentiam.
that is, one part in one place, and another in another, as a great thing that
fills such a room, one part is in one place, and another is in another; but God
fills heaven and earth, that is, all of God is every where, all that God is, is
in every place: Yea further, Centrum ubique circumferentia nullibi.
God is as much beyond every place, as he is in every place; he is as much
beyond the circumference of the heavens, and the earth, as he is in them; yea
if God should make ten thousand worlds more, he would fill all those as well
as he does this, without any motion at all, he would not move from one place
to another to fill up ten thousand worlds (if there were so many new ones made)
but in the same instant in which they were all made, that immense being of his
would fill up all. Surely God is a most excellent Being then above all other
things whatsoever.

Fourthly (for I intend but merely to present the chief things of the
excellency of God before you, and not to stand handling of these at large, for
every one of them might require a large tractate, but now only to present
before you what a God it is that you have to deal with) God is a Being that is
All-sufficient in himself; He stands in no need of any creature; in Acts
17.25. verse. He has need of nothing, of none of us, he has enough within
himself; before the world was, God was as blessed in himself as now he is;
there can be nothing added to him, there is such an excellency even in Gods
being its self, that there can be nothing added to him; we are poor creatures,
that stand in need of a thousand things continually, the air to breathe in, the
earth to bear us, fire to warm us, clothes to cover us, meat and drink, a
thousand things; we stand in need of the meanest creature, and if God should
take away the use of some mean contemptible creature, our lives would be made
miserable to us; but that is the excellency of Gods being that he has need of
nothing, he has all within himself, all the creatures in heaven and earth,
cannot add to him; no if there were ten thousand worlds more, although God did
possess them all, yet they would not add one whit unto what is in God himself;
therefore though the Lord has made the heaven and earth, God has an essential
and an attributed glory, his attributed glory is augmented or diminished by
man's obedience or disobedience, therefore sinners are said to rob God of his
glory, and Saints to give him glory; but his essential glory cannot be
increased or diminished.
and all things therein, yet we must not think that God is ever a whit the
better for these things, or has the more glory; he had as much glory and
blessedness in himself, as now he has, or can have; when all the Angels and
Saints shall be eternally blessing God in heaven, yet they can add nothing to
Gods glory: We say the Sun is a glorious creature, but does that add any
light to the Sun? so for Saints and Angels to be praising and blessing God,
what does that add to God? And in this the Name of God is excellent.

5 But further, in the fifth place, His Name alone is excellent in this thing,
that his excellency is universal, that is, all excellencies that are in all
creatures in heaven and earth, they are all in him virtually, and eminently,
he has them all in his own being, Psalm. 94.9. Shall not he that made the ear
hear, he that formed the eye shall not he see? the argument there will
confirm this to us, that whatsoever is in the creature that has any excellency
in it, that excellency is in God in an eminent way; the creature, one has one
drop of excellency, and another has another drop of excellency in it, and so a
third a third, every creature has its particular excellency in it, but God is
an universal good, all excellencies in all creatures are in God, all beauty,
all comfort, all goodness, whatsoever has any loveliness or desireableness in
it, I say it is all in God, and I know not any one consideration that will help
us more to understand God while we are here in the flesh than this, for in
regard of our weakness, we can know little or nothing of God, but by looking
into the creature, and so rising from them.

Now then when we come to look upon the creatures, and we see an excellency
in one creature, and another in another, Now if we can conceive as it were the
quintessence of all these excellencies drawn out, and conceive a being that
has all these together in him, this being is an excellent being indeed; this
would make us to look upon God above the creature when we look upon every
thing that is good in the creature to be in God himself, why then what ever
the creature has to draw the heart, why that the soul says is in God; and
indeed this one consideration of God, and the presenting of God to the soul in
this manner, is a special work of Gods converting a soul to himself; when I
say, the Lord intends to draw a soul to himself, to have the heart that was let
out after creature comforts, now to close with himself, and choose himself for
his portion, the Lord does show this to the soul: Soul what would thou have,
thou would have this comfort, and the other comfort to delight and content
thee; Know there can be nothing in any creature that thou see, but thou
may have it in me. Now this indeed we cannot by sense see, the comforts of
the creature are sensibly before us, and we see them by our senses; but now
God is above our sense, God he is above our reason, and there must be faith
to close with him; but now when God would convert a soul to himself, he does
show himself in such a way to the soul, as the soul does see that there is all
good in him that there is in the creature, and that it is in God in a more
satisfying and eminent manner.

Certainly, whatsoever there is in the effect, it must needs be in the causes;
now as all effects are to be resolved into the causes, so all causes are to be
resolved into this excellent being, that is the first cause of all things; for
these creaures that are effects, they have other causes of them, yet those
causes are effects of some higher causes, at length we must come to the first
cause, and all must be resolved into that; nay all excellencies in the
creature are more in God, than the excellency of the effect is in its causes;
for the causes when an effect is resolved into them, the causes if they be not
united to produce such an effect, they cannot do immediately that thing that
the effect could do; but now all excellency is so in God, as look what power
any creature has, or what thing it can do by any excellency it has, that God
can do; look what comfort it can bring by any good it has in it, the same
comfort God can bring; so that all is to be resolved into God; not that God
has all formally in him, as fire, air, meat, and drink, but what good there is
here, what excellency there is here, it is eminently in God, that is, God is
able to do of himself by his own being, whatsoever any creature is able to do,
though all the creatures in the world should be annihilated (taken away) and
thou only let live, God by his immediate power is able to let out to thee all
those variety of comforts that all the creatures the world had before could do:
Now when we can find all made up in God (as we say sometimes, that in some
one good dish, there is all dishes made up (that is but a similitude) but here
it is really that whatsoever any child of God loses in the creature, such a
one can find it to be made up in God) Indeed this is the art and skill of
Religion: Godliness does teach this art and skill, to make up whatsoever is
wanting in a creature, in God himself, and that is the chief ground of the
satisfaction and contentment of a gracious heart in the want of
creature comforts; and because the men of the world have no skill in this
mystery, they think it a mere notion, a conceit of men, they are not able to
apprehend any reallity in it, therefore it is that they vex and fret so much
when they want creature comforts, for they know not whither to go to make them
up in any other being: But the Saints know that all is in God, all excellency
in all creatures is in God, therefore when you look thus upon God, as having
all good that all creatures have, and that in himself; and when you come thus
to God as such a being so much above all creatures, then you have in some
measure a right apprehension of God: And that is the fifth thing.

6 But sixthly, The Name of God is excellent above all: For not only all
excellencies in the Creature are in him; but all those varieties of
excellencies that are scattered up and down severally in Creatures, are united
into one excellency in him; for a water may have the quintessence of many herbs
in it; there are many things in the water at that time; though but one drop of
water, yet there are many things in it: So there is such an union of all
excellencies in God, that I say it is but one in God; there is an indivisible
union of all variety: Things that are various in the Creature, they are all
united in one in God, that must needs be a glorious excellency indeed. If one
man had all the beauty and strength, and all the wisdom that all the men in
the world ever had, or have, and united into one, what beauty, what strength,
what wisdom would that one man have! now it is so in God, that all beauty, and
wisdom, and strength, are united into one excellency, so that God he is one
otherwise than any other Creature can be one; other Creatures may be made one
by composition, but now God he is not one by the union of many things
together; for there is but one thing in God, God is but one, there is a
variety, as we conceive, as the Sun when it shines upon different glasses,
red, or blew, or yellow, it has a variety, I but all this is but one Sun, so
all the attributes of God that we speak diverse times of, these are the several
manifestations of that one excellency that there is in God, all united into
one; therefore by this the Saints come to be the more happy, for they may not
only enjoy all the good that there is in the Creature, but enjoy it all in
one, and we say, the stronger is a thing, the more it is united; now in God
all good whatsoever is united in one, all good in the Creature, yea and all
good in himself, that is, all his attributes; so you must conceive of God;
only the manifestation is diverse; and therefore you must not conceive that
there is any one thing in him more than another; you may not conceive of God,
as if there were more mercy than justice, or more justice than mercy, or more
of either of these, than there is of truth, wisdom, and holiness: Indeed God
may manifest himself unto the Creature, more in one, than in the other, but as
they are in his own being they are not, only one as much as the other, but
they are all but one thing, only several manifestations, as but one Sun that
has diverse reflections by diverse glasses; so all Gods attributes are but one
excellency that is in him; therefore his Name is excellent above all things,
because he is but one God in this manner.

7 Further, Not only all good and excellency is in God, but all possible good,
what can possibly be imagined (as we know that the power of God that made the
world, could make thousands of worlds) all this is in him, and infinitely in
him, When we do speak of any thing to be in God, we must be sure that we do
not limit our thoughts, as when we speak of God to be a great God, do not
limit it, he is great, but infinitely so; when we speak of his wisdom, he
is wise, but infinitely wise, and so of his holiness, and justice, and truth,
and knowledge; all must be looked upon without any bounds whatsoever; in the
Creature there are such and such things, but they are all limited by their
causes, but God having no causes at all to limit him, therefore he is
infinite, whatsoever is in him it is infinitely in him, whatsoever is in him,
is not only infinite in the kind, as there is all the wisdom and holiness
that can be; but I say, it is absolutely infinite; as it is in him, it is so
infinite, that there is no kind of being but is included within it; speak but
any one thing of God, I say, it is not only infinite in the kind, but so as
it includes whatsoever has being, in the infinite Ocean of being that is in
himself; we are very ready when we look upon God to have limited thoughts,
and therein we bring him down to the Creature; this is the very reason why God
does hate Images so much as he does, because that Images do make a kind of a
representation of him, as though he were finite; as Papists, they tell us they
think not that such an Image is God, I, but being put in mind of God by such an
Image, there is a kind of limiting the infiniteness that is in God; and
therefore God hates it, and will not have that infinite excellency of his to
be represented by any Image whatsoeever; whenever thou think of God, or
speak of God, do not only compare him with that which is in the Creature,
but when thou have made thy comparison, let thy thoughts be infinitely above
it; there is no one attribute of God does help us more to understand what God
is, than when we conceive him to be infinite in all that he is or has.

8 Yea and further, All the good that there is in God, and excellency, it is
eternally in him; it may be such a Creature has an excellency, but how long
has it had it? it was not long before but it was nothing: but God has been
what he has been (if we may speak so) he has been eternally; now that is a
mighty swallowing consideration; the consideration of eternity; as a man that
is an Accountant, if he writes a figure of one, add but six ciphers to it, and
it is ten hundred thousand, now if he should be adding and adding all his life
time, yea if he should have lived from the beginning of the world to have
added to the figure of one, what an infinite sum would this be! but it is
nothing to eternity; either if you look back to eternity it is nothing, or if
you look forward to eternity, it is nothing; (the Saints indeed shall live
eternally in respect of that which is to come, the souls and bodies of the
Saints shall be eternally for time to come with God, and the souls and bodies
of the ungodly shall be eternally in Hell) Now all the excellency that there
is in God, is eternally in God, which way soever you look.

9 Further, Not only eternally, but immutably in him; and therefore his name
is alone excellent, it is immutable, that is, God has such an infinite
excellency, that it is impossible that he can be better, or other than he
is; if God should be otherwise than he is, he would instantly cease to be a
God; the being of God has that excellency in it, that there can be no
addition, no substraction, add any thing to him, and you destroy him, take any
thing from him, and you destroy his being, alter any thing in him, and he
ceases to be God; so the Scripture says, With him There is no shadow of
change. Jam. 1.17.
Indeed there is a change in the creature, but nothing at all in God; as if you
bring a piece of wax to the Sun it melts it, and clay, it hardens it, here is a
different effect of the Sun, but the Sun is the same; so bring the creature in
one disposition to God, and the love of God, and delight of God is in it; bring
the creature in another disposition to God, and the wrath of God is upon it,
yet God is the same, only the variety is in the creature. And therefore his
Name alone is excellent, and the creature, whatsoever excellence it has, it
changes up and down: As there is no shadow of change with God, so no shadow of
constancy in the creature.

10 Further in the next place, All these things are essentially in God;
Quicquid est in Deo est Deus
whatsoever is in God, it is his being, its God himself: This one thing would
much help you to understand the Nature of God, that whatsoever can be truly
said of God, it is God himself; as thus, Gods wisdom is God himself; Gods
mercy is God himself; Gods power is God himself: it is not so in the creature,
a man's wisdom is not a man's being, they are separable, one may be separated
from the other; but Gods wisdom is Gods being; a man's power and strength is
not his being, but Gods is, so a man's mercy and goodness is not his being,
but Gods is, and therefore (as before) these things that are variously
conceived by us, they are not only one in God, but his very being, and this
does mightily add to the glory of God, that whatsoever is in God, it is the
very essence and being of God himself: These things that we speak of God (as
I told you) because God is so infinitely above us, it is very hard to make them
plain to every understanding; and no marvel, because we are fallen so far from
him; and as I have gone along, I fear that a great many are ready to think,
Lord what are these things, we cannot apprehend them; why then go thy ways
home and be humbled for that great fall of mankind, Oh how far is man fallen
by his sin? we see now why God dwells in the thick cloud and darkness: Oh how
far am I fallen from God? for God made man at first able to know him; certainly
Adam did know all these things perfectly: it was the happiness of Adam in his
first creation to be able to look upon the face of God, and know what such
things as these meant; but now since our fall, we are said not only to be in
the dark, but darkness it self; Ephesians. 5.8.
and therefore it is but very little that we can know of God; we have such a
sight of God, as a poor man that lives all his days in a Dungeon, if he
should have one day a little crevise opened, where a little beam of the Sun
should shine, certainly he would stand and admire at it, if he never saw it
before, but how little would that man know of the nature of the Sun that had
but a little crevise opened for a beam to shine in a little time? Truly all
that ever the Ministers of God can tell you, or if God should send his Angels
to preach to open the Nature of God to you, it can be no other but a little
glimmering. But I hope if you bend your minds you may know so much as to make
you desire after the knowledge of him; for if there be no other effect than
this, yet it will be worth the while to make you to see that you do not know
God; and therefore your thoughts not being thus of God, as I have spoken, the
truth is, you have made God unto your selves but as an Idol (for if we
conceive otherwise of God than he is, we do but make him an Idol to our
selves) now, Oh that it might have but this effect at least (this that I have
said, with some few other things that are to be spoken) to cause men and women
to humble themselves before God for want of the knowledge of God, and to be
crying to God, that he would be pleased to make himself known unto them in
another way than they have known him, that so when they come to worship God,
they may be able to look upon him in another way than they have done: And
therefore I beseech you, be not discouraged, to think, I shall never know
these things, if God be thus, I shall never know what God is, be not
discouraged, for this God he is able to communicate himself beyond that way
that any creature is a^le to communicate its self, God can let out himself to
any creature as much as he pleases, and it is no matter whether the creature
be capable or no, the Lord can make it capable; and therefore be not
discouraged because of thy weakness; but if thou in the uprightness of thy
heart do seek to God, and do desire to know him above all things, If thou
searchest after the knowledge of God as after silver, Prove. 2.3, 4.
thou shall come to know God more than ever thou did; and certainly to have
but a few glimpses of this infinite first being of all things, it is a kind of
infinite satisfaction unto the souls of the servants of God, and though at
first they find it hard to know God, yet by seeking long after the knowledge
of him, they have found that knowledge of God that they would not be without
for ten thousand thousand worlds; its only the rational creature that is able
to know any thing of God at all, and this is a great part of that worship and
homage you owe to God, that you should know him, and so, that you might honor
him as a God, that you might glorify him as a God: Oh my brethren, how would
people live, had they but the real sight of such a God with whom they have to
deal in all their ways? when we put you upon the searching, to know what God
is, we put you not upon the searching to get notions to discourse of: I
confess in the right knowledge of the infinite first being of all things, there
are most excellent notions to be learned, but that that I endeavor to put you
on to, is this, that you might search to know this God, to the end that you
might fear him, and choose him to be your portion, that you might love him and
serve him, and blessed is that soul that shall thus know him.

The Second SERMON ON The Nature of God.
PSALM. 148.13. For his Name alone is excellent.


11 THE next thing is this, All excellencies are in God purely, and immixtly,
that is, God has all excellencies in him, and nothing else but excellency; the
creature it may have some excellency, but it has a mixture of imperfections;
it may have some power, but there is a mixture of weakness; it may have some
goodness, but there is a mixture of some kind of evil in creatures as they are
in themselves; the very Angels themselves, though they are upheld by God, yet
they have that in them that might make them sin against God, if God did but
leave them to themselves: So there is a mixture of weakness in all creatures,
but God alone is excellent, for he has nothing else in him but that which is
excellent, 1 John 1.5. The Lo^d is light, and in him there is no darkness; this
cannot be said of any creature, that the creature has excellency in him, and
there is no darkness at all in him; there is darkness in every creature, but
the Lord is light, and in him there is no darkness; that that is said
concerning light here, may be said concerning any thing else, the Lord has
such and such Excellencies, and in him there is no defect, all is in him purely.

12 Next, All is in God originally; that is, all is from himself: Now there is
no excellency in God that is by participation; He has it from himself, and in
himself. Whatsoever the creature has, it has it derivatively, not originally,
it receives it from another: but all that is in God it is originally, it is in
himself, and by himself, and from himself, all is in him as the spring of all
kind of excellency.

13 But in the next place, As all is in him originally, that is, he has all
from himself, So God is the fountain of all excellency to all creatures
whatsoever; if there be any good in any creature, it is but a beam from this
Sun, and a drop from this infinite Ocean, it all flows from that infinite Sea
of all good, which lets out it self to this creature, or the other creature, in
this or the other manner: So God is the fountain of all good to all creatures
whatsoever, they are to look upon him as having all coming from him. And
therefore he alone is excellent, and his glory is above the Heavens and Earth.

14 Further, As all things are from him, so they depend upon him; all
excellencies that are in the creature, as they come from God, so they have
their absolute dependency upon God, so as God need do nothing to destroy a
creature: if he does but withdraw himself from it, it falls to nothing
presently; take the most glorious Angels, and the highest Heavens, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Sea, and Earth, if God should but withdraw his hand from these
creatures, they would presently fall down to nothing; they do depend upon God,
as the light upon the Sun, there is no more light if the beams of the Sun be
withdrawn; so if God withdraw his influence from the creature, it can do
nothing, and its nothing presently; so that the influence that there is from
God to the creature, it is to maintain the creature in his being; every moment
the Lord must put forth as infinite a power to maintain thee and me, and every
creature, as he did at the first for the making of the world. Heb. 1.3.
And this is Gods excellency to uphold all things, they do so depend upon him.
If a workman make a house, he goes away, the house can stand without him; but
when God built the world, the world could not stand one moment without him. And
not only God must have an influence into the creature to preserve the being,
but likewise to enable the creature to act; the creature cannot act one moment
without God, no creature can stir in the least degree, Act. 17.28.
except the Lord concur with it; Therefore the Name of God alone is excellent;
By him, says the Scripture, we live, we move, we have our being; not only
we are upheld in our being and lives, but we move, we cannot stir one
moment, but God must concur with his creature for the motion and action of it.

15 Further, God alone is excellent in his operation, in his power, in the
manner of his working; though God give a power to other creatures to work, yet
God works in a different way from all other creatures.

First, God he does whatsoever he pleases either in heaven or earth. The will
of God, as I showed you before, it cannot be beyond Gods power, God cannot
will to do more than he has power to do, Psalm. 115.3. Psalm. 135.6. Eccles.
8.3.
Therefore the Lord he does whatsoever he pleases in heaven and earth. The
power of every creature can but work within the sphere, so far as the causes
give a virtue and efficacy, so far it is able to work, and no further.

Secondly, The power of God appears in this, that the Lord does the greatest,
and the most difficult things, as easily as he does the least and the easiest;
as thus, God makes the whole world as easily as he can make a crum of dirt;
God can make the Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, and all the Seas and Earth, with
as much ease as he can make a fly. God can make ten thousand Angels, as soon
as he can make one worm. And therefore God, he can as soon speak the word to
the soul of a man that is dead, Joh. 5.25.
to live, he can as soon raise a^l the dead out of their graves, as he can
give them a piece of bread to eat while they are alive, such is the
infiniteness of Gods operation.

3 Further, God is excellent in all that he does. There is nothing that God
does in any time, but was decreed to be done from eternity; that is, the
excellency of Gods working; the creature works something, but perhaps a man did
not think of what he does, a few days ago, but God does nothing, nor never
will do any thing, but it is that that was decreed from all eternity that he
would do, and God will never do any thing to all eternity, but what he had
decreed from all eternity before; yet it is for us creatures to observe
according to his revealed will; but this is the excellency of God above all
creatures whatever.

4 And then there is a further thing that is as considerable as any of the
other, God is so far from needing any matter to work upon, or instrument to
work by, when he does do anything, as there is no more required for any
creature to be, or work at any time when God would have it, but the alone act
of Gods will that was from eternity. As now the world it was not made six
thousand years ago; Now God willed from all eternity that there should be a
world in time, and there was nothing required to make this world but that act
of Gods will that was from all eternity, that it should be at that time. Man,
he does will and decree to do such a thing; now when the time comes, then he
bestirs himself, and takes this tool or instrument, and puts forth a power that
he did not put forth before: But the act of Gods will from all eternity was
sufficient to make all creatures that ever since have been made, and to provide
for all creatures that ever since have been provided for, one act of Gods will
has done all this; and that act of the will of God that has been from all
eternity has done it; there are not several acts of Gods will, but Gods act is
himself.

Diverse other things might be showed, as this,

5 Where God has done any work, all his works add nothing to him. The
creature has somewhat added to him by his works; as thus, A man that is a
workman he can make a house, and so he has the benefit of it to dwell in,
to keep off the weather, and so he makes cloth, and has the benefit of it:
But all the works of God add nothing to him. A man can do something by the
work that he has made that he could not do without his work: but God can do
nothing by any work that he has made, but he can do the same without that
work; when he has made all his works, they are not helpful to him (but this
was a branch of the All Sufficiency of God.)

16 In the next place, God alone is excellent in the manner of his
communication of himself, God does so communicate himself to his creatures, as
one creature cannot to another.

First, God can let out as much of himself as he will to any creature; now one
creature cannot let out as much as he pleases to another; for instance, A man
that has learning, he cannot make another as learned as he will; a man that
has holiness and goodness, cannot make another as holy, and as good as he
will: but God can, this is Gods propriety, he can let out of himself as much
as he pleases, as much holiness, as much goodness, as much power as he
pleases he is able to let out.

Secondly, the creature, When it does communicate any excellency, the more it
lets out, the less it has; but God has never a whit less by that that he
does let out to his creatures; as thus, the Sea is full of water, yet if you
take out but a little water, the Sea has so much the less; therefore some of
the Fathers would set out Eternity by this, that if a Sparrow should but once
in a thousand years fetch one drop of water from the Sea in the bill of it, yet
the Sparrow would sooner empty all the Sea, than the torments of the damned
should be at an end; so that if a drop be taken out of the Sea it is the
less: but God is such an infinite ocean of being, of excellencies, of
happiness, that let him let out, and communicate never so much of himself, yet
he has as much still as ever he had: God has let out excellency, and good
to all his creatures ever since the world began, all the good, the comfort, the
happiness, the sweetness, the beauty and excellency of all creatures have been
from God that infinite fountain, but now this fountain is as full as ever it
was, and will be as full to all eternity as ever it was: And here lies the
excellency of God beyond all creatures whatsoever.

17 In the next place, God alone is excellent, there is no comparison to be
made between him, and any thing else; as thus, Take the creature in what we
think it comes nearest to God, and the truth is, to speak properly, it comes no
nearer to God than those things that we think come less; as when we say that
God is a great God and fills all places, if you should suppose a body that
should fill all this world, it is no nearer to Gods immensity than a moat that
flies in the Sun: or thus, Take never so many thousand years, as we spoke the
last day, if an Accountant that should write down figures all his life time,
they would come we think, to an infinite sum; yet all those infinite
millions of years come no nearer to Gods eternity, than one minute does, and
the reason that I give is unanswerable, because that there must needs be
always an infinite distance between what is finite, and what is infinite, and
greater than an infinite distance there cannot be; now take such a body as
should fill the space between heaven and earth, there remains still an infinite
distance between the Immensity of God, and this body, and take so many numbers
of years as possibly can be imagined by Men or Angels, yet there will remain an
infinite distance between Gods eternity, and those numbers of years; now
greater than an infinite distance there cannot be; therefore all those years
do not come nearer to eternity than a minute, and all the greatness does not
come nearer to Immensity than a moat in the Sun; God is beyond all comparison
whatsoever, and the understanding that God is an infinite being, will help us
to understand all the rest that I have named.

18 And there is one more, and that is this, He is the last end of all things;
He is the highest end, for which all Creatures had their being, and the more
any Creature is subservient unto God, the more excellency a Creature has, For
of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.36.
to whom be glory for ever. All things must tend to God as the highest end;
cursed be that Creature that shall challenge to be the highest end of any
good thing whatsoever; this makes it to be a cursed thing for any man to make
himself to be his last end, to make his name, honor or credit to be the end
that he aims at; and indeed, this is the very thing that makes pride to be so
great a sin; the Scripture never speaks so of other things, as it does of
pride; it is said of other sins, that God hates the workers of iniquity, but it
is said of no sin, that God does resist it, only the sin of pride; why? James
4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
because a proud man does cross God in that which is indeed his excellency, and
that is this, That God is the highest end of all things, for whom all things
were made, now a proud man crosses God in this, nay says he, I will aim at my
self as the highest end; we may aim at our own good in a subordinate way, but
we must be sure to lift up God as the highest end of all, because he is
excellent above all; now put all these together.

First, That God he is, and there is none else; He is such a being, as in
comparison of him nothing else has a being; He is that being that has no
succession, that is always the same; He is an excellency in all places, that
fills all places without any local motion at all; He is a being that has all
sufficiency in himself, he has all excellencies, in him is an universality of
all excellencies, he has all excellencies united in one that are scattered up
and down in Creatures; yea, all the attributes of God are in him but one, he
has in him all possible good whatsoever; all things that are in God, are
equally in him, they are all infinitely in him, they are eternally, immutably,
essentially, purely, without mixture, originally, he is the fountain of all
good to the Creature; all excellency in the Creature does absolutely depend
upon him; he is excellent in his operation, he can do whatsoever he will,
he can do the greatest thing as easily as the least, and one act from
eternity, is enough to do all that ever he has done; He can communicate as
much of himself as he will to his Creature, and he has never a whit the less
in himself; there can be no comparison between him and the Creature, the
highest Creature comes not nearer him than the least, and he is the highest
end of all things whatsoever; and this God is our God; this is the God that we
profess to serve, that we profess to worship, and these are to be the
thoughts that we are to have of God when we come before him; Now you cannot
but imagine that there must needs be abundance of streams of Use and
Application that must follow from these things; all that I have done, it is but
to present what God is.

Now meethinks I hear many that give their minds to understand what God is,
even saying within themselves, Oh that we did but acknowledge God to be thus,
surely there is a farther excellency in God than we have imagined, and might
we have but further sight into these things that have been thus briefly
presented to us, Oh of what excellent use might all these be! I shall endeavor
therefore to present but to you, and even as briefly as I have done the other,
the several uses that may flow from all these things, I will only give you a
hint of one or two now.

Oh what infinite cause have we all to be ashamed of those low thoughts we
have had of God! we see, we may gather, that there is infinitely more in God,
and God is infinitely higher than ever we thought of (I say) then upon the
very hearing of such things as these are, and especially we being conscious to
our selves how little we are able to understand of them, we may see cause to
be ashamed of the poor and low thoughts that we have had of this infinite
Majesty; the unworthy thoughts that we have had of him, when we have come
into the presence of God; you have come to prayer to God, have you come to
prayer as unto such a God? have you had such kind of thoughts as these are,
that he is that high Majesty? Certainly you cannot sanctify Gods Name but you
must have high thoughts of God; and though I will not say, that those do not
sanctify Gods Name, that have not every one of these thoughts of God, yet thus
much I will say, that those that have not apprehended every one of these things
of God, have not sanctified Gods Name as much as they should, for we are to
apprehend what it is possible for us to apprehend here in this world, or
otherwise we do not sanctify Gods Name so as we ought; when we come to God
in prayer, or to worship him in any other duty of his worship, if we do not
apprehend of God as much as we possibly can in this world, we do not
sanctify Gods Name as much as we ought to do, and we are to be ashamed that
we have not such apprehensions of God as we might possibly have; if God be
such a God as this, what poor thoughts of God are these, that he is as an old
man in Heaven? some have such poor apprehensions of God, and when they hear the
Scripture speak of Gods eyes, and ears, and hands, they think that God has a
body, when as the Scripture does but speak to our capacities, that is, what a
man can do with his eyes, or hands, or ears, that God is able to do by his
infinite power. I appeal to you, have you apprehensions of the majesty and
glory of God, beyond all majesty and glory that any Creature is capable of in
this world? we do not sanctify Gods Name, except, I say, we apprehend God
higher in majesty and glory, than all creatures in the world are. Suppose you
were to come to a King that had all the glory and honor put upon him that ever
any creature had in this world, with what fear and trembling would we come
before such a Majesty as this is? but if thou have not come with further
trembling and fear before God, when thou came into his presence, if thou have
not come with higher thoughts of that God that thou have to deal withal (I
say) thou have not glorified God as a God; no marvel though people are so
slight and vain in the duties of Gods worship, because they do not know what a
God he is that they have to do withal.

Whose Name alone is excellent, and whose glory is above the Earth and Heavens.
Know sinner, and the Lord smite this upon thy heart, thou that art a wicked and
ungodly man all the days of thy life, thou have done nothing else but fought
against this God, this infinite and glorious God thou have been an enemy to all
the days of thy life, and every time thou renewest thy sins, thou do do
nothing else but strike at this infinite God, and provokest the wrath of this
infinite deity against thy soul and body; and dare thou stand out against
this God? will thou put it to the trial, to see whether that God that thou
sinnest against be such a God as this is? will thou put it to the ttial, that
God should set thee apart to make thee an object upon whom to exercise all that
infinite power that there is in God, to bring evil, and misery, and torments
upon thee for thy sin? this is the case of all desperate sinners that do go on
in a desperate way of sin; the language of their sin is this, I do hear much
spoken concerning the greatness, and excellency, and glory of God, I Will try and
venture, I Will put it to the experiment, whether God be such a God or no, as he
has manifested himself in his word: Oh woe to that Creature that shall come to
feel what the greatne^s of God does mean! Oh it is infinitely better for thee
to fall down before him and therefore this should be the Exhortation to all
sinners; Consider, Exhort.
Oh sinful man or woman, what a God it is thou do contest withal! shall the
potsheard strive with his Maker? let one potsheard strive with another, but let
not the Creature strive with the Almighty, for he will be infinitely too hard
for thee, and he will appear alone to be excellent; thou do lift up thy
will above his will, as if so be that thou would rise above this infinite
God, but know, in despite of thy heart he will be above thee, he has thee
under his feet this moment, and the sword of his justice is at thy very heart,
and he can take thy heart blood when he pleases, and send thee down to
eternal miseries; there is no striving with such a God as this is, who is alone
excellent; Isa 45.23. Romans 14.11.
the word has proceeded out of his mouth in Righteousness, that every knee
must bow unto him, and every tongue must confess this God; certainly one way or
other he will have his glory out of thee; God can as well cease to be, as not
to have his glory out of every Creature; do but consider of this, and learn to
tremble before this God; The Lord is excellent and glorious above all things,
and he is resolved that he will have his glory from every Creature one way or
other, and if it prove that he comes upon thee to force it out of thee, better
ten thousand times that thou had never been born; 1 Pet. 5.6. James 4.10.
therefore according to the Exhortation of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, Oh! let
us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and let us all say, Thou O
Lord art alone excellent, and thy glory is above the Heavens and Earth, and the
desire of our souls is to l^ft up thy Name as the excellent thing above all
Creatures. While we live here in this world, this is our excellency, and
blessed is that man or woman that comes to see this to be his or her
excellency, namely, that I might lift up Gods Name in the place where he has
set me; heretofore I have lift up other things as excellent, if I could get an
Estate, etc. But the Lord has made me to see that he alone is excellent, and
his excellency has darkened all the excellency of the Creature in my eyes; I
see nothing excellent but God, and all in order unto God; that is a good sign
of the work of grace in a man or woman, when he shall see so much of the
excellency of God, as Gods excellency shall darken all the excellency in the
world.

The Third SERMON ON The Nature of God.
PSALM. 148.13. For his Name alone is excellent.


BUt a second Use is this that we are now to proceed in, Oh how vile is sin
then that is committed against such a God as this is? there is nothing in the
world can show a soul the evil of sin, but the sight of God. If we should tell
you never so much of the terrors of the Law, and of hell fire, though you
might see the desert of sin somewhat, yet until you come to see with what a God
you have to deal, you can never know what the evil of sin means. Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.4.
says David, that was the thing that struck David's spirit, David knew that it
was against God that he sinned; when God shall come to the conscience of a
sinner, and present himself before his conscience, and say, Oh wretched sinner,
it is I that you have sinned against, as Christ did in Act. 9. unto Saul, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4.
So when God shall say, Sinner, sinner, why do thou rebel against me? If God
would but give us one sight of himself, that we might behold him as he is
upon his Throne, in this excellency of his Name above all things, it were
impossible but the heart of a sinner should even break at such a sight.
Certainly one day every sinner shall have a sight of God: Happy it is now for
us to have such a sight of God here in this world, that may cause us to see the
evil of our sins, for otherwise the sight of God hereafter, will certainly sink
our souls into the bottomless gulf of horror and despair. When Daniel was
about to confess his sin, in Dan. 9. Mark how he begins, because he would get
his heart to be affected with his sin, and the sins of the people that there
he confessed: Mark how he begins his prayer, Dan 9.4.
And I prayed (says he in the 4. verse) unto the Lord my God, and made my
confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God; thus he begins, I
made confession (says he) I prayed and made confession of sin, and said, Oh
Lord, the great and dreadful God: first he looks upon God how great and
dreadful he was, and this it was that caused him to confess his sin with
humiliation: you that say your prayers, and will confess that you are sinners,
did you but at the beginning of your prayers, when you go to confess your sin,
cast up one eye to heaven, and behold this God upon his Throne, and see him to
be the great and dreadful God, it would cause you to confess sin after another
manner than ever yet you have done: It is a good thing therefore in our
prayers, when we are about to confess sin, first to set before our souls the
greatness and the dreadfulness of that God that we have sinned against. When
this Prophet Daniel would humble that proud Belshazzer, in Dan. 5.23. Mark what
he says, And the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are thy ways,
have thou not glorified: This speech set home upon a man's conscience, were
enough to break the proudest and stoutest heart in the world. If so be that
the eyes of the proudest stoutest sinner were opened to see God in his glory,
and to hear the Lord speak thus to him, that God in whose hand is the breath of
thy nostrils, and all thy ways, that is the God that thou have not glorified,
thou do not think with whom it is that thou have to deal; but that is the
God that you have heard preached of thus, Whose Name alone is excellent, such
an infinite and glorious Deity is that Deity that thou have neglected and
despised, and preferred thy lusts before: Oh if God would but give commission
unto your consciences to speak this with power to you, that God that is thus
glorious and excellent you have sinned against, oh it would be of wonderful
force to break the hardest heart of men. And in Psalm. 104.1, 2. Psalm. 104.1, 2.
Do but see there how David had his heart rising against sin and sinners upon
the consideration of the excellency of God, there he speaks of the same
argument that we have here in the Text, Bless the Lord, Oh my soul: my God,
thou art very great, thou art clothed with honor and majesty (and so he goes
on) who coverest thy self with light as with a garment. He proceeds in the
Psalm describing the greatness and excellency of God: But then when he had
done describing Gods excellency, and found his heart warmed and enlarged, and
raised with the meditation of the excellency of God, Mark how he breaks forth
in the last words of the Psalm, Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth,
and let the wicked be no more; Verse. 35.
bless thou the Lord, Oh my soul: As if holy David should have said thus, Oh
Lord, I see thee to be very great, and thou art clothed with honor and
Majesty, and thy Name is excellent above all things: What? And are there any
wretched creatures that will dare to presume to rebel against thee who art so
great, that will dare yet to set their will against thy will, and to prefer
their lusts before thee? Oh cursed be those sinners, Let the sinners be
consumed from the earth, and let the wicked be no more. There is infinite
reason that wicked wretched creatures should be for ever consumed, that sin
against such a God as thou art, who art so great as thou art. My brethren, it
is no marvel though the people of God are so afraid of sin; many of you wonder
at the niceness of the consciences of many people, that they dare not commit
any known sin for a world; you wonder at them why they should be so nice, you
think it is foolishness: Would you know the reason? It is this, God has showed
unto their consciences a sight of himself, they have had a sight of the glory
of the Majesty of the great God, Whose Name alone is excellent, and it is that
that makes them afraid of sin for ever, and makes them look upon sin as the
greatest evil, and even tremble at the least temptation unto any sin
whatsoever. And that is the second Use, Great is the evil of sin, if committed
against such a God.

then if God be thus excellent above all, from the meditation of the
Excellency of God and his glory, we see cause to be vile in our own eyes; the
higher we see God to be, the lower we should be in our own eyes, there is
nothing will take down the spirit of a man more than God: I dare say of every
proud heart in the world, such a one knows not God, never had a sight of the
glory of God that he has to do withal; the sight of God will wonderfully
humble the heart before him, Job 42.5. is very famous for this, Job says, With
the hearing of the ear I have heard of thee, but now mine eyes have seen thee
(what follows then upon that) Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. Verse. 6.
Job that was a holy man, yet he confesses that he had but even heard of God,
he never had such a sight of God as God gave him at this time, and upon the
sight that he had of God, though he were a holy, and a gracious man, and
could stand in his uprightness, yet says he, Mine eyes have seen thee, and
therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Oh that God would give
such a fight of himself to all your souls, to those proud, stout, and
rebellious sinners that have gone on in ways of rebellion against him. You
have heard of God by the hearing of the ear, but have your eyes ever seen him?
If God would but give you a sight of what I have briefly spoken to you, you
would certainly fall down before him, and abhor your selves in dust and ashes:
So the Prophet Isaiah, though a godly man, yet in Isa. 6. he heard the
Cherubins and Seraphins praising of God, and crying, Holy, Holy, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3.
Holy is the Lord of Hoasts; And there was a vision of God upon his Throne to
the Prophet, what follows? says the Prophet, Woe unto me, for I am undone!
Why? For I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell among a people that are of
unclean lips; Woe unto me, for I am undone, for I have seen the King, the Lord
of Heasts! I see the Lord upon his Throne, and I behold the blessed Angels how
they admire at his glory, Oh woe to me, I am undone. If so holy a man shall
thus cry out upon the sight of God, and say, Woe to me, I am undone, because I
am a man of polluted lips! Oh what may thou do then, that art a man of
polluted lips, and polluted heart, and polluted life? Oh how are thy lips
polluted! The Prophet Isaiah, he was no swearer, neither was he one that
would talk filthy unclean talk, but yet he complains he was a man of polluted
lips, and cries, Woe to me, I am undone, because I have seen the Lord: Oh how
would thy heart then be humbled? What cause at least is there that thy heart
should be humbled that art so polluted as thou art? the sight of God should
mightily humble us before God, Psalm. 8 the beginning, Oh Lord our Lord, how
excellent is thy Name in all the earth? says the Prophet David, and so he
goes on to show the excellency of God; then he cries out in verse 4. What is
man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him?
Lord thou that art so excellent in thy self above all things, it is a wonder
that thou should vouchsafe so much as to look upon man. It may be thou
look high, because thou art a little above thy brethren, but if thou had a
sight of God, thou would wonder that this God should look to thee, Psalm.
113.6. there you have such an expression, That God does humble himself to
behold the things that are done in heaven: Why what an expression is hereof
Gods excellency? God is so excellent that he does humble himself to behold the
things that are done in heaven: now if he be so excellent as to humble
himself to the beholding of the things in heaven, then how does God humble
himself to behold things done in earth, to behold such wretched vilde creatures
as thou art? Oh be vile in thine own eyes upon the sight of the great God, and
by these three Uses, you may have three Notes whether ever God has made known
himself to you, or no.

First, Are you ashamed and confounded in your thoughts for those low poor
thoughts you have had of God?

Secondly, Has the sight of God caused you to see the dreadfulness of the
evil that there is in sin?

Thirdly, Has the sight of God made you to be vile in your own eyes? That is
a good evidence that you have had some sight of God indeed.

In the fourth place, If God be thus excellent, and his Set but God now, and
the creature together, nay, all the creatures in the world together, Oh how is
the vanity of all creature comforts in the world made known to us. There are
many ways to convince us that there is a vanity in all things in the world, by
the strength of reason we may be convinced, and by experience: A man
sometimes that has an estate, God does but touch his body, and lays him upon
his sickbed; such a man says, Oh what a poor thing is it to enjoy all the
world? had I all the world at my command, I could have no comfort in it, and
therefore what a vanity is there in the creature: And another perhaps by
arguments and reasons, will tell you that every thing is vain, and there is no
contentment, nor continuance in any thing in the world: When we see men that
are rich and great dye, and carry nothing with them, we are ready to say, Oh
how vain the world is! these are some means to cause us to see the vanity of
the creature: But what are all these to the sight of God? The sight of the
glory of God, it is infinitely more powerful to discover the vanity of all
things in the world to us: That man, or woman, that has had once a real sight
of this God in his infinite excellency, will not much regard what becomes of him
concerning outward things in this world. He that sees God to be great, will
see all other things to be small. And indeed we never see God to be truly
excellent, except we see him alone to be excellent. Thou think thou
know somewhat of God, I but still the excellency of the creature is glorious
in thy eyes: Certainly thou do not know God aright: If thou know God
aright in his excellency, thou know him Alone to be excellent, and
therefore if thou knew no other excellency but God, all other things would
be but vanity in thine eyes. In 2 Cor. 3.10. says the Apostle there
concerning the glory of the Law, compared with the glory of the Gospel, That
that which was made glorious, now had no glory by reason of a greater glory
that is come: So I may say in this case, the things of the world that were
glorious in thine eyes before, yet now they are not glorious, but all darkened,
because there is a greater glory that now comes and shines in upon thee. If a
man had lived in a dark Dungeon under the ground all the days of his life, and
never had the glimpse of any light whatsoever, never since he was born, if on
a sudden a candle should be brought to him, he would admire at that glory;
but now if this man should afterward be brought into the world, and see the
glory of the Sun, the glory of the candle would be nothing to him: So the men
of the world, because they live as it were in darkness, they have some comforts
in the creature, and they think them to be glorious, for they know no better:
But that soul that has had a sight of God, comes to see that all things in the
world are but darkness to him. There is nothing can disingage the heart of a
man from the creature, so, as a sight of God. You have a notable Scripture for
that, how a sight of God does dis-ingage the heart of a man from the creature,
in Act. 7.2. And he said, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hearken, The God of
glory appeared unto our Father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia before he
dwelt in Charran, and said unto him, Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy
kindred, and come into the Land which I shall show thee: And so he shows how
Abraham was content to forsake all his friends and Country; Why? the God of
glory appeared to him: it is said upon this, when the Holy Ghost would show
what it was that brought Abraham out of his Country, that took off his heart
from all his friends and Country, to go into a strange Country, says the Holy
Ghost, The God of glory appeared to our Father Abraham: Let a man's heart be
never so much glewed to any contentments that are here in the world, let but
the God of glory appear to that man, and all things are vanity, then the heart
quickly comes off from any thing. And indeed though there may be many
arguments that may make men and women to deny themselves very much the use of
creature comforts, yet the heart is never thoroughly taken off till the God of
glory appear to the soul. A notable example of self-denial it that of Moses,
Moses that might have had all the riches and glory of Egypt, might have been
next to the King himself, an heir, for so some write, that Pharaoh had no son,
and that Pharaohs daughter did adopt Moses, to the end that he might be an
heir to the Crown, and yet Moses that had all riches, and the treasures of
Egypt at command, yet he forsakes a^l; but though he forsook all for a while,
yet you will say, did he not repent him afterward? No, says the Text, Heb.
11.27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King, for he
endured, as seeing him that is invisible, that was the thing that did it, it
made Moses forsake all the riches of Egypt, and endure, to go on, and never
repent him for making such a choice: What was the great thing that did take
Moses off from the creature? It was the sight of God, that God that was
invisible: My brethren, the sight of God, it puts a mighty magnanimicy upon a
man's heart; there is nothing great to a great spirit, nor nothing can greaten
the spirit of a man or woman, so as the sight of the great God; no men and
women in the world have such great spirits as those that have seen the great
God: And the oftener any one has the sight of the great God, I say, the greater
will such men's and women's spirits be; they are raised to that height, that all
the world will not satisfy such a soul for the portion of it. And this again
in the fourth place, may be a Note of Trial, whether ever you have seen God
alone to be excellent; Has it taken off your hearts from the creature? Has
it engaged your hearts fully to God himself, that you can say, There is none in
heaven, Psalm. 73.25.
nor none in earth that I desire in comparison of thee.

In the fifth place, Is Gods Name alone excellent? Oh my Labor to search into
this Excellency so far as we may, and God gives us leave; God has revealed
much of himself to us in the Scripture, and in the book of the creature, and
God expects that what is revealed of him in the Scripture, and in the book of
the creature, that the rational creatures, Angels and Men, should labor and
search to know: There is nothing so sweet, so amiable, so lovely, so delightful
unto a rational creature (if it be purged from the filthiness and corruption
of sin) as the sight of the infinite first being of all things: Why here is
concluded all excellent sights whatsoever; some men are taken with such a
sight, to behold fair buildings, and others to behold brave pictures, one with
one thing, and another with another: Oh but the sight of God has all sights in
it that may delight the soul, and give content to the heart of Man or Angel:
and therefore labor to know the excellency of God. You poor creatures that
have minded little all this while but meer^y to understand your Trades, and how
you may get a shilling or two to provide for your families. Oh but know there
is a higher ob^ect for you to busy your thoughts and hearts about: Learn to
know this God, who alone is excellent, and be not discouraged at those things
that have been spoken, though they are above thy reach at first, yet if your
hearts be pure, and cleansed from filthiness, you have the promise, in Matthew.
5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. It may be you that
are poor people, you can never come to get learning to have the knowledge of
Arts and Sciences, and such things; I but if you have clean hearts you are
blessed in this, God says you shall see him: Labor to study God, and labor
to know God more; Psalm. 91.14. Mark how acceptable it is to God for his
creature to labor to know him, I will set him on high, because he has known
my Name. Thy Name, O Lord, alone is excellent, and thy glory above the heavens
and earth. And I will set him on high, because he knows my Name. Oh, says God,
yonder is a poor creature that above all things in the world desires to know
me: he has had a little glimpse of ^y glory, and oh how earnest is his heart
to know me! I will reveal more of my self to him, and then I will set him on
high, because he knows my Name, the Lord ha^h a has account of those that
know his Name: As for those ignorant creatures, let them be what they will in
regard of outward things, yet if they be ignorant of God, they are vile and
low, and base in Gods esteem; but take a soul that knows Gods Name, the Lord
will set him on high; such a one is high in the very thoughts of God, and the
Lord does take pleasure to make such a soul to be high: Paul in Phil. 3.8. did
account all things dung and dross (for what?) for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ: For indeed in the knowledge of Christ, God is known;
and if you would study the knowledge of God, it must be in Christ, you can
never know God but in Christ, Matthew. 11.27. says Christ there, No man knows
the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son shall reveal him. It must be
Christ that must reveal the glory of God to our souls, or else we can never
come to know him savingly.

hence we are taught to labor to keep the sense of the infinite distance that
there is between God and his creatures always in our hearts: And this is a
point of mavelous consequence, the sense of the distance between God and us:
If God be infinitely above the creature, then God expects that we that
profess any knowledge of him, that we should evermore have our thoughts upon
Gods excellency, raised in a kind of infiniteness above what we think of the
excellency of any creature; and our hearts then should work after God in a
kind of infiniteness more than ever they did work after any creature, as there
is an infinite disproportion between the excellency of God, and the excellency
that there is in any creature. I beseech you observe what I am speaking, for it
is of mavelous use to help us to sanctify God in all our ways; as there is
an infinite distance between the excellency of God, and of all creatures, so
there ought to be in a kind, an infinite distance between what our hearts are
in the working after God, and the working after the creature, otherwise we
lift not up Gods Name in his excellency and glory. And indeed a gracious heart
will make it so; and in this I conceive the very work of grace consists, in
that it is such a principle in the soul of a man or woman that is converted,
that though such a one be a finite creature, yet it has a kind of
infiniteness in the working of it after God. You will say, Infinite, how can
that be? True, I confess properly it cannot be infinite, but thus it is
infinite in its kind, that is, such a creature has such a principle as it
would fain, if it were possible, work infinitely after God: And

Further, This principle of grace does cause this in the heart, that it will
never limit its self in any working after God, and therefore has a kind of
Infiniteness; and here is the difference between one that has true grace, and
the most glorious hypocrite in the world; An hypocrite he will ever be
bounding his working after God, and think thus much is enough, what need any
more? If I do thus and thus, why I may do well, and go to heaven at last, and
so does bound himself: But now where there is the least dram of true grace,
though there be many weaknesses in the soul, yet such a soul does never bound
its se^f in working after God. I indeed heretofore have ^et out my heart to the
creature, but now I would fain, if I could, let out my heart infinitely after
God: Why? For I see an infinite distance between the good there is in the
creature, and the good there is in God; certainly where this is, there is
grace, and this one note were enough to discern the truth of grace in the
heart: If the sight of God have wrought this, that whereas heretofore thy heart
has been let out after such and such creature comforts, now thou do desire,
if it were possible, to let out thy heart infinitely after God; here is the
work of grace, and in this thou go beyond any hypocrite: Oh keep this
constant in thy soul, this is the especial sanctifying of Gods Name in all our
ways; when we see that God gives us leave to let out our hearts toward the
creature in some measure, then there is a great deal of danger, that we should
have our hearts stick in the creature, and that we should not have that
disproportion in the letting out of our hearts to the creature, and to God, as
ought to be: And this is the ground of all Idolatry in the world, when men
have seen some excellency in the creature, they have been taken with it, and
there have stuck, and have not been carried from the creature to God. And that
is Heathens Idolatry, when they see an excellency in the Sun, they think that
is God: So Christians Idolatry may be in this, If there be any
creature-comfort that thy heart closes withal, and there thou do stick, and
thy heart is not carried to God, yea, is not carried to God in such a
disproportion as there is between him and the creature; I say, so far as thou
want that that thou art capable of in this kind, so far thou art guilty of
Idolatry. Oh that this one note might stick upon us, There is none like unto
thee, O Lord: Can thou say this out of the uprightness of thy soul, as in the
presence of God, Lord thou that know all things, know that though I have
a vile heart that is let out after the creatures more than it ought to be, yet
Lord thou know that my heart is let out after nothing so much as after thee?
that would be a good argument of a gracious work of God upon thee: Surely if
none be like unto the Lord, then our hearts should be after nothing so as
after the Lord: We must not content our selves with a little love to God; Is
there such a disproportion between thy love to the creature, and thy love to
God, as there is between God, and the creature? Thou say thou love God, I
but it may be thou love the creature as well: Do thou think that this
will satisfy God? When thou hear that Gods Name alone is excellent, God
expects that thy love to him should be in a kind infinite above that love of
thine to any creature else.

And there is this one thing further, with which I will conclude, Surely if
Gods Name alone be excellent, then in a proportion Gods people alone are the
excellent people upon the earth. According as a man's God is, so is he; as you
know men conceive their excellency to be according to the excellency of him
whom they serve; according as a man's God is (I say) so is he: Now if God alone
be excellent, and he be thy God, then thou art excellent; the people of God
are therefore excellent, because their God is so excellent; this is the reason
of that phrase that you have in Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent
than his neighbor: Why is a righteous man more excellent than his neighbor?
It may be the righteous man is a poor man, and his neighbor is a rich man,
perhaps this poor good man's next neighbor is a Knight or a Nobleman, yet he
is more excellent than his neighbor: Why? because his God is more excellent,
because the infinite Lord of heaven and earth is the portion of a righteous
man: If God be alone excellent, then the righteous is alone excellent; and I
will give you a Scripture or two to show, that according to the excellency of
God, in a proportion does appear the excellency of the children of God; compare
Deuteronomy. 33. and the 26. verse, and the 29. verse together: In verse 26. There is
none like unto the God of Jesurun: then, in verse. 29. Happy art thou O Israel,
who is like unto thee? You see that there is a reflection of the glory of God
upon his Saints, there is none like to God, and there is none like to Gods
people. And so in 2 Samuel 7.22. you have an expression to the same purpose,
Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God, for there is none like thee, neither is
there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears:
then in verse 23. And what one Nation in the earth is like thy people? So that
we see here, that according to the rise of Gods excellency, so is the rise of
the excellency of his Saints. In a proportion they rise in their excellency as
God rises in his: If God be alone excellent, certainly they are the excellent
people in the world: And why? because the excellency of God is manifested over
them to do them good. Note.
Here is a note that has abundance of soul-satisfying encouragement to all the
Saints of God in any of their afflicted conditions whatsoever; thou have heard
that Gods Name is alone excellent, so add this to it for thy comfort, who art
one of Gods, that God accounts his chief excellency in his manifestation of
himself in all the world, to be, that he might let out himself for thy good,
and do good to thee, and that I will show you by a Scripture or two, in Psalm.
68.34. His Excellency (says the Text) is over Israel: Oh Lord, there is an
excellency in thee, and how does this work, where does this excellency of thine
appear? why it is over Israel; The Excellency of God it is over Israel; says
God, I have chosen out my Church, and mine Excellency shall be over them, and
manifested toward them for good; therefore in Exodus 15.7. there where Moses is
praising God for the great things that he does for his people, says he, in
the Greatness of thine Excellency thou have done this thing;
so that God does delight to show his Excellency, yea to show the Greatness of
his Excellency for the good of his people: Oh how should the Saints of God make
their boast of their God, and rejoice in him, and be encouraged in God alone!
though thou have no other portion then God alone, thou have portion enough. In
Micah 5.4. there is an admirable Scripture for the encouragement of the hearts
of Gods people in God alone, And he shall stand and feed in the strength of
the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God: It is a Prophecy
there of Christ, and as it is true of Christ, so of all the members of Christ,
they may stand when the world falls, whatsoever becomes of the world,
whatsoever troubles are about them, they are to stand, and rejoice themselves
in the Name of the Lord, in the strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the
Lord their God: the knowledge of this reference that the Saints have to God, it
is that that should put courage and boldness into their hearts before all the
world, Rev. 22.4. And they shall see his face, and his Name shall be in their
foreheads. They shall see the face of God (and what then) then the Name of God
shall be in their foreheads, they shall have a boldness and courage in the
cause of God; whatsoever becomes of the world, yet we have happiness enough in
God: Oh rejoice, rejoice in this (I say) you that are the people of God, for
there is none excellent so as you are excellent, and if so be that God now
invests you with this excellency. Two or three more Uses might be to finish
the Point.

What cause then have thou to fear this God, and to serve this God in all thy
ways, and to worship him as a God whose Name is alone excellent? Who would not
fear thee? there is none like unto thee, Jer. 10.7. Who would not fear thee, Oh
King of Nations, etc. Let this God be feared by us, let us labor to hold
forth the excellency of this our God in our lives and conversations, in our
whole course: Oh that it might be written upon our lives, The Name of God is
alone excellent; all you that profess to have any interest in this God, you
should walk so in your conversations, that it may be written upon your lives,
The Name of God is alone excellent, and his glory is above the earth and
heavens. Oh take heed that this blessed Name of God, that is alone excellent,
be not dishonored and polluted by you; that we might have been large in, if
we had time. James calls it, about Jam. 2.7. That worthy Name of the Lord: you
that profess your selves to be Christians, and profess godliness more than
others, know, that you have the Name of God upon you, and this Name of God it
is excellent and glorious, let it not suffer by you: Oh woe to you that ever
you were born, if you should be instruments of polluting the Name of God. Me
thinks any one that makes profession of Gods Name, should think with himself,
it were better that I were dead and rotten under the clods, than that ever I
should live to pollute this blessed Name of God that is so excellent: What? was
I born that I might live to have my hand in so great a mischief as that this
glorious Name of God should be darkened by me? Oh, the Lord forbid: Know what
the Name of God is that you profess, and meditate how excellent it is, and let
this be a strong argument to keep you from sin: When any temptation comes, oh
set this against it, Shall I pollute this Name of God that is so infinitely
excellent? No man or woman can dye with peace, and have peace upon their
sick-beds, except they can be able to look back into their lives, and to say,
Lord, though there has been much weakness in me, and in many things I have
dishonored thee, yet it has been my care in my generation, and in the place
that thou have set mee^, to lift up thy Name, and I have done some thing
through thy grace to lift up thy Name. Oh that I could leave this point upon
your hearts, that every one of you might go home and make but this one Use of
it; I have heard That the Name of God is excellent alone, and his glory is
above all: This likewise I have heard to be my duty, that this was the great
work that I was born for, that I should do some thing to make Gods Name great
before all those with whom I do converse; think every one of this, how long
have thou lived? Many of you will be ready to say, I have lived thus long in
such a place, and it may be that you can say that you have done no man wrong,
but good; But what can thou say to this Question? I appeal to thy conscience,
Has the Name of God been made great by thee? Have thou done any thing to lift
up this glorious Name of God in the place wherein God has set thee? It may be
thou have not thought that this was thy work; but this is the work that God
expects from thee, that thou should give up thy self to study by all the
means that possibly thou can, to lift up Gods Name, and deny thy own Name; no
matter though that be cast into the dirt, so be it the Name of God be lifted
up; with this resolution, Oh that you would but go away, and that this one note
might stick in your hearts, I am convinced that the Name of God is infinitely
glorious, and therefore for the time to come, through his Grace, whatsoever
becomes of me, yet I will do what I can to lift up his Name.

Consider what has been said in the Text, and the Lord give you understanding.
The First SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
THere is nothing of greater concernment, than to know God, and his Son whom
he has sent into the world, Even this is eternal life, says Christ. Joh.
17.3.
We have therefore endeavored to open somewhat to you concerning God, that
you may have right apprehensions of him, of that God with whom you have to
deal, out of that Scripture in Psalm. 148.13. His Name alone is excellent, his
glory is above the earth and heaven, and concluded what for the present I
intended to present before you about God, with the meditation of the excellency
of the state of those who have this God to be their God, who is thus excellent
and glorious; The Church makes her boast of her interest in God, in Psalm.
84.14. For this God is our God: Oh happy are they that having heard what a
glorious God God is, are able to say, This God is our God, this is my God in
whom my soul has interest! And if the Name of God be so excellent and
glorious, as you have heard, there is infinite cause that we should fear him,
and sanctify his Name in our conversations, Job 13.11. Shall not his
Excellency make you afraid? Oh where is that soul that shall dare to walk
before this God with boldness and presumptuousness, considering what a God he
is that it has to deal with? Shall not that excellency of his that has been
opened unto you, make you afraid, and cause you to fear such a God? Now then
having spoken somewhat about the Excellency of God, and what apprehensions we
are to have of God in all our ways, we are now to speak somewhat concerning
the Excellency of Christ, and to show you what apprehensions you are to have of
Jesus Christ, For this is eternal life, to know thee, and thy Son; to know God,
and not to know him in Christ, is to very little purpose. It is no saving
knowledge of God, if we were able to discourse never so much of him, except
we know him in Jesus Christ, in his Son. And therefore for the knowledge of
Christ, which I shall endeavor to present as briefly as I did the knowledge of
God, You may be pleased to turn to that Scripture in Isaiah 9. part of verse.
6. only in these words,

And his Name shall be called Wonderful. Text.


IF you read this verse, and that that follows, you might think that you were
rather reading an Evangelist, than a Prophet, one rather relating a History of
what was done, than a Prophecy of what was to be done. Isaiah here prophesies
clearly of Christ, as if he had been come at that time, and yet it was between
seven and eight hundred years before the coming of Christ that this Prophecy
was, Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall
be upon his shoulder; And his Name shall be called Wonderful. But it is the
usual way of Scripture to set before us things to be done, as if they were
already done, to note the certainty of what God reveals to be done, and faith
will make things that are not, to be, as if they were really present. And
indeed, faith never has a proper work so much as in this, in making things
that are not present, to be as if they were present, to make them real. It was
a time of great distress and trouble to the Church God, when this Prophecy
was, as will appear from the seventh Chapter even unto this Prophecy. And
frequently we find in Scripture in times of the greatest distress of the
Church, there were the clearest Prophesies of Christ, of the Messiah to come.
Genesis 49.10. Dan. 9.
Jacob Prophesies of Shiloh when he was in Egypt; and Daniel of the Messiah
when he was in Captivity, in Babylon; and Isaiah here, To us a Child is born,
unto us a Son is given, whose Name is Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God,
when the people were in great distress. And there are four reasons why the Lord
would have the Prophecy of the Messiah, at those times especially, when the
Church was in a sad, in a suffering condition.

First, Because that the only comfort of all the Saints of God then, was their
expectation of the Messiah to come, God would therefore propound Christ unto
them as that that might lighten all their darkness, that might sweeten all
their sorrows, and troubles; and indeed there was enough in this, in their
expectation of the Savior that was to come, this was that that made their
hearts rejoice in the midst of all their sorrows; Abraham saw his day and
rejoiced, Joh. 8.56.
and was glad.

Secondly, Therefore had they the clear manifestation of Christ in the time of
their outward troubles, to confirm their faith in this, that how-ever their
enemies prevailed much against them, yet it was impossible that they should
root out the Nation of the Jews, for the great Savior of the world was to come
out of them, therefore they were under Gods protection, and though they might
suffer somewhat, yet they could not cease from being a Nation, because that the
Messiah was to come out from them, and this was a great encouragement unto them
to expect mercy from God, because they were a people that the Lord would bring
the great Savior of the world out of.

And then thirdly, That by the propounding of so great a mercy as Jesus Christ
should be to the world, they might hereby have a help to their faith, that
surely God would not deny them lesser mercies: what great matter was it for
them to expect from God deliverance from some outward affliction, when as God
makes known unto them, that love, and that infinite compassion, those tender
bowels of his, even to send his own Son into the world for them?

And then fourthly, It was to teach them this, that the way of deliverance from
any outward affliction, it was to exercise their faith upon Christ the Messia
that was to come, the Lord would teach his Church when it was in afflictions,
not so much to be looking at the present affliction that was upon them, and so
to seek for outward help and means of deliverance, but would have them exercise
their faith upon the Messia that was to come, though many hundred years after;
and this exercise of faith was so pleasing to God, as it was the only means,
or the chief means of deliverance from all outward afflictions: Nay, says God,
if so be that they will rely upon me, and exercise their faith upon that
great promise of mine, to send my Son into the world, as for their deliverance
out of these outward troubles and afflictions, it shall be but a little matter
for me to do that for them; ordinarily when we are exercised with outward
afflictions, we only think of some natural helps and comforts, contrary to
those particular afflictions that are upon us, whereas the way indeed for us to
sanctify Gods Name, to do that that is acceptable to God when any outward
affliction befalls us, it is presently to exercise our faith upon the great
promise of God in Jesus Christ, upon the great Covenant of Grace, that God has
made with us in him, upon that great mercy of God in sending his Son into the
world; my condition is very sad, and I am grievously afflicted, I but surely
that mercy that would send Jesus Christ into the world, that mercy is enough to
deliver me out of any affliction, or at least to bless it to me; therefore do
not only cry to God when you are sick, or in trouble to deliver you from it,
but labor to exercise faith upon the Covenant of Grace in Christ, upon that
glorious mercy of God in his Son, that is the way that God would have us to
sanctify his Name in. And that is the reason why in times of great affliction,
there were such clear Prophesies of Jesus Christ, as here in my Text, For unto
us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and his Name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, etc. Now in this latter part of this verse, we have
Christ set out unto us in five notable and famous Titles of his.

His Name is, 1. Wonderful, 2. Counselor, 3. The Mighty God, 4. The
Everlasting Father, 5. The Prince of Peace.


I intend only to speak of the first, His Name shall be called Wonderful,
because I would have some kind of proportion between what I have presented to
you about God, and what I shall about Christ: And as for other things more
largely about God or Christ, it may be afterward, but only now I shall
desire to present Christ unto you in this one Title of his, His Name shall be
called Wonderful. From whence the Point is this,

Jesus Christ is the great Wonder of the world.

That is our point of Doctrine: God himself, above seven hundred years before
he was born, gives him this Name Wonderful; in the 19. of this Prophecy,
verse. 20. we read of a Savior, Isa. 19.20.
a Great one (says the Text) surely Jesus Christ he is a Savior, and a Great
one, he is the Wonder of the world. Judge. 13.17, 18. The story of the Angels
appearing unto Manoah, Manoah would fain know his name, And Manoah said unto
the Angel of the Lord, What is thy Name? verse. 18. the Angel of the Lord said
unto him, Why ask thou after my name, seeing it is secret? Now the word that
is translated in your books Secret, it is a word that signifies Wonderful; And
Austin in his Questions upon this Book of Judges, he is consident that this
Angel was Jesus Christ, and that his ascending up in the sacrifice that Manoah
offered, it was to fore-signifie Jesus Christ to be the only Sacrifice that
should ascend up to the Father, for a sweet savor in the nostrils of the
Father; it was Jesus Christ that did appear here to Manoah, and his Name is
Wonderful. Luther has such a speech (I remember) of Christ, says he, the
most famous and wonderful and glorious Miracle of all Miracles is, Jesus
Christ, he is the Wonder of the world; God is very wonderful in all his works;
in the works of Creation, Psalm. 8.1. Oh Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy
name? and in the end of the Psalm. Oh Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy Name
in all the earth? yea in that one work of his in making of our bodies, Psalm.
139.14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, (says the Psalmist) God has made
our very bodies fearfully and wonderfully, it is a wonderful work of God the
framing of our bodies in the womb. It was a means of the conversion of Gallen
from Atheism, he saw the Anatomy of a man's body, and beholding the wonderful
work of a man's body, it did force him to acknowledge the God of Nature, that
there was a being above Nature: Now though God be wonderful in all his works,
yet all his wonderful works in the Heavens, and in the Earth, and in the Seas,
they must all stand by, and give way to this great Wonder; as the Stars, though
they be glorious creatures in themselves, yet when the Sun arises, all their
light is eclipsed, you see nothing of them; so though God has many wonders in
the world, and has done many wonderful works, yet when the Son of
Righteousness does arise, when Jesus Christ comes to appear, all the other
works of God are darkened with the glory of this great Wonder; other things are
wonderful unto us because of our ignorance, because we are not able to
understand the reason of things; things are wonderful to children, that are
little regarded by wise men, and understanding men; Ignorance makes men to
wonder at many things that have nothing in them; but Christ he is a Wonde^, so
as God himself, the Father accounted him a Wonder, God himself gives unto Jesus
Christ this Name Wonderful; and no marvel, though he be a wonder to the
Angels themselves in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12. The Angels are said to desire to look
into the things of the Gospel. (...).
To pry into them. They stoop down to pry into those things of the Gospel.
Great is the mystery of godliness in Christ Jesus: Oh there are many glorious
mysteries of godliness in Jesus Christ, And such things as eye has not seen,
ear has not heard, neither can enter into the heart of man to conceive, as the
Scripture says in 1 Cor. 2.9. yea, they are revealed only by the Spirit of
God that searches all things, yea the deep things of God; the Spirit that
searches the deep things of God, must reveal the things of the Gospel unto that
soul that ever comes to the knowledge of them. It was a work of the Spirit of
God to instruct Bezaleel and Aholiab in those Arts of Workmanship, to work in
Brass, and the like, it is a work of Gods Spirit to show a man the reason of
the things of nature; but now when Gods Spirit comes to reveal Christ to the
soul, for it is the Spirit of God that searches the deep things of God; this
puts an emphasis upon it, showing that the things of the Gospel are deep
things, they are things that only are revealed by Gods Spirit, and not by an
ordinary work of Gods Spirit, but by an extraordinary work of the Spirit of
God, that Spirit that searches the deep things of God must declare these things
to any soul that comes to the understanding of them.

His Name is Wonderful. Now surely he that God spoke so much of before he
came into the world, he that so many wise men and Prophets did so long to see,
he that was the expectation and joy of the whole Church of God from the
beginning of the world, before he came; he that was so typified out by all
the Sacrifices and Types of the Old Testament, by the Temple, that was the
wonder of the world at that time; He that when he came into the world, had
his birth solemnized by the Angels, a heavenly Quire singing Doxologies; He
that had upon his first coming the wise men from the East coming to worship
him, surely he must be some wonderful one, some great one; and therefore as
we read of the people in Luke 1.66. when they saw and heard of such strange
things at John Baptists birth, the Text says, All they that heard them laid
them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of Child shall this be? So when
we hear of these things that were done by way of preparation to the coming of
Christ, for some two thousand years together, and such great things that were
done upon his coming, surely it must needs be some wonderful one. What manner
of Child is this that is given to us? wherefore then as we read of Moses in
Exodus 9.9. when he saw that wonderful sight in the wilderness, the bush
burning and not consumed, says Moses, I will go and see what yonder great
sight is; So we may well say, when Christ is propounded thus Wonderful, and
God himself gives him this Name, let us take off our thoughts from all other
things, and turn aside to see this great sight, to see what this Wonder is.
Therefore for the opening of this Wonder that is in Christ, to show you how
Christ is Wonderful, and how well he may challenge this Name, and how proper
this Title is to him, to be called Wonderful, I shall open it in these several
particulars.

First, Christ is wonderful in his Natures.

Secondly, Christ is wonderful in his Person.

Thirdly, He is wonderful in the manner of his Incarnation.

Fourthly, He is wonderful in the wonderful work that he came for into the
world, the wonderful things that he came to do.

Fifthly, He is wonderful in his Anointment, in his Offices.

Sixthly, He is wonderful in his admirable Indowments.

Seventhly, He is wonderful in his glorious Miracles that he wrought.

Eighthly, He is wonderful in that great glory of God the Father that appears
in him.

Ninthly, He is wonderful in the work of his Humiliation.

Tenthly, He is wonderful in his Conquest.

Eleventhly, Wonderful in his Exaltation, and the degrees of it.

Twelfthly, Wonderful in his Saints.

Lastly, he is wonderful, and shall be wonderful in the highest heavens, in
the Church Triumphant: and in all these regards, we shall see what a wonderful
Savior we have, and what kind of thoughts we are to have of Jesus Christ.
As certainly for the want of the right understanding of God, and the low
thoughts and apprehensions we have of him, the Name of God is little
sanctified among us; so for the want of the right understanding of Jesus
Christ, Oh how little is the Name of God sanctified in the mysteries of the
Gospel? we have the word (God) we can say that God made us; and so the word
Christ, and we hope to be saved by Jesus Christ, But oh, how far are we
either from apprehending God, such an infinite and glorious God as he has
already, though very darkly, been set out unto you? and so before we have
done, though it be but in a Sermon or two, you will find that your thoughts
of Jesus Christ have been too low and too mean: Oh that we could by any means
heighten your thoughts upon God and Christ, that you may know the Lord, and his
Son whom he has sent into the world.

First, Christ is wonderful in his Natures.

These Heads that I have propounded, they all might be largely insisted on,
but I think it best at first, to give you a short view of things, and to
present them together as briefly as I may. Wonderful in his Natures, for he is
God and man; our Savior is God, and so he is set forth unto us afterward,
the Mighty God, and is not this a wonderful thing, that mankind fallen from
God, should have no less Savior than the Mighty God himself? If all the Angels
in Heaven, and men in the world, had undertaken to have been the Saviors of
one soul, they could never have done it, they could never have accomplished
what they had undertaken; such is the state of man, as if ever he be saved,
he must have a Savior above the Angels, above all the strength that there is
in all the Angels in heaven, and creatures in all the world, he is that God
that you have heard of, whose Name is alone excellent, whose glory is above the
heavens and earth, but that we should be saved only by God, may seem to some
to be no such great wonder, who can save us but God? I but know, that here it
is not God putting forth an Attribute to save us, but it is God undertaking
this relation of a Savior, and God putting himself in another condition (as it
were) and taking upon him our nature, therefore that is that indeed that makes
the wonder, God-Man, Theanthropos, 1 Timothy 3.16. Great is the mystery of
godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, This is a wonderful mystery; that
there should be such a word, Theanthropos, God-Man, is the greatest wonder that
ever there was in the world, that there should be such a thing as should be
called God-Man, and is really and verily God and man together in one; I say,
this is the greatest wonder that ever was in the world, that the Divine and
humane Nature should be joined together, that we should have a Savior that
is as verily man as God, and as verily God as man, that those two Natures, the
Nature of God, and the nature of man should come together in one, that were so
distant before one from another, this is a wonder beyond all sense and reason,
and we had need have a Prospective-glass of God to be able to see indeed any
thing into it; we can easily believe (we think) that Christ was God and man,
every child can do so; when you ask your children what Christ was, you teach
them that he was both God and man, I, but I appeal to you, when were your
hearts taken with this as the geatest wonder in the world, that there should
be ever such a thing as God and man in one, and that to be the Savior of
mankind? That man, that is miserable, should look up to God to save him, look
up to the mercy of God, this were not so wonderful, but that miserable man must
be saved by one that is God-Man, Man and God, this is that that except the
Spirit of God that searches the deep things of God (as you had it before)
reveal it unto a man, it were impossible for man ever to have such a thought as
this is; and indeed, the setting out of this so great a mystery, is one great
argument, that the Scriptures are Divine: for it is too high a thing to have
entered into the thought of a creature; I say, too high a thing that ever a
creature should have such a thought, that the saving of man must be by Gods
being man, it cannot be imagined how such a thought could have come into a
creature, to be verily man (I say) this argues the Scripture to be from God,
it is too great a mystery for any creature ever to have imagined or thought of;
it is that that is the stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the
Gentiles; but the power and glory of God to those that shall be saved. If God
should have put this unto us, and said, Well, I am inclined to do good to you,
and willing to save you, but know, your estate is such as you can never be
saved, except there be such a Savior, such a Mediator for you, as must be
God and man both; why certainly both Angels and Men would have stood amazed at
this, and have concluded, that the estate of Mankind is desperate then, if so
be that the estate of man that is fallen from God, and has sinned against
him, be such as there is no way to deliver one soul from eternal condemnation,
and eternal wrath, but by such a Savior as must be both God and man: I say,
All Angels and Men, would have even concluded, then man must perish for ever:
but it is God, the Wonder-wo^king God that has wrought thus for Mankind,
which has sent us such a Savior as is both God and Man; Surely then his Name
may be called Wonderful.

Christ is wonderful in his Person.

But Secondly, Here is a greater wonder than that, God is God and man. God and
man (you will say) that may be, he has come in the similitude of flesh, and
has taken the shape of man, some kind of union there may be between the
Divine and humane Nature; but consider this second Wonder, he is not only
God, but a second Person in Trinity: Consider these two things in the Person of
Christ, First, He is to be looked at, not merely as God, but as God the second
Person of the Trinity, and this is a great wonder in Christian Religion, for it
was little known before. We read but little in the Old Testament about the
Trinity, only in Christ the Trinity comes to be known; when we are in
streights we will cry to God that made the heavens and earth to be a Savior;
but for us to know that we must be saved by God in the Second Person, that is
the character and engraven form of his Image, the Son of God, and yet so the
Son of God as he is Coeternal with his Father, equal with his Father, as the
Scripture speaks, and so God the Second Person in Trinity, as yet he is of the
same Nature that his Father is of, the same God, and yet the Son of God, the
consideration of the mystery of the Trinity, that appears in Christ, is a great
wonder above reason, that we may adore it, but search into it we are not able.

And then the second thing to be considered in his Person is this, That he is
not only God and man, but God and man hypostatically united, the union of the
Natures, that these Natures should be united both in one Person, this is the
great wonder in Christian Religion.

There are two principal Wonders in Christian Religion; I beseech you consider
aright of them.

The first is diverse Persons in one Nature. 2 Wonders in Christian Religion.


The second is diverse Natures in one Person.

These are the two Wonders in Christian Religion.

First, diverse Persons in one Nature, and that is the wonder of the Trinity,
for there you have but one Nature, the Divine Nature, but three Persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that is a Wonder that the Heathens knew
nothing of, and was little known till Christ came.

And the second Wonder in Christian Religion is, diverse Natures in one Person,
that is in Christ; Christ is God-man, but one Person united hypostatically; now
to search into this, that the same Person that is God, is man, and how the
humane nature subsists in the Deity, and has no subsistence at all in its
self, but in the Deity, how this is, only the Scripture reveals it to be so,
but how it is (I say) is too deep a sea for any creature to wade into, we must
stand and admire it, and adore God in it, that has revealed this as the object
of our faith, but to be able to search how such a thing can be, that that
union can be in one person, this is that that is a wonder above all
admiration: Indeed it is one of the most wonderful works that ever God did in
the world, to unite two such creatures that seemed to be of such distant
Natures, as the body of man, and the Soul of man in one Person; to unite a
piece of earth, and a piece of flesh, to such a glorious thing as a rational
immortal soul is, the union of these two together in one person is the greatest
work, for the works of Nature, that ever God did in the world; David saw his
body wonderfully and fearfully made; but certainly the union of the body and
soul, the soul being of the same nature with the Angels, that it should be
united with the body to make but one Person, this is a great wonder in the
works of Nature: But to unite the second Person in Trinity to the nature of
man, not to the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
for so the Scripture says, Christ did not take upon him the nature of Angels,
but the seed of Abraham; for if Christ would have been united to another
nature, one would have thought it should have been to an Angelical nature, but
to refuse that, and take man's nature, and unite it in one Person, that so it
should be said that that Person that is God, the same Person is man, Here is
the great Wonder in Christian Religion, the Personal union of the Natures of
Christ; and indeed from hence many wonderful things will arise.

As from hence, that same Person that was the Creator of all the world was a
creature; the same Person, I do not say the same Nature, this is the wonder in
Scripture. And he, the same Person that is the Lord of Mankind, yet is the
Son of Man, the Son of Man, and yet the Lord of Mankind.

The same Person that is Eternal, Immortal, yet he dyed, so the Scripture
says, They crucified the Lord of glory: What, can God that is the Lord of
glory, that made heaven and earth, the Eternal God, whose Name alone is
excellent, can he be crucified? yet that Person that was the Lord of glory,
whose Name alone is glorious, that Person was crucified, but suffered in his
humane nature; whatsoever Christ did suffer in his humane nature, it may be
said that that Person that was God did suffer, though not the Divine Nature,
the Divine Nature could not suffer, but the same Person that was God as well as
man he did suffer; it is the Scripture phrase clearly, and I might give you
many Texts of Scripture to show you that that person that was God, suffered,
but that is enough, They crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. But you will
say, to what great purpose is it for us to understand this, that Christ was God
and man in one Person, is it not enough to understand that he was God and man?
what need we look so much at the union of the two Natures? My brethren, Know
that there is a great deal in this, in knowing the union of the two Natures. It
is of mavelous use unto you for the helping of your faith, to know not only
that Christ had those two Natures, but the union of those two Natures.

You will say, How may it help our faith?

Thus, because hereby you may see that whatsoever Christ did, or suffered,
though but in his humane nature, yet it was of infinite value and efficacy, and
the infinite value and efficacy of what Christ did and suffered, does arise
from the union of the two Natures, because it was that Person that was God, did
such things, and suffered such things. I remember I my self once knew a very
godly man in the time of his sickness was in a great Agony, under a very great
temptation, and at Midnight sent a mile or two for a Minister, and he comes
to him, and this was his temptation: Fearing he should dye, A temptation of
the Devil to a godly man
and the Devil came with this temptation, Why, thy sin does deserve an infinite
punishment, thou have sinned against an infinite God, and thou do deserve
eternal death; but Christ in whom you have trusted, he being man, and
suffering only in his humane nature, he could suffer only that that was
finite, and his death was but a few days, a day or two, how can he by
suffering that that was but finite, by enduring a little while pain upon the
Cross, and by being under death but a day or two, how can he deliver you from
an infinite suffering, and from eternal death? This was the temptation that lay
upon him, and he was in a most lamentable agony of spirit upon this
temptation; but now in his calling to mind this, that though Christ in his
humane Nature was but finite, and that that he suffered could be but finite,
yet because his humane nature was united in one Person unto the Divine Nature,
hence what the humane nature did suffer, though finite, came to be of infinite
value and worth, and though his death that he was under, was but for a day or
two, yet it was of merit sufficient to ransom from eternal death, because the
Person that was God as well as man, was under the power of death; and by
recalling what he had heard heretofore about Christ being God and man in one
Person, he came to be eased, and the Temptation began to vanish; and the
truth is, there is no way that I know of, to satisfy ones heart and conscience
in the sufficiency of Christ's merits, but in this, that it was the merit of him
that was both God and man in one Person. It is true, those that do not see a
necessity of an infinite merit, they can easily satisfy themselves, and say
they believe in Christ Jesus that dyed for them. I but how can thou tell that
this death of Jesus Christ is of infinite merit to satisfy the infinite
Justice of God that requires satisfaction for thy sin? Why God has so
appointed it, and I hope in God it is so; but if thou can see the ground of
this, that will be a mavelous help to thy faith, that thou can look upon
thy Mediator as God and man in one Person, and therefore thou can look upon
whatsoever he has done or suffered as of infinite value, and so thou can
present it with boldness unto God. The right understanding of Christ thus, will
help us to honor Christ much, and will make him to be a further object of our
faith. Thus Christ is wonderful in his Person, in his Person as relating to God
the Father, the second Person in Trinity; So in his Person, that is, his humane
and Divine Nature united into one Person.

Christ Wonderful in the manner of his Incarnation.

Thirdly, Well may he have this Title of Wonderful, seeing he is such a one
as he is, thus opened unto you. But thirdly, Christ his Name is wonderful, he
is wonderful in the manner of his Incarnation. Christ he is God and man; but
how came Christ to take man's nature upon him? it was a wonderful and a strange
kind of way that the second Person in Trinity came to take our nature upon
him, it was by being conceived by the Holy Ghost, by being born of a Virgin;
Christ was man, and came from man, but not by man; the way of Christ's
generation it is wonderful, Oh who can declare it? We ordinarily can say, ^sa
53.8
we do believe that Christ was born of a Virgin, born of the Virgin Mary, who
cannot repeat his Creed? but I appeal to you, when were your hearts ever taken
with the wonderful work of God in the Incarnation of Christ, that way of being
born of a Virgin? God faith that he will do a great and mavelous thing; Isa
7.14.
For a Virgin shall conceive a Son, it is such a thing as never was done before
since the world began, nor never shall be done again; the ordinary manner of
the generation of man was here stopped, when Christ came to be born, says God,
I will have a new way of generation, for indeed there was a great Lord to be
born into the world, a great Prince, and he must be born after another way
different from the ordinary way of Mankind, in a wonderful way, the Holy Ghost
being the cause of the conception, and so brought forth by a Virgin: You will
say, Why was this? Here indeed consists the wonder that we are to sanctify
Gods Name in, not only to know that it was after such a way, and not as Adam
was, he was made man, but he must be made man in such a mavelous way: You
will say, why could not Christ come into the world after the ordinary manner of
generation? You will answer to your selves, God would have it so, but there is
something of Gods mind that he would have you know why he would have it so:
If Christ had been made man after the ordinary manner of generation, he could
not have been made free from Adams sin, from original corruption, for the Law
did lie upon Adam, and his Posterity, against all that should come from him in
the ordinary way of generation, therefore if Christ now should have come from
him in the ordinary way, if he had been of the seed of Adam, then he must
have been under the Covenant that Adam was, for it was to all his posterity,
Adam was to stand as a public person, unto his posterity, and in him we were
to stand or fall. (Now whether there might have been any other way or no for
Christ to have been freed from it, we will not stand to dispute.) But now
Christ was freed from the Covenant, so as he was not now under original guilt,
under original corruption, because he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, he was
conceived, not after the ordinary way of men, whereas you are to know, that all
your children coming into the world after the ordinary way of generation,
coming from man, by man, the first minute that their souls and bodies are
together, that the child is alive in the womb, it comes under the guilt of
Adams transgression, and comes to be originally corrupted, presently full of
sin and corruption; but it was not so in Christ, and this is the wonder of
Christ's Generation, that he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of a
Virgin, and so free from all kind of original sin; had there been the least
sin upon Christ, he could never have been a Savior for thee, nor any,
therefore Christ must come into the world in such a way as there must be no
sin upon him at all, and this is the reason why he was born of a Virgin, and
not after the ordinary course of Mankind, and therefore his Name may well be
called Wonderful, from the wonderful manner of his Incarnation.

Christ wonderful in his Works.

In the fourth place, Christ is wonderful in the wonderful Works that he came
about into the world; the work that Christ came into the world about, is the
greatest, and the most wonderful Work that ever was undertaken since the world
began, or can possibly be undertaken: Why what was the Work that Christ came
into the world about?

It was first to stand between God, the angry God, What the work was that
Christ came into the world about.
God provoked with man's sin, and sinful man. It was to be a Mediator between
God and his creature, it was to reconcile God and man together that had sinned
against him, and was turned enemy to him; the Work that Christ came to do, it
was to make up all the wrongs that sin had done, that sin had brought to God,
Christ came to make up the vast infinite breach that there was made between God
and man, so to procure Reconciliation for man, as to make God amends for all
the sin that had been committed, here is the work that Christ undertook, he
undertook to pacify the wrath of God his Father, in such a way, as that it
should be let out upon him, and he would bear what ever fruits of Gods wrath
was due to the sin of man, he came (I say) into the world for to reconcile God
and man, to make up all the breach, and to make restitution of all things; not
only to make up the breach that was made between God and man by man's sin, but
to make up the restitution of all things; whereas by man's sin all the works of
God in this world had almost been frustrated, and had man's sin gone on, God had
not had the glory that he made the world for; now Christ he comes into the
world to make up all again, that his Father might have full glory from all his
Works. Yea the great Work that he came into the world about, was, that he
might bring this to pass, that God his Father should have further glory now
from his work, than ever he should have had, if so be there had never been
any breach made, here is the great work that Christ came into the world about,
Christ beholding, that through man's sin, all things were even brought to a
confusion, Man's sin had plundered all the world (as it were) plundered the
Works of God, and had brought all to darkness, and misery, and confusion, now
Christ comes into the world to make all perfect again, and to raise up to God a
Name of praise and glory, higher than ever he should have had if there never
had been any sin committed against him; now was not this a wonderful work that
Christ came into the world about? we speak much of Christ, and that he came
into the world, but what came he for? Oh learn to sanctify Gods Name in this,
to look upon Christ whose Name is Wonderful, in regard not only of what he
was in himself, but of what he came about, the great and wonderful work that
he came into the world for, and did accomplish; and certainly did we
apprehend Christ thus, and look upon Christ as having such a Name as this is,
Wonderful, and know that upon this ground he is called Wonderful, it would
teach us to adore him, to honor him, to magnify him, and to have high
thoughts of him, it would be a mighty means to draw our hearts to believe in
him, the very setting of Christ as he is in himself before the soul as the
full object of faith, has a mighty power to draw faith out; as the setting of
a temptation before a man has a power to draw corruptions; so the setting of
Christ in his glory and excellency, in what he is, and what he came into the
world for (I say) it has a mighty power to draw forth faith, not only to draw
forth faith where faith was before, but it has a power to cause faith in the
soul; Christ is not only an object for us to work upon when we have a
faculty, but such an object as being set before the soul, has a quickening
power to cause life; therefore we cannot say, why should Jesus Christ be
preached to a company of people as are dead in sins, I, Christ indeed is a
glorious object, But they must have somewhat to work upon Christ. We must not
say so, for Christ is not only an object for the soul to work upon when it
has an eye to see, but such an object as the very setting of it before the
soul, has a quicking power to work life in the soul, to cause an eye to see
him, and to cause the heart to make after him, though it was never so dead
before: And it should be the work of Minister^ to set Jesus Christ before the
hearts of people, before their eyes continually, and though it may be there
comes nothing of it this time, I but try it again, and though nothing comes of
it the other time, but they pass all lightly by, and little regard the glory
of God, that appears in Jesus Christ, yet he is to be set before them again
and again; who knows when the quickening power and life may come from Christ?
Now this is the scope of the setting Christ thus before you; This day I have
endeavored to set him but a little before you in the opening this Title of his.

Let this be the Use of it, Oh when you go home, go and meditate of what has
been said, and labor when you are before God, which is the time for the
exercising of your faith upon Christ, Labor to set Jesus Christ before your
eyes, and look upon him as the great Wonder of the World, and never leave
meditating until you find your heart come to this, to admire at the Glory of
God in Jesus Christ; If ever your hearts were taken with admiration at any
thing in the World, Oh let them be taken up with the admiration of Jesus
Christ; this may confidently be concluded upon, that that Soul that ^e^^r
found its self taken with admiring of the Glory of God in Christ, did never
know what Christ meant; for Christ is such a kind of Savior, that if God do
propound Christ to the Soul in any measure, it is impossible, but that the
heart must be taken with him. There is a Savior sent into the World, he that
is the Object of my faith, and by him my Soul shall be saved. Now the first
work of the heart, is for to think this is too good to be true, do not
therefore think that you must be only saved by Jesus Christ, but know what
manner of Savior it is, its he whose Name is Wonderful.

The Second SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
Isaiah 9.6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful. Christ Wonderful in his
Offices.
CHrist further is the Wonder of the World in his Offices.

In his Natures.

In his Person.

In the manner of his Incarnation.

In the end why he was sent hither.

And in his Offices, in his Anointment as he was Christ. Christ signifies the
Anointed of God, and is all one with the Messiah; that that was the Messiah in
the Old Testament, is Christ in the New. The word signifies Anointed. And
Christ is the Anointed of the Father, Anointed to those three great Offices,
King, Priest, and Prophet. Great in all these three Offices, never any man in
the world had them all before, I say, never man in the world was Anointed to
these three together, but only Christ. We read in Scripture of a King and
Priest, so Melchisedeck was; we read in Scripture of a King, and a Prophet,
and so David was; we read in Scripture of a Prophet, and a Priest, so Jeremiah
was: but of King, Priest, and Prophet together anointed by God, we read of
none but Jesus Christ only. Among the Egyptians they were wont out of their
Philosophers, their wise men, to choose their Priests, and out of their Priests
to choose their Kings; and so whosoever was a King to them, was eminent first
in wisdom, being a Philosopher, able to teach, and eminent in his Priestly
office, and then eminent in his power, that he might be honored by all
people, as having those threefold eminencies that was accounted the greatest
eminency in the world, for those were the three great eminencies, the eminency
of wisdom to teach, and of Priesthood, and of Kingly power: Now Jesus Christ
he was wonderful in all these; now that is the thing that I aim at to show in
every particular of these Offices of Christ, how wonderful he was, and then
(though but briefly) I shall set the beauty and excellency of Christ in his
three Offices before you, and that shall be all that I intend to do at this
time, and shall but be very brief in them too: For I told you in the opening
of the Excellency of God, I did not intend to stand to open every particular
Attribute at large, but only to set the Excellency of God before you briefly,
so of Christ.

The Kingly Office of Christ.

Now for these Offices of Christ; his Kingly Office first; Christ is King, and
wonderful in this Office of his, for you cannot understand Christ your Savior
aright, except you understand him, as before in his Natures, in his Personal
union, and so in his Offices. First, As King, I shall not need to show
Scripture for these, the Scripture is full. If you read the 45. Psalm at your
leisure about the middle of it, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. And Rev. 17.14. Christ there is
said to be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Now Christ is a glorious King and
wonderful in his Kingly power.

First, He is King over all, over all Kings, over all Powers, he has the
highest Authority of all; Take that for the first thing. In Rev. 9 he is said
to be King of Kings and Lord of Lords. I remember Theodotius, and another
Emperor, did use to call themselves the Vassals of Christ, and so certainly
all the Kings and Princes in the world, they are but the Vassals of this great
King. Now he is wonderful in his Kingly power that has all the Kings and
Lords, and all Authority in the world under his feet, indeed they all hold on
him, and that will appear from the second place.

2 As his power is the highest, so it is universal, universal over all the
world, the Government of all the world is committed to him, 1 Cor. 15.27. All
things are put under his feet, God the Father has given unto him the
Government of all the world, he is not only the King of the Saints, though
he be their King in a special manner, but he is the King of Nations too,
Christ he is the King of Nations, God-Man (I say) the government of all the
world is given to him, all the Nations of the World are under him to govern and
to judge, and to make use of for the good of his Church; He is not only the
governor of the World universally, but a heavenly King, even the Angels
themselves are under him, Thrones, and Principalities, and Dominions, in Ephesians.
1.20. They are all brought into one under Christ, yea and the Devils themselves
are under him; It is he that has the Keys of Heaven, and the Keys of Hell,
Rev. 1.18. He that was dead, is alive, and has the Keys of Hell and Death:
And this Kingly Power of Christ must needs be wonderful.

3 But further, in the third place, Christ is wonderful in this his Kingly
Power, for he makes his Subjects, his Subjects do not make him, Col. 1.16. By
him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth. There is
no King that ever was in the World, but either God from heaven does tell people
that he would have such a one to be a King, or he is made by the people: For
what is one man's flesh, more than another man's? (I say) at first men they agree
together to set up such a man, or family, to have a Kingly Power, so that the
Kingly power of the Family, and of every one that comes of that Family, it is
by the people at first, none must plead it to be by conquest, for then
whosoever can conquer again, he must be King, if another can conquer he must
have right too, if that be the only right, if that were the only right that
a King had over his people, conquest, then as he had his right over the people
by conquest, so if the people conquer him, then they have right. Certainly the
best right of all the Kings of the earth this day, it must be by the first
compact with that Family, that is their right. I but our King that we have to
do withal, he makes his Subjects, they make not him King, but this King makes
all his Subjects; Indeed if Kings could give being to their Subjects, then
their right were another kind of right than now they have; but the truth is,
Subjects do give being to their King; I but our King the Lord Christ he is
Wonderful, a Wonderful King in this, because he does give being to all his
Subjects.

4 And then fourthly, The Subjects of th^s King are for him, he is not for
them; whereas it is otherwise between man and man; certainly the Subjects are
not made for the King, but the King is made for his Subjects; a Kingdom is not
made for a King, but a King for the Kingdom: But it is otherwise here, Christ
was not made for us, but we were made for him, all the Subjects of Christ were
made for the honor of Jesus Christ, and Christ I say, was not set up King for
them.

5 And then fifthly, This King Jesus Christ, is King in another manner than any
other Kings upon the earth, for it is he alone that makes Laws, other Kings
have not power themselves to make Laws, but together with their people, but he
alone makes Laws. It is true, the Kings of Israel they made not the people join
with them in all their Laws, because God himself let Laws there for the
government of the Commonwealth. But Jesus Christ, I say, he is the only
Lawgiver unto his Church, and therefore there can be no new Ordinances, nor
no new Laws, nor no new Officers in the Church that can be invented by man: It
is true, in the Civil state, there God leaves to humane prudence, and we may
invent Laws and humane Ordinances, and new Officers, so as may be good for the
Church, one Kingdom one kind of Law, and another, another; But now when we
come to speak of Christ's Kingly Power, especially as it has reference to the
Church, there, as he is King of Saints, there are no Ordinances, nor no Laws,
nor no officers that can be newly erected, but it must be the same, and it
must be the same in all Churches in the World, the same Laws must rule all,
and the same Ordinances, and the same Church Officers, there must be no
additions of any; Why? because that in Spiritual government, there we wait
upon God for his presence; we wait upon the presence of Christ to work
spiritually upon the soul, and we expect a spiritual efficacy from Jesus
Christ upon our souls, to draw us nearer to him, and to draw him near to us,
that we do in all Church Ordinances; and therefore only Christ can appoint
Laws for them.

You will say, (an there be no Laws, no nothing added in the Church for way of
decency and order, and such kind of things?

To that I answer briefly thus, There are some things that do belong to those
spiritual Ordinances, things that are in the Church that may be helpful to
them in a natural way; as now if congregations meet they must meet in some
place, they must have civil order in their meeting, there may be some things
civil and natural subservient unto those things that are spiritual; but that
that is properly Ecclesiastical whereby I vvait upon Jesus Christ to have my
heart drawn nearer to him, or to have him dravv nearer to me therein, there
must be no addition of men in any Law whatsoever, but only the things of
Christ that are merely spiritual; if there be any natural help, or civil help,
as we that are men cannot be exe^cised in things that are spiritual, without
some natural and civil helps, there certainly the prudence of man may come in;
but this cannot come to set up any new Ordinances, or set up any new Officers
in the Church, or make any new Laws that shall concern the spiritual Worship of
God, to work my heart in a spiritual way to God, or God unto me; here lies the
evil of man's inventions, when there shall be any inventions of man that shall
come instead of a spiritual Ordinance, that shall be set by man's Institution,
and have more put upon it than it has in a natural and civil way to be
helpful, why then it comes to be superstition, I say, when any thing is set by
man in the worship of God, that shall have more in it than that that is natural
or civil to help, then it comes to be sinful and wicked. When I think that by
any thing of man's appointment, God shall come nearer to me, or my heart shall
be drawn nearer to God, by virtue of any Institution of man, here is the very
proper nature of Institution; As for instance, Some thing that is natural or
civil to help Gods worship, that man may appoint, but nothing that is spiritual
to draw my heart nearer to God, or God nearer to me. As thus, If the Church of
God meet together for Ordinances, it must meet in some place, this is a natural
help to have a convenient meeting place, to have a place to keep them from the
air, or rain, or wind, this is natural; but if it go one step higher than
naturalness of the place, If I shall make this place by the consecration of man
to be used as an Ordinance to draw me nearer to God, or God nearer to me,
that is, to think that my prayers in that place are more acceptable than in
another, that because I perform services in that place it shall be more
accepted, Here I say, man raises it higher than natural, and puts a Divine
Institution upon it, and so it comes to be sinful; and so now you may come to
know what the meaning is, when we say, that Christ only can make Laws for his
Church, and Officers for his Church. Why? because whatsoever is spiritual, it
must be only by the Authority of Jesus Christ, this great King of his Church.

6 And then Sixthly, Christ is a wonderful King in this, that his Sovereignty
is absolute, which no Kings power is; though they have great power in the
world, yet they have not an absolute power to do what they list; and
certainly, no Subjects are bound so far to the humors of men, that they
shall do what they list, there is no absolute power that one man has over
another; bur the power that Jesus Christ has is absolute, an absolute Kingly
power, his Will it is the Law; no man's will in the World is sufficient to be a
law, but the will of this King it is sufficient.

7 And then in the Seventh place, he has power to bind Conscience, his Laws
are such as lay obligations and bonds upon the Consciences of men; no Law that
would be made by all the Angels in heaven could lay bonds upon conscience, but
the Law only of Jesus Christ; all the Laws that men can make, must receive
their power and authority especially from the end of them, and therefore if
they should not conduce unto that end for which God sets up Magistracy over
men, that is, for the good of the place, then the rule will hold, that if
there be not scandal or contempt, there is no obligation upon a man's
conscience, merely because it is the will of man. But now the Laws of Christ,
whatsoever they are, they lay bonds upon consciences, and if I do offend them
never so secretly, I stand as guilty before the great God; and that is the
seventh thing.

8 And then in the Eighth place, Christ's Kingly power it reaches to men's
hearts, (I must not as I go along enter into the large opening of any thing
that may be controversal, but merely present what at large might be opened to
you, about the Kingly power of Christ) I say, Christ's Kingly power is
wonderful in this, in that it rules over the hearts of men as well as their
consciences; Christ by his power is able to subue the wills of men, and bring
their hearts to obedience to him; all the power there is in the World cannot
do this: why the Kings of the earth, if they were put all together, they
could not subdue the heart of any one poor man in the world, the will of the
poorest Creature in the world cannot be subdued by all the powers of all the
Potentates and Emperors upon the face of the earth; they may beat his body, or
torter his body, or kill his body, but to subdue his heart, to make his soul to
be subject and obedient to them, that I say, all the powers of all the
Potentates in the world, nay all the Angels in heaven cannot do it, the will
of a man or woman is such, that all the Angels in heaven cannot bring it down,
only God himself; you many times say, you will break the will of such a one,
that is, you will make them not to do such a thing, but you are never able to
break their wills; Kings may prevail over their subjects, to make them to do
what they would have them do, and their Estates and Liberties may come to be
at their dispose; but all this while it may be he has never a one of their
hearts, and that is but a very mean kind of Kingly power, only to rule over men
by fear, and they not to love him. But now Christ in his Church, he has never
a subject that is truly under his Kingly power, but he rules his very will, and
has never a subject but loves him; where Christ does rule Spiritually in the
hearts of his people, though they were never so stubborn and rebellious before,
yet when Christ comes and brings them under his power, he brings their wills
and their hearts to him, and that is the glory of the Kingly power of Christ.

9 And then in the Ninth place, Christ is a wonderful King in this, that he
has the perfect knowledge of all his Subjects, and of their wants; alas, Kings
and Princes in great States, they know but very few Subject that they have; but
now Jesus Christ takes notice of every subject that is in his Kingdom, and
knows all their thoughts, and all their vvayes, and all their wants, all
their conditions, he knovves them all perfectly. Oh this is the glory of this
King, and wonderful is he in his Kingly power in this.

10 He is present with them all in all the Administration of Justice; the
King he cannot administer Justice, but he must use Instruments to do it, and
he cannot be present alvvayes; but Jesus Christ he is alvvayes present in
the Administration of what ever is administered to any of his Subjects, he
stands by and looks upon them all.

11 Christ is such a King as he has no need of any Instruments at all; he may
make use of them sometimes, but he has no need of any. Kings can do but very
little without some Instruments, what can a King do for the ruling of a
Kingdom, but with such and such Instruments? But Jesus Christ is wonderful in
his Kingly power, in that he has no need of any Instruments for the
administration of any Justice, but he can do it all immediately himself, if he
pleases.

12 Christ is glorious in his Kingly power, in this, that he does overruled all
the plots and counsels of all the enemies of his Subjects, for the furtherance
of the glory of his Kingdom, and the good of his Subjects; now my brethren,
look upon these things as real, and certainly by faith they are made real to
the hearts of the Saints, and they do rejoice in this; if we had such kind of
Governors, that had power over all the plots and designs of the enemies, what
a happy condition would we think our selves to be in? Now this is in our King
the Lord Jesus Christ, he has power over all the plots and endeavors of all
adversaries, to work them all for the good of his Church.

13 Further, the Lord Christ is wonderful for his Kingly power in regard of his
righteousness, Thy scepter is a righteous scepter, he is King of
righteousness, and so King of peace, as Melchisedeck was. It is a happy thing
when people live under righteous Governors, that they shall be sure never to
have any oppression, any wrong at all done by them, but they shall enjoy all in
a righteous and just way; Jesus Christ is such a King, thou shall have nothing
but righteous dealings from him. I, but there is something more in this, he is
not only righteous, because he makes righteous Laws, and has righteous
Administrations, but this is a King that brings everlasting righteousness to
his people, ye^ he himself is the righteousness of his people; it is he that
does cloth his people with righteousness. Indeed it is said of Saul, that he
clothed the people with Scarlet; By a good Governor people may come to be
clothed with fine raiment, and enjoy glorious prosperity, and the like: But
this is that King that clothes his people with everlasting righteousness; to
make them all to stand righteous before his Father, here is the glory of this
King. And then he brings peace, he brings peace by righteousness, he does
not bring peace to them by the sword, but by his righteous Administrations; so
he comes and brings peace, brings peace to the conscience, to the soul, which
no Kings can do. What can Kings do? they may treat about peace, and if they
be righteous they may be the cause of abundance of outward peace; I, but they
cannot bring peace of soul; Christ is the King of Righteousness, and the King
of Salem, so Melchisedeck signifies, he was King of Righteousness, and King of
Salem, that is, King of peace; this is the glory of this our King.

14 And further, other Kings are born to be Kings, but Christ dyed that he
might be a King; it is true, he was a King when he was born, and he was
born as others are to be a King, but especially Christ had his power upon his
death, it behooved him to suffer, and so to enter into his glory; so to enter
into his glory, that is, upon his sufferings, it behooved him; and so the
Apostle tells the Jews in the second of the Acts, that they had crucified
Christ, and upon their crucifying of him, Peter there stands up and tells them
in the six and thirtieth verse, that God had made that same Jesus whom they had
crucified, both Lord and Christ; by his death he came unto his glory. Others
come to glory by their Lives, but Christ comes to his glory by his Death, and
was raised to sit upon the Throne of Majesty and glory upon his death, and in
that he is wonderful in his Kingly power.

15 Further, Christ is King from everlasting to everlasting, for ever; Thy
throne O Lord endures for ever and ever: other Kings are but of yesterday, and
they are dead and gone; but it is not so with our King, the Lord is King for
ever.

16 Further, he is wonderful in this, he sits upon his Fathers Throne now at
this time. You have such a place in the third of the Revelations, verse. 21.
where Christ promises to those that overcome, that they shall sit upon his
throne, even as he over-came, and is set down with his Father in his throne.
The administration of all things in the World now, I say, it is given to Christ
jointly with his Father, Jesus Christ God-Man, sits upon the Throne of his
Father, not only the second Person in Trinity, but Christ God-Man sits upon the
Throne of his Father, and together with his Father does order and govern all
things; here is a height of glory that no creature else can be capable of; the
Humane Nature of Christ being joined in one Person with the Divine, so it comes
to have of the glory of this Kingly power upon it, that it may be said, That
Person that is Man, does now at this time sit upon the Throne of his Father,
and together with his Father does administer his power; so that the Apostle
speaks of a subjection of Christ that shall be afterward unto the Father more
than is now, 1 Cor. 15.25, 26, 27, 28.
in 1 Cor. 15.25. it is a text certainly that has a great mystery in it, and
is very hard to understand, For he must reign till he has put all enemies
under his feet; the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, for he has
put all things under his feet; but when he says, all things are put under him,
it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him; And when
all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be
subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.
When all things shall be subdued unto him, then the Son himself shall be
subject. It seems there is not that subjection now as shall be hereafter;
Christ now sits upon the Throne of his Father, and rules together with his
Father, but there is a time that Christ shall give up the Kingdom that now he
has, and he himself shall be subject, that is, he, when he has subdued
all the enemies of the Church, he shall in a visible and a more glorious way
rule over his own Saints, and that eternally, and then he to together with his
Saints, he as the head of his Saints, shall in another way be subject unto God
than now he is for the present, there shall be another administration of
things than now there is; now Christ sits upon the Throne oF his Father, here
Christ makes his Throne and his Fathers Throne distinct, so that there is yet
to come another kind of Throne that Christ has, besides the Throne that now
he sits upon; but this, I say, is a great mystery, only the Scripture holds
forth such a thing as this, that hereafter Christ shall have another Throne
than that he has now.

17 Yea Wonderful in this, that he will not only subject all enemies in the
conclusion, but he will put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. It is
a very notable Text often read, but little observed, 1 Cor. 15.24. Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father,
when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power. Though as
our condition is for the present, we have a great deal of need of humane Rule
and Authority, yet that is certain, that there has not been any such enmity
unto the Kingdom of Christ, as the Rulers, and Kings, and Princes of the
earth, for the greater part, I say, Christ has had no men that have more
kept-under his Kingdom than the Rulers and great ones, and Princes of the
earth, therefore it seems his Kingdom cannot be full till he has put down
all Rule and Power, and he himself to reign wholly without any such help of
man as now. But now in regard of our necessity, it is true, If all Rule and
Authority should be put down while we are in such a condition as we are for
the present, certainly we should be all in a confusion, therefore though
Christ sees that so many of the Rulers and great ones of the world have been,
and are enemies to his Kingdom, yet to keep things in a civil order, Christ
would have Rule and Authority for the present; But there is a time coming, when
his people shall be made so subject, as they shall have no need of these
things, but Christ will put them all down here in the world, and himself only
shall Reign; so you have it in the book of the Revelations, chap. 11. verse. 15.
That there were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for
ever and ever. For that it seems Christ has not yet taken his Power, had not
then, neither has he since: But there is a time coming for the Kingdoms of
the earth to be the Lords and his Christ's in another way than now they are.

18 And then the last of all, Christ is such a King, as he does in a spiritual
sense make all his Subjects Kings, he has a Crown of glory for every Subject,
for every one of those that are his Subjects, in that near relation, as he is
King of Saints, I say, he will put Crowns of glory upon them all; you have it
in Rev. 5.10. And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall
Reign on the earth, not only in heaven, but on the earth. Why now how
wonderful is Christ in this his Kingly power, that he is able to make every
Subject that he has a King? and he will do it. Now then, If we should put
all these together that have been named, you see how wonderful Christ is in his
Kingly Power.

1 He is high above all, King of Kings, Lord of Lords.

2 He is an universal King over all the World, a heavenly King, over Angels,
yea over Powers, over the Devils themselves.

3 It is he that makes his Subjects, not they him.

4 His Subjects are for him, and not he for them.

5 He alone is able to make Laws for his Church.

6 He has absolute Sovereignty.

7 His Laws do bind conscience.

8 He rules in the hearts of men.

9 He has perfect knowledge of all his Saints, and all their conditions.

10 He is present in all Administrations.

11 He is the KING of Righteousness, and of Peace.

12 He has no need of any Instrument to do any thing.

13 He overrules all the plots, counsels, endeavors of his enemies.

14 He was not only born to be a King, but he dyed to be King.

15 He is an everlasting King, his Kingdom endures from Generation to
Generation.

16 He sits upon his Fathers Throne as equal with him.

17 And will certainly subdue all enemies, and will put down all Rule, and all
Power.

18. And will put a Crown of glory upon every one of his Subjects.

This is our King, Rejoice therefore oh Daughter of Zion, for thy King comes.
Oh did we but apprehend these things by faith, that we have to do with Christ
as such a King, certainly our hearts could not be troubled whatsoever stirs
there are in the world, whatsoever Kings and Princes do in the world; yet when
we look up to this King, and by faith make all this real to our souls, Oh what
matter of infinite joy is it! I beseech you do not think that these are notions
that I speak unto you, those that exercise their faith aright upon Christ, they
exercise their faith upon him as such a King.

You say you do believe in Jesus Christ.

In Christ, Why what do you mean by Jesus Christ? Why you will say, he was the
Son of God. But what is further? Christ that is (Anointed) Anointed to what, to
King, Priest, and Prophet; King, what kind of King? Here I have presented to
you what kind of King Jesus Christ is Anointed by the Father. And thus must
you present him before your souls when you exercise your faith upon him.
Certainly there are few people that know what it is to exercise their faith
upon Christ, because they never knew Christ to be thus. Well might the Psalmist
say, Psalm. 97.1. The Lord Reigns, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of
Isles be glad thereof. Oh it is well for us that the Lord Reigns; certainly
did not Jesus Christ reign in his Church, yea did not he reign in the world,
all things would come to confusion presently. Were it possible that such a
handful as his Church that is a despised company, a poor people that lives in
the world, and is so hated by the world, and all the Devils in hell, and their
instruments, which do labor to extirpate them, and yet that they should
continue: certainly it is because the Lord Reigns, and so orders a^^ things
that seems to be against his Church, for the good of his Church, otherwise it
could not continue in the world: Oh let the earth rejoice, because the Lord
does Reign; And again, in Psalm. 99.1. mark there what use is made of Christ's
Kingly power. The Lord Reigns, let the people tremble; Oh the Lord Reigns,
let the people tremble; certainly all wicked and ungodly men that are Rebels
against this King, they have cause to tremble, such men as say of Christ, We
will not have this man to reign over us, they have cause to tremble, for the
Lord Christ will overcome them; certainly his Garments shall be dyed in blood,
and what will become of them when he shall come to take his Kingdom to
himself? Moreover; Those mine enemies that would not have me to Reign over
them, come and bring them, and slay them before my face. All wicked and ungodly
men in their sins, they do as if they should say thus, we will not have this
man to Reign over us; thou who do cast off Jesus Christ as a King, certainly
thou can not expect good from him as a Savior.

Christ's Priestly Office.

Now for the second thing, and that is the Priestly Office of Jesus Christ,
Christ is wonderful in that, he is a great High Priest. In Heb. 4.14. Christ
is there called a Great High Priest, Seeing then that we have a Great High
Priest that is passed into the heavens; And so in Heb. 7.26. For such an High
Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and
made higher than the Heavens. A great High Priest, a High Priest made higher
than the Heavens, this is the High Priest that we have which we are to exercise
our faith upon.

1 He has a Royal Priesthood, for it is joined with Kingly Power, and
therefore Melchisedeck was his type. He was not after the Order of Aaron, but
he was after the Order of Melchisedeck, because it is a Royal Priesthood, and
so the Saints are called a Royal Priesthood; And Melchisedeck is said to be
without Father or Mother: the meaning is, He was not so as he was a man, for
he had Father and Mother, beginning and end, but in his typical relation he
was so, they were concealed, to typifie, that Christ, as he was man, he had
no Father, and as he was God, he had no Mother, and he had no beginning in
his Priestly office, it was from everlasting, and it shall endure to
everlasting. So he is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, and
not after the Order of Aaron.

2 And in the next place, All the Priests in the Law did typifie Christ, and
all did cease in him; certainly he must needs be a great High Priest that was
typified by them, and in whom all ceased and vanished: As when the Sun arises,
the light of the stars does no more appear; there was no further Priesthood
when Jesus came and took that Office to himself in his humane Nature in this
world.

3 But further, Christ is wonderful in his Priesthood in this, that he had no
need to offer for himself, as others had; for he was blameless, and without
sin.

4 Yea, and consider what Christ offered, and there you shall see him
wonderful; the Offering that Christ offered, it was the blood of God, I say, it
was that that we may call safely according to Scripture language, the blood of
God; and that will not seem to be a hard expression, if we understand what
the personal union of the two Natures are, in Act. 20.28. faith the Apostle to
the Church of Ephesus, Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of
God which he has purchased with his own blood. These kind of phrases we
have that come from the Personal union of the two Natures; so that the blood
that Christ did shed, and offer unto God as a Sacrifice for the sin of man, it
is that that the Scripture calls the blood of God. Now the blood that other
Priests did offer, was the blood of Goats, and Bulls, and Lambs, and Kids, but
now what a wonderful Priest have we, that comes to offer Sacrifice to the
Father for us, and comes to offer blood, that is the blood of God. He is
wonderful in his Priestly Office in regard of his Offering.

5 Further from this follows, that Christ offered a Sacrifice unto God that was
sufficient to satisfy God for all the wrong that ever was done him by man's
sin; they offered poor things unto God, you know, in the time of the Law,
things that were worthless: But now the Sacrifice that Christ offered unto the
Father, when he, that High Priest, came to offer, it was a Sacrifice that did
satisfy Gods infinite Justice, did make up all the wrong that all the sins of
the Elect had ever done to God, it was that that infinite Justice said it was
well-pleased withal. It was worth all that Christ did render it up to his
Father for, not only a Sacrifice that was a sweet savor, because God would
be pleased to accept of it, but a Sacrifice that had in its self such a savor
that could not but be sweet in the nostrils of God the Father, for it did
fully satisfy the Justice of God the Father for the sins of mankind; here is
a wonderful High Priest now, that he should come and offer such a Sacrifice
that should be of such infinite merit and worth as it was.

6 Yea, and he was wonderful, because that he did offer himself, not only
his blood, but himself, soul and body, he made himself a Sacrifice, none of
the Priests did so in the time of the Law; was there ever heard of such a
Priest that came to offer sacrifice, that did offer himself for such as he
would make atonement for? Jesus Christ he was anointed by God the Father as a
Priest of his Church to offer sacrifice, now he must have so nothing to offer,
and Christ saw that whatsoever he could offer, if so be that he had offered
that that had been the worth of Heaven and Earth, whatsoever it had been, it
could never have been an Atonement for those souls which he did undertake
for, therefore Christ offers himself; as there is nothing but God can be a
satisfying portion to an immortal soul, so no sacrifice but Christ himself
could be a Sacrifice to pacify Gods wrath for the sins of mankind, if Christ
should have said, Father, Thou have made me Lord over all the world, and I
will give it all for a Ransom for the soul of this poor sinner, God would have
said, It will not do it, but it must be thy self; I, and Christ yields to it,
A body have thou prepared me: Isa. 53.10
And be made his soul an offering for sin. And a body have thou prepared for
me, both body and soul of Christ was offered to God the Father for a
sacrifice, that he might smell a sweet savor of rest, even concerning us who
are wicked and wretched sinners. Either Christ must offer himself soul and body
to be a Sacrifice for thy sin, or else thy soul and body must have been
offered as a sacrifice to Gods Justice, and then it must eternall^ have been
under the stroke of Gods Justice; but to that end to free that soul and body of
thine, if thou be a believer, to free thee from the eternal Justice of God,
therefore Christ did offer his soul and body as a sacrifice to his Father.

7 And yet further, Christ was wonderful in his Priestly Office, for he was
not only the Sacrifice, but the Altar. It would be wonderful to hear of a
Priest that should offer himself, but the Priest to be the Sacrifice, and the
Altar too that should sanctify the Sacrifice, it is a greater wonder: and
because this expression seems to be very hard, I take this out of Heb. 9.14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God; he offers his body and soul as it were
upon his Divine Nature, that as the Altar did sanctify the Offering, so the
Divine Nature of Christ did sanctify the offering of his Humane Nature, so
that he indeed became both the Altar, and the Sacrifice.

8 And then further, Christ is wonderful in his Priestly Office, and that is in
this, That he offered but one Sacrifice, and at one time; now the Priests in
former time, they offered many Sacrifices, and they offered often; but now if
you would read of Christ's Priestly Office, read especially the seventh, eighth,
and ninth Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and there you shall have as
much almost as in all the Scripture besides, of the Priestly Office of Jesus
Christ; The Priests in the Law they offered often, but Christ offered but once,
and having but once offered he sits down in glory, upon his offering of
himself but once before the Father it was available for ever, for so the
Scripture tells us in diverse places of the Hebrews, and he was able to save to
the uttermost, upon his once offering of himself.

And then further, Christ is wonderful in his Priestly Office in this, which is
as much as in any thing, and that is, that he does now exercise it in heaven at
the right hand of the Father by his intercession, for so the Scripture says in
the eighth of the Hebrews, That we have such an high Priest, who is set on the
right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, and there he is making
intercession. As the Priest (you know) in the time of the Law did exercise his
Priestly Office, not only by offering Sacrifice, but by going into the Holy of
Holies, and there had the names of the Tribes engraven upon his breast, and so
presented them before God, and made intercession for all the Tribes. Also
Christ he is our wonderful High Priest, for he having offered himself a
Sacrifice to the Justice of his Father, he is gone to Heaven, and has the
names of all Believers upon his breast, upon his heart, and there presents them
all before his Father, and is their Advocate, makes intercession for them, he
is always holding before the Father all his Sufferings, as it were pleading
before God the Father for them. Why thou art a poor Creature here, and art, it
may be, fallen down in thy closet pleading with God for mercy, and thou art
discouraged for the straitness of thy heart, and the like, but now learn how
to make use of thy faith, look upon Jesus Christ, he is the object of thy
faith; I, but you must believe in Christ as the High Priest that is gone before
into Heaven, and now is at the right hand of the Father making intercession for
thy soul. It may be thou art discouraged because thy prayers are poor and
weak; I but thy faith must be exercised upon that God-man, who is pleading
with God the Father for thee, and that by his own merits, that are worth more
than ten thousand thousand Worlds, and except you do exercise your faith upon
Christ as a Priest thus, you do not exercise your faith aright; Oh what
strangers are most people in the world to the exercising of faith! I appeal to
you, when did you exercise your faith upon Christ as such an High Priest? you
would see him to be a wonderful Savior indeed, if by the eye of faith you did
behold him to be thus.

Thus he is wonderful in his Priestly Office; oh what wonderful things are
these, if they were made real to us by faith! How wonderful would be the
comfort and joy of the Saints of God in the exercising of their faith, upon
this that I do but now name unto you, whereby as we go along you may see how
far short you have come from exercising your faith upon Christ as such a
Savior, as the Scripture does present him to you.

9 Again, his Priestly Office endures for ever, he lives for ever to make
intercession; the Priests in the Law they dyed, but Christ he is a Priest for
ever, and he makes intercession himself, he has no Deputy, nor no Successors
as others had, but he himself makes intercession for ever for his people, and
his Priesthood is confirmed by an Oath, Psalm. 110.41
The Lord swear; the Lord by an Oath confirmed the Priesthood of Christ after
the order of Melchisedeck, to the end that we might be the more sure of such a
wonderful mercy of God to Mankind, that is the reason that he added an Oath to
the Priesthood of Christ, because that aimed at higher things than the
Priesthood of Aaron did, that was but an external Priesthood, but this aiming
at such high things, yea that Sacrifice that must be tendered up to God for a
full atonement for the sin of Mankind, therefore God confirmed this by an
Oath; for believers when they hear such things (those that are weak) I but Lord
(think they) are these things so? is it possible that God should have such
thoughts of Mankind, to work so wonderful for man's Salvation! therefore says
God, I have confirmed this by an oath.

And then this Priesthood of Christ is a Priesthood of a better covenant, the
other was but after a carnal Commandment; and in comparison of this it was but
an external covenant, for there was certainly a covenant of Works besides that
of Grace, that God did renew with the people of Israel, even when he gave the
Law, the Ceremonial Law did not only typifie the Covenant of Grace that should
be revealed hereafter more fully, but it was annexed to the Covenant of Works,
as it appears plainly in the Epistle to the Hebrews, but yet still I say they
had a Covenant of Grace that was coucht darkly in the Ceremonial Law, therefore
Christ is said to be a Mediator of a better Covenant, he comes to deal between
God and Man in a better Covenant than was before.

And then further, the Priesthood of Christ it comes to have more efficacy
than that of Aaron had, for it prevails to the purging of conscience, which
that could not do.

And it brings the Saints into the Holy of Holies, and that with boldness, and
for that you have a most excellent Scripture of the Saints being brought into
the Holy of Holies by the Priesthood of Christ, in the tenth to the Hebrews,
Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus,
Heb. 10.19.
by the Sacrifice that this our Priest has offered to the Father, we come to
enter into the Holiest of all, and that with boldness.

It was not so in the time of the Law; no, but after the High Priest had
offered Sacrifice, he alone goes into the Holy of Holies; but now mark, here
not only Christ our High Priest, but we, may come with boldness, which none of
the people could do in the Law, that is thus, there is such an efficacy in the
Sacrifice of our High Priest, as that every believer may come, though he has
never so many sins of his own, he may come with boldness into the Holy of
Holies, into the most immediate presence of God the Father, through the
sacrifice of this our Priest, that has made such a way by his Blood for us, to
come and enter into the Holy of Holies; the People in the time of the Law were
to stand at a distance, for this Sacrifice was not actually offered; but since
Christ's coming, and his actual offering up his Sacrifice, now the Saints of God
may come with boldness into the holy, immediate, and glorious presence of God
that can be; let God appear never so gloriously, yet the Saints have liberty
and boldness to come into the most glorious presence of God; and therefore
Christ is wonderful in this Priestly Office of his. Two or three things more
should have been spoken.

That Christ has made us Priests unto God, we have the glory of his
Priesthood upon our selves, if we belong unto him; Priests, that we may
offer up Sacrifice to God now acceptable; were it not through the virtue of
this Priestly Office of Christ, we could not do it: But it is by the Priestly
Office of Christ that all Believers are now made Priests unto God, so as they
may offer Sacrifice to God acceptable; it may be thou go to God in Prayer,
and offerest up a Sacrifice to God, and think God will be well pleased with
it, I pray now upon what terms do thou offer them up? Thy Prayers should be
Sacrifices, but in the time of the Law none must offer a Sacrifice but a
Priest; Have thou an interest in the Priestly Office of Christ, and do thou
go unto Jesus Christ by faith, and give up thy Sacrifice into his hands, and
desire that he would present it to the Father? certainly except thou do so,
all thy Sacrifices are cast out as dung and filth in thy face, and are an
abomination unto God. As in the time of the Law we know, let a man offer never
so good a Bullock, or Sheep, though they were worth never so much, yet if he
did not offer them by the Priest, we know they were abomination unto God: so
our services are as our Sacrifices, and they must be offered up unto God by
this our High Priest; and in this Jesus Christ is wonderful in his Priestly
Office, for by virtue of that Sacrifice of his that he offered to the Father,
all the Sacrifices of all the elect ones are tendered up to the Father, and so
come to be accepted; And then do we exercise our faith upon Christ aright,
when we can look upon our High Priest, and tender up our Sacrifices by faith
unto the Father through him. To believe in Christ is to have thy faith a^t upon
Christ in his several Offices. Oh what strangers are most unto the glory of
Jesus Christ? what little glory has Christ from you, when you understand him
not in those things that are his glory? or you that do understand him, oh but
how seldom has your faith acted upon him, according as he has been set out
unto you in these several things?

The Prophetical Office of Christ.

Christ is wonderful in his Prophetical Office; I will but name one or two
particulars about that, which is exceeding comfortable.

First, a wonderful Prophet he must needs be, for he is one that knows all
the mind of God the Father perfectly, which certainly all the Creatures in the
world do not; take all the Angels in Heaven, and Men in the World, and they
know not all that is in the heart of God the Father. Now Christ he knows all
that is in the very heart of the Father, and whatsoever the Father does, Jesus
Christ knows it; in the fifth of Joh. verse. 20. For the Father loves the Son,
and shows him all things that himself does; there is nothing that God the
Father does, but he shows it all to Jesus Christ; and in the first of John,
verse. 18. No man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten Son which is
in the bosom of the Father. This is a wonderful Teacher indeed, a glorious
Prophet, we may well call him Wonderful in regard of his teaching. He is
called (the) Prophet, and (that) Prophet in Scripture, because he is one that
came from the bosom of the Father, and lives in the bosom of the Father, and
whatsoever the Father has done or will do, he shows it unto him, and
therefore he knows all the mind of his Father, and knows all things that does
any way concern his Church, or whatsoever shall befall his Church, it is he
that knows it, and is able to make it known as he pleases; and he is anointed
by God the Father to be the teacher of all those that are elect ones, and that
do belong to Christ, he has taken the charge of every one of them, to teach
and instruct them in all the mind of his Father; now next unto the Sacrifice of
Christ, there is no one thing in Scripture of greater use than this to the
Servants of God; believers many times go away, and say, oh I have heard of
great and wonderful things, but we cannot understand them; oh do not go away
discouraged, but remember the last thing that is said in the Sermon, that
Christ is wonderful in his Prophetical Office, and has undertaken the charge
of thy soul to instruct it in all the mind of his Father, and so far as is
necessary for thy Salvation thou shall be instructed, or Christ must be
unfaithful in his Office; now that cannot be, but except thou be instructed
this must be so, for Christ has the charge of thee. And this is made in
Scripture as a fruit of his being slain, in the fifth of the Revelation, verse.
6. And I beheld, and lo in the midst of the Throne, and of the fear Beasts,
and in the widst of the Elders, stood a Lamb as it had been slain, and he came
and opened the seals, opened the Prophecies, and so foretold what should
befall the Church to the end of the World; it was a Lamb slain that did it,
^oting, that it is a fruit of the death of Christ, that those things which
concern the Saints come to be opened and made known unto them, and Christ
cannot plead to his Father, and say, that thou gave me the charge of such and
such, but they were dull and could not learn, and therefore that is the second
thing.

2 That the dullness cannot hinder, whether they have strong parts, or weak
parts, it is all one to the teaching of Jesus Christ, it may be a hinderance to
a Ministers teaching, but if they come under the teaching of Jesus Christ, it
is all one, whether strong parted, or weak parted, it makes no difference at
all; and there is one Scripture that does declare the faithfulness of Christ
in his Office, and an infinite treasury of comfort it is to the Saints; in the
fifteenth of John, verse. 15. there is an expression of the Prophetical Office
of Christ, says Christ there, Henceforth I call you not servants, for the
servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you friends, for all
things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you. Jesus Christ
knows the counsels of his Father perfectly, and all his will and mind; now
says he, all things that I have known of the Father, that is, that concerns
you to know, there is nothing that I have known of my father from eternity,
that any way concerns you to know, but I have revealed it to you; Christ he is
the Prophet of his Church, to reveal to thy soul, if thou be a believer,
whatsoever he knows of his Father, all those treasures of wisdom, and
counsels of his Father concerning thy eternal estate, Christ is designed by his
Father to make these things known unto thee, first or last thou must come to
know what thou art capable to know. Oh how wonderful is Christ in this
Prophetical Office of his, to undertake to teach all the elect from the
beginning of the world to the end; this indeed is the reason why many poor weak
people do understand more of Christ than many learned men do; you will say,
We never can believe it, that such poor ignorant people should understand
things of religion better than Learned men, and great Rabbis.

Thou speak ignorantly, and carnally, thou do not understand what the
Prophetical Office of Jesus Christ does mean, for God the Father has anointed
Jesus Christ to come to instruct his elect ones in all the mystery of
godliness, and whatsoever he has heard from the Father he tells them. When
God the Father sent Christ into the World, he says, Go your way; and this is
the charge that I lay upon you, that whatsoever you have heard of me from all
eternity, first or last, reveal it to those souls; it is a wonderful benefit
that the Saints have by this Prophetical Office of Christ; and this is spoken
to his Disciples, not as eminent only, but he calls them friends, in the
fourteenth verse, And all things that I have heard of my Father I have made
known to you; here is the fruit of Christ's friendship; you are my friends, and
here is the fruit of my love to you; he does not say, I have called you
friends, therefore I will give you great possessions in the World; no, but I
have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father I have
made known to you; for Jesus Christ to make known these blessed things that he
has heard of the Father, that are kept from the wise of the world, this is the
fruit of Christ's friendship; therefore though Christ does not give you
Possessions in the world, though you be poor and mean, yet you may be dear
friends to Jesus Christ.

Q. How shall I know this?

A. Why? if Christ reveals to your souls those great things of eternal life
that he has heard from the Father, certainly you are the friends of Jesus
Christ; oh that we could exercise our faith in this Prophetical Office of
Christ, in which he is wonderful; when you would exercise faith upon Christ,
exercise your faith upon him as a Prophet; Lord, I am weak and dull, but Lord
thou have anointed thine own Son to reveal unto me thy will, as much as
concerns my everlasting good; look upon Jesus Christ as the wonder of the world
in all these things, in his Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Office, and then
do you honor the Son of God as the Son of God, when you look thus upon him.
And then another Scripture we have in Joh. 17.8. I have given unto them the
words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and have known surely
that I come out from thee, and they have believed that thou did send me.
When I was in thy bosom from eternity, thou gave me such words, and did
put this upon me, that I should reveal thy will to such and such, and every
particular one was mentioned unto Christ, whom such words should be made known
too; says Christ, I have done it, I have given unto them the words which thou
gave me, and therefore Christ he is called the Word, especially in regard
of his Prophetical Office, The Word was made Flesh, the Word was God; Christ
comes to rexeal the mind of his Father unto the children of men; as by the
words of a man, the mind and counsels, and thoughts of a man come to be made
known, so Christ was the Word of God; though I say not that this is all the
sense from that, but there is a higher sense; but this is one thing aimed at,
that by him the counsels of God come to be made known to the children of men,
therefore Christ says, That no man knows the Father but the Son, and him to
whom the Son shall reveal him: He comes to reveal God to the children of men.
And that may be a third particular.

3 The wonder of Christ's Prophetical Office, it is in the great things that he
is sent to reveal, in the high things, the supernatural things, things that are
so infinitely above the reach of reason. Let a man be elevated unto the
greatest height of reason, he is not able to reach into the mysteries of
godliness, no, as the Apostle says in a place in the Corinthians before named,
it must be the Spirit of God that searches the deep things of God; now this is
the Spirit of God that is sent from the Father and the Son, that searches the
deep things of God, they are deep, high, supernatural, glorious things that
Jesus Christ does discover; Oh there are unsearchable riches, the Apostle calls
the Gospel, Unsearchable riches, rich things that have no footsteps at all in
the creature; we can never come by any knowledge that we can have from the
creature, to understand those things: There is nothing written in the book of
Nature, in the great book of Gods Creation and Providence, not one letter
written of the glorious things of the Gospel: Now these are the things that
Christ is wonderful in, to reveal things that are so high, and so wonderful and
glorious, therefore in Luke 4.22. When Christ was performing that Prophetical
Office of his, the Text says, That all wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth; as if they should say, Oh here are wonderful things
indeed, these are secret things indeed that we were not taught, they all did
wonder at the gracious things that proceeded out of his mouth. It is true,
before Christ was Incarnate, there was somewhat of the mystery of the Gospel,
and our forefathers that were saved, were saved by the same Gospel, but the
knowledge of the glorious mysteries of the Gospel were kept hid till that great
Prophet should come into the world, and that is a special reason why all the
time before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, there was so little knowledge;
God, and the way of eternal life was known so little, because the Lord would
reserve the Revelation of himself, and those great Counsels of his Will
concerning man's eternal estate, he would reserve them for the great Prophet to
come to reveal, and when Christ came, then broke forth light into the world;
and as Christ comes to any place, so there breaks forth the light of those
glorious supernatural things that are above the reach of reason, yea such
things as Angels could never have understood, therefore I remember it is said
in one place. That those things are made known to Angels by the Gospel, the
Lord sending his Ministers in his Name to preach those things from Christ, that
so the Angels come to understand further things in the mystery of the Gospel,
than they did before; therefore they are things above the reach of any men's
understanding whatsoever.

4 And especially, it will make the Prophetical Office of Christ wonderful, if
we add to this a fourth consideration, that these things are not revealed to
the wisest and the great ones of the world,
but to such men and women that ordinarily have the least understanding in the
things of the world, those men that have the dullest capacity to understand the
reason of things in the world, those that are the most ignorant people in the
world, why Jesus Christ chooses out them, and makes them to be apprehensive of
the mysteries of the Gospel, such things as Angels themselves desire to pry
into. 1 Pet. 1.12.
Here is a wonder, that such poor, weak, dull, ignorant creatures, sometimes
that can scarce be able to speak two or three sentences in good sense together
to a man, yet that they should have the clear understanding of the chief
mysteries in the Gospel, and such things as Angels desire to pry into, here is
a wonderful work, and therefore we read in Matthew. 21.15. when the poor
children came to understand somewhat of Christ, When the chief Priests and
Scribes saw the wondeful things that he did, and the children crying in the
Temple and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
they were sore displeased. Mark how this is joined to the wonderful things,
they saw the wonderful things that Christ did, and the children crying in the
Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David, they were displeased. It is one of the
most wonderful things in the world to see that sometimes poor young children,
and such as understand but very little in the matters of the world, and yet
that these shall come to understand the deepest mysteries of godliness, those
things that exercise the understanding of Angels, and shall exercise them to
all eternity, yet poor children and youths shall come to understand these
things further than the great Rabbis and Doctors of the world, is not this a
wonderful thing in the dispensation of the Prophetical Office of Christ? You
make this use when you see poor youths come to have understanding in the great
things of the Gospel, you think surely it is but a conceit: Oh, but rather make
this use, let your thoughts be carried to admire at the wonderful dispensation
of the Prophetical Office of Jesus Christ; and so in Matthew. 11.25, 27. you
shall see what a wonderful thing it is made, even this dispensation of Christ's
Prophetical Office, in verse. 25. and so on. At that time Jesus answered and
said, I thank thee 0 Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. Now
that the Father did hide them from the wise of the world, and revealed them
unto babes, it was by Christ, though he thanks the Father, and that it was
done by Christ it appears in verse. 27. All things are delivered to me of my
Father, and no man knows the Son, but the father, neither knows any man the
Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. All things are
delivered to me; so that Christ here makes the revelation of God unto babes,
to be the fruit of Gods delivering up all things to him; All things are
delivered to me, and no man knows the Father but the Son, and him to whom
the Son will reveal him; so that Christ having received all power from the
Father, upon this it is that these babes come to have such understanding in the
mysteries of godliness, and the wise of the world never come to understand.

And then that is very remarkable as we go along, that upon this ground Jesus
Christ does invite souls to come to him, Come unto me all ye that labor, and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. As if he should say thus, Conceive
now as if Jesus Christ were preaching now personally to you, and he were
saying thus to you, All power is committed to me by the Father, and as a fruit
of this, that the Father has committed to me, I do reveal him to whom I
please, and none can know the Father but by me, I have the dispensation of all
the treasures of wisdom, and the revelation of all the mysteries of eternal
life from my Father; Oh therefore come to me, come to me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden; you labor under the burden of your ignorance, perhaps you
complain, alas, I do not know God, nor understand the great mysteries of
salvation; I pray, and hear, and yet I cannot come to understand what God is,
Why come to me says Christ, for all things are given to me, and if I reveal
the Father, you shall know him; therefore all you that labor and are heavy
laden, all you that see the need you have of the knowledge of my Father, and of
the way of eternal life, come to me, and I will reveal these things unto you,
and so will bring rest unto your souls. Wonderful is Christ in the way of his
Administrations, and that is another consideration in the Prophetical Office of
Christ.

5 But further, Christ is a wonderful Prophet in this, that he reveals things
many times suddenly, he is not bound to those ways that any man or Angel is
bound to; if a man or Angel would come to instruct others in the truths of the
Gospel, they must instruct them by degrees, to understand one thing at once,
and another at another time, and so deduct one thing from another in that way,
but Christ he can make known the things of eternal life in an instant to the
soul. Whosoever comes to Christ, must be convinced of sin, and be emptied of
himself, and be humbled, all these things are in every soul that comes to
Christ; now all these things may by one beam of light be wrought that Jesus
Christ shall let into the soul. As an Apothecary may get the very quintessence
of all herbs in one drop, though you cannot see the herbs: so Jesus Christ I
say, sometimes by one beam of light lets in a hundred truths into the soul, so
that they do apprehend the substance of all those particulars that are spoken
of, and there is a proportionable work upon their hearts to bring them to
Christ; is not this a wonderful work of Christ? that a man that has been an
ignorant, sottish blind creature, a profane ungodly man, hating all
godliness, perhaps he comes to hear a Sermon merely to scorn, as many have
done, this man comes in the very heat of his wickedness, so that a man would
wonder that some fruit of Gods wrath comes not from heaven to strike him into
the bottomless pit, yet it may be at this very Sermon, there shall be some
one beam of light darted into his spirit, that may work his soul to heaven,
possibly, if he should dye at that instant; though it is true, ordinarily God
begins to stir first, and does it not all at once, but yet sometimes some that
come into a Congregation most ignorant and sottish, and know no other God but
Mammon and lusts, and yet coming to the word, at one instant God darts in that
light into his spirit, as this man comes to have his heart turned to God, and
comes to know his misery, and to know the way of salvation, and the Covenant of
Grace, but not distinctly. It may be after this beam of light is darted in,
God may come over again distinctly, and reveal to him his miserable estate by
nature, and humble him more, and so he may have a little glimpse of this at
one Sermon, and a little more at another, but at that very instant there may
be that let into the heart, that possibly may unite the heart to Jesus Christ,
and save it if it should dye at that present; here is a wonderful work in the
Prophetical Office of Jesus Christ.

6 And then Christ is wonderful in his Prophetical Office, in this, he teaches
the heart; no men, nor Angels, can teach the heart, but Jesus Christ; though
men, or Angels may present truths before another man, and so convince the
understanding, yet there is no men, nor Angels, can be able to say thus, I
will so make known such a truth to this man or woman, as I will gain his heart
by it, it shall transform his heart into the very image of that truth that I
shall present unto him, no man, nor Angel can do it; but Christ he teaches so
as no man teaches, Job 36.22. Behold God exalts by his power, who teaches
like him? Now God teaches by Christ in the administration of his Prophetical
Office. Man may come and tell us, this and the other thing ought to be done;
Oh but who teaches like Jesus Christ? none teaches the heart but Jesus Christ,
Job 38.36. Who has put wisdom in the inward parts, or who has given
understanding to the heart? certainly none living, no Angel can do it, nor no
man can do it, it is only Jesus Christ in the administration of his
Prophetical Office, it is he that teaches, and prevails with the heart when
he comes with truths, therefore when you see people come to hear many truths,
and sit under a clear and distinct Ministry that opens many truths unto them,
it may be many will get brain-knowledge that shall make them to confer about
those truths, but yet not changed: you will say, What should be the reason why
they that have so much knowledge live wickedly? why here is the ground, Jesus
Christ he has not exercised this Prophetical Office of his so far upon them,
to overpower their hearts, Here is the reason why such men have had knowledge
in the brain, and yet lived wickedly a long time; yet if they belonged to
Christ, at some other time they shall come to hear the Word of God, they shall
hear the very same truths they heard before, and perhaps delivered in a weaker
manner than they have heard it, and yet their hearts shall be a hundred times
more wrought upon at that time than ever they were wrought upon before.
Sometimes a man comes by accident into a Congregation, and hears a Minister
upon such a subject, and it may be a Minister by the by speaks of something
that he little thought of perhaps before he came up, and this man has heard
the same truth largely handled, perhaps many Tractates about it heretofore, and
his heart never touched, but now hearing it mentioned by the by his heart is
mightily wrought upon, and he goes away, and says, Verily God is in this
place. What is the reason? why here Christ speaks to the heart, and before man
only spoke to the ear, this is a wonderful thing in the Prophetical Office of
Christ, that he speaks to the heart; and thus should we exercise our faith
upon Christ in this, when we come to the Word, look upon Christ by the eye of
faith as the great Prophet of the Church, that teaches so as no man teaches,
that does not only speak unto the ear, but speaks unto the heart.

7 Further, Chr^^t is wonderful in his Prophetical Office in this, In that he
teaches immediately himself; indeed he does teach mediately, that is by his
Ministers, therefore you shall find Act. 1.1. there St. Luke speaking of
Christ's teaching when he lived here upon the earth, says he in verse. 1. The
former Treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do
and teach; why Luke is he that writ the Gospel, and the Acts, he writ the
sum of what Christ did teach in the whole course of his life, and yet here
he tells us that he did make a Treatise, and did relate what Jesus Began to
do and teach; if one should have said to Luke, Why, did you not relate all that
Jesus did do, and preach? why Christ is dead now. But the meaning is this, That
indeed all that Christ did preach personally when he was here in the world, it
was but a Beginning, Christ was to teach afterward to the end of the world,
and that he was to do partly by his Ministers that should be to the end of
the world, he does exercise his Prophetical Office by them.

And by the way, whenever you come to hear any Minister of God to reveal any
thing of the Gospel to you, you are to look upon it as Christ exercising his
Prophetical Office in this way; he is wonderful in teaching in this, that he
does not only by instruments, but immediately himself many times; where there
is want of means, we may there expect Jesus Christ immediately to reveal the
Will of his Father to those souls that do belong to Election.

8 And then Christ is wonderful in teaching, for he teaches infallibly, which
none can do. Likewise many other particulars might be named in the wonder of
Christ's Prophetical Office, but time does slip me, therefore we will proceed
to the next thing in the wonder of Christ, only take this along with you, That
in your believing in Jesus Christ, you must believe in him as Christ, that is
Anointed by the Father, King, Priest, and Prophet; and when you exercise your
faith upon him in all these three of his Offices, then you will know what it is
rightly to believe indeed. But to go on.

The Third SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
Isaiah 9.6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful.
Christ Wonderful in his Miracles.
CHrist is wonderful in the Miracles that he wrought here in the World while
he lived; in the second of Acts, verse. 22. Ye men of Israel hear these words,
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by Miracles, Wonders, and
Signs which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know.
Never did any come into the Wo^ld to work such great Miracles and Wonders as
Christ did, and indeed all that ever did Miracles and Wonders, they did do
them by Jesus Christ. Josephus that was no great friend to Christ, he was a
Jew, and did not acknowledge Christ to be the Messiah, yet he writing the Story
of those times, could not but take notice of such an one as Christ; he did
profess, that at such a time there was a Wise man did arise, which they did
call by the Name of Jesus, that did work a great many Miracles; and says he,
Josephus Antiq. B. 18. e. 4
If it be lawful to call him a Man. He was afraid to call him a man, because of
the wondrous things that he did.

But if any of you say, How shall we be able to know certainly the truth of
all those Miracles that he did? we read in the Gospel how great things Christ
did; how he cast out Devils, and cured the Blind and Lame, and raised up the
Dead, and the like, but how can we know the truth of them?

For the answer of that, Austine has this, Either all those things are true,
or they are not true; if they be, then he is confirmed to be the Messiah; but
if they be not true, then says he, this is the greatest Miracle of all, that
such a supernatural Doctrine as that is, to believe in him that was crucified,
to save the World, and for men to venture their souls and eternal estates upon
this, without having this to be confirmed by Miracles at first, this is the
greatest Miracle of all; but we will pass by that, only note it as we go,
that Christ was wonderful in all the Wonders that he wrought while he lived.

Christ wonderful in his Glorious indowments and excellency of his Person.

But further, Christ he is the Wonder of the World, in regard of those glorious
endowments and excellency of his Person, those Personal endowments and
excellencies that he had; and herein he is the Wonder of the World.

Now the endowments and excellencies of Jesus Christ they are great and
glorious, Thou art fairer than the children of men. It is he that received the
Spirit without measure, it is he that had the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge dwelling in him bodily, and he must needs be the Wonder of the
World; that Scripture in the second of the Colossians, does show unto us what a
wonderful Savior we have, it is such an expression that had we not had it
from the Holy Ghost we should never have dared to have ventured upon it, as in
Col. 2.3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and then
in verse. 9. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; what an
high expression is here? All the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily in
Jesus Christ; surely he has excellent endowments then, he is filled with
glorious things, his Human Nature is elevated and enlarged to the highest
capacity that a Creature can have to receive excellency. And God has raised up
the Humane Nature of Christ to show how high he is able to elevate a Creature,
and make it capable for the receiving of Glory, that he might declare it to
Angels and Saints to all eternity; I say, man's nature is raised to that height,
that God might to all eternity make known to the Angels and Saints this thing,
and say, Behold to what a height is mine infinite power able to raise a
Creature, to be capable of happiness? Therefore Christ's Human Nature is so
raised, and our nature in him, which should be a wonderful comfort to us, that
our nature should be raised to so much glory in Christ.

And a great argument to us, to take heed of the abuse of Humane Nature, of thy
Body, and of thy Soul; oh that ever any one should be given up to that
sottishness, that is, a man that has Humane nature in him, that should look
after no greater good than merely to eat, and drink, and play, and satisfy his
lust; do thou know oh Creature that thy nature is raised to such an height of
excellency, that God might declare to Angels and men what his power was able to
do? and shall thou that have the same Nature, that art a kin (as it were) to
Christ, shall thou be so base and vile, to mind thy filthy and base lusts, and
mind no higher good than this? the very thought of the raising our Nature in
Christ, it is a mighty argument to raise up the thoughts of one that is a man,
to a higher pitch than ever they have been; think thus, certainly my nature is
capable of some higher good than merely to ear and drink, and play, and to have
a little Money here for a while; why now that shows the personal excellency and
endowments of Christ in general, that all the fullness of the Godhead does
dwell bodily in him, and therefore Christ he is called the Character, and the
engraven form of the Image of God, in the first of the Hebrews; it is not said
so of man; though man be said to be made according to Gods Image, yet it is
never said of him, That he is the brightness of Gods glory, and the express
Image of his Person, so as it is said of Christ; and in the Colossians you have
mighty high expressions about the Personal excellency of Christ, Chap. 1.15.
Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every Creature; and
then he is the beginning of all things, ver. 18. He is the Image of the
invisible God, as God and man, for so I must speak of him; he is the Image of
the invisible God in another manner, and more fully, than any creature is, or
possibly can be, for Jesus Christ, take him God and Man, he has the very
character and engraven form of whatsoever glory there is in the Father; I say,
take him as God and Man, as thus, he has an omnipotency in him, therefore it
is said in the third of the Philippians latter end, Who shall change our vild
body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, (how) according to
the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. Now this
is a great Mystery of godliness, that God-Man should have an Omnipotency in
him; and then likewise he has the express Image of all the knowledge of God:
for as he is God-man, he is made the Judge of all the World, and he will be
the Judge, not merely as he is God, but as God and Man; now seeing he is the
Judge of all the World he must have an infinite knowledge, he must know the
hearts of men, and all the works of men; and he must have an infinite Holiness
and Justice that must judge all the World. And thus God-man has an express
Character of the Attributes of God, which none else has; and then he has an
express character of the Immensity of God. If you speak of his Body, it cannot
be every where, but God-Man is in all places; thus you have it in the third of
John, verse. 13. it is a very strange expression, and it can never be
understood but by understanding the personal union of the two Natures. Why at
that time he was speaking to them there upon the earth, and yet says he, The
Son of man which is in heaven. At this time he that is the Son of man is in
heaven, his body could not be in two places at once, but God-man was then in
heaven. Thus you see the excellency of Christ, in being the character of the
Father, and having the Divine Attributes in him in another manner than any
creature in the world could have that is a mere creature.

2 And then further, this personal excellency of Christ will appear, when we
consider how Christ comes to have those excellencies, that he has them all by
virtue of the personal union. The humane Nature alone it is but a creature if
you take it distinct; But now this humane nature is filled with all excellency
from the Father; and indeed the Father is the fountain of all firstly; these
excellencies that Christ has, they come from the personal union immediately;
now God unto other creatures gives them as it were of bounty out of himself,
he does confer from himself, he puts forth an act of power for the bestowing
of such and such excellencies upon such creatures, but when the humane nature
of Christ was to be filled with such excellencies, it is by taking of the
humane nature of Christ into himself, as we say concerning sight. Philosophers
have a dispute whether it be by taking in the species, or by sending out
something from the eye. This may a little resemble this great mystery, there
are some things that God bestows by sending out from himself, other
excellencies he bestows by taking in to himself: Now all other creatures,
Angels and men (but only the humane nature of Christ) have all the excellency
that they have by Gods sending out from himself; but now all the indowments of
Jesus Christ, and all his excellencies, he has them all from God taking of
him into himself, that is, in a pesonal union, not taking him into communion
with himself as his Saints, but taking him into a personal union, and so comes
to have all excellencies in another manner than any other creature can possibly
have.

Thirdly, Christ is wonderful, take him God and man, in this, That all his
personal excellencies that he has, depend upon himself; he is Independent,
the excellency that Christ's humane nature has, it is, I say, Independent in
this, that is, it depends upon his person; there is no dependence of the
excellency that Christ has, but upon the very person of Christ himself, all
depends upon him, for he says of himself, That he has life in himself, so
you have it in Joh. 5. Joh. 5.27.
it is spoken concerning Christ's excellency there, For as the Father has life
in himself, so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. Indeed the
Son is from the Father by an eternal generation; but now though he be firstly
from the Father, yet now the Son has life in himself, yea and eternally he
had life in himself, and so what excellency the humane nature has, it does
depend upon its own person, which is a higher and a more glorious way of having
excellency, than it is possible for any thing else to have.

4 And then in the fourth place, hence Christ, even God man, he comes to be
worthy of Divine honor, Divine honor is due to Jesus Christ that is God-man;
there is no creature can partake of Divine honor by coming never so near to
God, but only the humane nature of Christ being personally united: Let a
child of God, a Saint, be never so holy, because he comes to partake of so
much excellency of holiness, he is not therefore to partake of Divine honor,
nor an Angel; but now Christ, God and man, the very humane nature joined with
the Divine in one personal union, comes to share in the Divine honor that is
due to him both God and man, and it is a wonderful Work of God to bring that
that is in its self but a creature, to come to have a share in Divine honor.

5 And then Christ is wonderful in this, that hence he is an infinite object
of the Delight of his Father, not only as he is eternally begotten of the
Father, but as he is both God and man, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, I am pleased fully in him,
Jesus Christ is an object even adequate to the very heart of God the Father; Oh
how should we take content in him! certainly if he be so excellent as he
is, as to give full satisfaction to God the Father, then he may very well give
full satisfaction to your souls.

Yea, and God the Father manifests his satisfaction so fully in him, that he
has made him to be heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and therefore he is said,
to be the beginning of all things, all do subsist by him.

Yea, and further, there is that satisfaction that the Father has in him, that
God the Father did make all things for his sake; I say, all things in the world
are made for the sake of Jesus Christ, Angels are made for his sake, and this
world, and seas, all the work that ever God did, or will do to all eternity, it
was for the sake of Jesus Christ, that God the Father might honor himself in
Jesus Christ; that Text is very full for that, and we need no more, in Col.
1.16. All things were created by him, and for him. So that God has a higher
end in creating the world than you think for, God did not only create that he
might manifest that he was a mighty God, and merciful, and bountiful, and the
like, but God had a higher end when he made the world, it was to advance his
Son, when he made the Angels, God would never have made them, but for the
honor of his Son.

Oh what infinite cause have we to honor Jesus Christ; Oh how happy are they
that live to the honor of Jesus Christ, by whom God may have glory beyond a
natural way! did you consider this, that you were made for the honor of Jesus
Christ, and the honor that God the Father would have from you is this, that
you should live to the honor of his Son, and all other honor that you give
unto God, except it be in order to his Son, it is not accepted, I say,
whatsoever honor any man or woman does endeavor to give to God, is not
accepted of him, but in relation to the honor of Jesus Christ; therefore if
you look at God in a mere natural way, and honor, and worship him never so
much, as the heathens did, all this would not do; but now that honor that God
has in reference to his Son, when a poor sinner is sensible of the breach that
sin has made between him and the infinite God, and comes to see Jesus Christ,
and seeks to advance Jesus Christ by faith, I says God, here is the honor
that I would have. And therefore when all the elect ones that were given to
Jesus Christ to redeem, when they are all converted and brought to Jesus
Christ, the world will fall about our ears, why, because says God, I have the
end that I made the world for, and now I have brought in all that do belong to
my Son, and all those works by which my Son will come to have his honor
eternally are done, let there be an end of the world, and the end of the world
is like to be the sooner now; because that we see God is doing so much for the
setting up of Jesus Christ in this latter age; as when a man's time is almost at
an end for his work, then he does work more speedily than he did before; now
says God, I have made the world for the honor of my Son, but yet to this day
how little honor has my Son had from the world? and there is a time, says
God, that I will manifest to all the world that I did make it for Jesus Christ,
he did not make it for a company of Tyrants to do what they would in, nor for
a company of profane people, to eat and drink, and follow their lusts in, but
the end at which God aimed at in making the world, says he, I will set up my
Son in the world, and all the works that ever have been done in the world,
shall at length come in to conduce to the honor of my Son. And this shall be
the great work that shall be done at the Day of Judgment, he will show to
all the world how all those works that did seem to go most against Jesus
Christ, how they were brought about for the honor of Jesus Christ: Oh blessed
are those souls that come to see that all things were made for the honor of
Jesus Christ, and so give glory to him accordingly. Thus you see what a
wonderful Savior we have, that God has made all things for him; Surely our
Savior is glorious and wonderful.

6 There is one thing more, he is wonderful in his Indowments and Excellencies
in this, that his Excellencies are in him to be conveyed to his people, Joh.
1.16.
Out of his fullness do all we receive, and grace for grace. Out of the fullness
of all Excellency that is put into him. The Saints of God and elect ones, they
draw all the excellency they have here, or shall have to all eternity. For you
must know this, Though the Divine Nature be the fountain of all Excellency,
yet it is not to be conveyed, but only through Jesus Christ; this is the
great mystery of godliness, and this is the wonder in the Gospel that is so
much above nature, that though God be the fountain of all in himself, yet he
has determined that this goodness of his shall be first let out to his Son,
and so shall be conveyed through him to the Saints, so that all the gifts and
graces we have, we must not look upon them only as coming from ^od the
Creator of all things, but as coming from God through him, that is God and man
in this mystical way; therefore if you say you look at God, and believe in Gods
mercy, without understanding the way of Gods communicating himself, you may
utterly mistake, it must be in Christ that we must receive grace for grace.
Now that there should be such a thing revealed, that God should say, I will
set up my Son, the second Person in Trinity, to take your nature, and to be
God and man, and he shall be as a Conduit to be filled with all things
whatsoever, and you shall have as it were your pipes joined to him, and through
him, you shall come to partake of what good I intend for you, This is the
wonder of the world.

And hence it is that Christ is compared to all things that have any excellency
in them; Is there an excellency in light, Christ is called Joh. 1.9.
Light, Christ is called Mat. 13.46.
Pearl? and Rev. 3.18.
Gold, and Raiment, and the Psalm. 84.11.
Sun, and Joh. 7.38.
Living water, any thing that has any excellency in it, Joh. 6.50.
Bread, Isa. 15.1.
Wine, Milk, whatsoever in the creature has any excellency in it, Christ is
called by that Name, to show that all Excellencies are in him as one; As I told
you that Gods Excellency was such an excellency, as the very quintessence of
all excellencies was united in one in him, so Christ has the quintessence of
all excellencies in him, and in him as in a conduit to be conveyed to all that
God intends eternal good unto.

Oh what a Savior have we, my Brethren! now me thinks this should be a very
strong argument to draw your hearts to Jesus Christ, or at least to say as
Philip said, Let us see but Jesus Christ, this wonder of the world, and we
will never wonder at any thing more in the world: Oh let us understand what
Jesus Christ our Savior is; here you may see what a full object of your faith
Jesus Christ is, and how you may venture your souls upon him, and your eternal
estates; here is enough to draw faith, and encourage faith, and enlarge faith;
and oh that God would be pleased, by presenting what Christ is, to work faith
in some soul that has not had it before; but now where faith is before this,
look beyond your own worth, and your own inlargements: And thus in these things
you see how wonderful Christ is. There remains two things more.

The Fourth SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
Isaiah 9.6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful.
Christ is Wonderful in regard of the glory of the Father that shines in him.
WE proceed: The Name of Christ is Wonderful in regard of the wonderful glory
of the Father that shines in him; It is in Jesus Christ that God reveals
himself, and appears both to men and Angels: It is true, somewhat we might
know of the invisible things of God by the things that are seen, as the Apostle
speaks in Romans 1.20. by his great Works of Creation and Providence: but there
is as much difference between the Glory of God that shines in all his Works of
Creation and Providence, and the Glory of God that shines in the face of
Christ, as between the glittering of a Glowworm in a dark night, and the glory
of the Sun in the full strength of it. Now only take this along with you, that
God expects that those that do see his glory in Christ, should glorify him in
another manner than those that see his glory only shining in the Works of
Creation and Providence; that as there is much difference between the shining
of the Sun in its full strength, and a Glowworm, even so there should be as
much difference between believers glorifying God, and heathens, as there is
between the Glowworm, and the glory of the Sun; you should not satisfy your
self except you find that there is some such proportionable difference; for
certainly if you have seen God in Christ, you have seen him wonderfully indeed;
therefore in 2 Cor. 3.18. says the Apostle, But we all with open face
bebolding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. This Scripture has
very much in it, he speaks of the Gospel, and compares that to a Glass,
wherein the glory of God shines, so as we may behold it with open face, and so
behold it, as that we are changed into the very same image of it, from glory to
glory, from one degree unto another. We may behold the glory of God in the
glass of the creature, and never be changed into the same image; but when we
behold the glory of God in the glass of the Gospel, we then come to be
changed into the same Image, and still to be changed more and more; and with
open face we do behold it. And in chap. 4. verse. 6. For God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. Mark it, he
is the knowledge of God, the light of the knowledge of God, and the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God; and all this is, in the face of Jesus
Christ; in the face of the creature there may be the knowledge of God, but the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, this is in the face of Jesus
Christ. He that has seen me, has seen the Father, says Christ to Philip;
It was a maxim among the Fathers in the time of the Law, that no man could see
God, and live, God was so glorious, that they thought that he could not be
seen, but it would overwhelm any creature that was in the flesh that should see
him; but now mark in that Prophecy that we have of the times of the Gospel in
Isa. 40.3. There is a Prophecy of Christ that is apparent, The voice of him
that cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord (which is in
express words applied to John the Baptist the forerunner of Christ; And in the
very same words) make straight in the Desert a high way for our God, every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain shall be made low, and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain; Then it follows in
the fifth verse, And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see it together; before no man could see God and live, Flesh was not able
to behold God, but now when the Word was made Flesh, when the times of the
Gospel came wherein God would make himself appear through his Son more clearly
and fully, now all Flesh shall see it, shall see the glory of the Lord; now the
glory of God appears wonderfully in Christ in these four or five particulars.

The Power of God appears in Christ.
First, The glory of Gods Attributes do shine more brightly in the face of
Christ than any other ways; As for instance, The power of God appears
infinitely more in Christ, than in making heaven and earth; for God to unite
God and man together in one Person, is a greater work than making heaven and
earth; there is more power of God put forth in the hypostatical union of the
Natures of Christ, besides all the power of God that appears in the great Works
that Christ did do, and in carrying Christ through all those great Works that
he was carried through, than in making of heaven and earth. There is more
power of God appears in the conversion of one soul to Christ, than in making
heaven and earth: Then what power of God appears in Christ himself?

And the wisdom of God appears more in Christ, than in the creation of heaven
and earth. The Wisdom of God appears in Christ.
Now for God to find out such a glorious way of Reconciliation as he has
found out in his Son, in this the wisdom of God is more glorious than in all
his works infinitely, the glory of Gods wisdom in other things is darkened in
comparison of his wisdom in this; If God had put it to Angels to find out a
way of Reconciliation, they could never have guest at such a way as this is;
that we should be reconciled in Christ, here is the glory of wisdom.

There likewise does appear the glory of Gods holiness more in Christ than in
any other way; it is true, The Holiness of God appears in Christ
the Law is a glass of Gods holiness, and those that cast reproach upon the
Law, they spit in the very face of Gods holiness; I but that is no such glass
as Jesus Christ is, there we see the holiness of God in another manner than
we can do it in the holy Law that God has made. God never showed his hatred
of sin so much as he did in Christ, and it cannot be devised by all Angels
and men how it were possible to have such an Argument to manifest the hatred of
sin so as it is manifested in Christ, that God should deal so with his Son, as
he has done for the sin of man; I say, if an infinite Wisdom should set it
self on work never so much to find out an Argument to manifest the hatred of
sin, there could not be a greater Argument: So that when God sent his Son into
the world to dye for man's sin, he did as it were say, I have many ways to
manifest my holiness to the children of men, how infinitely I do hate sin, but
here is a way that it shall appear to the uttermost, they shall see it in my
dealing with my Son; certainly in Christ Gods wisdom has found out an
Argument to make us all to be convinced of the infinite holiness of God, that
God hates sin more than hell its self, and that we should do so too.

Again, the Justice of God appears in Christ, more than in any thing else: It
appears not so much in all the torments of the damned, as in Gods dealings with
Christ, The Justice of God appears in Christ.
in that he required such satisfaction from him as he did; when as we hear
of the dreadful curses of the Law, and of the torments that are in hell, we
may thereby be put in mind of an infinite Justice; Oh how righteous is God in
his ways there, and his Justice seems to be wonderful unto us: But when you
behold in this red glass of the blood of Christ, Gods Justice, it is a great
deal more glorious here, than in all the damned in hell. If God should grant to
any of you to stand upon the very brink of hell, and there to look into the
pit, and see all the torments and tortures there, and hear all the cries there,
then you think your hearts would be affected with the Justice of God, to fear
it. I but when God makes himself known to you in Christ, when you hear of the
sufferings of Christ for sin, God would have you to be more affected with his
Justice, and to fear it more, than if you saw all the Torments of hell. And the
truth is, there is no such way to set out the Justice of God, as to show the
dealing of God with his Son for the sin of man. If I would preach but one
Sermon that should be my last, of the Terribleness of Gods Justice, I would
speak of some Scripture that should show the terribleness of the dealing of God
with his Son, and that would set out the Justice of God to be a great deal
more glorious than any thing else.

The glory of Gods Mercy appears in Christ.
And so the glory of Gods mercy and goodness is more in Christ than any other
thing; we enjoy these outward comforts as a fruit of the bounty and goodness
of God; I but what are all these to all the love of God in his Son? I remember
a learned man compares all the good things we receive from God, from his
general bounty and providence, and his love and mercy that appears in Christ,
with a few sparks that come out of a burning furnace, and the heat of it
within; look what difference there is between them, such difference is there
between the love of God to us in all the comforts in this world, and the love
of God in Jesus Christ; God he would have an Argument to manifest the
infiniteness of his love unto his creatures, and no such Argument as this, So
God loved the world that he sent forth his only begotten Son. Joh. 3.16.


And so the glory of Gods Truth that is manifested in fulfilling Promises, The
glory of Gods Truth appears in Christ.
any promise that is fulfilled manifests the glory of Gods truth and
faithfulness, but now the fulfilling that great Promise of God in sending his
Son into the world, here the truth and faithfulness of God appears more
gloriously than in all other; for there was never a promise so difficult as
this promise; many men can be content to fulfill promises of smaller moment,
when there is no great difficulty in the fulfilling of them, I but here is the
greatest Promise that ever was, and there was the greatest difficulty for God
to fulfill this promise of any thing that ever God did promise; and indeed when
as we hear that Christ was promised some four thousand years before he came
into the world, and yet at length he came into the world, it is a good
Argument to teach us never to doubt of the fulfilling of Gods promises; And
indeed the right apprehension of Gods faithfulness in this great Promise of his
Son, will mightily strengthen the faith of the people of God to believe any
smaller promises, and not to stagger in them; and the reason why people are so
ready to stagger in their belief about smaller promises, it is because they
have not been acquainted with the work of faith in believing that great promise
that God made with his people in sending his Son into the world; so that these
Attributes with all other, do shine gloriously in Christ. No marvel then though
the Angels upon the birth of Christ, they cry out, Glory be to God on high; as
if they should say, Oh Lord, Here is one come into the world, wherein thy glory
does appear, and by whom thou shall have glory to all eternity: Though Christ
was but a Babe in the Manger, yet the Angels did see more glory in him, than in
the highest heavens; they did not see so much cause to cry, Glory be to God on
high, from any object that ever they saw, as when they saw the Babe in the
Manger, then Oh glory be to God on high, we behold thy glory shining here,
and blessed are those that shall be enabled to behold the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ; who would not but have beheld the glory of God in his
great works? what man or woman that has any knowledge of God at all, would for
a world but have beheld so much of the glory of God as does appear in the great
Works of Creation and Providence; Oh what comfort have the Saints in beholding
the glory of the great God, when they look up unto heaven, and upon the earth,
and in the seas! Oh but then the sweetness, and soul-satisfaction that there
must needs be in the beholding the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ!

And this by the way would be a good evidence of your faith; have you beheld
more of Gods glory in the face of Christ than ever you did in all the world
besides? Yea and has the glory of God in the face of Christ, darkened all the
glory of the world besides unto you? Have your hearts been taken with that
glory more, than with all the glory that there is in the world? Why here would
be a good evidence of faith indeed, that you have had a true and real fight of
Jesus Christ; we cannot have a real sight of Jesus Christ, but we must
certainly see more of God in him, than in all things else.

The glory of Gods great works in bringing man to his eternal estate appears in
Christ. Ephesians. 1.4.
And then secondly, As the glory of Gods Attributes, so the glory of the great
Counsels and Works of God, especially in the governing of man unto his eternal
estate, that appears in Christ above all.

As the great Counsels of God in Election, We are chosen in Christ, the great
Counsels and Works of God in Vocation, Justification, Adoption, Reconciliation,
Sanctification, and Glorification, these are the great Works that God does
glorify himself in, these are the great things that the thoughts and counsels
of God has been from all eternity exercised about, whatsoever your thoughts
are exercised about, yet I say, the thoughts and counsels of God have been
exercised from all eternity about these great Works of his, Election, Vocation,
Justification, Adoption, Reconciliation, Sanctification, Glorification, all
these Works whereby he does order and guide mankind unto an eternal estate.
Now the glory of God in all these Works they are in Christ, Christ he is the
head of our Election, and all are chosen in him; what is Vocation but a calling
unto Christ, and revealing Christ to the soul? And so Justification it is in
Christ still: And we are made children, adopted in him, and reconciled in him,
and sanctified through him, and are to be glorified through him; all these
great Works about which the heart of God is so much busied, the glory of God in
all these, it does shine in the face of Christ, and without the knowledge of
Christ we could never come to know any of these things. What could the heathen
know of Gods eternal Election, or Vocation, or Justification, or Adoption, or
Glorification, to speak such words to the Heathens as these are in reference to
God, it would be barbarism; But now these are the great things of God that are
revealed to Christians by Jesus Christ, we come to have all these glorious
counsels of God in these great works of his to be opened to us, and Christ is
wonderful in all them, and all those that did know what these things mean, they
see the glory of God wonderfully in them.

Thirdly, the glory of God is wonderful in Christ, in that all the good and
mercy that is in order to eternal life, that God communicates to the children
of men, it is through Christ.

Now we mentioned somewhat like to this in the former, when we showed Christ's
endowments, that from him we have all Excellencies; But now I only mention it
to show how the glory of God the Father is in him, because that God has
appointed him for the communication of all the good that he does intend
toward the children of men in order to eternal life; now the glory of God must
needs be eminent in him this way; for God accounts it a great part of his
glory to communicate himself to his creatures, therefore that through which he
does communicate himself, must needs be partaker of abundance of glory; God
has honored Christ in this, that he has chosen him to be the instrument of
the conveyance of all saving good to all the Elect. Now suppose there were a
glass that all the beams of the Sun that ever could shine upon the world, were
contracted in it, and no beam of the Sun could shine upon the world but through
that glass, first it must come upon the glass, and shine through it, and so
shine upon the world, surely this glass would be very glorious. You may
conceive of Christ thus, Conceive of God the Father as the Sun, and of all his
elect ones as the world, and Jesus Christ as the glass between the Father, and
all the Elect; now all the beams of the love, and mercy, and goodness that ever
shall come from God upon all his elect ones, they all come through this glass,
through Jesus Christ; Oh how glorious is Jesus Christ, how wonderful is he then
in that glory of the Father!

Fourthly, The glory of the Father is wonderful in him in this, that God the
Father attains unto his greatest design, the great design that God had in
making of the world, and in the preserving of the world; I say, God attains
unto it by his Son, by Jesus Christ, And that design would be lost, if Jesus
Christ did not bring things about for the glory of his Father. God has made a
world for his glory, and he preserves a World for his glory, but the main
design that God had in making the world, and that he has in preserving the
world, it is to fetch about a great design that he has only by Jesus Christ,
and therefore it is that the Father is so well pleased in his Son, because that
by him he comes to attain the great design that he has in making the world.

Quest. You will say, What is that?

Answ. Truth it is, we understand but little of it for the present, but we
know in the general it is this, That he might have his elect ones eternally
with himself to behold his face, and magnify him together with Angels for his
mercy in Jesus Christ, that is the great design that God had; other men have
great designs in their heads, but the greatest design that God has of all, it
is to fetch about his honor in his Son, and to glorify himself in his elect
ones to all eternity, that is the great design for which he made the world,
without which he would never have made it. And God, as I may so say, is well
enough satisfied in the midst of all the dishonor that is done to him in this
wicked corrupt world, with this consideration, Well, but my Son does drive on
my design, and this pleases me; no matter though I be dishonored, though my
Name be never so much blasphemed in the world, yet my Son carries on my great
design, and the glory I foresee I shall have in the accomplishment of that
great design of mine, it does so please me, that it is no great matter to me
what wicked men that belong not to mine Election do. Christ is wonderful in
this, that he carries on the great design that God had from all eternity in
making the world.

And then lastly, The glory of God is great in Christ, and therefore wonderful,
because it is through him that all the services and praises that God has from
his elect ones, do all come through him: As there is a reflection of the glory
of God in the descending of it, when it does descend upon the elect through
Christ, so in the ascending of it again from believers it does ascend through
Christ, there is as great a necessity that when we tender up any honor to God,
that it should come through Christ, as when God lets down any beams of his
glory, that that should come through Christ; Christ is as Jacobs Ladder, for
God to come down as it were from heaven to us, and for us to ascend up to
heaven through him, Ephesians. 3. last, Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ
Jesus thoughout all Ages world without end. Unto him be glory in the Church
(but how) by Christ Jesus; except the glory that you tender up to God goes
through Christ, God accounts not himself glorified in it; For whatsoever comes
from God to you, except it comes through Christ, it will be to little purpose;
so whatsoever comes from you unto God, except it comes through his Son, it is
not accepted of God; therefore oh how wonderful is Christ in this, That such
glory of the Attributes of God do shine in him? the great Counsels, and Works
of God about man's eternal estate are all in him: And all the good that God
communicates to his elect ones, all is through him: And the great design that
God had from all eternity, he does attain it by his Son. Lastly, All the
honor that he has from all his elect ones, it is through his Son. How
wonderful is Christ then in regard of the glory of the Father in him? only as
we go along, remember that when we set Christ thus before you, we do it not
merely to your understandings, that you may conceive thus of Christ, but as an
object of your faith, you must exercise your faith upon Christ, as such a
Christ in whom the glory of the Father does so much appear.

Christ Wonderful in his Humiliation.

The next thing is, Christ is wonderful in his Humiliation; and indeed this may
seem to be the greatest Wonder of all, at least to our sense it is, especially
if we do understand what has been said before of Christ, what a Person Christ
is; now to hear what we shall hear of his Humiliation, will appear to be an
amazing, and an astonishing Wonder.

As first, The wonder of his Humiliation is in this, That Christ, God and man,
as you have heard before, should have all the sins of all the elect ones from
the beginning of the world, to the end of the world laid upon him. For such a
one as Christ is, infinitely beloved of the Father, and equal with the Father,
Phil. 2.6.
accounted it no robbery to be equal with God, yet that he should stand before
God the Father with all the sins of the Elect charged upon him, so the
Scripture tells us, 2 Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin: He has made him to be sin for us; for Christ to be made a worm
was a wonderful Humiliation, but for Christ to be made sin was a greater
Humiliation than to be made a worm; surely this must needs be a wonder to all
the Angels in heaven, for them to see such a one, whom they knew to be the
eternal Son of God, equal with the Father, to stand before the Father clothed
at it were with all the sins of the Elect. We read in Zech. 3. a kind of type
of this, in verse. 3. of Joshua the High Priest, he was clothed with filthy
Garments, and stood before the Angel, so Jesus Christ stands clothed with
filthy Garments, he that is clothed with Majesty and Glory, yet he must come
and stand clothed with filthy Garments before the Father. For one to be
clothed with filthy garments, and yet to be in some room alone, that no body
should see him, is no great matter, but to see a great Prince to come out
before the world clothed with filthy garments, it is a very great humiliation:
But Christ that was infinitely above all the Princes in the world, he comes
and stands before Men and Angels, yea before God himself clothed with these
filthy garments. For a man to have sin upon him before other men it is no great
matter, but for him to come into the presence of God with sin upon him, it is a
terrible thing. But now the Son of God must do it, he comes into the presence
of the Father, and stands with all the sins of the Elect upon him, what an
object is here of Wonder? Luther calls Christ the greatest sinner that ever was
in the world, I confess that is somewhat hard, for it was but charged upon him,
but his meaning is only this that I am speaking of: Christ had not only the
sins of David, his Murder and Adultery, and denial of Peter, and the like, but
all the sins of all the elect ones, from the beginning of the world, to the end
of the world, which they were, or should be guilty of, charged upon him.

Secondly, The wonder of Christ's Humiliation it is in this, that he that was
so high should be now brought down so low for the sin of man; is not this a
wonder, that he that thunders in the heavens, should be crying in a Manger?
Is it not a great wonder, that he that framed the heavens and earth, should
work with a Carpenter in his Trade; that he that is the great Judge of all the
world should be accused, and should be condemned as a Malefactor, and
crucified among Thieves? That he that is the Lord of Life should dye, that he
that dwelt in that light that is unapprochable, should have darkness to cover
him, that he that is the blessed God should be made a curse for the sin of
man, are not these things wonderful in Christian Religion? and yet all these
are things that may be said of Christ; for the Lord of Life to come and dye,
and that accursed death, this was a wonder that all the world seemed to be
affected with, the very insensitive creatures; for at the death of Christ the
Sun withdrew his light as being amazed with this wonder, not able to behold it,
and the earth shaked and trembled, and the graves opened at this wonder, the
very stones clave in sunder at this wonder; there was such a mighty concussion
of things at this time, that it made one that knew nothing of the cause of it,
One Dionysius, seeing the darkness at that time, Aut Deus naturae patitur aut
mundi machina dissolvetur.
and such great things which were done, cry out, Certainly either the God of
Nature suffers at this time, or the world is at an end. So great a wonder it
was that the Lord of Life should thus dye an accursed death; Angels, yea all
insensitive creatures they stood amazed at it, and seemed to be exceedingly
affected with it.

And then in the third place, Why, Christ may dye, and yet not suffer so much
to make us wonder, many of the servants of God have died cruel deaths; But then
in the third place, There is a greater wonder in C^^ists humiliation, than in
the sufferings of the servants of God, because though their bodies suffered,
yet they had much freedom in their souls, they were filled with joy and
comfort in the time of their sufferings, so it was in the Martyrs; Oh but it
was otherwise with Christ, though he were the fountain of all consolation, yet
Christ suffers in his soul, he was sorrowful in his soul to the very death,
he gave his soul to be an offering for sin, and indeed the suffering of
Christ's soul, was the soul of his suffering, the chief of his suffering, when
as Christ was in the Garden, there he acknowledges that his soul was compassed
round about with sorrows, Matthew. 26.38.
his soul was very sorrowful; and in another Evangelist he began to be
amazed, and a third Evangelist says, Mark 14.33.
he began to be filled with sorrow in his soul, and the very trouble of his
soul was that that drew forth from him such a wonderful sweat as never was
heard of in the world before, nor never since, nor never is like to be, that a
man from distress and trouble of his soul should sweat so: Many a man when he
is in fear and trouble of mind, he may sweat; but when did you ever hear of a
man out of trouble of mind that did sweat blood, that blood should come and
break through his skin, and run down upon him, and this through the trouble of
his mind? for there was no bodily affliction upon Christ then, but merely the
trouble of his Spirit, and he knowing what cup he was to drink, and the
trouble that he suffered in his Soul, did cause the blood to break through his
veyns, and come to trickle down; and not some thin blood, for so I have read of
one in Paris that was condemned to dye, and the very trouble of his spirit did
cause some blood to come out of his body, but thin; but the Scripture tells us
that there was clodders of blood; and when was this sweat? when he was abroad
in the night time, and lay upon the ground, and in the Winter season: In a
Winters night when he was abroad, and lay upon the ground, he sweat this
sweat, and all from the trouble of his spirit: A man may sweat in Summer, and
in Winter in the day time, or in a warm room, or in a bed, but for Christ in a
Winters night, and lying upon the ground to sweat such a sweat, for clodders of
blood to trickle down,
never was Garden watered as this Garden; now who would not have accounted this
a Wonder of all Wonders?

Here upon this ground lies grovelling the Son of God, the same God that made
the heavens and earth, lies here in trouble and anguish of his Spirit, while
he sweat clodders of blood; certainly there was some great matter upon the
Spirit of Christ at this time. We know it by experience, a Porter when he
has a great burden upon his body, he carries it while he sweats again: Oh
but when you see Porters sweating under their burdens, remember Jesus Christ
sweating under the burden of sin.

Besides that other expression, If it be possible let this cup pass from me,
and then the second time, and the third time to do it again: Why the Martyrs
have gone cheerfully to their deaths, whose deaths have been as cruel as the
death of Jesus Christ, and more cruel for the outward part of it, but here even
the great Champion from whom all the Martyrs that ever were, had their
strength, he, when he comes to dye, If it be possible let this cup pass from
me, says he; certainly he saw that which the Martyrs never saw: He
suffered in his Soul.

Fourthly, Christ he suffered these things from his Father, that makes the
wonder greater, and so his sufferings greater; he did not suffer only from
wicked men and devils, men indeed they are like themselves malicious, the
devils are like themselves cruel, I but Christ he might have looked up to his
Father, and have said, But oh blessed Father, Matthew. 3.17.
thou have said from heaven, that I am thy well-beloved Son: Christ would have
accounted it no great matter to have suffered from men or devils, so be it
that his Father had shined upon him; Oh no, but here is the wonder, and the
greatest thing for Angels, and men to admire at, that God the Father he
inflicts these sufferings with his own hand upon him, and the chief sufferings
of Jesus Christ they were inflicted by the very hand of God the Father himself;
for a King to come and take his own child, and scourge him, and put him to
death with his own hand, we would say, There was never such a thing heard of!
yet thus it was in the work of our Redemption, God the Father takes Christ with
his own hands, and puts him to death, For he made his Soul an offering for
sin, it was he that bruised him: If you read Isa. 53.10. you shall find it
was the Father that did it; And that was typified in Abraham's coming with his
knife to sacrifice Isaac his Son, was not that a wonderful thing, that story of
Abraham? Isaac must be sacrificed, and Abraham to sacrifice Isaac his only
Son with his own hands, what a strange history is that? but that was but the
type, here is the Antitype, here God the Father takes his Isaac, his only Son
Christ, and sacrifices him himself; surely there was some great thing to be
done, that God the Father should do it thus himself.

Fifthly, Not only God he comes himself upon him, and inflicts these evils,
but he does not spare him at all.

You will say, If God himself must be the Executioner, and come and lay his
hand upon him, he will lay his hand gently upon his own Son. Nay, when Jesus
Christ the Son of God came to take our sins upon him, the Father would not
spare him one whit, but lets out the fullness of Justice upon him, lets out his
Justice to the full, Romans 8.32. it is said, That God spared not his own Son,
certainly if God would have spared any, one would have thought it should have
been his Son: Oh here behold the Justice of God the Father, that when his own
Son takes sin upon him, and that by imputation, he must pay to the uttermost
farthing to Justice, yea though he prayed with strong cryings and tears, as in
Heb. 5.7. Though it is true, the Father did carry him through, yet in this God
would not spare him, notwithstanding any of his cries, but he must suffer to
the uttermost, and pay the uttermost farthing that Divine Justice did require
for the satisfying of it for man's sins. Many poor creatures think that having
to deal with God who is a merc^ful God, though they have the guilt of great
sins upon them, yet if they cry out to God for mercy, that God will spare them;
why, art thou dearer to God than Jesus Christ was, thy sins are thine own, his
was but by imputation, yet when he cried, he must not be spared? What
thoughts must the Angels in He^ven have upon this when they see him whom they
knew to be the eternal Son of God under the hand of the Father, and the Father
not so much as to spare him in any thing? Certainly if we do not know these
things, or believe them, if we think to put off God lightly, if we think that
a few cries to God at last will be enough to cause God to spare us, and pass
by all our sins, do but know God in Christ, and a thousand of thy vain thoughts
about God, and the pacifying God for thy sin, will vanish away and come to
nothing, did we but know God aright in Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, Yea but yet further, there is a further wonder in this humiliation of
Christ. God did not spare him; I but when God deals thus with his Son, will he
leave him? For one to suffer much, yea and though it be much from God, yet so
long as they may have the presence of God with them, that God does not leave
them it is not so much. But in all these sufferings, God the Father leaves him,
this is that is expressed by that speech, that wonderful speech of Christ upon
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; There was never a speech
spoke in this world that had matter of so much admiration as that speech of
Jesus Christ that was the eternal Son of God, Matthew. 27.46.
in the midst of his sufferings, that he should thus cry out, certainly he
did not mistake, what Christ apprehended to be, was, we many time may
apprehend that God has forsaken us, when there is no such thing, but certainly
Christ was never deceived in his apprehensions, but what he did apprehend, it
was true: But now what this forsaking of God was, it is a very hard thing, a
great mystery, which is too deep for us to dive into, but that there was a
forsaking, and that he was not deceived, but that he apprehended was real,
that must needs be granted, or otherwise we must grant that Christ was
deceived, which would be blasphemy for us to say.

Seventhly, Yea again yet further, the wonder in Christ's humiliation was this,
that all this Christ foresaw, and yet did willingly undertake it to save
mankind, see what the heart of Christ in his sufferings toward his elect
ones, was, that rather than he would see them to be plunged into the
bottomless gulf of eternal misery, he would put himself into it to keep them
out, he did it willingly; When he did fir stundertake this great work with
his Father, he knew what he should suffer, A body have thou prepared me, it
is written in the volume of thy book I should do thy will, Heb. 10 5, 7.
and lo I come, I delight to do thy will, And what was it? It was the suffering
of all these things that I have named unto you, and I have but even named them
unto you.

Eighthly, And yet further, the wonder of Christ's humiliation (my scope is now
to present as briefly as may be, as much of Christ as I can unto you, that you
may have some help for your more clear apprehensions of Christ, and how to make
him the object of your faith) The wonder of Christ appears in this, that there
should be such a way to save men as this is, that the Son of God should be
thus humbled, and this we find clearly in Scripture set out to us; but that
God would have such a way to save sinners, and no other, this is as great a
wonder as any thing, it is certainly the astonishment of the Angels, and the
admiration of the Saints to all eternity; that the Lord should look upon base
man, and that he should have thoughts to save him, that was nothing; but when
God saw that if he be saved, he must be saved after this way, that God
should as it were trouble heaven and earth for the saving of a poor wretched
sinful creature, and though God saw that it would cost him so dear to save a
soul, yet that he should go on with his work to save him, here is the wonder;
but this is the way of salvation, and this is that that is infinitely above
reason, not only above sense, but above reason; which of the Heathens could
have imagined that there should have been such a way to save man by as this;
Why how will thou be saved? I will cry to God for mercy, and break off my sin,
and be sorry with all my heart, why if this were the way there was no wonder
in that; but know oh thou sinner, whosoever thou art, that if ever thou be
saved, that thou must be saved by a wonderful way; and the truth is,
considering that this is the way of saving sinners, we may stand and wonder
that any are saved; when you hear of but few that go to heaven, and that most
people in the world perish, and when you come to hear the way of saving man,
and what it cost, and the great difficulty of it, you may then stand and wonder
that any should be saved: Oh when ever you think of salvation, think wisely of
this, it is a wonderful work of God to save a sinner, and the most wonderful
work that ever God did do; why, because the way of saving a sinner is so
strange; and truly my Brethren, then does God begin to work savingly upon the
heart of a sinner, when the sinner begins to stand and wonder at the way of
saving, and till that time it cannot be conceived that God is beginning
savingly to work upon your hearts. I appeal to your consciences, you that have
gone on in a secure dead-hearted way, when was ever your hearts taken up in
admiring at the way of Gods saving sinners? why, if it has done so, that is a
good evidence that God is beginning to show himself unto you in a saving way.
But now if you go on, and have but low thoughts about the way of salvation, if
your hearts do not sanctify Gods Name in admiring at the wonderful way of
salvation, know, that yet the Gospel is hidden to you, certainly you yet do not
understand the counsels of God about the way of salvation, when your hearts are
not taken up with admiring at the glory of God in it.

A note of Trial.
I will but leave this note of Trial with you, whether Christ be revealed to
you; have your souls wondered at him, My Brethen? there are diverse things that
men wonder at in the world, and their hearts are taken with them, and all
because they understand not Christ the great Wonder of the world. We read in
Rev. 17. that when Antichrist had gotten a great deal of power, that the world
did wonder at him, verse. 6. When I saw her, I wondered with great admiration,
etc. Antichrist having a great deal of power makes men to wonder much at him.
Now in verse. 8. The Beast which thou saw, was and is not, and shall ascend
out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the
earth shall wonder, (whose names were not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and
yet is, says he, those whose names are not written the book of life, that was
written from the foundation of the world, they shall make a wonder at
Antichrist, and at his great power, and at the way of his falling too. So in
Rev. 13.2, 3. And the Dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great
Authority, etc. When the Dragon had given his power to the Beast, that is the
Civil state and power, had given its power unto Antichrist, unto their
Church State, so that they had the Civil sword in their own hands, and were
able by that Civil power to force all to come in to their Dictates, now the
Text says, That they all wondered at it; but who are they? in Chap. 17. v. 8.
those whose names were not written in the book of life; so that carnal hearts
now may be taken with the wondering after the pomp and glory of the word, and
after the power of Antichrist, because Antichrist prevails in the world, but
they are those whose mames are not written in the book of life; those whose
names are written in the book of life, they will never stand wondering at the
excellency of Antichrist, because of his outward glory; no, Those whose names
are written in the book of life, they have learned to wonder at Jesus Christ,
not at Antichrist; let Jesus Christ be never so mean, and humbled, and low,
and persecuted in his members, in his Ordinances, yet they see that excellency
in Jesus Christ, as makes them wonder, and it is such a wonder as it does
darken all the wonders in the world besides.

The Fifth SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
Isaiah 9.6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful.
THe point that we are upon you may remember is this, That Jesus Christ is the
great Wonder of the world; As is his Name, so is he Wonderful.

9 Ther^ is yet more wonder in it if we consider that God the Father was well
pleased with all this, it pleased him, so you may find in Isa. 53.10. It
pleased him to bruise him. It pleased the Father; For God the Father taking
such delight in his Son, and seeing him brought into such a low condition, not
only to be in the form of a servant, but in the form (I say) and similitude of
an evil servant, to be beaten, and so beaten by himself, and all this to
please him, certainly there was some great matter in it, that God the Father
should be well pleased with making his own Son to be a curse for man's sin,
and yet this we find in Scripture, that it was a thing that well pleased God,
certainly were it not for some great and wonderful design that God had to bring
about, God the Father could not have been well pleased with such a thing, with
the death of his own Son, and putting him to death, and that to an accursed
death, yet he was well pleased; certainly there was a wonderful design that God
had to bring about by such a way.

10 And then further, the humiliation of Christ is wonderful in regard of the
efficacy of his humiliation, that by his death, all the wrath, and the Justice
of God should be as it were swallowed up in reference to all the elect, that
the wrath and justice of God should be swallowed up in a few days suffering
of Jesus Christ (of this man Jesus Christ) that God should account it as much
as if all the elect had been under his wrath to all eternity, the efficacy of
Christ's suffering is a wonderful efficacy, for it is an infinite efficacy, it
is infinitely satisfactory.

11 Yea further, not only satisfactory to Gods Justice, but it is that that
takes away the sting and venom of all the sufferings of the Saints to the end
of the world; Christ's sufferings takes away the venom and evil that is in the
Saints sufferings.
the efficacy of Christ's humiliation it is in reference unto God the Father,
and it is in reference unto the Saints; I say in reference unto the Father, it
satisfies all his Justice and Wrath; And in reference unto the elect ones, it
is that which takes away the sting and the venom of all their humiliations and
sufferings to the end of the world; though God has so appointed that his
Saints that he sets his heart upon to do good unto for ever, should here in
this world suffer many hard things, be under grievous afflictions, yet there
is such a way taken, as that Jesus Christ's sufferings should take away all the
sting, the venom, the evil of their sufferings, and so Christ was wonderful in
his sufferings in that regard: There was never sufferings, nor such a death in
the world, that it should take away the sting of all sufferings, and death too,
for so many thousands of people, and yet this did it.

12 And further, Christ is wonderful in his sufferings, Christ suffered as a
common Person.
because he suffered as a common Person, ^hee did not suffer as a particular
man, but we are to look upon Jesus Christ in all the work of his humiliation
as a common Person, and so all the elect from the beginning of the world to the
end are looked upon by God the Father as suffering in him, as dying in him, as
being made a curse in him; as the first Adam was a common person, and God
looked upon all mankind as dead in him, in Adam, so the second Adam was a
common Person, and in his death all the elect are looked upon as dying, and so
as satisfying Gods wrath for their sins in their own person, but vertually in
him as in a head. And in this Christ was wonderful in his humiliation, and
indeed we do not understand Christ's humiliation aright, except we understand
it thus. We sometimes speak of the great sufferings of Christ, and so far we
understand perhaps that this was for us, that he dyed for us, but we do not
understand that we dyed in him, and that he was a common Person, and all the
elect were looked upon as in him, as suffering in him, and satisfying Gods
wrath in him, why thus we are to exercise our faith upon Christ's humiliation;
and indeed this is the mystery of the humiliation of Jesus Christ.

Christ by suffering enters into glory.
13 And further, Christ was wonderful in his humiliation in this, that by such a
way he enters into his glory; that when God intended the greatest height of
glory to a creature that ever was, or ever should be, that yet he would have
such a way to lead unto it, as that Christ should first be brought into such a
low condition, to be a worm, and no man, to be so accused, to be made a
scorn of men, to be indeed in the lowest estate that is almost possible to
conceive a creature here to be in, and yet that God should intend this to be
the way to the highest degree of glory that is possible for a creature to
attain unto, here was the wonderful counsel of God, the wonderful work of God;
now you know that so it was in Christ, the Scripture says, Ought he not to
suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory? God manifested in him what
way he would have to bring us unto glory, that is by the way of suffering, by
the way of Afflictions, by the way of trouble, to pave the way to glory by such
kind of pavement as this, this was the wonderful work of God.

14 And in this further, here was the most wonderful Argument of Gods hatred to
sin In Christ's suffering appears Gods hatred of sin.
that possibly can be imagined, and wonderfullest pattern and example of
self-denial that ever was in the world, Christ was wonderful in this, in that
in him there was held out the most wonderful Argument of Gods hatred of sin, as
if God would say, I will set mine infinite wisdom on work to find out an
Argument to manifest my hatred to sin; there could not have been a greater, an
infinite wisdom could not have found a greater manifestation of the hatred of
sin.

And then he was in his humiliation, Christ in suffering, a pattern of
self-denial.
I say the pattern of the greatest self-denial that ever was, or ever can be.
God holds forth his own Son to be the pattern of self-denial to all the world;
the Lord sees how we are altogether for our selves, how hard it is for us to
deny our selves; Well, says God, I will not only require of you that you
shall deny your selves for me as your duty, and bound as creatures to do it to
your Creator, but I will send into the World such a pattern of self-denial, as
it is impossible for men or Angels to imagine a more wonderful pattern of
self-denial, My Son, that is equal with my self, to come in the form of a
servant, although he had right to all things, he shall empty, and deny
himself to the extremity of all kind of misery.

And then that that makes up all the wonder is this, Christ suffered for us.
that all this should be done for us, for such poor worms, for such vile base
creatures as we are; why might not men and Angels have thought thus? why Lord,
had it not been better for ten thousand thousand, and hundreds of thousands,
and millions of such creatures to have perished to all eternity, than that thy
Son should be brought so low, to suffer so as he did? But no, says God, I
will manifest a great wonder in the world in this, that all this shall be done
and suffered for poor worms (men) in whose eternal destruction I might have
glorified my self for ever; though it is true, I could as well have honored my
self in their ruin and destruction, as I did in the eternal destruction of the
Angels that sinned against me, yet I will show forth a wonderful work, that
men and Angels shall wonder at to all eternity, that such and such things shall
be done and suffered to save them, so unworthy, so vile; thus Christ is
wonderful in his humiliation: And these things have been but briefly presented
to you, that so I might give you a general view of the mystery of godliness
that there is in the humiliation of Jesus Christ.

Christ Wonderful in his Conquest.

But now it follows further, that Christ likewise is wonderful in his Conquest,
he is the most glorious and wonderful Conqueror that ever was in the world.

For first, What did he conquer? What does he triumph over? What? he has
conquered even Divine Justice it self, as I may so speak; the Law, Gods wrath
and justice came even fighting as it were against Jesus Christ, and Christ
encounters with them, yea he encounters with the Devil, and with Hell, and
with Death; all these are enemies that Jesus Christ encounters withal. And
certainly had any one but seen Christ go into the Lists to encounter with these
Combatants, he could not but have stood amazed at it, Oh what will become of
this Champion that is entered into such a combat as this is! But stay but a
little, and you shall see him leading Captivity captive, you shall see him
Triumphing over all, you shall see him conquering and saying, I have the Keys
of Hell, I that was dead, am risen, and have the Keys of Hell and Death, you
shall see him Triumphing over Wrath and Justice, and the Law, and the Devils,
you shall see him fetching all that he came for out of the hand of the Devil,
yea here is the wonder of the Conquest, never was there a man that did conquer
death but only Jesus Christ that had power over Death: All other Conquerors
they may conquer men, and kill them, but they cannot conquer Death it self; now
Jesus Christ's Conquest was over Death its self, to have the very keys of
Death, and that follows, Death and Hell.

And further, which makes the wonder of his Conquest, he does conquer death by
dying, that is the wonder of it. What man conquers his enemy by being slain
himself? Jesus Christ did so, he conquers all his enemies that came against
him, he conquers them by dying, and therefore in Col. 2. it is spoken of
Christ's coming to dye upon the Cross: And having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, he made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them in it. When Christ
was brought upon the Cross, one would think he had been triumphed over himself
then, for he was brought very low indeed when he was brought there to hang
between two Malefactors, as if he had been the greatest Malefactor of all; now
one would have thought that Devils and wicked men, and Death, and all had
triumphed over him; but mark, the Text says, That he did there spoil
Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them
in it. We can imagine somewhat of Christ's Triumph now in heaven sitting at the
right hand of the Father, when he ascended into heaven, there he Triumphed;
but to imagine a triumph of Christ in his Cross, when his enemies were scorning
and contemning him, that then he should spoil Principalities and Powers, and
upon the Cross Triumph over them, this is a great mystery of godliness, and
herein is the wonder of Christ's Conquest, of Christ's Triumph.

And then further, the wonder of the Triumph of Christ consists in this, That
he has not only vanquished all the enemies of his people, but he has
vanquished them by his own power: Conquerours have use of the strength of
others, but Christ had strength enough of his own without any addition, and he
did not only quell the Adversary, but he turns all into good to his people:
It is one thing for a Conqueror to overcome an enemy, so as an enemy shall not
be able to do any more hurt to those that belong to him, and another thing to
subdue them so far as to make them all to be servants to him, that is a
greater Conquest. Man by a strong Army may be a Conqueror by killing his
enemies, and so never to hear of them more, but if he can subdue and bring
them all to be useful and serviceable to himself and his people, this Conquest
is a great deal the more glorious; now such is the Conquest of Christ, that he
has not only quelled their power, but has brought all to be serviceable to
his people, the Law is serviceable to them, and now Gods Justice is for good to
them, and the very wrath of God is now for their good, and the Devil, and
Death, and Hell, and wicked men, they are all made useful unto Jesus Christ,
and so unto his people.

Lastly, Christ is wonderful in his Conquest in this, that he conquered
likewise as a common Person, as a head, and in him he has made all his Saints
Conquerours, yea the Scripture says that they are more than Conquerours
through Jesus Christ, in him they are looked upon as having overcome all those:
Thou that art the weakest in thy self, and art able to do least, art afraid of
every expression of Gods wrath, and terror of the Law, of the threats of
wicked men, of the temptations of the Devil, of the very thoughts of Death or
Hell, yet I say, if thou be a believer, thou have conquered all these
already, they are not one^y conquered to thy hand, but thou have conquered them
all, that is, vertually in thy head, thou art made a Conqueror over Sin, and
Death, and Hell, and as in Christ thy head, so in some measure in thy self,
that is, Christ has put such a principle into thy heart as will conquer all
thine enemies that come against thee, in due time, so that this is the glory of
Christ's Conquest, and he is wonderful in it.

Now more particularly there is following the Conquest of Christ, Christ's
Resurrection, and his Ascension, and his sitting at the right hand of the
Father, and his coming to Judgment: In all these we have a wonderful
Redeemer. I very briefly present all these before you, but in a few words to
show you a little of the mystery of godliness in every one of these, that so I
might in a very little narrow compass, present the chief glory of Jesus Christ
unto you, I mean the heads of it; though we cannot tell you the thousandth
thousandth part of the glory of Christ.

Christ Wonderful in his Resurrection.

Christ was wonderful in his Resurrection; there was never such a Resurrection,
nor never shall be, as Christ's was. That Christ rose from the dead, I suppose
you all know, but now the mystery of godliness in this, and the wonderful work
of God in it, In Romans 1.4. it is said, That Christ was mightily declared to be
the Son of God in his Resurrection from the dead.

You will say, Why, others rise too, both godly and wicked shall rise, how is
Christ wonderfully and mightily declared to be the Son of God by the
Resurrection from the dead?

Why thus, Christ he undertaking to satisfy for man's sins, to pay the debt
that man did owe to God for his Sin; God the Father comes upon him, sues out
the Bond, casts him into Prison, into the Gaol: Now when Jesus Christ did arise
from the dead, there was a declaration to all the world that he had satisfied
the debt fully to God the Father, that he had paid fully what Divine Justice
did require for the sin of man; now this was a mighty declaration of Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God; had he not been the Son of God, he could never
have rose again, having dyed upon such terms as he did; Christ did dye to
satisfy Gods wrath, and undertook this, Lord I am content to come under the
bonds of death till thine infinite Justice shall say, That it is satisfied,
that it has enough: If all the Angels in heaven, and men on the earth had
undertook such a work, and said, Lord, Let us all dye, and abide under the
power of Death, until thine infinite Justice shall say, It is enough, they must
have abode to all eternity under it, they could never have come out of Prison,
but have lain there; but now Christ he undertook this work, and was content to
be under the power of Death till God should fully discharge him, as being
satisfied; God says at length I am satisfied, Let the prison doors be opened,
let him go; so that when Christ comes out of the Grave, now he is declared
before men and Angels mightily in a wonderful manner to be the Son of God; and
it is upon this that the Scripture says in Psalm 2. Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, which is applied by the Apostle in Act. 13. and some
other Scriptures unto Christ's Resurrection.

This is now, as if so be that Christ had been begotten but that day; why
Christ was the begotten Son of the Father from all Eternity.

I but Christ coming under the charge of man's sin, and under the power of
death, all the while he was in that low estate of humiliation, he does not
appear like the Son of God before the world, but when he comes and gets the
power over all, and is acquitted and rises again, now he does appear like
himself indeed, the only begotten Son of the Father, he is now mightily
declared to be the Son of God; and in this the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
was wonderful, for the wonderful power and efficacy that there is in it; Christ
being acquitted, all the elect were in him acquitted, all were acquitted in him
vertually, though there is another acquitting personally when they believe: At
the very time of Christ's Resurrection, all the Elect were acquitted as in a
head, yet I say, There is another acquitting from God in ones own person, that
is upon believing: From hence that notable Scripture we have in 1 Pet. 3.21.
The like figure whereunto, even Baptism does now save us (not the putting away
of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

What answer is this that the Apostle speaks of? and how is this answer by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ?

The answer that here the Apostle speaks of, it is an answer unto all demands
that Gods Justice, that the Law, that the Devils can make, for any punishment
that a sinner has deserved: If Gods Justice should say to a sinner, Thou have
sinned, and therefore thou must dye, thou must be punished, thou must satisfy
Justice.

If the Devil should come and demand that the Threats of God should be
fulfilled because here is a sinner.

If thine own conscience should in the Name of God demand that thou should
answer for thy sin.

A good conscience by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, is able to make answer
to all these demands: A good conscience, that is, one that has a good
conscience can make answer through Christ's Resurrection, and say, Why are these
things demanded of me? Christ has satisfied for all, he has satisfied for
my sin, and paid my debt, and is risen again. Has not God the Father acquitted
him in raising him from the dead, and therefore in him all is satisfied, and
this is the answer I make to all the Bills that are put in against me. If
there be Bills put in against m^n in any Court, they come and make answer;
What ever Bill can be put in against a believer, if the Law of God, or any
Temptation should put in any Bill, says a believer, here is my answer, That
all is satisfied in Christ: Now this is by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; if
Christ had dyed, yet if he had not risen again, thou could not have made
answer, That all is done, all might have been doing, but thou could not have
made answer that all is done; but by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, thou
can make answer to any demand.

And observe, That this is the answer of a good conscience. Men and women that
talk so much of faith, and yet have evil consciences, they cannot make this
answer by the Resurrection of Christ: Those that tell you we are to believe,
and God looks at nothing else but believing: It is true, if they understand it
aright, in the point of Justification, that is the thing that is for the
justifying of a person, but there is somewhat more that is required of a
justified person, and therefore no person can make this answer, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, but such a one as has a good conscience: The
answer of a good conscience (says the Text) by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: If thou have a corrupt and vilde wicked conscience, thy conscience
flies in thy face for sins that thou live in, know, that thou can never
make answer (to those demands that shall be made against thee) by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, with any comfort, till thy conscience comes to
be purified by faith: That is the wonder of Christ's Resurrection, mightily
declared to be the Son of God.

And in his Resurrection, there is a Resurrection of all the Saints, all the
elect ones; for the Scripture says, That he was the first fruits from the
dead, that is, that look as the first fruits did sanctify all the rest, and
all were consecrated in the first fruits being offered to God: So all the elect
ones in Christ's Resurrection did rise again, I say, vertually in him, and it
was a pledge of their Resurrection, the Resurrection of their souls spiritually
to life here, and their Resurrection to eternal life, and so we are to
exercise our faith upon Christ's Resurrection; this is the mystery of godliness
in Christ's Resurrection, and hence is that known place in 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy, says the Text, great is the mystery of godliness, God was
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit.

A wonderful mystery there is in godliness; why what mystery?

God was manifested in the flesh, the Son of God came and took our nature upon
him, that was wonderful, but this is as great a wonder as the other, Justified
in the Spirit, it is all one as by being justified upon his Resurrection, by
the power of the Spirit he was quickened, and life was put into him, and so he
rose again, and thereby was declared before all the world to be justified, to
stand acquitted from all the charge of our sins that was upon him; and so if
you compare that place Justified in the Spirit, with that in 1 Pet. 3.18. Put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, that is, by the power of his
Godhead he was quicked, upon his Resurrection; now that that one Apostle
says (quickened) another says (justified) to show, that when he was quickened,
that is rose again by the power of his Deity, then both he, and all the elect
ones stood just in the presence of God, acquitted of all their sins, and this
is the mystery of godliness.

There is abundance in every one of these, but it is not my purpose to handle
the Resurrection of Christ, or his Assention, but merely to give you a little
glimpse of the mystery of godliness that there is therein, that you may
understand him aright, so as you may be able to exercise your faith upon him,
not only Dying and Humbled, but Conquering and Rising.

Christ Wonderful in his Ascension.

And for the Ascension of Christ into heaven the manner of it was wonderful.
There comes a cloud and carries him up, and the Disciples stands gazing; it was
a wonder to be gazed at, the Ascension of Jesus Christ, body and soul into
heaven, in that glorious way.

But especially if we consider that Christ ascended likewise as our head,
ascended into heaven as the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies: And it is
said, that we are set together in heavenly places together with Christ, so you
have it in Ephesians. 2.6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in christ Jesus: For Christ went as in our names to take
possession of heaven, this is the mystery of godliness in Christ's Ascension:
He went up to Heaven, but he went in the name of the Elect to take
possession, as a man that has bought house and lands, may have one appointed
by him to go in his name to take possession of the house and land, Jesus Christ
in the name of all the elect from the beginning of the world to the end, went
up unto heaven to take possession there, and on purpose to prepare Mansions for
them against their coming: Thus wonderful was Christ in his Ascension.

Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father.

And in heaven Christ sits at the right hand of the Father, thereby declaring
that God the Father was well-pleased with all that he has done, because he
sets him at his right hand; after Christ had made an end of all his work, he
is said to sit down, in Heb. 10.12. This man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; he had done
his work, and God the Father approves of him, and so honors him in setting him
at his right hand, and there gives unto him all power to rule together with
himself, as you heard in his Kingly Office, and there he is to make
Intercession continually for his Elect, and has that weight of glory put upon
him that is possible for humane nature to have put upon him, that is the
meaning of sitting at the right hand of God; these four things are meant by it.

First, When he came to heaven, God the Father, that he might acknowledge
that his Son had fully done the work that he was sent into the world about,
he does honor him by setting him at his right hand.

Secondly, He gives unto him all Authority and Power to Reign together with
himself. Matthew. 28.18.


Thirdly, There he is as the High Priest to make Intercession for his Saints,
to be their Advocate continually at the right hand of the Father to make
Intercession for them. Heb. 7.25.


And then fourthly, It is to signify that Christ has the highest degree of
glory, that it is possible for humane nature to be capable of; Therefore you
must not understand the right hand of God in a corporeal way, as if God had
right hand or left, but sitting so in those four respects as I have named: And
all these make Christ a wonderful Redeemer, he that shall come up to God the
Father in Heaven, and to have God own his being fully pleased with what he did
upon the Earth, and there setting him upon his own Throne, to reign with him,
and there to be for ever to make intercession for the Saints, and to have the
height of all glory to be bestowed upon him; Certainly this is a wonderful
Redeemer.

Christ wonderful in his coming to Judgment.

And then Christ shall in a wonderful manner come to judge the world again,
then he shall come to be admired indeed; so you have it in 2 These. 1.10. 2
These 1.10.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all
them that believe: Those that do believe in Christ, they see him to be
wonderful; now they do admire at him; but when he shall come again in glory at
the great day, then he shall appear so wonderful, as they shall all stand
admiring, and saying, Well we indeed heard that our blessed Savior was the
wonder of the world, and we saw so much as made us admire at his glory; but
we never thought that we had had such a glorious Savior, as now we see we
have; wonderful and glorious is Jesus Christ now, but when he shall come with
his thousand thousands of Angels, and when there shall be such a wonderful
change in the world, the Elements melt with fervent heat, and the Heavens
depart like a scroul, and the Heavens and Earth shaken, and all the Princes and
Monarks in the world, and all the children of men appearing before him: Oh
wonderful then shall he be in his attendance, and then in his own person.

Wonderful shall he be then in the manner of his proceedings, in bringing
forth all the books of Gods forbearance, and the books of men's conscience, and
the book of the word to proceed with men and Angels for their eternal estate,
in this Christ will appear then to be wonderful: Thus Christ is wonderful in
his humiliation, and in his exaltation: But further, a word or two more.

Christ wonderful in his working toward his Saints, and in the high esteem
that the Saints have of him.

Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty, who would not fear
thee, O thou King of Saints! The great things that Christ does in the world
toward his Churches, are wonderful, and the great esteem his Saints have of
him, they account all things as dung and dross for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And he shall be wonderful eternally hereafter in the highest Heavens, and
there he will be the matter of the wonder of all the Angels and Saints; and
the matter of the admiration, and the praises that God shall have to all
eternity, it shall be from what the Angels and Saints do see in Jesus Christ;
therefore surely he will be wonderful in Heaven.

And then wonderful, when the understandings of the Saints shall be elevated
to the highest pitch that they are capable of: sometimes we do wonder at
things, because of our ignorance; ignorant people will wonder almost at any
thing; at the works of Arts and Sciences, they wonder, because they know but
little, but now that, that the most understanding man in the world shall wonder
at, certainly it has some great excellency in it: Now Christ shall not be the
wonder of the Saints only while they are here in in this world, but when they
shall be in Heaven, and have their understandings enlightened and enlarged to
the height that possibly they can be enlarged to, and yet even then Christ
shall be their wonder, and they shall wonder at Christ more than they do now
abundantly: Certainly that has real excellency in it indeed, and great
excellency, that the more understanding a man is, the more he shall admire at
it: perhaps poor people they may wonder at some men for their parts, yet if
they had any great understanding themselves, they would see such a man's parts
had little in them; but if a man had such parts, that the more any man came to
understand him, the higher in degree their understandings were, the more they
should wonder, certainly this man had a great deal of excellency in him indeed:
So it is in Christ, that when the Saints shall be elevated to the height, they
shall so much the more admire at him.

Further, In Heaven Christ shall be wondered at for ever; many things are
wondered at for the present, I but the wonder quickly ceases; we use to say of
strange things, they are but of nine days wonder, but Jesus Christ is not
only a wonder at first, when the soul comes first to embrace Jesus Christ: It
is true, poor sinners at their first embracing Jesus Christ, for the very
novelty of those things they see in him, they do admire at them, they never did
understand such things before; but the truth is, if that grace be true, thou
shall not only wonder when thou come to Christ at first, at the excellency
in him, but the longer thou continuest a Believer, the more thou will wonder;
and when thou come to Heaven, after thousand millions of millions of years,
thou will wonder as much at him as thou did the first moment; those men that
have made profession of Religion, and seemed to come to Christ, they wonder at
first hearing of the Gospel, like the stony-ground, that received the word with
joy, Oh how wonderfully are they affected at the first hearing of the glorious
things of the Gospel! but now mark, their wonder quickly ceases, and their joy
ceases within a little while; they do not now see so great excellency to admire
at it, neither have they so great joy; but where there is true Faith, there the
soul does not only wonder at Christ, at his first coming to Christ, but still
more and more to all eternity.

And now my Brethren, me thinks that all wonders in the world should lie by a
while, upon this wonder of Christ's being presented to you; and as we read in
Dan. 6. of one that came in a vision, and said, Gabriel, make this man to
understand the vision; so shall I call to a Gabriel? no, to Jesus Christ, to
the Immanuel, he that is the great wonder; Oh blessed blessed Redeemer, make
these souls to understand these things, to understand somewhat of this wonder;
we have many wonders of our own, and we tell this and that news, but O that
Christ would but show himself now to your souls, that you may understand
somewhat of this wonder, that your hearts may be for ever taken off from
wondering at any thing in this world: I have seen, says David, an end of all
perfection, but thy Law is very broad: So we may say, and the heart would say
that were brought to Christ, Oh Lord, I have seen an end of all the great
things in the world, but Jesus Christ is very great and glorious indeed, it is
he that has darkened all the glory that there is in the world, but now I may
say of all these things, as it is said of Daniel, in chap. 12. verse. 10. None
of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand these things that
are spoken of Christ; the wicked they will not understand, those that God has
not given unto Jesus Christ will not understand, but they will be content to
part with Christ for any thing for all this: O detestable wickedness that there
is in the heart of man, that after this that has been revealed to you about
Christ, so much of his glory held forth for the wonder of the world, that after
this yet thou should prize thy base lusts before all the good and the glory
that there is in Jesus Christ: certainly that man or woman must needs have the
Angels in Heaven, and all the Saints to acknowledge the righteous judgment of
God in the condemnation of them, that has lived under the Gospel, and has
heard what a wonderful Savior is come into the world, if such a one should yet
go away, and prize a base filthy lust before all the good and glory that there
is in Jesus Christ; take heed of this: certainly if it be so, if any of you
be found at the great day still going on in the ways of known fins, this will
be your charge,

You lived in such a place wherein you heard that my Son was the great wonder
of the world, and glorious things were showed you, to allure you to believe in
him, and yet he was nothing in your eyes, but your own vile lusts were more
glorious in your eyes: O just and righteous is the condemnation of this
creature for ever; certainly the sin of unbeleef, the sin of rejection of Jesus
Christ must needs be a dreadful sin, because Jesus Christ is so great a wonder
as you have heard.

The Sixth SERMON ON The Excellency of Christ.
Isaiah 9.6. And his Name shall be called Wonderful.
NOw we come to the Application of all, which is the work of this exercise.
Application.


First, Certainly Jesus Christ is little known in the world, if this be he,
this great wonder of the world: Oh how little is Christ known! Christ is but a
mere Notion and Imagination to most people in the world; you heard the very
sound of this name, and how Christ came into the world to save sinners; but I
appeal unto your consciences, when were your hearts taken with the admiration
of the glory of God shining in the face of Jesus Christ? has Christ been made
the greatest wonder in the world unto you? some of you have seen many wondrous
works of God, some of you perhaps in the Seas, or abroad in other Countries, or
if not there, yet you have seen the Heavens, and the Earth, at which you many
times wonder; but when did God dart light into your spirits, to cause you to
see so much of Jesus Christ, as made him to be the great wonder of all his
works? certainly that soul knows not God nor Christ savingly, that knows him
not as the wonder of the world; it is impossible that such a poor creature as
man is should come to understand such great mysteries of godliness as are in
Christ in any measure, but must needs admire at the glory of that great work,
and say with acclamation, Oh the height, and depth, and breadth, and length of
the glory of God, his Wisdom, and Mercy, and Truth, and Power!

Many Notes of Trial there may be of Faith, but I know not any one more
familiar than this is (at least negatively, it must needs be a true Note) that
is, that there cannot be Faith without it, namely, if the heart has not been
taken up with the wonder of Christ, so as all the wonders in the world have
been darkened in the soul in comparison of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, If Christ be so great a wonder, then O how vile a thing is it for
the hearts of men to prefer any base filthy lusts before Jesus Christ? when God
has manifested him in that wonderful way unto the children of men, and so much
of his glory in him, yet that their hearts should be taken off from him, and
every base lust to be preferred before him, Oh how just must the condemnation
of such be for ever! we may take up that complaint that there was in Psalm.
106.7. Psalm. 106.7.
Our Fathers understood not thy wonders, says the Psalmist: So the truth is,
as our Fathers did not, so few there are that understand the wonders of the
Lord in Jesus Christ; and therefore every thing is preferred before him; with
what infinite indignation must God needs look upon that wretched soul, that
shall prefer every base lust before Jesus Christ? I remember a speech of
Chrysostom, speaking of that Text, That our vile bodies shall be made like
unto the glorious body of Christ, says he, were all the world turned into
tears, yet they were not sufficient to lament the misery of that soul that
forsakes Jesus Christ: his heart was so much taken with the excellency of Jesus
Christ, that he thought it impossible to lament the misery of the creature
that should forsake him: and so St. Paul having his heart filled with the
glorious Mystery of Christ, he breaks forth with this dreadful curse, He that
loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha, as if St.
Paul should say (having his spirit filled with the glory of Christ) Oh what
shall God manifest so much of his glory in his Son, and shall base wretched
vile creatures prefer their lusts before him, and have their hearts taken up
with other vain things, and not love the Lord Jesus Christ? let that soul be
cursed with a bitter curse, says Paul; such a soul does deserve indeed to be
cursed with a bitter and an eternal curse, that shall hear so much of Jesus
Christ, and how God has revealed himself in that wonderful way in his Son, and
yet that soul shall not be willing to forsake a base lust for all the good
there is in Jesus Christ; let that soul be cursed with a bitter curse: It
deserves above all creatures to have the most bitter curse to be upon it to
all eternity: certainly the more glory there is in Christ, the more dreadful
will the condemnation of wicked men be, This is (the) condemnation, that such
glorious light is come into the world, and men chose darkness rather than
light. How many hear of Christ, and mind little, but only have a noise, they
hear some strange things of Christ, and let them pass by, and think there is
little reallity in what they hear, but the only real comfort is in satisfying
of the flesh in the lusts of it. In Act. 13.41. Act. 13.41.
we have an excellent Scripture for the reproof of such that hear the Gospel,
and mind it not; Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of
in the Prophets, Behold ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, for I work a
work in your days, a work which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man
declare it unto you: It is spoken concerning Christ, as appears in the verse
before, And by him all that believe are justified from all things, by which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses: Now then it follows, Beware
therefore lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold
ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; as if he should say, you hear the Gospel
about the glorious way that God has to reconcile sinners to himself, to
justify sinners, but in the mean time your hearts do close with your own
Conceits, and your own ways, with the Law of Moses, and think by your own good
meanings, and your own good works, that you shall do well enough, and shall
stand before God; but says the Apostle, Beware lest that come upon you which
is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye despisers, and wonder: you perhaps,
when you hear such things declared unto you, you account it strange doctrine,
and you stand and wonder what the meaning of those things should be; but as
you wonder, so you do despise; you condemn it as a strange thing that you were
not wont to hear heretofore, and as a thing you cannot understand the reason
of; this is the usual guize of carnal hearts, when they hear any doctrine,
though there be never so much of God in it, and of the Mystery of the Gospel
that is revealed in it, yet if they understand not the reason of it, if it
appear to them as a new thing, they wonder indeed, but they despise withal,
and condemn it, and slight it, and pass it over, as they did St. Paul's
Doctrine, What will this babbler say? he brings us news of a strange God, and
the like: so these are things that people are not acquainted withal, and so
they cast them off, and despise: but mark, says the Text, Take heed, beware
lest this come upon you, that you shall behold and wonder, and despise and
perish too, for I work a work in your days, a work which you shall in no wise
believe, though a man declare it unto you: there shall be the great Counsels
of God revealed in your days, and in your Congregations, there shall be
revealed those Counsels of God, whereby God intends to save many souls; and
here and there God will make known these things to save poor souls, but you in
the mean time being conceited of your own understandings, or your own Civil
Righteousness, that you are not so bad as others, and that you are in a good
case, and in a good condition all this while, and upon a conceit, you hear, and
wonder, and despise, but you shall perish, and shall never come to believe
those great things that God in your days shall reveal for the salvation of the
souls of others; and this is a most dreadful curse that is upon the hearts of
many men and women that hear the great things of the Gospel; as it is said in
the second of the Acts, that they spoke the wonderful things of God, and yet
there was some that did but mock; this is the condition of some, that their
spirits secretly despise and contemn those things that they should adore; such
things as upon the hearing they should even fall down upon their faces, and
adore God in the beholding of them, and yet I say, slighting of them, and
resting to their own ways, and conceits, here is the curse of God upon their
hearts, that though they hear them, yet they shall not believe them, I work a
work in your days, a work that you shall in no wise believe, though a man
declare it unto you, says the Holy Ghost, this Scripture is very much
fulfilled in Congregations where the Gospel comes to be preached.

Thirdly, But further, in the third place; If Jesus Christ be so great a
wonder, certainly then the misery of mankind is very great, it follows from
hence; if there be such need of so wonderful a Redeemer, Oh the dreadful
breach that sin has made between God and man, that required such a wonderful
work of God to make it up! this is that that God would have you have a right
understanding of, and have serious thoughts about it; God would not have sinful
wretched man to think the breach between God and him is a light matter, a
little thing: No, when the Lord has sent his Son into the world, and has
declared him to be thus wonderful: when the Lord shows what a wonderful
glorious work of his there is in his Son for the saving of mankind, he thereby
does declare unto you, and would have you know it, that the breach that your
sin has made between God and your own souls, it is a wonderful breach;
certainly were the Misery of man no other but such as the power of Angels, as
the power of any mere creature could help out of, Jesus Christ had never come
into the world, there had never been such a wonderful work of God to redeem
man; But now when you hear that the way of God to redeem man is so wonderful,
you have cause to lay your hands upon your hearts, and say, Oh the depth of
misery that my soul is fallen into! Oh the desperate disease of my soul, that
must have such a wonderful cure! Oh that ever the great and infinite God should
work so wonderfully for the salvation of such a poor wretched creature as
sinful man is! My Brethren, we do not sanctify the Name of God in the great
thing that God would be sanctified in, except we have right apprehensions of
the dreadful breach our sin has made between the Lord and our own souls, that
so we might have right apprehensions of this wonderful work that God has done
for the salvation of mankind; this is the reason why God so many times does
bring sinful creatures into so great straights, into the very gulf of despair
oftentimes before he reveals the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ unto them:
It is, I say, because the Lord would have his name sanctified in this wonderful
work of redemption by Jesus Christ, that the sinner might be prepared to stand
and admire at the wonderful glory of God in Jesus Christ; And there is nothing
in the world that God looks so much for as this, to be sanctified in these
wonderful things that he has done for mankind in Christ; and if we have but
slight thoughts of the breach that our sin has made, certainly we cannot but
have slight thoughts likewise of the work that God has done to deliver us from
our sin: Thou think thy sin to be a light matter, but know, that when thou
have sinned against God, there must be the most wonderful work of God to
reconcile thee to himself, that ever God did from all eternity, or will do to
all eternity; this is the greatest wonder, his sending of Jesus Christ into the
world; know therefore the depth of thy misery by this; if God should have
devised as it were from all eternity how to have manifested the wonderful
misery of mankind, no greater could be found than this wonderful work of his
in the redemption of mankind. This is a third.

And then Fourthly, Is Jesus Christ the great wonder of the world? hence then
all Believers have exceeding cause of rejoicing in the hearing of what Christ
is, what a wonderful Savior they have, Let the children of Zion rejoice in
their King: Rejoice in this,

First, That God has so honored you, as that he has wrought so wonderfully
for your salvation; certainly, as thy redemption is, so art thou; that is,
there is some reflection of the glory of thy Redeemer upon thee; how has Go^
honored thee before his Angels? and how honorable shall thou be hereafter,
when it shall appear to all the world, that the Infinite God did so gloriously
work for the saving of thy soul? God looks upon all the Kings of the Earth as
worms, Yea all the Nations of the earth as the drop of the bucket, and the dust
of the balance, as nothing, less than nothing: You see how meanly God values
all the Nations of the Earth: But when he speaks of his Son, that is thy
Redeemer, His Name shall be called wonderful, says he, he is wonderful in
the eyes of God the Father; thou that have such a wonderful Redeemer as this
is, certainly thy condition must needs be comfortable.

But Secondly, The main comfort that Believers may have from this glory of
Christ, as has been opened to you, is this, that hereby they may see Jesus
Christ as a full object for their souls to rest upon, whatever their condition
be; thou have an All-sufficient Savior, thou have an object that thou may
venture thy soul, thy eternal estate upon, for he is a wonderful Redeemer;
conceive thy misery to the uttermost that possibly can be, suppose thou see
the guilt of all thy sins before thee, and apprehendest thy soul bound over to
eternal death for thy sin; suppose thou see the justice of God coming out
against thee, to require satisfaction for thy sin; the curse of the Law, that
likewise brings thee under it, and thou see the bottomeless pit even ready
open for thee, and the horrible vile iniquities that thou have been guilty of,
presenting themselves unto thee with all the aggravations of them; suppose all
this, And thou stand now before the great God, ready to receive the sentence
of thy eternal estate. Now these things may make thy heart to shake, and indeed
they will where they are seen really; But in the midst of such a sight, if God
do but give thee a sight of thy Redeemer that is so wonderful, here is enough
to draw forth Faith, yea to beget Faith in the soul; let this be but
presented, whatsoever thy misery be, yet know, here is a wonderful Redeemer,
who cannot only cure ordinary diseases, and deliver in ordinary troubles, but
can wonderfully deliver, and no cure can be too hard for him; Oh therefore
thou troubled soul! that do apprehend the evil of thy sin, and the dread^^l
danger that thou art in: Oh that thou could but see this wonderful Redeemer
before thee! thou would see him to be an object for the most vile
wretchedest sinner that ever lived upon the face of the earth to rest upon; And
because God the Father accounts wonderfully of his Son; therefore it is that
he would not have us only to believe in his Son in ordinary cases, but in
extraordinary cases; you that are believers, and hope you have any part in
Christ, know, that God expects that you should sanctify his Son as a wonderful
Redeemer; now, if you can only believe in Christ in an ordinary way, when your
condition is ordinary, and your straights not very great, this is not to
sanctify Christ as a wonderful Savior. Now let this be but laid to thy heart
when temptations are strong, and when thy heart is ready to sink in any
extremity; It may be temptation comes and tells thee thy condition is
extraordinary, who was ever so left of God as thou art, then do but lay these
truths upon thy heart, that have been revealed in the opening of the
wonderfulness of Christ, and even say thus to thy soul, well, but oh my soul!
thou have heretofore believed in God, but have thou sanctified the Name of
Christ, as wonderful? have thou believed in Jesus Christ, as in him whose Name
by God himself is called wonderful? Thou have, thou think, believed in him
as a Savior, as a Redeemer, but have thou believed in him as thus wonderful in
his Natures, in his Person, in his Offices, in his indowments, and in all the
great things that he has done, in the glory of the Father that shines in him?
have thou sanctified his Name in all those particulars wherein Christ has been
made known to be wonderful? certainly Believers do not sanctify this Name of
Christ, except there be some kind of proportion between their Faith, and all
these glorious things that are revealed of Jesus Christ: It is he that is a
full object for thy soul to rest upon in all straights whatsoever, when the men
of the world shall be at their wits end, they having their ordinary help fail
them, yet thou that art a Believer, and know what Jesus Christ is, ^^d the
glory of God that appears in him, thou need not be at thy wits end, for
thou have him whose Name is wonderful, to be the object of thy Faith.

Thirdly, The consolation to Believers from this title of Christ, is in this;
That certainly, if there be such a wonderful Redeemer, that God himself does
glory so much in, and account him so wonderful, then it must needs follow, that
God does intend wonderful things for the Saints; no wise man that has
abilities, will in a wonderful manner busy himself about a trifle: certainly
if the Lord does thus work for mankind in his Son, if the Lord provide such a
wonderful Savior for the children of men, we may fully conclude, that God
has wonderful thoughts to do great things for mankind; the thoughts of God
for the good of mankind are very great, and very glorious, they are some high
things, some glorious things that God does aim at for mankind. Oh raise up
therefore your thoughts! let all that are but men raise up their thoughts, and
think, surely there is some great happiness for the children of men; God has
revealed it from Heaven, when he has told us that there is such a wonderful
Redeemer come into the Earth: But Oh you Believers! do you in a special manner
raise up your hearts, and expect glorious things? and though you have but
little from God for the present, yet conclude, that God has wonderful thoughts
about you that are the members of Jesus Christ; and there must come a time,
that there must be wonderful things bestowed upon you, or otherwise God should
lose the honor of all the wonderful things he has done in Christ, and that
he will never do: God will at length bring every believer to such a height of
glory, as before Men and Angels it shall be declared by the glory of your
souls, that Jesus Christ was a wonderful Redeemer; such glory thou may have,
we cannot tell the particulars; If we should go to open the happiness of the
Saints, what it should be in Heaven, we should quickly be swallowed up; but
one would think that this one thing should be enough to fill the heart of the
Believer with joy, I shall have so much happiness from God one day, as must
declare before Men and Angels, that Jesus Christ was a wonderful Savior, such
glory as God himself will glory in.

Oh look here! look upon this poor wretch, that a while was such a vile wicked
creature, and a child of wrath, and of perdition in its self, and look now
what a height of glory this soul is raised up to, and now give your testimony
whether my Son be not a wonderful Redeemer; this will be the condition of
every poor believer that lives, and comfort your selves in exercising your
Faith in this.

What ever I am now for the present, though but a lump of clay and filth, yet I
being a Believer, Christ being mine, my condition must be such one day as God
the Father will say before men and Angels, behold the wonderfulness of my Son,
in what I have done for this soul; and that may be enough to satisfy the soul
for the present, that God will show himself wonderful in thy good, and thy
salvation; so that it may be said of every particular believer, thy estate
shall be such one day, as if there were no other saved in all the world but
thy self, yet Jesus Christ will manifest himself wonderful in thy salvation;
for indeed that is that that he aims at, to be wonderful in the salvation of
his Saints, in bringing them unto glory, and that is the comfort of all
Believers from this title of Christ's being wonderful. But now then as thy
comforts art great from this title, so thy duties should be some way
proportionable too; thou should therefore honor God the Father of Christ,
as a wonderful Savior: -- Labor therefore first to search into this deep
mystery of the Gospel:

Oh what a shame is it that those that do profess themselves Christians, should
understand so little of Jesus Christ! this is that that God expects: I say,
that we should study the Gospel, search into the Gospel, that we may see more
of Christ; the more we see, the more still we shall wonder, for Christ is an
infinite depth, and the more we search into him, the more we shall see cause
to wonder: In the first of the Ephesians, mark what a prayer Paul makes for the
Ephesians, in the 17, and 18. verses, he told them before, that he did not
cease to give thanks for them, making mention of them in his prayers: to what
end? That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of Glory, may give unto
you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him.

He does not only pray, that they might have some knowledge of him, but that
they might have a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ;
and this from the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from the Father of Glory.

Mark what titles he gives to God when he prays for them, that they might
have the knowledge of Jesus Christ; it must be the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ that must do it, and the Father of Glory.

God does never show himself to be the Father of Glory so much, as when he
gives the knowledge of Jesus Christ to a soul, then God does make himself to
appear indeed to be the Father of Glory.

And further, The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward who believe. And in the third of the Ephesians, from the 14 verse to
the 20. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named, that he would grant you
according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the Inner-man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, that
ye being rooted and grounded in love, (All this now is but a preparation to
what he would desire further, and that is this) That so you may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might
be filled with all the fullness of God: This is a most admirable Scripture,
surely the Spirit of Christ filled the heart of Saint Paul; and such kind of
Scriptures as these, are mighty strong Arguments to evince the Scripture to be
the Word of God: when we read such passages as these, that have a spirit in
them, beyond the spirit of any man; certainly it was beyond the spirit of any
man to express himself in such a manner, That he bowed his knees unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they might comprehend with all Saints
what is the breadth, length, depth and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fullness of
God; and that is that which I would especially observe, that Christians should
not content themselves with a little knowledge of Christ, but they should
labor to comprehend what is the length, breadth, depth, and height, they
should labor to dive into the M^steries of the Gospel, as it is said of Moses,
when he saw that wonderful work in the wilderness, says he, I will now turn
aside and see this great sight; you have it recorded in the seventh of the
Acts, and 31. verse. There appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sina, an
Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush: When Moses saw it, he wondered
at the sight, and as he drew near to behold it, etc. He had a sight of it at
a distance, and yet so much, as he wondered at it, and then he drew near, and
the Lord spoke to him: So it should be with us, we have some sight of Christ,
but is it not at a distance? we hear a Minister speaking of Christ to us (the
great wonder of the world) and it may be at the hearing we are ready to
think, there is somewhat in Christ beyond what we have apprehended heretofore;
I but I beseech you Brethren, let it not pass away so; those things that have
been spoken concerning Christ, God will require an account of; and know, it is
a dangerous thing to have the glory of Jesus Christ to pass by any soul, and to
do it no good: If we had been preaching to you of Moral Virtues, or any deep
discourse about any point, save about Jesus Christ, there had not been so much
danger of letting it pass without profit; but when God sets before you the
glory of his Son, know, there is a great deal of danger upon the hearing of
such things without profit; therefore you had need say upon the hearing of such
things, as Moses said, That you will draw near, you will go and pray over these
again; and beseech the Lord that he would reveal these things unto you: Pray
with David, O Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy
Law: By Law there is meant those things that were revealed in the Word of God;
and surely upon our hearing what God has revealed in his Word, we have cause
to pray with more earnestness, Lord open our eyes that we may see the
wonderful things of thy Gospel; but mark, When Moses drew near, Then God spoke
to him, and revealed himself further to him: If Moses had stood wondering at
this sight, and went no further, it may be he had not had God revealing
himself so clearly to him; but when he draws near, then God speaks to him: So
if your hearts be taken with what you hear of this wonderful Savior, and then
you draw near, and take pains in your closets by meditation and prayer, to see
what is the meaning of this wonder: Why Lord shall I hear of such things, and
not understand them? they are things that do nearly concern me, and shall I
not understand them? If you labor to draw near, God will speak and reveal
further of his mind to you: But further, of this Text in the Ephesians, We
must labor to comprehend the heights and depths, and to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge.

You will say, these are too wonderful things for us to know.

Nay, The Apostle prays that they may know that which passes knowledge:
Though the fullness of the glory of it passes all knowledge, yet still there
may be so much of the knowledge of these things, as may help you to sanctify
Gods Name, and make your hearts spiritual; for says the Text, That ye may
know the love of God which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with
all the fullness of God: It is a very strange phrase (for the creature to be
filled with God) and had we it not in Scripture, we should not have dared to
have used such an expression: But here it is to be filled with all the
fullness of God: This phrase is a great deal higher; but how comes this to
pass? by comprehending the height, and depth, and length, and breadth; that
is, by understanding Jesus Christ, and the Glory of God in him, by this means
does the soul come to be filled with all the fullness of God.

What is the reason that Christians are so empty in their spirits, in their
conversations? but because they know so little of the Mystery of the Gospel: If
thou did but understand the Mystery of the Gospel, but how the Lord makes
known himself in the face of Jesus Christ, this would fill thy heart with all
the fullness of God; those Christians are the Christians filled with excellency
indeed, that do comprehend the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of
this wonderful work of God in Christ: There is nothing sanctifies the heart so
much, as the knowledge of Christ in a right way.

Seneca has such an expression concerning the Heavens: Oh the Heavens are a
wonderful spectacle, and a spectacle fit for a reasonable creature to be
employed about! Though we should get little benefit by knowing the Motions of
the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yet the beauty and excellency that is
there, and the wonderful work of God in the Heavens, it cannot but take a
rational creature: Now, if the wonderful work of God in the Heavens be such,
as it must needs take a rational creature: Oh what is the wonderful work of God
in Jesus Christ! therefore let us make it the chief of our study, to study the
Lord Jesus.

Luther has an expression to the same purpose, O says he, I vehemently, I
extremely am displeased with my self, and displease my self, yea (says he) I
hate my self, because I cannot get that great benefit, that great work that
there is in man's Redemption, because I cannot get it to be transfused into my
very bones and marrow; I would fain get it in there. Saint Paul, in Gal. 1.15,
16. said, he was separated from his Mothers womb, and called by Grace, and had
Christ revealed in him. O blessed is that soul that the Lord has separated for
himself, that Jesus Christ might be revealed in it, that is a blessed soul: --
You know how Paul accounted the knowledge of Christ, The excellent knowledge,
the excellency of knowledge, and accounted all things dung and dross in
comparison; and so David, in Psalm. 119.27. Make me to understand the way of
thy Precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works: When you come together,
you can be talking of this News, and the other News, but were your hearts
filled with the knowledge of Jesus Christ, you could not but talk of the
wonderful things that God has done for your souls in Jesus Christ.

And as we are to labor to search that we may know more, so to give God the
praise of this his wonder that he has done; In Psalm. 107.8. Oh that men would
praise the Lord for the wonderful things that he has done for the children of
men: It is meant there I confess of the wonderful works of Gods providence;
but surely if God be to be praised and magnified for his wonderful works of
providence, much more for the wonderful works that he has done for the soul
in Jesus Christ. And so in Psalm. 86.9, 10. You have an expression there to the
same purpose: All Nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before
thee, O Lord, and shall glo^ifie thy Name, for thou art great, and do
wondrous things: Oh that this Scripture were fulfilled, that all Nations might
come and worship the Lord, and glorify God upon this ground, because God is
great, and does wonderful things; The wonderful things of God in his works of
Creation and Providence, are nothing so much regarded of God himself, as the
wonderful things he has done in Christ; and therefore the Lord expects that
the Saints should glorify him more for that, than for any thing else: And the
truth is, God re^ects all the glory that he has from his creatures, except
he has it, because of the wonders that he has done in his Son.

And as we should study Christ, and praise and bless God, and have our hearts
enlarged for Jesus Christ: So this is the duty of believers, to whom God has
revealed Christ as wonderful, that in their conversations they should hold out
the wonderful Glory of Jesus Christ; thou should so walk before men, as to
manifest to all the world that thy Savior is a wonderful Savior.

And thou should manifest it by thy wonderful change; that soul that has
part in Christ, whose Name is wonderful, honors Christ in this, If he does
manifest that since he came to know Jesus Christ, there is a wonderful change
made in him; what a change is there made in this youth, or child, young man,
or neighbor, or friend! Not long since what an ignorant sot was he? but since
he went to hear the Word, Oh the understanding in a little time that such a
one has got in the Mysteries of the Gospel! such a one was not able to go into
Gods presence to express himself in prayer any otherwise but upon a book, but
now, Oh what a spirit of prayer has God given to such a poor wretch, that was
so ignorant the other day! Now, O how can he pour out his soul before the
Lord! Such a one that not long since was a profane and loose liver, and
sensual and base in his life and conversation, now oh how holy, how heavenly,
how spiritual, and would not commit the lest known sin, if he might gain a
thousand worlds for it! such a one that was false in his service before, now
how trusty! one may trust ones life, and all that one has with him now; such a
one that heretofore was a swearer, oh how does he reverence the Name of God!
such a one that was a froward passionate spirited man or woman, now how meek
and gentle are they! what a mighty change is there in the spirit of such a
servant, or wife, or husband, or neighbor! And such a one that was altogether
for himself, and proud, and haughty, but now, oh how humble, and submissive!
now he can deny himself of any thing: As we read of Christ, that when he
commanded the winds and the waves, the Text says, all people wondered at him:
So when the winds of thy passion are up, if thou can but bid them be still,
all would wonder at it: Oh how comes there so great a change! such a one that
was impatient before in any suffering, now what ever he suffers, how like a
Lamb is he, and opens not his mouth! Now in the midst of afflictions, and
pains, and troubles, he can lie rejoicing and praising God; And such a one,
though he has never such strong temptations to draw him on the other side,
yet now he can resist the strongest temptations; before, if a companion did
but hold up his finger, he must go, but now I say he can resist strong
temptations, and oh how he accounts it his glory and happiness to suffer for
Jesus Christ: Now this does manifest Christ a wonderful Savior. As it was the
speech of a Heathen, seeing the Christians suffer with so great patience, he
cries out, Of a truth, the God of the Christians is a great God, that does
enable them to do such great things: So thou must so walk in thy life, that
thou must manifest that Jesus Christ is a wonderful Savior.

And be ashamed to complain of any difficulty in any duties that thou art set
about; thou art set about such a duty, and oh thou complainest they are hard,
and difficult, and tedious! Is it for thy Savior that thou do it? thou
should be willing to go through fire and water; and in this one thing the
wonderfulness of the change of a soul does appear as much as in any thing, That
those things that before were accounted burdens, now the soul accounts them as
a privilege, and the joy of its heart; others cannot do so: Now the Gospel
makes such a change, and in this change of thy heart, and of thy life, Jesus
Christ is held forth in the world to be a wonderful Savior; but now, if thou
can do no more than those that are strangers to Jesus Christ, what honor
has Christ in thy life and conversation? One passage or two more.

If Christ be a wonderful Savior, hence then every one that hears of Christ,
should think it to be a dreadful thing to miss of Jesus Christ: Oh then let
all souls to whom Christ is made known, make after him! Oh thou wretched soul,
that have not yet understood the way of God toward mankind, now labor to
know it! If the Lord has wonderful thoughts for the saving of mankind, then
let thy thoughts be such: And after all this shall my soul perish eternally?
shall I be cast away, notwithstanding God has wrought in such a glorious and
wonderful way for the salvation of souls? must I perish at last for all this?
Thy heart should make toward God, and be encouraged in this, because the way
of salvation is so wonderful: why, may not thy soul come in likewise and be
saved? there is not the worst of you all, but here is help in this wonderful
Savior to help you, and redeem you; had you but hearts now to come in and to
fall down before the Lord when you get alone in your closets, and say, Lord, I
have heard that there is a wonderful Savior come into the world, and has done
wonderfully for the redeeming of mankind; Oh that he might be wonderful in
my salvation also! that I may be among the number of those that may to all
eternity be admiring at thy glory in Jesus Christ; many of you rejoice in
this, that God has wrought wonderfully to preserve you some times out of
dangers, I but what are all the wonderful works of God toward you, except you
have your part in him whose Name is called wonderful?

And last of all, Let us long for that time when Jesus Christ shall appear in
all his glory; he does appear now to the souls of his Saints very wonderful,
as he is set out in the Word; but there is a time when Christ shall come and
appear in all his glory in another manner than we are able to set him out:
After the blowing of the seventh Trumpet that you read of in the book of the
Revelations, then is the Mystery finished, and what is the finishing of it? in
chap. 11. then is the voice heard, saying, Rev. 11.15.
The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever: Then shall the Lord Jesus Christ
come and appear in all his wonderful works to the children of men, and to be
admired in the Saints; then shall be fulfilled the Scripture we have in John
14.20, 21. Mark what Christ promises there to his Disciples, At that day ye
shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you: he that has
my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. -- At that day you shall know it: It seems his
Disciples understood but little of this Mystery before, but says Christ, there
is a day that you shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in
you: And be of good comfort, all believers, there is a time coming that you
will see Christ more wonderful than now you do; you do now see Christ to be
wonderful, and your hearts are taken in some measure, taken off from all the
Creatures, to admire at Jesus Christ; in Act. 3.11, 12. when the people
wondered at the cure that the Apostles wrought upon the lame man; mark at the
12th. verse. When Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel,
why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our
own power or holiness we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, and of
Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus, etc.
As if they should say, Why do you wonder a^ us? know, that the God of Abraham,
and of Isaac, and of Jacob, has glorified his Son Jesus; it is he that you
are to wonder at: The Saints have their hearts taken off from Creatures, from
men, from instruments, and they look upon him, that the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob has glorified, even Jesus Christ; and he is the matter of their
wonder. But do thou wonder at Jesus Christ now? know, Christ will come ere
long in another manner to be admired at by his Saints in all his glory; Christ
was wonderful when he came with sin, and when he comes without sin he shall
be more wonderful; he shall come in all his glory with his holy Angels, to
make good all that he has promised, and to bring with him all that he has
purchased, and then we shall see him as he is. -- Now we see Jesus Christ
but through a glass, and yet our hearts are taken with him; and we wonder at
him now, but oh how shall we wonder when we come to see him as he is! when
we shall behold his face in glory; we see now the Lord Christ in his
Ordinances, but as in a picture; As at the first, when there are treaties
between one Prince and another about a march, the first sight that they have of
one another, it is but by a picture, and if they be delighted with but seeing
the picture one of another, much more will they be delighted and inamoured
with the person, when they come to see it its self: so it is with the Saints,
here all that the Saints can see of Jesus Christ, that makes them so wonder at
him, and to account him to be the chiefest of ten thousand, all is but by
seeing of him by a picture; Jesus Christ is in Heaven, and he sends us his
picture in his Ordinances; so St. Paul says, in Gal. 3. concerning the
Ministry of the Word, that Jesus Christ had been evidently set forth crucified
among them. Now are your hearts taken with the sight of Christ, when you see
him as it were in a picture? know, as Christ said to Nathanael, Because I said
unto thee, I saw thee under the Figg tree, beleevest thou? thou shall see
greater things than these. So thou shall ere long see Jesus Christ as he is;
We are now the Sons of God, but it appears not what we shall be, for when
he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

And thou shall not only see him, but so see him, as he shall never go out of
thy sight; thou have but a little glimpse of him now for the present, and thy
soul rejoices in that, the time is coming when thou shall see him, and thy eyes
shall feed upon him for ever; the Lord Christ shall go up and down the Heavens
as the wonder of the Angels, and all the Saints shall be following, wondering
at him to all eternity; The luster of the deity shall be shining through the
humanity of Christ, and men and Angels shall stand gazing and wondering at the
glory of Jesus Christ to all eternity: Oh let us comfort one another with these
sayings, and in the expectation of the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ. And
those that shall long for the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, upon the
seeing of him here, have a good evidence that they do belong to Jesus Christ,
and shall be partakers of the wonderful things that Jesus Christ has wrought
and purchased with his own blood.

And thus we have opened to you and applied this glorious wonder of Jesus
Christ; His Name shall be called Wonderful; he is wonderful in the Word, Oh
that he may be wonderful in your hearts, and in your lives.

THE CONTENTS OF THE EXCELLENCY of the SOUL.
Matthew 16.26. For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to
lose his own Soul, etc. THe Text divided into two general parts. 1 That there
is in every man a Soul, a spiritual substance, besides what is visible and
sensible. p. 203 2 That this Soul is more worth than all the world. Ibid.
The terms of the Text explained, shows what is meant by Soul. ibid. That
every man has a soul, and the necessity of looking to it, for five Reasons. p.
204 1 We see there are Actions in men that are beyond that which concerns the
body at all. ib. 2 There is a power in man to curb his body, to deny himself of
that which is most suitable to the body. ib. 3 That which the Scripture makes
the chief Actions of man to consist in, which have any reference to God, is
such things as are done by somewhat beyond the body. ib. 4 When this bodily
substance is decaying, mouldring away, there are many thoughts in a man about
his Eternal Estate. p. 205 5 For we know that there are real pains and
torments upon a man's spirit. ib. Doct. Did they but know the worth of their
souls, it could not but raise them very high above these empty vanities. p. 208

The Excellency of the Soul discovered. 1 In its Relations to God. p. 208 2 The
soul is only commended by God. 209 3 It is under the power of no man to
inflict evil upon it. ib. 4 It is of large extent and capacity to receive the
Image of God. ib.
For, 1 It is that that is capable to have the Image of God stamped upon it. ib.
2 It is able to work as God himself works. p. 210. 3 It is capable of enjoying
communion with God himself. ib. 4 It is capable of the communication of those
Excellencies that ever God did, or will communicate to any. p. 211 5 The
Contiguity it has with God himself. p. 212
A second Excellency of the Soul discovered in Relation to the Angels. p. 213 A
third, in the Endeavor of it. ib. A fourth, in the Immortality. p. 214 A
fifth, in the Measure of all other Excellencies. p. 215 A sixth, in the Price
that was paid for it. p. 216 A seventh, in regard of the Body. p. 217 God only
can satisfy the soul. p. 219 The Devil himself esteems it. p. 220 Use 1
Shows that we ought to look upon every child of man with some reverence,
esteem, and honor. 221 Use 2 How can we look upon many people without having
our hearts raised with the meditation of the dreadfulness of Gods Justice upon
men for sin? ib. Use 3 It must needs be an honorable work to be busied about
souls. 223 Use 4 Those that have most Soul-Excellency, are the most excellent
people. 226 Use 5 Let us bless God for our souls. 228 For hence it is that 1
You are looked upon by the Angels themselves. ib. 2 The Providence of God is
more toward you. ib. 3 You are such as are capable of all the good Christ has
purchased. 229
6 Bless God for Soul-Mercies above all other. 231 7 What a pity is it that
God should not have the honor of men's souls. 232 8 Take heed of dishonouring
these souls of yours. 233 Question How may a man dishonor his soul? Answer,
236 1 When he lives idly, and makes no use of it. ib. 2 When he emploies it
about low and mean things. 237 3 When he defiles his soul. 238 4 When he make
it a drudge to his body. ib. 5 When he grudges the time and cost he spends
upon it. 239 6 When he lays not up provision for it against an evil day. 240
7 When he thinks to satisfy it with any thing but God. ibid.
Next Use shows how to put honor upon our soul. ib. And that 1 By having your
thoughts often upon them. ib. 2 By keeping your bodies under them. 241 3 By
adorning your souls with beauty. 242 4 By providing for them. ib. 5 By
employing them in things suitable to them. ib. 6 By bringing them to gain that
end for which they were made. ib.
Doct. 2 That the loss of the soul is a most dreadful loss. 243 Answers to that
Question, What Christ means by the loss of the soul? ib. Not because they will
be annihilated. ib. But 1 The loss of the soul is in the privations of it, of
all good. 244 2 It consists in its departing from God. ib. 3 In subjecting it
to that misery and evil that is contrary to what good it is capable of. ib. 4
In the suckerless and helpless condition it is brought into. For 1 Every man
and woman, as they came into the world, are deprived of that glory and
excellency that God did indow the souls of men with at their first Creation. 2
All our souls do naturally wander away from God. 245 3 In its depravity and
sinfulness. ib. 4 Its being in a succourless, helpless condition. ib.
Wherein consists the loss of the soul in Hell? 246 1 In the full rejection of
the soul from God. ib. 1 From living the life of God. 247 2 From having any
union with God. 249 3 From having any fruition of God. ib. 4 From enjoying the
presence of Christ. 250 5 From being ever exercised in that blessed work of
praising God. 251 6 From ever living in God, as the Saints do. ib.
A second thing wherein the misery of the souls loss consists in Hell, is in
its being made very sensible of the loss of its chiefest good. 254 Which is 1
To be cast under the eternal curse of God. 255 2 To have all the faculties of
the soul to be filled with wrath. 256 1 The infinite power of God put forth in
enlarging their natures, that they may be the more capable of evil. ib. 2 To
uphold their natures, that they sink not with those dreadful evils. ib. 3 To
let out on the soul whatever it can bear to make it miserable. 4 To keep all
the faculties of the lost soul in its utmost activity. 258
3 Its misery appears in its succourless and helpless condition. ib.
For 1 All the power of God cannot help it. 2 There can be no Mediator between
God and the lost soul. ib.
Several Aggravations whereby the misery of a soul that is lost does appear.
As, 1 If the soul be lost, then the body is, and will be lost also. ib. Because
1 The body all the time a man does live, is the only or most immediate
instrument the soul has to work and to sin by. 259 2 Because the soul that is
lost shall be united to the body, the very extremity of the soul must needs
bring misery on the body also. ib.
2 When the soul comes into this condition, it comes into the most dreadfullest
condition that any creature is in. ib. 3 It will then have none to pity it.
Jesus Christ will not pity it. The Angels will not pity it. The Saints will
not pity it. Their kindred will not pity it. ib.
4 It will prove to most that are lost, an unexpected loss. 260 5 It will prove
to be a dreadful loss, because it will prove to be a wilful loss. 261 6 It
will be a great loss for a little matter. 262 7 Many will lose their souls
that were very nigh the savi^g of their souls. ib. 8 When they shall consider
they have lost their souls, and have nothing in lieu thereof. 263 9 The shame
that shall be put upon such lost souls as shall perish eternally. ib. 10 When
they shall see others taken up to Heaven, that were as unlikely to be saved as
themselves. 264 Use 1 If the souls loss be so dreadful, bless God that your
souls are not thus lost. ib. 2 Let us bless God then for Jesus Christ. 267 3 It
must needs then be a dreadful evil for any to have a hand in this loss. 269 4
It rebukes the folly and madness of most people that have no care of their
souls. 272 Several ways by which men come to lose their souls As 1 Some lose
their souls by wandering up and down in darkness all the days of their lives.
ib. 2 Others by pawning them away. 273 The pawning of the soul is most
dangerous of all other. 274 For 1 There is no such pawn as possibly can be
laid as this ib. 2 In laying of pawns there is a time prefixed for the
redemption. ib. 3 You bargain the bringing of somewhat that you have in your
own power to redeem it. ib.
3 Men lose their souls, by wounding of them. ib. Quest. Wounding them, how you
will say? By that I mean the commissions of sins against conscience. 275 4 Men
lose their souls by being gulled of them. 5 By selling of them away. ib. Men
sell their souls, 1 When men seek advantage to themselves by any unlawful
means. 276 2 When men shall resolutely give up themselves to all manner of
wickedness. 277
6 Men lose their souls by poisoning them. ib. And that 1 Either by wicked
company, Or, 2 By wicked errors.
7 Others lose their souls by venturing them. 279 This a man may do in four
cases. 1 By rashness. 280 2 By doing things that are doubtful. ib. 3 By
venturing upon Gods patience. ib. 4 By venturing upon their own lives. 281
8 Many lose their souls by starving them. 283 9 Some lose their souls by
surfeiting of them. 285 10 And lastly, By forfeiting of them. ib. And that two
ways. 1 By not tendering that homage to God that is due. ib. 2 By breaking
Covenant with God. 286
Use 5 It concerns us to examine whether our souls be not in such a condition,
that if they should depart in, they would be lost. ib. But who are they that
are no better qualified? Answer. 287 1 That soul that God has not convinced of
the dangerous natural condition in which it is. 2 That soul that has not made
it his greatest care above all things to save it self. 3 That soul to whom the
Lord has not revealed the glory of the mysteries of the Gospel. 4 That soul
that has no other righteousness to tender up to God but its own. 289
Quest. What other Righteousness is there? Answer, A supernatural
Righteousness. 290 5 That soul that God has not made in some measure at least
to feel the weight of sin. ib. 6 That soul that walks after the flesh in a
course of sin. 291 7 That soul that is under the dominion of any one lust. 292
Quest. What is it for sin to domineer? Answ. When sin shall set up a kind of
Throne, and give Laws as a King. 293 8 That soul that has not had such a
change wrought by the Spirit, as is a New Birth, or Resurrection. 294 9 That
soul that has not gone beyond those the Scripture brands for Hypocrites. 296
Quest. How shall a man know he is gone further than these? Answer. 298 1 They
could not say, because the word is pure, therefore they delighted in it. 2 That
they prized Jesus Christ as a sanctifier. 3 That they lift up God as the
highest end.
Use last, Mind that serious question, What you shall do to be saved? 299
Object. But we must inquire after all truth. Answer, Yes, but seasonably, and
in its due time. 300, 301 Rules about our inquiring how to be saved. ib. 1 Do
it timely. 2 Do it earnestly. 202 3 Do it sincerely. 4 Do it constantly. 203
Reasons why we should thus inquire. ib. Because 1 By nature we are in a lost
condition. 2 Salvation is a difficult thing. 3 There are but few that shall be
saved. ib.
The true Question of what we should do to be saved Answered. 306 1 If you
would have your souls saved, join with God in what he has revealed to you
concerni g your own condition. ib. 2 Break off the acts of thy sin at least.
308, 309 Wherein is showed the reason of this Rule.
3 Take off your heart as much as you can from the world. 310 4 Acquaint thy
self with the mysteries of the Gospel. ib. Quest. What is there in the Gospel
and Covenant of Grace we must inform our selves of. 311 Answ. 1 Informing our
selves of the necessity of satisfaction to Divine Justice. ib. 2 Of a necessity
of pe^fect Righteousness. 3 Of an absolute necessity of the application of
Christ's Righteousness. 313 4 Of the necessity of Regeneration. ib.
5 The fear of God must be mighty and strong upon your spirits. 314 6 Attend
upon those means that God has appointed to save your souls. 317 Quest. Can we
do any thing toward the working our own salvation? Answered. 317, 318, 319 7
Take heed of resting upon false hopes of thy salvation. 320 Question, What are
those hopes? Answer. 321 1 Such hopes as are not Scripture-hopes. 2 Such as are
not wrought by the spirit. 323 3 Such as are not lively hopes. 324 4 Such as
are not purging hopes. 325
Next thing is by laying the foundation sure of salvation. Where that Question
is answered, what it is? 328 9 Keep thy soul under the authority of the word.
331 2 The authority of conscience. 332
10 Take heed of sinning against the price of thy soul, against the good of the
Covenant, and against mercy. 333, 334, 335 11 Take heed of sinning against the
Spirit of Grace. 336 12 Account the preciousness of the time of your lives to
consist in this, that it is a day of salvation. 337 13 And lastly, Be sure to
go with those that go in the streightest and in the safest way. 337, 338, 339
The last thing treats of the transcendency of the Souls loss above the worlds
gains. 340 Shows, Three things that may help a natural man to see the things
of the world to be as nothing. ib. 1 If God wound his conscience, and terrify
him. 2 When God lays his hand upon him in afflicting of him. 3 Even strength
of Reason. 343
As 1 Though thou should gain the world, and yet be a man like to perish at
last, thou have gotten but little. ib. 2 He is never a whit the better for any
thing in the w rld. 346 3 All these are things beneath the soul. 347, 348 4
They are such things as God has denied to the choicest of his servants. 349 5
They may stand with Gods eternal hatred of his creature. 350 6 They have no
real good in them. ib. 7 There is nothing that can satisfy the heart. 352 8
What ever a wicked man has of the world, he has it without God. ib. 9 All
these things turn upon a wheel of uncertainty. 353, 354
Use It shows us not to envy at the prosperity of the wicked. 357 2 Let all
those that seek the world in those ways wherein they are like to lose their
souls think upon this truth. 360 The Souls Excellency. The Worlds Vanity.
3 It shows the way to answer all Temptations. 365 By thus comparing the World
with the Soul. 365 4 And lastly, Encouragement to those that will rather
venture all in the ways of God, than to hazard their Souls.
Mr. BVRROVGHS on the BEATITUDES.

The First SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
I Have endeavored to show somewhat unto you about the Excellency of the Name
of God, and likewise the Excellency of Jesus Christ, and what he is, that so
you might have right apprehensions of God and Christ. Now in the third place, I
shall desire to show you somewhat about the Excellency of your own Souls: And
to that end attend to Matthew. 16.26.

For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
Soul? The Text.
or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

OUr Savior going himself to suffer, tells his Disciples what they must expect
in the following of him, Verse. 24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. These are the terms, says Christ, upon which you must follow
me, you must be willing to deny your selves, and to take up your cross, to
suffer hard things if you follow me. Christ would have his Disciples know the
worst at first, and not please themselves in a fools Paradise, thinking that by
following of him they should get great matters to themselves in the world; no,
says he, expect no such matter, but deny your selves, and take up my cross.
But this may seem to be hard, it may be our cross may be the loss of all,
the loss of our lives, and must we take up that? yes, says Christ, in the
verse before my Text, be not solicitous what your cross is like to be, only
be willing to take it up. And the truth is, the more willing you are to take
it up, the better will it be for you, and you will get nothing by seeking to
shift for your selves, For whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and
whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. Verse. 25.
It may be when you meet with sufferings in the world, you will think to shift
this way, or that way, but you will get nothing: If you would save your lives
by forsaking the truth, it is the only way to lose your lives: But if you be
willing to lose your lives for my truth, you shall save them; or what if by
forsaking me and my truth, when you meet with suffering, you should save your
lives, and your estates, and live bravely in the world, do you think you are
any gainers by this? you are infinitely mistaken: If you cast up the account,
you will find that you have gotten nothing all: For what is a man profited if
he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? And thus you see how the
words come in.

These words that I have read unto you, are of exceeding serious consideration:
And indeed they should be as Thunder in every man's ears. Some Scripture that a
Minister may preach on, may concern some particular person in a Congregation
more than others: But here is a Text concerns every one that has a soul, Man
and woman, high and low, old and young, What shall it profit any one to gain
the whole word, and to lose their own soul? -- I have read of one that gave
counsel to John King of Portugal, that he would repeat this Text to himself,
and spend one quarter of an hour in the meditation of it, What shall it profit
a man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? and that he would
make the words of this Text to be the cloze of his prayer continually, What
shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? This was
wholesome counsel; and certainly the tight meditation and understanding of this
Text would be of admirable use to every soul. You have in the words these two
things plainly hinted.

First, That there is in every man a soul, a spiritual substance, besides what
is visible and sensible.

And secondly, That this soul of man is more worth than all the world, it has
that excellency, that if a man gains all the world, and loses that, when he
has cast up his account, he may put his gains in his eye, he shall find
himself a miserable creature.

We might make more divisions, or subdivisions of the words, but I will
content my self only with those two things, and speak chiefly to the latter.
Now to make way for that, I will speak a little of the former, What is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his soul? his Soul.

Every man has a soul, a rational spiritual substance beyond that that is
visible or sensible; in Job 32.8. But there is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding. There is a spirit in man
besides the bodily substance that you see, there is a spirit in man, such a
spirit as is capable of the inspiration of the Almighty to give understanding,
etc. And in Genesis 2.7. it is said, That God formed man of the dust of the earth,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Here is another manner of
mans-creation, (...)
than of other creatures; God did but say of other creatures let them be, Let
the earth bring forth creeping things etc. And it was so: But when he comes to
man, he forms man out of the dust of the earth, that is for his body, and for
his spirit, he breathes into his nostrils the breath of life. I have read of a
people that would not be persuaded that there was any difference between
beasts and them: And truly there is somewhat to do to persuade carnal hearts of
any great difference between a beast and them in relation to God, or to another
life: But certainly there is a spirit in man, there is somewat beyond that body
of thine that is visible, which does infinitely concern thee to look to.

For first, We see that there are actions in men that are beyond that which
concerns the body at all: And therefore surely there is a spirit in man,
besides what the body is; the highest actions of men are such as do not concern
the body, as thus, The knowledge of the heavens, the knowledge of Angels, of
spirits, what has the body to do with such things? the knowledge of the
mysteries of the Gospel, and the conversing with them, they are abstracted
notions from all kind of bodily substances; the knowledge of God and Christ,
yea the very knowledge of Mathematical notions, many notions there are in Arts
and Sciences that are abstract from all bodily things; certainly then there is
a spirit in man beyond that bodily substance that does appear common with the
brute beasts.

Yet secondly, There is a power in man to curb his body, to deny himself of
that which is most suitable to the body, says Paul, (...), Subactum seu
dejectumpremo, in captivitatem reduco, vel, ut alii, contundo Prove. 23.1, 2.
1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection. Surely there
is somewhat in man that is above the body, that has so much command of the
body, as it appears the spirit of man has to beat down the body, If thou be
a man given to thine appetite, when thou sit at the table of a great man,
put a knife to thy throat, a man is able, to curb his appetite; though the body
has never so strong a desire to such and such things, yet the soul of man is
able to curb his body and deny it: Matthew. 18.8, 9.
If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, or thy right eye offend thee, pl^ck
it out. There is a power in man to deny the body that which it desires never so
much, which a beast cannot, that cannot deny that which is suitable to his
sense every way, except therebe some stronger sensitive thing to take him off:
But man is able to deny his sense, when there is no sensitive object before him
to take him off: By that dominion that the soul of man has over his body, he
is able to curb his body, and to deny his body, therefore surely there is a
spirit in man.

3. Again, That which the Scripture makes the chief actions of man to consist
in, which have any reference to God, is such things that are done by somewhat
beyond the body. Whatsoever a man does, if it be but only the body that is
exercised, and sense, it is not acceptable to God. 1. Tim 4.8.
Bodily exercise profits little, says the Scripture, and 1 Cor. 13.3. What
if I give my body to be burnt? A man may give his body to be burnt: there all
the senses may concur in it, and yet if there be not a spirit in man to act
this upon any higher ends and grounds, than any thing that is bodily can reach
unto, it is worth nothing, it is not regarded.

Fourthly, There is a spirit in man beyond this bodily substance: for when this
bodily substance is decaying, mouldring away, there are many thoughts in a man
about an eternal estate, and more fresh and lively sometimes when the body is
mouldring away, than ever there was before; there are no creatures but Angels
and men that take any cognizance of an eternal estate, that take any thoughts
about what is to come hereafter. Now we say, Nature does nothing in vain, Deus
and natura nihil agu^t frustra.
surely God would not have put such kind of workings in man about another
condition, after this body shall moulder away, but that there is somewhat that
does concern some other part of man besides that bodily substance of his.

Fifthly, and then lastly, There is certainly a spirit in man beyond his bodily
substance: for we know that there are real pains and torments upon a man's
spirit. The burdens of conscience in the reflex act that a man's conscience has
upon himself summoning of him to appear before the great God: Though a man's
body be in never such health, and has all outward accommodations about him, as
music, good cheer, friends, estate, yet there is that horror and torment in
his spirit, sometimes through the consciousness of the guilt of sin, that he
is not able to bear: nay were there not somewhat beyond this bodily substance,
certainly this could never be; verily then there is a spirit in man, and hence
therefore you see that there is somewhat does concern you all beyond your
present, outward, and bodily condition. Let no man think that he has provided
well for himself, when he has provided money, and house, and lands, and good
cheer, and clothes, and such kind of things; do not think that thou art happy
in that: for these are things that concern thy outward man, there is still
another substance in thee that thou art to look after, that takes little notice
of such things as these are.

Neither do you think that you have provided well for your children, when you
have provided an estate, an inheritance, somewhat to leave them, know, that
there is another substance in your children, besides that outward bodily
substance you look upon. Do you see a fine feature, comely parts, comely
countenance, and your children finely clothed? I but know there is a spirit in
that child besides that bodily substance that you are to look to: Certainly
man is very far fallen from God, that none scarce takes notice of his own
spirit: We do not only naturally live without a God in the world, so as to know
little of that infinite divine Spirit that is the first being of all things;
but we live without the knowledge of our own spirits, of our own souls: Truly
few men there are that know their own souls. As a man by his eye sees things
that are without him, but he does not see his own eye; so by the soul we come
to understand many things without us, but yet how little do we understand of
our own souls? well might the Psalmist therefore complain, and say, in Psalm.
49.20. Man that is in honor, and understands not, is like the beasts that
perish. God did indeed make man at first in honor, but now he is become like
the very beasts, he does mind little or nothing more than the very beasts
themselves, he blesses himself if he has but content for the body for a
while, as if there were nothing else concerned him; I appeal unto your
consciences in this thing, whether the uttermost sphere of your thoughts have
been any further than merely within the compass of bodily content: If you
should come to a beast, and talk to it about Trades and titles of honor, and
Arts and Sciences, and such kind of things, why what is all this to a beast?
Give a beast hay or corn, and such kind of things that are suitable to it, and
it minds that more than it does any high notions that you are able to tell it;
and truly thus it is with sensual men, even as the Atheist who says in his
heart, That there is no God; so a kind of Atheism there is in their hearts to
say they have no souls, that there is no difference between them and the
brute-beasts; hence it is that they savor spiritual things so little. Tell
carnal men of the excellency of the Name of God, Tell them of Jesus Christ, how
wonderful he is, of the wonderful mysteries of the Gospel, and of the things
of eternal life, they are dry things to such a one, he savours them not: Tell
him of money, and meat, and drink, and sports, and clothes, and such kind of
things, they are suitable unto him, there is some savor in them; but for the
great things of the Kingdom of God, and of eternal life, there is no savor at
all in them; and thus far is man fallen from God, and lives for the most part,
as if so be he were capable of no higher good, but merely to eat and drink,
and live for a while here like a beast: Thus does the Devil gull and deceive
most of us: Now my brethren, this is a work that I have undertaken, and it
concerns as much the Ministers of God to show unto you what you are your
selves, what God has made you, as to show you what God is, and what Christ is,
that you may come to understand your selves; you can never come to know your
reference unto God, until you come to know what God has made you; this is
therefore my scope in this Scripture, to show unto you what God has made you,
and that you have souls within you, and souls of exceeding great worth (I will
not say infinite, for none is infinite but God himself) but more worth than all
the world, than all the creatures that God has made, except the Angels in
heaven: The souls of the children of men are most excellent creatures; did but
a man or woman consider seriously that they have souls in them beyond their
bodies, it would raise them up a little.

But this next Point that is the main and principal, raise them very high above
those poor empty vanities that they have minded all this while: Therefore there
is in man not only a soul, but that that is more worth than all the world,
that if it should be lost, that man that gained the whole world, would be a
great loser in his bargain.

Know therefore this, that there is not the poorest man or woman living, nay
not the poorest child that lies begging a crust of bread at your door, but
this child has a soul in it that is more worth than heaven and earth, this
poor ragged tattered child that lies in rags, I say, crying at your threshold,
and begging a piece of bread, it has a soul in it that has greater excellency
than the Sun, Moon, and Stars, than all the Heavens, than the Sea, than the
Earth, put all the creatures in the world together, that are under Angels, the
spirit of this poor child has more excellency in it, than all these things,
and that is the thing that I am to make out unto you.

Why natural life has more excellency in it than any creature that has no
life. I remember Austin says of a Fly, because it has life, that it has
more excellency in it than the Sun its self, because though the Sun be a
glorious creature, yet it has no life in it; life in the meanest creature has
a greater excellency than any thing else that has not life.

But now the soul has the highest natural life that is, and capable of the
highest happiness that any creature is capable of, and therefore more excellent
than all the world; But that we shall come too in its order.

The excellency of the soul may be discovered, first, In the relation it has
to God, The Excellency of the Soul discovered, 1 In its relation to God.
God does challenge a peculiar relation to the spirits of men; and therefore in
Heb. 12.9. ^od is called the Father of spirits, Shall we not much rather be
in subjection to the F^ther of spirits and live? As if God did not so much look
after, and regard your bodies, the outward man, but he is the Father of
spirits. And in Zeck. 12.1. There is likewise an expression to the same
purpose, That God did form the spirit of man within him: God accounts it a
special part of his glory, that he makes the spirits of men; he is the Father
of spirits: But now I shall not enter into that controversy of the Generation
of the soul; thus far these Scriptures with others do evidence, that God has a
more special hand in the producing of this spiritual substance, than he has
in other Creatures.

2 And further, The soul is only under Gods command: No Creature can have
power over the soul of a man, he may force his body, but his soul cannot be
forced by men or Angels.

3 Yea, And it is under the power of no Creature to inflict evil upon it: Fear
not them, says Christ, that can kill the body, and can do no more; there is
all they can do, Mat. 10.28. Luke 12.4, 5
they can but kill the body, fear not them, but fear him, who after he has
killed the body, has power to cast the soul into Hell, yea, I say unto you,
fear him, says Christ. So that it appears by the Text, that there is no
Creature can do hurt to the soul; the Devils themselves they cannot do it; they
can propound objects before the soul, but except the soul do consent, they
cannot force it; it is only God that has power over the soul, therefore says
Christ, fear him, that is, fear God that has this power; all other creatures,
this is all their do, as we may say, they are able to kill the body.

4 But further, The excellency of the soul of man, in reference unto God,
appears especially in the large extent of capacity that it has to receive the
Image of God, and its ability to work according as God does work himself, and
to enjoy communion with God, and to receive the communication of those choice
excellencies that God has to communicate; these things show the excellency of
the soul: the large extent I say of the soul in the capacity it has of good
(of divine good.)

As First, It is that that is capable to have the Image of God stamped upon it;
Whatsoever the body has, it is but in way of reflection from the soul; we
know those Princes that are great and rich Princes, except necessity compells
them, do not use to stamp their Image upon Leather, or Brass, or Copper, but
upon the choicest metals, upon Gold and Silver: So when God would have a
Creature upon which he would stamp his Image, he does not choose a mean
Creature, the brute beasts, or any sensitive Creature, but he chooses the most
excellent of his Creatures, Angels, and the spirits of men, that are, one as
Gold, and the other as Silver, and the great God stamps his Image upon these
two, and only upon these two; these are the two Principal Metals, Gold and
Silver, Angels and men's spirits, upon which God did stamp his Image in their
first Creation.

Secondly, Not only to have the Image of God upon them, but they are able to
work as God himself works; No other Creature is able to do so, but Angels and
men's spirits: And this is the principal thing that shows the excellency of the
soul, it is able to understand the first being, God himself, and to make God
to be the last end of all things; what is Gods work, wherein the very
happiness, as I may so say, of God himself consists, but in the understanding
of himself, as the first being, and the working unto himself as the last end,
and the enjoyment of himself? that is Gods own happiness: Now of such
excellency is the soul of man (however by sin it is depraved) that it is
capable of the understanding of an infinite eternal first being; it is capable
of working toward this first being, as the last good of all, which is the
same way and kind of working, as God himself does work.

Thirdly, And it is capable of enjoyment of the communion with God himself;
What is Gods happiness, but to enjoy himself as the only good? Now the soul of
man is capable of the enjoyment of God, of having communion with the infinite
first being of all things, and so he is capable of living the same life that
God himself lives; for so the Scripture says, Ephesians. 4.18. Colos. 1.21.
That the Heathens were estranged from the life of God; so that it appears
then, that believers are not estranged from the life of God, but do live the
life of God in the enjoyment of communion with himself: For indeed there could
be no communion, except there were living the same kind of life; as thus, A
man and a beast cannot have communion together, why? because they live not the
same life one with another, their lives are of different kinds: so, were it
not that the soul were capable of the same life that God lives, it could not
be capable of communion with God.

Fourthly, And further, The soul is of such a nature, as it is capable of the
communication of the choicest excellencies that ever God did, or will
communicate unto any: Certainly there are very glorious excellencies in God, in
the infinite fountain of all good, in the infinite first being of all things;
and this God being an infinite good, does take infinite delight in the
communication of his goodness; Now I say, the souls of men are of such a large
extent, as they are some way capable of the enjoyment of any good that God has
to communicate, which he has revealed in his word; yea, and the truth is,
when we hear of Gods communicating of himself to his Son, that has a humane
soul as well as a body, we cannot but conceive that a humane soul is of that
large extent, as it is capable of the highest and excellentest good that God
has to communicate to any Creature. We cannot but think that the soul of Jesus
Christ has as much of Gods goodness communicated to it, as ever creature had,
or can have; now the soul of Jesus Christ is of the same nature with our souls,
as his body; he took the same kind of flesh as we have, only there was no
sin; and so the soul, it is the same kind of soul that we have, only it was
not sinful, as ours are: Now, if the soul of Jesus Christ be capable of the
highest good that God the infinite good has to communicate to any creature,
then the souls of men and women are also: howsoever you have looked after your
souls no further, but only to be serviceable to your bodies, to get meat and
drink, and be as it were salt, Cujus anima est pro sale.
as the Philosopher says of the Epicure, that the soul serves for no other end
to him, but to keep his body from stinking; yet know, whatsoever thou art,
though now a sinful wretched vile creature, and art deprived of the chief
excellency that thy soul is capable of, yet that soul of thine that thou have,
is capable of the highest good thing that an infinite God has to communicate:
Oh that God by your owning of this, would a little but raise your spirits to
think that you have been deluded and deceived all this while: this is the
excellency now of your souls, in reference unto God.

Fifthly, And yet there is in the next place A further reference that your
souls have to God, and that is the contiguity, as I may so speak, with God
himself: that is, of all things that are here in this world, the soul of man it
is that that is next unto God himself: Next to God, you will say, what do you
mean when you say that the soul of man it is contiguous unto God? I mean this,
that God has made all creatures for himself, but he has made them all for
himself to come to him by man; he has made all these inferior things in the
world for man, and man for himself, and so God comes to attain the end of all
things in this world by man, so that man is next unto God: God would have the
glory of all the creatures in the world, but how? by man: says God, All these
things that I have made, I will have them be in subjection to man, for so they
were in their first Creation; and as I shall appear in all other of my works,
so shall this creature honor me, and fear me, and admire me, and magnify
me, upon the taking notice of, and receiving in that good that there is in any
creature: All the goodness there is in the creature, it comes to me, but how
shall I have the glory of it all? why, I will make a creature that shall be as
it were between me and other creatures, that shall partake of the nature of
other creatures, but so as he shall have a certain kind of divine Beam of my
excellency, and shall be able to take notice of me and to receive in my
goodness; what he does receive in of the sweetness of the creature, he shall
receive it in as my sweet, and my goodness; Incoms from me; and so he shall
reflect it upon my face again; so that man's soul is like a Glass; as you see a
Glass that takes the beams of the Sun that shines upon it, and casts it toward
the Sun again, as upon a wall; the beams of the Sun comes into the Glass, and
then the Glass can reflect it this way, or that way: So the glory of God shines
in the world, and man's soul is as the glass, and when it was in its first
purity, was as a clear crystal glass, and received in all the beams of Gods
glory, all the glory of God I say, that did shine in all his creatures, was
received into man's soul, as the beams of the Sun into a glass, and now man was
able to reflect the glory of these beams upon the face of God again, and to
return all again to God; for as all things that are good come from him, so all
good should return again to him; but now, how comes the Lord to have an
enjoyment as it were of his goodness that he lets out from himself? How comes
he to have it return back again to himself? Why, the way of his returning, it
is by the Angels in heaven, and the spirits of men; these are the two excellent
creatures that God does make use of to fetch in all the glory that he has
from all his creatures, that they in an active way should reflect it all upon
the face of God again; certainly the soul of man is of an excellent nature
then, that is contiguous with God himself, next unto him; It is no matter
whether a man be rich or poor, learned or unlearned, yet he has a soul that
is capable of this.

Yet further, For the excellency of the soul, The excellency of the soul
discovered in its relation to Angels.
as it is excellent in relation to God, so in relation to the Angels. It is of
the same kind of nature that they are of, they are spirits, and so is the soul
of man, yea it has the very same name with God himself, God is a Spirit, and
so is the soul of man; it is of the very same nature with the Angels, and so is
able to converse with them as well as with God himself; but for the way and
manner of converse with those spirits, that is little revealed in the word, and
therefore we can say litt^e of it.

And further, The excellency of man's soul, 3 The excellency of the soul in 1
Indowments of it.
it will appear in the excellent endowments of it: Look upon the soul of man in
his fallen estate, and what admirable endowments some men have, as in the
excellent knowledge that some men have of Arts and Sciences, the knowledge of
the heavens; it is a very g^orious thing that they are able to ascend up in
their understanding, and to know all the motions of the heavens, and can tell
you to a minute of an hour what kind of motions there will be, as appears
plainly by eclipses: The arts of Navigation, that they can compass the world up
and down that way: If it were but in these sensible things that we see so much
art in, as in these mighty buildings, which shows that a man out of a deal of
rubbish can raise and erect such a building as this is, this shows the
excellency of man's soul; and if there be so much excellency in it naturally,
that it can do such things, then what can it be raised unto, and enabled unto
by a divine power? What can it do when it is enlarged by grace, and made
partaker of the Divine nature?

4. The souls excellency demonstrated from its immortality. Luke 12.4, 5.
And further, The excellency of the soul appears in the immortality of it: Fear
not them that can kill the body, and can do no more. Certainly if the soul were
mortal, as the body is, then that man that kills the body, kills the soul too,
and therefore we may fear a man not only because he can kill the body, but
because he can kill the soul; but says Christ, Fear not them that can kill
the body, and can do no more. The soul is as an Eagle, when a man dies, that
gets out of the Cage, and so it flies away; says Stephen, when he was to dye,
Act. 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit: Why, if so be that his spirit had dyed with his
body, he need not have said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Ph^l. 1.23.
And so St. Paul, I am in a straight, and know not what to do, whether to live
or dye, but he thought it was better for him to be dissolved, it was not to
be destroyed, it is but a dissolution, he rather desired a dissolution, that
he might be with Christ, which is best of all: Certainly, it was this that
made the straight, If I dye, I shall be with Christ immediately, and if I
live, I shall enjoy some communion with him, and likewise do a great deal of
service for him: If Paul had thought that his soul and body should have dyed
both together, certainly he would have desired to have lived, rather than to
dye; for when he did live, his soul did enjoy communion with Jesus Christ, and
he did do abundance of service for him: Now is it possible to think that a man
that did so much service for Christ as ever man did, and that enjoyed so much
sweet communion with Jesus Christ, that such a man should be willing to dye?
Certainly no, but that he knew that upon the dissolution of his body, his soul
should enjoy further communion with Jesus Christ, than it could do here: It is
an immortal substance, it runs parallel with eternity; of such an excellent
nature the soul of man is.

And then further, in this appears The excellency of it, that it is the measure
of all other kind of excellency. 5 The so^ls excellency showed in being the
measure of all other excellencies.
The soul of man is the measure of all other kind of excellencies, as thus,
look how far any thing may be subservient for the good of the soul, so far
that thing has an excellency in it; and if it be not subservient for the good
of the soul, it has no worth and excellency in it; as thus, Suppose a man have
a great estate in the world, great comings in, many friends, many places; now
there is some excellency you will say in these things: but are these
subservient for the good of thy soul, that thy soul can enjoy communion with
God so much the better? then these things are good to thee; but if so be that
these things hinder the work of thy soul, and do not help it forward in the
service that it is most capable of, and made for, there is no excellency in
these things. And indeed I know no one better sign that a man does understand
the true worth of his soul than this: What does he account to be the measure
of the excellency of all the things of this world? Thou would fain have an
estate, and outward things in abundance, as other men have: Why thou say
they are the good creatures of God, I grant it, they are so; but now wherein
do thou think the excellency of these creatures does most consist? Certainly
if thou come to know the true worth of thy soul, thou will say, God gives me
these outward things, and blessed be his Name, by a more large portion of
these things am I enabled to do more large service for God; my soul is freed
from encumbrances in the world, and they do help forward the work that my soul
is specially concerned in, viz. the service of God, and therefore I account it
a greater good to enjoy these things, than to be without them: now if thou
come to reason in this manner, it is a sign that God has shown thee what the
true worth and excellency of thy soul is.

6 The price paid for souls proves its excellency.
But that I might draw to a conclusion, This is that that above all things will
demonstrate the worth and excellency of the soul, The great price that was paid
for it. That Jesus Christ should be willing to lay down his life to purchase
the pardon of the sin of thy soul, to deliver thy soul from eternal misery, 1
Pet. 1.18.
this shows the great worth of the soul; We are not redeemed by silver and
gold, says the Apostle Peter, by any of these corruptible things, Verse. 19.
but by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. According to the price that is paid
for one, you may know the worth of such a one: Suppose there were diverse men
that were taken captives, one is but an ordinary Mariner, you will say perhaps
forty pound will redeem such a one; but suppose the other be a Gentleman, or a
Knight, a Nobleman, there must go five hundred, or two or three thousand
pounds for their redemption, according to the excellency of the man, so must
be the price of his ransom: So my brethren, when we consider the price of
men's souls, that were taken captive by sin, what was paid for them, it was a
price that was more worth than ten thousand thousand worlds; certainly the soul
is of an excellent nature: Indeed it cannot be imagined that Jesus Christ
would have taken man's nature upon him, and dyed an accursed death to have saved
the whole world from being dissolved; Suppose it had lain upon this, that
heaven and earth must have been dissolved, except Jesus Christ would take man's
nature upon him, certainly Jesus Christ would have suffered heaven and earth to
have gone to nothing, rather than to have done as he did: But when Jesus Christ
saw that these immortal souls by their sin were brought into such a condition,
that they must perish to all eternity, except he come and take their nature
upon him, and lay down his life, and dye an accursed death, says Jesus Christ,
rather than such precious souls which my Father has made capable of enjoyment
of so much good from him, and bringing glory to him, rather than these should
perish, I am content to come and dye, and suffer the wrath of my Father; surely
the price that was paid for souls, does hold forth the great worth of them: In
the death of Christ we may read in large characters the worth of a soul.

And my brethren, Even the body its self, 7 The exc^llency of the soul proved
from the body.
because it is as the case of the soul, it is a very excellent thing. Of all
the corporeal things that ever God has made, the body of man is the most
excellent thing, therefore David in Psalm. 139. speaking of his body, says,
verse 14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, mavelous are thy works, and
that my soul knows right well. And then verse. 15. My substance was not hid
from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest part
of the earth. When I was curiously wrought, From (...)
the word in the Hebrew signifies Imbroydred; the body of man is Imbroydery;
and hence in Genesis 2. it is said there, that God formed man, ampigore.
and here in Psalm. 139. God did imbroyder him: And therefore Gallen that was an
Atheist a long time, when he came to see the Anatomy of a man's body, he cried
out, Now I adore the God of Nature. Now the Lord has wrought the body so
curiously, because it is the case of the soul, and that being such an excellent
creature, must have a suitable case. As if you have a curious Watch, you will
not put it into an ill-favou^ed dirty leather case, but will have a curious
silver case for it. Now because the Lord did make a curious piece, the soul of
man, which was the masterpiece of Gods creation, next to the Angels, therefore
he puts it into a very curious case; this shows the excellency of those
spirits that are within us; howsoever they are now defiled with sin, yet thus
they were made at first. When we are speaking to men about their own
excellency, one would think that then they should attend.

I have spoken of God and Christ's excellency, they may seem to be things above
you: But now I am speaking of your own excellency, what you are, and what you
are capable off. Oh remember this you poor people and others, for (as we shall
show afterward) you have souls as excellent as the greatest men in the world.
And there is nothing to the contrary, but you may have that spiritual substance
of yours filled with so much good as is infinitely more worth than ten thousand
thousand worlds, if you have hearts to look after it.

The Second SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew. 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?
I Shall add one thing more, which shows the excellency of the soul in the
relation that it has to God, and that is this,

That it is satisfied only with God himself, there is nothing can fill the
soul of man to satisfy it, but God himself. For the true object of man's
understanding, it is not this truth, or the other truth, but truth in general,
and the highest truth, and that is God; and the object of this soul, it is not
this or that good, but good in general, the highest and the chiefest good, and
that is God: Let all the creatures in the world present themselves before the
soul of man to be the portion of him, Man's soul would say, these are not the
things that can satisfy me; says Austin, Lord thou have made us for thy
self, and our heart is unquiet till it comes unto thy self, and this is the
excellency of man's soul, it is above all creatures; it is a virtue in the soul
of man to have a holy kind of pride, to think all creatures in the world to
be too little to be the portion of it, and God takes this well, he likes it
well, that we should know our own souls, so far, that we should have this
kind of pride of spirit, as we may so call it, or rather a right elevation of
spirit, to look upon all creatures in the world, as too low, and too mean to
be the portion of one immortal soul.

Many other things were delivered about the excellency of man's soul, that so
you might know something of your worth, that you are too good to be slaves to
the Devil, and it is good for you to know your own worth in this thing, that so
your hearts might be elevated above those bare things that you sought to have
your happiness in; all those that ever have had true wisdom, have accounted
souls to be very precious. I remember Zozomen the Ecclesiastical Historian
says of the Martyrs, that they suffered torment in their bodies, as if they
were other folks bodies, and not their own, they looked not upon them as any
part of themselves, but on their souls as themselves; and so you find it in
Scripture that it is the soul of man, that is a man's self. Compare for this, my
Text in Matthew, with Luke 9. where you have the same speech of our Savior
setting out the excellency of a man's soul. In the one it is, What will it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? In the other
it is, If he lose himself; this is all one, the losing of a man's soul, and the
losing of himself: for a man's self it is his soul, as for the body it is but
the case, it is but the outside, and so indeed some of the Heathens accounted
their bodies. Anaxarchus, Tunde tunde Anaxarchi follem, Anaxarchum enim non
tundis.
when he was beaten in a Mortar to death by the Tyrants, he calls to them,
Beat, Beat as long as you will, you beat but the outward part of Anaxarchus, it
is but the vessel in which he is.

The Devil himself has high esteem of souls, the Devil cares not, so be it
he may gain men's souls, what they have for their bodies; the Devil does not
envy any wicked man to prosper in this world, to have a healthful lusty body,
and to have stature and strength, and beauty; But now, if he sees that there
be any means for the good of their souls, he envies that, may the Devil have
but their souls, he cares not what they have otherwise. But we come to the
application of this first point in my Text, Of the excellency of man's soul.

And the first Use is this, A good man, says the Scripture, is merciful to his
beast, and surely then a good man will be merciful to one that has an
immortal soul, and it may be an immortal soul better than his Governor; how
many have more respect to Dogs, to brute-beasts, than they have to servants and
children, and poor people, who have immortal souls? I have read of the Turks,
that though they be noted for most cruel people to men, as you heard of their
cruelty to those in the Galleys, yet they are very pitiful to brute-beasts,
and therefore they will give alms and stipends out of charity, to maintain
brute-beasts withal; and there is a story of a youth that abusing a bird that
had a long bill, was like to have been stoned to death in the street, they did
so hate cruelty to those kind of creatures, though they be cruel to men. Many
have this Turkish disposition, that are dogged and cruel to those of their own
kind, to those that have immortal souls together with themselves, though
pitiful even to brute-beasts. This is the first Use, Look upon all that have
these souls with an honorable respect, considering they have that that is of
so much worth.



But you will say, It is lawful for men to be employed in these, and poor
people must be employed in them.

That is true, It is lawful to be employed in such things, but now, when men
and women have such poor and mean employment, and have no higher thoughts but
merely to get bread by such employments, and their souls busied all their days
about nothing else but those things, this shows the woeful fall of man, and
manifests a dreadful fruit of Gods Justice upon the children of men for their
sin, Certainly, Man that was made in honor is become like the beast that
perishes in this regard: And when we see the condition of men to be so low,
so base and vile as they are, so beneath the excellency of a rational and
immortal soul; Oh let us raise our thoughts to the meditation Gods divine
Justice, it is a fearful fruit of the justice of God upon man for sin; what, is
this the creature that has an immortal soul made by God more worth than ten
thousand worlds? that lies scraping from morning to night in a kennel, and has
no other thoughts for any higher excellency, but only if it can get a lump of
bread to live by, there is all they have to do, as if they were born for no
other end? Oh! think then, is this the creature that has such an excellent
soul? surely sin has made a great breach between God and man, and has brought
mankind into a very low and mean condition, and yet worse are those than
these that have no other use of their souls than to be drudges to the Devil,
and slaves unto their lusts, but of this we shall speak to more afterward;
but now I only mention it, as to give a hint to the meditation of Gods justice
upon man for his sin.

Thirdly, If the soul of a man be of so great an excellency, Ministry? that
works altogether about immortal souls, in bringing them to God, to live to God,
and to enjoy communion with him: why do we account a Physician a more
honorable Profession, than a Horse-leech? one looks to the bodies of Beasts,
and the other to the bodies of Men; If there be such a difference between the
body of a Beast, and the body of a Man, that he that is employed about the one
is accounted honorable, and he that is employed about the other is accounted
low, then certainly the employment of the Ministry must needs be honorable,
for it is about souls.

The Magistrate looks unto your peace, the Lawyer to your estates, the
Physician to your bodies, and the Divine to your souls; though outward respects
may be given more, and should be to the Magistrate, yet certainly the
employment about immortal souls, must needs be the honourablest in the world:
It is the honor of the Angels, in Psa. 91. to take care of the bodies of the
Saints: If it be the glory of Angels to take care of Gods people, what glory
is it that God puts upon the Ministers of the Gospel to look to souls? and
truly, in this thing God has put more glory upon Men, than upon Angels; for
God has not made it to be his set ordinance that Angels should convert souls,
but he has made it so that men should be made use of to convert souls by
preaching the word; and let all the Angels in Heaven show an employment so
honorable as this employment is. You would account it a great honor to have
the Body of a Prince to watch over; Surely there is no immortal soul but is
more precious than all the Princes in the world; and if the Lord should give
unto you the care of all the Creatures, except the souls of men, it were not
such an honorable work as to give you the care of any one immortal soul; says
the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 4. the beginning, Let a man esteem of us as the
dispensers of the Mysteries of Christ: Let them esteem of us; it is true,
Ministers of the Gospel should be willing to lie under the feet of any to do
good to their souls; but because we know that it is a great hinderance to the
work of their Ministry, when brutish carnal spirits have low and mean esteem
of their work; therefore we find that the Apostle would ever be setting up
the honor of this work, Let a man esteem of us as the dispencers of the
Mysteries of Christ, and in 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren, to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to esteem of them very highly in love for their works sake; And so in Heb.
13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Oh it is a sad
thing! if one that God sends to watch for the souls of people, shall be forced
to return his account to God with sorrow of heart, and say, Lord, thou that
know all things, know what desires I have had, and what endeavors to do
good to the souls of this people, how it has been my study, my prayer, to
find out what might be most profitable for their souls, how willing I was to
venture my life in seeking to do good to their souls; but Oh Lord! I have spent
care, and study, and strength, and even almost my life in vain; little good do
I find done to the souls of this people; Lord, they reject thy word, they
contemn it, they mind it not; there are other things that their hearts are
upon, to follow the lusts of their flesh, as if so be they had no immortal
souls to look unto; I say, if any faithful Minister of God shall go to God and
make his moan thus unto God with grief and trouble of heart, it will be very
ill for you; it will be a fearful moan in the ears of God against a people,
when any Minister shall justly make this to God against them; therefore says
the Apostle here, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief. Consider, so far as any have
charge of souls, it is a heavy burden that is upon them, a heavy weight;
surely, whosoever should take charge of so many thousand souls as belongs to
this Congregation would have weight and burden enough upon his shoulders, you
should pity them that have this charge over you. I remember Chrysostom in his
writing upon this very Scripture, says, He wonders how any of these that are
here said to watch over men's souls, how any of them could be saved, because
the charge is so great that is upon them: And I have read of one being called
to the work of the Ministry, would by any means avoid it, and professes that
he would not for all the world have the charge of a soul one day upon him.
Certainly it is a great work, and requires very much seriousness and diligence
to have a soul committed to one. If a man had a precious Pearl committed to his
charge, that were worth ten thousand pound, that he must look to it, and keep
it, he would hardly be able to sleep quietly after he had so great a charge
committed to him; And truly, if men are careful that have but beasts committed
to them, as Jacob said concerning his Uncle Labans cattle, that he looked to
them so as that he endured the frost in the night, and the heat of the day;
much diligence and care then should they have, that have the charge of souls:
But we let that pass.

Yet in the fourth place, If souls have such excellency, The Righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor; perhaps his neighbor is richer than he, has a
comlier body than he, but yet he is more excellent, why? because all
excellency must be judged by that that is most proper to the Creature, and that
that is the chief part of the Creature; as if you would judge of the goodness
of a knife, you will not judge by the haft of it, whether it be good or no,
but you will judge by the metal of the knife, you judge by that wherein the
chief of the knife is; so, if you will judge of the excellency of a man or
woman, you must judge of his excellency by the excellency of that that is most
proper to him: Now, for Sense, for the body, why the brute-beasts they have
sense, they have flesh and blood as well as we, only we differ in these
rational immortal souls that God has given to us; therefore such, whose souls
are filled with divine excellency, they are to be most honored, they are
indeed the Lords and Ladies of the world; therefore the Scripture speaks of
those, whose outsides were mean enough; in the latter end of the 11th. of the
Hebrews, that wandered in sheepskins and goat skins, yet they were such as the
world was not worthy of them. Indeed, a man of understanding is of an excellent
spirit; we read of the Ark, the outside was of Badgers-skins, it had a poor
and mean outside, but within were the Cherubims, and Gold was within; And so,
many have very mean outsides, but within there is a great deal of excellency;
and others that have brave outsides, and well clad without, yet if you look
within them, oh what vile souls have they! the heart of the wicked is little
worth, says the Scripture; Perhaps his Land may be somewhat worth, and his
House, but his heart is little worth; As many a man that has perhaps a hand
full of sores, yet may have a fine imbroidered Glove upon it; and a dunghill
may be strewed with herbs, and in the winter time filthy dunghills you know
are covered with white Snow, that in a fair frosty day look as glistering as
the Snow that is upon a fine Meddow, but still nothing but filth: So it is with
many a man that has a fine outside, covered over it may be with a great many
outward excellencies, but within their spirits nothing but carrion, nothing but
abominable stuff that is filthy and loathsome in the eyes of God; as a sore
leg may have a fine stockin o^ boot upon it; and so a sore putrified soul may
have a brave outside upon it. But that God that is a Spirit, that looks unto
Spirit, and those men that know what spiritual excellency means, if they see a
man or woman have a filthy, defiled, corrupt soul, they cannot but esteem of
them accordingly. Whatsoever the body, or the outside be, those are the most
excellent in Gods esteem, and the holy Angels, and the Saints, that have the
most excellent souls, for that is the best part of man.



First, You are looked upon by the Angels themselves, with honor, and with
respect, till such time as the Angels certainly know your Reprobation, and that
you be sent down to hell: Though you be wicked for the present, and your
souls be defiled, yet the Angels know nothing but that these souls, though now
much fallen from God, may be such as may live with them to enjoy eternal
communion with God together with them, and therefore they look upon you with
honor.

And the providence of God it is more toward you, than toward any other
creature in the world. Does God take care for Oxen? says the Scripture: True,
the providence of God it is over all his works, there is not the least worm
that stirs without his providence. I, but does God take care for Oxen? that is,
as if the Holy Ghost there should say, the providence of God over other
creatures, it is nothing in comparison of that it is over the spirits of men,
over those that have immortal souls: When God looks upon the creature, that he
has given an immortal soul too, why says God, My Providence shall in a
special manner be over this soul: And certainly the thoughts of God have been
from all eternity working toward those that have immortal souls, in a more
special manner than toward any of his other creatures; how ever you think of
God, yet that is certain, God has had his thoughts toward you one way or
other from all eternity, and intends to fetch out a great deal of honor to his
name from you one way or other, and therefore his Providence is toward you;
God observes you, and marks you what way you take, his eye is upon you, for he
intends to bring some great glory out of you, God will not lose his creature
fully, you may lose your own souls, but God will not lose the glory that he
might have from you, but he will have glory from you one way or other.

And if God has given you immortal souls, you have cause to bless him, because
whatsoever you are now, yet you are such as are capable of all the good that
ever Jesus Christ has purchased, and therefore it is a happy thing for one to
have an immortal soul, because they are not out of capacity of receiving that
good that the Lord Christ has purchased for his people; the brute beasts are
not capable, they are capable of no higher good, but to eat and drink, and live
here a while, and have their senses to be pleased, and there is an end of
them, but know, whatsoever thou art, thou art capable of all the good that ever
Christ has purchased, and therefore thy condition is a great deal better in
that respect than the condition of all other creatures in the world. And thou
having a soul within thee, God has made thee for eternity one way or other,
and he intends for to have thee to live to all eternity in one condition or
other: Now it is I say, a happiness to be made such a creature, as that God
should have thoughts about from all eternity.

It may be you will say, It were better that it were otherwise with us.

I confess such is the condition of some through their sin, living and dying in
it, that it were better ten thousand times that they had been Dogs, or Toads,
and Serpents, I but that is but through thy wickedness, but it cannot be said
of the vildest alive, for there is none of you, but for ought Angels or men
know, may live eternally to the praise of Gods grace in Christ, you have such
kind of natures as are capable of it. Now it is true, if you should dye in
your sins, then it might be said at that instance when you dye in your sins,
that it had been better that you had been Toads or Serpents, or any thing in
the world: But were not this a sad thing for a man that has such an excellent
nature, to live and dye so that they may wish hereafter that they had been
Toads or Dogs? how many are there that are willing, so they may live like a
beast, to dye like a beast, I but that thou can not bring thy self to dye
like a beast, thou must be infinitely worse, or infinitely better than the brute
beasts. But bless God that thou have a nature capable of so much good,
whatsoever thou art in other respects, though God has made a great difference
between thee and others that are of the same kind in thy outward estate, God
has made a great deal of difference between poor and rich, between a poor
Alms-body that lives in so mean a condition, and between a Nobleman, a Prince,
an Emperor; I but this difference is made in the outward estate and body, but
there is no such difference made in their souls, thou have as precious a soul
within thee, that is naturally as good as ever any Emperor had in the world,
so Philosophers say of the souls of men, men's souls are equal, and one is not
better than another by nature, what they are better by is afterward, by
education, or by common gifts of the graces of God, but by nature all men are
equal. And therefore that wherein man's excellency is, is in his soul, thou art
as high as any Emperor in the world, and therefore it is that the Scripture
would have no difference made between the souls of men, in Exodus 30.15. you
shall find there by that Scripture, that God would not have difference made of
the souls of men, it is said in the 14. verse, Every one that passes among
you, that are numbered from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering
unto the Lord; God would have an offering from every one of them: Now mark what
he says in the 15. verse, The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall
not give less than half a shekel when they give an offering unto the Lord to
make an atonement for their souls; There must be the same atonement made for
souls, both for the rich, and for the poor. And as we spoke the last day in
opening the excellency of the soul, it appears by the price that was paid for
it; so here they are equal in this, that the poor man's soul must have as great
a price paid to save it, as the richest man in the world. And therefore bless
God for thy soul in this, that he has made thee equal with the Kings and
Princes of the world in that that is thy more noble, and more excellent part.

And bless God for soul-mercies above all mercies; If the soul be so
excellent, then I say, bless God that has granted thee soul-mercies, though
he has denied thee bodily-mercies, it is no great matter; as suppose, If so
be that God should take away the sight of thine eyes, yet if he opens the
eyes of thine understanding, of thy soul, thou art happy: Suppose that thou art
lame in thy body, yet if thou can walk in the ways of Gods Commandments,
and run there, thou art a happy creature: It may be thou want food, I, but
if God feed thy soul with spiritual Manna, feed thee every day with food from
heaven, and take care for the feeding of thy soul, thou art not so miserable as
thou thoughtst thy self; thou have tattered clothes, I but if God has provided
the righteousness of his Son to be a garment to cloach thy soul, every time
thou appearest before him, thou art a happy creature in that, therefore when
thy heart is ready to murmr, that God has denied thee bodily mercies that
he has granted to others, think with thy self, I but has not God recompensed
me in soul mercies? I make no question but there are many souls that bless God
that ever they have lived to this time, though they have suffered hard things
for their bodies, many that have lost, and been plundered of all, yet bless God
that they have lived to the time wherein there was so much plenty of the food
of souls: Oh those truths of God that have been revealed unto us since those
times, but had those that had the power before, had the power still continued,
we had never had such truths made known unto us, they account all recompensed
in soul-mercies, in Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ. Mark what the Apostle says there, his heart is filled with this,
Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Wherefore? that he
has given us good trading, and good incomes, that has given us food and
raiment, we are to bless God for this, I but the Apostles heart was above
this, therefore says he, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ, they are the blessings indeed that we have cause to bless him for,
spiritual blessings, soul-mercies; as for bodily-mercies, we know that the
Heathens and Reprobates have had as great a share in as any in the world; but
blessed be God, though we be denied these outward bodily favors, yet we
have spiritual blessings. Oh thanks be to God, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with spiritual blessings in heavenly places
in Christ. And this now would be a good argument that you do know the worth of
your souls; if you can be blessing of God for spiritual blessings in Jesus
Christ, above all blessings, and account your selves rich enough, if you have
the riches of spiritual blessings.

And then further, Oh if the soul of man be so precious, What great pity is
it that God should not have the honor of men's souls, of such a noble and
excellent creature; it is great pity that there should be any creature under
the Sun that God should not have the honor of; that God should not have honor
from every pile of grass, from every bit of bread that is eaten, from every
stone in the street: But now that God should give to mankind such an excellent
spirit, a soul more precious than all the world, and yet that God should not
have the glory of this, Oh this is an evil thing under the Sun indeed, this
must needs go to the heart of God; for the truth is, God has his glory from
all other creatures by the soul of man. As for other creatures, he has his
glory but passively from them, but for man's soul he does expect to have his
glory actively from that: that man by his soul should come to know this God,
the infinite first-being of all things, should fear him, and worship him, and
serve him, and have communion with him, and praise him; and therefore David in
Psalm. 103. My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his
holy name. And again, he concludes, My soul praise thou the Lord. And so in
Psalm. 104. Now upon the consideration of what has been said of the excellency
of our souls, we should lay a charge upon them, that they do honor God, and
serve God: What a sad charge will this be to many a man at the great day, when
God shall say, Had thou been made a Dog, I never had had so much dishonor
as I have had, I should have had more honor if I had made thee a Dog, there I
should have had my honor passively, and no dishonor from thee? But now, thou
being made an immortal soul, as it was capable of honoring me, so of sinning
against me; the more excellent a thing is, the more capable of evil it is, as
well as of good; no creatures, but Angels and men are able to sin against God.
Oh it is pity that God should not have the honor of thy immortal soul. God
had more honor from Nebuchadnezzar, when he was driven out among the beasts,
than when he sat upon the Throne as a King.

And then further, that should have been another Use, to have labored to
persuade you to take heed of dishonouring these souls of yours. God has put a
great deal of glory and excellency upon them, do not you dishonor them; and
many ways should have been said how men do put dishonor upon their souls;
only for the conclusion; Oh that you would but learn to love your own souls: To
love them. It is a strange exhortation you will say to exhort men to love their
souls: Oh, that you would but do it, Psalm. 22. David calls his soul his
Darling, the souls of men should be indeed their Darlings, not their bodies.
It was a speech of a Courtier to his friend, says he, I love you as mine own
soul; Oh says he, then you love me not at all; if you had said you had loved
me as your body, then I should have thought you had loved me, but I see no
love you have to your soul; It was the prayer of the Apostle St. John in the
Epistle that he writ to his host Gaius, I suppose you that know Scripture, are
not unacquainted with it, in his third Epistle, Beloved, I wish above all
things that thou may prosper, and be in health, even as thy soul prospers.

I shall close all I intend for the present with this Scripture; it seems that
Gaius was a holy man, but a man of a weakly and sick body, and therefore St.
John writing to him, he prays thus, Above all things, I desire that thy body
may but prosper, as thy soul prospers. As if he should say, O Gaius, thou
have an excellent gracious soul, endued with admirable graces of the Spirit of
God, full of God thy soul is, though thy body be weakly: Oh that thou had
but as good a body, as thou have a soul. It seems Gaius had more care of his
soul a great deal, than of his body: but now my brethren consider this, Would
not this be a curse to most men for one to pray thus for them, Oh Lord, give
them such bodies, as they have souls? it were as much as to say, Lord, Let that
body be blasted, let it be filled with diseases, let it be filled with
rottenness, let it consume away, let it be a noisome and loathsome body, for
his soul is so; The souls of most men are filled with diseases, are noisome and
loathsome in the eyes of God. It is a happy thing, my brethren, to have better
souls than bodies, that was the happiness of Gaius, and so it would be your
happiness, if you could say so; you have great care of the bodies of your
children, I, but have you a greater care of their souls? if you have, it would
be an excellent sign that God has made you to understand what true excellency
means. It is a great question among Divines, and among Philosophers too, about
the propagation of the soul, how it comes in, whether by the Parents, or
immediate creation; truly there is one argument that it is not like to come in
by the Parents, because we see that there is scarce any Parents that have any
care of the souls of their children, but altogether caring that their bodies
may be fine, and that they may be brave; and as they look at their children,
so they look at themselves, they love their bodies to the uttermost, to make
provision for the flesh, but no further. What a deal of do would there be, if
when any of your children goes abroad, or husband, or wife, If you should hear
that they have gotten a fall and broke their legs or arms? but now when you go
abroad, and fall into sin, and get a wound to your souls, as every sin it gives
a deadly wound, yea such a wound as only the blood of Jesus Christ is able
(...) cure it; and there is nothing made of all this, as if we were nothing
but lumps of flesh: Oh have a care of your souls, and labor to love them, and
make them to be your Darling; you had need have a care of them, for as they
are precious, so they are tender; as it is with Watches and curious
Instruments, those that are most curious are the easiest hurt, the very air
will put them out of temper; and so the souls of men, because they are things
so excellent, they are things of a very curious nature, and a little thing will
hurt them. As a little thing will hurt the eye, for that is a more excellent
member than your finger or leg; so the soul is a more excellent part, and
therefore it is that that is most in danger to be hurt and mischiefed, yea and
to perish, and if your soul perishes, your body will follow after, what will
become of that if your soul be lost and perish? but the only way to love your
bodies well, and aright, it is to love your souls.

The Third SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew. 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world and
lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?
I Shall speak something unto a Use that was mentioned the last day, and that
was this,

If God has given unto us such precious souls, Oh then let not us dishonor
our souls: Dishonor them, Why, how may a man dishonor his soul?

1 Why first when he lives idly, and makes no use at all of it, any more
than if he had but the soul of a Brute. Psalm. 24.5. speaking of him that had
not lift up his soul unto vanity, I remember the old Latin Arius Montanus turns
it, He that has received his soul in vain. And indeed most people do receive
their souls from God in vain, or to no purpose, they make no more use of them
than the Philosopher said of the Swine that had his soul only as salt to keep
the flesh from stinking; there is all the use many men make of their souls,
only to keep their bodies from smelling, and from corruption.

Secondly, We dishonor our souls when we employ them about low and mean
things unworthy of them, and make them to be the chief things that we employ
them about; It is the misery of man so to do, that I spoke of before, and it is
the sin of man so to do: How many men that have such precious immortal souls as
these are, know no higher good to employ them about, than to be it may be all
day or night in shuffling a pair of Cards, or casting of Dice, or at Tables?
there is the highest good that they know how to employ their souls about. What
a poor mean low thing is this, what a dishonor to such a soul as this? If so
be any of you have servants that are of good breeding, good parentage, that
are of excellent parts, that have lived long with you, that have skill in your
Trade, if you should set them to do nothing but pick straws, they would account
it a great dishonor put upon them. Truly what do you with these precious
immortal souls of yours that are so much worth, even more than the world, but
employ them in such poor things, even to pick straws as it were? if a man
should have pearls, that every one of them were worth a Kingdom, and he
should know no other use to make of them than to stop holes in Mud walls, one
would think it, as to be great folly in him, so a great dishonor put upon
those pearls that are of so much worth; why your souls are more worth every one
of them than all the Pearls and Kingdoms in the world, and for you to do
nothing else but spend the strength of your souls about gathering of a little
dirt together here in this world, it is a great dishonor to your souls.

We have a story of Domitian that was a great Emperor, and yet he had such a
low and mean spirit, as that he would spend the greatest part of his time in
catching of Flies. This is recorded of him as an argument of the lowness and
meanness of his spirit, unworthy a man of so great a dignity: Oh so our souls
that God has made so high and put such glory upon, what are they busied about
in most people? I remember Gregory Nyssen, he tells of some, and among others
of Origin, to be of that opinion, that the souls of men were made altogether
at the first Creation, and lived glorious spirits till they sinned against God,
and all those that sinned against God were thrust into the bodies of men, as
into a prison, and those that did not sin, they ^ive still with God in glory.
And Jerome, as I remember in his 32. Epist. speaks of that opinion that did
prevail; and we find Plato, though a heathen, he speaks of the souls of men,
and thought that they were made altogether before their bodies, if not from
eternity. These men they thought the souls of men so precious, as that they
could not come into the bodies of men but for their faults, as a punishment to
them, because they saw how meanly men's souls lived while they were in their
bodies, and therefore thought it impossible for such a precious soul as a man
had, to come to live so meanly, were it not for Gods anger punishing the soul
for some sin or other: Oh do not dishonor them by employing of them about
unworthy and low things.

Thirdly, Do not dishonor them by defiling of them by casting filth, and dirt
upon them. Would not a Prince account himself dishonored, to have the filth
and dirt of the street to be cast into his face? Certainly, when thou do
defile thy soul by sin, when thou do sin, thou do as vile an act as
casting dirt in the face of a Prince. There is no Princes body upon earth so
excellent as the soul of the poorest and meanest man, no filth in the world so
vile as the filth of sin, and by thy sin thou do cast this filth upon thy
soul, and so do all besmear it, and defile it. You love to have clean and
handsome bodies, and are loath to come into company all besmeared and besooted:
Oh but how often do you go into the presence of God most abominable and
loathsome! Oh do not put that dishonor upon your souls!

Fourthly, Do not dishonor your souls by making them drudges to your bodies,
by making them to be Caters to provide for the body, and to satisfy the lusts
of the flesh; I have seen (says Solomon) servants upon horses, Eccles. 10 ^.
and Princes walking as servants upon the earth. This was an evil Solomon
thought, but to see our base vile bodies to be set up, and our souls to be
brought under, and servants and slaves to this body, Oh how vile is it! If you
should see a great Prince to be made a slave to some Scullion-boy, you would
account it a great leaving of his condition, and dishonor put upon him, but
while thou make thy soul to be a slave to thy body, it is worse a great
deal. Seneca, though he were but a Heathen, yet has this notable speech, I am
greater, and born to greater things, than that I should be a drudge to my
body, and the slave of my body: A Heathen thought himself too great, and born
to greater things than that ever he should bring that soul of his to be a
drudge and slave to his body. And indeed did we know our souls, we should
think so, and we should never make them drudges to our bodies, merely to
satisfy the lusts of the flesh; and yet how many men and women are loath to
dye, only upon this ground, because that then they shall have no more
satisfaction to the lusts of the flesh? Oh what dishonor is there put upon
this precious and excellent soul in this? but much more dishonor when thou
make it a drudge and slave to the Devil? it is an evil to have our souls to
be slaves to our bodies, but a greater evil to be a slave and drudge to the
Devil, that the Devil should have command of them, and carry them up and down
as he pleases. I remember, it is reported of Theodosius, and another Emperor
that did use to call themselves the vassals of Christ; but as for those
precious souls now to be vassals to the Devil, Oh this is too great a
dishonor that is put upon them.

Fifthly, Again, you dishonor your souls by grudging the time and cost that is
spent upon them; how many men and women think the time is lost that is spent
upon their souls more immediately! they must indeed sometime pray, and sometime
hear the word, but the time, and all the charge they are at for their souls,
they look upon it even almost as lost, and so grudge it, and so would fain be
about some thing for their bodies; speak to them about praying in their
families, they have business, and what is all their business for, but only for
their bodies? Indeed we should rather turn our plea the other way, and be
loath to spare time for our outward estate, rather than for our souls, those
immortal souls of ours; it is a wonder, how any one that knows the worth of his
soul, can find in his heart, but upon mere necessity, and out of duty, to
spare time for his outward condition. The soul is dishonored when the time and
cost that is bestowed about it is grudged, as if it were merely lost, and cast
away.

Sixthly, Again we dishonor our souls when as we lay not up provision for
them against an evil day, this is a dishonor put upon them.

Seventhly, And lastly, you dishonor your souls, when as you think to satisfy
them with any thing but God himself; if you should have any of your friends
that are of quality come to your house, if you should set a bowl of swill
before them, and think to satisfy their hunger that way, they would think it a
great dishonor to them. Now if you do think to satisfy your souls with any
thing here but God himself, you do as it were bring bones to set before a
Prince. It was a speech unworthy of a man which we read of in the Gospel
concerning rich Dives, Soul, Soul, take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for
many years. Soul, Soul, eat, drink, and take thine ease; Why, what had that to
do with eating and drinking? How unworthy was this, I say, of one that had an
immortal soul thus to speak: Oh this is a great dishonor that is put upon the
soul.

Now then learn we in a right way to put honor upon our souls, and to love
them, and make them our Darlings; and manifest your love to your souls,

First, By having your thoughts often upon them; we manifest our love to a
friend by having our thoughts run upon him: Oh let your thoughts run much upon
your souls, I am thus and thus in regard of my outward estate; in regard of my
body, through Gods mercy I have all my limbs and senses, and comfortable
provision for it: Oh but my soul, how is it with thee? be often conferring
with your souls, as you know one friend loves to confer with another: Can you
say you love such a friend that is your next neighbor, and never spend any
time in conference together, scarce ever speak one with another? Certainly so
it is with the souls of men, they think but little of the terms that their
souls are in with God, of what conditions their souls are in, whether good or
bad, and the day is yet to come wherein many a man has spent one half hour in
conference with his soul, to know how terms do stand between his soul and the
Almighty God: Oh love your souls by thinking on them, and thinking often what
should become of them.

2. And further, love them by making them Emperesses of your bodies, by keeping
your bodies under them: Those that the Scripture sets out unto us which have
had the most precious souls, they have ever more beat down their bodies, and
kept them low: You know Paul that was one of the most precious spirited men
that ever lived upon the face of the earth, yet says he, I beat down my body,
I beat it black and blew, lest after I have preached to others, I my self
become a Reprobate; he did not think his happiness to consist in pampering his
body, no, but he beat it down, and therein he showed his love to his soul, in
that he made his soul to be Emperess as it were.

It is the speech of a learned man upon those words, Subdue the earth, that is
thy body, and all earthly things, to that spiritual part of thine, thy soul. If
one should tell you what the ancient Martyrs, and worthy Instruments of God
that were precious men in their time, how hardly they used their bodies, it
would hardly be believed by you; but this is certain, there was never any that
knew the true worth of their souls, but they made them the Emperesses of their
bodies. Ambrose said of Valentinian, No man was ever such a servant to his
Master, as Valentinians body was to his soul; Bring your bodies down, and
therein you will show the greatest love unto your souls.

3. And further, Adorn your souls, labor to put comeliness and beauty upon
them as much as you can, and therein you will show love and respect to them:
Adorn them with those graces that may make them amiable and lovely in the eyes
of God himself, in 1 Pet. 5.5. Be clothed with humility. Those that
understand the Greek language, know it to be a word that signifies a dress
that Gentlewomen use to have upon their heads with ribands, such as they did
use to wear in those days, and so they thought themselves very comely, and the
Apostle alludes to those kind of dresses. Oh humility is the finest dress for
a woman in the world, and so for men too. The finest clothes that you can put
upon you is the clothes of humility; and so any grace of Gods Spirit it is the
clothing of the soul: Oh therefore show your love unto your souls by laboring
to deck and adorn them with such clothing as this is.

4. And show your love to your souls by providing for them, while God affords
means, labor to understand the want of your souls, and be willing to be at
any charge and cost for the good of them: If your head ache, or you have any
little pain in any of your members, how do you seek out, and are willing to be
at a great deal of charge that you may have ease for your bodies? now seek out
for your souls, the one is a sign that you love your bodies well, and the other
will be a sign that you love your souls as well.

5. And then show love to your souls in the excellency of them, in things that
are suitable to them, in conversing with God and Jesus Christ, with the
mysteries of the Gospel, and with heavenly things.

6. Show your love to them in laboring to bring them to the attaining of that
end that they were made for, the uttermost happiness that they are capable of;
then indeed you show true love to your souls, when as your care is to bring
them to the attainment of that end that God made them for: Certainly when God
made a creature of so much excellency, he did intend a glorious end for it:
And let this now be your great care, and manifest your love to your souls, I
say, in this, by laboring to attain the end that God made them for. But this
shall suffice for the first point, of the preciousness and excellency of our
souls.

We come now to the second, and that is the main Point indeed in the Text,
that is,

That the loss of this soul is a most dreadful loss.

Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life; Even the
Devil himself could say so. The loss of bodily life we account a great evil,
and therefore the Scripture calls Death by the name of the King of Terrors;
and is it so great an evil to lose a bodily life, to have the soul and body but
separated? Is the face of a bodily death so ghastly? Oh how great an evil, and
how ghastly is the face of the eternal death, and the loss of the immortal soul?
This Point my brethren, is a Point of exceeding great concernment to
understand; we shall therefore,

First, Inquire what we mean by the loss of the soul, or when may the soul be
said to be lost?

The second thing, Wherein does the dreadfulness of the loss of the soul
consist?

And then thirdly, I shall discover to you some aggravations of the evil of the
loss of the soul.

Fourthly, And then we shall come to apply all together.

For the first then, What does Christ mean when he says, What profits it a
man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his soul?

First, You are to know this, That we are not said to lose our souls, because
they shall be annihilated, and cease to be, the ceasing of the soul to be,
that is not the loss of the soul, the ceasing indeed of our bodily lives is the
loss of our lives, but it is not so with the soul, for the soul of no man or
woman shall be lost so.

Yea, and this would not be the greatest loss for the soul to cease to be.
There are two degrees of evil that are beyond the evil of ceasing to be; to
be miserable, to be in pain and torture, is worse than not to be, and to be
sinful, is worse than to be in pain; and therefore the ceasing to be, is not
the greatest evil: What is the loss of the soul then?

First, The loss of the soul it is first in the privation of it of all the good
and excellency that the soul is capable of, the privation of the true good that
the soul was made for.

Secondly, It consists in its departing and wandering from God: As a sheep is
said to be a lost sheep that wanders up and down in the wilderness; so that is
a lost soul that wanders away from God the fountain of all good.

Thirdly, It consists in the subjecting of it to that misery and evil that is
contrary to what good it is capable of.

And then fourthly, and lastly, in the succourless and helpless condition that
it is brought into; we use the phrase of Lost to all these things; when a man
has lost his estate, we account such a man as a lost man; and when a man is
brought into a great deal of misery, that heretofore was in a great deal of
happiness, we account such a man to be a lost man; but especially when a man
is succourless and helpless, when he has no way to help and relieve himself,
then he is a lost man indeed: And according to the degrees of these four
things then a soul may be said to be lost. And here for the present every man
and woman's soul in the world by nature is a lost soul.

First, Every man and woman, as they come into the world are deprived of the
glory and excellency that God did indow the souls of men withal in their first
creation, we are all deprived of the glory of God, says the Scripture.

And secondly, All our souls do now naturally wander away from God, continually
depart, and wander from the infinite glorious first-being of all things; Thou
that art an old man or woman that have lived many years, and God has not
revealed himself in working the true work of conversion in thee, to change thy
estate, know, that thy soul has been departing and wandering from the Lord all
the days of thy life, to this very present, thou art like a lost sheep,
wandering up and down in the wilderness, and in danger to be destroyed every
minute of an hour by some wild beast or other; though it is true, thy soul is
not made a prey to the Devil so as to destroy thee utterly, yet thou have been
in danger all the while thou have been wandering from the Lord to be made a
prey upon by the Devil, and utterly to have been cast away.

Yea, and thirdly, There is a great deal of misery upon thy soul, if thou
knew it; as, contrary to that light that he has set up in thy
understanding, there is blindness in thee, there is error in thee; contrary to
that holiness that was at first in thy heart and soul, there is nothing but sin
and wickedness, all the spauns and seeds of all kind of sin is in thy heart;
there is a great deal of that evil that is contrary to what thy soul was made
withal at first, there is enmity in thy soul against God himself.

Yea, and fourthly, Thy soul is in a succourless, helpless, shiftless condition
in respect of what thou art able to do, or what all the creatures in heaven or
earth are able to do for thee; let all the Angels in heaven, and men in the
world, join together to seek to do good to thy soul, they are not able to
deliver thy soul from that evil that now it is in, and that it is in further
danger of. And this is the reason of that phrase that you have in Luke 19.10.
The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. We are all
lost sheep going astray, and Jesus Christ came to seek and to save lost souls;
Souls deprived of the glory of God, Souls wandering away from God, Souls filled
with evil, Souls succourless, and helpless in regard of any power in any
creature in heaven and earth to save them: Christ beholding how such precious
souls were every one of them lost, if he had not come to save them, he was
pleased to come from heaven to seek and to save souls thus lost.

Now though souls be for the present in a lost condition, yet there is a
further loss of the soul than this; for if the soul be neglected here, it will
be lost forever; there are many that are lost now for the present, and yet
afterward Christ finds them, and there is joy in heaven at the finding of
them; but there is a loss that shall be eternal, and that loss is more
dreadful than the former, yet the former has the degree of it, but that the
perfection of the former: Now the loss of the soul in hell consists in these
three particulars.

First, The full and perfect eternal rejection of the soul from God, and from
all good in him together, with the fullness of all kind of evil that the soul
is capable of; this is the condition of a lost soul that perishes.

Secondly, And then in the next place it consists in the making of this soul to
be perfectly sensible of the loss of that good, and of all the evil it is
possessed withal, making of it perfectly sensible of it: Here men and women are
in lost conditions, but they know it not, they are not sensible of it: But God
will bring the soul into such a condition, as it shall be made perfectly
sensible of the loss of all the good that it might have had, and of all the
evil that is upon it.

Thirdly, And then lastly, It shall be in such a condition, so succourless, so
helpless, as is not only beyond the power of Angels, and all men to help it;
but I say, so succourless, so lost, as that Gods mercy, and all the good there
is in Christ shall never save it, and as God has set and ordered things, can
never save it.

Now then these things being opened to you, you will understand what this Text
means: When you read this Text you think there may be truth in it, and in
general you will ^ssent unto it, but if you come to understand but these
things, then indeed you cannot but all subscribe to it and acknowledge: Oh it
is indeed a dreadful thing the loss of the soul. But now because it is a point
of so great moment, I will not satisfy my self merely in telling you these
things, but endeavor to open them unto you, what the evil of this loss is,
that if it might be, by presenting this before the souls of men, they may see
more the danger that they are in, and how the Devil has gulled and deceived
them all this while: It may make many souls to be at a stand, if they come to
know what this loss indeed does mean. Now I shall endeavor the opening of this
in the three last particulars that I named.

First, For the rejection of the soul from God so as to be deprived of all the
good there is in God, and that it is capable of; Now for the understanding of
the evil of this, we must inquire what is that good that the souls of men are
capable of, or else we cannot come to understand what an evil thing it is to
lose it.

Now for the good that the soul is capable of, I will but only name some heads
unto you, for in a Treatise that some of you have in your hands, of Moses
looking to the recompense of reward, there are the principal heads of the good
and excellency that the soul is capable of, and shall be blessed in heaven
eternally with: And the apprehending the loss of these things, will discover
much, The first part of the evil of the loss of the soul. I will but in a very
brief way present them unto you.

Why the Glory of God upon the soul, the Image of God, the Life of God, the
Divine nature that the soul is capable of: Now for the soul never to live the
Life of God, nor to have his Image, nor any of the Glory of Gold upon it, this
is a fearful evil to those that know the excellency of these things; of the
blessed vision of God in heaven, to see him that is the infinite first-being of
all things, to see him as he is, to see him that has all excellency in him,
and to see all the good there is in God, as the good of the soul. The soul is
capable of the understanding of the mind of God, to have all the glorious
Counsels of God about his works and ways that he has had from all eternity
to be revealed unto, so far as concerns it, and as any way may make it happy:
To live to see what the ways of God have been from all eternity, and what they
shall be to all eternity, and that for the good of this soul, that it may be
for ever in his presence, and to stand and look upon his face, and see him as
the portion of it, Oh this must needs be a glorious thing: Certainly if the
presence of God put such a glory upon the heavens, it must needs put abundance
of glory upon the soul that shall stand immediately always in his presence: To
have eternal communion with God, that is, to have the imbracements of God,
embracing the soul, and delighting himself in it above all other his works, but
only the Angels and his Son; delighting, I say, himself in the soul, and
embracing it, communicating and letting out himself in all his luster and glory
when he shall have enlarged the soul to be able to the uttermost to receive
in that glory that he has to communicate: And for him to converse with the
souls of men to all eternity in a familiar way, as one friend with another; and
for the soul to be letting out its self again to God, for that is in
communion, there is Gods letting out himself to it, and its letting out its
self again to God; now, I say, it is the greatest delight to what God has in
himself, his Son, and Spirit, and Angels, the letting out of himself to the
souls of men (those that shall be saved:) And on the other side, it must needs
be an infinite delight to the soul always to be letting out it self upon
God, as now, what delight do men take in eating and drinking? now if there be
such delight from the humor in the palate meeting with a piece of meat in the
mouth, because of the suitableness between one object and another? Oh what
delight must there needs be when this immortal precious soul being enlarged to
the uttermost with all exc^^^ency shall then meet with an infinite God, the
infinite first-being of all things as the most suitable object to it, and so
be letting of its self forth to God, and God letting of himself forth to it
again.

Again, the good that the soul is capable of with God, it is to have an union
with God, for the soul to be made one with God, to be united so as to be made
one with him: He that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, says the Apostle;
and says Christ, in Joh. 17. Father, I will that those that thou have given
me, may be one with me, as thou and I are one. Spiritual things do most
unite one to another; there may be a thousand beams of the Sun united, and
almost into one point, because it is of a more spiritual nature: so when the
soul shall be made one Spirit with God, it being a Spirit, and God likewise a
Spirit, there will be an exact union one with another: And so the more
spiritual things are, the more they communicate one to another; as in nature,
the more corporeal a thing is, the less it communicates its self; the earth
does not communicate its self with any creature; the water communicates its
self more than that, and the air more than that, and the fire more than that;
the Sun, that is less corporeal than any of these elements that we have here,
and therefore that communicates its self more than the element does: Now God
being a Spirit, and the souls of men spiritual, Oh what a communion will there
be of each to other!

And then further, the soul is capable of fruition of God; union, and
communion, and fruition, what is that you will say? that is to have God not
only to be united to it, but to have a kind of possession of him, to have the
use of all that there is in God that can make me happy, to have the full use
of it when I will; then a man does enjoy a thing, when he can have the use of
such a thing when he will: Now the souls of the Saints shall enjoy God, that
is, shall have the use of all that glory and good there is in God that can make
them happy, when they will, and shall have as much use of God as they will;
surely they must needs be happy that shall thus enjoy God: If a man had the
fruition of the world, that he could have the use of all the good things in
the world, when he would, you would think him happy; but this is the happiness
of the souls of the Saints, that they shall have such a fruition of God, that
they shall have all the use of God that they will, and when they w^ll.

And further, Fruition has this in it, it has a reflect act; A man, though
he has a great deal of riches given him, yet if he does not know this, or if
so be that he does know it, and yet have not the comfort of it, he does not
enjoy it; such a man, though he be born to a great deal, yet if he have not
the reflect act to know that he has it, he does not enjoy it: So we enjoy
but little of God now, because God, though he be the portion of a gracious
heart, yet the heart does not know this fully: But knowledge, when it shall be
perfect, then the soul shall perfectly know what good there is in God, and how
far my soul may and is happy in the enjoyment of this God; I shall know how to
make use of God to the full, and shall have continually the comfort of all that
good there is in God.

And yet further, the presence and communion with Jesus Christ that the soul
shall have, besides that of God the Father, it shall be with him, where he
is: It is a blessed thing here to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, but
to be always with him, to have always fruition of him, and to have communion
likewise with all the Saints and Angels, and all the blessed spirits, that is a
blessed thing indeed. I remember I have read of Cato, when he was about to
dye, Oh blessed day, says he, for now I shall go to the souls of wise men,
and Philosophers; and so upon that ground he did account the day of his death a
blessed day, because he should go to have communion with the souls of
Philosophers and wise men: But how blessed is it then for our souls to have
communion eternally with Angels and blessed spirits? You are come to an
innumerable company of Angels, Heb. 12.22, 23
and the spirits of just men made perfect. When a soul is converted, it comes
to have some kind of communion with innumerable company of Angels, and with the
spirits of just men made perfect: It has the assurance of it here, and shall
have the enjoyment fully and perfectly hereafter.

And then the continual exercise that the soul shall be busied in, to be for
ever blessing, and magnifying, and praising and worshipping of God, and
receiving in from God, and letting out its self to God: The eternal Sabbath
that it shall keep, and then the eternal rest that the soul shall have, when it
comes to God, it comes there to its Center, there it has perfect peace and
rest, and can never have trouble further.

Yea, and it shall live in God; not only God live in it, but it shall, I say,
live in God, as (though the similitude comes short of it) the fish swimming in
the Sea; so the soul shall be swimming in the infinite Ocean of the excellency
of the great God. It is said of John, Rev. 1.10. Col. 3.3
that he was in the Spirit on the Lords day; so the soul shall live in God:
Our life is hid with Christ in God: But our life shall be plain and apparent,
not hidden, but apparent before Angels, and all the rest of the blessed, and so
our lives shall be after another manner than now they are. Now to open every
one of these things would be very large, so that it suffices now only to
present them to you, to show in a short view the good of the soul in the full
enjoyment of God, and what it shall have from him, that so you may see what the
loss of the soul means. Now if these things be true and real, Oh what a
dreadful thing is it for a man to lose his soul, for a man to come to lose all
this good, that others that have souls like unto him shall come to enjoy, and
that he might have enjoyed as well as others! If there were no more in the
loss of the soul but this, to be cast away from the good that it is capable
of, it might show unto us this loss to be very dreadful. It was a speech of
Austin long since speaking of that place where Dives did desire Lazarus to come
with one drop of water to cool his tormented tongue, says he, If there should
be but one drop of heavenly felicity let into Hell, it would quench all the
fire of Hell presently: And Chrysostom has such an expression, that he would
rather suffer thousands of years in pain and torment in Hell, than he would
lose that good that he might have in the enjoyment of God; he accounted paena
damni, the loss of God to be the greater, and it were a good sign of a soul
that did understand its own excellency, and what good it were capable of, to
fear as well the loss of God, and what good it might have in God, and to
account that as great an evil to it, as pain, and horror, and torment: Why,
when we come to express the wrath of God to you, and the evil that sin
deserves, we speak of Hell fire, and so the Scripture does; If we would set
out the great evil of punishment (when we speak to men and women that are lead
by sense) we would tell them of their bodies being thousands of years in
scalding Lead, and kept alive there, and this would startle and amaze them; but
certainly the evil of the souls rejection from God, and being cast off from the
good that there is in God, it is as great, if not a greater evil; and a good
sign, I say it were, that God is going to show what our souls are to us and the
true excellency of them; If we begin to be affected with the loss of God
himself, and the good we might have in God, not only afraid of Hell, because
of fire and torment there, but afraid of having our souls lost, because of
being deprived of such infinite good, as otherwise we might come to enjoy with
God: A gracious heart has more thought about losing the good that there is in
God, than of the pain that he should feel in Hell.

To set it out a little but in this resemblance, of the eye being deprived of
light: An eye that has beheld the glory of the Heavens, and of the Creatures,
though it should never have any pain, but only there should be such an ill
humor, so as to take away all light from it; why what hurt is here to the eye?
it is but only the absence of a good thing, the eye feels no pain; but what
man in the world but would rather be willing to have his eyes to see, and not
to be blind all his life time, than to have the enjoyment of thousands of
gold and silver? Now if the bare absence of the sight of a man's eyes be so
great an evil, and he would rather almost endure any pain, than to have his
eyes deprived of the light, then certainly the absence of God must needs be a
most dreadful evil to the soul: when the Sun shines in its luster, how
beautiful is it?
and how pleasant to that it is at midnight, when it is dismal dark? why what
is done? it is only the absence of one Creature, one Creature is here now, and
shines gloriously upon us, and at midnight the Creature is gone: so what a
mighty change and alteration would there be in the soul, if it should be
deprived of the presence of the Lord? if the Lord who is infinite in glory be
present with the soul, and shine upon it to all eternity, Oh how glorious will
it be but Gods withdrawing himself, fully and everlastingly from the soul, Oh
what a dismal night of darkness will there be! and therefore it is a most
dreadful thing for the soul of a man to be lost in regard of this first
particular, in regard of the privation of that good that it is capable of.

The Fourth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
NOw for the second Particular, Namely, wherein consists the eternal loss of
the soul; it is this; when the soul in Hell is so possessed with sin, as to be
contrary unto God eternally: I say the soul cast away from God is possessed of
all the evil of sin, so as for ever to hate God, and to abhor him, and to
blaspheme him, that is one particular of the condition of a lost soul.

As every soul here by nature is deprived of all that good in which it was
created, and secondly, as it does wander from, and is at enmity against God: so
when the soul is lost eternally, then it is perfectly against God, and does
hate and blaspheme God for ever: Thou that art a wicked man, thou will sin, but
when God has cast thee away from him eternally, then, as I may say, thou shall
have thy belly full of sin, thou then shall be fully given up unto sin, Rev.
16.11. And they blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and
sorrows: Now that is spoken of the beast, of Antichrist; but if men here
blaspheme God because of pains, what shall they do that are damned in Hell?
they that shall have the vials of Gods wrath poured out upon them? But you will
ask, how does it appear that for the wicked to be given up to sin is such an
evil unto them, whereas here it is their delight to commit sin? To which I
answer, though they love sin, and though sin be their delight here, yet
hereafter, when they are cast off from God for ever, then they shall not find
that delight in sin, as now they do: as to give you it in an example, put a
fish into a pot of water, and the fish does swim, and play, and delight
therein, because it is the proper element of the fish to be in the water; but
now, if you do but put fire under that pot of water wherein the fish does play
and take delight, why then that which was before the delight and element of the
fish, thereby becomes its pain and torture: so, though sin in this life is
delightful unto wicked men, because it is their proper element to be in sin in
this life, yet hereafter sin shall be their pain, because then there shall be
mixed with it the wrath of God, which will make it pain and torture. Again, the
loss of the soul consists in this, when the soul is fully possessed of all the
evils that are contrary to all the good it is capable of: Thus shall it be with
the lost soul eternally:

That as the Saints shall be enlarged and made more capable of good, which
they shall enjoy to all eternity: so, those that are wicked and lost souls,
which shall be opposite to God, shall be enlarged in their capacities, and
be possessed, and made capable of all contrary evils.

First, To be cast under the eternal curse of God, I say, to be eternally
under the curse of the Almighty.

Secondly, To have all the faculties of the soul to be filled with the wrath
of God, to have the understanding to be filled with what may increase torment
in that, and for the conscience, to have the worm gnawing, which never dies;
and to have the thoughts employed, and running upon those things that will be
so hideous unto them, and to have the will continually crossed by God himself,
and to have the heart sinking under the wrath of the infinite God in despair
for ever. Brethren, the soul of man, it is a very large vessel, and because we
know but little of the large extent of our souls, therefore it is that we are
so little sensible of the loss of them, or of the pain and torment they are
capable of, or liable unto: But as the soul is larger than the body to take in
comfort; so is it larger than the body likewise to take in pain, misery, and
wrath: we should be sensible of such an expression as this; to have the body
in all the members of it to be filled with fire, so as to be all on a hot
fiery burning coal, and that to all eternity; this you would think could not
but be an extreme misery: But the souls capacity is far larger than the
bodies: And to have the soul filled in every faculty of it with the wrath of
God, it is far greater pain, than to have the body in such a condition, which
is the condition of a lost soul. Further, it does consist in having the power
of God stretched forth to bring evil and wrath upon it, and that to the utmost,
Romans 9.22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endures with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted unto destruction?
(As thus)

First, The infinite power of God put forth in enlarging their natures, that
they may be the more capable of evil.

Secondly, The infinite power of God put forth to uphold their natures, that
they be not sunk down with those dreadful evils that God has to put upon them.

Thirdly, The infinite power of God to let out upon the soul, what ever it can
bear to make it miserable, so as not to be annihilated therewith, which it
shall bear for ever. And further, A lost soul is in this condition also, to be
continually under the stroke of Gods justice, that when it ha^h lain under its
pains thousands of thousands of years, says divine Justice, I am not yet
satisfied. Now that that is required, is, that the soul should lie under the
wrath of God, until such time that God may have as much honor by punishing it,
as he has had dishonor by its sinning against him, and that must be for
ever; because God can never have so much honor by the punishing of it, as he
has had dishonor by its sinning against him: (And then) As the soul should
have had eternal communion with God and Christ, etc. it being lost, it must
have communion instead thereof with the Devil and the damned spirits in Hell:
And if this be the condition of a lost soul in Hell, as it is, then what shall
a man gain in gaining the world, if he lose his soul? But further, to make
this misery appear to be misery indeed, There is required a perfect sense of
all these evils: for a man or woman may be in a lost condition, as many are
now, but they do not understand it, and therefore are not sensible of it.

But that soul that is lost eternally, the Lord shall so far enlighten its
understanding, as may make it sensible of all its evil; certainly many this day
are in such a condition, as did they but understand the lost condition they are
in, it would make them tremble: But now, when the soul is eternally lost, it
shall then perfectly understand what its lost condition is, and then the
thoughts of its mind shall be so busied about its misery, as that it shall not
be able to ease its self one moment, but its thoughts shall be busied about
its condition, so far as may make it miserable; And the Lord is able to make a
creature as sensible of misery as he pleases. For this is the propriety of
God, to make a creature as sensible of all the evil that is upon him as he
pleases; and if so, then when all these evils come upon the creature, and the
Lord intends to make the creature fully sensible of it; then certainly it must
needs be miserable indeed. Further, then this loss of the soul consists in
this, That it must have nothing to support it, when the burden of the wrath of
the infinite God shall be thus upon it; (as also) there shall be no mixture
of any good to bring relief or ease, nor any intermission of time; it must not
be one moment of time out of this condition of misery, but must be in it
continually to all eternity.

Further, In this does its misery consist, because God will keep all the
faculties of the lost soul in their utmost activity, whereas now it is not so
with us; for if misery and pain be upon us here, after a while our activity
and sensibleness of it is partly gone: But the Lord will make such souls as are
eternally lost, as perfectly sensible of this its misery every moment, as ever
it was the very first moment that it went into that misery. Then

Lastly, In regard of the irrecoverableness of the lostness of the soul when it
is once lost.

The soul, when it is departed from the body, and once lost, then all the power
of God can never help nor recover it; but then the stream of Gods wrath shall
carry it with that mighty force, as that it shall not be able to all eternity
to have the least actings of its self toward its deliverance for ever.

Secondly, There shall be no Mediator between God and the lost soul, none to
mediate for it: Now, had not we a Mediator between God and us, we were all
certainly lost; but now for the soul that is once lost eternally, Jesus Christ
will never tender up any work of mediation for such a soul; that is certainly
gone and lost irrecoverably. And then further, the gates of mercy will be for
ever shut against such a soul.

Now for the further opening and setting forth the dreadfulness of the loss of
the soul, there are diverse aggravations wherein the misery of it does further
appear.

The first aggravation is this, If the soul be thus lost, then the body is,
and will be lost also: It will bring the body into the very same lost condition
of misery that it is in its self, so far as it is capable of misery; and that
upon these two grounds.

First, Because the body all the time a man does live in this world, it was the
only or most immediate instrument that the soul had to work and to sin by: And
certainly God must needs hate that body, and curse it, that did belong to the
soul, because it was the only instrument of the soul to sin by.

Secondly, Miserable must the body also be, because when such a lost soul
shall be united unto the body, the very extremity of the soul must needs bring
misery upon the body also; as thus, When Christ had the apprehensions of his
Fathers wrath and displeasure in his soul, how did it work upon his body even
so as to cause even clodders of blood to fall from him? Now, what caused this
pain in his body, but the terrors of God in his soul? and if it was so with
Jesus Christ, that had but sin imputed unto him, then certainly the body of a
damned creature must needs be in very great and dreadful torment, to which
this soul is united. If a holy man cried out, Thy arrows stick fast in me,
Psalm. 38.2.3
and thy hand presses me sore, there is no soundness in my flesh, because of
thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. I say,
if the anger of God caused this misery unto David's body for his sin, what
misery will that be when all the faculties of the soul shall be filled with
the wrath of God to their utmost capacity? O then, I say, what dreadful evil
and pain will there be unto the body united unto such a soul!

The second aggravation of the loss of the soul, it is this, That when it comes
to be in this lost condition, then it comes to be in the deadfullest and most
miserable condition that any Creature is in, except the Devils themselves. The
Scripture tells us, it is an evil thing to have riches kept for a man's hurt:
But O then what an evil is it, and will it be, for a man to have an immortal
soul for his hurt? this is the condition of a lost soul.

The third aggravation of the loss of the soul, is this, It will have none to
pity it, in that its miserable lost condition it is in.

If a man in this world should lose his estate, or any great loss, he would
have many to pity him: if a man lose by fire, then he may obtain a gathering,
whereby his loss may be partly made up, or he relieved; or if you lose your
children, you have your friends to pity you, and to condole with you: But that
man that shall have his soul lost, he shall be in such a condition, as that
he shall have none to pity him.

True, we are all lost by nature, but in that our lost condition we have God
pitying us, and Christ pitying us, and the Angels looking upon us with pity,
and Saints pitying us; But hereafter, if lost, none shall pity that soul in
that condition, when its loss is eternal. God shall not pity it, but then the
blessed God shall look upon it as an object of his eternal curse: But no pity
shall he have of souls in that their lost condition; neither shall Jesus
Christ pity them: True, Jesus Christ came to seek and to save those that were
naturally lost, but ye have done what in you lay to frustrate the ends of
Christ his coming: and as Christ shall not pity you, so mercy it self shall
not pity you; but be so far from pitying of you, as that it shall plead
against you

And Angels they shall not pity you, because they shall be taken up in
blessing and praising of God for his works, and righteous judgments upon you:

Neither shall the Saints pity you, though it be thy Father, out of whose
loins thou came; or though it be thy Mother, out of whose womb thou came;
yet they shall not pity thee, though thou art lost, and lost eternally, but
shall rejoice at it, and bless God for his justice upon thee: therefore
miserable is the condition of a lost soul.

The fourth aggravation of a lost soul, is this, It will prove unto most that
are lost, an unexpected loss: There are very few that have any apprehensions of
the loss of their souls, but they think they may go on in sin, and yet do well
enough.

It may be thou hear a Minister speak of the loss of the soul, but thou
flatterest thy self, and think thou shall do well enough; but at length,
before thou art aware, thy soul may be lost, and that unexpectedly; then it
must needs be dreadful, because it is so great and unexpected: As (for
example) if a Merchant should hear that his stock at the Indies were there safe
and well, and afterward upon an instant there does come news unexpectedly that
all is lost and gone, Oh how does it damp him! and O consider how it will damp
thee hereafter, though now thou do flatter thy self, If thy soul should be
lost eternally? I say, it will be a dreadful loss in regard of the
unexpectedness of it.

A fifth aggravation is this, It will prove to be a dreadful loss, because the
loss of every soul that shall be lost, will prove to be a wilful loss: This
is a great perplexity to a man in this world, when as he does see he is
undone, and that merely through his own wilfulness; and this will be the
aggravation of the souls loss, that one day it shall plainly appear unto them,
that it was through their own wilfulness.

Ye will not come to me, says Christ, John 5.40.
that you might have life; and ye will not endure to hear of the danger ye
are in, of being lost eternally: Oh how wilful must the loss of those souls
be, that will not give ear to hear of the danger their souls are in, of being
thus lost? And O how wilfully do you run on in wicked courses, which God has
given command unto the contrary in his Word, and how do you wilfully cast off
the means that God has appointed for your salvation? But know, ye perish
wilfully, if ye wilfully reject or neglect to improve the means that God has
given for the saving of your souls: I say, that man or woman that shall
wilfully cast off those truths of God that should save them, that man or woman
does wilfully perish:

Well, but you will say, you do not sin wilfully, but you are overtaken with
sin. To which I answer, that the sin which a man does do, which outward carnal
motives would be a prevailing means to him to persuade him not to do; yet all
that is in Gods Word given to persuade to the contrary, does not; he sins
wilfully, and if he perish, he will be found to perish wilfully.

It may be you will further say, you are ignorant, and therefore if we did
know better, we would do better; I answer, yet it is wilful, because you are
wilfully ignorant; and therefore your loss is wilful.

The sixth aggravation of the loss of the soul, it is this, because the eternal
loss of the soul will be a great loss for a little matter.

For a man to venture the loss of his soul for the gaining of a Kingdom, he
would think it something, but yet the Text tells us he would be a great
loser; but if so great a loser to gain a Kingdom for his soul, O then how
great an evil will it be for a man or woman to lose their souls for trifles!
You do not got the world for your souls, but perhaps you do venture the loss of
your souls for the getting of a groat, or sixpence, or twopence, or it may be
upon the fear of the displeasure, or anger of your Master or Mistress; you will
venture the loss of your souls in telling a lie to excuse you, or it may be
for the satisfying of a base lust one quarter of an hour, thou will venture the
eternal loss of a precious soul, more worth than ten thousand worlds.

Did you never go into the place where condemned persons were, and ask them
what they are there for? why, it may be some of them will say but for a small
matter, it may be the undue gaining of two or three shillings, and now my life
must go for it: So many lose their souls, even for trifles, for nothing, for a
base lust, which is worse than nothing; the consideration of which will make it
the more dreadful.

Seventhly, The loss of the soul will be very dreadful upon this
consideration, because many will lose their souls, that are very nigh to the
saving of their souls: I say, the nearer a man or woman does come to the saving
their souls, and yet lose them; the loss of the soul upon that consideration
will be the more dreadful to them; and it is thus with many that have many
good workings in and upon their hearts, so that they are in a very good
forwardness unto the everlasting salvation of their souls, and yet there does
come some lust that does drive them back again: The loss of the souls of
hypocrites therefore will be dreadful to consider: I that was in so fair a way
to salvation in the use of means, and content to leave so many evil ways, and
yet that I should have one that I would not leave, and for this have I lost my
soul; I that was contented to take up so many duties, and yet by my hearts
embracing of one sinful lust, to lose my soul; as Herod heard John Baptist
gladly, and he reformed many things, and yet he had one sin that he would
not part withal: Those that are the nearest the salvation of their souls, and
yet lost at last, this will be a great aggravation of the misery thereof.

An eighth aggravation of the loss of the soul, is this, The consideration that
they have lost their souls, and that so, as that they have nothing in lieu of
them; they shall not only lose their souls, but they shall even lose the thing
for which they did venture the loss of their souls: As for example, if a man
should have his heart so set upon a trifle, as to lose his whole estate for it,
and after he has lost his estate for it, he should lose that thing for which
he lost his estate too; this would aggravate the loss of his estate much more:
Just so, if you do loss your souls for the world, or for pleasure; if your
souls perish, I say ye shall both lose your souls, and that thing, be it what
it will, for which you ventured and lost your souls.

And thou shall have no more pleasure nor I content than those that did not
venture the loss of their souls for it.

The ninth aggravation of the loss of the soul, is, The shame that shall be
put upon those souls that shall be lost, that perish eternally: As when thy
acquaintance, thy neighbors that dwelt next unto thee, that knew thee, that
dwelt in the family with thee, that kept days of fast with thee, and went unto
the meetings with thee, when they shall be those that shall be with God for
ever eternally blessing and praising of him, and shall point thee out, as with
the finger, before God, the Angels, and blessed Saints, and say, Behold, this
is he that was an hypocrite, that sat under the same word, and that did
partake of the same means and ordinances as I did, Psalm 52 7.
and yet he has lost his soul: Lo this is the man that made not God his
stay. So all they that perish shall stand before men and Angels, and be
pointed at by them, saying, Lo this is the man, and lo this is the woman,
that made not God their strength, but did so love their sin, as that they would
not by any means be persuaded to part with it, but would rather venture the
loss of their souls, to enjoy their sins, and fulfill their lust, than part with
their sins to save their souls.

The tenth aggravation of the misery of a lost soul, is this, When they shall
see others taken up into the Kingdom of Heaven, who were as unlikely to be
saved as themselves, and they themselves shut out, and eternally lost: It may
be thou that art a carnal Master may see thy poor servant taken up to God,
and thou thy self shut out; or it may be the carnal Father or Mother may see
their child saved, and yet they themselves lost; Oh this will be a sad
aggravation of their loss. And thus you have heard the dreadful loss of the
soul, together with the aggravations thereof in these ten particulars. Now for
the Use.

Is it so, that the loss of the soul eternally is so dreadful a loss, as you
have heard it is? Oh then let every one here bless God for their souls, that
their souls are not thus lost. It might have been so long ere this time; when
such a kinsman of thine dyed, or thy fellow servants, or when such a neighbor
or acquaintance of thine dyed, if thou had but dyed when they dyed, thy soul,
it may be, had been eternally lost.

This I can assure you, that naturally you are all lost, and what makes the
difference between thy soul, and the condition of a lost soul, as you have
heard, but only the mere mercy of God? Oh therefore now bless God for his
mercy unto thee, that thy soul is not as yet a lost soul, and think thus with
thy self, Lord, if these things be true, and so dreadful to hear of, Oh then
what would be my misery if it should prove that I should be the person made
sensible thereof, by experiencing the misery I hear of, to be the miserable
condition of a lost soul?

The Scripture does say concerning the joy and happiness of the Saints, That
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what their happiness
shall be, that shall be saved. And the like may be said of the misery of the
souls that are eternally lost; and the Scripture does say, That if our Gospel
be hid, 2 Cor. 4.3.
it is hid to them that are lost. I beseech you therefore remember what has
been spoken concerning the condition of lo^t souls, and lay to heart what has
been spoken out of this Text, lest within a little time you feel what has been
spoken to be a truth, and so be forced to cry out, True it is, I heard such a
day out of such a text, what was the miserable condition of a soul eternally
lost, but now I find it by experience to be true, and the one half I now
feel, I could not then conceive: And know the reason, my Brethren, why we lay
the misery of lost souls thus before you, it is to this end, that none of you
might be thus lost: And it is a blessed thing for you to hear these things; for
how many are there that have lost their souls, which till they were thus lost,
never so much as heard any thing about the loss of their souls, which if they
had, who knows what might have been done by them for the saving of their souls?
Beloved, such a subject as this cannot be spoken unto you without trembling;
for certainly this subject will be much adding to the prevention of the loss,
or else it will mightily aggravate the loss of your souls, if ever they are
eternally lost; therefore all I have at present to counsel you to, is, to lay
these things to your hearts seriously, as also to bless God for your souls,
that as yet they are not in this dreadful eternally lost condition.

The Fifth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
So it should be here, whatever we lose, we are to be comforted in this,
that our souls are not gone and lost: It is a notable Scripture, in 1 Pet. 4.
verse. last. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. As
if the Apostle should say, you are like to meet with great sufferings, you may
likely be deprived of all you have, of your estates, and of all your comforts,
and may come to suffer much, yet commit the keeping of your souls to him in
well doing, as unto a faithful Creator: Why, they might have said, but what
shall become of other things? if storms, and tempests, and sufferings come,
what shall become of our estates? what shall become of our livelihoods, and of
our bodies? why says the Apostle, as for them, for your estates, for your
bodies, it may be they may perish; you are not so much to look after them, but
commit the keeping of your souls unto him, as unto a faithful Creator. The
Apostle here exhorts them what to do in times of sufferings, and by what he
does express, he does imply, that they should take no care for outward estate,
and body; it is enough that your souls are well, commit the keeping of your
souls to him, as unto a faithful Creator, we have enough if that be safe: You
know in time of danger, as fires, and other times, if a man has any precious
thing, he carries that presently to some special friend, and commits the
keeping of that to him; his writings and such things, wherein his estate is
most: So says the Apostle, in the time of public danger, Take care to commit
the keeping of your souls to him, as unto a faithful Creator, and you are well
enough. That is the first.

Secondly, If the loss of the soul be so dreadful a loss, Oh let us bless God
then for Jesus Christ, without whom all our souls had been eternally lost,
never a soul in the world but must have perished unto all eternity, had not
Jesus Christ come into the world to be the great Savior of souls; All the
Angels in Heaven, and men in the world could never have saved one soul; now
Christ saw this, and his bowels did even yearn toward so many thousands of
precious souls, and rather than they should perish, he was content to come and
make his own soul to be an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. the soul of Christ
was made an offering there, and what was that but for the saving of souls? we
may therefore, concerning Christ, well say, as the Elders, in Rev. 5.9. They
sang a new song, saying, Thou art worthy, etc. for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy blood. Oh thou art worthy! O blessed Savior! He
does not say what, but only thus, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof, for thou were slain, and have redeemed us to God: There
is infinite worthiness in Christ, and worthy he is of all the honor that we
are able possibly to bring to him, had we ten thousand times more strength
than we have to do it; For he was slain, and has redeemed us to God by his
blood. If there were a company of poor people upon the Sea, and in danger to be
lost, their own ship through stress of weather fallen to pieces, and they upon
a plank, and ready to be swallowed up of every wave, and there comes a ship
by, and saves their lives, Oh how would they be affected with such a mercy as
this! and bless God for his goodness, that such a ship should come by at such a
time; we had all been lost if this ship had not come by just at this time: So
when we read the Gospel, we read of Jesus Christ God-Man coming into the
world, and standing between the wrath of the Infinite God, and sinful souls,
let us then consider how infinitely we are bound to bless God for Jesus
Christ; for we were ready even all of us to be swallowed up into the
bottomless gulf of the wrath of the infinite God; the waves of Gods infinite
wrath, were ready to have covered over all mankind, only the Lord Jesus
Christ comes, and even leaps, as it were, into the very Ocean of Gods wrath,
into the very flames of the wrath and justice of God, to pluck out our souls,
and to save them: Bless we God then for Jesus Christ, considering that the
loss of souls is such a dreadful loss, and only saved by that great Savior
that is come into the world.

And then thirdly, If the loss of the soul be so dreadful, then it must needs
be a dreadful evil for any to have any hand in this loss, or to be any
furtherance of it: Take heed that thou have no hand at all in so great an evil
as this is; Oh how much better thou had never been born, than to have a hand
in so great an evil! we account those miserable creatures, that have a hand in
the loss of Kingdoms; to have a hand in the undoing of one soul is a greater
mischief, than to be the cause of the undoing of a whole Kingdom for their
outward estate: If one should be the cause of the ruin of a whole Kingdom
for their outward estate, you would say that certainly it had been better that
that man had never been born: Certainly thou that have a hand in the undoing of
any soul, thou were born to do a greater mischief than such a one; if any
friend of yours take a course whereby he undoes himself, and when the evil
consequence of his unwise courses appears, you are ready to say, Blessed be
God I had no hand in it. If people will damn their souls eternally, take heed
you have no hand in it; and if any of your children, friends, servants,
acquaintance, neighbors, should perish eternally, yet it will be a great
mercy if you have no hand in it: People may have a hand in the loss of other
men's souls many ways.

As by carelessness of the souls of those committed to their charge; they may
come to be lost by thy carelessness; by thy neglect their souls may perish; and
especially it concerns those that take the charge of souls, they had need look
to it, that those do not cry out against them in Hell, that it was through
their neglect that they are here now, and must lie here for ever? Oh the cry of
a soul against a man is a dreadful thing! perhaps the souls of some of your
children may be in Hell, crying out against you for the neglect of them, that
you regarded them not, you let them profane Sabbaths, you could hear them
swear, and rebuke them not, or but very slightly; you never instructed them in
the ways of God, and eternal life: you were the cause of the destruction of
their souls, by your wicked example; they saw their Parents do thus and thus,
hate goodness and good men; they saw them scorn at the Word, or neglect it, and
contemn it, and upon that they did so too, and now they are in Hell for it, and
cursing the time that ever they were born of such Parents: And many souls, no
question there are in Hell, cursing the time that ever they came into such a
wicked family, wherein they saw so much wickedness, wherein there was no
worshipping of God, nor no means to come to know God, and upon that they went
on securely in wickedness, and now are sunk down to eternal misery. -- You may
be the cause of the destruction of others souls, by drawing of them to sin;
when you shall be active to draw any one to the commission of any sin, thou
do what in thee lie to cast away that precious immortal soul; And have
never any of you had a hand in this? have you never been instruments to draw
others to some sin or other? now if you have, either these that you have
tempted are yet alive, or they are dead; if they be alive, know, that you are
bound in conscience to do now to the uttermost for the good of their souls; to
make it your great work, if it be possible, to do them as much good as ever
you did them hurt; for certainly Soul-satisfaction is required of men, as well
as Bodily-satisfaction: If you have wronged a man in his estate any way,
although it were seven, twenty years ago, if God comes to awaken your
consciences, it will not serve your turn to return and repent, that is, to be
very sorry that you have done it, and ask God forgiveness, but before you can
have peace, you must make satisfaction where you have wronged, if God enable
you: Now, does God stand so much upon that, that if one has but wronged a man
in his estate, that all the sorrow and repenting in the world will never bring
peace of conscience, without restitution, where there is ability? then
certainly, if one has wronged another in his soul, and has endangered the
damnation of that, by drawing of him to sin: It is not enough for thee that
thou see this thy sin, and thou art sorry for it, and thou will never seek to
draw others any more, no, but thou art bound, if such be alive, to go to them
if thou can, and to seek now to do them as much good for their souls, as thou
were a cause of evil; what if this soul should perish at last by this sin, that
thou were a cause to draw them to, thou had need look about thee while they
live, that if it be possible thou may make a satisfaction for that
soul-wrong that thou have done to them; and it may be such a one is dead, and
so dead, as for ought thou know he never did repent him of that sin; now
then see what a case thou art in: there is one drawn to a sin by thee, and now
he is in Hell for that sin that thou were the cause of; what a case have thou
brought thy self into now? Is it any otherwise like, but that thou must follow?
shall one be in Hell for a sin that thou were the cause of, and do thou
think always to escape? here is the dreadful estate that any man brings
himself to, when he draws others to sin: thou had need to look about thee,
and thy heart to be affected with that sin that has been punished with the
eternal damnation of those souls that thou have drawn to that sin. -- And not
only by tempting to sin, but by encouraging to sin, by dissuading from that
that is good: It may be some souls have been in a good forwardness to that
which is good, they have begun to inquire after the ways of God, but have
gotten into thy company, and thou have sought to take them off; and what, will
you be such fools as to believe every thing that is said, and you will be
melancholy and mad, and who are they but a company of simple people that do
thus and thus? and thus thou have been a means to hinder the good work of God
in others, and to draw them from the good way that they were a beginning to set
their feet in, and now they begin to be out of love with the good ways of
God, and thou have been the cause of it: Now, if these souls perish, and it may
be some of them are in Hell already; truly, if a man's heart we^e as hard as
any Iron, or Steel in the world, one would think that such a meditation as this
should break his heart in pieces: That I know nothing to the contrary but some
may be in Hell for my cause. -- And so many other ways we might name, how a
man might have his hand in the loss of the souls of others; what way soever
thou have a hand in the sin of others, ^or keeping of others from good, so many
ways thou may have a hand in the loss of their souls: But I intend not to
stand upon this point, only consider of it, and the Lord strike the hearts of
those that are guilty in this kind; But the main use that I would spend the
chief part of the time in, is this,



The several ways by which men come to lose their Souls.

As first, Some there are that lose their souls by wandering up and down in
darkness all the days of their lives, by wandering in the ways of sin, in the
dark, and so are a continual prey unto the Devil: how many, yea and in many
places, the generality of people, they go on continually in blindness and
darkness, in the vanity of their conversations, knowing nothing of God, nor of
their own souls; and the first time that the eyes of their souls are opened and
enlightened, it is when they are irrecoverably undone; yea the first thing that
many souls do ever understand concerning themselves, it is this, I am lost and
undone for ever; it is so with many, certainly they know nothing about their
own souls, nor about God, till they come to know this, I am cast away from God,
and have lost my soul for ever.

Secondly, Others, they lose their souls by pawning of them away; by pawning of
them, what is that you will say? why, you know what it is to pawn a thing, when
you come and receive from a Broker such a thing, you lay something else to pawn
for it, and upon this condition, that within such a time you bring them such a
thing that you bargain for, and if you do not bring it against that time, then
you lose your pawn: Thus many pawn away their souls; when there is a temptation
to any sin, and they have a mind to it, now upon the commission of this sin
thou do lay thy soul to pawn to the Devil, only upon this condition, that if
thou do repent and believe before God cuts thee off, then thou shall have thy
soul again; upon these terms most people sin, and in case thou do not bring
repentance and belief in Christ, thy soul is gone: I appeal to you, there is a
temptation to sin, you know it is a sin, and there is a great deal of danger in
it, well but you have a mind to it, and you will needs have it, now you will
acknowledge this, indeed if I do not repent, then I shall be damned, but
before I die, I hope to repent, and so I hope that my soul shall not perish;
that is as much as to say, I will lay my soul in pawn, and if I can bring
repentance before I die, I will have my soul again, but if I do not, then my
soul is gone; thus upon the commission of every sin, thou do lay thy soul to
pawn, the devil has it upon such terms as these: Now how many thousands have
lost this their pawn, they have not brought Faith and Repentance within their
time before they died, and so the Devil has kept the pawn, and will keep it
for ever: And it is more dangerous the laying of such a pawn, than the ordinary
laying of pawns to Brokers.

First, There is no such pawn that possibly can be laid as this, the soul of a
man: Men and women that have any wisdom, they will not lay pawns of those
things that are precious to them, Oh it goes to their hearts to think, what
must I lay this to pawn! I thought I should never have lived to the day to lay
such a thing to pawn, I but when thou come to lay thy soul to pawn, thou
layest a more precious thing than all the world is.

Secondly, When thou layest a thing to pawn, thou do prefix thy own time for
the redeeming of it again, perhaps two, three, four months before thou bring
that, that is bargained for; but when thou layest thy soul to pawn, thou can
not set any time: Luke 12.20
What do thou know, oh Fool, but that this night thy soul may be taken away
from thee?

Thirdly, Yea and further, When you lay such a thing to pawn, you make a
bargain for the bringing of somewhat to redeem it that you have in your own
power, or make account that you shall have in your own power to bring, you will
not make the bargain to bring such a thing that you are sure you shall not have
in your own power: Now, when you lay your souls to pawn, you lay them to pawn
for that that you have not in your power, nor all the creatures in Heaven and
Earth cannot help you to in your need, and that is Faith and Repentance: All
the Angels in Heaven, nor men in the world cannot help you to it; it is only
in the hands of God, of the Infinite blessed God, against whom you sin, and
whom you provoke, and yet how many do thus pawn their souls? and no marvel
though men lose their fouls, because they pawn them thus foolishly and
wretchedly; and that is the second way of men's losing of their souls.

Thirdly, Men lose their souls by wounding them, they give them deadly wounds,
upon which the souls of most do perish.

Quest. Wounding, how you will say?

Answ. By that I mean the commission of sins against conscience; to commit a
known sin, and a wilful sin, oh this gives a wide gash in the soul, a most
fearful wound! every sin against conscience gives a wound that requires a salve
to heal it, that is more worth than a thousand worlds; the sins against
conscience, against light, against knowledge, they are deep wounds unto the
souls of men; and it is not usual for such wounds to be healed, for they do
not only strike at the life of the soul, but they harden the heart of the
sinner exceedingly, and keep off the means that might do the soul good; thou
go abroad into company, and there thou committest a sin against thy
conscience, oh thou have given a gash to that precious soul of thine, thou have
given it a deep wound, and except thou look to it, and that presently, thy
soul perhaps may die for ever! A man that has received a deep wound, he
presently sends for the Chyrurgion, and if it bleeds well, he hopes the cure
is more hopeful: so when thou have committed sin, if indeed it bleed, that is,
if thy soul presently be sensible of it, and affected with it, and mourn and
lament, and so seek after the Chyrurgion, there may be hopes; but men and
women do wound their own souls by wilful sins, sins against their consciences,
and yet they are not sensible of them, they do not so much as bleed, but they
lie in the very open Air, as it were, and are not bound up at all, Ah! thousand
thousands there are that die and perish this way.

Fourthly, And then a fourth sort there are that lose their souls by being
gulled of them, by being deceived of them; Satan persuades them they are in a
good condition, that all is well with them, and they need not fear, what need
they to trouble themselves, these are but the melancholy thoughts of such and
such kind of people; there is no such great matters required in sorrow for sin,
and it is but a Lord have mercy upon us, and but, a being in Christ, and hoping
in Gods mercy, and the like; and thus by such kind of delusions as these are,
many souls are gulled and deceived by the Devil, and so perish for ever. They
are like unto Jonas, that was asleep, and awakened in the midst of a dreadful
tempest: so certainly these souls, when they come to know themselves, and to
be awakened, it will be in the dreadful tempest of Gods wrath: As Sampson;
the Philistims are upon thee, when he lay in Delilahs bosom; so there will
be that dreadful noise one day to these souls, the wrath of God, and the curse
of the Law is upon thee, that must lie upon thee; Oh the dreadful sorrow there
will be when the soul shall see, oh I am deluded and gulled! many of you are
vexed extremely, when you are gulled of any little part of your estates, but to
be deluded and gulled of your souls, so as they must be lost for ever, this
will be extreme horror another day.

Fifthly, A fifth way of losing our souls, is, by selling of them away; selling
of them away, you will say, what do I mean by that? It is said of Alexander the
sixth, that was Pope, he sold his soul to the Devil for the Popedom, there
was an express contract between the Devil and him, that if in such a year he
should come to be Pope, the Devil should have his soul: But now, there is a
twofold selling of our souls to the Devil, besides such a kind of contract, as
when the Devil shall appear in a bodily shape, and so people sell their souls
to him.

First, As first, When men seek advantage to themselves by any unlawful means,
seek the gain of the world, or any profits or pleasures, by cheating,
couzening, wronging, swearing, or forswearing; seek I say to gain any thing in
such a way; there is such a thing that thou would have, and that thou may
have, if thou will be false in thy books, in thy reckonings, or forswear thy
self for gain, I say thou do as truly sell thy soul for the getting of that
gain, as ever Conjurer did, that did contract face to face with the Devil: I
would have such a gain, why, says the Devil, (though thou do not see him)
then thou must lie, thou must cousen, thou must swear, and forswear, I will do
it, says the soul; and thus thou do many times sell thy soul to the Devil:
You that are chap-men, if one should come and offer you a little matter for a
commodity that is of price, you have such a piece of ware in your shops that is
worth forty shillings, and one comes and offers you t^o-pence for it, why you
rise in disdain against it, what: offer me twopence for that which is worth
forty shillings; oh now that your hearts would rise in disdain when the Devil
comes to buy your souls! you should rise in disdain, what, shall I venture the
selling of this soul of mine, that is more worth than ten thousand worlds, for
such a poor gain as this is? and yet many of you do.

Secondly, And then there is a second way of a man's selling of his soul, and
that is when a man shall resolutely give up himself to all manner of
wickedness: Thus it is said of Ahab, 1 King. 21.20. Ahab sold himself to work
wickedness, that is, Ahab in a resolute way was set upon any manner of
wickedness that might serve his own turn: When a man shall be set upon this,
that what ever way of wickedness may be subservient to the attaining of such
and such designs that I have, I will venture upon it, I say, this man sells his
soul in this case to the Devil, Ahab sold himself to work wickedness.

Sixthly, And then a sixth way of men's losing their souls, it is by being
poisoned, their souls are poisoned, and so they come to be lost: now the
poison of the soul it is either wicked company, or wicked errors; either of
those two.

By keeping of wicked company, thou keep in an infectious Air, thou go
from home sometimes and meetest with such wicked company, thou gettest thy
bain, thy poison there, and poison works diverse ways; sometimes it will cause
one to swell mightily; how many, when they come from their wicked company, come
home with such swelling hearts, in such an outrageous way, swearing, and
fighting, and blaspheming, and scorning, and contemning at all ways of
godliness; now these have been abroad, and have gotten poison, and so they
shall, and are ready to burst with it.

Now there are other kinds of poison that will not work till a quarter or half
a year after: A man may go into company, and get his bain, and yet not work
till a quarter of a year after: As I remember a Philosopher seeing two women
that were wicked, talk together, Oh! says he, now the Viper is taking of
poison from the Asp, and indeed it seemed to be a Proverb in Tertullians time,
for I meet with such a proverbial speech in him, as that the Viper borrows
poison from the Asp: so when wicked company are infusing wicked principles,
here is the poison gotten from the Asp; wicked company perhaps they come with
their sweet cups, and perhaps thou drinkest down the Wine merrily, but together
with the Wine, wicked things are infused into thy spirit that are poisonful:
When thou art in wicked company, and hear the ways of God spoken against,
and hear the Saints of God railed on, and the good Word of God spoken
against, and this thou drawest into thy heart, oh there is poison goes down in
this cup; it is like to poison thy soul, and to be thy undoing for ever.

And then there is another kind of venom, and that is wicked errors and
heresies, when men drink off the Cup of Fornication, as when they are taken
with the great errors of Popery, this poisons the soul; that place in the
Thessalonians is a most dreadful place, even for that very error, 2
Thessalonians 2.11. Speaking of Antichrist, that he should come with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; and for this cause God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. This is a most dreadful Text against those that shall drink
in the errors of Popery.

But you will say, that they are learned men, and have a great deal of show of
truth, with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness: But how art thou deceived
by them? because thou receivest not the love of the truth, that thou might
be saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions to believe a
lie, that they might be damned; to that end God sends strong delusions, that
men might believe those errors, and drink in that cup of fornications, that
they might be damned for ever.

If it were but only that one error drunk down in the grosness of it, that
is, that the righteousness that I must tender up to God for satisfaction to
divine Justice, and for my eternal salvation, must be mine own righteousness,
mine own works: Here is enough to poison a soul to eternal perdition; and many
other ways there may be that may endanger the soul extremely, and very ill
consequences may be gathered from good principles: As for that principle of
our Justification by free Grace in Christ; That it is only by Christ that we
are justified, that principle is exceeding good, but from thence such dangerous
venomous consequences may be drawn, as may extremely endanger; and I make no
question do invenome and poison many thousand souls, upon which they draw
consequences for looseness, and against humiliation for sin, and against
obedience to the Law, as by Moses. All the principles and errors that are
against the strict ways of God, that tend to any looseness, certainly they are
invenoming principles: Oh take heed of any doctrine, of any conceits, of any
opinions that do any way tend to looseness! they will certainly poison and
invenome your souls, so that your very errors may be enough to damn you
eternally. Many lose their souls by poisoning.

Seventhly, And there are many that lose their souls by venturing of them;
there are many ventures upon which many come to lose their souls; there are
four cases wherein a man may lose his soul by venturing of it.

First, As first by rashness, men that are inconsiderate and rash in their
ways, that will suddenly fall upon things before they examine them, that
rashness and suddenness of thine to fall upon things before thou do examine
them, and to go on in a rash way the most part of thy life, as many do; this
indangers the loss of thy soul.

Secondly, And others venture the loss of their souls, by doing things that
are doubtful, that their consciences mis-give them in, and tell them, Oh this
is not right, I doubt I sin against God in this, and yet they will put on and
venture, before they satisfy their doubts, but take heed of doing any thing
with a doubtful conscience, for you know what the Scripture says, in the 14.
of the Romans, the latter end; Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. If thou
doubtest, thou must not venture to do a thing, till thou have examined thy
doubt, and there see upon what ground thy doubt is built, for if thou will
presume to do a thing doubtfully, it may cost thee thy life.

Thirdly, A third venture, it is to venture upon Gods patience; why, the Lord
is a patient God, and he has spared me so many years; all this while I have
been spared, and have done well enough, why may not I hope that God will spare
me still, and be patient with me still? how many wretched sinful creatures
venture upon this? they perhaps have been brought up in wickedness and
profaneness; God has been patient toward them, and yet they can to their
sin again and again, and live very merry lives: Now all this time thou live
upon the mere patience of God, and thou think because God has been patient
thus long, therefore he will be so still: We may indeed venture upon the
Grace of God in his Son, as well for sanctification as for pardon, but not to
venture either upon patience, or any thing else, so as to continue in our sins,
though God has been patient thus long, thou do not know but that upon thy
next venture the cord of mercy may crack, and thou may sink and perish
eternally; that may befall thee in one day, that has not befallen thee all thy
life before; take heed my brethren of venturing upon patience, for that has
not a word of promise to strengthen it unto thee: Indeed Faith is a kind of
venture, but that ventures upon the Word of God, and the Promise of God, and it
is good venturing upon that, but when thou venturest upon patience, thou have
no word to assure thee that patience will hold; Thou have no word to make this
good unto thee, that though God has been patient so many years, therefore he
will be so still.

Fourthly, And then a fourth venture that men make, it is to venture upon their
own lives; they are young, and they hope they may live many years yet, I know
others they live to be old men, and why may not I live and have my pleasure as
well as they? and thus they venture; Oh but what if the thread of thy life
should be snapt asunder, what will become of thee then! will thou venture thy
eternal miscarrying upon such a brittle and frail thing as thy life is? Oh it
is a desperate venture, when men and women will venture thus! that if God take
away my life now, certainly I must perish for ever. -- Now I put it unto every
soul in this place, let this be the case now, do you examine what you think in
your consciences your conditions would be, if you should hear a voice from
Heaven saying unto you presently, this soul shall have no more time to make
provision for eternity; I am persuaded that in such a place as this is there
cannot but be many that would in their own consciences say, If God should take
away my life now, I fear I should be lost for ever; I doubt, if we could go
from one to another, and lay our ears to the bosoms of men, and could but hear
what the consciences of men say upon this that is now put to them, that thou
should dye in the condition in which now thou art, and what repentance thou
have had, be it good or bad, that thy soul must depend upon, if it be not
right, thy soul must perish; I say, I fear that upon such a message from
Heaven, many a man's and woman's heart would ask within them, and their
consciences would tell them, I am afraid I should be lost for ever: Oh for
thee to be content to be in such a condition any one moment, that if thou
should dye that moment, thy soul should be damned, I say thou art a bold
and presumptuous sinner, a most desperate wretch.

The Sixth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
8. MAny do lose their souls by starving of them, that is, such as neglect the
Word, that is the food of the soul, the Word of God, upon which the soul should
feed, as the body does upon any food, that neglect Gods Ordinances, that care
not to come to the Word, either to feed upon it privately or publicly, that
think that there is no need of the Word: but if they can procure food for their
bodies, and make shift to get up a living, and that that may satisfy the
flesh, there is all that they look after; but for the feeding of their souls by
the Word, it is that that is little minded or regarded by thousands: Oh how
many that belong to this Congregation perish eternally, even that way, by
starving! We pity people that we see ready to die that are starved; if we
hear but of a prisoner starved, even the poorest body, we account it an in
humane thing in those that knew it, and did not relieve them; to see a beast to
die by starving, we account it a cruel thing; and it can scarce consist with
the heart of a man to see, I say, so much as a dog to perish by way of
starving: Now to see immortal souls, thousands of them to die and perish, and
drop down to Hell as thick as may be, and that for want of the food of their
souls, merely for starving, it should be an object of pity and commiseration.
Now because we are sensual, we are only affected with such things as concern
the body immediately; but for the soul, how many care not what kind of Ministry
they live under? Oh the curse of God is upon them! as we read of in Psalm.
106.15. He gave them their requests, and sent leanness into their souls; he
gave them their requests, that is, he gave them Quails; They lusted in the
wilde^ness, and tempted God in the desert; and he gave them Quails to feed
upon, but sent leanness into their souls; we may apply it thus, unto those
that seek after nothing else but Quails, but that that may feed the flesh: Oh
the curse of God is upon their souls! there is leanness there, and they are
starved there even unto death; whereas those that do but know what the
sweetness of the Word is to their souls, and have fed upon the Word, they had
rather feed upon brown bread and water all their days, so be it they may have
the Word, than have the greatest delicacies in the world without the Word. I
put this to your consciences, answer it as in the presence of God; if this
should be put to you, can you say as in Gods presence that sees and searches
the hearts of men, that upon the real sweetness and good your souls have found
in the Word, that if God should put it to your choice, either to live with
bread and water, and have the Word, or to live with all the delicacies in the
world without the Word, you would a thousand thousand times sooner choose to
live with the Word with bread and water, rather than without the Word with all
delicacies. Luther I remember he has an expression, That he had rather be
in Hell with the Word, than in Paradise without the Word.

Ninthly, In the ninth place there is another sort that lose their souls by
surfeiting of them; their souls do surfeit with the cares and pleasures of this
life, they glut their hearts with the delights, and pleasures, and cares of
this world, until their souls get a surfeit and die of them; giving liberty
unto their hearts to delight themselves in all outward contentments, especially
if they be lawful: Now a man or woman may surfeit their souls, Licitis perimus
omnes.
and undo themselves by lawful things; as a man may not only destroy his life
by eating poison, but by a surfeit of good meat, though the meat be good, yet
he may surfeit upon it: so, though the things of this world, the cares, and
the pleasures may be (as some things are) in themselves lawful, yet by an
inordinate and immoderate letting out thy heart to lawful things, thou may
surfeit thy soul, and it may die of that surfeit: Many men think themselves out
of danger, if the things that their hearts are upon, be in themselves lawful,
they are not swearers, and whoremasters, and drunkards, and thieves, as others
are, and therefore they think their souls may be saved: I say, thou may
busy thy heart only about that which is in its self lawful, and yet thy soul
may take a surfeit and perish eternally.

Tenthly and lastly; Many lose their souls by forfeiting them, and that by
these two ways.

First, A man forfeits his soul, as men do their Coppyholds, by not tendering
that homage to their Lord that is due, by which they hold their Lands, and so
their Lands come to be forfeit; so do thou; God has given thee thy precious
soul, more worth than all the world, and thou hold it of God, but so as thou
must tender up to this Lord that homage that is due to him, that is, thou must
worship God: When we come to worship God, this is that we do, we come to
tender up that homage that we acknowledge to be due to God for these souls of
ours that he has given unto us, that is our worship; that is the nature of
worship, The tendering up something by way of homage, to acknowledge that due
respect we owe unto God, as that Lord that has the absolute dispose of us;
now by neglect of worshipping of God, of tendering up his homage, thou
forfeitest thy soul, and indangerest thy self to perish eternally; and oh how
few people regard any such worship of God! and though they do the thing that
God requires, as praying, and coming to hear the Word, yet do they not do it as
in a way of tendering up homage to that God, upon whom they do only depend;
but now this is that which God requires of us, or otherwise our souls are
forfeited.

Secondly, Men forfeit their souls by breaking covenant with God; however there
may be some that God will not take the forfeiture of, yet certainly upon thy
breach of covenant with God thy soul is forfeited: Thou do engage thy soul to
God every time thou do enter into covenant with him; It may be said of any
man or woman that enters into covenant with God, who is this that has engaged
his soul to God? now thou engaging and binding thy soul to God in thy covenant,
upon thy breach of it, dealing falsely, thou do forfeit thy soul: And by
these several ways souls are lost; and oh how many thousand souls perish with
such ways and manners as these are! and therefore seeing there are such
several ways of the loss of souls, let not people think themselves safe,
though they do not go in some ways whereby they may come to lose their souls;
for there are very many ways whereby thou may lose thy soul, and so
miscarry to eternity.

what if I should now die? I have not made my Will, and my estate would go such
and such ways, as I would not have it, it would be squandered away, it would
be spent in Suits of Law; I, but rather let thy thoughts run out thus, what if
I should now die, would not my soul be lost and perish for ever? Now, though I
have said we cannot set forth such a man or woman, and conclude that their
souls shall certainly be lost, because we know not what God may do hereafter,
but we may say this, that such a man or woman's soul in the condition it is, If
God do no more for it than he has yet done, that then it will certainly be
lost: Indeed a man or woman may come to know, and certainly to conclude that
they are elected, but none can come to such a conclusion, to know certainly
that they are Reprobates: the vilest wretch that is upon the face of the earth,
he has not ground sufficient to conclude against himself that he is a
Reprobate, and that his soul shall for ever be lost; and therefore surely we
cannot conclude against another, if not against our selves. -- Well, but who
are they, that if God should work no otherwise upon them than he has done,
that then their souls would be lost?

First, In the first place, That soul to whom God has not made known, and
convinced it of the dangerous natural condition in which it is, if such a soul
should depart from the body, it would be lost. -- Only let me premise these
two cautions; I do not speak of Infants, but of those that are come to years,
and that live under means: -- And I speak of Gods ordinary way; we will not
limit God, what he may do in extraordinary ways, but in an ordinary course
and way of Gods dealings with the children of men, that he lets live to come
to years, and be under means, these following rules will discover who they are
that at the present are in a lost condition; I say, such to whom God has never
revealed and convinced them of the evil of their natural condition, in which
they were born, in which they are, if God should let them so die, and make
known no more to them than he has, such a soul would be lost, and that upon
this ground, because that without Faith it must be lost, that is acknowledged
by all; he that believes not shall be damned, is condemned already. Now,
there cannot be Faith in a Savior to save the soul, but it must needs imply
that I know what a dangerous condition I am in by sin. For there is even a
contradiction implied in my believing in Christ, as a Savior, and yet I not
convinced of the damnable condition that I am in without this Christ.

Secondly, That soul that yet has not made it to be its great care, above all
outward things in this world, to save its self, that soul, if it should now
depart from the body, would be lost: I say, if God has not first convinced
thee, and made thee sensible of that damnable condition in which thou art in
thy self, and secondly, if he has not taken off thy heart from the creature,
from the things that are here below, and made it to be the great care of thy
soul, for to get it to be saved, has not made thee to be solicitous about
the work of saving of thy soul; such a soul as this is, I say, if it should now
depart, would be lost, for God does not save souls, but by manifesting himself
to them; Phil. 2.12.
he would have all to work out their salvation with fear and trembling.
Certainly, though the principle of our salvation be without us, yet the Lord
that made us without our selves, will never save us without our selves;
whosoever God does save, he does make them solicitous and careful about the
work of the salvation of their souls: Now, if thy conscience tells thee that to
this day thy care has been about many vanities, but as for having thy heart
taken up with the saving thy soul, thou know not what belongs to this; I
say, if God should work no more in thee, than he has done, if thou should
now die, thou would be lost.

Thirdly, That soul to whom the Lord has not revealed the glory of the
mysteries of the Gospel, that yet has the Gospel kept hidden from it, that
does not see into the glorious work of God in the covenant of Grace, in those
great counsels of God, and great things that God has done for the salvation of
mankind in Jesus Christ, that soul would be lost, if it should now go from the
body, and no further work of God upon it: That Scripture that diverse times you
have heard named, is proof sufficient for it; If our Gospel be hidden, it is
hidden to those that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Now certainly, my brethren, if God
has revealed to your souls the glorious things of the Gospel, they cannot but
be taking things to you, they cannot but cause much stirring, much activeness,
mighty workings in your souls: when once the glorious light of the Gospel comes
into a soul, I say, it cannot but cause mighty stirrings and workings in such a
soul. When I see people sit deadly and dully under the means of Grace, under
the preaching of the glorious things of the Gospel, I cannot but think with my
self, Lord, do these people know what Jesus Christ is? and understand what the
great things are that God has done for the salvation of mankind? certainly
did they but know the wonderful and strange works of God about the salvation of
the souls of the children of men, their hearts could not but stir within them,
and work in another manner than yet they have done.

Fourthly, That soul that has no other righteousness to tender ^p unto God but
its own righteousness, if now it should depart, would be lost eternally:
Whatever man or woman it be that have lived the most unblameable in his life
and conversation, that has been the most righteous, that no man could be able
to blame him for any thing, yet I say, if this man or woman has no other
righteousness to tender up unto God but his own, certainly this soul would be
a lost soul for ever; the truth is, even the soul of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
the souls of all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, all of them would
be lost eternally, had they no other righteousness to tender up to God but
their own, much more those who have only a Civil righteousness, and a mere
natural righteousness, such righteousness as is attainable by the very light of
nature, such a righteousness as St. Paul speaks on, in the 3. of the
Philippians, that he lived unblameably, how he was a Pharisee, and he
accounted that righteousness of his conversation, to be gain, yet afterward,
when Christ was revealed to him, he accounted it but loss, for he saw that it
would endanger the loss of his soul eternally, the resting upon that.

Quest. You will say, the soul that has no other righteousness but his own to
tender up to God, is that soul lost? why, what other righteousness is there
besides that which is a man's own?

Answ. To that I answer, There is a supernatural righteousness, the
righteousness of a Mediator, God-Man, that is come into the world to stand
between lost souls, and an infinite provoked God; and that is made over to the
soul by Faith, and that soul that is saved, by the hand of Faith, does tender
up the righteousness of that Mediator, God-Man, for the satisfaction of
infinite divine Justice, and the appeasing of infinite wrath, and that is the
soul that is saved: but that soul that is not acquainted with such a
righteousness, that has not such a righteousness made over to it by Faith, the
righteousness of the Son of God, the righteousness that is by Faith in Christ,
that soul, if it should now depart from the body, and the Lord work no
otherwise upon it, than he has yet done, certainly he would be a lost soul;
and that is the fourth evidence of a soul that would presently be lost, if it
should now depart from the body.

Fifthly, A fifth evidence is this, That soul that God has not made (in some
measure at least) to feel the weight and burden of sin, discovered sin unto it
as a greater burden than all burdens whatsoever, if such a soul should depart,
it would prove to be lost, and that upon this Reason.

Because without repentance a soul must needs be lost, Except ye repent, Luk
13.3.
ye shall all likewise perish, says Christ. Now repentance cannot stand with
feeling sin light, much less with joy in sin: Repentance, whether before Faith
or after, we will not now speak of, whether a Legal repentance, or an
Evangelical repentance, yet it must be such a repentance as must be
apprehensive and sensible of sin, as a greater evil than all the evils that it
is liable to here in the world; It must feel sin, as it is against God, feel
sin, as sin, so as to be a burden to it (the measure of it, how far, and how
weighty sin should be, we do not now stand upon) but that sin should be
found a great burden, yea an intolerable burden, so that were it not for an
infinite Mediator, the soul could not stand under the burden, that is
necessary in the work of repentance, and so the soul to come to sorrow for sin,
as sin; and this is the repentance which is unto life, which cannot be except
the soul does feel in some measure the weight and burden of sin.

Sixthly, Again, that man or woman that walks after the flesh, in a course of
sin, to give satisfaction and contentment unto the flesh, that makes it to be
the great care and endeavor of it for to satisfy the flesh, such of you,
whose consciences tell you, that the contentment of your hearts is some fleshly
thing, and that in the course of your lives you walk after the flesh, certainly
if you should now die, your souls would be lost; and that is clear out of Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Therefore those that do not walk after
the spirit, but after the flesh, there is condemnation unto them at the
present; O! if men had but enlightened and stirring consciences, how easy
would it be for men and women to see themselves in a restless condition, and
to conclude, that if these things be the truths of God, then I am in such a
condition, and though I do not know what God may work for time to come, yet if
I should now die, my soul would be lost eternally; and so that other place, in
Romans 8. They that live after the flesh shall die; that is, perish eternally; if
your hearts be after the flesh, after fleshly things, and they are the things
that you mind, and if you would speak as in the presence of God, you cannot
but acknowledge that the things of the flesh, are the things that do take up
your hearts, that are the adequate objects of your spirits, and you think your
great good and contentment lies in them; so that if so be you might but live
always in this world, and have those contentments to the flesh, as you desire,
you would care for nothing else, but your hearts would be fully satisfied;
this is living after the flesh; now the Scripture tells us clearly, that those
that live after the flesh thus, shall die. It is your great care that the flesh
be satisfied, and it is Gods threat, that when you make it thus your great
care to satisfy the flesh, that you shall die, so that this is a perishing
condition unto you.

Seventhly, Yea further, what soul soever is but under the dominion of any one
lust, that soul, if it should now depart, would certainly be lost: Not only
such as live in all kind of sins, that the constant course of their lives is in
every kind of sin; but if there be but any one reigning, ruling sin, if there
be but any one sinful way that God has convinced thy conscience of to be a
sin, and yet because of gain, or delight, or pleasure, or honors, or respects,
thou do go on in a constant course, and way, and practice of that sin, though
it be but one sin, so that thou art a slave to any one lust, certainly this
soul of thine, if God works no ootherwise upon it, than yet he has done, will
certainly be lost; and that is clear out of Romans 6.14. For sin shall not have
dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under grace. I would
reason from this Scripture, thus, what soul soever is not under grace, under
the covenant of grace, and under the mercy that there is in that covenant, that
soul, if now it should depart, must perish eternally; but whosoever is under
the dominion of any one sin, is not under grace; for the Scripture plainly
says, That sin shall not have dominion over us, if we be under grace: If our
souls be in such an estate, as they be under the grace of the Gospel, then
there must not any one sin have dominion over them; there may some sin dwell
there, but not reign there: there is a great deal of difference between sins
being in the soul, and ruling over the soul.

Quest. You will say then, What is it for sin to have dominion?

Answ. When sin shall set up a kind of Throne in the soul, and give Laws as a
King, and thou shall obey: It is one thing for an enemy to come with violence
and take possession, and hurry one on to do that one would not do, and another
thing to be subject, and to yield to the laws and commandments of sin. Now
sin has dominion when it is as a King upon his Throne, that thou ye^ldest
subjection unto it, and for the satisfying of thine own lusts, thou art willing
that this sin should rule over thee: Now that you may know a little further for
the meaning of this; sin and Jesus Christ cannot have dominion both together:
Then thus far we may go safely, that except Jesus Christ has dominion over
you, then sin has: But how shall I know whether Christ has dominion? I will
but appeal to you in this plain and familiar kind of expressing of my self;
can thou say as in the presence of God that sees and searchest thy heart, O
Lord, thou know that I have given up my heart to the Rule of Jesus Christ? I
would put this to every soul here present, and I beseech you weigh it, for we
are speaking of matters of life and death, of salvation and damnation; now
therefore I put this unto you, and think of it, can thou appeal to God in the
sincerity of thy heart, and say, Lord, thou art the seer and searcher of all
hearts, and thou know, that though I have many weaknesses and infirmities,
and am often overcome by temptation, yet thou know that I have given up my
heart to the obedience of Jesus Christ, and I do give it up, and it is that
that my soul desires above all things, that Jesus Christ may rule in it, that
Christ may have dominion, that his Laws may be set up, and if I knew any more
of the mind of Jesus Christ, whatsoever it cost me, thou that know all
things, know I would submit unto it, and if there be any thing that is
against the mind of Jesus Christ, if it be but known to me, thou know that
my heart is against it, and I would rather than a world that I were delivered
from the power of it; can thou speak thus as in the presence of God? and
certainly a Christian, though a weak Christian, can appeal to God in the
sincerity of it, and is able to venture its self upon such an appeal to God.
And if there be not this dominion of Jesus Christ, then there is the dominion
of sin, and then thou art not under grace; therefore if God does not more in
thy soul than he has done, thou shall perish for ever; and that man or woman
that can sleep quietly so, has a strange pillow to sleep upon. It is reported
of Augustus Caesar, that hearing of a Gentleman that was much in debt, he sent
to buy his pillow, saying, Surely there is a great deal of virtue in that
pillow, that such a man could sleep on, who was so much in debt: Truly I may
say so, it is a strange kind of pillow that men can sleep upon, who are in
such a condition, that if God do no more for, than he has done, would
certainly perish.

Eighthly, But further, That man or woman that has not yet had such a change
wrought by the power of the Spirit of God, as is a new birth, a resurrection
from death, a new creation, that soul, if it now depart, would certainly
perish. Certainly every one of you, as you come into the world, as you are by
nature, your souls are in a lost estate, and in such a lost estate, as except
the Lord make such a change in your heart, as is a new birth, by which you come
to be born again; as is a new resurrection, by which you come to be raised
from the dead; as is a new creation, by which you come to be a new Creature;
certainly you perish; till this be wrought in your hearts by the power of the
Spirit, you are in a perishing condition; there is nothing more plain than this
in Scripture: You know what Christ says to Nicodemus, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, except a man be born again, John 3.3.
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; Therefore it is not enough that it may be
thou live somewhat better than heretofore thou have done; It may be when
thou were a young man, thou were wanton, or unclean, and profane, and abroad
in the fields, and in wicked houses on the Lords day, I but now thou have more
wisdom and understanding, and now thou do not so, this is well, and good,
and this is to be encouraged; I but what is this to such a mighty change as to
be born again? If so be that your bodies had no other kind of soul than that
that is of sense, and afterward a rational soul should be put into it, what a
mighty change would there be in that body? before they could only see, and
hear, and feel, but now having a rational soul, they can understand, understand
reason, understand the ways of men; this is a mighty change; and truly, there
is as mighty a change when God puts a new life into the soul, and does
regenerate it, making it partaker of the divine Nature, and even to come to
live the life of God, according as the Scripture phrase is: Now this must be
in every soul that must be saved, and if the time be not come, that this
regeneration is wrought, then certainly thy soul is yet in a perishing
condition, God knows only what he does intend to do hereafter, but for the
present, thy soul, I say, is in a perishing condition: The first work that God
made (that is, the work of Creation) by sin was quite spoiled; Now Jesus Christ
the Son of God, that is his honor and his work to rear up a new world, and
that is a better world a great deal than the former world was; and the special
creatures of this world they are his Saints, and the new Creation in their
hearts; now this is the condition of a converted soul, it is made a new
Creature, All old things are done away. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Thou that live in thine old ways, and art altogether for thine old
customs, and what shall thou do contrary now to what thy Forefathers did, and
thou thy self have done all thy life time? and the like; oh this is a dangerous
kind of reasoning! why, thou must be a new Creature, and all things are to
become new in thy soul; thou must know; that the Old Man is dead in thee, and
that the New Creature is reared up in thee, or else thou can not know, that
if thy soul should this night depart, but that thou should be an undone
Creature for ever.

Yea, Shall I yet say further, because it is a point of a wonderful consequence
for men and women to put themselves to it; I fear that there is many men and
women here, that yet all their lives time have not put this question to
themselves, What are the terms betvveen God and me? why, I hope that God
will work grace in me; I but what has God done? is it so wrought at this
present, that if I were this moment to die, I were in a safe condition, and the
hazard of my miscarrying to all eternity were over? A man may joyfully go
through all conditions in this world, if he were able to say, well, whatever
befall me in this world, yet my condition is such, that I know the hazard of
my miscarrying for ever, blessed be God that is over: Oh that people would but
put this question to themselves, In what estate am I now it, if I were to die
this instant?

Ninthly, Wherefore then another thing is this, That soul that yet has not
gone beyond those that the Scripture does brand and note for Hypocrites, or
Reprobates, if thou have yet no more wrought in thee than the Scripture shows
that they had, then certainly if thou should now die, thou must needs
perish. -- As now, the Scripture holds forth these examples.

Pharaoh confessing his sins, The Lord is Righteous, says Pharaoh, and I have
sinned.

Saul, I have sinned against the Lord.

Ahab, He humbled himself in sackcloath, and went softly, when the Prophet
threatened Gods anger against him.

The Scripture tells you of the stony-ground, which received the Word with joy.

Of Herod, That he heard John Baptist gladly, and reformed many things.

Of Judas, He came and acknowledged his sin, and brought again the thirty
pieces that he had gotten by it, and cast it down: yet these of which the
Scripture thus speaks, all of their souls were lost for ever, and yet I say,
they went thus far; Now it concerns us very nearly to look to our selves, and
not to think we are safe upon every slight apprehension; if the Scripture
holds forth such examples that went thus far, and yet were lost, we had need
be careful to examine our state. -- To what end do you think does God set
down these examples of wicked men, whose souls were lost, and show you
how much good they did? certainly this was Gods end, that men and women
might not flatter themselves with every little good thing that they do, but
that they should be ferious and very solicitous in the examination of the
estate of their souls, how the terms are betvveen God and them; this was Gods
end in it, and this being Gods end, we are to make the use of it that God did
aim at in holding forth these things in his Word unto us: Oh therefore do not
satisfy your selves with a little, do not say, if I should now die this
night, and no further work wrought, yet I hope the work is so far wrought,
that my soul will not be lost.

The Seventh SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
BUt you slay we must go further, How shall a man know that he is gone
further than those whose souls are lost?

David, Lord, thy Word is pure, therefore does thy servant love it? I believe
not one of these could say so. Lord God, Thy Word is a pure Word, I see a
holiness and beauty in thy Word, and therefore my soul does close with it,
because it is pure; this is further than any of them went: David could say so,
Saul could not, nor Ahab could not, nor Herod could not, the stony-ground, and
Herod rejoiced in it, but it was not from the purity of it that they did
rejoice, for then they would have rejoiced in all the Word of God, every part
of Gods Word being pure and holy.

Secondly, They could not say thus, That they did prize Jesus Christ for a
Sanctifier, as well as a Savior: None of them did look upon Jesus Christ, that
he might deliver their souls from the power of their sin, and work
righteousness in them, as well as deliver them from the wrath that is to come.
Therefore though some of them would be glad to be saved from hell by Christ,
yet to look upon Christ in regard of his purity and holiness, as altogether
lovely, this none of them could do.

Thirdly and lastly, None of them did lift up God as the highest end of all,
and give up themselves, and all that they had, or were, or could do, being
empty of themselves, so as to lift up God as revealed in Christ as the highest
end, so as God and Christ to be all in all to their souls; they went not thus
far: And therefore do not think that it is a putting people to great streights,
to tell them how far many went, whose souls were lost, and if they went no
further, their souls would likewise be eternally lost. -- Now then, these
things being so, what remains, but that you should lay them to your hearts? Oh
lay them to your hearts, and if God would but be pleased this evening to cause
every one in this Congregation to examine themselves, and call their souls into
question, O my soul, how is it with thee? how do things stand between God and
thee? art thou in such an estate, as if God should call for thee out of the
body this moment, that thou should be saved? Oh be not satisfied in any
thing in the world, till you come to a resolution in these things; And if you
find that these things speak against you, and your souls be cast by them for
the present, do not slight them, for verily God will make them good upon thee,
these things shall stand when thy soul shall perish.

Wherefore then this is the last use about this point of the dreadful loss of
the soul; Act. 16.30.
What shall I then do to be saved? The world is troubled with a great many
questions at this day, questions that have no great necessity in them; but here
is the great question, Men and Brethren, what shall I do to be saved? And if
people when they meet together would be taken up, and be asking of this
question one of another, it would prevent a great many wrangling and jangling
questions, that men spend their time in; oh when they are asking of you many
such vain questions, answer those vain questions but thus, I but do you know
how one may do to be saved? tell me something of the way of God about the
salvation of my soul; and that is that, that both Ministers and Christians
should most aim at, to help one another in; they should not fill peoples heads
with curious questions, and specially young ones, for that is a great deceit of
the Devil at this day: There was never a time wherein there was a more hopeful
harvest of young ones, than there was two or three years since in England, and
in this City, and because the Devil saw it was in vain to tempt their hearts to
their former profaneness, he labors by all means to cause them to fall into
the hands of vain jangling people, that shall fill their heads with a great
many curious questions about controversies, and things that they do not
understand, and so take away the very strength and life of the work of the Word
upon them, when as the Scripture tells us plainly, that we must not receive
the weak in Faith unto doubtful disputations. Romans 14.1.
But

Object. You will say, we must inquire after all truths.

Answ. It is true, but seasonably, in their due time; It is not for young
converts, before they be settled in the main things of Religion, to have their
heads filled with doubtful disputations; it is the plain Scripture, and it is
as plain, if we would understand it, as Thou shall not steal, or commit
adultery; oh this has hindered the salvation of many a soul! Now therefore
this is that that I would aim at, to turn the strength of your souls into this
great question, What shall we do to be saved? in Ecclesiastes 7. says the
wise man there, God has made man upright, but he has found to himself many
inventions, so your books have it, but I find it translated in the old Lattin,
He has mingled himself with many questions, so they turn the phrase: Now the
Lord take off your hearts from those, and give you hearts to attend to this
great question, What shall we do to be saved? It was the question, you know,
of the Jailer, in Act. 16.30. And it concerns those that yet have not assurance
of what condition their souls are in for salvation, to ask this question
speedily, and not to put it off till they come to sickness and death, and then
send for Ministers and godly Christians, and say, Oh! what shall I do? how many
upon their sick and death beds, that never minded to inquire before what they
should do to be saved, the^ are in dreadful anguish, and then cry out, Oh what
shall I do? Oh the distressed condition I am in! I am afraid my soul is lost
for ever, what shall I do? why do thou ask it now? is this question to ask
now when thy soul is going before the great and dreadful God to have the
sentence of its eternal doom to be past upon it? Oh it concerns you betimes,
you young ones, as soon as ever you come to know you have souls, it concerns
you to be asking this great question, What shall I do to be saved? And we
have an example of this, of a young man that Christ looked upon in love, because
he was inquisitive about the salvation of his soul; the story is in Matthew.
19.16. Behold one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I
do that I may inherit eternal life, and verse. 20. It appears that this was a
young man; The young man says unto him, All these things have I done. Oh it
were a comely thing for young men to come to Christ, and say, What shall we do
to have eternal life? and it appears that he was a young Gentleman, a man of
great possessions, and he is called in the Gospel by St. Luke, a Ruler; some
Interpreters think that that was meant only in the family, for the Jews had
some chief in the family that did rule and govern there; but this young man he
comes to Christ, and that running, Mark 10.17.
as in Mark. 10. where you have the story, and Christ looked upon him, and loved
him, as in verse. 21. Oh it is a lovely thing to see young people begin betimes
to inquire what they should do to be saved, and we have had great hopes of
young people; but here is the policy of the Devil, when the Lord was bringing
the greatest harvest of young people within this three or four years to
himself, as ever was, I think, since the beginning of the world, and the Devil
knowing that he could not get them to turn to lewdness and profaneness
presently again, therefore he labors to put them upon turning all their
Religion into questions about controversal things, which they could not be able
to manage and understand, and so puts them off the thoughts of that great
question, What they should do to be saved? But O labor to inquire, and to be
satisfied and resolved in that question betimes.

Secondly, If you ask this question, as you are to do it betimes, so do it
earnestly, do it with a great deal of fervency of spirit, as a matter of
infinite concernment; so in Matthew. 10.17. When he was gone forth into the way,
there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, good Master, what
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? He came running with a great deal
of fervency and earnestness about the business; and the fervency that youth
has should be manifested in this, in being earnest in the inquiring after the
way of salvation; people that are elder, they think they are well enough, and
they have not lived so long, they think, as not to know how to be saved all
this while, and therefore will not enquire; so that their spirits do not boil
with that fervency and heat as young ones do; he came running to Christ.

Thirdly, If you do inquire, inquire sincerely, with a heart truly willing to
do whatsoever God shall make known to you; we are this day about this great
question, what a man should do to save his soul? I suppose many of you would
be glad to know what should be done, and mee-thinks every one is ready to ask
such a question as this is: But before we come to answer it, let me speak to
you as in the Name of God, do you desire to know it with a heart truly willing
to yield to whatsoever should out of Gods Word be revealed to you? put this to
your own hearts before we come to give any answer, otherwise what do you hear
this day, if there be not such a heart as this, that you can appeal to God,
and profess that whatsoever this day the Lord shall reveal unto me^ from his
Word that I should do to save my soul, here I am, and profess to yield my self
up to the truths of God, if your hearts be so framed, then we may have
encouragement to come and show you what should be done.

Fourthly, And you must inquire constantly too; if you should not be satisfied
at one time, never be at rest till you are satisfied, do not ask what I should
do, and come to hear what you should do, and then pass it over, and let every
little thing take this out of your minds again; but when you begin to be
inquiring after the way of salvation, resolve that you will never give rest to
your souls, till you have gotten this question answered to you. -- And there is
a great deal of reason that we should ask this question in such a way. For,

Reas. First, Every one of your souls are in a lost condition naturally;
therefore it concerns you to be inquiring after the way of salvation.

Secondly, The salvation of a soul is the most difficult thing in the world; if
ever thy soul be saved, it must cost more than Heaven and Earth is worth to
save it; it is not therefore such a trifling business, the saving of souls:
This I dare avouch, as in the Name of God, that the soul of the poorest girl or
servant that is here, if it be saved, it must cost more than Heaven and Earth
is worth to save it; therefore there is a difficulty in it.

Thirdly and lastly, There are but few that shall be saved; there is nothing
more clear in the Word of God than that, that there are but few souls that
shall be saved; we cannot tell (as I have said) that this or the other soul
cannot be saved; we are not to enter into Gods counsels concerning particular
souls, but this we may say, Matthew. 7.13. compared with Luke 13.24.
and have warrant from the Word to say, that there are but few souls that shall
be saved: Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way, and few there be that enter: And upon that ground Christ
himself raises that exhortation, therefore strive; therefore inquire you after
the way of salvation with all your might; if there should a voice come from
Heaven at this time, and say, there are but few in this Congregation shall go
out alive, it would put every one to a stand; every one would think with
himself, Oh Lord! must I die here? why there is this voice from Heaven, that
there are but few souls in the world but shall perish eternally; then certainly
it is not for us to be quiet, but it concerns us to be restless in our
conditions, and every one to say, what, is it I? what, is it I? when Christ did
but say that one of you shall betray me, every one was inquiring, Is it I? Is
it I? but when it is said that there shall be but few saved; the flock of
Christ is but a little flock, the words in the original are two diminutives,
and may be translated, a little little flock; Oh it concerns you all to look
about you. But now these things being premised for the putting of you on to the
enquiring after salvation with all your might: now we come to the answer of
this question, What we should do that our souls may be saved?

And in the answer to this we must premise further.

First, There is nothing that any man can do, that saves him, there must be
somewhat higher that what he can do; and yet God requires that he should do
what he can do; Indeed what any man can do of himself, yea or by assistance
from common grace, yea we will say further, by assistance from any grace
whatsoever, though it may help forward his salvation, by an ordinance of God,
yet it cannot be the thing that saves him, the thing that saves him is higher
than what is done by the creature, it is what is done by Christ, or what is
suffered by Christ, it is that that saves the soul, and not, I say, what is
done or suffered by us.

But yet now we must not make such a vain, and foolish, and dangerous
inference, that therefore nothing is to be done, because the things that we
do are not the things that save us; there is a great deal of evil comes from
men and women's presuming to draw consequences; they think that if this be
true, the other will follow, and so through the weakness of their
understandings, Ephesians. 2.1. John 15.5.
they come to draw dangerous consequences from true positions: Why, we are
dead in sins by nature, and without me ye can do nothing, says Christ; upon
this here is this consequence drawn by many ignorant people that pervert the
Word to their own destruction, If God be not merciful to them; therefore why
should we pray, or read, or hear, or use any means, let us lay aside all, we
can do nothing, we are dead in sins, and the like: Now we are to know, that
though nothing can be done by us (till God bring us into a state of grace and
salvation) that is acceptable, so as certainly shall bring us to Heaven, yet if
it be but that that shall stop us in the contrary way a little, it is worth
our labor; If it be but that that any way may tend toward the bringing of us
unto any means that may do us good, why it is worth our labor, and all our
pains; but especially if we consider this, that though we are not able to do
that that shall save us, yet God is pleased often to convey his strength to
those he does intend to save, through the use of those means; rather at that
time when they do improve their natural abilities, than at that time when they
sit idle and do nothing, and therefore you must be up and be doing. We read
in the Gospel concerning the young man that I told you came to Christ, and
inquired what he should do for eternal life, Christ professed to him that he
was not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, he was not so far as others; It is
true, if a man abuses his doing, and rests in his doing, that sets him as far
from the Kingdom of Heaven, as profane ones, and therefore Publicans and
Harlots may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, as soon as Scribes and
Pharisees; But there may be many actions done by a common assistance of Gods
Spirit, that may bring some nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven than others; and
the denial of such a thing as that is, would be an extreme boldness in any;
for they are the very words of Christ to the young man, That he was not far
from the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore notwithstanding your inability, and
notwithstanding the things that we do are not the things that save us, yet we
have ground enough to put on men and women to do. -- Now the meaning of this
great question is this, What is the way that God ordinarily takes to bring men
and women to salvation by? or how should I follow God on in his way? that is a
certain truth of the Ancients, Though God made thee without thee, yet he will
not save thee without thee; God works upon us as upon rational creatures, and
therefore it does concern all the children of men that would have their souls
saved, to observe the work of God, and to stir up what is in them to join with
the work of God in the way of salvation; and certainly whatever conceits there
are to the contrary, they are not only foolish, but extreme dangerous, and
Satan's policy and cunning is exceedingly much seen in them.

A further thing that I would premise before I come to particulars, is this,
when I speak of any thing that should be done, I prescribe no particular
order, knowing that the works of God are various; And sometimes God stirs up a
soul to do one thing, and sometimes to do another thing, but take them in what
order you will, yet we must name them for memory sake in some order, and God
expects them from you, and you are to join with God in those works, if you
would have your souls to be saved.

The great Question, of what we should do to be saved, answered.

First, If you would have your souls saved, do you join with God in what he
has revealed to you concerning your lost condition, laboring to understand
those truths clearly, that are delivered in the Word concerning the lost
condition of souls by nature, and to work those truths upon your hearts, to be
sensible of them: Those whom God intends to save, he shows unto them what this
salvation is; he shows them from what it is they are to be saved, that so
they may not run away with (the mere word (Salvation) and saving of souls) now
God reveals this in his Word, and when he intends to save a soul, he does by
his Spirit stir it up to join with the Word of God, and work those things upon
its self, so as to be made sensible of them.

As thus, the soul being solicitous how it should come to be saved, it
searches the Scripture, and there it finds how we are by nature the children
of wrath; there it finds that God had made man according to his own Image at
first, but man has sinned against God, and broken the covenant upon which his
eternal state did depend, and in the sin of the first man all men have sinned,
and are deprived of the glory of God, and now are conceived in sin, and brought
forth in iniquity, so that there is a most dreadful breach between God and the
soul, and that man by nature is become an enemy to the Infinite God: That now
he has the seeds of all kind of sin in him, and that all his life, while he
continues in his natural estate here, is nothing else but a fighting against
God, a flying in the very face of God: He finds that by sin he is brought
under a most dreadful curse, the curse of the Law, and that he is bound over
by the bonds of the Law, even to death, to eternal death, as the wages of sin;
these things the soul finds in Scripture; now if thou would be saved, when
thou find God revealing such things, labor thoroughly to convince thy soul of
the truth of them; and are these things so indeed? is this my condition? am I
thus and thus naturally? Oh what good then will it do to me to have all the
world, and be in such a condition as this is? Oh my soul! when were thou
sensible of this condition? do thou walk as it becomes one that is sensible
of such a lost estate as this is? Oh! labor to drink in these truths, and to
work them upon thy heart, and cry to God to set them home upon thy spirit, to
make thy soul thoroughly sensible of them, as he uses to make those whom he
has a purpose to save. Here Is the first thing.

And yet one thing about this further, is, That you must come to a conviction,
not only of your lost estate, but of your inability to save your selves, and
the inability that there is in all creatures in Heaven and Earth to save them;
that thy fall from God is so dreadful, that all the created power in Heaven and
Earth cannot help thee, yea and that thou thy self now art unable to help thy
self to save thy soul; be convinced thoroughly of this: This was the way that
Christ took with the young man, he tells him of the Law first, and then
afterward because he was conceited that he had fulfilled the Law, and done
it, Christ puts him upon a duty (that might convince him to the contrary) which
was required in the spiritual meaning of the Law, that forbids covetousness,
and requires that we should be willing to part with all for God, when he
calls for it; Go and sell all that thou have, and follow me, and take up thy
cross and follow me, says Christ; I but the young man he had great
possessions; but because ^^e was no swearer, nor stealer, nor murderer, nor
liar, he thought he had fulfilled the Law, but Christ by putting that to him,
did as much as if he should say, poor young man, thou art deceived, thou
think that thou are able to do what God requires in his Law, but did thou
but understand the spiritual part of the Law, thou would see that thou art
so cast by it, that all that thou art able to do in thy obedience to the Law,
cannot be sufficient (through the sinfulness of thy heart and nature) but thou
must perish if thou take such a course as that is, to think to be saved by
the Law; certainly this it is upon which thousands of souls do perish, they
think indeed they are sinners, but they hope they shall do better, and they are
able, they think (though not without God, God must help them) to do that that
the Word of God requires of them, whereby they may come to be saved; now
certainly thou know not thy fallen condition, and how far off thou art from
God, and what thy sinful estate is naturally, that have such thoughts as these.

But secondly, If thou would have thy soul saved, break off the acts of thy
sin at least; you will say, why do we speak to men to break off the acts of
their sin? -- why, certainly we may well speak, for God does give men power
for outward acts very far; thou can not do it of thy self, that is true, but
there is a common work of Gods Spirit, that does enable men and women for
outward acts very far: Let him that stole steal no more. A man now at the day
of judgment cannot say, Lord, I continued in theft, because I was not able to
forbear it; though thou can not change thy heart indeed, yet forbear the
outward act thou can: one that is dumb might say, if he could speak, Lord, I
was no swearer, because I could not speak, otherwise thou art ready to say, I
cannot help it, but God will find it otherwise at the great day: Certainly, if
thou would but put thy self upon what strength God gives thee, thou may
as well go to a Sermon, as to an Alehouse; It is a very false reasoning of
people, that because they have not true grace, therefore God inables them to do
no outward acts; therefore do what in thee lies to break off the outward acts
of thy sin: Thou that art a company-keeper, a Sabbath-breaker, a swearer, an
unclean person, take heed of continuing in the outward way of sinning against
God, resolve this day against those outward acts of thy sin; do but do thus
much, because thou think thou can do nothing, do but profess thus to God
in his presence, when thou art gone, get alone, and say, Lord, it is true, I
can do nothing-without thee, but here I do engage my self to join with
whatsoever thou have given me, or shall give me to abstain from those acts of
sin, which I have lived in, and this Lord I engage my self to do, as ever I
expect to be saved in the day of Jesus Christ; can thou not say these words?
express thy self but thus to God, and certainly these things thou may say,
and that is somewhat; That man and woman that shall wilfully go on in those
vile gross acts of sin that are against the very light of nature, and the light
of their consciences, for them to come and say, What shall I do to be saved?
and yet still continue in their sins, it is but a trifling with God, and taking
Gods Name in vain, except it be with a resolution to go thus far.

Thirdly, Thou must labor to take off thine heart as much as thou can from
the things of the world, from these outward contentments here, from seeking
after them as thy greatest good; that that was thy chief desire heretofore,
thou must labor to take off thy heart from, and possess thy soul with the one
thing necessary, to conclude thus with thy self, it is not necessary that I
should be rich, that I should be honorable, that I should have these and
these outward comforts in the world; but it is necessary that I should look to
the salvation of my soul; when God has a purpose to save, he does take the
heart off very much from creature comforts; Oh, if peoples hearts were but
taken off from the world, to seek after salvation in a constant way, as they
are at some flashes, when they hear some truths that come near to their hearts,
or when they are upon their sick-beds, Oh how far might they have been gone in
the way of salvation! but the thoughts of the world has taken their hearts,
and all other things have vanished and come to nothing.

Fourthly, If thou would have thy soul saved, thy great care and endeavor
must be to acquaint thy self with the knowledge of the Mysteries of the Gospel
of the covenant of grace, of the way that God has chalkt out for salvation;
let a man or woman have never so good meanings, never such good desires and
affections, live never so fairly and civilly in the world, yet if they be not
acquainted with the way that God in the Gospel, and in the Covenant of Grace
has revealed for the salvation of souls, they may perish for all that, God
has appointed but one way to save souls, and he is set upon it and
determined, that whosoever misses that way, must perish, whatsoever good
thoughts and desires they have otherwise.

The Eighth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
Quest. NOw you will say, What is it in the Gospel, and in the Covenant of
Grace that we must labor to inform our selves in, that we may be saved?

Answ. First, Thou must labor to inform thy self of the absolute necessity of
satisfaction to divine Justice, that is revealed in the Gospel, and that thou
must come to know, I am a sinful wretched creature, my soul is in a damnable
condition; now that that must save me must satisfy Gods infinite Justice, I
may not be saved merely by my crying to God for mercy; no, if there were
nothing else but my crying to God for mercy, yea, put all my good deeds into
the scale, put what I have done, what I can do, what I can be enabled to do,
all my prayers, my cries, this will not do. -- It is true, there is not enough
in me, but will not Gods mercy eke it out? -- No, it is neither what thou
do, or can do, or can be enabled to do, and put Gods mercy merely
without any more, that does it, but it is a satisfaction to justice, a price
paid for the soul; no soul is ever saved, but it is saved in the way of a
price, that is paid for it; and this thou must acquaint thy soul with, which
thousands of people are ignorant of; yet they hope to be saved, but how? they
will pray to God that they may be saved, and that God would have mercy upon
them; and is here all? certainly this is not the way of the Gospel; but the way
of the Gospel it is that that reveals unto the soul the price that is paid for
a soul, even the blood of Christ: That in Christ the great Mediator of the
second Covenant, there is a perfect satisfaction to Gods Infinite Justice; this
indeed is a great part of the Mystery of the Gospel; this is the saving truth
of the Gospel, and thou must acquaint thy soul with this truth if thou be
saved. -- And when thou hear of this truth, perhaps thou can not
understand it for the present, Oh then thou had need go to God in secret, and
be crying to him that he would reveal this truth unto thee. -- But you will
say, it is not our crying; -- It is true, it is not merely our crying, but
there is something of God further: But God has made many gracious promises of
answering our cries, and now that so he may make good his promises, he will
further reveal this Mystery of the Gospel to thee, that there is a necessity of
satisfaction to divine Justice for thy sin that has brought thy soul into a
lost condition.

Secondly, And further, A necessity of a perfect Righteousness; we will not
speak of any thing controversal about it, which way it comes to be applied;
but this all will grant, that there is a perfect Righteousness that we have
need of; the way of salvation is a perfect Righteousness, thou must have a
surety that must have a perfect Righteousness for thee.

Thirdly, And then the way of salvation is this, it reveals an absolute
necessity of the Application of the satisfaction and Righteousness of Jesus
Christ; the Application of that, that it must be made thine some way, that
thou must have thy part and share in it, by thy union unto Christ; and by being
made one mystically with him through Faith, so that the soul is not merely
saved through mercy: Nor thus, that Christ he has come and done such and such
things, and therefore says God the Father, for the sake of Jesus Christ I will
save thee, for he has satisfied me by what he has done: No, but there is
somewhat more; I confess it is true, in the conclusion we are saved for the
sake of Christ, but it is by our union with Christ, we are united to Christ,
and made one with him, and so what Christ has done for our salvation, is
tendered up to the Father as ours, we being one with Jesus Christ: so that now,
if thou should know thy miserable estate by nature, and thereupon inquire
after salvation, and cry to God that he would be merciful unto thee; that is
not enough, but the Gospel reveals further. Suppose thou come to know more
than thou can understand by the light of nature, but yet the Gospel does
reveal to thee, that not only thou must be saved by Christ, but thou must be
united to Christ by Faith; there must be a spiritual marriage between the Son
of God, and thy soul; thou must have Christ to be a head, and thou a member;
he thy husband, and thou his Spouse; thou must inquire after this union, and
that is the way of believing, and the substance of the Apostles words to the
Jailer, when he cried, what he should do to be saved, why says he, Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: It must be through Jesus
Christ, the great Mediator of the second Covenant, by thy believing in him,
and being made one with him that thou must come to be saved.

Fourthly, And then the Gospel it reveals further as necessary to salvation, a
necessity of Regeneration, of being born again, of having the Image of God
renewed in the soul, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, of being a new Creature,
the want of which, if the soul should now depart, it must certainly perish
under, but now if it come to be saved, it must have this revealed to it; for
in the Gospel there is held forth the great work of God in begetting that soul
anew to himself, that he does intend to save, in putting a new life into it,
in sending the Spirt of Jesus Christ into it, whereby it lives, and acts, and
works, being now carried on, not by its own spirit, but by the Spirit of the
Son of God; this is necessary to salvation, to do acts of Regeneration: so
Christ tells Nicodomus, he must be born again, and this only the Gospel
reveals; and thus our souls should labor to acquaint themselves with the great
things of the Gospel; and as the wise man says concerning instruction, in
Prove. 4.13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her, for she
is thy life. So I say of these instructions that are revealed in the Gospel,
keep them, for they are your lives; do not think that God, though he is
infinitely merciful, yet that he will save souls any other way, for God has
set this way, and it is an infinite mercy that we are to admire at, and adore,
and praise his Name for, that there may be salvation any way; and if there may
be salvation any way, oh you poor wretched children of men! know, that you
should be restless, till you come to understand further that one way; Oh that
we could make it to be the great business of our lives, to search into the
Gospel, and find out these things, for it is through this that we come to have
eternal life.

Fifthly, A fifth rule for the salvation of your souls, (If God has put it
into your hearts to seek to have them saved) you must walk with fear and
trembling before the Lord all the days of your lives; the fear of God must be
mighty and strong upon your spirits, if you would be saved, and you must
labor to keep the fear of the great God upon your spirits; that place is
famous for this, in Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his own
good pleasure. As if the Holy Ghost should say, you had need walk with fear
before the Lord, for the truth is, he has you at such infinite advantage, as
you are not able to stir one foot to do any thing for the deliverance of your
souls from eternal wrath, without the work of God upon you; you had need take
heed what you do, that you do not provoke this infinite God that has you under
his feet, that you are able to do nothing toward your salvation if he
withdraw himself from you.

I appeal to you, suppose you did so depend upon any one man in the world, that
your life lay at his mercy, and if he should but speak a word you were a dead
man or woman, would you not when you come into his presence come with fear,
lest you should displease him? would you say, what do I care for him? let him
be pleased or not pleased, what is that to me? you would not dare to do it:
Now, shall we have less fear, because he with whom we have to do is the
Lord? if we had dependence upon any man in the world, as we have upon God,
we would fear him: Now I say, shall God have the less fear, because he is a
God? he should have the more fear; Fear him, says Christ, that when he has
killed the body, can likewise kill the soul; Yea I say unto you, fear him;
Christ puts an I say upon that; and truly, that soul begins to be in a way of
salvation, that begins to have the fear of the great God to fall upon him. Most
people in the world they walk boldly, and presumptuously in the presence of
God, as if God had nothing to do with them, and as if they had nothing to do
with God. Alas! these go on in the ways of death and destruction: but that
soul that God has a purpose to save, he begins to reveal his glory to it, and
to shine upon it, as he did upon Saul, when he did shine from Heaven in a
glorious manner, and stopped him in his way when he was riding post unto Hell
and destruction; he cries to him, I am he that thou have sinned against, I am
he that thou persecutest, then Saul falls down trembling, and says, Lord,
What wi^t thou have me to do? as if Saul should say, Lord, I did not know
thee, but I see thee now to be a great and a dreadful God, I see that I am in
thy hands to save or destroy, as thou please; and therefore Saul comes with a
trembling heart, and cries to God, Lord, What will thou have me to do? I, he
was in a good way of salvation; and so when a vile sinner that has gone on
without the fear of God upon him, shall now come in trembling, beholding the
dreadfulness of the Infinite God, that eternal first-beeing that it has to
deal withal, and now shall have his fear strike into it, this soul is in a
good way of salvation, it is stopped in the way of destruction, and it is in a
good way of salvation; and that is very observable further in the Text, Work
out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in
you. That is a place that many people grossly abuse, they think they need do
nothing; but mark how boldly do these people cross the Spirit of God in the
Text, for the Spirit of God makes this Argument, do you work out your
salvation, because God works, and say they, It must be God that works, and
therefore I will do nothing; Oh! if you should wilfully go on in ways of
provocation to God, and upon your sickbed, and deathbed, cry, Oh Lord! that
now thou would be pleased to work upon my soul, as thou usest to work upon
those that thou intendest to save; If God should make this answer, Thou a bold
wretch, that have provoked the eyes of my glory all thy days, and do thou
now cry to me to do it? If any of you do think that there will ever be a time
when you will stand in need of Gods mercy to save your souls, you had need walk
with fear and trembling before this God; Now I put this to the soul of every
one here, do thou not think, O thou sinful soul, that there will be a time
that thou shall stand in need of the mercy of God? and what course do thou
take now beforehand? is that course that thou take beforehand a continual
provocation of God? is that a good preparation to that time? if there were a
man that you lived near, though for the present you care not for him, but
slighted him, yet if you knew that there would be a time that you must stand
in need of that man, so as if he should forsake you, you would be a lost man,
would you dare to provoke that man? we all know what need we shall have of
the mercy of God, and therefore we had need walk with fear and trembling
before him.

Sixthly, Further, If thou would have thy soul saved, attend upon those
means that ^od has appointed to save souls, wait at wisdoms posts. Now this
one direction being clearly shown out of Scripture, will be enough to confute
all that talk against doing: If God has appointed means to save, then surely
he has appointed that we must attend upon those means. Now in Romans 1.16. The
preaching of the Gospel there is called, The power of God to salvation. Now if
you would be saved, you must bring your souls under that which is the power of
God to salvation. Because the Lord in the Ministry of the Gospel does use to
put forth his Almighty Power for the saving of souls, therefore it is that the
Gospel is called the power of God to salvation; you cannot be saved without the
Almighty Power of God, and where is that put forth but in the preaching of the
Gospel? To whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? That is, the Arm of God in the
preaching of the Gospel; so you know what the Apostle says, in Romans 10. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

You will say, can we do any thing toward our salvation? yes, you may hear,
it is the duty of us as creatures to come and hear the Word; and Faith comes by
hearing: so then Faith comes by somewhat that we do, but not so that God has
tied himself to give Faith to every one that hears, I would not be understood
so: But thus, God has appointed, that hearing should be a means for the
working of Faith; It is true, it is the blessing of God in hearing, but hearing
is the way that God has set; God indeed can convey Faith from Heaven to any
soul immediately; I but where there is the preaching of the Gospel, there do I
expect that these creatures that do intend that I should work Faith in them,
should come and attend upon the preaching of the Gospel: Christ could have
opened the blind man's eyes, without spitting upon the clay, and anointing his
face, but he would have that done, and that must be the means by which he
will open his eyes: So if God will have hearing the Word of the Gospel to be
the means by which he will work Faith in the soul, take heed how this be
neglected, Act. 20.18. Paul was sent to preach, to what end? To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that
are sanctified by Faith that is in me. Says the Lord Christ to Paul, I will
send thee to open the eyes of men, and to turn them from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of
sins; and this is the great ordinance that I intend for this end, and that I
will accompany to those that I purpose to save at any time. Therefore when you
come to hear the Word, you should come to it as the great Ordinance that God
has appointed to save souls by. Is there any soul that begins in this
Congregation to be awakened, and to think with it self, Oh Lord, What shall I
do to be saved? I tell thee, that every time thou come to hear the Word
preached, thou should come to it with such thoughts as these; Now am I going
to that great Ordinance that the Lord has appointed to convey his power
through, to the salvation of those souls that are appointed to eternal life; I
am going to the Pool of Bethesda, and there will I wait until the Lord shall
be pleased for to send his Angel to stir in my heart, and I have begun to feel
some power of Christ already, which does encourage me to hope for further
power; There is many a soul has met with Jesus Christ, and he has brought it
from the power of Satan, to his own Kingdom of light, and why may not my soul
meet with the same power of Jesus Christ? however, I am resolved, that as long
as I live, I will wait upon God in the way that he has appointed; Oh the Word
it has a great deal of efficacy for the salvation of souls, therefore if thou
would have thy soul saved, attend upon it for that end. I shall apply one
Scripture, which may be for the preparation to what remains. -- You are about
inquiring how you should be saved, and we are about answering, Oh take heed
that you be not found in this, like unto those wretched Jews (which God forbid
that there should be any one in this place found like unto) that would fain
have the Prophet Jeremiah be inquiring what the mind of God was concerning
them, and they professed, that whatsoever the Lord should reveal by him, that
they would do, but when it came, lo they fling off all, and it was to no
purpose; the Scripture is in Jer. 42.5. Then they said to Jeremiah, The Lord
be a true and a faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to
all things, for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us. We desire
thee to go and know the mind of God, and tell it us, and here we profess and
call God to witness, that we will do what lies in us to perform all that the
Lord thy God shall require; This was a very fair promise, and I hope there are
some souls, if not generally all of you, have such a kind of disposition. Oh
let his servant search his Word, and find out what should be done, and
whatsoever he shall speak according to his Word, that will we do, and God
forbid it should be otherwise; it were just with God that our souls should
perish, if we should do otherwise; but there is a mighty deal of deceitfulness
in the hearts of men; Jeremiah went, and did as they desired him, but mark,
chap. 44. 16. and you shall see what a different disposition there was in them,
to what there seemed to be before; first you shall find in chap. 43. they
begin to wrangle at what Jeremiah spoke to them, all the proud men began to
wrangle at what Jeremiah spoke, mark, it is all the proud men, they are proud
spirits that do contend with Gods Word, but mark, first they wrangle, chap.
43.2. and then they grow resolute and stubborn, chap. 44.16. As for the word
that thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
thee; why, what, are these the men that called God to witness, that whatsoever
Jeremiah should declare in the Name of God, they would do it? and yet now,
first they wrangle at what he says, and then they resolve, that as for what
he has spoken to them in the Name of the Lord, they will not hear it: Now God
forbid that ever there should be found among any of you such wrangling spirits
with the Word of God; certainly God will justify the words of his servants
that they speak in his Name one day, and will make them good upon you, and they
may lie heavy upon the soul that shall neglect them; but then where there is
first wrangling at the Word of God, there usually grows an impudent, proud,
stubborn, casting off the Word of God; As for the word that thou have spoken
unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. Why should not
we do what we have a mind to? why should not we take our liberty on the
Lords day, as we were wont, and follovv our business as we were wont?
let them say what they will, we will do as we were wont to do, and
we will keep our company, as we were wont to do; let them speak while
their heart aches; this was the very guize of this people that made such a
profession before the Lord, but oh the Lord forbid that it should be so with
any of you.

But Seventhly, If thou would have thy soul saved, thou must take heed of
resting upon false hopes of thy salvation, you must raze down even to the very
ground all your false hopes of salvation; there is nothing in the world
hinders the salvation of souls more than false hopes; when men dare build
their eternal salvation upon every slight and vain hope that they hold, The
hope of the Hypocrite, the Scriptuie says, is like the Spiders-webb, spun out
of thine own conceits, but every little touch is enough to strike it down
again: Oh the poor things that people thus venture their souls upon! I shevved
you in the opening of what did cause the loss of souls, that one thing was by
venturing, and their vain hopes was one; now these must be rased down; you
will say, what are those vain hopes that must first be rased down? and
what do you mean by rasing of them down?

That I may speak plainly in this thing, that concerns the poorest and meanest,
that is of the meanest capacity in the world, as well as the most able or
learned (for the poorest has a soul to save, as well as the richest, and the
weakest, as well as the learned) if such a one should say, What are those
things that are to be rased down? to that I answ^^.

First, Such hopes as are not Scripture-hopes, if they be not Scripture hopes,
they must be rased down; Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scripture might have hope. We have hope through patience and comfort of the
Scripture; how does the hopes of those that shall be saved arise? -- Why, they
rise thus, either by reading, or hearing something out of the Word of God, and
God darting some light, some truths into their souls through his Word, they
come to receive it, and there it lies working in them, till at length their
souls relish it, and they taste the sweetness of the Word, and come to have
comfort in it, and so through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, their
hope comes to be raised; the Scripture in raising hopes, first it works
patience, it usually beats down the soul first, and speaks hard things to it,
and the soul that God over-powers to himself, it is willing to lie under the
power of the Scripture, and be patient, notwithstanding the Scripture does
reveal such hard things, and puts it upon never such hard duties, the heart, I
say, yields to it, and at length the soul comes to find sweetness out of the
Scripture, and so hopes comes to be raised, that is, the soul sees some
eternal truth out of the Word of God, the truth of God himself that is eternal,
a divine truth that it dares venture its eternal estate upon, and upon this it
does raise its hope; it is able to give an account from some place of the
Scripture, upon what grounds it does hope. -- I hope that God will show mercy
to me, and save my soul in the day of Christ; will some say, I but what ground
have you for your hopes? Now, if your hopes be right, then there is somewhat
in this Book of God to be showed as the ground of this; and indeed you can
have but little comfort of your hopes, except you be able to hold forth some
Scripture of other upon which you build your hopes, for when you say you hope,
you may not mean that you think and a^e persuaded that it is so, but what
Scripture have you for i^^^ you will say, what Scriptures have any to ground
their hop^s of salvation upon? what Scriptures? a great many; I will give you
but this one that many have to ground their hope^ upon, Romans 8.1. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Upon this now says a soul that God
brings to himself; What does God say in his Word (that word upon which my soul
stands, and must be cast one day for eternity) that those that are in Christ
Jesus, shall never be condemned? I but who are they? such as walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, such as the bent of whose hearts, and the
endeavors of whose souls are not after fleshly things, the comforts of this
world, but after spiritual things; such whom the Lord has made to be sensible
of spiritual things, and such as the Lord does act and guide by his holy Spirit
in their ways and conversations, God says, such shall never be condemned;
then upon this I will build my hopes, for I feel that the Lord has been
pleased to work so on me, as to bring me to Jesus Christ to see him, to close
with him, and to rely upon him, and I feel the fruit of the Spirit of Christ
in me, that whereas before I walked after the flesh, and spiritual things I
did not savor, now I find that the lusts of the flesh are mortified, and I
should wrong the grace of God, if I should deny the actings, and the guidings
of the Spirit in my soul; and therefore I will build my hopes, and rest upon
this Scripture. -- And the more any soul rests upon any Scripture (if it rests
truly) the more shall it find the power of that Scripture upon it: --
Therefore you shall know the difference between an hypocrites resting upon
Scripture, and one that rests through the work of Gods Grace; an Hypocrite
rests upon such a Scripture, and conceits that his heart is according to the
Scripture; but now he does not find, that the more he rests, the more his
heart is wrought upon by the Scripture, and daily grows to be liker and liker
to the Scripture, to come nearer and nearer to what is required in the
Scripture; but now when a gracious heart does rest upon Scripture, it finds
that daily it does grow nearer and nearer to the Scripture, and that works
daily more and more upon it; and indeed this is the way to grow in
sanctification, and to make our hearts like to the Scriptures. Fall upon
several places, and let your souls rest upon them for eternity, and so you will
find your hearts to grow more and more like to those Scriptures, and the power
of those Scriptures will appear more and more in your hearts and conversations.
This is the way of the Saints that have hopes to be saved.

Secondly, Again, those hopes that are to be rased, are hopes that are not
wrought in the soul by the power of the Holy Ghost: in the forenamed Chapter,
The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. That hope that is right for
salvation, is such a hope as is wrought through the power of the Holy Ghost:
Now then, that hope that is in men and women, which is born with them, and has
lived with them all their days, that springs from the root of nature, for so
that that is born with us, and grows up with us all the days of our lives, I
say, it springs from a root of nature, and so the hopes of most people, they
are no other but such as springs from a root of nature; come from one to
another, and ask them, do you think to be saved? I, I hope so; how long have
you hoped so? ever since I can remember, I thank God; I, I thought so; it is a
hope that springs out of the root of nature, and therefore you have had it
always, whereas the true hope of the godly for salvation, it is a hope wrought
in their hearts by the Almighty power of the Holy Ghost.

And I appeal to you now, what Almighty power of the Holy Ghost have you felt
in your hearts to raise up those hopes that you have in you? -- For certainly
the grace of hope has a difficulty in it, as well as any grace whatsoever; now
all people almost find an easiness in that; but here the Scripture makes it to
be the glory of the Holy Ghost, to raise hopes in any creature; therefore
those hopes that arise from a root of nature, that are not wrought by an
Almighty power of the Holy Ghost in the heart, must be rased down. -- Do but
put your souls to this question, I have hopes to be saved, but Lord, how are
they wrought? what power of the Holy Ghost has been in my heart to raise these
hopes? Suppose there were no Holy Ghost (as they said in the Acts, that they
had not so much as heard whether there were any Holy Ghost or no) yet might not
I have such a hope as I have in Gods mercy? Oh the hope that will bring to
salvation is such a hope as is raised by the power of the Holy Ghost. -- Now if
our hopes be raised by the power of the Holy Ghost, then they will have much
of the Holy Ghost in them, and suitable to your hopes, so does the Holy Ghost
come into your hearts, and dwell in your hearts, and if it comes in and dwells
in your hearts, then it does inlighten your hearts, it does act and guide you,
you are lead by the Holy Ghost in your way; Now, can you say, that in the
course of your lives, it is the Holy Ghost that guides you, that you are
carried on by the Holy Ghost, and not by your own spirits; It is true, the best
of all may be acted by their own spirits, in some time of temptation, but for
the course of their lives they are acted and guided by the Holy Ghost, their
lives are such, as those that live by them may say, here is one that is acted
and guided by the Holy Ghost; Now, can you say so? certainly if you have true
hopes for salvation, it is raised by the Holy Ghost, and if it be raised by
the Holy Ghost, it does act your lives in the ways of holiness.

Thirdly, Those hopes must be rased down that are not lively hopes, and
purging hopes, I will put them both together. -- That are not lively, that you
have in 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Here is a great deal
in this Scripture; First, that the hopes of the Saints are lively hopes, that
is, a hope as is mightily working in them, it will not suffer their hearts to
lie dead in any way of wickedness; Indeed, it may be with the hearts of the
Saints, as it is with a fountain of living water, that may have some dirt cast
into it, but it being a living spring, it works out that dirt; so the children
of God that have some lively hopes, may have some dirt cast in by temptation;
some sin, I, but if their hopes be lively, it will work it all out. -- And
mark, you are begotten, therefore you see that the hopes of life and salvation
it is that that is not bred with us (as I spoke before) but it is that that
follows from our new birth. -- And this is by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. The power and the virtue of the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead being in the soul, and putting a new life into the soul, begets
it to this lively hope.

And then it is a purging hope, 1 John 3.3. And every man that has this hope,
purifieth himself even as he is pure. Mark, you think, what need men be so
pure and strict? are there none of you that ever have scorned at purity, and
preciseness, and holiness? if you have, consider of this text upon which your
souls lies; every man that has this hope, that is, to see Jesus Christ, and
be made like unto him, he does here in this world purify himself, as Jesus
Christ is pure, that is, he does make Jesus Christ to be his pattern in all
that he does, and aims at no less purity, than the very purity of the Son of
God; he does aim at it, he makes it his work, though he cannot come fully to
it, and that very hope that is in him does work him to this; Now what hopes you
have had that are not such, must be rased down to the ground, if ever you
would be saved at last.

The Ninth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
Question.

YOu will say, Rased down to the ground, what is that?

Answ. By that I mean this.

First, You should be willing to seek to God, and that earnestly, that he
would never let you be at quiet in any false hope, be earnest with God in
prayer: O Lord, I see that the matter of my salvation, is a matter of infinite
consequence; if I should mistake, if I should miscarry in it, it had been
better for me never to have been born; O Lord! therefore help me in this
thing above all, that I may never rest my salvation upon any false hopes, that
so I may not at the last be disappointed of my last hopes; be earnest thus
with God, and be willing to know the worst of your selves; Lord, if thou see
the work be not yet done let me know it, let me know it now, before it is
too late; It is better to know that yet the work is to begin, while you have
time to work, than to know it after when the time is gone: And then, be
willing to examine your hopes, to lay them to the rule of the Scripture, and
that very narrowly: And if you find your hopes cannot stand with the Word,
then resolve thus with your selves, the work is yet to be done, the very
laying of the foundation of that great work, of the saving of my soul, it is to
begin: -- I but you will say, God forbid this, we have not lived all this
while, to begin to lay the work for the saving of our souls now, that were an
ill thing indeed: -- O I would to God it were not so! but this very thought
that some have, that they are not now to begin the ^aying of the foundation in
saving their souls, is that that does destroy them, whereas, though a man or
woman have lived many years, yea though they have been Professors of Religion,
yet if upon examination they can find that the saving work of God is not
wrought in their hearts, and upon that can conclude, Lord it is to begin, for
ought I know, I must begin the work again, and better it is to begin twice,
than be damned once, therefore whatsoever becomes of me, I will begin again;
this were a good sign: Suppose you should begin again, and it may be you
thought too ill of your selves, for it may be there was some truth in your
hopes, or hearts, that you could not see, yet there is no great danger in this,
that that was good will hold, though you do not see it; it is the safest way
for men and women therefore to be willing to begin often, yea and sometimes it
is the best and the readiest course for people that have lost their evidences
for salvation, and they can see no clear evidences out of Gods Word to settle
their hearts upon, for the great matter of their salvation; I say, it is the
readiest way for them to do as if they were to begin again, rather than to
spend time in looking out their old evidences; as a man perhaps that has lost
his evidences may have them renewed with less charge and cost than he can seek
them out, and so sometimes it is with the soul when it has lost its evidences
for salvation, it may get new in less time, and with less charge, than to seek
out the old. It may be thou look to see whether thou have not been an
Hypocrite all this while, or formal: Suppose upon examination thou can not
find any thing to satisfy thy soul, but that it has been so, yet now, what
hinders but that thou may this instant throw thy soul upon Jesus Christ? I
but I am afraid that when I have come to Christ, I have not come rightly. -- I
but perhaps thou may come to Christ in that time that thou may know
whether thou have come rightly, yea or nay: -- But now the best way for those
that are mightily troubled and solicitous about evidences whether their estate
be right or no, I say, let those, rather than spend too much time in
discouraging of their own hearts, begin the work again; let such a one present
Jesus Christ now as a Savior for lost man, whose grace is infinitely full, and
infinitely free; and there is nothing hinders thee but that thou may at this
very instant cast thy self upon him to be thy Savior, both to save thee from
sin, and from condemnation.

I but you will say, I may presume, and who has right to do any such thing?

To that I answer, that there is nothing can give thee right to Christ, but by
casting thy soul upon him, by believing in him, that right that we have to
Christ, it is by believing: It is not by any work before believing that gives
thee right to Jesus Christ: So that by this you see what I mean by rasing down
the old foundation.

The next is, by laying the new foundation of this great work of thy salvation,
and be sure thou lay that sure.

You will say, lay it sure, what is it?

Christ is the foundation, No other foundation can be laid but Christ himself;
lay it there: -- And then that that is next to Christ the foundation, it is the
true work of Faith, and the true work of Repentance; the true work of Faith
that is next, that is the foundation of what is wrought in our hearts; Christ
is the foundation first, but of any work in our hearts, the work of Faith,
Believe, and thou shall be saved: Now then, this work of Faith, thou must
rightly know what it is, and the way of thy believing; and how thou do
receive Jesus Christ in thy believing; and the power of thy Faith how that is
wrought; and what the work of it is upon thy heart; now thou having laid Christ
for thy foundation, and understood the mystery of the Gospel, then when thou
come to believe, in this great mystery of the Gospel, thou must consider what
is it that I am now to believe; why I am now to believe this, that the thoughts
of God from all eternity were for the good of the children of men; and
therefore he has sent the second Person in Trinity into the world to take
man's nature upon him, to die an accursed death for the sin of man: And for me
in particular, the thoughts of God were thus upon me from all eternity, to send
his son into the world to take my nature upon him, and to be made a curse for
my sin, to pay a price for my soul, and through him (when I believe) I do
believe all my sin to be pardoned, the infinite, holy, dreadful God to be at
peace with me, my soul to be reconciled; this wretched sinful soul of mine to
be received into mercy, into the love of God, as the love of a Father, to be
made an Heir of God and Eternal life, when thou do believe, this is the
Object of thy Faith; now this is a mighty work, a mighty thing to believe such
things as these are: Consider therefore what thou do, when thou say thou
do believe in Jesus Christ, put that to the soul, can thou, O my soul,
close with these things? can thou venture thy soul upon such things as these
are? and when thou come to believe, what do thou? it is not that thou
think that these things are true, but thou do in thy believing receive
Jesus Christ according to the condition of the Gospel, that is, thy heart does
open to receive into it the King of glory; Oh it is Christ that is the
foundation of the New Wo^ld that God is to raise up; It is Jesus Christ that
brings in all the good, and happiness, and glory of God to the children of men,
and it is he that my heart opens to receive in, to embrace, to be satisfied
with all, as all the good and happiness I expect; and it is Christ that my
heart opens too to save me from my sin, as well as from punishment, to unite
me to God, to bring me to union with him, that I may live for ever to the
praise of the great God; and it is this Christ that I take into my heart to be
King and Governor, and now to rule: Sin, Satan, Temptations, Lusts, shall not
reign as they have done, but Christ shall set up his own Government in my soul.
-- Now then, upon this must needs follow wonderful and glorious effects upon
the soul, the soul that does believe such high things as these are, and does
open it self to receive Christ upon such terms, certainly, I say, there must
needs be wonderful effects wrought in that soul; such things must needs work
the soul up to God, to live to him in another manner than ever, and that is the
reason of the Scripture expression, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Whosoever is in Christ, is a New Creature, all old things are past away, and
all things are become new. For why? the Lord has revealed new glorious things
to such a soul, and the Lord therefore now acts and carries on the soul to
other manner of objects than ever before it was wont to be busied about. --
And such a kind of work of Faith is this, that is the foundation of the great
work of salvation next to Jesus Christ himself, as the old must be rased down,
so a new must be raised up.

Now when you come to think of salvation, that you hope to be saved, you must
have recourse to such a kind of work upon you, as this; how have I felt the
power of the Holy Ghost rasing down old things? and how have I felt the power
of God, even that power by which Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, to
raise such a foundation as this is? -- And upon this now follows the work of
Humiliation and Repentance, that is, Godly sorrow; and so to mourn, as to have
the heart to be taken from its former courses and ways, and be set upon the
contrary good: -- Now when the soul finds such workings of God upon it (as
certainly these things cannot be, and no notice at all taken of them) when the
soul takes notice how God comes in with power upon it, and believes, that now
surely the Lord intends salvation to me, the Lord has laid such a groundwork
upon my soul, as I dare venture all upon it, and now I have cause to hope that
the hazard of miscarrying to all eternity is over. O this is that that is the
joy of the Holy Ghost, joy unspeakable and glorious, when the soul upon good
grounds can have hopes that the hazard of its miscarrying to all eternity is
over; now, My soul return unto thy rest, Psalm. 16.7.
says such a one; so that that is the next thing, the rasing down of the old,
and raising up the new foundation.

Ninthly, If thou would have thy soul saved, thou must keep thy soul under
the authority of the Word, and maintain the authority of the Word, and the
authority of conscience over thee; this is the way, if thou meanest to go in
Gods way for salvation.

First, For the Word; The soul that God intends to save, he does reveal unto
it a dreadful authority that there is in this Book of God; this is that word,
says God to the soul, wherein I have revealed my mind to the children of men:
Those counsels of my will that concern the eternal good of the children of men
are in this book, and all your souls are to be cast by this book, by this word,
for eternity: Now this being revealed to the soul, the soul stands in awe of
this word, and trembles at this word, fears the authority of it, looks upon
every threatening in the Word, every command in the Word, every promise in the
Word, as having a divine authority stamped upon it, sees the broad Seal of
Heaven stamped upon every thing in this Book, and dares not wilfully transgress
against any thing in the Word, and so continues in keeping its self under the
dreadful authority of the Word; and that soul is in a good forwardness to be
saved, that is kept under the dreadful authority of Gods Word, in the constant
course of it: Now I appeal to you, you would fain have your souls saved, but
can you say thus? Indeed I have many sins, yet God knows, (that knows all
things) that my soul it is kept under the dreadful authority of his Word
continually, and this I labor to do more and more, and I am willing it should
be so, I am not willing to have the authority of Gods Word cast off, but I am
g^ad that ever God did discover to me the dreadful authority that there is in
his Word.

Secondly, And then the next thing is the authority of conscience; if
conscience have any enlightening, it is that that will discover very much of
the mind of God unto thee; there is nothing will discover Gods mind more unto
the heart of a man or woman, than an enlightened conscience, and it will
discover it with power; a Minister speaks, and his words many times vanish in
the Air, but when conscience comes to discover Gods mind, it comes with power,
and speaks particularly to this soul, and the other soul, and conscience (when
it has light) will be pleading of Gods cause, and admonishing and plucking
the soul out of the ways of death and perdition, and it will not easily be
put off; you may easily put off the counsels of such and such friends, but
conscience will not easily be put off, it will come with such majesty upon the
heart of a sinner, that there is no gainsaying of it; conscience will not
regard the vain shifts that people have, but still comes in a commanding power:
Oh keep the authority of conscience, many men and women, because they cannot go
on freely in the ways of sin, where conscience and the word have much
authority over them, therefore they seek to cast off the authority of the word
and conscience, but know this for a truth, that that soul that has cast off
the authority of the word and conscience, is going apace to Hell, is going
apace to destruction; All the while the word and conscience kept thee under,
thou were in some forwardness toward the way of life, but if thou have once
cast off that, then Oh how does the soul grow hardened in sin! how easily are
the truths of God rejected! and then it goes with greediness to satisfy the
lusts of the flesh, and ten thousand to one but such a soul perishes eternally.
Oh, if there be ever a soul in this place that had the authority of Gods word
and conscience to be over them with power, and now through the violence of
their lusts have cast it off; Oh let such a one take notice of what is said
unto them in the Name of God, Oh thy soul is going apace to destruction; But as
for you that begin to feel any authority of the word, or of conscience upon
you, Oh keep it; for this it is that will carry and guide thee in the way that
will bring to life at the last.

Tenthly, If thou would have thy soul be saved, take heed of sinning
against the price of thy soul, against the blood of the covenant, and against
mercy; take heed of these three things, take heed of sinning against Jesus
Christ that paid the price, against the Gospel, that revealed the price of thy
soul; Oh take heed above all things of turning the grace of God into
wantonness! let not the free grace of God revealed in Jesus Christ be turned
to be a means to harden thy soul in sin, to think thou may take the more
liberty to have the satisfaction of the lusts of the flesh, why, because Jesus
Christ came to save sinners; let me say to thee, as Peter to Simon Magus, Oh
Pray if it be possible that the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. If
thou have ever had such reasonings in thy heart, why, Jesus Christ came to save
sinners; and the grace of the Gospel, that is free and full enough to save
souls, though they be never such great sinners, and upon that thou have taken
more liberty; Oh thou had need fall down before the Lord, and cry, If it be
possible that such a thought of thy heart might be forgiven thee; if you look
into the Epistle of Jude, you shall find a dreadful passage against such as
turn the grace of God into wantonness; it is made a sign of a Reprobate, and it
is as black a brand of a Reprobate as any one, to turn the grace of God (and
especially that grace of God that is in the price that is paid for souls, to
turn that) into wantonness is the most dreadful hinderance of saving of a soul,
that possibly can be; Oh take heed of sinning against Jesus Christ the great
Savior of souls, but honor Jesus Christ all the ways you can; would you fain
have your souls saved? Christ is the great Savior of souls, and you had need
honor him, (Kiss the Son lest he be angry) and love him; Psalm. 2.1^.
you had need love his ordinances, and all his members, and all his people; you
had need give all the respect that may be to him, because he is the only
Savior of souls: -- And for the blood of the Covenant, take heed you sin not
against that, let it not be accounted as a common thing; Oh do not prize the
satisfying of your own lusts, rather than the blood of the Covenant, and all
the good that was purchased by that blood; when any wretched sinner shall hear
the Gospel preached to him, and yet shall prize the living in any base wicked
way of sin, I say, such a one does trample the blood of the everlasting
Covenant under his feet, and the language of his heart and actions is nothing
but this, whatsoever is spoken concerning the blood of the everlasting Covenant
revealed in the Gospel, I do prize the satisfying the lusts of mine own heart,
more than all the good that is in the Covenant; now do you think can such a
soul as this be saved? now you sin against the blood of the Covenant, when you
come hand over head to the Sacrament, and thereby you come to be guilty of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ; People are mighty earnest about coming to
Sacraments, now do but read 1 Cor. 11. It is a Scripture which I know you that
are acquainted with Scripture, are not unacquainted with, verse. 27. Whosoever
shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; And what then, verse. 29. He eats
and drinks his own damnation. When you would have the Sacrament, as the seal
of the blood of Christ, and yet come in your sin and filthiness, and do not
discern the Lords body, you come to be guilty of the blood of Christ, and so
to be guilty of your own damnation; and so many think to seal their souls, by
eating and drinking, the damnation of their souls; for there is nothing set out
in Scripture that furthers more the damnation of a soul, than to sin against
the blood of the Covenant: I know some make that Scripture their damnation to
themselves, that is, that they are only to be reproved and condemned for
doing so, but we are to enlarge Scripture to the uttermost that may be; and
seeing the Scripture has made the sin against the blood of Christ in other
places so dreadful, we may very well understand that place in the most
dreadful sense that may be: Now if in case you come unworthily, you hear what
the Scripture speaks, it is guiltiness of the blood of Christ, and eating and
drinking your own souls damnation: -- And then take heed of sinning against the
mercy of God; let not mercy harden you, but let it soften your hearts; Oh that
soul is in a good forwardness to be saved, that every time it thinks of the
mercy of God, it finds it self to melt before the Lord, and mourn bitterly for
sin, when as it applies the mercy of God to it self, I, that is a good
evidence; but now when you think or speak of Gods mercy, you find your hearts
the more hardened in sin, Oh this is dreadful! for how can such a soul be
saved, that sins against the mercy and love of Jesus Christ? for who shall hear
and plead for thy soul before God, when as thou art guilty of the blood of
Jesus Christ? and what is it that shall be thine atonement before the Father?
It must be blood; Without shedding of blood there is no remission of sin: And
what blood must be for the remission of thy sin, when as thou tramplest the
blood of the Covenant under thy feet? and when thou sinnest against mercy? what
is it that must recover thee, but the mercy of God, when thou come to God in
the anguish of thy soul? Now if thy case be thus, that Jesus Christ shall
plead against thee, and say, Oh Father, Father, avenge thy self upon this
wretch, that has not only sinned against thy work of Creation, but against
the work of Redemption, that I went into the world to work; Father, let this
soul perish eternally, that has rejected me, and received every base wretched
lust before me; now, shall that soul be saved that shall have the blood of
the Covenant cry against it, and mercy it self cry to the Lord against it,
Lord, avenge my cause, for I have been most abominably and cursedly abused by
this wretch? when not only the Law of Gods Justice, and Satan accuses thee,
but Christ, and his blood, and the Gospel it self, how shall such a soul be
saved? now then, if you would have your souls saved, take heed of sinning
against Jesus Christ, against the Gospel, and against the blood of God, and
against the mercy of God.

Eleventhly, If thou would have thy soul saved, take heed of sinning against
the Spirit of Grace, the good Spirit of God, that must draw thee to Christ, and
guide thee in the way of salvation, if ever thou be saved.

Now, take heed of sleighting the motions of Gods Spirit, oh do not slight any
motion of the Spirit of God; how do thou know, but when there comes in any
motion of Gods Spirit, it comes in to save thee at this time? thou can not
tell but that at any time when Gods Spirit does assist his Word, thy soul may
depend upon that time, so as God may say, had this soul followed on the work at
this time, it might have been saved; but upon its not following it on, it shall
not be saved; does Gods Spirit begin to move thy soul, when thou art hearing
the Word? Oh do not go into wicked company, and so lose all again, but get
alone in thy closet, and fall down even upon thy face, and cry to God, that he
would follow on the work of his Spirit, that he has begun in thee: Oh Lord, I
lived a long time in a dead-hearted condition, never minding the good of my
soul, but thou have begun to stir me, and Lord, I hope it is the beginning of
thy saving work upon my soul; Oh that thou would go on with it. How many
upon their sick-beds and deathbeds, would give a thousand worlds (if they had
them) that they could have such stirrings of the Spirit of God, as sometimes
they have felt? Oh now when the Spirit stirs, and temptation stirs, take heed
of listening to temptation, and rejecting the motions of Gods Spirit, but think
of that that we read on of the people of Israel, when they were going to
Canaan, they were very near Canaan, and when they were upon the borders of it,
they refused to go into the Land, when God would have them, and upon that The
Lord did swear in his wrath, Psalm 95.10.
that they should never enter into his rest: So when the Spirit of God begins
to bring thee near to salvation, that it may be said of thee, as Christ to the
young man, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, O take heed of
hearkening to temptation, lest the Lord swear that thou shall never enter into
Heaven. The Spirit of God, which is like unto the Dove in the Ark, perhaps it
comes into thy heart once, and it comes in again, and thou sendest it out
again, but take heed of sending it out the third time, lest it should never
come in to thee again; Genesis 6.3.
but that the Lord should say, Spirit, never strive more with such a soul: Oh
when God begins to stir, it does concern you, to say with Samuel, Lord, speak,
for thy servant hears. You that have been forward heretofore, and have lost the
work of Gods Spirit, you had need look about you, for it is a dangerous thing
to draw back; My soul, says God, Heb. 10.38.
shall have no pleasure in those that shall draw back. And if the soul of God
will have no pleasure in thee, how shall thy soul be saved?

Twelfthly, Whosoever would have their souls saved, let them take this course,
account the preciousness of the time of your lives to consist in this, that it
is a day of salvation; account it therefore a mercy of God that your lives are
continued upon this reason, not because you may get great estates, and live and
have your pleasures and delights, but because God has appointed the time of
man's life here in this world, to be the time to provide for his eternity; few
men and women in the world know how to judge aright of the preciousness of
their time, the time of their lives; and that man or woman that comes to know
aright how to judge of the preciousness of this time of life, and of what does
depend upon it, such a one is in a good forwardness to salvation.

Thirteenthly, The last thing that I shall Name is this, be sure to go with
those that go in the safest way, and the straightest way; many of you, you
question about many things that others do, whether they need do so or no; why
can none be saved but those that do so? but I appeal to your consciences, do
not you think the strictest way of godliness is the safest way for salvation?
now, if it be the safest, if you did but understand the infinite consequence
of the salvation of your souls, there need be no other Argument to persuade
you to any strict way of godliness, but this; whatever it be, whether
absolutely necessary, or no, I am sure it is the safest way; and I am sure
there was never yet any upon his sickbed that did repent him that he was too
strict and too precise, but I have known many that have repented them of being
too loose, and too careless: Now in a matter that is of great consequence, you
will be sure to take the safest way: If there be any people in the world that
walk so as your consciences tell you they are in a more strict way than others,
more holy, more close to God, more self-denying, more faithful, it does concern
you to inquire after those, and to walk after those, and join with them; surely
those that go on in the safest way for the salvation of their souls, those I
will make a pattern to me; I will not look what the common course of the
world, and the generality of the world does; The Scripture tells us that There
are but few that shall be saved; And therefore the fewness of men shall never
discourage me; be they never so few, be they never so mean, If I am
persuaded in my conscience it is the safest way, that is the way that I will
walk in, and surely it is the way for the soul to have comfort at the great
day, when it shall appear before the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. I
beseech you consider of this, if you were all now to appear before Jesus
Christ, to have your eternal estates determined of, in what men's conditions
would you wish your selves to be in? if it might be at your liberty, and
Christ should say, now I am to pass the sentence of eternity upon you for your
salvation or damnation; now what kind of men's estates would you wish your
selves to be in? who would you rather be like unto? who would you venture most
upon, to be dealt withal according as your consciences do think they are most
like to be dealt with? I am persuaded, if this were the case, most loose, and
profane, and ungodly men, would run and cling unto those that now they scorn
and contemn; unto those that walk with the most strictness and holiness in
their conversations: Certainly if you would do so Then, it is your wisdom to
do so Now; that which will be true then, certainly is true now; and therefore
that is a good way for the helping to save your souls, to join with those that
walk in the strictest and the holiest way, to do that now, that if you were to
die, you would wish you had done; and to be with them now, that if you were to
have the sentence of eternity past upon you, you would wish you had been
withal. But this shall suffice for what is to be said concerning that great
Question, about the preventing the loss of our souls, and what we should do to
be saved: -- Now for the conclusion; you have heard diverse things already,
about the way, and direction for the saving of souls; I suppose when first the
Question was raised, every one of you would be greedy to hear an answer; There
was never a one in this place but would fain have his soul saved eternally;
what do you mean to do now? what are your thoughts? there has been a question,
and I have endeavored in the Name of God to answer it; Now this is that that I
desire of you even before you sleep, get into the presence of God alone, and
give in your answer to God, what you mean to do, are you resolved upon it? will
you engage your souls now to God (this evening) that that little time that he
will let you live in this world, that your endeavors shall be according to
those particulars that have been opened unto you? Oh blessed be God if this
be but in any one soul! but can any one think that among such a multitude as
this is, but that the Lord would be pleased to dart some thing or other into
one or more. Let me conclude at this time, as the servant of Naaman said to
him, when the Prophet gave him direction what he should do to be cleansed,
he began to be angry, and was loath to do what the Prophet bid him; why
(says his servant to him) My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great
thing, would thou not have done it? how much rather then when he says to
thee, wash and be clean? So I say to you; considering what the worth of your
souls is, and the danger there is of your eternal miscarrying, how if God
should have said this, That so your souls may be saved, I require of every one
of you that you should for forty, fifty years lie as a head-block at the fire
burning; I, and if God should have said thus unto us from Heaven, we had all
cause to have fallen upon our faces, and have blessed God for his mercy toward
us; but now God does not require any such thing as this at your hands, but
requires the abandoning of your lusts, and the attending upon him in his
Ordinances; and he requires the keeping of your souls under his Word and
Conscience, and the following of the motions of his Spirit, and the believing
in his Son; such things as these the Lord requires, upon which your souls may
eternally be saved; and will not you accept? well, that soul that God intends
to save, he will persuade, and the Lord persuade your souls in these things,
that so you may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Tenth SERMON ON The Excellency of the Soul.
Matthew 16.26. For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?


NOw then having done with that point, we are to come to the last thing; That
as the loss is great, as in all the respects I opened, so it is such, that
suppose a man to have gained the whole world in a way of the loss of his soul,
yet that gain will never recompense it; Job 27.8. For what is the hope of the
hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his soul? There are some
men that seek the world, and yet lose both the world and their souls, they
neither gain the world, nor their own souls; and some there are that do gain
the world and their souls both: But there is no necessary connection between
either gaining the world, or losing ones soul, or losing the world, and gaining
the soul, but one may be severed from the other.

But suppose God should let a man gain what he will (though many men seek for
gain by sinful ways, and God crosses them in it, they have not their gain, and
yet they are damned eternally for seeking gain) but suppose a man had gotten
all the world, as he would desire, and yet this man wicked and losing his
soul, he is a most miserable man: Now this is the thing that I have to do, to
show unto you what a poor gain a man has that is wicked, though he has got
the world, when he has cast up all his reckonings, it may be said of him, as
we usually say of men that have got little, They may put all their gain in
their eye, and never see the worse: So certainly, if thou have sought after
gain in this world, in such a way as thou have not provided for thine own soul,
when thou come to sum up all thine accounts, thou will see that very little
is got: There are many ways whereby a man may come to see all the glory in the
world to be but darkness: By seeing the glory of God, the glory of Christ, and
the infinite consequence of an eternal estate; those three things make the
spiritual man to look upon all the glittering vanities of this world, but as
mere darkness, and as nothing: -- But now there be three other things that may
help a natural man to see the things of the world to be as nothing, and the
gains of it to be very poor gain, (I mean one that is not sanctified, that
has no grace.)

The first is, If God do but please to wound his conscience, and terrify him,
he will see all things to be poor things indeed.

Or secondly, When God lays his hand upon him in afflicting of him, upon his
sickbed, or upon his deathbed. It is reported of Musculus, that when he lay
upon his deathbed, and his friends coming about him, and seeing what a poor
condition he was in, that had been an eminent worthy Instrument of God, and an
excellent Preacher in his time, and they mourning for the sad condition they
saw him to be in, O quid sumus? say they; as he lay in his bed he overheard
them, Fumus, said he; that is, O what are we? smoke: Many a carnal man in the
time of his sickness, and apprehension of death, will say, that all this world
it is as nothing.

A third thing that may make even a carnal heart to see all the things of this
world to be as nothing, It is strength of Reason; though there should not be
terror of conscience, nor any afflictions, yet strength of reason may discover
the gain of this world to be as nothing, in comparing of it unto the soul; and
this strength of reason God is pleased sometimes to sanctify by his Spirit,
when it is helped by the Word, by the sanctified reason that there is in the
Word; I say, when it is helped by that, then God blesses it so as to work off
the heart from the world, to the things that concern the everlasting good of
the soul; And it is that that I shall speak to at this time, to convince you
what a poor thing the gain of the world is, even by strength of reason, and yet
such reason as is founded upon the Scripture. -- I have already shown you the
things that may make a spiritual heart see a vanity in all things in the world,
as the excellency of God, and of Christ, and the consequences of eternity; Now
the other two, terror of conscience, and afflictions, they are Gods work, and
God, when he pleases to show the vanity of the World, ^oth ordinarily bring
them upon the creature; but now for the third way of God to discover to the
creature by the sanctified saving work of his Spirit, the vanity of all things;
I shall endeavor to show it you by strength of Argument and Reason out of the
Word.

As First, Surely though thou should gain the world, and yet be a man that
art like to perish at last, thou have gotten but little; and it appears first
in this, that all those that ever came to have true wisdom, and that are in
Scripture commended for men of true wisdom, they have looked upon all the
things of the world as very poor things: -- First, What do you think of him
that was the wisest man upon Earth (mere man) even Solomon? that had the
greatest experience that ever man had, of what good, the honors, or pleasures,
or profits of the world could do; and yet after all his experience, see his
testimony of all, in Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of vanity, says the Preacher, vanity
of vanities, all is vanity. Observe these five things in it: -- First, The
things of this world are not only vain, but vanity in the abstract: --
Secondly, They are an excessive vanity, vanity of vanities, -- Thirdly, A heap
of vanity, vanity of vanities, -- Fourthly, All is vanity, -- Fifthly, He adds
his name to this, Says the Preacher; Now the word that is translated here
Preacher, in the Hebrew, as those that know the tongue, know, it signifies one
gathered, and it is in the feminine gender, and so some think it notes the soul
of Solomon, that gathered wisdom after he had been gathering vanity so long:
But this is the result of it, that all things in the world are only vanity,
and that vanity of vanities, heaps of vanity; or else a soul gathered to God,
after all his departure from him, He says it is so; herein Solomon is like a
man that has gotten to the top of an high hill, such a hill as there are
perhaps hundreds of people of a strong conceit, that upon the top of the hill
are very rich treasures to be had, and they are all scrambling up the hill,
and treading even one upon another that they may get up the hill; Now Solomon
had got to the top of the hill before the rest, and he seeing men keeping a
stir to get up out of s^^h a conceit, cries out to them, Sirs you are all
deceived, you are persuaded that if you could get estates, and honors, and
promotions, that then you should have a great deal of content, why, I am got
upon this hill, and I find there is nothing but dirt here, there is nothing
here that will answer all your toil, and trouble, and expectation, but you will
be utterly deceived; this is the meaning of this Scripture: And then next unto
Solomon, one of the wisest and holiest men that ever lived upon the earth, St.
Paul in the New Testament; mark, as soon as ever God did but work upon his
heart, to show unto him better things, Phil. 3.8. He professes that he did
account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus, verse. 7. But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for
Christ, yea doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, but doggs-meat, that I may win Christ. This
was the slight esteem that Paul had of all the things in the world, that men
kept such a stir about. -- And so when God did but begin to work upon Zaccheus,
when he did but hear of the salvation of his soul, when Christ did but tell
him, This day is salvation come to thy house, presently, (being a covetous rich
man that had gotten his estate wrongfully) he cries out, The half of my goods
I give to the poor, and if I have wronged any man by forged cavillation, I will
restore fourfold. And so John the Beloved Disciple of Christ, which lay in his
bosom, and therefore knew so much of the mind of Christ, you know what he
says in his first Epist. 2.15. Love not the world, neither the things that are
in the world, if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him:
for all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life, is not of the Father. The lust of the flesh, that is
pleasures and sensuality; the lust of the eyes, that is riches; and the pride
of life, that is honors; these are not of the Father, but of the world, says
John; you may think they are great matters, they may be great in your eyes,
but they are not of the Father, but of the world; And the world passes away,
and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God, abides for ever. It
were infinite to show you this both in Scripture, and likewise in the whole
course of the story of the Church, how slightly the Martyrs did account all
the things of this world, as soon as ever God gave them any true spiritual
heavenly wisdom; but because that would cost a great deal of time, therefore
we proceed to show by strength of reason, further out of the Scripture; yet
this may convince rational men, that that which the wisest men in the world,
that have had from God a testimony of great wisdom, have thought to be a
little matter, certainly has no great matter in it; but they have thought the
gain of all the world to be as nothing; therefore certainly there is no great
matter in getting the things of the world, however men esteem of them.

Secondly, What if a man does gain the world, but loses his soul, he is never a
whit the better for any thing in the world; we say sometimes in our common
language, such a man is the best man in the Parish, and I have the hands of the
best men in the Parish; the truth is, we mean the richest men in the Parish:
but riches and honors make no man one whit better than he was before: Prove.
10.20.
The heart of the wicked is little worth. Let a man have never so great an
estate, he may have so many houses that are worth so much, but he is worth no
more than he was; as a great letter makes no more to the sense of a word, than
a little letter does; so great honors, and great places, make no more to the
excellency of a man, than to be without them; these things in the world they
have no goodness in them any further than we put goodness upon them; we may
indeed make good use of them, and so by our good use we may make our selves
better through Gods Grace; but the possessing of them does not make any soul
one whit better than it was before, they make many souls worse; thousands of
souls grow worse than they were before, by the enjoyment of the world, but
where have you one better? none can be better by the things of the world, no,
it must be by some grace of God that a soul grows better, and not by the
things of the world: I will give you for this, this demonstration, you never
find in Scripture (that I know of) that ever any child of God was worse for
afflictions in the conclusion, but you may find, that almost every child of
God that was in prosperity, was the worse for their prosperity, there are very
few to be excepted: I confess we read not of Daniel, nor of Nehemiah, and I
know not any but those two, but ever were the worse for their prosperity, but
not one worse for afflictions, from Genesis to the Revelation; therefore
certainly there is no such great matter in the things of the world; That is a
remarkable place we have in Dan. 11.21. And in his estate shall stand up a
vile person, and he shall obtain the Kingdom by flatteries. -- A vile person,
and yet have the honor of the Kingdom, how can this stand? yes, it is by
interpreters thought to be Antiochus Epiphanes, he was advanced to that
mighty height, that I remember Josephus says, Antiq. l. 12. c. 7
that the Samaritans in their letter to him give him the Title of the mighty
God; he had that title given to him by those that were under him, and
Antiochus Epiphanes, which signifies illustrious; Illustrious Epiphanes, the
Mighty God, and yet the Holy Ghost gives him this title, a vile person; what
good do a few herbs that are strewn upon a Carrion do? do they make the Carrion
to be less corrupt and putrified than it was? truly all the bravery that
wicked men have, it is at the best but a few herbs and flowers strewn upon a
filthy carrion, which makes them not to be the better: The things of this
world therefore in Scripture are called the things of another man's, in Luke
16.12. And if you have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own? You may know the meaning of it by the
verse before: If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous
Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? The riches of this world
are called unrighteous Mammon; now these are opposite to the true riches, as if
these were not True riches, and then in verse. 12. If you have not been faithful
in that which is another man's, that is, in these riches of the world, who shall
give you that which is your own? so that nothing is a man's own, to make him
better, but grace; the good things of the soul, they are a man's own, but the
other things they are the worlds things, they are not a man's own; therefore
what does it profit a man that he has gained the world? for he is never a
whit the better man.

Thirdly, All these things, they are things beneath the soul, things of an
inferior nature; what good is it for a man that has gotten never so much
food, that he has laid up for his horses and dogs, but he has nothing for
his children or for himself? So if a man has gotten the world, he has gotten
somewhat for his body, his inferior part; I but he has gotten nothing for
his soul that is above it: These are things beneath and under the soul: what
good would it be for a soldier, if he have gilt his scabbard, but he has a
broken rusty sword within, or but a wooden sword within? Therefore I find in
Scripture that the bodies of men and women are called the sheath of their
souls, Dan. 7.15. I Daniel was grieved in my spirit, in the midst of my body.
So it is in your books translated, but those that understand the Original Text,
they know it is a word that signifies a sheath, and so Arius Montanus turns it,
and likewise in your Margents, in the midst of his sheath; and by comparing
this Scripture with another, it is plain, that that is the propriety of the
word, 1 Chronicles. 21.27. Where the Text says, The Lord commanded the Angel, and
he put up his sword again into the sheath thereof. Now the word that is here
translated sheath, I find by comparing of them together, that it is the very
same word in the Original that Daniel translates body; for the body is but as
the sheath unto the soul, and what will it gain a soldier to have a brave
sheath, and in the mean time have nothing within it, or that that is of no use
at all? thus it is with many, they seek great things for their bodies, but
their souls are left in the mean time without any succor or help, and in a
most miserable condition; all things that are in the world should be servants
to thy soul, for they are all inferior to it. We account it a great dis^onour
to a man to marry his servant; a man of estate in the world, if we hear he
has married his servant, which is very mean, we account it a dishonor: Now
for thy heart to mingle it self with the things of this world, as its chiefest
good, what do thou but marry thy soul to that which should be thy servant?
for all these things are but as servants to the soul; and for the heart of a
man to be set upon the things of this world, it is to have the curse of Cham
to be upon him; A servant of servants shall thou be; for the things of the
world they should be thy servants, and thou art their servant, and so a
servant of servants; the curse of Cham is upon thee, when thou art a slave to
thy estate, or thy honors, or to thy brutish lusts, a servant of servants art
thou.

Fourthly, They are such things as God in his ordinary administration of
providence has denied to the choicest of his servants, specially in the times
of the Gospel: Many of the choice of his servants in former times were in very
low and mean conditions; but for the times of the Gospel, how did Christ
himself, who was the Son of God, live? he had not a hole to hide his head in;
The fowls of the air had nests, and the Foxes had holes, but the son of man,
not whereon to lay his head. Jesus Christ, that was infinitely beloved of the
Father; and all the Apostles, they were in a poor mean condition, every one of
them died a violent death, but only John; we have records of their several
sorts of death, some crucified, some stoned, and some other kinds of death, but
all put to death, save John, and read but the latter end of the eleventh of the
Hebrews, Those that the world was not worthy of, how they wandered up and down,
In sheepskins, and goat skins, and dens, and caves of the earth. That was a
little before Christ's time, he speaks of those in the time of the Macchabes:
Now certainly, if God has so ordered things in his general administrations,
toward such as are most dear in his eyes, as to deny them these things, that
they shall have but little of them, there is no great matter in them, surely if
there were any great matter in them, God would not deny them to his servants;
when a wicked rich man shall look upon a poor man that walks humbly before God,
and would not commit the least sin willingly for a world, meethinks such a man
should think thus, Oh Lord! what a difference is there between such a poor man
and I, and yet my conscience tells me, that God has more honor from him in
one day, than he has from me in all my life; surely there is no such great
matter in the things of the world, that God has denied them him: If there were
any great matter in them, certainly such as walk most humbly with God, and most
close with God, should have them if they were absolutely good. -- And indeed,
this is one great reason that Gods own dear servants should have so little of
the world, and others so much, it is, that he might hold this forth to all the
world, that the things of this world have but little in them.

Fifthly, And consider but the next Argument which follows upon this, and is of
a near kin to it, That all the things of this world, the pleasures, profits,
honors, they surely have no great matter in them, for they are no more than
may stand with Gods eternal hatred of his creature. Now certainly, those things
that have no higher excellency in them than may stand with the eternal hatred
of the Infinite God, certainly they have no great excellency in them; those
things that Reprobates may have, surely have no great matters in them, that
that you give to your Swine, you make no great matter of it; take all the
things of the world, they are no more than God gives to Swine, than God gives
to Reprobates, than God gives to such as he does eternally hate; I remember
that Luther has such an expression as this of the Turkish Empire, It is but a
crum that the great Master of the family casts to his Dog: Now if all the
Turkish Empire be no more than a bit of bread that you would cast to your Dog,
then what is your estate? The Lord who is so infinitely rich in mercy, he can
afford such bones for Dogs as these are, surely there is no great matters in
these things that Reprobates may have as well as children; therefore you that
are poor people (and yet godly) that want these things, do you quiet your
hearts, what though you have not such an estate as others? Oh do not murmr!
why, it is no great matter you want, you want but that that God gives to
Reprobates; Suppose a man gains the world, if he lose his soul, what gets he?
he gets a bone that Dogs have, for the loss of his soul.

Sixthly, Take this Argument, That the things of this world, they have no
reality in them at all, no real good in them, according to the language of
Scripture, what are the things of the world divided into? take the division
that you had before of St. John, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life. Take pleasures, and riches, and honors, do but see what
the Scripture speaks of them all.

First, For sensual pleasures, you think they have a great deal of reality in
them, why in the Scripture phrase they are nothing, in Amos 6. compare the
former part of the chapter with verse. 13. verse. 4. That lie upon beds of Ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and e^^ the Lambs out of the flock,
and the Calves out of the midst of the stall, that chaunt to the sound of the
Viol, and invent to themselves instruments like David, that drink Wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but they are not grieved
for the afflictions of Joseph. Here is the pleasures that these men lived in,
described; but mark what he says, in verse. 13. Ye which rejoice in a thing
of naught: You do rejoice in that which is nothing; all these pleasures, these
brave merriments, when you get into a Tavern, there you drink, and vaunt, and
have pleasure and music, and what a brave life is this? I but, ye that
rejoice, says the Holy Ghost, in a thing of naught, it may be a great matter
in your eyes, I but the truth is, it is nothing; that is for Pleasure.

Secondly, For Riches, see the testimony of the Holy Ghost concerning them, in
Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thi^e eyes upon that which is not? That which has no
being at all; no, it is only grace and godliness, that is that that has a
being, Prove. 8.21. That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance,
Junius turns it, to inherit that which is; you think that the things of grace
are but imaginations, and only worldly things are real, no, the things of the
world are but fancies, and the things of grace are real.

Thirdly, And then the third is for Honors, Act. 25.23. And on the morrow when
Agrippa was come and Bernice with great Pomp; With much fancy, it was but all a
fancy, (...).
and the truth is, the excellency that these things of the world have, it is an
excellency that our fancy puts upon them; as a piece of gold that heretofore
was but twenty shillings, it is raised up to two and twenty shillings; I but
though men may raise it up in their fancies to be worth more, the gold is the
same: So the things of this world, we may raise them up very high by our
fancies, but there is no more real good in them than there was before they are
but shadows, and though a man's shadow be longer or shorter, yet a man grows
not longer and shorter with his shadow; so though a man's estate be more or
less, yet his happiness does not grow more or less according to his estate;
therefore still, what does it profit a man if he gains the world? why he
gains a shadow, he gains that that has nothing in it, he gains a fancy, a
dream, and he loses his soul for all this.

Seventhly, Further, suppose there were some reality, yet there is nothing that
can satisfy the heart, Isa. 55. Why do you lay out your money for that that is
not bread and for that that sati^fies not? Only Grace is that that satisfies
the soul; these things have so much mud at the bottom, that you cannot have a
full draught of them. -- And besides, there is a curse of God upon them, that
they should not satisfy; yea God has so fashioned the hearts of the children
of men, that they shall never be satisfied with these things: And the eager
desire after these things, comes from a great distemper; just as Maids and
Women that have green-sicknesses, or that long; you shall have them long for
coals, it may be, and dirt, and so green fruit, but though they long for it,
yet this cannot satisfy them, why, because it is but trash: So the heart of a
man or woman that longs for the things of this world, why it is in a distemper,
as one that longs to feed upon dirt, they may feed upon them, but never be
satisfied with them.

Eighthly, Yet further; how can the gain of the world make up the loss of any
spiritual good? for one that goes on in ways of looseness, that soul, whatever
he gets in the world, he has it without God, God in his ordinary providence
may cast it in, but he has it without the blessing of God with it: What if a
man had never such fine flowers in a Garden, if the Sun should never shine upon
them? truly so it is with many wicked men, they have brave and fine estates,
but they never have the Sunshine of the blessing of God upon any thing they
have; yea that that they have in a way of sin, they have it with a curse of God
together with it: That that wicked men feed upon, it i^ b^t ^will, and like
Hoggs-meat that is wrapped up in the dirt; their meat is filthy and stinking it
self, but when it is wrapped up in dirt, then it is worse, and so their estates;
the Scripture calls all in the world but as doggs-meat, and it is wrapped up in
their sin, and the curse of God is upon it. Suppose that that thou do feed
upon had no curse of God upon it, yet it is but as a piece of carrion, but now
it is wrapped up in thy sin, and so long as thou go on in thy sin, the curse
of God is upon it: But now, the good of all the things in the world consists in
this, the communication of Gods goodness toward me in them, and Christ's
blessing of them to draw my heart nearer to God, and to be instrumental for
me the better to serve God; but Oh how few men do know wherein the true chief
good of these things does consist: I have more of the things of the world than
others have, I, but wherein am I more happy? wherein? Oh! I see God letting out
of himself to me in the way of his goodness, and he gives me this to do him
more service than others that are poor; Oh, if thou could say thus, this
were a sign of a gracious heart indeed. A man that loses his soul, and gets the
world, he gets dogs-meat wrapped up in dirt and filth. Oh poor price for an
immortal soul!

Ninthly, And then besides, we must show you somewhat about the uncertainty of
all these things. Charge those that are rich in the world, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that they trust not in uncertain riches. The whole wo^ld is as it were upon a
wheel; the Scripture says, that the tongue sets on fire the whole course of
nature, it is in the Original, the wheel of nature; all these things are
turning up and down, as it were in a wheel you have heard of the wheel of him
who was a great King, and having overcome others set them to draw his Chariot,
but he observing of them as they drew his Chariot, took notice how they
continually looked back unto the wheel, and asking them what the reason was,
why say they, we by this see the turning of the things of this world, the nail
that is now on the top, is by and by on the bottom, we were high enough within
a while, but now are low enough; and the consideration of this did abate the
pride of that great Prince that made four Kings to draw his Chariot: So it is
but a wheel of nature, and will thou venture thy soul for these things that
have no certainty in them? I remember Philip de Co^^ines reports of a Duke of
Exeter, which married one of the Kings of Englands Sisters, and yet he says,
that he was seen in the Low Countries begging his bread barefoot; Oh
therefore would a man venture the loss of his soul for the gaining of these
things that are so fading and passing away! All flesh is grass, and as the
flower of the field, it passes away, and comes to nothing; yea at those times
when we have most use of the things of the world, then they are gone from us,
as Absalom when he was caught by the tree, and had the most use of his Mule,
then his Mule left him, and leaves him hanging by the hair of the head; so
worldly things are most out of the way, when you have the most need of them;
and will a man venture the loss of his soul for the gaining of these things
that will leave you when you have the most need of them; when you lie upon your
sickbed and deathbed, what good will it do you to think that I wore fine
clothes, and I had so much riches coming in yearly: Riches avail not in the day
of wrath; but Righteousness, that delivers from death. All these things are but
fading, and will fail a man when he^ has the most need of them. I remember our
Chronicles tell a strange story of Richard the third King of England, and you
that have them, it is worth your reading; I do not know that ever I read of a
more magnificent Coronation for a King, than of his, set out in abundance of
glory, he had one Earl that bare before him his Crown, and four Earls carrying
four swords before him, one a sword of state; and another without a point, to
betoken mercy, and two glittering swords, one in respect of the Temporalty, and
the other in respect of the Clergy, and four Barons bearing a Canopy over his
head, and himself in a long Purple Velvet Robe, and his Queen in all her Pomp
and State; himself had a Duke to bear up his Train, and his Queen she had a
Countess to bear up hers, and diverse other particulars that might be shown to
set out the greatest pomp and glory almost that could bet conceived for a man
to be in; but behold the revolution of things, within some two years and a
little more after this, this glorious Prince was slain, and his body lying
naked to the view of all, and carried on a Horse with his hands and head
hanging down on the one side, and his heels on the other, as Butchers carry
Swine or Calves, and so he was carried to Leicester, and there lay diverse
days above ground naked and contemptible, and the very stone in which his body
was laid, was afterward made use of to be a Trough for Horses to drink at, at
a common Inn; such hatred did they show to him, which a while before was in
such a glorious condition: Thus we see that these things which are here, will
not hold long, and for one to seek to make his rest in these things, is, as if
a bird should build her nest in a little bush, that is floating up and down in
the Sea; these things will carry you a little way, but not far; we have all to
provide for eternity. If a man had a Voyage to the Indies, and he should
provide a little Boat that should carry him from Westminster to the Bridge, it
were a poor provision; so when we provide for outward comforts, and no more,
we little think of the great Voyage that we have to go; we have all of us to
sail to eternity, and what is a Boat of these outward comforts to carry us that
long Voyage? The things of this world may well be compared to a Tree in the
time of a storm; when you are traveling in the way it begins to rain, and you
ride under an Oak or an Elm-Tree; Now if there falls but a little Rain, it may
keep you dry, but if it rains much, the longer you stand under the Tree, the
worse you will be: So the things of this world may comfort and quiet us
against a little trouble, but Riches, as I said, Avail not in the day of wrath.
They will not keep off the dreadful storm of Gods wrath; all these things are
uncertain, and will disappoint us.

Now these and diverse other Considerations that might be added, are the
strength of Reason grounded upon the Scripture, to convince a man of the vanity
of all the things of the world. Now put all these Considerations together, and
well may we say, as it was said of the price that was given for Christ, that
Zechariah prophesies of, those thirty pieces, a goodly price that was given for
him. You hear sometimes of Judas's sin, that he betrayed Christ for thirty
pieces, a goodly price; I may well apply this to your souls, you that venture
the loss of your souls for getting the world, though you could possibly get all
the world, considering what has been said, it is a goodly price; do you not
see what a goodly price is given for your soul? if these things be but made
real to you, it would be of marvelous use to help against any temptation to
any thing of this world. Now you have se^n what darkness is upon all things,
how they are all but glittering vanities, and not worth the venturing of the
soul for, take heed of hazarding your souls upon any of these things, you will
curse your selves hereafter when it is too late; Oh cursed wretch that I was,
that I should yet venture upon sinful ways that I was told would in-danger the
eternal destruction of my soul! and notwithstanding I heard what a vanity was
in all these things, yet for such a vanity I was drawn aside to lose mine own
soul; well, you see the upshot of all, that to venture your souls for the gain
of the world, it is to venture the loss of pearls for pebble stones, to venture
Gold for dirt, yea for dirt that has a great deal of poison in it, for so it
has; all these things in the world being separated from God, they are not
only dirt, but there is poison in them. Now then, these things being laid
together, you see the point cleared, and all that does remain it is but to
bind up this in several Uses and Applications; If all these things be so poor
and mean, what use are we to make of all these Meditations and Considerations?

USE.

Then for Use, If these things be so, in the first place we learn, not to
envy at the prosperity of ungodly men, whatever it be, let them ruffle it out
for a while here in this world, and carry all before them; let man have his day
here in this world, there is no great cause to envy him, if he be going on in
such a way as he is like to lose his soul; poor miserable wretched creature
that he is, better ten thousand times he had never been born: Poor people
that are wicked, (as many are) they have the curse of God mingled in water, and
rich men that are wicked, they have the curse of God like poison in their Wine;
now we know, of the twain, the poison will work more strongly in Wine, than in
Water, and so of both, certainly ungodly rich men, that have most of the world,
are the most miserable creatures, for they have more to answer for than others
have, and their estates are usually fuel for their lusts, and so their
condition is worse than the condition of any beggar that begs his bread from
door to door; And certainly there is no wicked rich man upon the earth, but if
so be that he dye so, he will hereafter curse the time that ever he had an
estate, and wish he had been a beggar, and gone begging up and down in his
rags, for then he had not had so much to answer for before God. O he is not
a man to be envied at! What man is there that would envy at a malefactor
condemned to dye, though he have on brave clothes? would not any one of you
rather save your Russet plain suit, or a Leather suit, than a suit of Velvet,
and go to be executed in it. I have read of Chrysostom, who being invited to a
feast, as he was a going, he met with one a going to execution, and it fell
out that the way to execution was a very fair way, but the way that lead him to
his friends house, it was a dirty Lane, and he makes this meditation of it, Oh
how much better is it to go in this dirty Lane, to go and rejoice with my
friend, than in a fair plain way, and go as the other does to execution! he
was not willing to go his way, though it were a fair and plain way, but rather
to go his own, though a foul and dirty, he considered that the end of the way
was different: So do not look much upon men and women, what their present
condition is, but look what their end is like to be, and do not envy them. I
suppose you cannot but have heard the story of a poor soldier, that having a
command from his General not to touch any thing upon pain of death, yet coming
by a Vine, takes a bunch of Grapes; the General being very strict, he condemns
him to dye, because of his disobedience, and as he was going to execution, he
went eating the bunch of Grapes; his fellow-souldier rebuked him, but he gives
him this answer, I pray ye do not envy my Grapes to me, for they cost me
dear: So truly we have little cause to envy the men of the world their Grapes,
that they have their mirth, their merry-meetings, whatsoever they have, for it
is like to cost them dear, it is like to cost them their souls, they endanger
their eternal perishing; and therefore there is no cause at all to envy such.
David indeed was troubled a while when he saw the prosperity of the ungodly,
but when he went into the Sanctuary, Psalm. 73.
there he understood their end; Oh my Brethren, you are come into the
Sanctuary, you are come now in the exercise of the Word thus to hear what is
like to become of ungodly men, that enjoy all the world for their portion,
their end is like to be the loss of their souls eternally; do not envy them;
Thou do envy them, and suppose that God should say to thee, well, it shall
be with thee, as with them, that is, you shall have as much as they, and there
is all the good you are like ever to have from me; would you not see cause to
give a dreadful skreek, if such a message should come from Heaven to you? what
a foolish thing were it for a child that has a loving Father, and a great
Inheritance that he expects from him, because he sees a stranger that comes
and sits at the Table, and have better provision than he has, to grumble and
grutch, because he has not such provision made for him every day? Oh he has
no cause to do so, for the Inheritance is reserved for him. God, he is a rich
Householder, and he can give such things as these are to his enemies, as we
speak of, but the Inheritance is reserved for thee; envy not the ungodly in the
enjoyment of the world, for the truth is, their portion it is but very little,
it is but a poor pittance for an immortal soul to have, though he should have
all the world. It is true, we should be sensible of our unworthiness of the
least crum of any good thing, yet though we should be sensible of our
unworthiness, yet we should not be satisfied with having all the world for
our portion. It was a most admirable speech of Luther, when diverse of the
Princes of Germany made much of him, he began to be afraid lest he should
have his portion in these outward things, and here should be all, he breaks
forth in this expression, fearing lest God should give him his portion here; I
did, says he, protest to God with all my power and strength that he should
not put me off so with these things, he would not be content with them; that
is the first Use; Little cause to envy at the men of the world; for the truth
is, it is but a poor pittance they have, and they have made a most miserable
bargain: If you should see one that professes himself to be a Merchant, and he
should venture many thousand pounds, but bring home nothing but a fair painted
bauble for children to play with, would you envy it to him? Just thus it is
with the men of the world, they flatter and please themselves with their
baubles, but their souls are gone in the mean time.

Secondly, Wherefore in the second place, let all those that do seek to get the
world in those ways wherein they are like to lose their souls, let them lay
this Scripture to heart, and O that God would settle it upon their spirits,
that you might when you awake in the night season think of it; when you walk up
and down, when you are in your shops, in your business, think but of this Text;
I remember I told you in the beginning, of one that counseled one of the Kings
of Portugal to think of this Text a quarter of an hour every day, O that you
would every time you awake, especially you that have been seeking after much of
the world, think seriously of this Scripture, Am not I the man or woman that
have hazarded my soul for seeking after somewhat of the world? have thou never
sought to gain any thing of the world in a way of sin, and to this day thy
heart not thoroughly humbled for it, nor repented? it may be not to this day
made restitution? has not the eager pursuit after the things of this world
taken thy heart up so much, that thou have not favored the things of God and
eternal life? thou look upon the things of the world, as if they were the
only realities, but for spiritual things, they are imaginations; have not the
things of this world so taken up thy spirit, as made thee to have slight
thoughts of spiritual and heavenly things? have not thou blessed thy self in the
enjoyment of these things, though in the mean time God has not made known to
thee the riches of his Kingdom? yet thou have thought thy self to have enough
in the enjoyment of what thou have; have not thou often, when thou have been at
the Word, had thy thoughts and spirits about the things of the world, as the
things suitable to thee, but the things of the Word thou have not relisht? yea
and any thing in the Word that has come close to that covetous corruption of
thine, thy heart has secretly derided it; there are no men in the world that
do more secretly condemn and deride the things of God, spiritual things, than
worldly-minded men. In Luke 16.14. we read that Christ preaching to the
Pharisees against their covetousness, and telling them That no man could serve
two Masters, but either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he
will hold to the one, and despise the other, ye cannot serve God and Mammon,
says Christ: You cannot think to have your hearts set upon the world, and your
gain, and yet serve the Lord; but if your hearts be set so upon your estates,
you will make bold with God, you will venture upon the ways of sin, for the
gaining of the things of this world; but mark, The Pharisees also who were
covetous, (...).
heard all these things, and they derided him; the word in the Greek is, They
blew their noses at him; as a man when he scorns and derides another, he will
s^ew it by his nose; so they in a kind of speaking in their nose, in a
jeering, scorning way, they derided Jesus Christ, that talked after this
fashion, What, that a man cannot serve God and Mammon too, that a man cannot
look after the things of the world, and the things of God too: Carnal hearts,
they do hear things in Religion, as unsavory things, whose hearts are after
the things of the world. And so not only for Riches, but for thy Credit: Have
thou not often ventured to lie, to save thy credit in something, and have been
more troubled when thou have been discovered in any thing that makes against
thy credit, and esteem, than in the sin that thou have committed against God?
Now by such kind of evidences it is clear, that men enjoy the world in such a
way, as wherein they are like to lose their souls to all eternity; and now, Oh
do but look upon your estates that you have, and do but think what they cost
you, and little comfort you will have in them. It is observed of David, when
he did long for the waters of the Well of Bethlehem, and there were men
ventured their lives to get him the water; when it came to him, he would not
drink of it, Oh it is the price of blood! so when thou look upon thy estate,
and fittest at thy table, and see that thou have more there than other men,
and look into thy Chest, and there thou have plenty of Garments, and thy
children are fine and brave, and the like; these are pretty things for a while
to please the fancy with, I but what do they cost? as he that would reckon his
cloth, he reckons that the dying and the spinning it cost him so much, I but
what cost the wool? why, that was his own, and he accounted nothing of that:
So, such and such things that thou have, what do they cost? they cost thus
much, and thus much, I but has not thy soul gone into the bargain? and can
thou have pleasure in it, when it cost thee so dear as it has? Psalm. 31.6. the
spirit of holy David rises up in indignation against such men as these are, I
have hated them that regard lying vanities; My spirit cannot but with
indignation and abomination rise up against them; what? that men should follow
after vanity, when there are such glorious things to be followed after? when
there is the blessed God, and the glorious Riches of Grace and Salvation that
are revealed in his Word that may take the hearts of the children of men, and
yet they follow after vain things; men that have immortal souls, capable of
eternal communion with the Lord in the highest Heavens, for them to follow
after vanity, and satisfy themselves in such things, I hate them, says David;
certainly it is the curse of God that is upon the hearts of men, that suffers
them to follow after such things, and especially in the times of the Gospel,
when such glorious things are revealed to their souls, I say the curse of God
is upon them, Isa. 44.20. He feeds on Ashes, a deceived heart has turned
him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my
right hand: He feeds of Ashes; A deceived heart has turned him aside, that
he cannot deliver his soul, there lies the sore evil of it; A deceived heart,
he needs not cast it upon the Devil, but it is his own bare filthy corrupt
heart that dares not trust God for his soul for eternity, he will have present
things, come of it what will come; he knows what the meaning of present things
are, but what those are that are to come, he knows not; a deceived heart has
seduced him, and he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my
right hand? that is, is not the strength of my endeavor set upon falsehoods?
the chief of my strength and endeavors, is it not set upon a lie? Chrysostom
says, If he were to preach to all the world, he would choose that Text as
soon as any; Oh ye children of men, why do ye love vanity, and follow after
leasing? And it were happy, if it were always sounding in the ears of every
one, whose hearts are after present things, so that such a one may hear a voice
behind him, saying, This is not the way, but this is the way, walk in it: Thou
have deceived thy soul all this while, and wearied thy self, and that through
the curse of God upon thy heart; as Hab. 2.13. Behold, is it not of the Lord of
Hosts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, and the people shall
weary themselves for very vanity? Is not this of the Lord of Hosts? So when we
see men and women, why they have understanding in the things of the world, yet
for the matter of God, they have none at all; They are very industrious and
laborious to get outward things, and outward comforts of this world, and tire
themselves; can sit up late, and rise early; Oh is it not of the Lord of Hosts
that people should thus weary and tire themselves? by way of similitude we may
apply it to the spirits of men, that are wearying and tyring of themselves
after vanity; it is the Lords curse that is upon their hearts. It is said, I
remember, of Dionysius, that when he was upon his sickbed, he hears Thales
the Philosopher discoursing excellently about diverse excellent moralities, and
he curses those pleasures and delights that had taken off his heart from
attending to such things: When thou come upon thy sickbed, what will comfort
thee then? it cannot be thy silver nor gold; therefore oh that the Lord would
make thee now for the present to see thy vanity and folly before it be too
late, and thou curse thy self, and there be no hopes for thee! But it is this
point shows the folly and madness of those that seek after never such great
things in the world with the hazard of their souls, but then, what shall we
say to those that will hazard their souls for every trifle? We spoke of that
in the aggravation of the dreadfulness of the loss of the soul, only a word or
two more of it here. In Amos 2.6. God complains there, that the righteous were
sold for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes: That they put such a poor
price upon righteous men, and upon poor men; as if God should say, Know, I put
a greater price upon my righteous servants, than all the silver in the world;
Oh now! the complaint may be against many people, that sell their souls for
silver, yea even for a pair of shoes, for a trifle, for a toy, for nothing;
not for all the world, but for every little pittance; what is that that thou
have, or art like to have? why very poor things in comparison of the world. I
remember it is reported of Alcibiades a young Gallant, that Socrates comes in a
jeering way unto him for his pride, and brings him a Map of the world, and
says he to him, Show me, I pray thee, where lies thy Land here: Now, if I
were to speak to Princes and Emperors, yet this Text would speak dreadfully to
them, that they should venture their souls for Kingdoms and Empires; but now
for you that are never like to have any such things, for you to set your hearts
upon such trifles, and so to damn your souls, what can you get? look upon a
Map, and see what all England is: Europe is but a fourth part of the world that
is known, I but then what is England to Europe, and then to all the world? and
then what is one County in England, and one City, or one House? I have a great
many Tenements, says one, in a Parish, but what is all this to the world, and
all this world unto Heaven, and Heaven and the world unto God? but now to think
that thou art blessed, because thou have but a few rotten Tenements, Oh what a
seduced heart has deceived thee, that thou can be satisfied with such
things as these are? this one meditation me thinks might sink into the hearts
of those that will venture their souls for every trifle: If ever thy soul be
saved, God must set such a price upon it, that he must give more than a
thousand worlds are worth to save it, he must give no less than the blood of
his Son; and can thou think that the infinite God should prize thy soul at
such a high rate, when thou thy self do prize it at such a low rate? If so
be that a man had lost any thing of his estate, and it could not be redeemed
without some great sum of money, If his friends come to know that he does not
prize what he has lost, will any friend be so mad as to lay down five
hundred pound to redeem that for his friend which he knows aforehand that he
does no^ prize at twelve pence? So, can thou think that that soul of thine
that thou prizest at nothing, that the Infinite God should lay down such a
price to redeem it?

Thirdly, From the consideration of the comparison of the gain of the world, to
the loss of the soul; It is a Use of exhortation, To teach us to answer all
temptations, or to work this upon our hearts, the answering of all temptations
to any way of sin, To answer all with this, you offer me too little,
whatsoever you can offer me, to draw me to think well of sin, certainly it is
too little, for it indangers my soul; the through understanding of this point,
and the working of it upon the heart, is a very great help against whatsoever
temptation should come to draw thee to sin.

Surely, If these things be so, then this can be no Argument for me to
neglect any duty that God calls for at my hands, or to venture upon any way
that my conscience tells me is sin: Oh but if I do thus, it will endanger my
estate, but if I do such a thing I shall get so much by it: Certainly there can
be no strength in this, if what has been spoken out of this Text be true.
But now when there comes a temptation and prevails over thee, thou do deny
this Scripture to be the Word of God, and thou set thy judgment against
the truth of God; but now consider with thy self which is like to stand, know,
that God will make his Word stand, he will make it good, when thou and a
thousand thousand such as thou art shall perish for ever; and therefore, as you
that are chapmen, when men offer you less than your ware is worth, you scorn
and contemn them; so you should do when temptation offers you less than your
soul is worth. We read of Saul, when he saw the people following David, says
he, What can the son of Jesse do for you? Can he give you Olive-yards and
Vine-yards, and the like? So when temptation to sin comes, ask it, what can you
do for me? can you save my soul in the time of distress? you would draw me to
such and such courses, such and such companions would draw me to such and such
ways, I but you may put them off with this, Is this the way to save my soul?
if it be, then I will do it, but if it will not do that, God forbid that I
should meddle; Oh therefore remember, remember, that the fashion of this world
passes away, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. The Apostle would take off the hearts of men
from the things of this world, and bring this Argument, says he, The fashion
of this world it passes away; Therefore use the world, as not abusing it. That
that you have in your English book, passes away, it is ((...)) and I find two
very learned Writers translate it by a word that signifies to deceive; The
fashion of the world will deceive you at last, and another by a word that
signifies, To go quite cross; These two significations it has, it does
deceive, or it goes quite cross; the outward show of the world, oh it does
deceive thousand thousands of souls to their eternal perdition, and it goes
quite cross; it seems to promise thee thus and thus much, but it will go quite
cross in the conclusion, and will be thy undoing, if thou do not take heed;
and therefore let not any thing in the world be a temptation to thee, for the
least sin that possibly may be. I remember Austin in his book about an
officious lie, has this passage; says he, A man must not tell an officious
lie (that is, a lie without an intention to do any body hurt) for the gaining
of the world, nay, for the gaining of all the souls in the world, the least sin
is a greater evil, than the gain of all the world is a good, because that it is
dangerous to the soul, upon that very ground; and therefore it is said of
Basil, when the persecutors terrified him with the loss of all that he had,
but that did not prevail, then they made him fair proffers, and great
advantages that he should have, I but Basil laughed at them, and bid them go
and proffer such things to children: So the story of the Martyrs tells us of
Austinius, that godly man, that having been a means to demolish a place for
Idol worship, The Idolaters afterward came upon him, and put him to extremity
of torments, and set children upon him to rake his flesh with their knives, but
at length they would be content if he would but give never so little for the
building up of the Idol Temple again, to let him go free, No, says he, not
one halfpenny. Certainly this point will be enough to justify any that shall
lose estate, or endure any thing in the world, rather than do any thing that
may in the least degree hazard their souls: And so that Martyress Juletta, when
one accused her, and said, that she was a Christian, nay, then says the
Judge, you must not have liberty of the Law, No, says she, then farewell
riches, and life, and all; she would be sure to keep her soul safe,
whatsoever became of all other things.

The last Use is an Use of Encouragement to those that will rather venture all
in the ways of God, than to hazard their souls; thou art the wise Merchant,
that art willing to sell all for the Pearl, and bless thy self in God for this,
that ever God has put this into thy heart, to look to that which is the main
chance, as we use to say: If God had left thee to thy self, thou might have
gone on in such ways as others do, but can thou say, the Lord has caused
the fear of himself, and the fear of eternity to fall upon my soul, and I can
appeal to him, that whatever comes of me in regard of outward, me thinks I
can be satisfied, so be it all things be well with my soul; I say, bless thy
self in God; a man is not to praise himself, but in God, that is thus, When
thou do consider how God has drawn thy heart to him, and thy interest in
God, thou may bless thy self in God, in the grace of God, that has given
thee a heart, taken off from creature comforts, dis-ingaged from them, and set
upon the things that concern the eternal salvation of thy soul; bless thy self
in God, and be not troubled though thou be cut short in the things of this
world. One would think that that which has been said about the vanity of the
things of this world, should make people that are crossed in them (if they be
godly) to be satisfied. What if thou art plundered of all, and ^ast little
p^ovision for thy family, and ^ast bread for one day, and know not where to
get bread for the next? I but is thy soul safe? I remember we read in Genesis
of the King of Sodom; he could say to Abr^ham, Give me the souls, and take
the goods to thy self; though he were but a Heathen King, he spoke of their
natural l^ves: So do you whose hearts God has inclined to soul-saving ways;
say to the men of the world, Do you take the riches, but let me have the
safety and welfa e of the soul: Oh if God have assured thee upon good grounds
that thy so^l is safe, thy sin pardoned, what great matter though thou have not
some of the lumber of this world? If a malefactor that were in danger to die,
should go to seek for a pardon for his life, well, when he has gotten it, and
is coming from the presence of the King, perhaps he loses his glove or
handkerchief upon the stairs, were it not an unseemly thing for such a man to
fall a crying, and wringing of his hands, because he had lost his glove? Just
thus, for all the world, is the madness and folly of people that say, they have
some comfortable hope that God will have mercy upon their souls, and will save
them for ever, yet when they are crossed and wronged, they cry out, they are
undone; man and woman thou art not undone, for thy soul is safe. Lord strike
(says Luther, strike, only pardon my sin; And my Brethren, well may you be
encouraged to undergo any difficulties, and to bear the loss of the comforts of
this world, for the saving of your souls) for indeed the Lord has granted to
us the way of salvation of souls at an easier rate than our Forefathers had; If
I should but tell you the way that many of our Forefathers had for the saving
of their souls, and many of the Saints of God in former times, you would have
said then that it was a difficult way to save souls, and go to Heaven: As I
will but give you an instance of one man, and another woman, how hardly they
came to salvation. That blessed Martyr Bensesius, see but what a way he had to
Heaven for profession of Christian Religion; The Persecutors came to him, and
because he would not deny the Truth, they strike his body in all his members
out if joint, and when they had done that, they make wounds in all parts of his
body, then thirdly, they bring Iron combs sharpened, and so rake upon his body
thus wounded, and when they had done that, they laid him upon an Iron grate,
and with instruments of Iron open those wounds, and after that they melt hot
burning salt, and strew it upon those wounds being opened, and then they come
with hot Irons; and fear him with those hot Irons, and after that dragg him by
the heels into a dungeon, where they had prepared sharp shells, and there he
lay and perished; here is one that went to Heaven upon hard terms, you will
say; but God calls not you to do so, but to deny your selves in some base lust,
in some sinful and ungodly way, in something that you may spare, that you may
spare as well as the water out of your shoes, as we use to say.

And then of a woman, that was of Noble birth, and yet she being convented for
Religion, and answering boldly and resolutely, and would not yield, after many
temptations and fair speeches, they dragged her by the hair of the head from
the seat of Judicature, and having dragged her, they pull off one joint from
another, and having done that, get the teeth and claws of wild beasts, and
rake her flesh from the bones, and having afterward done that, then they came
with hot Irons and Torches, and burning flames, one of one side, and another of
another side, and scorch and burn her to death in such a way as that was, and
yet she goes on constantly; so be it she might save her soul, she was
willing to endure all this misery; we do not know what God may call you to
before you die; many of our Brethren have suffered very hard things, and God
may call you to hard things, Oh that this Text might prepare you! And now my
Brethren, as it has been a means to carry others through temptations, and many
difficulties in this world, so if you would lay but these truths to your
hearts, and if you cannot think of every particular passage, yet do but think
of the Text, and take but this one Note, and that is, that whereas God calls
others to spend their strength in suffering so great evils, to save their
souls; be you willing to spend the strength that God spares you, in doing, in
serving; spend your strength in active obedience so much the more, by how much
the less you are called to spend it in the way of passive obedience, that so
you may have cause to bless God for ever in Heaven, when you shall come to see
soul and body to be blessed and saved eternally; you may bless God for ever in
Heaven for revealing such a truth, and setting home such a Text; What shall it
profit a man, though he gain the whole world, and lose his soul? and what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns over
against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
Folios.
A Practical Commentary, or an Exposition with Observations, Reasons, and Uses,
upon the first Epistle General of John. By that pious and worthy Divine Master
John Cot^on, Pastor of Bostox in New England.

A Learned Commentary, or Exposition upon the first Chapter of the second
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians; being the substance of many Sermons
formerly Preached at Grayes-Inne, London, by that Reverend and judicious
Divine, Richard Sibbs, D. D. sometimes Master of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge,
and Preacher to that Honorable Society. Published for the public good and
benefit of the Church of Christ. by Tho. Manton, B. D. and Preacher of the
Gospel at Stoake-Newington, near London.

(...); or Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more
secret and undiscerned differences between 1. The Hypocrite in his best dress
of seeming virtue, and formal duties: And the true Christian in his real
graces, and sincere obedience. As also between the blackest weeds of daily
infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving grace; and the reigning sins
of the unregenerate, that pretend unto that godliness they never had. By that
late burning and shining Lamp, Mr. Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wrington
in Sommerset.

A Commentary upon the Divine Revelation of the Apostle and Evangelist John. By
David Pareus, sometimes Professor of Divinity in the University of Heidelburg.
And specially some things upon the twentieth Chapter, are observed by the same
Author, against the Millenaries. Translated out of the Latin into English, by
Elias Arnold.

Quartoes.
A Theater of flying Infects, wherein especially the manner of right ordering
the Be is excellently described, with discourses Historical and Physical
concerning them, with a Second part of Meditations and Observations Theological
and Moral, in three Centuries upon the same subject, by Samuel Purchase, M. A.

Peoples Need of a living Pastor, at the Funeral of Mr. John Frost, M. A. by
Mr. Zach. Crofton.

(...); or the Saint's Worthiness and the World's worthlesness, both opened and
declared, in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that eminently Religious, and
highly honored Knight Sir. Nathanael Barnardiston, Aug. 26. 1653. By Samuel
Faireclough, Pastor of the Congregation at Ketton.

Holy things for holy men: or the Lawyers Plea nonsuited, etc. In some
Christian reproof and pity expressed toward M. Prynn's book, entitled, The
Lord's Supper briefly Vindicated, by S. S. Minister of the Gospel.

An Antid te against H. Haggar's poisonous Pamphlet, entitled, The Foundation
of the Font discovered: or a reply, wherein his audaciousness and sophistry in
arguing against Infant Baptism, Discipleship, Church Membership is detected,
his cavils against M. C. M. B. and M. Hall are answered, etc. By A. Houghton,
Minister of the Gospel at Prees in Salop.

Large Octavoes.
Four profitable Treatises very useful for Christian practice, viz. The Killing
power of the Law; The Spiritual Watch; The New Birth: Of the Sabbath. By the
Reverend Willian Fenner, late Minister of Rochford in Essex.

Enchyridion Judicum, or Jehosaphats Charge to his Judges. Together with
Catastrophe Magnatum, or King David's Lamentation, at Prince Abners
Incineration. By John Livesey Minister of the Gospel at Atherton.

The Journal or Diary of a thankful Christian: a Daybook of National and
public, personal and private passages of Gods providence, to help Christians
to thankfulness and experience. By John Beudle, Minister of the Gospel at
Barnstone in Essex.

Mr. Robinsons Christian Armor.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration or the Doctrine of
Regeneration opened and applied, by George Swinock, M. A. Preacher of the
Gospel at Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire.

Heaven and Hell epitomized, the true Christian Characterized, by the same
Author.

Small Octavoes.
Catechizing God's Ordinance, in sundry Sermons by Mr. Zachary Crofton,
Minister at Buttolphs Aldgate, London, the second Edition corrected and
augmented.

The godly man's Ark, in the day of his distress, discovered in diverse Sermons,
the first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Moore.
Whereunto is annexed Mrs. Elizabeth Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of her healrh, for her comfort in the time of
sickness. By E. Calamy, B. D. Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Gale of opportunity, and the Beloved Disciple, by Thomas Froysell.

The Wedding Ring fit for the Finger: in a Sermon at a Wedding in Edmonton, by
William Seaker.

Book of Emblems, with Latin and English verses made upon (Lights) by Robert
Farly.

Sion in the house of mourning, because of Sin and Suffering, being an
Exposition on the fifth Chapter of the Lamentations, by D. S. Pastor of
Upingham, in the County of Rutland.

The one thing necessary; by M. Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook.

A Plea for Alms; delivered in a Sermon at the Spittle, before a solemn
Assembly of the City, on Tuesday in Easter week, April 13. 1658. by M. Thomas
Watson, Minister of Stephens Walbrook.

Moses unvailed, or those figures which served unto the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah Christ Jesus, briefly explained;
whereunto is added the Harmony of the Prophets, breathing with one mouth, the
mystery of his coming, and of that redemption which by his death he was to
accomplish. To confirm the Christian, and convince the Jew, very profitable and
full of comfort. By William Guild, Minister of God's Word at King-Edward in
Scotland.

The Sacred Ordinance of Ordination: by Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery. As it was ^ately held forth in a Sermon preached at the solemn
Ordination of Ministers in the City of Norwich, June 11. Anno 1656. By John
Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at great Yarmouth.

Divine Principles, or a Scripture Catechism, etc.

Good Company; being a collection of various, serious, pious Meditations;
useful for instruction, consolation, and confirmation. By J. Melvin, Minister
of the Gospel at Udimer in Sussex.

A Religious Treatise upon Simeon's Song; or instructions how to live holily,
and dye happily: by T. VVoodriff, B. D. Pastor at Kingsland in Herefordshire.

Five Sermons in five several ways of preaching; the 1 in B. A. way, the 2 in
B. H. way, the 3 in Dr. M. and M. C. way, the 4 in the Presbyterian way, and
the 5 in the Independent way of preaching: by A. VV. Minister of the Gospel,

The Reformation, in which is reconciliation with God and his People: or a
Catechism unveiling the Apostles Creed, with Annotations; in which Faith,
Ordinances, and Government are professed as in the Primitive times, in
opposition to all Errors and Heresies. By VV. K. Minister of the Gospel.

Prospering profaneness provoking Holy Conference, and Gods attention; several
Sermons from Malachy 3.15, 16, 17. by Zach. Crofton.

The Agreement and resolution of several Associated Ministers in the County of
Cork, for the Ordaining of Ministers.

Twelves.
Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies.

The Life and Death of M. Ignasius Jourdain, one of the Aldermen of the City of
Exeter; who departed this life, July 15. 1640. The second Edition published and
enlarged, by Ferdina. Nicolls Minister of the Gospel at Mary Acres, Exon.

The dangerous rule: or a Sermon preached at Clonmel in the Province of Munster
in Ireland, upon Aug. 3. 1657. before the Reverend Judges for that Circuit. By
S. L. Master in Arts, and lately fellow of C. C. C. in Oxon.

The Woman's glory: a Treatise, first asserting the due honor of that Sex; by
manifesting that Women are capable of the highest improvements. The second
Edition enlarged. By Samuel Torshel.

Twenty foures.
Groans of the Spirit, or a Trial of the truth of Prayer.

A Handkerchef for Parents wet Eyes, upon the death of their Children, or
Friends.

There are going to the Press some new pieces of Mr. William Fenners, late of
Rochford in Essex, never yet printed, preserved by a special Providence, one of
which is a second part of his wilful impenitency; being five Sermons more that
he preached upon the 18 of Ezekiel, and the 32 verse.

Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Nathanael Brook, and
are to be sold at his shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversy, Sermons, Devotions.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councills, and
Ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost sheep returned home, by Edward
Chesensale Esquire Octavo.

The Quakers cause at the second hearing, being a full answer to their tenets.

Re-assertion of grace? Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel;
a reply to Mr. Anthony Bridges Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford, by
Robert Town.

Anabaptists anatomized and silenced, or a dispute of Mr. Tombs by Mr. J. Crag,
where all may receive clear satisfaction of that controversy, the best of that
subject extant. Octavo.

A Glimpse of Divine light, being an explication of some passages exhibited to
the Commissioners at White Hall for approbation of Public Preachers, against
J. Harrison of Land-Chapel, Lancashire.

The zealous Magistrate; a Sermon by T. Thresces. Quarte.

New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, Quarto, in the year
1651.

Divinity no enemy to Astrology; a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in
the year 1643, by Dr. Thomas Swaddling.

Britannia Rediviva; a Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1648. by J. Shaw Minister
of Hull.

The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March 24, by J. Shaw.

Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or Man,
in several Sermons, by J. Webster, Quarto.

Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth: by K. Matton.

The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness: or, a more hopeful
way to Grace and Salvation, by K. Young, Octavo.

A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the
wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting, by J. Brinsley
of Yarmouth.

Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are discovered several evidences
of the work of Grace, by J. Collins of Norwich.

The sum of practical Divinity: or, the grounds of Religion in a Catechistical
way, by Master Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel: an useful piece.

Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and all
other Governments, are turned and changed, by J. Davis Minister in Dover,
admirably useful, and seriously to be considered in these times.

The Treasure of the Soul, wherein we are taught by dying to sin, to attain to
the perfect love of God.

A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by J.
Hall, Bishop of Norwich

Select thoughts: or, choice helps for a pious Spirit, beholding the excellency
of her Lord Jesus, by J. Hall, Bishop of Norwich.

The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is added, songs in
the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions, by J. Hall, Bishop of Norwich.

The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness, by T. Fetisplace.

Excellent (...) Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, (...) and other Arts,
or Mechanics.
The incomparabl^ ^^^atise of Tactometria, s^^ Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious
manner, together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison, and
in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Demension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of Measures and Weights, observations on gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metricald, by T. Wybard.

Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares,
Timber, Stones, Steeples, Pillars, Globes, as also the making and use of the
Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners,
Carpenters, and Masons, by L. Diggs.

The unparalled work for ease and expedition, entitled, the Exact Surveyor,
or the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner of
Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champian, Plain, Wood-lands, or Mountains,
by the plain Table: as also, how to find the Area, or Content of any Land, to
Protect, Reduce, or Divide the same; as also, to take the Plot or Chart, to
make a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburn, or any other eminent
Surveyors Method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about buildings, by J. Air.

The Golden Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the
Theory and Practice united in a sympathetical proportion, betwixt Lines and
Numbers, in their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure,
Magnitude, and Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by
Calculations, and confirmed with variety of Examples in every Species; made
compendious and easy for Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by
Th. Wilsford Corrector of the last Edition of Record.

Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it has been proved by many
hundreds in the (...) ^^^don, and other places, by them practiced, (...)
^^owledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest Method; the meanest
capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours practice, may attain to a
perfection in this Art, by J. Rich Author and Teacher thereof, dwelling in
Swithins-lane, in London.

Milk for Children; a plain and easy Method, teaching to read and write,
useful for Schools and Families, by J. Thomas, D. D.

The Painting of the Ancients, the History of the beginning, progress, and
consumma^ing of the practice of that noble Art of Painting, by F. Junius.

Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Surgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving. etc.
Culpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from the
decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged, the way and manner of finding out the
cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to live
or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, according to
the judgment of Hyppocrates, and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpeper's censure of Urines.

Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his Wife for the public good, being the
choicest and most profitable of those secrets in Physic and Surgery, which
whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast, and resolved never to be
published till after his death.

The Yorkshire Spaw: or the virtue and use of that Water in curing of desperate
Diseases, with directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that
repair thither.

Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of man, by
A. Read, Doctor in Physic.

The Art of simpling, an Introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants,
wherein the definitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names,
virtues, times of gathering, temperatures of them, are compendiously discoursed
of: also a discovery of the lesser World, by W. Coals.

Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers,
with their several original names, the places where they grow, their
descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also
their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular physical
virtues; with necessary Observations on the seasons of planting and gathering
of our English plants. A work admirable useful for Apothecaries, Chirurgions,
and other ingenuous persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the
English physical Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their two voluminous
Herbals have discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent occasions their own
Physicians, the Ingredients being to be had in their own Fields and Gardens:
published for the general good, by W. Coals. M. D.

The Complete Midwives practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the
body of Mankind: the second Edition, corrected and enlarged, with a full
supply of such most useful and admirable secrets, which Master Nicholas
Culpeper in his brief Treatise, and other English Writers in the Art of
Midwifry, have hitherto wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, or wholly
omitted, by T. Chamberlain, M. P. illustrated with Copper-Figures.

The Queens Closet opened; incomparable Secrets in Physic, Surgery,
Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experienced persons of our times, many whereof were honored with her own
practice.

True History, and Divine Poetry.
The Tears of the Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel proceedings
of the Spaniards in the Island of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and
other places of the West Indies; in which to the life are discovered the
tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully
managed against them.

Harvey's Divine Poems, the History of Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John the
Evangelist.

Fons Lachrymarum: or, a Fountain of Tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet
Jeremiah, in Verse, with an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas, by J. Quarles.

The Admirable ingenuous Satyr against Hypocrites.

Several other accurately ingenuous Treatises, lately printed.
Themis Aurea, The Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, in which, the
occult Secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light; written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englisht by T. H.

The Iron-Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand; a Prophetical Treatise.

J. Tradiscan's Rarities, published by himself.

The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late King Charles,
with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648.

The perfect Cook, a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for Pastry, or
all other manner of All a Mode Kick-shaws; with the most refined ways of
dressing flesh, fowl, or making of the most poinant sawces, whether after the
French, or English manner, with fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs, by M. M.

Admirable Useful Treatises newly printed.
The Expert Doctors Dispensatory the whole Art of Physic restored to practice:
the Apothecaries shop, and Chirurgions Closet opened; with a Survey, as also a
correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a judicious Censure of their
defects; and a supply of what they are deficient in: together with a learned
account of the virtues and quantities; and uses of Simples and Compounds; with
the Symptoms of Diseases: as also prescriptions for their several cures, by
that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a Work for the
order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be paralleled by any
Dispensatory, in what Language soever.

Cabinet of Jewels, Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. in eight
excellent Sermons: with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel;
with the expediency of Marriage in public Assemblies, by J. Crag, Minister of
the Gospel.

Natures Secrets, or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors, describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes,
and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodigies of Precedent times, with presages of the weather, and
descriptions of the weather-glass, by T. Wilsford.

Helmont disguised: or, the vulga^ errors of impartial and unskilful Practicers
of Physic confuted; more especially as they concern the Cures of Fevers, the
Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases, by way of Dialogue, in which the
chief rarities of Physic are admirably discoursed of, by J. T.

Books very lately printed, and in the Press now printing.
Geometry demonstrated by Lines and Numbers; from thence Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and
Spherical Triangles, by T. Wilsford.

The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar, to these times,
by F. Wilsford.

Sir Kerelm Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and incomparable
secrets of Physic, Surgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving, Candying,
distilling of Wa^ers, extraction of Oils, compounding of the costliest
Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and select Experiments, as they
offered themselves to their Observations, whether here or in Foreign Countries.

The soul's Cordial, in two Treatises, the first teaching how to be eased of
the guilt of sin; the second discovering advantages by Christ's Ascension, by
that faithful Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Christopher Love, late
Minister of Lawrence Jury; the third Volume of his Works.

Jacobs seed, the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by the late Reverend
Divine, Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs; the second Edition very much enlarged.

The Saints Tombstone: or, the Remains of the Blessed. A plain Narrative of
some remarkable passages, in the holy Life, and happy Death of Mistress Dorothy
Shaw, Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull,
collected by her dearest friends, especially for her sorrowful Husband, and six
Daughters consolation and imitation.

The so well entertained Work, the New World of English Words: or, a general
Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect
Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English Words, throughout
the Arts and Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are
useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation; to which is added the
signification of Proper Names, Mithology, and Poetical Fictions, Historical
Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World;
especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles,
and other most memorable Passages are mentioned: A Work very necessary for
strangers, as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that would rightly
understand what they discourse, or read. Collected and published by E. P. For
the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been
assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their names are presented before the
Book.

The so much desired, and learned Commentary on Psalm. the fifteenth, by that
Reverend and Eminent Divine, Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of the Gospel
in York; to which is prefixed a brief account of the Authors Life, and of his
Work, by R. Bolton.

The way to Bliss, in three Books, being a learned Treatise of the Philosophers
Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole Esquire

The Judges Charge, delivered in a Sermon befote Mr. Justice Hall, and Mr.
Sergeant Crook, Judges of the Assize, at St. Mary Overies in Southwark, by B.
Purre. M. A. Pastor of Camerwel, in the County of Surrey; a Sermon worthy of
the perusal of all such persons, as endeavor to be honest and just
Practitioners in the Law.

The Modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing the practick part of
the Law, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of presidents for
Bargains, and Sales, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants,
Joyntures, Indentures; to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries, with good
Provisoes, and Covenants to stand seized, Charter-parties for Ships, Leases,
Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in ^se,
intended for all young Students and Practicers in the Law, by John Hern.

Moor's Arithmetic, the second Edition much refined, and diligently cleared
from the former mistakes of the Press. A Work containing the whole Art of
Arithmetic, as well in Numbers as Species; together with many Additions by the
Author. To come forth at Michaelmass Term.

Likewise,

Excercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the Oval
Figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of Midorgius his
Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical sections may
be easily understood; a Work much desired, and never before published in the
English Tongue: by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great Level of the
Fennes.

America painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first Original
undertakings of the advancement of the plantations in those parts, with an
exquisite Map, by F. Gorges, Esquire

Culpeper's School of Physic, or the Experimental Practice of the whole Art,
so reduced, either into Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the
freeborn Students of the three Kingdoms may in this Method find perfect ways
for the operation of such Medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the cures of
their Patients, by N. C.

Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the year 1660.

Dr. Martin Luthers Treatise of the Liberty of a Christian: an useful Treatise
for the staring of the Controversies so much disputed in these times about this
great point.

The Key of Knowledge, a little Book by way of Question and Answer, intended
for the use of all degrees of Christians, especially for the Saints of
Religious Families, by John Jackson.

The true Evangelical temper; a Treatise modestly and soberly fitted to the
present grand concernments of the State and Church, by John Jackson.

The Book of Conscience opened and read, by John Jackson.

Williams Clowes his Chirurgical observations for those that are burned with
flames of Gunpowder, as also for the curing of wounds, and of the Lues venera,
etc.

The Moderate Baptist, in two parts, showing the Scripture way for the
administering of the Sacrament of Baptism, discovering that old error of
original sin in Babes, by William Baitten.

History and Policy Reviewed in the Heroic Transactions on Oliver late Lord
Protector, declaring his steps to Princely perfection drawn in lively
Parallels to the Ascents of the great Patriarch Moses, to the height of thirty
degrees of Honor, by H. D. Esquire

J. Cleaveland Revived; Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable pieces: a second Impression with many Additions.

The Exquisite Letters of Master Robert Loveday, the late admired Translatour
of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory,
published by his dear Brother, Mr. A. L.

Englands Worthies, Select Lives of forty seven of the most eminent persons
from Constantine the Great to the death of Oliver Cromwell late Protector: by W.
Winstanley, Gent.

The Accomplished Cook; the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery revealed in a
more easy and perfect Method than has been published in any Language; expert
and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish, the raising of
Pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kick-shaws, and the most poinant
Sauces, with the terms of carving and sewing: the Bills of Fare, an exact
account of all dishes for the season with other A la mode Curiosities; together
with the lively Illustrations of such necessary figures as are referred to
practice: approved by the many years experience, and careful industry of Robert
May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of honor.

The Character or A la mode Prospect of France, to which is added Gallus
Castratus: or an answer to a late slanderous Pamphlet, called, the Character of
England; as also a fresh Whip for the Mounsieur, in answer to his Letter, in
vindication to his Madam, the second Edition.

The History of the life and death of Oliver late Lord Protector, wherein from
his Cradle to his Tomb are impartially transmitted to posterity, the most
weighty Transactions, Foreign and Domestic, that have happened in his time,
either in Matters of Law, Proceedings in Parliament, or others Affairs in
Church or State, by S. Carrington.

The Scales of Commerce and Trade, the Mystery revealed as to traffic, with a
Debtor or Creditor, for Merchants Accounts after the Italian way, and easiest
Method; as also a Treatise of Architecture, and a computation as to all the
charges of Building, by T. Wilsford, Gent.

Three Treatises, viz. of the Attributes of G^d, of the excellency of Christ,
of the preciousness of the Soul, etc.

The Joys of Heaven promised to the Saints on Earth. Christ's Sermons on the
Beatitudes, preached in the Mount, being an Exposition of the fifth Chapter of
Matthew, delivered in several Lectures by Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, the last
Sermons he preached a little before his death, at Giles Cripple-gate, London;
these two volumes never before printed are come forth, with the approbation of
those godly and learned Divines who were entrusted for the publishing of his
Works; these are printed for Nathanael Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, and for
Thomas Parkhurst at the three Crowns in Cheapside, over against the great
Conduit.

These are to give notice, that the true and right Lozenges and Pectorals so
generally known and approved of for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Astmaes,
Colds in general, and all other Diseases incident to the Head, are rightly made
only by John Piercy, Gent. the first Inventer of them; and whosoever makes
them besides, do but counterfeit them: they are to be sold by Nathanael Brook
at the Angel in Cornhill.

FINIS.

