THE FIRST LECTVRE, OF GEOGRAPHIE, (Which is a description of the Terestriall
Globe) Read publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbier His ACADEMY, AT Bednall-Greene.

LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, and are to be sold by Hanna Allen at the
Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

The public Lecture of an Introduction to Geographie (which is a description
of the Terestriall Globe) read publicly at Sr. Balthazar Gerbier his Academy
at Bednall Green.
AS Plato did refuse the entry into his Academy, to those that had not studied
Geometry; which finds the contents of all sort of quantity: It may justly be
said, that Fathers of Families ought not to suffer their Sons to engage
themselves to travel until they have first studied, not only their own home,
but made themselves acquainted with those parts they are bound for; and to have
pitched on the best of that study: not as some Germains, over curious to note
Steeples, and bare names of Towns (besides those of Hosts, and the places where
the best wines are) but the constitution of Empires, States, and Nations: As it
is an approved prudence to enquire after the qualities and ends of men, before
we treat with them.

Now as the Academie thought it most fit to begin the opening of Lectures with
an Introduction to Cosmographie (which is a description of the whole world, and
consequently, that great looking-glass declaring the mavelous works of God)
To proceed with Geographie is also thought convenient, for that it proves as
the Eye of History, representing unto us in a moment that accomplished master
piece, in English, the description of the Earth. This art comprehends first the
Chorographie, which describes some part of the Earth, or some Kingdom.

Secondly, the Topographie, which describes a City, or some other place, with
the adjacent neighborhood.

And thirdly, Hydrographie, which describes particularly the water, and its
parts.

We must not make any scruple to say that to contract under our senses the
diversity of so many Monarchies that are on the Earth, and with a cast of an
Ey of ones imagination, to represent to ones self all what the life, of number
of men, and their great journeyes could not so truly perform, must needs be
termed a kind of borrowing from the all knowledge of God, in whose sight all
things appear.

And as he has put in man a mind full of knowledge; that there is nothing
which fits him better then those objects, which may administer unto him a more
perfect knowledge of things created; for that he sees thereby the works of the
maker, and reciprocally the maker by his works, Domine, Dominus noster quam
admirabile est nomen tuum in universa Terra? And thereby man seeing such great
wonders frames his mind: For as from Infants, we become men; of Ignocents,
reasonable; so by study, we become from ignorant, intelligent.

And to this, Geographie serves for easy steps, to those that have their
natural sense of sight; for that by those conducts or Chanals our mind is
filled with a true discernment of all what appears on the superficie of the
Earth; the division of Nations, and Shires; the situations whereof would
otherwise be confused unto us, and consequently would not prove of that use it
is to a good Christian Traveller.

Geographie is divided in two principal parts, in Geometrical and Historical.
THE Geometrical, distinguishes and describes all the surface of the
Terestriall Globe, by certain imaginary circles and lineaments, which do mark
the longitude and latitude; and the principal parts in the which it can be
divided, to discourse of it in order and clearly.

The Historical Geographie, describes the proprieties of every Region, its
situation, its Mountains, Forest, and Rivers; the temperature of the Air, the
nature of the Soil; what Metals, and what Plants it produces, what Fruits,
what Animals; of what complexion the inhabitants are, what their Religion is,
the form of their Politic State, their means, their forces, what Towns, and
what Castles there are, etc.

On the surface of the Terestriall Globe, there are Poles, Hemisphears,
Circles, Zones, Climats, Parallels, Degrees, Inhabitants, Regions, Winds, and
Measures.

Poles are the extremity of an imagenary straight line passing through the
Center of the Earth; the one is Artick, and the other Antarctick.

The Artick Pole is that which appears always in our Hemispheare, and is
named in diverse manners, as Borealis, or Boreus, and Aquilonaris of the
Northern Wind, which blows from that part. It is also called Septentrionalis,
of the seven stars, by the Latins called Triones, and by us vulgarly the
Chariot.

The Antarck Pole is that which is Diametraly opposed to the Article Pole, it
is also by the Latins called Australis, and Austrinus, and Notius, of the wind
Auster, Notus, and Meridionalis, which is the South wind, its that which is
never seen in our Hemispheare, But hidden under the Horizon.

Hemispheares are half Spears.

The Circles are divided into great, and little.

The great Circles have their center equal with that of the Earth, which they
divide in two equal Parts, there are six, The Equinoctial, the Zodiac, the
Meridien, the Horizon, and the two imperfect Circles.

The little Circles have their Center different to that of the Earth, which
they divide in two unequal Parts, they are four, the Tropicke of Cancer, and
the Tropicke of Capricorn; The two Pole Circles, Articke, and the Antarticke.

Of the Equinoctial.
THE Equinoctial is a great Circle, equally distant from the two Poles of the
world.

It is called Equinoctial, because that the Sun making his course under it,
makes the days equal to the nights through all the universal earth, which
happens when the Sun is at the first point of Aries, and Libra.

The Equinoctial serves to show the Latitude of the Towns, which is their
distance from the Equinoctial Line.

It serves to show the Septentrionall, and Meridionall part.

It is divided into 360 parts, which are degrees of longitude, And the
Inhabitants which are under this Circle are esteemed to be in the middle of the
world; as far from the Articke Pole, as from the Antarticke, having the
Sphere straight, and all the Days equal to the Nights.

Of the Zodiac.
THE Zodiac is a great Circle, divided by the Equinoctial in two parts
equally; The part which declines toward the Septentrion is called
Septentrionall; and the six figures Septentrionals; which are Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo.

The part which declines toward South is called Meridionall, and the
Meridionals signs are Libra, Scorpius, Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius,
Pisces.

The Line which is in the middle of the Circle is called Eclip^icke, because
that the Eclipses are made under it.

It has in breadth 12 degrees, and 360. degrees in length; Each degree is
divided in 60. minutes, every miniute into 60 seconds, and every second into 60
thirds, and so forth.

Of the Meridien.
THE Meridien is a great Circle, which passes by the Poles of the world; and by
the Zenith of the Region of the which its said Meridien.

It is called Meridien because that the Sun making its course under it, it is
Midday in the Region of the which its said Meridien.

Zenith is the point which is directly over our heads: It is evident that the
Zeniths being infinite, the Meridiens will be also infinite, if they do not
meet many Zeniths under a same Meridien: But the Geographers sets but one by
every Town or Province.

It shows also the difference of the Longitudes, which is the difference from
one Meridien to another.

Of the Horizon.
THe Horizon is a great changeable Circle, which has the same Center as the
Earth, which it divides into two equal parts, Superior and Inferior: The
Superior part is called hemispheare of the day, and the Inferior hemispheare
of the night.

The highest point in the Horizon is called Semith in the Arabian tongue, or
Pole of the Horizon.

Its opposite is said nathir: It is evident that the Semith being infinite, the
Horizons will be also infinite.

But the Geographers do put but one for every Town and Province.

Of the two imperfect Circles.
THe two imperfect Circles, are two great Circles, cutting one another in
straight Angles, at the Poles of the World.

The one is called Circle of Solstice, and the other Circle of Equinox.

The Circle of Solstice, is the Circle which passes by the Poles of the World,
and by the Solsticall points, which are Cancer and Capricorn.

Circle of the Equinox, is the Circle which passes by the Poles of the World,
and by the Equinoctial Poles, which are Aries and Libra.

They serve to cut the Sphere in four equal parts, and the year in four
seasons.

Of the four little Circles.
THe four little Circles of the Sphere, are the two Tropicks of Cancer, and
of Capricorn. The two Circles of the Pole Artick, and Antartick;

The Trophick of Cancer is the Circle which the Sun marks when it is in the
first point of Capricorn.

These Circles are distant 23 degrees, 30 minutes from the Equinoctial; which
is the greatest declining of the Sun.

The Circle of the Artick Pole, is the Circle which is mark: by the Pole of the
Zodiac about the Pole of the world Artick.

The Circle of the Pole Antartick, is the Circle which the Pole of the Zodiac
marks about the pole of the world Antartick.

These Circles are 23 degrees, 30 minutes distant from the Poles of the World.

These Circles divide the Earth into five Zones.

That which is between the Tropic is called Torride, because of the continual
presence of the Sun, and has of breath 47 degrees.

Those which are between the two Circles of the Poles, are called cold, by the
farnes of the Sun, and are of 47 degrees.

Those which are between the Pole Circle and the Tropic, are called temperate,
because they participate of the two others, and have each one 43 degrees of
breadth.

Of the Clymats.
A Climat is the space of the Earth, in the which the days vary of a half hour.

The Climats begin at the Equinoctial, and finish at the Circle of the Pole;
therefore it is that there are 24 Climats, because that under the Equinoctial
the longest days are of twelve hours, and under the Circle of the Pole the
greatest day is of 24 hours, which are 24 half hours, and therefore 24
Climats.

Those that have set but 7 or 8 Climats have put but those of the earth which
they knew.

Ptolomee has put 48. but he has made them of quarters of hours, which are
named Parallels.

Others have put 36, 24. to the Circle of the Pole, and 12. from the said
Circle to the Pole, but they have made the Climates of 15. to 15. days.

The Ancients named the Climates by the places where they did pass, as by
Meroes, Syene, Alexandria, Rhodes, Roma, Boristhenes and the Montagnes of
Riphaes.

The Degrees are of two sorts; of Longitude and of Latitude:

The degrees of Longitude are innumber of 360.

The degrees of Latitude in the same number.

The Inhabitants of the Earth are considered according to their shadows, or
according to their positions and sears; The Inhabitants (according to their
shadows) are Amphisciens in the Torrid Zone, Heterosciens in the temperate
Zone, and Perisciens in the cold Zone; all these names come from the Greek
tongue.

The Amphisciens have two sorts of shadows.

The Heterosciens have only the one, or the other.

And the Perisciens have it round about them.

The considerations of the Inhabitants according, the Positions are of three
Sorts; Periecians or cohabitants in a same Parallel, and Meriden; But at the
points of the same opposed Paralled, Anticiens, and Contr' habitants in a same
half of Meridien, and in diverse Parallels equally distant of the Equator. And
Antipodes, in the parts of the Earth diametrally opposed.

The Regions or Quarters of the world are four principal, Septentrio,
Meridies, Oriens, and Occidens.

The principal Winds are North, South, Est, and West; correspondent to the
aforesaid Regions.

The Measures.
THE Point is the least party. The Line consists in many continued points. The
Line properly, or according, the Mathimaticiens has no breadth. The Surface
consists in many Lines. The Body or Solid in many Surfaces. The Inch
comprehends twelve Lines: these Lines have the breadth of a grain of Corn. The
Foot twelve Inches. The Cubit a Foot and a half. The Fadome six Foot. The
Perch 18 or 20 Foot. The Common Pace two Foot and a half. The Geometrical
Pace five Foot. The Roman Mile is a thousand Geometrical Paces. The Grecian
Stade a hundred and five and twenty Paces. The Persian Parasangne, three
thousand seven hundred and fifty! The Egyptian Schene is of three different
sorts, two thousand five hundred, five thousand, and of seven thousand five
hundred. The Spanish league three thousand four hundred. The common French
league, two thousand five hundred. The Switzers league, five thousand. The
Italian mile, a thousand. The German league four thousand. The Swedish league,
five thousand. The Hungarian league, six thousand. The English mile, a thousand
two hunderd. The degree of latitude, threescore thousand. The degree of
Longitude (under the Equator) threescore thousand. The circumference of the
Terrestrial Globe, one and twenty millions, six hundred thousand. The Diameter
of the Terestriall Globe, seven millions one hundred seven an fifty thousand
five hundred, or there about. The Surface is, one hundred seventy four
thousand millions, of millions, two and forty thousand millions. The solidity
is the surface multiplied by the third of the Diameter. For every degree of
Latitude, or of Longitude, under the Equator, is taken most commonly 60
minites, 60 thousand Geometrical Paces. Threescore Roman miles. Four hundred
and fourscore Grecian stades. Sixteen Persian Parasangues. Fifty ancient French
leagues. Seventeen Spanish leagues and a half. Four and twenty, or five and
twenty common French leagues Twelve leagues of Switzerland. Threescore miles of
Italy. Fifteen German miles or leagues. Twelve Swedish leagues. Ten Hungarian
leagues. Five and fifty miles of England. Fifty miles of Scotland.
The proper terms belonging to Geographie, are
THe Sea, Gulf, Strait, Isle, Peninsula, Istmus, Continent, Promontory or Cape.

The Sea is the Infinite concourse of Water which covers an infinite space of
the surface of the Earth, which is divided into many parts, and receives diverse
names, according to the lands and people which joins it (as we shall show
hereafter.

Gulf, is a great overture in the Earth, longer then broader where the Sea
enters.

Strait (which is called in Latin fretum) is a forced Sea between two Lands,
which makes great noise, by reason of its agitation.

Isle, is a Portion of Earth environed on all sides by the Sea.

Peninsula is a portion of Earth environed by the Sea, saving that by some
little part, it is fastened to another Land.

Istmus, is the little part of Earth which fastens the Peninsula to the firm
Land.

Continent, is the firm Land, which is neither Isle nor Peninsula, nor Istmus.

Promontorie, is the highest part of the point of the Earth, which advances in
the Sea, and which is discovered far off; its that which is commonly called
Cape.

The next Lecture of Geographie shall be the description of all the parts of
the Terestriall Globe.


