EXCEEDING GOOD NEVVS from Nottingham, and Yorkshire. BEING A TRVE RELATION of
all that has passed there since the removing of the Army from Beverley to
Nottingham. WITH THE NVMBER of Arms and Ammunition that is carried to the
Common Hall in YORK. BEING SENT IN A LETTER from Mr. Gifford to a private
friend in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for I. T. September 5. 1642.

THE LAST NEWS from Nottingham, and Yorkshire.
SIR,
MY Respect first tendered unto you, next I shall acquaint you with all the
passages and proceedings that has passed since my last letters to you.

Satturday Post came to His Majesty at York, that a Ship was arrived at
Cottam in the mouth of Tees, betwixt Hartlepoole and Tinmouth, wherein are
four great Pieces of Ordnance, 560. great Saddles and Bridles* besides 2000
Buts, nine great Casks of Pistols and Carbines; a great proportition of powder
and shot. The same day Colonel Goring writ unto His Majesty, that he keeps
Portsmouth for Him. and if He dares not confide in him; If He will send another
Governor, he will surrender his charge to the Person.

The Kentish men are here, and very resolute for the King, and they say have
stayed some of the Kings at Chattam; Also there was some Ammunition yesterday
sent to Leicester for His Majesty's service, and the K ng intends to raise a
great Army both of Horse and Foot within the Kingdom, diverse Counties having
proffered great store of Horse, M^n, and moneys for His assistance; and most of
the Gentry of Yorkshire, and diverse Kentish Gentlemen and others, sat in the
Deanery all the last week, and they promis^ to raise the King 100000 men in
the Northern parts, and in Wales.

Sunday, great store of Carriages came from Beverley, in regard the Siege of
Hull was given over: This day came fourteen Pieces of Ordnance to the Manor
at York, and some 30 Carriages more laden with powder, shot, match,
firelocks, and Carbines, and diverse other necessaries for War, which was
laid up in the Storehouse at York.

This day likewise was brought great store of Ammunition to York, from Durham
to Cliffe, and Hartlepoole, which came in that Ship, that lately arrived from
Holland.

Upon Monday, news was brought to York of another Ship that was arrived at the
Holy Island near Barwicke, laden with Ammunition also that was sent from the
Queen. Likewise this day came into York above 100 Wagons laden with
Saddles, Bridles, Bits, Pistolls, and Carbines, powder and shot, with diverse
other Engines for War.

This day the Lord General the Farle of Lindsey having disbanded the Army at
Beverley, returned to York by His Majesty's command; and two Companies was
discharged and sent to their Habitions, and there to be ready upon all
occasions.

Tuesday, the Palsgrave left the Court at York, and has taken his Journey
into Holland. This day two Posts was dispatched toward Scotland, but upon what
occasions it is not yet known. This day Sir John Hotham sallied out of Hull,
and plundered some houses near Beverley, levelling the Works raised by His
Majesty, and so retired back again*

Wednesday, one Mr. Marwood (lately a Justice of Peace) who lived within five
miles of York, was robbed by 17 Troopers and Cavalliers, who entered into his
house in the night, breaking open his closets, chests and trunks, took all his
plate, and 120 l. in money, and a great deal of linen. Also they intended to
have killed the Justice, but that he made an escape from them. And it appears
the said Mr, Marwood was lately put out of his place of being a Justice,
because he refused to put the Commission of Array in ex^cution, commanded by
His Majesty; for which it seems these Cavalliers did bear him a grudge,
calling him Roundhead, and was heard to say two or three days before they
would pillage him, by which means three of them is taken, but the rest got
away. When His Majesty heard of it, He was much incensed therewith, and said,
if they could be all taken, every man of them should dye for it; to be an
example for future times.

Thursday, the King went to Clifton, a mile off York to see some Horse
exercised, which was sent Him by diverse of the Gentry of Yorkshire* and the
Bishopric of Durham; at which time one Colonel Ashburnham, who had the same
day made an escape out of Hull in a disguised habit, presented himself to His
Majesty, in the said disguised manner, where he gave His Majesty some Letters,
which he had brought out of Holland, from the Queen, which he had preserved
from being found about him, during his imprisonment in Hull; After His Majesty
was informed who he was, and had received the Letters from him, He presently
Commanded a Horse to be brought, whereon this Colonel Ashournham was mounted,
in those ragged Robes he came disguised out of Hull in; And so Ridd by His
Majeste, discoursing alone with him, until he came at York.

This day a Bill was set up before the Court Gates, by His Majesty's
appointement, That all Gentlemen Volunteers, such as intended to bear their
own charges, and to make a particular Guard for His Majesty's own Person, would
enter themselves into His own Troop, under the Red Cornet, and to give in
their names and their servants names, That Order may be taken at the Kings
remove, for Billetting of such as are to attend upon His Majesty.

Friday, four Troops of Horse belonging to the Lord of Carnarvan, Sir Charles
Lucas, Captain Howard, and Captain Chapman, did exercise and show themselves
on Heyworth Moore, where the King came with diverse Lords and Gentlem^n to take
a view of them, the King being on Horseback with the Lords: And gave command
to the Lord of Carnarvan to march with these Troops toward Newarke upon Trent,
and there to attend His Majesty's coming to Nottingham to set up His Standard,
and then to receive further Order.

The Gentry of Yorkshire sat all this week in the Deanary, touching the
raising of more Forces for his Majesty, in regard the Parliament had refused
to accept of their Petition, concerning the Accommodation with His Majesty,
and of Sir John Hothams Insolences they complained off, and how one Captain
Iack^son was Committed to Prison, for presenting of it.

Satterday* Post came to YOPKE from Scotland, that General L^fley was gone
into Ireland with 1500. Horse, To Aid Colonel Munrce in the North part of
Ireland.

This Day 80* Wagons came Londen with Ammunition from Tinmouth, Hartlepoole
and other places being great Sadles, Firelockes, Pistols, Carobines with great
store of shot and Powder, all which was put into the Common hall in York.

Monday, All the Ammunition that was brought to York, both from Beverley and
the North parts, was Loading a way toward Nottingham, There being seven-score
Wagons and Carts, appointed to carry all the Ammunition thither from York,
and diverse Troops of Horse this day went out of York, to Nottingham.

This day likewise Sir Lewis Dives was made Collonell of a Troop o^ Horse, who
lately made an escape out of his house in Wotton in Bedford-shire, whose house
was b^set by diverse trained Bands in the Country, for apprehending of him, and
bringing him to the Parliament

This night a Petition came to his Majesty from the Parliament and the City of
London, that his Majesty would be pleased to choose twelve Lords about him, and
they to choose twelve of their Lords for a Treaty of Peace, what answer the
King gave we hear not yet.

Tuesday His Majesty took his Journey to Nottingham, and his Household
follows him, there he intendes to set up his Standard upon Monday, and from
thence to march forward toward London, diverse Troops of Horse, and abundance
of the Gentry of the Cavalliers and others is this day gone after the King.

At Nottingham his Majesty will draw up all his forces together and so March
forwards, so that we are like to be partakers of the misery of civil wars
within this Kingdom, if the Lord of his Merrcy prevent it not, the next week
I shall give you Information of his Majesty's further proceedings, I Rest.

York September the 2. Your Loving friend* A. Gifford.

FINIS.

