PROPOSALS FOR Reformation OF Abuses and Subtilties in Practice against the LAW
and in Scandal of it.

By William Gery, Esquire; of Gray's Inn.

London, Printed for William Shears, at his Shop in the New Exchange, 1659.

Proposals for Reformation of Abuses, and Subtilties in Practice against the
Law, and in Scandal of it.
THe Writs and Processes ordained by Law, are truly intended for remedies,
redress of wrongs, and oppressions.

The Statute of 25 Ed. 3. c. 17. which gave the Capias in debt, detinu,
assumpsit, which before that Law was not, by the common Law: For no man's person
might be arrested for such Causes, nor taken in Execution, the lands and
chattels of the Debtor, were only liable to execution.

The Statute intended doubtless a good use of the Capias, for a more speedy
way to compel payment of debts; and not to be made a stale for wrong and
oppression as now it is.

The Statute is abused in this, that men now adays are by force of the Capias
and Latitat Arrested and imprisoned upon great Actions, for pretended great
sums of money, when in truth, there is no debt at all due, or any just cause of
Action.

And commonly upon great Actions, when little is due, both which are great
oppressions, and tend to the ruin of the Person, and family, in dishonor of
the law, and scandal of justice: and no remedy by the law for so doing, nor
equivalent damage. Will you vex your brother, that would live in peace by you?
Revenge your self upon your Neighbor? Will you ruin him in his estate or good
name? Arrest him, right or wrong, this will either bend him to your ends, or
break him in defense of himself; countenancing thereby the greatest oppression
and injustice by color of Justice in the use of Writs and Process of law.

The inconvenience that are by Arrests.
1 Such Arrests upon fained actions, or great actions, for small debts puts the
party to an incapacity of Bail, whereas if the true cause of the action were
known, bail might be procured.

2 It draws present great charges and expenses upon the party arrested, to the
undoing of the party, and support only of the riotous expenses of under
Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Sergeants, and their adherents, who live upon the spoil,
and ruin of other men, and to the dishonor of God.

3 It exposes the party Arrested to base and vile usage.

4 It impoverisheth the prisoner, and disables him to pay.

5 It deprives the party Arrested of the means of livelihood, and use of his
Trade or Art to live by, for the support of himself, his relations, family,
Wife and Children, and payment of his debts.

6 The words of the Writ of Capias, are but ad respond^ndum, and the Writ of
Debt is but debet ut dicit: In the first place, the party Arrested is undone by
imprisonment, before he comes to Answer; and in the other case, upon a
supposall, before it be known, whether a debtor or no debtor.

7 There is great danger by Arrests, manslaughter often happening by the
violent assault of the Sheriffs Bailiffs, and Sergeants in their Arrests.

8 Imprisonment pay no debts, the Keepers and Jailours of prisons devour all
by excessive fees.

9 Imprisonment destroys industry, corrupts manners, and nourishes idleness.

10 By imprisonment the Commonwealth suffers damage, men in prison being
buried alive, whose abilities of mind and bodies might be serviceable to the
public, in times both of Peace and War, if at liberty.

Added to these Reasons, the excessive charge incident to these Arrests, the
prisoner being kept at the Bailiffs house, charges run upon him ten or twenty
shillings a day and night, for Chamber-rent and expenses, which they draw upon
the prisoner without mercy. And if the prisoner be carried to Newgate for want
of means to keep himself at the Bailiffs or Sergeants house) so long as the
prisoner lies there, the Creditor is not bound to Declare. And if not able to
remove himself by Habeas Corpus, which is very chargable to do, the very Writ
of Habeas Corpus, being 11s 4d. or thereabout, and nigh 4l. more according to
the number of the Actions he lies under: And if not able to remove himself, he
lies there a prisoner at the will of him that Arrested him, or put in Bail,
which is not easily to be done, when the Action is great, and the true cause of
the Action not known; And if the prisoner so Arrested be able to remove himself
to the Upper Bench, there must he lie three Terms before the pretended Creditor
is bound to Declare; and in the mean while, the party Arrested is unhappily
undone by such imprisonment, and his Wise and Children; And for this so great
oppression, it may be, he may get twenty shillings costs for want of the
Declaration, a satisfaction in ludibrium Justitiae, that is, in mockery of
Justice. The case is alike if removed by Habeas Corpus into the Fleet

And so if the party be Arrested in any Corporation, and if in the Country, the
under Sheriffs will sit two or three Habeas Corpus before they will bring up
the prisoner; and until he has drawn from the prisoner, considerable sums
for the charge of his remove.

And if it so happen the under Sheriff to be amerced, for not returning his
Writs, such amerciaments are pro forma tantum, not one of twenty estreated, or
if estreated, easily compounded.

As are the inconveniences by Arrest, the like are if the party prosecutor
proceed by Outlary upon the Capias.
1 A Man may be Outlawed upon any pretense of Debt detinue, Assumpsit, or other
pretense, whether true or false, and never know of it.

2 The person so Outlawed may die outlawed, which is of ill consequence to such
person.

3 The Outlary is chargeable to reverse.

4 The forfeiture by the Outlary goes to the Commonwealth without benefit to
the party prosecutor, whose satisfaction the law intends where there is a just
debt; but where it is otherwise, the law is abused, and the party sued
oppressed.

5 The parties Outlawed are without any remedy against the prosecutor, because
he has the law on his side.

6 When men's estates come to be seized on in cases of Outlary, the under
Sheriffs Bailiffes and their followers lick their fingers, and by undervaluing
of the Goods and Chattels of the pretended Debtor, he, his Wife and Children
are undone, havoc being made of the estate.

7 The freehold is liable to seizure upon the Outlawry returned, which if
seized, cannot be reversed, but by pleading, which is very chargeable to do.

8 The party Outlawed is liable to be sued, but disabled to sue for his debts
or for his own right.

When therefore these prosecutions by Arrest of the Body, or by exigent shall
be upon fained, fraudulent and false ground, how great is the wrongs,
oppressions, and injustice: And no remedy or damages equivalent because done
by Process of the Law.

Remedies proposed for redress of the Inconveniences aforesaid.
1 THat in all cases of Debt, detinue, Assumpsits, and the like, there be no
arrest, but a Summons, as before the said Statute of 25. E. 3. c. 17. And such
Summons to be served by the party prosecutor, either upon the party debtor, or
left at his place of dwelling, as is the Subpena; and upon Affidavit made of
such service, the Sheriff to make his return.

This will prevent the fraud of under-Sheriffs and Bailiffs, by whose shifts
and delays, in serving and execution of Process, the people are abused and
wronged and Justice delayed.

This will avoid the extraordinary charge that men are put unto by
under-Sheriffs, their Bailiffs, and Officers, to get their Process and Writs
served, especially when it comes to execution.

And for avoiding of feigned Actions, or Arrests upon greater Actions, where
the Debt or duty is but small.
IT is proposed that all contracts hereafter made, be by specialty, if they
exceed forty shillings, which are properly triable in the County Court or Court
Baron, and ought not to be from thence removed, as cunningly they are, by the
Atturnies, to the great vexation of the people, and abuse of the law, and the
Atturnies that do this not discountenanced.

This course of giving of specialty upon Contracts, will greatly prevent that
sin of Perjury, too commonly practiced: It was the observation of the Lord
Chancellor Egerton, that a contract by parole, was a contract by perjury, and
in anno 40, Elizabeth ter. Tr. he openly declared in Court, that he would give
no relief, to him that claimed a Lease by Parol. And in 1. Jacobi Regis, that
it were good for the Commonwealth, that no promises by parol, proved by
witness, were allowed, considering the plenty of witnesses now adays, that
were Testes Diabolici, qui magis fame quam fama moventer.

And Judge, Doddridges opinion in Slades case, Cook 4. part fol: 92: is, that
the action upon the case is a feigned action, and devised in deceit of the law:

1 A Debt created by specialty, will prevent multiplicity of suits, which are
introduced by parole Contracts, they being ten for one:

2 The action upon a specialtie, is a certain action, the action upon the case
upon paroll contract doubtful and uncertain:

3 The wager of law is taken from the party for his defense, in the action upon
the case, which in the action of debt is saved to him, where the debt is not by
specialty:

4 The action upon the case, is an action of surprise, men's words being often
wrested beyond the true intent of the party, and there a home-swearer carries
the cause:

5 In contracts by specialty there is apparent truth in contracts by paroll,
truth is obscure, and the discovery dangerous and dubious.

6 Contracts by specialty have a certainty in them, so have not contracts by
paroll.

7 Contracts by specialty are more certain and safe for a Jury to ground their
Verdict upon than contracts by paroll.

8 In contracts by paroll where perjury is committed, commonly the witnesses
produced are never more to be heard of, and the party thereby injured, left
without remedy by such swearing, against such swearer, it is otherwise in cases
of contracts by specialty, for therein there is more assurance of remedy, than
in contracts by words, such persons being more responsable to Justice in case
of miscarriage.

Excepted always out of these Proposals, the Contracts and dealings between
Merchant and Merchants, and of their Factours, Servants and Agents, as by the
Statute of anno 21. King James is provided.

FINIS.

