Vindiciae Voti. OR A VINDICATION OF THE TRUE SENSE OF THE NATIONAL COVENANT,
in a brief and moderate Answer to the Protestation Protested: Discovering the
unsoundnesse of that interpretation of the COVENANT, and the weakness of the
grounds there suggested for Separate and Independent Churches.

BY JOHN GEREE, Master of ARTS, and Preacher of GODS word in TEWKESBURY.

Published by the Authority of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the sign
of the gilt Cup, near (...).

Christian READER,
AFter I had sent up this exercise about the Protestation to the Press, there
came into my hands a Pamphlet named The Protestation Protested, or a
Remonstrance showing what is principally required of all those that have or do
take the Protestation: Which Treatise so far as it does concern this title,
seemed to me so irrational, that I thought all understanding Christians would
rather have smiled at the weakness, then have been any way moved with the
Sophistry of it; But finding by experience that not only many of the more
intelligent Christians, but even some of reputation in an higher rank, were
much taken with it, and the effect of it, that some were scrupled, some
attempted a tumultuous removing of things established by Law, under color of
this Protestation, I thought it necessary

(...) that many make of so solemn a vow, under which guilt by his exposition
he concludes the most of the best Ministers, and people of this Kingdom, who
have entered this Protestation; wherein thus far we willingly agree with him. A
vow to GOD is a straight and sacred Band, that should not be entered into
rashly, but with serious deliberation, Eccles. 5, 2. else in stead of an help,
it may become a snare, and be so far from acceptance, that it prove an
abomination, as in Iephtaes case, Judges 11.30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 39. After a vow
is taken, there ought to be as much tenderness to observe it, as caution
before we undertake it, else we shall but double our guilt, and increase GODS
displeasure against us. What we vow is in it self good, and so caries with it
an engagement to performance. Our Vow is second engagement super-added to the
first, if after it we be negligent, we break more bonds, and so must needs be
more guilty: Its not to be doubted but many enter this Protestation rather for
company then conscience, and so will make too little account of keeping it, and
need admonition to observe, as well as to enter this Covenant. But that this
neglect should be so general, as to include the generality of the Godly, as
this Expositor does make it, that I dare not assent unto, the Psalmist has
taught me more tenderness, Ps. 73, 15. If I will speak thus, behold I should
offend against the generation of thy Children. To condemn the godly was such a
thing to this blessed Psalmist, that he would renownce sense, and reason, and
set upon a serious review, rather then dash upon it: In whose steps had this
Author trodden, he would not have been so rash, to have put the fool upon
them: He might with less ado then the Psalmist have freed himself from
needless Horror, and the godly from unjust censure. But now to the point.

He gives us the ground of his Censure. Page 2.

THe Protestation is to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England, so far
as it is opposite to Popery, which they do not perform, so long as they
retain and maintain the imposition of the Liturgy, 2 the Discipline, 3 the
Government, 4 the Ceremonies.



He that has solemnly vowed to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England,
so far as it is opposite to Popery, must renownce all Popery, and particularly
the imposition of the Liturgy, etc. or else he breaks his vow, and is a fool
etc. But the Ministers and people have protested to maintain the Doctrine of
the Church of England, so far as it is opposite to Popery. Therefore they must
renownce all Popery, and particularly the imposition of the Liturgy etc. or
else they break their vows and are fools, in whom GOD has no pleasure.

Now what a manifest fallacy is here, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter, from that which is spoken in some respect, to that which is spoken
absolutely; for the Protestation is not against Popery absolutely; but as this
Author expresses it, so far forth, as it is against the Doctrine of the Church
of England: what Popery then the Doctrine of the Church of England does not
condemn this Protestation does not include, being only to defend the Doctrine
of the Church of England against Popery, and Popish Innovations. But then some
will demand is not the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery. I
answer, ad hominem. If the things here objected be Popery, then the Doctrine
of the Church is not against all Popery, for these things so far as they may be
termed Doctrinall, are yet according to the Doctrine of the Church of England;
unless you will say that the Doctrine of the Church of England is contrary to
the practice of the Church of England, whence then thus I Argue: Either the
Doctrine of the Church of England is not against all Popery, or else the
imposition of the Liturgy, Ceremonies, Discipline, Government, are not Popery;
for the Doctrine of the Church of England is not against them. If the Doctrine
of the Church of England is not against all Popery, he that vows to maintain
that Doctrine against all Popery, vows not against Popery absolutely, but only
as it is against that Doctrine: and then this Authors inference from this vow
against Popery, with this restraint, that we must therefore oppose all Popery
absolutely, is a manifest inconsequence: on the other side, if the Liturgy etc.
be not Popery, as they must not be, if the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND be
complete against it, then they are not abjured: So however it be, the
Covenanter is free from breach and folly: And this I conceive is so clear,
that it needs no further confirmation: yet a little more to evince the
absurdity of it, by other particulars in the Protestation, we protest to
maintain every person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do
in the lawful pursuance of it. If a man should thence infer, that we must
defend him whatsoever he shall do in the pursuance of it, if he shall move
sedition or the like, were not this a violation of the sense of this Covenant?
and is not the same, when we stretch the opposing of Popery so far as it is
opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of England; to be meant against all
Popery whatsoever? though it be granted, it be maintained in the Church of
England? His foundation then is most rotten, and what firmness can be in the
building?

But he makes the objection, Page 2. which he endeavors to answer as well as he
can: The Objection is, that these things are established by the Law, therefore
we may not cast them off till the Law be abrogated, and we protest against
Popery, to cast it out so far as lawfully we may.

Thus the Protestor, where in he has objected, what he has not well answered,
though all be don very rawly. For first he should have framed the Argument
thus, Those things are established by the Laws of England, where the Doctrine
of the Church of England is established, and therefore according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, these things cannot be interpreted to be
Popery; and so not within the Verge of that Protestation, which is against
Popery, as it is opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of England: which
objection if he ever answer, erit mihi magnus Apollo. The Objection which he
has made, he strengthens from the words of the Protestation, that we protest
to cast out things as far as lawfully we may, which clause does not at all
respect the matter protested against, but the means and manner of pursuance,
that we shall not do it in any tumultuous or seditious or illegal way, but by
honest and lawful means. A thing needful to be taken notice of by many
respective Readers of this Book, who while they learn of him that they must
oppose the things mentioned, as parts of Popery, from them selves infer, that
it ought to be done in a violent way, without waiting for the direction of
Authority, which in private persons is not to oppose lawfully, but illegally,
and seditiously.

But now let us hear his Answer. First says he, All Laws are to be
interpreted according to their clear intention and end. Now the Law for
reformation never intended to allow or set up Popery in the Church of England.

There is a twofold intention of Laws, one general arising from men's
goodness, and that may be to remove whatsoever is evil, the other special
arising from men's light, and that is to remove such particulars as are
discovered to be evil the latter intention is the rule of interpreting Laws,
not the former, and this Author speaks of the former.
sense he takes it, is a device of his own, that has neither authority nor
reason, for the confirmation of it. Laws are to be interpreted according to
the mind of the Lawgiver, which the Grammatical sense of the words does
usually discover. Indeed in matters doubtful, where the words are capable of a
double sense, the intention of the Law may there clear, what sense is most
Genuine: but that the general intention of of the Law shall give a sense
contrary to the letter of the Law, is without doubt, a groundless and
dangerous fancy. Its true, the Law never intended to set up Popery, but the
question is, whether it be destructive of all Popery. The Law can reach no
further then the light of the Lawgivers, who if they saw not all Popery, could
not by their Laws condemn all, nor did, if the things in Question be Popery.
Lex Currit cum praxi. The general practice especially of those that are
regular discovers the mind of the Law, and the practice has been to maintain
these things, therefore its not the meaning of the Law to condemn them, nor of
this Protestation to abjure them.

Secondly he says, If humane Laws be found to be contrary to Gods word, they
are invalid and void ipso facto.

noe binding power, because by a superior Law we are bound to the contrary:
But yet such Laws are not Ipso facto void, or if void, yet they are void in
foro conscientiae, in the Court of Heaven, not in foro politico, in Courts on
Earth, though we are not bound to obey them, yet we are without resistance to
submit to such penalties, under the danger of Sedition, which were there noe
Laws, we were free from. Again, this Thesis of his is misapplied, for thence
he infers. Thirdly, that having made this Protestation, we ought to have no
communion with the aforesaid particulars, notwithstanding they be confirmed by
Law, which inference is therefore faulty, because the Protestation is only
against Popery as it is against the Doctrine of the Church, and that which is
confirmed by our law, though it be Popery, yet it is not Popery opposite to the
Doctrine of the Church of England. If the Laws of the Land, and the Doctrine
of our Church, had their establishment in different Courts, then that which is
established by Law, might be against the Doctrine of the Church; but the
Doctrine of the Church, and the Laws of the Lands, having both their
establishment in Parliament, what is confirmed by Law cannot be Popery against
the Doctrine of the Church, and therefore this Authors arguing must needs be
irrational.

But now we are furnished with a second Objection which we are to consider of,
and whether this Author has with any better success taken of, then he has
the former, what says he, If the Parliament did not by Popery understand the
Liturgy, Ceremonies, Government of our Church, and he gives good reason to
conceive they did not, for then many of them would not have taken it. What shall
we do then? that is his Quaere, now hear his Answers. First says he; we are
sure they intended it against all Popery. To which I Answer; that its most
clear, and so he himself expresses in the former Page, they only intend it
against Popery, as it is opposite against the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and such Popery the mentioned things cannot be. Secondly says he,
They express, that the words are not to be extended to the maintaining of any
form of Worship, Discipline, or Ceremonies in the said Church: What does he
thence infer, why forsooth? that therefore we may not Protest for the
maintenance of these; why, was that the Question whether we should be bound to
maintain them, or whether we are bound to abolish them? What ridiculous
disputing then is this? But hence I Argue: If the Protestation do not include
them for confirmation, because they are no parts of Doctrine; it does not
exclude them for abolition, but leaves them for determination to another
opportunity. Thirdly says he, Suppose that at the first making of the
Protestation, that these particulars were not mentioned in the Catalogue of
Popery, yet no good Christian can or will deny, that the House of Commons did
not at all intend to exclude what ever should pertain to Popery as a branch
thereof. This Author is very good at bold assertions, but all as bad in
confirmations, for what a good Christian may do in weakness, I will not
determine; but no wise Christian, as far as I can conceive, can judge, that
what ever shall be found to be Popery, is included in this Protestation, but
what ever is found to be Popery against the Doctrine of the Church of England,
which is the term limiting Popery in the Protestation. Fourthly he Argues from
the hopes that we have by this Parliament, of such a Reformation, as will not
deserve the name of Reformation, if all Popery be not made to be packing. I
join with him in all comfortable hopes from this Honorable House, but what is
this to his matter in hand? All the Reformation to be expected from this
Parliament, is not expected by this Protestation, this is one degree to reform
whatever Popery or Innovation is against Law established, this done, the
Parliament is proceeding further to perfect hoped for Reformation, by removing
corruptions established by Law. Fifthly, Suppose says he, that it could be
imagined by any reasonable man, that the House of Commons had no thought
implicitly to include the foresaid things in the fardell of Popery: shall
private and particular Christians knowing these to be Popery, and
Antichristian, being bound by their solemn Vow and Protestation, never reform
themselves etc. I Answer no man can; if (as he is rational) he deal
rationally. But suppose that these things were not included in the Protestation
according to the intention of the House of Commons, which may appear by
unanswerable grounds.

1. Because the express words be against that Popery which is against the
Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, which these things mentioned, established by
Law in our Church cannot be.

Secondly, Since the general taking, and first making of this Protestation,
the Government and Discipline of the Church has been in strong dispute whether
it should continue or no, which had it been Protested against, there had been
no place for dispute, which yet does neither take off the friends of that side
from asserting, nor is used by the opposites to Prelacy, to overbeare their
Antagonists, which had been the easiest and speediest way of victory, if this
Authors fancy had had truth in it.

Thirdly, Under favor, though (as I shall make it appear) I am no friend to
the foresaid things, yet it was not rational that the Parliament should
include these things in their PROTESTATION; for these things being established
by Law, and fixed in many of the members hearts as well as Laws, to desire men
presently to abjure them, before a full debating of them, seems a point of
such rashness, yea Tyranny, as will not consist with the transcendent wisdom,
and Justice of that Honorable Court.

Fourthly, Nay further I conceive (under favor) that it would not have stood
with the duty of that House to their Sovereign (of which I know they are most
tender) nor that respect that they owe to the Laws of the Land, to protest
against things established by Law, till the Law it self be abrogated, for none
may Protest in such a case further then they are free: Subjects can challeng no
more freedom then the Laws allow them, where and while Laws do tie them, they
are in subjection: and therefore could not in point of duty Protest against
such things, in such a manner, to which the Laws binds them. The power of the
House of Commons (where this Protestation was framed) is no doubt great, far
beyond my apprehension, yet in this case I conceive their power over Laws is
with the consent of the Lords, and his Majesty, to abolish them, but not
Protest against them, while they are in force. By all which Arguments its
manifest that the Parliament neither did really, nor could rationally, intend
in the Protestation to Protest against these things established by Law, and if
we suppose truly they intended it not, this Author does suppose still falsely,
that we are by our Protestation bound to reject and oppose them, for its an old
sound rule, Oaths, and Protestations, are to be expounded according to the
meaning of the framer and giver, not of the taker, else by a dishonest
aequivocation, any thing almost may be cluded; therefore what the Protestation
meant not, we in the taking are not tied to. And if this disputer should think
this should bind us in the things mentioned, though the Parliament intended no
such thing, but the contrary: He may as well affirm that we are bound to
maintain his impendant Churches, for whereas we Protest to maintain the
lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every person that makes this
Protestation; he may infer, but independancy is in his judgment, a right and
liberty of all Christians entering into this Covenant, therefore we are tied to
maintain it: This inference has less dissonancy from the letter of the
Covenant, then that of his about the particulars questioned; yet though I
believe he has as good a will to this as the former; he dare not be so bold
as to draw such a conclusion, because though the letter may bear it, yet the
judgment of the compilers makes it manifest, it was far from their meaning,
which reason likewise might have kept him from including the particulars in
hand.

But now lastly, he comes in with other quaeries, What then, shall men never
reform themselves, but live and die Communicants, etc.

Protestation; did not all that held these unlawful, before this Protestation
was formed, in their own practice withdraw from these things, so far as they
held them unlawful, and against the word of GOD, and so may and ought to do
still, though they be not included in the Protestation? But to proceed, this
Author next brings in his Scholars, questioning how it may appear, that the
forementioned particulars are branches of Popery. And he faines them, speaking,
that if their Consciences were convinced thereof by the word of GOD, then by
their Protestation, as well as by GODS word, they were bound to renownce them:

Protestation we ought not, unless they be Popery opposite to the Doctrine of
the Church of England. I my self must needs account these things, or the most
of them of the same alloy with many things by the Doctrine and Laws of our
Church already condemned and abolisht, else I should not have been nor
continued, as in part I do, a sufferer for witnessing against them: And I do
as earnestly desire Reformation of them as of any thing; that little grace that
I have, does as much Act that way to wrestle with the Lord, for the rooting up
of those plants which our heavenly Father has not planted, as any way, but
nothing engaged by this Protestation, but only by that allegiance which I owe
to Christ and his word. But some may say, If you be against those things, why
do you plead for them?



First the Honorable Houses of Parliament are by it wronged, and are thereby
like to grow more opposite to the removing of the things here pleaded against,
and so (as it is usually) this making have will hinder the work it aims to
further, unless this conceit be seasonably corrected.

Secondly, This misinterpretation will hinder many from entering this
Protestation, which remora of so good a work, had need be removed, which this
Answer may further.

Thirdly, Many that have taken it, are partly troubled, because such things are
yet suffered that they think they have Protested against; which they think they
should not only omit to Act, but also by all means oppose; partly I see men
are taken off for praying for the abolition of such things, as they conceive
are already cast off by Protestation, and are inclined by carnal violence
under this pretense, to do that in the Church, which by a spiritual violence
they should endeavor to prevail for with GOD, that so they may be prevailers
with men, to have public corruptions purged by public authority, which is a
safe, comfortable, and honorable way.

Lastly, Some that think somethings in themselves lawful and tolerable, I find
by this Protestation Protested, to conceive them unlawful, as against the
Protestation though in themselves indifferent. As to instance, though they
think and justly, That the use of the Liturgy in the whole form of it, as a
complete service of GOD to be many ways vicious, yet they think the use of
some of the forms there, which are without exception, and most suited to the
peoples wants, to be in themselves lawful. Notwithstanding though not for his
Arguments, to prove them Popish, yet for the exposition of the Protestation
they refuse them, and not only refuse them, but lay imputation on those that
use them, as breakers of their Vow and Protestation. Now as I have proved, no
use of the Service Book is against the Protestation, so nor the use of some
prayers in such a manner out of the Book, can as I conceive, be justly termed
Popish: for suppose that the form we use be in the Masse-Book, why may we not
as well ask the same Christian Graces, that Papists and we both conceive to be
necessary to a Christian soul, as express the same faith touching the Trinity
or any other point wherein we agree in the same words, and that without the
guilt or imputation of Popery? And again, he that does thus use the Book, not
according to the whole frame of it, but selecting what is most holy, nor
according to the set words of it, but with liberty of correcting the
expressions, which to our times seem harsh, and unsuitable, does hereby as I
conceive, avoid his second Argument, the imposition makes it not Popish to him,
because he uses it with liberty of conscience; To this we may add further,
There is I conceive a true and useful distinction to be made of humane
constitutions: some are helps, and so are in genere boni, good in their kind,
the other have no ground, but mere imposition, and so are in genere mali, in
their kind evil. Now forms of Prayer are humane helps, and so good in their
kind: Prayer is an Ordinance of GOD, it requires a form of words, especially
in public; all men are not able to conceive a form, and therefore a composed
form to them is an help, The form of words in Prayer is not the service, but
modus, the manner of serving God in that Ordinance.
and so good in its kind. Now for the Governors of the Church where there is
need of a form, to tie to one form which they conceive pure, of purpose to
exclude others, which they conceive corrupt, is I conceive no usurpation upon
Christ. And this was the end of our Godly reformers in appointing this Prayer
Book: Now though many men need not this help, and it may be can conceive
better expressions, yet being that forms are human helps, and not in
themselves evil: I conceive we may use some of the Prayers without sin, for
though its often said, that we may not do evil that good may come thereon, yet
I never heard it proved, that we may not sometime do a less good, and not the
greater, for peace and order, and to enjoy the greater good at other times,
more fully and freely? This gives me satisfaction, and I believe many godly,
and so prevents division from the Church Assemblies, which is desirable, for
breaches if they be not necessary are justly scandalous. If any dissent from
us, we shall be more ready to contend with GOD then them; with God (I say) that
he would move the Parliament to remove this form so excepted against, and
corrupt in the general composure of it, and what ever other they prescribe not
exactly to tie the well guifted to it, but leave a liberty to vary as God shall
enable them, as I have heard it has been in our dear Sister Church of
Scotland: Or if they tie them to any form, that they will rather tie them to
the matter, then the words, to prevent the broaching of errors in Prayers,
which some think was the first occasion of set forms. There be Haereticall
Prayers as well as Sermons: A Socinian may vent his Haeresy against the person
of Christ, or the grace of Christ. An Anabaptist may vent his Haeresy against
the Magistrates of Christ, or Ordinances of Christ, in his Prayer as well as
Preaching, therefore the Governors may justly tie them to set heads of Prayer,
though they leave a liberty to the able, to use their own expressions; so
Haeresy shall be prevented, and no breach of liberty justly pretended: but this I
refer to the wisdom of that Honorable Court.

Another Evil of this Treatise, which needed cure, it has bred in some, and
nourisht in others, an opinion, that our Churches are not Churches, nor our
Ministers true Ministers, nor our Sacraments to be participated without sin,
whereby some are drawn to, and others confirmed in a neglect of the servants,
and service of God, which is no small evil, that deserves cure. Give me leave
therefore a little to examine his grounds. His first assay against our
Churches, is in the close of the proof of his third point, the Discipline of
our Church to be Antichristian, whence he concludes we want Discipline: and
from the Book-prayer, and pell mell admission to the Sacrament, he affirms in
his judgment, we want true Sacraments, and that the Preaching of the word, be
generally corrupted, then it wants a third mark of a Visible Church: for
answer, I conceive a distinction suggested by the assertor of the Scotch
Discipline to be very true, and here pertinent. P. 196. A Visible Church may be
considered, either Metaphysically, or politically. It is one thing to consider
men as living Creatures, endued with reason, another thing to consider them as
Magistrates, Masters, Fathers, servants, etc. So it is one thing to consider a
Visible Church in her essentialls, as a Society of men and women, separated
from the blind world, by divine vocation, and professing together the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, another thing to consider it as a complete political body,
in which the power of Spiritual government and jurisdiction is exercised, some
governing, some governed. Now a Church that wants government, or has one that
is corrupt, may be a true Church in the former sense, though not in the latter,
and being a true Church in the former sense, her members may communicate together
in these holy things, which fall under the power of order, which may be called
Sacra mystica, as word, prayer, Sacraments, though not insuch things as are
under the power of jurisdiction.

For his objections about Sacraments, the first I hope has received already
sufficient answer.

For his second objection of Pell mell admission to the Sacrament, if he
dispute against the Church of England in general, he must consider what her
Laws are, not what the practice of some is: Its true, the Law enjoynes all to
come, but its as true, that the same Law forbids those that are in contention,
or are otherwise offensive to the Congregation, to be admitted till
satisfaction given: So the command is general, that men may, not be let alone
in prophanenes, and the admission is restrained, that men may not be suffered
to be prophaners.

And for his Third, The Preaching of the word generally corrupted, that shows
a mind to cavil, rather then any cause, seeing that corrupting of the Word,
was against the Churches Laws, by particular persons, and all such decrees
against Laws are declared invalid: But in this he has an if at the ministry
which he further proposes in his Fourth particular in these words.

And to these Curates consideration I refer it, whether they be able truly out
of good premises to conclude themselves the Ministers of Christ lawfully
called, when all of them do immediately derive their Ministry from the
Antichristian Hierarchy, as the sole foundation thereof; and under the name of
Curates, he comprehends all the Godly, and learned Pastors in the Church, and
dare he say, that the sole foundation of their Ministry is the Antichristian
Hierarchy? Are the precious gifts and graces that Christ Jesus has bestowed
upon them, and blessed and honored with the conversion of many souls, no part
of the foundation of their Ministry? Is the free choice of their people,
desiring them to take the oversight of them, no part of the foundation of their
Calling? Will not these in some men's judgments, and it may be of this
disputers, serve the turn without any thing else? Have they any thing from the
Bishops, but as it were, an external authorizing, to exercise their gifts in
a public way amongst their people? which if it be in some respects corrupt,
shall this corrupt complement make void the call of God, and of the people? God
forbid! undoubtedly Christ would never so ordinarily work by them as he does,
were they not his Ministers, but Antichrists: Besides I believe this disputer
knows, that by Law the Bishop ought to have diverse grave Presbyters with him,
and then the imposition of hands is by the Presbytery, as was Timothies, not of
Episcopacy only.

But having answered his Objections Printed, its needful I answer some others
occasioned by him.

Oh but say some, if these things be not included in the Protestation, of what
use then is the Protestation.

Thyatira, Rev. 14. Hold fast that which thou have: God has given this Church
some light, whereby almost all the erroneous Doctrines, and superstitions of
Popery are removed, which light by the audaciousnesse and corruption of some
Innovators, has been greatly obscured, our Churches Doctrine in matter of
Justification, Free Will, Free Grace; Gods eternal decrees, etc. has been
almost utterly overthrown: Altars, Images, etc. brought in, and the
adversaries were as great as naught, and had proceeded far to work disturbance
in the present proceedings: whereupon it pleased God to move our wise and
Religious Parliament (ever blessed be his name for it) to make this
Protestation to maintain the truths and purity by Law established, which was
an excellent means to hold fast that they had, and prevent apostasy, give me
leave to illustrate this by an homely comparison: When men are lifting up a
thing of great weight, or Horses are drawing some great burden up a steep
hill, when either are at a stand, wisdom teaches them to under-prop the
burden and stay it where it is, till breath is taken, or more help added to
raise it to a desired pitch. So was it with our worthy Reformers, they were
tugging to heave an heavy weight, and were at a dead lift; This Protestation to
defend our Doctrine that is pure, was an underpropping, that things might not
go backwards, till they could add more strength to raise things higher, which
God be blessed, they are busily indeavoring, and if men will but wait, I hope
they shall see the Reformation raised as high as the Doctrines of Scriptures,
which ought to be the only rule, and I doubt not but is theirs.

But if they were in the Protestation, ought we not with violence to pull them
down, and so deal with all superstitious Pictures, etc.

Protestation gives men no leave to break their Ranks, it puts not a sword of
authority into every private man's hand, but every thing is to be don in a
lawful way, without breach of that order that God has appointed in the world,
or our Laws have ordered in our Land. To answer this then distinctly: Things
Protested against, are either private things, or public, as for instance,
some Crucifixes, and other inperstitious Pictures, are our own, at our own
full dispose, some are in public places and as it were of public interest,
things that are private in a private man's power, this Protestation does bind
him to a present Reformation of without further leave from any. But for things
that are public, private persons are to make their address to Magistracy,
and entreat them to proceed, and then the private persons may follow as
Assistants.

Again, Some corruptions are in our own persons, as our own bowing to, or
before the Altar: some are in others; that in our own we are presently to
Reform, but if another continue corrupt practices, we may admonish them,
Protest against them, but not lay violent hands on them, but detect them to the
Magistrate, who by his Protestation, will be bound to punish and Reform them;
thus Gods work will be done in Gods way, with more beauty, safety, and
certainty, and suitable to the mature Judgments of the wise Compilers of this
useful Vow.

After he has done thus with the Protestation, he proceeds to other
objections, to overthrow all subordination in the particular Churches of a
Nation, not only to one another, which was never dreamt of, but to any general
government by Officers gathered out of all, and so set over all, and so he
lays a ground for independent Separate Churches, which he desires may be
erected in this Nation: but this task of his is undertaken and performed with
better order and strength, by another Author in the Presbyteriall Government
Examined. And yet that has received a solid Answer by the Assertor of the
Scotch Government, and that not only in the general, by the grounds there laid
down: but by a particular view and answer to the Arguments of the examiner,
and therefore thither I shall remit the Reader that wil-take pains for
satisfaction in those points. The full discussing of these things, is also
besides my purpose, who do only undertake the Answer of it, in reference to
what is said, touching the misinterpretation of the Covenants, as impeaching
the Doctrine that in the preceding Sermons I desired to publish, yet because I
perceive many are much unsettled (and that even of those to whom I have some
relation) with the things that are scattered in this discourse, I will endeavor
briefly to run over the things here that are material, especially such as have
not a full answer in the aboue-mentioned Treatise.

In this Authors Answers to his own Quaery, what shall be substituted instead
of Prelacy, Liturgy, and Ceremonies, many things deserve examination. First
whereas he says, considering the Church of England to be none other then a
National Church, its incapable of constitution. This word National Church, I
find often used, and much put upon it, and yet neither is it a Scripture
phrase, nor do any give us a certain exposition of it, if by it they
understand a Church that has some common National Worship, by some common
Pastor, at some common place, as all the Jews had the same High Priest, and
Temple, and all the Males were to meet thrice a year at the place which God
should choose; In which respect I conceive the Church of the Jews was properly
termed a National Church; in this sense Christians have no National Churches.
But he seems to make a National Church to be when an whole Nation is taken
into a Visible Church, or Churches, having all of them the outward profession
of Religion, which he says, is impossible now, because particular Visible
Churches consist of none but Visible living members, and visible Saints under
Christ the King of Saints. But here I would feign know the reason why it is
necessary that the members in a particular Church, should be of better metal
then the members of a National Church: does not God require by his precepts,
as much of a National Church, and say as much of them, as of a particular
Church? See Exodus 19.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. how often is that Priest on the National
Church of the Jews, Be ye holy or Saints, for I am holy: The very same charge
that is pressed on Christians, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. where no more is required of
the members of Christian particular Churches, then of the members of the Jewish
National Church, and are not the members of the Jewish National Church called
holy or Saints, as well as be commanded to be so? How often is this reason given
by the Lord, for you are an holy people: See Deuteronomy. 7.6, and 14^, 21, and 26,
19. And many otherglorious things are spoken of the church of the Jews. Ie. 2,
5. Ps. 135, 4. And was not Christ their King? Psa. 44, 4. If he were slain
from before the Foundation of the world, and the Redeemer of the Church under
the Law, was he not their King too? What difference then does Scriptures make
between the members of a National and particular Church, and who dares
distinguish where the Scripture does not? If they Answer that the National
Church of the Jews were holy in Profession, or are called holy in regard of
some that were so indeed, the denomination being from the better part; will
not, nay must not that answer serve us? were all the members of the
Apostolical Churches Visible Saints, otherwise then by profession? what those
that were carnal in Corinth? Cap. 3. and defrauders and scandalous contenders
too? C. 6. Those that were drunk when they came to the Sacrament too? Those
that denied the Resurrection too? 1 Cor. 15, 12. and those that had not
repented of their uncleanness, fornication, and Lasciviousness too? 2 Cor.
12, 21. And those that traduced the Apostle too. Cap. 11. Then what shall deny
the visibility of a Saint, or a living member? So I might ask touching some in
the Ancient holy Church of Rome, Romans 16, 17, 18. And the like of some in the
Church of Philippi. Cap. 3.18.19. So likewise in the Church of Sardis, Revel.
3, 1, 4. and Laodicea. Revel. 3, 16, etc. Can these be said to consist of
Saints, or holy people any more then the Jews, must they not have the Title of
Saints, in regard of their Profession? or the denomination from the better
part? Can Sardis in any other respect have the name of a Colden Candlestick?
And then I would know again, for what reason it should be more dishonorable to
Christ to be the head of a Congregation that are not all Visible Saints,
further then by profession and outward conformity, then to be the head of a
Nation, where all are not Visible Saints, or why Christians should be in more
danger, for being one by Profession in a Congregationall body, then Christ and
Prophets, for being one with such as were not Visible Saints in a National
body, these I confess are Riddles to me: Nay I conceive that though all that
do profess holiness and life should in-duty be so, yet Christ in the parable
of the Tares and wheat, shows it will not be so, and a general separation is
not to be attempted till the end of the world, for the Tares signify the
workers of Iniquity that grow and are to be gathered out of the Kingdom of
him who is styled the King of Saints; and out of what Kingdom but the Kingdom
parabolized, The Kingdom of Heaven. Math. 13, 24, 41. and these Tares were not
secret Hypocrites, for the Servants did discern them, and tell the Master of
them, and not the Master the Servants: nor does it any way cross us that the
field is interpreted the world, as though the wicked and Godly should be in the
world together, but in distinct societies. For this cannot be? Why should the
Servants wonder to see the wicked in the world? how could the Tares come after
the wheat, as they are said to do, seeing the wicked were in the world, before
the Godly in the Church? see verses 25, 27: Why should the Servants consult
about the wicked in the World? What have they to do with those that are
without? yea if the whate and the Tares be thus interpreted, there must by this
parable be nothing but wheat in the Church, no Chafe, no Judas, no hypocrite,
for all but the tares are righteous, and shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom
of the Father. verses 41.43. But why then is the Field interpreted to be the
world?

Judea, but extended to the whole world that would entertain it. Secondly, the
word of this Kingdom, ver. 19. was to be Preached in the world and by the word
of this Kingdom, this Kingdom was to be gathered in the world, in which
Kingdom should appear the Tares with the Wheat. These things are so suitable
to Christ's words and scop, that I do not at al doubt but that this is the true
exposition of this parable. Nor does the Argument so confidently held out
against it, any whit overthrow it: if you thus interpret the parable say some,
you must of necessity exclude all Church Gensures, and so cross other plain
Scriptures.

that are scandalous, now a man may be in the judgment of charity, godly in
regard of his estate in general, and yet in some particular scandalous, and so
need, and deserve excommunication. And a man may be so merely formal, that in
the judgment of charity, he cannot be deemed godly, and yet he may be
faire-conditioned, without crime, and without scandal, here the Tares will
escape, and the Wheat undergo Separation, and therefore since the Separation
here inquired of, is of another nature, then that which is effected by Church
censures, to exclude Church censures by it, is to rack it and wrest it, beyond
its scope. I have stuck the longer in this, because this is the Cardo
Controversiae, the Hing on which the rest is turned, now I proceed. He after
makes great complaint of the State of our Church, to which I so far consent,
that I could wish with Jeremy, my head waters, and mine eyes fountains, to
send forth rivers of tears, for the breakers of Gods Law. But he takes up
afterward, and tells us, that like Sardis, we have a few names which have not
defiled their garments, and the way of reformation he prescribes it by
separating these few names into a new Church, for which he cites 2 Cor: 6, 17.

But stay, is this Christ's way? does he so counsel the Church of Sardis? if
so, I will yield: if not, is not this way of his humane presumption exalted
against the wisdom of Christ? Now Christ's Counsel is to repent of the evil,
hold fast the good, ver. 3. to strengthen the things that are ready to die, ver
2. but not a word of separating the few. How dare any then presume to do it? I
have often sought, and long, a resolution of this doubt, but could never yet
find it, but this Author thinks he has found a command 2 Cor. 6, 17. Come
out from among them, and be ye separate. A strange thing (says he) be ye
separate; but a strange proof say I, That a command to Christians, to come out
from among Heathen Idolaters, and not to touch any sinful thing should be
thought to prove it the duty of Christians to be separate from formal profane
Christians, and not to touch any holy thing with them? what proportion is here
for an inference? And for my part, I must confess, I have wondered to see men
so strict in this, that they will not join in holy duties with the Profane,
which yet I see make no scruple to join in following vain fashions with them
which was wont to be counted an unclean thing: But this is further confirmed
by a direction to Jeremy, Ier. 15, 20. If thou take forth the precious from the
vile, but this is likewise as unfit a shaft for his Bow, for Jeremy lived in a
National Church, in which such a Separation as here this disputer strives for,
he confesses is not requisite, nor was it practiced by Isaiah 8, 18. though he
had occasion, or by any other. I marvel then that this Author, or any other,
should bring this place of Jeremy, to prove their Separation: There is a
Doctrinall Separation which is required in every Minister, if he divide the
word of truth aright, and that we are bound to as well as Jeremy, and the Godly
Ministers do carefully perform: but for such a Separation as this Protestor
requires, here can be no ground for, which they affirm was not required from
the Church of the Jews: But it is further affirmed, that after such an
Apostasy as ours, Churches must be gathered anew, as when the Apostles planted
Churches where the Gospel had not been Preached, this is only dictated without
proof, and yet is neither true nor probable, there being so wide a difference
between our Nation now, and when Joseph of Arimathea first planted the Gospel
in it, when it was purely Paganish: besides, If this were requisite, then must
God also give Ministers qualified to gather Churches, and not only to go on in
the ordinary work of the Ministry: that is, Ministers endued with
extraordinary gifts having immediate callings, to Preach where they will,
without the leave of men, with extraordinary assistance, without which
ordinarily no liberty can be expected to gather Churches, till therefore I see
the like gifts and callings, in some measure, I shall not believe the like
work or duty to lie on Ministers now.

But some may ask what shall then be done?

Sardis, by Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and Prophet? and that is to repent of
what has been amiss; publik humiliation, may fit public transgression,
which the Parliament may be entreated to apply to this malady, and then not
separate from, but labor to strengthen and rectify that which is ready to
die. The Parliament are about a great and good work of removing erroneous and
scandalous Ministers, and seting up godly and learned lights every where, and
withal, giving or confirming rather power to the godly Pastors, to keep off
those that are unfit for the Sacrament by gross ignorance, or scandalous life,
by which means, Parishes that are already taught, may be quickly brought into
for better order, and those that are not, may by teaching be brought to some
good measure of understanding, and desire of the Sacrament, and some at least
outward Reformation before they be required or admitted to Communion in the
Sacrament. But here we have another Quaere what we shall do, where profane
and ignorant persons are permitted Pell, Mell, to which he Answers, that if
Gods Ordinance be Profane (as they are) by ignorant and profaned persons
coming to the Lords Table) then others also that Communicate with them, are
guilty of the same profanation. What is this so without any exception?
profane and ignorant persons profane the Word, and Prayer, and Fasting, and
these are Gods Ordinances, cannot we perform this with them, but be guilty?
this is new doctrine. In the Church of Sardis to which he did compare us, were
the few names guilty of that profanation which the rest must needs do? do
not the Scriptures show the contrary? Revel. 3, 4. their Garments were
undefiled, is there no other way to keep our selves free from pollution, but
separation? what if we endeavor to remove the profane? is not that a better
course? and that which was the burden still laid upon the god^y? but never
that in this case they should separate themselves, or if they cannot separate
the wicked, but do their part, discovering them, and desiring their ejection,
will not that free them from guilt? I think it will: and if not, I believe he
must not long keep in any of his new Churches. But the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
5, 6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, so those that are corrupt will
leaven all. Thus this sentence must be expounded, Gal. 5, 9. in regard of
infection with the same evils.
from which they shall be safe enough that bewail and distaste his ill
qualities, though they be at the Sacrament with him, yet if they can get
assistance, one effect of their distaste should be excommunication: But the
Apostle applies it to mixed Communion, ver. 8 but he misapplies that Text which
others more suitably interpret of leading our lives, not eating the Sacrament.
And for that verse the 9. not to company with fornicators, its meant of
familiarity, not of the Sacrament. For you may see by the two following verses,
such an accompanying is there forbidden to a Brother which is allowed with an
heathen, and therefore cannot be meant of Communion in the Sacrament. But I
hope by the piety of our Parliament, every godly Minister will be enabled to
keep off all that be guilty of such crimes, if that will serve the turn, and
remove that objection. The place Ephesians. 5, 5, 7. Be not partakers with them, is
clearly meant in regard of their sins, not the Sacrament, as appears by the
following verse.

In Answering the next objection, he brings two places to prove that the holy
thing of God should not be profaned, but against what adversary? whosoever
taught so? but that the profaning of them by one, should profane then to
others, its denied: his place Isa 1, 1^. will only prove that God rejected
their service, whose hands were full of blood, not the sacrificers of the good,
else how will he excuse Isaiahs Communion with that Church? or Christ Jesus
after him, when they were as bad? or where is his inference made or practiced
by the Prophets or Christ from this place, of necessity of separation where the
profane be?

In answering his next quaere, he tells us that to Communicate with evil doers
is to partake of their evil deeds. This is affirmed, but not proved, nor do I
think it ever will, that my doing a good action well upon command of God, with
one that does the same good Action will make me guilty of his sin; sure I am,
then Christ and his Prophets, and Apostles, were all sorely defiled. His proof
2 These. 3, 6. is quite misapplied, for its spoken of withdrawing from him in
regard of company and respect which is free and Arbitrary, not of the
Sacrament, wherein they were not to withdraw from him, but if the quality of
the offense did require it, were to put him away.

In his next Answer he affirms that no Communion can be had in our Parish
Assemblies possibly, without setting up new Churches: But I hope in this he is
much deceived as in the rest. He compares us to Sardis formerly, yet I hope
there Communion might be had without this medicine of new Churches. Nay let
there be shown any example or any precept in the Scripture that in our case new
Churches should be erected, and not the old repaired, and brought back to the
rule from which they have swerved, and we will yield the cause: but if there be
no such precept nor example, then in vain are all such pleas as he uses, for
things which Christ has neither left precept nor pattern of. And when we see
God has heard the Prayers, and blessed the Nation for the prayers of the godly
in our Churches, as now they stand, and has made us a people saved by the
Lord, who is the shield of our help, and the sword of our excellency, more we
shall not expect by his new Churches, unless he convince the necessity of them,
by better evidence out of the word, which when he has proved, we will never
put him to trouble to answer inconveniences, but will with him buckle our
selves to digest them; but we will not cast our selves, nor will the wisdom of
the state suffer it to be cast on inconveniences for good men's fancies without
Christ's command.

Nor will we ever object it to be too strickt, pure or perfect, if the rule for
it be convinced, but we will affirm that being its strayter then the counsel
which Christ gave to Sardis, and different from it too, the pretense of purity
and perfection is not to be hearkened to, for it is not such in truth, but show,
because it is not after Christ. Col. 2, 8. The like we say for envying at them,
we will blame them that envy at them, if they discover the rule for what they
do, but till then we shall censure them we hope by this Parliament. The
Discipline of Christ will be set up in every Congregation, and this will be a
better or weaklier managed, as the Ministers and members are grown in Christ:
if then any Christian be where great scandalls are, they may remove to other
Congregations that have attained a better degree of Reformation, and this
without any breach.

His next quaere is what National government shall be set up by the Parliament,
for which he heartily prays, that God would direct them in so glorious a work,
and blesses God for such instruments, for such a work I thank him for his
affection, but yet if his Doctrine of the independancy of Churches be sound,
this prayer cannot be of faith, for a man cannot pray in faith that men should
meddle with that which is not within their sphaere or Calling, and sure if
independancy be a liberty of Christ, all the Parliament has to do, is to
assert this liberty, and what is more, is but usurpation. Then he tells us that
the government of a National Church has no pattern in the word: the full
answer of that I refer to the assertion of the government of the Church of
Scotland, which I doubt not but will give good satisfaction to the indifferent
Reader. Afterward he discovers (me thinks) too much uncharitableness and
self love. When he affirms, let them have their liberty, and do for the rest
what they will, it is indifferent to them, a little more care of the souls of
Christians might better suite with those that so far transcend others in
outward reformation.

His last objection is inconveniency of independent Churches, if they err as
they may, they want means of reclayming, which is better set on by the Scotch
Assertor, yet he has said more, then he has well answered, for having named
all the means which their independancy is capable of, and being conscious it
seems that they were too weak. He adds 2 other that quite destroy the
independancy. As first that other Churches may excommunicate them, how are they
independent, if under the Jurisdiction of other Churches? or how can they be
excommunicated by those under whose Jurisdiction they are not? sure this is
worse dependence then under the Presbytery, where a part is only subjected to
the whole, but here a part is subjected to a part.

And this second is no better, for if they be under the Magistrate for any
Haeresy, why not for all? those that are guilty will not confess any of their
Haeresies, for known Haeresies, but assert them for truth, and so challenge
exception for them, as well as any, and if that be a known heresy, which is such
to the judgment of the Magistrate, the^ for all heresy they are to be subject to
ce^sure, and their indepe^da^cy is a nullity. Thus have I gone through this
whole discourse without endeavoring to stifle, but rather sincerely to search
out what is truth in every particular. It is my desire and prayer, that I might
do nothing against, but for the truth, rather would I desire that God should
bring me forth to the severest sufferings for the truth, then leave me though
in simplicity of heart, to oppose any the least truth. What remains but that
while we that mind the same things, Christ's honor in the salvation of his
people, and right performance of his Ordinances, and differ only in the way,
labor to keep Unity of heart, till we have unity of judgment, and let our
Prayers be united at the Throne of Grace, though our persons be in different
Societies, that God may persuade the wanderers into the Tents of those, to whom
he has vouchsafed the better light: That God may have the more honor, and we
the more strength, and comfort by our free and scruple-lesse consociation:
Which mercy the Lord vouchsafe for Jesus Christ his sake, by the help of the
Spirit of truth, leading into al truth, to whom be glory for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

