The Second LECTURE being an Introduction to COSMOGRAPHIE: Read Publicly at
SR. Balthazar Gerbiers ACADEMY. ON BEDNALL GREEN.

ROMANS cap. 1. ver. 20. Invisibilia enim Dei a creatura Mundi per ea quae facta
sunt, intellecta conspiciuntur: Sempiterna quoque ejus virtus, and Divinitas.
The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made. Romans chap. 1. Verse. 20. London
Printed for Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern, 1649.

To the Right Honorable the Lord President of the most Honorable Council of
State.
Right Honorable,
HAving given to the Public (according to desire) the first Lecture
concerning an Introduction to Cosmography, read gratis in the Academy which I
have endeavored to Erect, for the glory of God, the honor of this State and
Nation, the encouragement and improvement of all Lovers of Virtue. I have
accompanied the same (by way of respect and humble duty) with a Dedicatory
Epistle to the Right Honorable Speaker of the most Honorable Assembly of
Parliament; And accordingly take leave, humbly to present this Printed Lecture
to your Lordship, who sits at the Helm of that great Council of State, on
which the wisest public Ministers of the world look with great observance.

And as I may humbly conceive this Dedication to be very fit, This Lecture
beginning with a Summary Description of the Orders of the Heavens, of their
Revolutions, and Distances, so many times by those Orders which pass at the
Council of State, this part of the world is to be Governed, so as that the
Question may prove not inpertinent, whether or no this State shall be a second
Earthly Paradise, And all the Revolutions settled answerable to the same, that
there be no Distances between Peace, Righteousness, and Truth, but that all
may be so united, as to meet and kiss each other perpetually, Being the
fervent wishes and prayers of

Right Honorable, Your most humble and obedient Servant Balthazar Gerbier.
Bednall green, this 5 of November. 1649.
THE Second Lecture BEING An Introduction to Cosmographie: Read Publicly at
Sir Balthazar Gerbiers Academy on Bednall-greene.
IN our first Lecture of Cosmography we declared, what the Sphere is,
What Heaven is,
Of the Qualities of the Heavens,
Of the Celestial Region,
That there are many Heavens or Orbs,
Of the Firmament, or eight Heaven,
Whether or no the Stars be infinite, and how the Astronomers divide them.
Whether or no the Stars be shining of themselves, and transparent?
That the Heavens are round, and that their motions are the one within the
other, from the East to the West.

In this Second Lecture, we shall show how that there are two other Heavens,
differing from the eight precedent.

The Order of the Heavens.

Of the Heavens revolutions.

Of the Heavens distances.

Of the Elementary Region.

Of the Fire, the Air, the Water and the Earth.

That the Earth is in the Center of the World, and that the Earth is unmovable.

That there are two other Heavens, differing from the eight Heavens, proved in
our first Lecture.
Until the time of Aristotle there were but eight Heavens discovered, because
that then there were but observed, but eight different motions in the
Celestial Bodies, but when afterward it was observed that the Stars had a
different motion to that of the world, it was expedient, not to give two
contrary motions to a simple Body (as the Heavens are) to suppose a ninth
Heaven, the which, as first moveable, conveyed by its impetuous swiftness all
the others with it. This was the opinion of Ptolomie; and since him Thebit,
Alphragan, Albategnius, and other excellent Astronomers, and for the same
reason (after that it was observed that there were three different motions in
the Firmament) there was added a tenth Heaven, which is the first moveable; it
moves from East to West in 24 hours on the Poles of the World, drawing by its
impetuous swiftness all the other inferior Heavens with it, the which
nevertheless turns always contrary to it, performing the course which is
proper, and natural to them, from West to East, on the Poles of the Zodiaque,
the which they severally atchieve in diversity of times. This is also alleged
by the learned King Alfonze, John of Lineris, George Purbachis, John of Monte
Region, and others.

Besides these ten Heavens (which have been observed by the diverse motions of
the Stars and Planets) there is yet another, the highest and largest of all,
the which is unmovable, and its in that Heaven in the which God spreads the
beams of his glory to his welbeloved, there is the eternal rest of the happy,
or as the Apostle says, Quod oculos non vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor
hominis ascendit, quae preparavit Deus iis qui diligunt illum, that is to say,
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

It Is named Coelum impereum, that is to say, of fire, because of its pureness,

But this Heaven being not known unto us, but by divine Revelation, it
behooves the Divines and not the Astrologers to discourse of it.

The Orders of the Heavens or Orbs.
IN times past there were diverse opinions touching the order and disposition of
the Heavens or Orbs, some placing the Sun and the Moon above the other
Planets, as having authority over them, others as Plato, assuring that the
lights were the nearest to the Earth, that their influences might flow with
more effect. Some as Democritus, maintaining Mercury to be the highest
elevated.

But in this manner the order of the Heavens is by us proved: First, by the
swiftness or slownesse of the motions, that is to say, that the Planet which
is the longest a finishing its course is of necessity the highest, Saturn
performs his in 30 years, Jupiter in 12, Mars in 2. the Sun in 365 days and
6 hours. etc. and therefore it must necessarily follow, that they exceed one
another in height.

Of the Heavens, or Orbs Revolutions.
ALL the Heavens or Orbs do sur-round the Earth as a circle does its center,
and the further they are from it, the longer they are accomplishing their
circuits,

The Moon (as being in the lowermost Orb or Heaven, and the nearest to the
Earth) makes its revolution in 27 days and 8 hours,

Mercury, Venus, and the Sun, in 365, days, and 6 hours,

Mars, in one year, three hundred twelve days and 23 hours.

Saturn, in nine and twenty years, one hundred four and fifty days, and
three and twenty hours.

The Firmament makes a revolution in six and thirty thousand years, and another
revolution in seven thousand years.

The ninth Heaven accomplisheth its course in nine and forty thousand years.

And the tenth Heaven (of a quite contrary motion to all these) performs his
in four and twenty hours or in a natural day,

These Marvelous revolutions Manifest unto us the Power and Greatness of the
Omnipotent Providence of him that made them, they likewise daily manifest and
Praise him; as the Royal Prophet says in the 19 Psa. Coeli enarrant gloriam
Dei and opera manuum ejus annuntiat Firmamentum, that is, The Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handyworks.

Of the Heavens or several Orbs distances.
THe Astronomers in their measuring the height of the several Orbs, or
Heavens, do make use of the Earths half diameter (the half Diameter is of
twelve hundred Leagues or thereabouts) and infer thus, that the Heaven of the
Moon is distant three and thirty half Diameters from the Center of the Earth,
which makes nine and thirty thousand, and six hundred Leagues.

Mars, one thousand eight hundred and two and fifty half Diameters.

Jupiter, Seven thousand eight hundred and two and fifty.

Saturn, Fourteen thousand three hundred and seventy three.

The Firmament two and twenty thousand six hundred and twelve half Diameters,
which are seven and twenty Millions, one hundred four and thirty Thousand, and
four Hundred Leagues (These leagues are Geometrical leagues, which contain
three thousand paces) which is so vast an extent, that if our first father
Adam, were yet alive, and that from his Creation he had ascended every day
eighteen Leagues toward the Heavens, yet for the present he would not have
attained to the concavity of the eight Heaven, and thus much more I may say,
for to represent how far distant the Stars are from us, That if a Cannon
bullet were in that place where the Stars are, and that it should descend
each hour two hundred leagues: yet would it remain more then 15 years before
it could arrive to the Earth.

Now by the distance of the Heavens, as beforesaid, can be known the
thickness of each Orb or Heaven, and that by substracting the lesser distance
from the greater following. As for Example, if three and thirty half diameters
be subtracted from threescore and four half Diameters, the remainder will be
one and thirty half diameters, and of so many half Diameters is the solidity
of the Moons Heaven, or Orb, and in the like manner, you may find out the
others.

Of the Elementary Region.
THe Elementary Region, is the concavity of the Moons Heaven, or Orb, the
which is filled with the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water and Earth.

An Element is a simple Body, the which cannot be divided nor separated into
different forms, that there are four Elements is easily proved, since there
is nothing so natural as that the things do dissolve into the same parts of
the which they are composed, All perfect mixed Bodies ca(...) into Earth, Water,
Air, and into Fire, there (...) both earth, water, air and fire, the which
(...) manifestly shows, for when a green St(...) of it is seen dissolved into
Fire, part into (...) which is of the nature of Air) part into scumme, which
is of the nature of water, and part of it into ashes which are of the nature of
the Earth; and consequently, all oother mixed Bodies, as Stones, Mettalls,
Plants, Animalls, etc.

That they are just four, is also proved by the four humors which are
observed to be in the several bodies of Animalls, as the gall, which answers
to the fire, the Blood which answers to the Air, the Fleame which answers to
the Water, and the Melancholy humor which answers to the Earth.

The Fire possesses the highest place of the Elementary Region, as the most
purest and the lightest.

The Air is next unto the Element of the Fire, as being purer and lighter then
the Water, and Earth.

The Water is under the Air, and above the Earth and the Earth (as heaviest)
is the Lowermost, and the Center to all the world.

Of the Fire.
THe Fire is an Element extreme hot, and moderately dry.

Since each Element has its proper and natural place, Reason wills that the
fire should have his, Now since its the purest and the lightest of all the
Elements; its natural place must then be in the nearest space unto the
concavity of the Moon, we do also see that all the Fires lighted here
beneath, tend naturally upwards, and are corrupted by the Air which invirons
them, which clearly shows that the natural place of this Element is above the
Air.

We cannot see it in its natural place, because it has no color; and it does
not inflame the Heaven, because the Heaven is not susceptible of any heat, nor
of any other alteration.

The Element of the Fire contains about forty thousand leagues of depth, from
its superficial concavity to its convexe.

Of the Air.
THE Air is an Element very moist and moderately hot. Its natural place is
the superficial concavity of the Element of the Fire, and the superficial
convexe of the Element of Water. But the Water and the Earth making but one
Globe (as we shall show hereafter) the place of the Air is all the space
there remains betwixt the Earth, and the elementary Fire, which space has
thirty leagues of height.

The Air is divided into three Regions, the highest, middlemost, and lowermost.

The highest Region of the Air is hot, and dry by reason of the proximity of
the elementary Fire, and of the motions of the Heavens.

The middlemost is cold and moist, by reason of the vapors, which are elevated
by the virtue of the Sun, which thickening and congealing, do refresh the place
where they are, and this Region is yet colder by reason of the Antyperistasis;
that is to say, by a contrary force, which a contrary Element makes,
strengthening it self against a greater strength of a contrary Element.

The lowermost Region of the Air is both hot, cold, and temperate, according
as the beams of the Sun cast themselves perpendicularly or oblickly thereon.

Of the Water.
THE Water is an Element, both extreme cold, and moderately moist.

The natural place of the Water is between the Air and the Earth, so that
the Earth ought to be environed, and wholly encompassed by the Waters.

But God has caused the Element of the Water, to retire in the concavities of
the Earth, for the habitation and preservation both of Men and Animals in their
being; there is much to be alleged that may contradict this passage, but this
seems to be the most probably true, that God has ordained it by his absolute
power, as it is written in Genesis the first Chapter, Congregentur aquae quae
sub Coelo sunt, in locum unum, et appareat arida; that is to say, Let the
waters under the Heaven be gathered together into one place, and let the dry
land appear.

Of the Earth.
THE Earth is an Element both extreme dry, and moderately cold.

That the Earth is heavier then the Water, is proved thus, That which causes
another to yield in heaviness, ought to be heavier then that other. But the
Earth causes the water to yield in heavines, therefore it must needs follow,
that the Earth is heavier then the Water; this is proved thus, when any Earth,
or a Stone is cast into a Vessel full of water, it descends to the bottom,
and causes the water to retire; and when the Earth or the Stone, is first at
the bottom of the vessel, the water being poured therein, it does not cause
them to retire.

Against this there are opposed two considerable objections; the one is, that
the water is seen to have motion through the Earth, (which happens by the Rain
falling on the Earth, and its passing through it;) Its Elementary place must
needs then be under the Earth toward which it always runs, and this would not
happen, if it were not heavier then the Earth.

The second Objection is, that seeing there are great Gulphes of water found
under the Earth (as appears by Wells and Fountains) it therefore follows
that the elementary place of the water, ought to be under the Earth; for the
more water you draw out of a Well, the more there enters into it, which would
not be (say they) if there were not great Gulphes of water under the ground,
which are the sourses of Springs.

But these opinions being maintained by very feeble grounds; we shall answer to
the First, That though the name water is seen to descend through the Earth, it
is not because its heavier, but only that it fills the pores and concavities
thereof, which having done, we may clearly see, it only drives over the
superficies of the Earth.

The answer against the Second is, That the Perennity of Springs does not
proceed from the great water-gulphs under ground, forasmuch that there has no
such thing been known, but to the contrary, that all the Fountains have their
origin from the Sea, and that the Earth is full of veins, which contain the
water sent from the Sea, for to moisten the Earth, which otherwise could not
produce its sundry proprieties. The opening of those veins make a Fountain,
the Fountains engender currents, many currents make a River, many Rivers a
Flood, which discharges it self in the Sea.

Against this there is also objected that then the Fountains ought to be
brinish and Salt, as the Seawater is; and secondly, that the Springs being
much higher then the Sea, the motion ought to ascend* which is contrary to the
nature of water. The answer to it is, that the saltness of the water is purged
by the long and narrow traces which it makes within the stony and sandy places
through which it passes, which is evident in the greatest part of such
Fountains as pass by the Rocks, since they are much purer, and cleaner then
those which run through fat and fenny grounds.

For the Springs, it is not incongruous to say, that the water ascends from the
Sea to them, because its a motion made by attraction.

That the Earth is in the middle of the World.
THE Philosopher Aristarchus Samienus, did believe that the Earth was not in
the middle of the World, but that the Sun was in the middle, and being there
as unmovable, it gave light to all the world: This Philosophers esteeming it to
be a great absurdity, that the Earth which produces an infinite number of
movable animalls, should be unmovable and that the cause should be of a worse
condition, then its effect: This opinion has been since renewed by Copernicus
(an excellent Astronomer) who did strive to prove it in his revolutions.

But the contrary is proved thus, The Stars (which are in the Firmament)
whether they be in the middle of the Heaven toward the East, or toward the
West, appear always of one and the self same bigness, which would not
happen, if the earth were not equally distant from it; for if the Earth were
nearer to the Firmament in one place then the other, it would follow that from
the part of the superficies of the Earth nearest to the Firmament, the half of
the Heaven could not be seen, which is against the opinion of Ptolomie, and of
all the Philosophers, who say, that in what part soever of the Earth a man is,
he may see six signs of the Zodiac to rise, and six to descend, so there be
no hinderance, and thus always half of the Heaven is seen, and the other
half hidden.

It is also proved thus, the further the Moon goes from the Sun, the more it
augments its light to our consideration; therefore when its at the full, it is
at the furthest distance that possibly may be from the Sun; and so it must of
necessity be on the Diameter of the Heaven, and then the half of the Heaven
will be between the Sun and the Moon, when its at the full.

The same is proved also by the Ecilpses of the Moon; for when the Moon is
eclipsed, half of the Heaven is interposed between the Sun and the Moon,
because the Moon never eclipses but in its full; therefore if the earth were
not interposed, there would be no eclipse, since by the interposition of the
Earth, the shadow is made; as also the Equinoxe would not be throughout the
whole world. The long Artificial days would not equal the long* Artificial
nights, and an infinite number of other absurdities would follow; and therefore
we will conclude, that the Earth, as the heaviest element, has been placed in
the lowermost place, and the lowermost place of necessity must be that which is
the furthest from the Heavens, and the place which is the furthest from the
Heavens, cannot but be the Center, therefore the Earth is in the Center; that
is to say, in the middle of the Heavens, or of the World.

That the Earth is unmovable.
THE Earth cannot have any motion, for if it should move, it must needs
eitherbe out of its place, or circularly on its Center: If it moves out of its
place, its motion must be either upwards or downwards, downwards it cannot,
because its at the Center. It cannot move upwards, because its against the
nature of heavy things, and then the proofs here before mentioned do suffice;
for it would else quit its Center, and then the Stars would not always
appear of the selfsame greatness, which is absurd; therefore if it has any
motion, it must be circularly on its Center.

Neither can its motion be circularly according to Copernicus his opinion;
because that if it were so, it must turn on the Axe of the World, or on some
other.

If it be on the Axe of the World, it must perform its course in twenty four
hours, by reason of the first movable, and then by such a violent motion the
buildings would be shaken, the Birds, the Clouds, (and all what is seen in the
Air) would always incline toward the West, as not being able to follow the
swift motion of the Earth.

Nor can it move by any other way, be the motion never so slow, because that a
Town placed either more or less distant from the Pole, would then have diverse
elevations, because that the circumference (which the motion of the earth would
cause it to make about the Pole) would not be parallel to it, which can never
happen; therefore its concluded that the earth is at the Center without any
motion.

But Copernicus answers to these Reasons, and inferres on the motion of twenty
four hours, that though its very swift; yet nevertheless it has its due
proportions, and may be resembled to a rest; as those who are in a Boat sit at
their ease, though the Boat swiftly moves, which is also more evident in a Pale
full of water, which may be turned about in the Air, four or five times
without spilling a drop.

Yet nevertheless this answer which he holds forth is to little purpose, since
that if the earth should perform its course in twenty four hours, and that
having eight thousand leagues of circuit to accomplish, it must then make five
or six leagues in a minute of an hour; and if a Stone being cast up into the
Air should remain a minute of an hour in its ascent or descent, it would
then fall five or six leagues beyond the place from whence it was flung, which
has never been seen nor heard of.

Nevertheless he answers to this reason, and says, that the earth does not
only turn, but the Air also with an equal swiftness, which causes the
earth, the Man, the Air, and the Stone to turn, all by an equal swiftness.

But suppose this were; then there would happen two inconveniences which are
against all experience; The first is, that if a man should shoot an arrow with
all his force toward the East, and contrary to the motion of the Air; and
that the same man should shoot such another arrow toward the West (according
to the motion of the Air) the arrow shot toward the West with the motion of
the Air, will go much swifter, for having the Air to back it, then that shot
toward the West for having the Air against it, the which contradicts to
experience it self.

The second is, That those things supported by the Air, the lighter they are,
the further they are carried; the heavier they are, the less are they
transported, it must therefore follow, that if from the top of a Tower, a
Stone, and a Hat should be flung, the Hat would be carried a great deal
further then the Stone, which is also against experience.

Those which maintain the motion of the earth, are forced to set the Sun at
the Center; and although this opinion be as far from a seeming truth, as from
the truth it self; Nevertheless as the haughtiness of man's wit tends to
affect always some particular point, so there are many found, who have more
passion then reason, and will maintain things which they themselves know to
contradict reason, only to give an Essay of their wit and eloquence, but these
are mere flashes, and directly against the holy Scriptures, where it is said in
the 1. Epistle, and 10. Verse of St. Paul to the Hebrews, Et tu in Principio
Domine terram Fundasti; that is to say, And thou Lord in the beginning have
laid the Foundations of the Earth stable; and by the same unreproveable words,
it is likewise proved, that the Sun has its course and motion, and that
therefore it cannot be at the Center of the world. Needs there any other
allegation or instance hereon, then the Commandment which Joshua gave to the
Sun to retarde its course, as it is written in the 10. Chapter, 12. and 13.
Verses of the Book of Joshua, Sol contra Gabaon ne movearis, et Luna donec
ulciscereturse gens de inimicus suis; that is to say, Sun, stand thou still
upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon: And the Sun stood still,
and the Moon stopped, until the people of Israel had avenged themselves on
their enemies.

We will not trouble you with a further search of any other motions, since
these are sufficiently deducted and confirmed.

But in all Ages there have been such Critticks, only for to make themselves
famous, and to be spoken of; and hereat we need not to wonder, since there are
so many diverse opinions and beliefes extant, which repugne directly against
the holy Scriptures, and against the Articles of our Faith, whereon our
Salvation is grounded.

Let us conclude therefore this Lecture, with all due acknowledgement and
admiration, that God has been pleased in his infinite incomprehensible bounty
to create for our use (who are but dust and ashes) these inaccessible Heavens;
as also the Sun, Moon, and Stars, prescribing unto them their several
infallible courses, and admirable Order, for as he is above them all, he needs
them out. But we cannot subsist without them; our eyes would not stand us in
stead, unless we do make use of them (as the two great lights of our bodies)
to contemplate and study the admirable order, motion, and distance of the great
lights of Heaven, which by their mavelous operations and courses, do manifest
to the good and bad (who do equally enjoy the light of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars) the glory, excellency, power, and bottomless riches of God, and who do
confound those wilful blind Atheists, more to be abhorred (if possible could
be) then the Devils, for that Devils do acknowledge God, though they do not
believe in him.

We know that some will be apt to allege that diverse great and wise men have
not believed that there is a God. But those were more then blind, and bereaved
of all their senses, and far worse then Swine, who never look up to the Oak
whence the Akorns fall down to them.

Certainly they were greater enemies then friends to knowledge, being they
studied not to know the Principle of all, the Author of Immortality, and seeing
they denied that point, its no wonder they denied the Divine Providence.
Neither was it an ill observation, that all those Philosophers who were
Atheists, had not studied the Art of Cosmography. But alas to what purpose does
Hell, the Devils, and Furies serve, and against whom do they inrage, and
where do they discharge their furies, if they should not swallow these
Monsters, who do not apprehend that the Sun might eclipse, or that it should
withdraw its beams, condemning them to an eternal night? for that they do
not remember their Creator in the days of their youth; when the Sun, or the
Moon, or the Stars be not darkened.

O Great and merciful God, let all men acknowledge thee in thy Works, as well
as see thee by Faith, since thy works are the visible messengers, and witnesses
of thy Power and Mercy!

Let all men adore and love thee for that thou art; Let their souls profit by
every thing that argues that thou art the same, who said to Moses, Ego sum qui
sum, I am that I am.

And finally, let all men acknowledge, that as by an infallible computation the
height of the Heavens is argued to be such, as that if a Canon bullet should
descend two hundred leagues in one hour, it would be more then fifteen years
ere it could arrive to the superficies of the earth: Yet Lord, and merciful
Father, thou have made all men's hearts (which by Sin were become hard as
flint, and certainly heavier then a Canon bullet) capable to ascend unto thee
in a moment by Faith; not only seven and twenty millions one hundred four and
thirty thousand, and four hundred leagues as beforesaid, but so much more
higher, as thou art above all those Heavens.

Continue this wonder of all wonders, and suffer us so to advance in knowledge,
that the more we study and know, the more we may become capable to be united
unto thee.

The end of the second Lecture of COSMOGRAPHY.

