ARTIFICIAL FIRE, OR, COAL for Rich and Poor.
This being the offer of an Excellent new Invention, by Mr. RICHARD GESLING
Ingineer, (late deceased) but now thought fit to be put in Practice.
Read, Practice, Judge.






FIRE and Water be two of the most excellent Creatures that ever God created:
if this be wanting, there is no subsistence to Man; if Water be wanting, no
subsistence to Beast; where these two predominate, there is neither life for
Man or Beast, and where they master they leave no servant; of these two we
shall need to speak at this time but of Fire only; and what has been left to
us by that painful Ingineer Mr. Gesling, who was the first Inventor of this, I
here have thought good to put to public view, that all both Rich and Poor may
be provided for in some competent way; had he lived, he might have put it to
Press, but I seeing none to stir in it, I h^^^^g a Writ from him, have here
set it forth in these times of scarcity, which if thou practice and make
experiment, it shall be to thy profit and com^^^^. It may be some foolish
lasie persons may say, as some fine Nosed City Dames used to tell their
Husbands; O Husband! we shall never be well, we nor our Children, whilst we
live in the smell of this Cities Seacoale smoke; Pray, a Country house for our
health, that we may get out of this stinking Seacoale smell. -- But -- how many
of these fine Nosed Dames now cry, Would to God we had Seacoale, O the want of
Fire undoes us! O the sweet Seacoale fire we used to have, how we want them
now, no fire to your Seacoale! Thus now they see the want of that they slighted
in times past; This forth rich, a word for the poor.

The great want of Fuel for fire, makes many a poor Creature cast about how
to pass over this cold Winter to come, but finding small redress for so
cruel an enemy* as the cold makes some turn Thieves that never stole before,
steal Posts, Seats, Benches from doors, Railes, nay, the very Stocks that
should punish them, and all to keep cold Winter away: Now that all may be
provided for, and the better furnished before Winter comes, take this Model to
help thee at the cheapest and easiest rate that Experience can find out; there
be many ways, of all which thou shall find here both the sweetest,
wholesomest, and cheapest, and most usefullest and beneficial'st both to rich
and poor; I tell you this Secret is worth the looking after, and by it many
thousands may be set at work, and yet before Summer be over, store may be
made: It may be you will say, Why was it not begun sooner this year? But I
tell you two Reasons; one, the want of Seacoale to help; the other it is never
too late to seek profit: do thou practice it, and thou shall see profit to
proceed suddenly; and so God prosper thee and thy labors.

First, provide a piece of Ground where the Sun lies upon it, and for the
better ordering, take a Brick-maker, or a Labourer to do it: Do thus,

Take three Load of red Mortar, such as you make Bricks with double Loads, half
a Chaldron of good Seacoales of the smallest and best, three Sackfulls of the
best Smalcoale, four bushels of Saw-dust, four trusses of Straw chopped;
work all these together with water stiff as Bricks, then when it is worked
all together very well, take four sacks of the dust of Smalcoale, and with
that used as they do the Sand for casting of Brick; then cast the Ingredients
as you cast Brick, but half so thick, and dry it as Brick is dried; or you may
make it up in round Balls not too big, with Charcoale, or Smalcoale dust, on
the outside, and so laid to dry, when they be through d^y, burn them with a
little Scotch-coale, or Wood, or any Combustible matter to fire it, or with two
or three wooden chips to kindle your fire withal, and to keep in the life of
the fire, and these cast a most excellent heat, and keep fire for any use, to
Roast, Boil, or Bake, for the richer sort; but be sure you lay them not too
close on the fire, but as you see your pattern upon this Paper, mingled with a
Scotch-coale or two.

For the Poorer sort, Cow Dung mingled with Saw-dust and Smalcoale, made up
into Bals, or in a square like a Tile, not too thick, and dried, make a very
good Fuel, but something noisome. Also that which comes out of the p^unches
of Beasts killed, it being dried is excellent fire.

Horse-dung in Balls with Saw-dust, or the dust of Smalcoale, or Charcoale
dust, dried, is good Fuel, but the smell is offensive.

Greenwich Heath, or Hounslow Heath Turfe well dried, is very good fuel, with
a little Scotch-coale burnt with it.

Peate if well dried, but well fatted with seggy or flagge roots from Fenny
places, is a very good firing, mingled with Coal when it is burnt.

Some make an Oven with Kennell dirt, with a hole at the top for the heat and
smoke to ascend up in the chimny, and with six or seven bricks raise the
bottom and make up the shed, and then daube up the oven, leaving the hole at
top, and before put in a few Scotch-coale, and after it is kindled will keep
fire a week, every two days putting addition of the kennell dirt to keep it
whole, and putting Seacoale, or Scocth-coale as the fire declines; this is a
fire which casts a good heat at the mouth and top, but not commendable nor fit
to roast.

Above all things let me persuade all men to sweep their Chimneys clean
against winter, for with Scotch-coale, or Coal minged with wood, or with any
of these Chimneys grow extraordinary foul; and he that means to keep his
house from firing, let him be sure to keep his Chimney clean: Thus if thou
make use, thou shall see thy labor worth thy pains, and be thankful to
him that has been the Instructor, for this Artificial Fire.

LONDON, (...) by Richard Cotes for Michael Spark Senior, 1644.


