A LETTER TO THE States General of the United Provinces, FROM Prince WALDECK,
Who Commands Their Army in FLANDERS: Giving an Account of the Happy Success
they had against the French Army commanded by the Marshall d'Humieres, on the
15/25 of August instant, 1689.
Published by Authority.
THIS Morning a good part of your Lordships Army being gone to Forage, we had
news, that the Marshall d'Humieres with his Army, which he had reinforced some
days before with 6000 Men, was on his march, of which we immediately advertised
the Foragers by firing several pieces of Canon, as had been agreed on. In the
mean time the Enemies Vanguard attackt the Village Forge, where 800 Men were
posted under the Command of the English Colonel Hodges, Lieutenant Colonel
Goes, and the Major of the Regiment of Hesse. This attack lasted about 2 Hours,
but our Men defended themselves very bravely, till Major de Roo (who was sent
to give notice thereof to the Lieutenant Generals Webbenum, the Earl of
Marleborough and d'Huby, who were with the Foragers and to bring them back)
came to their Assistance with some Horse; whereupon our Men, seeing the whole
French Army advanced toward them, retired Fighting till they came to a Hill
near the Town of Walcourt, in which was posted a Batallion of Lunenburghers of
Linstau's Regiment, who were afterward reinforced with the Batallion of
Colonel Holle. The French attacked the said Town very furiously with many
Batallions and several pieces of Canon, which lasted two hours and a half.
Lieutenant General Aylua advanced with 3 Regiments toward the Town, of which
he detached that commanded by Brigadier Talmash, and the Lieutenant General the
Earl of Marleborough, followed with the Guard du Corpse, and two English
Regiments. In the mean time Major General Slangenburg, advanced with a
Detachement of Foot to the other side of the Town, which obliged the Enemy to
retire in Confusion, leaving behind them their Cannon and Ammunition, and a
great many killed and wounded, the number whereof is not yet certainly known,
amongst which are three Captains of the French Guards; and Monsieur d' Artagnan
Commandant of the said Guards, with several others, are taken Prisoners. In
their Retreat came two Drummers from the Enemy, to desire a Cessation to bury
their dead; who said, That Six Battalions of the Guards, who likewise made the
Attack, were, for the most part, ruined. On our side none of any Consideration
are killed, besides Lieutenant Colonel Graham of the English, the Major of the
Lunenburgh Dragoons, and a Captain Lieutenant; And a Captain, and some
Foragers, were taken: And in the Town there were very few killed or wounded.
The French retired to their Camp, and our Troops kept their Ground till Night.
The Velt Marshall Count de Nassau, with all the other Generals and Officers,
behaved themselves as could be wished; and all our Troops showed a great
Courage and desire to come to a Battle, and particularly the English, who were
engaged in this Action, behaved themselves very well And a great Success might
have been expected had the Situation of the Country suffered us to follow the
Enemy.

I Congratulate Your Lordships upon the good Success of this Rencounter, which
has fallen out so fortunately for your Arms, and in which the Enemy has been
forced to Retire. Praying God farther to Bless Your Lordships Arms and
Government; To whose Protection I Commend You, and Remain

Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant, G. Frederick P. of
Waldeck.
From the Camp near the Castle of Til, Aug. 25. 1689. late at Night.
Other Letters from the Army say, That there were 2000 of the French killed and
wounded.

Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1689.


