EDOVARDUS Confessor Redivivus. THE PIETY and VIRTUES Of HOLY Edward the
Confessor, Revived in the Sacred Majesty of King James the II. BEING A RELATION
of the Admirable and Unexpected finding of a Sacred Relic, (viz. the
CRUCIFIX) of that Pious Prince; which was found in Westminster-Abby, (the place
of his Interrment) 622 Years succeeding; and is since worn sometimes by his
present Majesty. With a COMMENT thereon. Previous to which Relation, are
recited many wonderful casual Discoveries; All of them being Presagious, or
very Effective.

Cuncta aperit secreta Dies; abscondita pandet
Adveniens aetas, and tempus operta recludet.
Long latent Day discovers hidden Things;
And Time to come, to Light close Matter brings.
LONDON, Printed by W. D. And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1688.

Ad Regiam Majestatem Jacobi Secundi, (Inclytissimi Regis Jacobi quarti Seri
sed very Nepotis.)
PArce tuum vatem temerum reputare JACOBE,
Rex metuende, cui nunquam bella omina desunt;
Et quae semper eram palam profarier ausus,
Foelicis Regis, foelicis and omina plebis.
DRead Prince, Thy Fecial Prophet don't disdain,
Animadversor of Thy Omens plain;
And who to Publish them has took the pain,
As sure Presages of Thy Blessed Reign.
THE PREFACE, Without Reading which, the Discourse and Design of the ensuing
Treatise cannot well be understood.
PResently after His Majesty's most happy Inauguration, I heard of that
unexpected Bene-ominous Accident, which is the Subject of this present
Discourse: Not One in Ten, but looked upon it as a matter merely Fabulous and
Feigned: For my part, (having been abroad in the World) I have met with strange
Passages, but read of many more; so, for my better satisfaction, I went to a
Loving Friend of mine, Mr. J. G. (Famous for Astronomical Learning) living near
the Abbey, who assured me of the Truth thereof; and offered to carry me to the
very Person who was the Discoverer thereof, and received a Royal Reward; which
I refused, (for that would have looked as if I had distrusted my Friends
Veracity.) Within two or three days after, my old Friend T. H. Esquire;
Windsor-Herald (also a near Inbabitant) re-assured me of the Truth thereof:
Upon which, I Penned this ensuing Discourse; giving it to one, to use at his
Discretion, being a Printer, my Friend; and I thought it would have found no
obstacle in the Impression: But those that were Authorized to License,
obstinately refused it, as savouring of down right Popery and Superstition. So
I, having occasion to retire into the Country, acquiesc'd, and let it lie,
(submitting to the Rigor, or Nicety of the Licensers): But afterward, when I
saw many notable, and very acceptable Occurrences fall under His Majesty's
Auspicious Government, (such as are mentioned by Tertullus the Orator, Acts
24.2.) I incited my Friend to move afresh: These Occurrences are such as,

His Proclamation, April 4. declaring, His Benign Indulging Well-meaning Tender
Consciences in matter of Religion, and Forms and Circumstances of Worship:
Certainly, the means to make People live in more Unity, and more free from
Envy, that might arrive from some, to have more Privilege, Grace and Favor
than others. This caused a great rejoicing of all People generally, as Mr.
Gadbury well observes. Annot. Apr. 88.

Then His paying the Arrears, due to His late Majesty 's Servants; as far as
His present Majesty with convenience could do; He having had no Supplies, but
His own ordinary Revenues. The Payment of their Arrears is the more to be
Commended, in that, after the Measure and Quantum was Considered and
Determined, the performance thereof was as speedy as might be: Qui cito dat,
bis dat.

His particular taking into consideration the Debts due to the City Orphans and
Widows: Strangely have their Moneys been squandred and embezled by the
Step-Fathers of this Renowned City, once so Memorable for Piety and Justice.
Gulielmus Stephanides, Writing of it, sub. H. 2. made it a City of Prayer. So
Robert Fabian, sub. H. 7. in his Prologue to his Second Chronological Volume:
But truly, of late Years, it has showed it self Spelunca Latronum Matt. 21.13.

His Intention to settle a Registry of Sales of Estates and Chattels, Real.
About the Year 76 and onward, the House of Commons were upon this Matter; At
Satanus impediit and divertit in peiora; 1 These. 2.18. For my part, I Wrote to
several Noblemens Chaplains, desiring them to persuade their Lords to Advance
it; the Right Reverend the Lords, Bishops of Gloucester and Rochester can Attest
this to be True: The Honorable Knights, Sir Winston Churchil, and Sir Joseph
Williamson, (then Secretary of State) will acknowledge I put them upon it. --
Certainly it would be a mighty satisfaction and Security to all sorts of
People, whom God's Blessing, and their own Honest endeavor have made capable
of Purchase; and is the usage of the Low Countries, introduced by Charles the
V. whose Memory the Netherlanders greatly Reverence upon this very account.
This is mentioned by Sir William Temple, P. 200. of his excellent Discourse of
those Parts.

His restoring of an ancient Order of Knighthood, many Ages dis-used, viz. The
Thistle, so reviving the Honor of His Ancient Kingdom of Scotland (the Nurse
of Brave Men) It was one of the Praises of that Good and Great Prince, Humphry
Duke of Gloucester, that Wrote himself Son, Brother, and Uncle of Kings, etc.
That He was Amator Honoris, a Lover of Honor. (See Weaver, 555.) But our
Generous Sovereign is Lapsi Restaurator Honoris, a Restorer of it when fallen.

But lastly, and above all, What is mentioned by Mr. John Gadbury, in his
Ephemeris for the approaching Year 88. viz. upon the 23 of Aug. His Majesty
began his Royal Progress for the West, where he most Mercifully vouchsafed to
heal many Languishing Men, Women, and Children, of the Evil: And this indeed
was the main matter I presumed to Presage from this discoursed Discovery.

But to conclude my Preface; Why may not I presume Vaticiniously from that
passage I borrow from Hareus, (mentioned hereafter, Page 24) to add by the By,
Post longos imbres obscuraque nubila quid si
Natio Jacobo gaudebit Hiberna sereno?
After long Clouds and Storms, what if we see
James the Serene, a Sun to Ireland be?


Let not my Reader Censure this comes out too too long, post factum, when as
Mr. Pain Fisher's most excellent Latin Panegyric in Heroic Verse, upon his
Majesty's Inauguration; Nor Mr. Sandfords much and long expected Prosal
Description thereof, have not yet seen the Light: The former, I suppose (and
it is pity) has been hitherto suppressed, Propter non posse pecuniae; Non propter
Papismum, as was the Fate of Mine.

DAy-Fatality, 1679.
TEmporibus duris qui Scripsit Fata-Dierum.]
Flagellum Mercurii Antiducalis; or, The Author of the Touch of the Times
Charitably brought to the Whipping-Post, to prevent his coming to the Gallows,
1679.
Mercurium rigide correxit and Antiducalem.]
Swans Welcome, 1679.
Omina Cygnorum Duce qui redeunte notavit.]
Vnio Dissidentium, Heir Apparent, and Presumptive made one, 1680.
Haeredem Praesumptivum uniit Apparenti
Subdola quos hominum Gens disunire studebat.]
A Panegyric to His Royal Highness, upon His Majesty's late Declaration,
concerning Monmouth's Pretensions, 1681.
Qui postquam Carolus Augustus Monumetensem
Clarasset spurium, cantavit Carmine laeto.]
Prince Protecting Providence, upon occasion of His Royal Highness's Escape of
Shipwreck, 1682.
Edidit and posthac Protectos Numine Divos
Selectos aliquos, tum praecipueque Jacobum
Syrtibus exemptum.] Christian Valor Encouraged; or, An Exhortation to the
French King to Invade the Turks, 1684.
Monuitque deinde potentem
Gallorum Regem, saevos Invadere Turcas,
Christicolis Stimulos.] -- [Scripsit hunc ipse Libellum,
Qui Confessoris Crucifixum tractat Edardi
Inventum mire, reddendum jure Iacobo.
Non Possessori primo, virtute Secundo.
He that Wrote Those, This present Piece did Write,
Which of Saint Edward's Crucifix does Treat,
So strangely found, now kept by JAMES the Great;
Who, to the Pristine Owner, no whit is,
In Virtues all, Inferior I wis.
In Page 27. I have a Passage relating to St. Brightwald; for the better
apprehending the Application whereof, I must Inform my Reader, This Holy Man
was a great Lover of his Country; and seeing St. Edward the Confessor had no
Heirs of his Body (and knowing the Turbulent Ambitious Temper of the Potent
Godwinian Family) was greatly troubled; foreseeing what Calamities might
happly follow. It pleased God to quiet his Mind by that Vision, which I mention
Page aforesaid.

Edovardus Confessor Redivivus: OR, Pious Edward the Confessor REVIVED in His
Present Majesty.
SVETONIVS tells us, The Assassination of Julius Caesar was predenounc'd by
evident Prodigies. Certain Men being employed to cast down some Ancient
Monuments; in that of Capys, (Founder of Capua) they found a Brazen-Table, in
which was written in Greek Letters this Sentence, Quandoque ossa Capys, etc.
When e're the Bones of Capys should be discovered, it should come to pass, That
he that was sprang from Julius should be Slain by the hand of his own
Relations; and that afterward Italy should be Plagued with innumerable
Slaughters. And lest that any should think the matter Fabulous and
Commentitious, Cornelius Balbus, one of Caesar's Familiars, was the Author of
this Report, (as says the said Author Suetonius). That this came to pass, all
know that have read the Roman Histories, and the Tragedy of Julius Caesar.

Herodotus relates, That the Lacedaemonians were always overcome by the
Tegaeans: They asked advice of the Oracle, how, and by what means they might
please the Gods, that they might overcome their Enemies the Tegaeans? Pythia
answered, That Orestes Bones (who was Son of Agamemnon) were to be brought to
Lacedemon. And they doubting, and being uncertain of the place where they were
to be found: The Oracle answered in Greek to this effect, (as I have
Paraphrastically Translated it; In a mean Cottage an Arcadian lives,
Where force of Bellows, Art Assistance gives:
There Hammer on the Anvil soundly plies,
And Son of Agamemnon Buried lies.
Purchase that Cottage; for within its Ground,
The Fatal Bones, by digging, may be found.


When no Man could understand the Oracle, one Liches came to Tigaea, and
sitting in a Brazier's Shop, wondered at his Work; to whom the Brazier said,
Wonder not at this; How would thou wonder, if thou should see a
Sepulcher, (which I discovered by digging a Well) where were Bones seven Cubits
long, which I have again Religiously Buried. Then Lyches instantly called to
mind the Oracle, and ruminating much within himself, communicated the matter to
the Lacedaemonians; and seigning an escape, returned to the Tegaeans, bought the
Bones of the Brazier, and carried them to Lacedemon: And then it came to pass,
that the Lacedaemonians overcame their Enemies.

There was a City called Libethra, (upon Mount Olympus) near which was
Orpheus's Tomb. Now the Oracle had declared to the Libethrans, Their City
should be destroyed by a Swine, when the Sun should first see Orpheus Bones.
They regarded the Oracle the less, because they believed not any such Beast
should have so much strength as to destroy such a City; for, -- Nascitur a
mediis Effectus quilibet aptis.

By means and ways of fit Proportion,
Things are brought to Execution.
But when it pleased the Gods these things should come to pass, a certain
Shepherd at Noontide, being weary, laid himself down by Orpheus's Tomb, and
falling asleep, began to chant Orpheus's Verses, in a sweet and delectable
Tone: Some Shepherds and Plow-men, that were hard by, were much taken, and left
their Station to hear the Melody of the Sleeping Shepherd; coming near, and
justling one another, they threw down the Pillar; whereby the Urn was broken,
and Orpheus's Bones lay open to the Sun: The Night following fell much Rain,
and the River overflowing its Banks, cast down the Walls of Libethra,
over-turn'd the Holy-Temple and Buildings, and destroyed the Citizens. (My
Author has this Story out of Pausanias his Baeotica). And I must not omit the
Equivocal meaning of the Oracle, the Stream being called by the name of a Swine.

Xerxes, the Son of Darius, having dug up an old Monument of Belus, found an
Urn of Glass, in which a Corpse lay in Oil; but the Urn was not full. Now, near
unto this was a little Column, on which was written, That it should go ill with
him that opened the Sepulcher, and did not fill the Vrn: Which, when Xerxes had
read, he was taken with much Dread and Horror, and commands Oil to be poured
in; which being performed, it was never the fuller, though often reiterated.
The Monument being closed, he departed with much Grief; and soon after was
miserably Assassinated. Aelianus ex Herodoto, lib. 3.

There was a Town of the Xanthians, which had a Bridge laid over the small
River Lycus; in which were said to have been Brazen Tables, whereon Letters
were Engraven, showing, That the Empire of the Persians was sometime to be
overthrown by the Grecians. Now, a little before Alexander the Great had Fought
at Gravisum, this Bridge was shaken down, and the aforesaid Tables were fallen
into the River. Alexander was much moved at the Report of these Tables; when as
for some time he had stood doubtful, which way to steer the Course of his
Victories, turned to the Right Hand, and subdued, with wonderful speed, all the
Seacoast, from Lydia unto Phoenicia. Plutarchs's Alexand.

Procopius the Tyrant, being Slain by Valens the Emperor, the Walls of
Calcedon (because the Citizens thereof had favored Procopius's Party) were
thrown down to the Ground. In one of whose Stones was an Oracle found,
Engraven; averring, That the said Walls should be converted to the Use of the
Baths in Constantinople. Calcedon lay over against Constantinople; Now, while
the Walls were throwing down, the Citizens of Constantinople, viz. the
Bithinians, Nicomedians, and Nicaeans, made humble Suit to the contrary; but
the Emperor Valens took the Suit in ill part, and commanded the Stones to be
carried to the use aforesaid, viz. to build the Baths called, Constantiana, [So
great is the force of Destiny and Fate]. Read Cuspinian in the Life of Valens,
and the Ecclesiastical History of Socrates Scholasticus, ( lib. 4. chapter 8.)
Translated out of Greek by Meredith Hanmer, D. D. who recites the Prophecy in
English Verse of fourteen Feet, not well relishing to our Poetical Palate at
this day; or as Camden phrases it, Apolline minus plenas.

In the sixth Year of Justine the Great, Edessa, that Noble and Blessed City of
the Osroenians, was over flown with the Streams of the River Scirtus, that
glided by i; insomuch as many Houses were carried away with the violence
thereof, and multitudes of Men were drowned with the Water: [See Evagrius's
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 4. chap. 8.] And Cedrenus reports, That at the
same time, in the Bank of the River, a Table of Stone was found, whereon was
Written in Egyptian Letters to this effect; Scirtus the Stream shall Leap and
Dance,
And cause Edessas great mischance.


If my Reader be Inquisitive, why Evagrius calls Edessa that Blessed City, let
him know, 'twas because King Agabarus (that so much desired to see our Savior)
lived there: Of which matter, see Eusebius, lib. 1. chap. 14. who discourses at
large of Agabarus his Letter to our Savior, and the Answer thereunto; the
sending of Thadeus to Him; who Cured his Disease, and Converted him, and his
People.

Rodericus Toletanus writes, That before the Coming of the Saracens into Spain,
King Roderick, upon hope of some Treasure, did open a part of the Palace, long
being forbidden to be touched; but found nothing but Pictures, which resembled
the Moors, with a Prophecy, That whenever that part of the Palace was opened,
the People there resembled should overcome Spain, and so it happened. See
Heylen after his Catalogue of the Gothish Kings of Spain.

In the Time of Ferdinand the First, King of Arragon, the City of Naples was in
a most Flourishing condition, and the Kingdom free from all Calamity. Now, it is
manifest, That one Cataldus, about 1000 Years before that Time, had been Bishop
at Tarentinum; the Citizens whereof did Worship him as their Patron: In the
midst of the Night he again and again appeared to a Minister, (who had lately
taken the Order of Priesthood, having been Educated under the Vow of Chastity)
charging him, That he should, without delay, take out of a certain place, a
little Book, which he in his Lifetime had Wrote, and privately hid,
(containing some Divine Writings) and bring it to the King. The Priest gave
little Credit to the Dream, although he saw Cataldus in his Sleep, very often,
and always of the same shape and form. After that, he appeared unto him (being
all alone in the Temple, early in a Morning) Apparelled in such Bishops Weeds
as he used in his Lifetime, and Adorned with a Mitre; advising him, as he
desired to avoid great Punishment, That the next day, without further delay, he
should digg for the Book which he had Written and Hidden, (as he had formerly
shown him by Visions) and bring it to the King. The Priest and People went the
next day to the place wherein, for many Years, this little Book had been
hidden, and found it Bound with a Leaden Cover, and Clasped; wherein it
appeared, that the Destruction of the Kingdom, Miserable Calamities, and Most
Sad Times were at hand; whereof the King was warned.

We have found, by Experience, (says my Author) That this Prophecy was fully
Executed, and showed it self to be so Divine, that not long after Ferdinand
himself, either by the justly incensed Wrath of God Almighty, or other
inscrutable Causes of his Divine Will, could not avoid what he was so fully
admonished of; but, in the very first appearance of War, departed this Life;
and Charles the Eighth of France, with a strong Hand, Invaded the Kingdom. And
Alphonsus, the Heir of Ferdinand, having but newly entered the Kingdoms
Government, was thereof deprived, basely running away, and dying in Flight, as
a Banished Man. Then the Second Son of Ferdinand, (the hopefulness of whose
Youth had indeared him to all Men) to whom the Kingdom fell, was entangled with
a miserable and fatal War, and died in the Flower of his Age: and afterward,
the French and Spaniards dividing the Kingdom, made Havoc of all, with
deplorable Devastations. Alexander ab Alexandro, cap. 15. The Discourse of
Policy and Religion, by Mr. Fitz-Herbert, mentions this Matter.

We read in the Persian History of one Emande Daule, a great Persian Prince,
that resting in the House of Tacut, a Prince whom he had Vanquished, he began
to be careful for the Payment of his Soldiers, being without Money, and seeing
their Insolence to be great, and that they would Mutiny if they were delayed:
Being very Pensive, he laid him down upon a Bed, studying what course to take;
where, lifting up his Eyes, he espied an ugly Snake at an hole, which did often
put forth her Head, and draw it up again: Daule being amazed thereat, commanded
they should presently break up the top of the House, and Kill the Snake; which
was done; and in doing of it, they discovered a great Treasure which Yacut had
hidden there, and which was sufficient to Pay the Soldiers. Soon after, there
happened another Accident to Daule, which was both Pleasant and Profitable:
Having an intent to make some Apparel, he caused a Tailor to be brought unto
him; who being before him, instead of a Measure, he called for a Cudgel; the
Tailor (who had served Yacut) fearing to be Bastinado'd, besought him to Pardon
him, and without any Exhortation of the Cudgel, would confess the Truth; which
was, That he had seventeen Coffers in his House, which Yacut had committed to
his Custody: Daule was joyful of this Discovery; and having sent for the
Coffers, they were found full of Cloth of Gold, and all sorts of Silk of great
value; whereof the Tailor had his share.

Jornandes writes, That Attila relied much upon the Sword of Mars, kept along
time among the Kings of the Scythians, and discovered at first, upon this
occasion: A certain Neat-herd seeing one of his Beasts halting, and not knowing
how it came, followed the Tract of the Blood; at the end whereof, he finds a
Sword, upon which the Beast had trod in Feeding: This Sword he takes out of the
Ground, and brings it to Attila; who, joyful of such a Present, (for which he
rewarded the Neat-herd) being a Man of a lofty Courage, conceived in his Mind,
the Monarchy of the World was designed for him; and that Mars's Sword would
bear him out, to make War with every one. Camerarius, lib. 4.

I will not say any thing of Alis's Cimitar, so renowned among the Turks; but
come to Joan of Arc, and her Sword, so strangely discovered; I will Epitomize
it out of Belleforest: She was Born of very mean Parentage, in the Country of
Barrois: It pleased God, by means of her, to deliver, not only the City of
Orleance, but the Kingdom of France. This Maid, aged Eighteen, was Sincere and
Modest; and, fearing God, had many Revelations, by which she was exhorted to an
Enterprise, differing from, and infinitely above the mean Vacation she
followed, (which was to look after her Father's Cattle) viz. to go to the King,
and Inform him, God had ordained her for the Party that should deliver the
Kingdom, raise the Siege of Orleance, and cause his Majesty to be Sacred at
Rheims, in despite of the English Force, then in a most Victorious Condition.
With this Assurance, she Addressed her self to Robert de Bandriecourt,
Governor of Vancoleur, to the end he should Conduct her (accoutred as a Man)
to the King; to whom she was ordered to say, That she was sent by God, to
Succor Him, and Recover His Kingdom; and Reveal things to Him so Secret, that
thereby he should know, God, and no other, was Chief of the Enterprise she
undertook. The Governor, at first, was Astonished, and thought she was
Extravagated by some Melanchohy Humor: But seeing her so discreet in her
Proposals, advised in her Answers, and resolute in what she said, began to have
her in Esteem: But was more satisfied the Work of God was in it, when as the
same day, the French were Deseared at Rouveroy; she averred, The King had even
then received a great loss, and 'twas time to hasten the business; and that if
she were not Conducted to him, the Kingdom would yet suffer more.

The Issue of the matter making him see the Maid was in the right, he failed no
longer to put her in fit Equipage, and to dispatch her with two Champaign
Gentlemen: But they knowing the difficulty, would not (at first) enterprise the
Thing; but Joan of Arc so assured them, that they condescended to her Request,
and Accompanied her.

She Arrived at Chinon (where the King then was), in March 1429. and at the
very time when the Council had Decreed, (Things being as they were) it were
best for the King to retire into Dauphine, and preserve (if Orleance were
taken) Languedock, Lionnois, Auvergne, and the said Dauphine, till it should
please God to have Compassion of Him, and his People. In fine, She was brought
to the King, whom she knew, though he retired himself behind others, to conceal
himself: To whom she proposed her business, as aforesaid. Her Promises were so
great, that the King remitted her to some Lords of the Council, and Doctors in
Divinity, to Examine her; to whom she Proposed her business, as aforesaid she
had done to His Majesty; and they found nothing in her worthy of Censure,
although she discoursed of matters of Faith very high (which she did with great
Integrity and Eloquence).

Here Belleforest makes a Pause, and says, The greatest Enemies of France have
brought more Honor to the Memory of this Virgin, than many French of our time,
who have dared to soil her Irreprehensible Life with their foul Bespatterings.
And he quotes Meyer, a Flemish Annalist, ( No Equitable Judge, says he, to the
French Nation, but an Enemy to the Blood of their Kings); who affirms, What
ever she Proposed in Words, she made good in Deeds. Quis non videt, etc. (says
he;) Who sees not this to be the Work of God? Who can doubt, these things were
not effected by the Immense Clemency of God?

Although the King, and His Council, were assured of the Virtue of Joan, and
were of resolved Opinion, she was inspired by God; because she had told the
King things which he had never Discoursed to any Body: Yet, not to go over
lightly to work with a thing of such Importance, she was sent to Poitiers;
where Resided then the Grand Parliament of France, and the University, (which
before was wont to be the Ornament of Paris) to the end the Parliament and the
Divines might enquire further of the Proposals of the Maid, and make Judgment
accordingly; who concluded, That the King ought to Believe and Confide in her,
and to furnish her with Moneys for her Equipage, to Advance toward the Army.
Being returned to the King, he gave her Arms and Horses; and she requested him
to send and search for a Sword, being in the Church of Saint Katharines of
Fierbois, in the Blade of which, near to the Traverse Bar, or Guard, were five
Crosses impressed; and that no other Sword but This, could serve her turn.

What the Conduct of this Virgin, and her Select Sword (by her so wonderfully
discovered) in a short time effected, I refer to the English and French
Chronologers.

These two Instances of Swords answer to the latter part of my Title, viz.
Effective Consequence.

In the Preface to my Introductio ad Latinam Blazoniam. I tell my Readers, Arms
are the Rewards of Meritorious Deeds, whether Military or Civil, which Deeds
soon Die, (how Nobly soever performed:) But the Rewards are lasting, out-living
the Actors; and in their Honorary Symbols, continually from Age to Age,
accompanying and dignifying their Descendents. Thus Charles the VII. that
grateful King of France, rewarded this successful Virgin, and her Family, with
these Arms following:

D'Azure a l'Espee, etc. (B. a Sword in pale. Ar. its Guard, Or, Surmounted by
a Crown, and Accosted by two Fleurs lys of the same. Her Successors bear the
Name of Du Lys. And I shall have occasion to speak of the Allusion of these
Ensigns, in a Collection I intend suddenly to make Public, of many of the
Arms of the Europian Nations; alluding either to the Name it self, or other
Circumstances of the Bearer.

Sozomenus, Lib. 6. writes, That when Julian the Apostate Sacrificed to the
Gods of the Gentiles, a Crowned Cross was found in the Entralls of the Slain
Beasts; upon which, the Ministers of the Offering, astonished, cried out, Illud
esse Signum Victoriae and Aeternitatis Christianae Religionis: It was a sign of
the Prevalency and Eternity of the Christian Religion.

Dagobert, the Son of Clotherius, King of France, being Young, pulled from
Sadregefillus (a deserving and worthy Nobleman, whom his Father had designed
Governor of Aquitain) his Honorable Robe belonging to his Place and Quality,
and grievously Beat him; out of a Fond Conceit he had not that Respect for him,
which the Son of a King might expect: Upon this mis-usage he went to
Clotherius, complaining of the same, and showing the Marks of the Blows he
received; the King Incensed, commanded his Son should be taken, and brought to
him: The Prince fearing the Anger of his Father, flies from on Secret place to
another; at last, the King having but one only Son, and bethinking himself he
had done sufficient Penance for his Offense, by long Fear and Flight, resolves
to Forgive him, and be Reconciled. Those whom the King sent to fetch him from
the Cave, where he had Absconded himself, were taken with such Fear and Horror,
that the Hairs of their heads stood upright, and their whole Bodies trembled,
and had no Power to go into the Cave; which was a thing much to be wondered at:
But in this place lay Buried the Bodies of the Martyrs Dionisius, Rusticus, and
Eleutherius; which, until that time, was not known to any Man; but they
appearing to Dagobert in his Sleep, advised him to Build a Church there, which
he afterward performed. But I should have told you, The Father supposing the
Messengers unwilling to distaste the Son, had (to gratify him) counterfeited
this Fear, was sain publicly to pronounce his Pardon; and then they could
enter, and fetch him out.

Genoueva, a Virgin of Paris, did most Reverently frequent the Village Catula,
where Holy Dionisius Died; to whom she had Dedicated a Cathedral Church: She
went to certain Priests with Collected Moneys; but they, fearing further
Supplies, and having present want of some, made their excuse: On the contrary,
she (Divinely Inspired) said, I beseech you go to the Bridge of the City, and
whatever you hear declare it to me. They going forth, while they stood
attentively in the Marketplace, expecting what to hear, two Swine-herds coming
toward them, talked together; says One, While I sought a straid Hogg, I found
a Furnace of Lime: I also, says the Other, found another in the Wood: The
amazed Priests relate to the Virgin what they heard; she Weeps for Joy; and
notice being given to the Citizens, Collections were made, and a Magnificent
Temple Built, and Dedicated to Dionisius. Bonfinius, Lib. 5.

There are many over-weaning and credulous Persons of the Reformed Religion,
believe the Pope grants Pardons to ratify Murders, and perpetrate Crimes. Now,
it pleased God, in the secret disposition of his hidden Judgment, to Reveal the
contrary, in this wonderful and unexpected Manner. About the Year 1608. 6
Jacobi l. as the Sexton was digging a Grave in the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, London, to Interr the Corpse of Doctor Stanhop, he chanced to light upon
the Coffin of one Sir Gerard Braybroke, Knight, Buried there Two hundred Years
before; where finding the Cords whole, the Flowers fresh, he espied a Charter
of Pardon or Indulgence not Consumed, not Eaten, not Defaced in so long time:
You may read this Charter in Latin, in the Historia Ecclesiae Paulinae, Written
by my most Loving Friend, and fellow Officer, Sir William Dugdale, late Garter
King at Arms. I will Recite it here, Translated into English, Verbatim.

BOniface, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God: To his beloved Son, the
Noble Gentleman, Gerard Braybroke the younger, Knight; and to his beloved
Daughter in Christ, the Noble Lady his Wife, Elizabeth, of the Diocese of
Lincoln, Salvation and Apostolical Benediction. It proceeds from your
Affectionate Devotion, with which you Reverence Us, and the Church of Rome,
that We admit Your Petition to a favorable Hearing, especially that which
concerns the Salvation of Your Souls. For this cause, We being moved to yield
to Your Supplications, By the Tenor of these Presents, do grant this Indulgence
to Your Devotion: That such a Ghostly Father, as either of You shall choose,
shall have Power, by Apostolical Authority, to grant to You (persisting in the
Sincerity of Faith, in the Unity of the Holy Church of Rome, and in Obedience
and Devotion toward Us, or Our Successors, Popes of Rome, Canonically entering
into that Sea) full Remission (only once at the point of Death) of all Your
Sins, whereof you shall be Contrite and Confessed; in such manner,
nevertheless, that in these Cases, where Satisfaction is to be made to any
other, the same Confessor shall enjoin You to do it by Your selves, if You
Survive, or by Your Heirs, if You should then Die, which You or They ought to
perform, as aforesaid: And lest ( which God forbid) You should by this Favor,
become more prone to commit unlawful Things hereafter, We declare, That if,
upon confidence of this Remission or Indulgence, You shall commit any such
Sins, That this present Pardon shall not be any help to You, concerning Them.
Furthermore, Let it be Lawful for no Man to Infringe this Writing or Grant of
Ours, or with whatsoever boldness to Contradict it: And if any shall presume to
attempt any such thing, let him know, That he shall Incurr the Indignation of
Almighty God, and of his Blessed Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. Given at
Rome, at St. Peter's, under the Fishers Ring, 5o. Junii, in the Second Year of
Our Papacy.

Note, This was Boniface the IX. and the Year was 1400. the First of Henry the
IV.

Now, Let all that are Opiniated as aforesaid, read, and well consider the
Conditions of this Brieve. First, It is necessary to Persist in the Sincerity
of the Faith. Secondly, To be Sorrowful and Contrite, and to confess Our Sins.
Thirdly, To make Satisfaction or Restitution, if any be needful. Fourthly, Not
to Presume hereby to commit unlawful Things. I pray, who can be Sorrowful, or
truly Confess, or duly intend to Satisfy, that fully intends to commit Sins?
Who can be imboldned to fall into Sin, in hope of a Plenary Indulgence, when
this very Hope and Presumption is a main Bar against gaining the same.
Gregorius Turonensis, ( lib. 1. chap. 14.) tells us, When the Article of our
Resurrection was most eagerly Impugned by the Saducean Heresy, in the days of
Theodosius the Emperor, it pleased God to reveal and awake the Martyrs St.
Maximinian, Malchus, Martinian, and the rest, after they had Slept 372 Years:
For 'twas concluded, If God could raise from Sleep after so many Years, He
could do it after any Number: and so consequently, having at first Created all
Things out of Nothing, could again raise them out of their own Ashes.

Baronius in his Annals ( Anno Christi 357.) relates, That when so many Doubts
were made about the Martyrdom of St. Foelix, Pope and Martyr, that his Name was
in danger to be blotted out of the Calendar; it pleased God to Reveal his Body,
by means of some who dug at Rome, in the Church of St. Cosmus and Damianus,
for Treasure; and, which is very Remarkable, it was the very day before his
Feast was Celebrated.

Even so, The Divine Providence, who with admirable convenience disposes all
things, even then in the Royal City of London, in the chiefest Church, in the
greatest Recourse of such who were so malevolently Opiniated, disclosed this
Pardon, in Vindication of the Catholics, when they were most hotly pursued,
and most wrongfully condemned of Crimes of this Nature: This Discovery being as
a Witness produced from Heaven to acquit Them, as it were by the Sentence of
God himself.

It will not be amiss to note here, That this Noble Knight, Sir Gerard
Braybroke, was Brother to Bishop Braybroke, whose Skeleton, or Skinny Bony
Remains (by the fall of St. Paul's Arched Floor into Sr. Faiths, preiently after
the Fatal Fire 1666.) was discovered; and is now reserved in (that our
admirable piece of Building) the Consistory, and shown as a great Rarity to
curious Persons: And from whence may be Collected, That this Family of
Braybroke, had an Egyptian Humor of Desire, that their bodies might not
suddenly Decay; but attend, if possible, the Reunion of the Soul.

The Just Weight of the Scarlet Gown (a Book full of Curiosity) in the Chapter
of Cardinal Fabritio Savelli tells us, That a little before Pope Vrbane the
VIII. Dred, it was verily believed, That the deceased Cardinal Savelli (Uncle
to this Fabritio) would have been Pope, because he was a Man of an approved
good Life, Charitable, and endued with all the Qualities appertaining to an
High Bishop; not fore deemed to be such a Pope as lived in the Time of
Sebastian Brandt, a German Poet, whom I shall quote hereafter, who complains in
his Chapter, De Fidei Catholicae and Imperii Casu, Turcarumque incursione;
Thus, Dormitant Reges, proceres, Palinurus in undis,
Mortiferis recubat, qui caput orbis habet.
Kings, Princes Sleep; nay, the Churches Head,
Like nodding Palinurus, takes no heed
Unto his Helm, but sits like one that is Dead.


And this was the rather so believed, because that in certain Mountainous
places, as one goes toward the Seashore of Siena, there was a Marble Stone
found, with an Inscription upon it, which said, That in the Year 1645. there
should be a Pope of the Family of Savelli: And in the very same Stone were the
Arms of Savelli Engraven; which were Bendy Or G. a Chief Ar. charged with a
Rose, between two Lions Rampant confronting one another, of the Second: As I
learn from Promptuair Armorial, a French Author, who exhibits a short Alphabet
of Arms, of sundry Nations, and a Copious one of France.

Now, my Reader may object; Here Is plain Presage, but the Effects followed not:
I answer, I will for once make use of a Word much in Vogue, whilst the
Exclusive Party raged and imagined vain Things, and which I sufficiently
confuted (as to their Sense and Acceptance) in my Vnio Dissidentium, viz. He
was not an Apparent; but Presumptive Pope: Every body hoping and expecting his
Virtues would make Him so. But, as to the finding of such a Stone, in such
uncouth places, I deem and esteem it a wonderful Discovery, and very worthy of
Remarque, as strange an Accident as one shall likely read.

Many of these Things perhaps may (to some) appear difficult to believe; but
they are the Reports of worthy Historians; and, for my part, I profess, I dare
not dis-believe Them, having had my Self particular and Personal experience of
Things as strange and incredible, as any of Their said Relations
before-recited. I could Instance that Memorable Accident that happened July
1671. at St. Catharines, near the Tower of London, of a Maid being struk upon
the Arm by an Invisible Hand, with several Crosses of a Sanguineal hew and
color (making together a Rhombular Form, which Heralds call a Lozenge); she
was struck more than once; for as they began to wear away, she was re-struck:
This was seen by my Self, and very many Persons more, (and some of great
Quality, that came from White Hall): For my own part, I have naturally such an
Air of Curiosity to things of this Nature, that I gave notice to very many;
among the rest, to One whom Foreign Travel, and all Polite Learning, greatly
Adorn; and whose Treatise, De Ortu and Natura Sanguinis, shall make him
Memorable, as long as Humane Frailty shall have need of Paeonian Aid, and the
Influence of Apollo. I say, Apollo. -- Cujus Inventum Medicina fuit, opiferque
per orbem
Dicitur; Herbarum Subjecta potentia cuique.
Who first Invented Medicine; and, through all
The World, they Him the Great Physician call.


He, I say, was very Instrumental in bringing the Maid to her Health and
Senses, which the Fright had very much impaired and disordered (as Mr. Robert
Garret, Seniour Brother of St. Catharines, and others, can Attest.) This then,
was no Foolery, or Ridiculous Passage, like that of the Crosses appearing in
Austry-Church in Warwickshire; which nevertheless was Published in Print, and
Visited by Thousands; whereas the Author had no other Record, than only the
Honest and True Report of such as saw it, and knew not the Fallacy.

The Crosses of Austry being nothing else but certain remaining old ones,
Painted in Times past in durable Colors; and having been (upon Beautifying the
Church) whited over, the White in time began, through continued Humidity of the
Air, to impair, and wear away; and so the under Painting began to appear again.
An Accident which I have taken notice of long before, in a Church
Mural-Painting, in the County of Suffolk discovering the Pourtraicture of the
Patron Saint of the Church.

Several were the Opinions concerning this wonderful Percussion of the Maid of
St. Catharines; some thought it the Effect of Witchcraft; others, a Presage of
the Romish Religions Restitution. The Place where it happened, being within the
Precinct of a College, left unsuppressed at the general Dissolution of Henry
the VIII. and continuing with Choral Service, even till the latter Times of
Queen Elizabeth: The Quire little Inferior to that of St. Paul's; and dissolved
by the Machination of one Dr. W. the then Master: The Stalls yet remain of very
Antique Work. As for the self-ended Dissolver, a strange Judgment followed the
Action; for his only Son made away himself in his Mothers Abode within the same
Cloisters; and she (Ob caussas quas dicere nolo, mortua est ex Communicata, and
non absque Conatu multo intercessioneque magna Christianae Sepulturae,
Commissa; cadavere interea (in fastigio Ecclesiae plumbeo) faetorem
intolerabilem emittente) reservato: ut audivi a nativis quibusdam, quibus
Parents haec (horrore) narrarant. So fared it with the Eagle that took a Cole
from the Altar, and Fired her own Nest.

But now to the Matter of Holy Edward the Confessor, Relating to His Present
Majesty.
AS Preparation was making for the Coronation of our present King's most Sacred
Majesty in Westminster-Abby, the Workmen busied about the building of Scaffolds
(either by mischance, or out of Curiosity of Inspection) broke the Coffin,
wherein lay the Remains of Holy Edward the Confessor: After the Coronation was
Accomplished, some Officer of the Church, or Servant of the Ecclesiastics (as
curious of Inspection as the former) put his Staff into the hole, and stirring,
perceived something to gingle; and taking it out, found it to be a Golden
Crucifix, of very considerable Value. This he durst not conceal, but revealing
it to one of the Superiors of the Collegiate Society, it was made known to the
King; who, like Himself, rewarded the Finder; and sometimes, in Reverence to
the Ancient Proprietor; wears this Religious Ornament himself.

St. Edward died the Fourth of January, Anno 1066. 621 Years ago. It Is
remarkable, this Crucifix should lie so long quiet and unknown, and at length
be so strangely discovered, and be Preserved to be Presented to our present
Sovereign; as if in Him alone, above all his Predecessors, were Virtues
agreeable to those of the first Proprietor, the so Memorable Pious Edward the
Confessor.

Day-Fatality, speaking of the Auspicious Fourteenth of October, His Majesty's
Birthday, concludes a Latin Decastich, with this Distich; Natali laetare tuo,
quam maxim princeps,
Fausta velut haec sunt omina semper habe.
Great Prince, rejoice in this Your Day of Birth,
And may such Omens still increase Your Mirth.


Verily, This hearty Wish has not been in vain, but has succeeded
Prosperously; See Day-Fatality concerning the Third of March; as also, The
Swans-Welcome, and Prince-Protecting Providence. And forget not, That very
many took notice, that at His Majesty's Proclamation, at the very Instant when
'twas performed at the Royal Exchange, a great number of Doves were there
Flocked together. To which is added, The finding of a Sacred Relic,
appertaining to a Dove-like Prince.

Let us hear what Authors say of King Edward. Stow says, ( Page 94.) For His
excellent Holiness, He is, unto this very Day, called Saint Edward; who, so
soon as he had gotten His Father's Kingdom, released the heavy Tribute of
Dane-Gilt.

And ( Page 95.) he calls Him, Good King Edward, and commends him for his
Compassion; and relates a Story, as if God had endued Him with the Grace of
seeing Visions. The Description of which Vision, I have oftentimes beheld in
Painted Glass, on the South Side of the Body of Westminster-Abby Church. And
Stow relates it at large, from approved Authors, That when the Officers had
Collected the grievous Tribute, called Dane-Gilt, and brought it into the
King's Treasury; The King being called to see so great an Heap and Mass, was,
at the beholding thereof, much asraid; protesting he saw the Devil Dancing
thereupon, and making exceeding much Joy; and therefore gave Commandment it
should be forthwith rendered again to the former Owners thereof; averring, That
of so cruel an Exaction He would not keep One Farthing to Himself, but it
should go back from whence it came.

If Pope Nicholas the III. called the Money, drawn and squeesed a Pauperibus
Litigantibus, from Poor Litigious People, by cunning Solicitors and Attorneys,
their very Blood and Souls; How much more, hard Taxes, which especially light
upon the Trading part of a Nation; who, of all People, ought to be encouraged;
as was the Opinion of Frederick Marquis of Mantua; for Les Estate du Monde,
tells us, His Subjects loved Him much; for He was Liberal, and would Lend them
Money without Interest, if he fonnd them fit for Traffic; An Heroic and
Princely Humor: But I return.

Stow tells us likewise, King Edward was the first that Collected from the
Ordinances, and Customs of the Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbers,
an excellent Body of Law. Fox in his Martyrology, says of them, That being
gathered out of the Best and Chiefest of other Laws, they were so Just and
Equal, and so Serving the Public Profit and Weal of all Estates and Conditions
of Men, that the People long after did Rebel to have the same Laws again.

Matthew Paris tells us, That William the Conqueror, at his Coming in, did
Swear to Use and Practice the same Good Laws of King Edward, for the Common
Laws of the Realm; but, being Established in the Kingdom, broke his Word, and
placed the Norman Laws in their room. And Stow informs us, That his Son, Henry
the First, restored the said Laws again, and amended Them where deficient. In
the first Chapter of the said Laws, the Duty of a King is excellently set
forth; but I refer you to Fox.

But let us hear the Elogy the aforesaid Fox gives this Prince (from approved
Authors;) He was a Man of a Gentle and Soft Spirit, of Nature and Condition so
far from all War and Bloodshed, that being in His Banishment, He wished rather
so to continue all His Lifetime, in that Private Estate, than by Bloodshed to
aspire to His Kingdom. After He had taken upon Him the Government of the Realm,
He guided the same with much Wisdom and Justice Twenty Four Years, save Two
Months; from whom Issued (as out of a Fountain) much Godliness, Mercy, Pity,
and Liberality toward the Poor, Gentleness and Justice toward all Men; and,
in all Honest Life, He gave a Virtuous Example to His People.

Wardner, in his Albions England, says thus of St. Edward:

Religious, Chaste, Wise, Fortunate, Stout, Frank and Mild was He;
And from all Taxes, Wrongs and Foes did set His Kingdom Free.
Serlo, of Paris, in his Epitaph, begins thus of Him;

Edovardus probitate potens Pietate verendus.
Powerful in Goodness, and Reverend in His Piety.
Robert of Gloucester calls him, Edward the Simple (understand it not in our
worst Acceptance at this day) but with a reference to Mat. 10.16. As Innocent
and Harmless as a Dove: or, to the Qualification of Moses, Numb. 12.3. Who was
very Meek above all the Men upon the Face of the Earth. Farther Illustrated,
Ecclus. 45.1, 2, 3, 4. concluding thus, That God chose Him for His Faithfulness
and Meekness, out of all Men, etc. Meekness being an Attribute our Savior
assumes to himself, Matt. 11.29. and therefore by no means unbecoming a King;
and which Robert of Gloucester should have called Sweetness of Conversation,
which was made admirably good in that Story Alluredus Rivalleness relates of
Him,

That as He lay on a Time Waking in His Bed, it chanced, That His Chamberlain
taking Money out of one of the King's Coffers, left it open, and goes his ways:
A Young Servitor, that Waited at the King's Table, spying the Coffer open, and
supposing the King asleep, thrust a good quantity of Money into his Bosom,
goes away, and lays it up; comes again, and does the like; and when he came the
Third time, and the King knew (as 'twas thought) the Chamberlain was at hand,
and willing the Young Man should avoid the danger, cried out to him; Thou art
too bold, take what Thou have, and get Thee gone; for, by God 's Mother, if
Hugoline come (for that was the Chamberlain's Name, and whose Epitaph is
mentioned by Weaver, Page 483.) he will not leave Thee one Penny; whereupon the
Thief made have away, and was never discovered by the King: Now, when Hugoline
came, and perceived much Money to be gone, and by his own negligence, he began
to sigh most grievously; whereupon, the King Rising, and making as if he knew
nothing of what had happened, asked, What he ailed to be so Troubled? which,
when the Chamberlain had related; the King replied, Be not Troubled, certainly
he that has it, has more need of it than Thou and I; let him go, that which
remains is enough for Us.

Certainly, This is an Instance of great Clemency, Mildness, and good Humor:
And, to which, let me add another out of Haraeus.

The King Residing at His Palace, near the Church of St. Peter, there came a
certain Irishman, deprived of the Use of both his Feet; and seeing Hugoline,
the King's Chamberlain, said unto him, Six times (as thou see, even creeping)
have I Visited the Thresholds of the Apostles, and yet have not deserved the
Restoration of my Limbs. But I have received Command from the Prince of the
Apostles, to go to the King; That He, taking me upon His Sacred Shoulders, bear
me to the Church, near His Palace; there to receive my Cure, if so be He
vouchsafes to do it. (Oh wonderful Humility!) The King takes him on His
Shoulders, and carries him: the Man stretches out his Legs, (his Hams being
become Flexible) and is Cured. Thus is the Story related by my Author, who
Dedicated his Book to Pope Sixtus Quintus.

God Blessed these his admirable Virtues with the wonderful Gift of Healing the
King's Evil. The Author of the Book called Vita Edovarde, says thus: This King
Edward, of Famous Memory, before the Day of His Nativity, was Elected of God;
wherefore, as we have known, produced by good and sufficient Witnesses, God
greatly Glorified Him in His Lifetime, with wonderful Signs; among the which,
this that follows was one: A Young-Woman Married, but without Children, etc.
had a Disease about her Jaws, and under her Cheeks, like Kernels; and this
Disease so Corrupted her Face with Stench, that, without great shame, she could
not speak to any body. This Woman was admonished in her Sleep, To go to King
Edward, and procure Him to Wash her Face with Water, and she should be Cured.
To the Court she came; and the King, Informed of the Matter, disdained not to
make Trial: having therefore a Basin of Water brought unto Him, He dipped His
hands therein, and washed the Woman's Face, oft-times rubbing the Diseased
place; sometimes also signing it with the Sign of the Cross. Now, after He had
thus Washed it, the hard Crustation or Swelling was softened and dissolved; and
the King pressing with His hand the Tumors, out of them came little Worms (of
which they were full) as also much Corrupt Matter and Blood: The King still
persevered with His hands to bring forth the Corruption. This done, He
commanded her a sufficient Allowance every day, for all things necessary, until
she had received perfect Health; which was within a Week after: And whereas she
was before Barren, she had a Child by her Husband. Ex libro cui Titulus, Vita
Edovardi.

Again, Authors affirm, That a certain Man named Vlfunius Spillcorne; when he
had hewn Timber in a certain Wood, laid him down to Sleep, after his sore
Labor: Now, the Blood and Humors of his Head so settled about his Eyes, that
he was thereof Blind for Nineteen Years: But, admonished in his Sleep, he went
in Pilgrimage to many Churches, to implore the help of God for his Blindness;
and, last of all, he came to Court; where he stood at the Entry of the King's
Chamber, an earnest Suitor for his Royal Help. At length, the King being
Informed of the Poor Man's Dream, He said, By Our Lady Saint Mary, I would do
any thing with a good Will, if it would please God, by Me, to have Mercy upon
this Poor Wretch: So, being also much put on by His Attendants, He called for
Water, and washed the Blind-Man's Eyes, and strait-ways the Blood dropped
plentifully out; and the Man being Healed, cried out with a cheerful Voice, I
see Thee, O King! Thus having recovered his Sight, he kept the King's Palace at
Windsor a long Season (for there he was Healed) after King Edward was Dead; and
Deceased in the Reign of William the Conqueror. Now, although these things seem
strange, yet the Normans ever averred, That He often did the like in His Youth,
while He remained in Normandy in Exile. How much more then, when He came to be
a King, in Possession (actually a Vicegerent of the Omnipotent God), that, by
what means soever pleases himself, works Wonders.

I have been the more large in the Recital of these Two remarkable Passages,
because our Kings of England deduce their Gifts and Faculties of Curing the
King's Evil (called in Latin, Struma, in French, Les Escroueles) from Edward
the Confessor, upon these Two Cures. And, because Cured by Our Kings, we call
it the King's Evil; and in our Modern Latin, Morbus Regius. And to this will I
make particular Application at the End of my Discourse.

Neither will I omit, from the Recitals aforesaid, to speak something in savor
of Dreams: Johannes Spondanus, in his Comment upon Penelopes Dream, ( Lib. 14.
Hom. Odys) says, Re vera hic testor, etc. I do avow, (which also I have heard
made good by Persons of undoubted Credit, as to themselves) nothing
considerable, either Good or Ill, ever happened to me, but I foresaw it in my
Dreams.

He Dedicated his Book to Henry the Third, King of Navarre; which was after
King of France, and known by the Name of Henry le Grand; and to whom he durst
not have uttered any thing but Truth. Nam Sacra est Reverentia Regnum.

I could say something as to my own particular, very patt to the purpose: But I
esteem it fitter for Private Discourse, than Public Edition, and return to the
Matter in hand.

These, before-recited, were the Virtues, Qualifications, and Endowments of the
Prince, whose Crucifix was so strangely preserved (which being so secretly
found, and not known of before, might easily have been detained): But as the
Vision of St. Brightwald (sometimes Monk of Glastenbury, and after Bishop of
Wilton) assured him, The Kingdom of England was the Kingdom of God, and He
would give it to whom He pleased. So, this Regium Cimelium, this Royal Rarity,
was ordained for One Elect of God; whom, though the Numerous and Powerful
Exclusive Party in England, and a Malevolent Party in Scotland, would have put
by; yet, maugre all, He is become Saint Edward the Confessor's Successor to His
Crown, Scepter, and This Religious Relic, so wonderfully preserved: Which is
the more Remarkable, in that the Massy Silver Head, belonging to the Royal
Image, covered all over with Silver Plate, gilded, which Queen Catharine
caused to be laid upon the Tomb of Henry the Fifth; was, at the Suppression in
Henry the Eighth's Time, when the battering Hammers of Destruction made havoc
almost in every Church, Sacrilegiously purloined forth Westminster-Abby; though
one would think, it being so manisest and obvious a thing, it should have
Incited and Commanded the Care of the Church Officers to its Security and
Preservation from Sacrilege.

No doubt, the having of this Pious Symbol and Badge, so auspiciously come by,
is an evident Omen and Presage, our Sovereign (as was its Pristine Owner) will
be Blessed with an happy Hand, in the Cure of the King's Evil; Be as sparing of
heavy Taxes as may be; A great Conservator of the Laws of he Land; A Pattern of
Piety; A Mirror of Mercy; A Fountain of Pity and Liberality toward the Poor;
Gentle and Just toward all Men: In a word, an Exchecquer of all Virtue; as was
the former Bearer thereof. I have mentioned before, That Wardner says of St.
Edward, That He set His Kingdom free from all Wrongs and Foes.

Serlo, of Paris, says of Him to the same Effect: Hic bello sic pace suos
exterruit Hosts,
Praesumpsit pacem rumpere nemo suam.
In Peace and War He so over awed His Foes,
None dare His Peace and Quiet discompose.


Hear Old Robert of Gloucester speaking to the same effect: Sooth our Lord
nourished his Meekness, and yat him great Grase that Men should be addrade of
him, that routh not be Wrath; and though Men trowed him to be Slow, he had such
Subjects under him, that at his hest, daunted his Enemies; as Syward Earl of
Northumberland, and Leofricus of Hereford, etc.

Our Legists tell us, Qui facit per alium facit per se, King Edward did His
Enemies business by others. But our Prince ( JAMES the Good and Just) is able
to be His own Conduct; to be Immensi tremor Oceani, Terrarum Arbiter; the
Terror of the Ocean, the Balance and Arbiter of Nations. Who shall dare to
raise up this Lion of England? Genesis 49.9.

Day-Fatality (Edit. 2. P. 1.) tells us, Normandy was Conquered from Duke
Robert, that Day Forty Years the Normans had won England. Edward the Confessor
came from Normandy to Reign in England, His Father's Kingdom, unjustly detained
by His Maternal Brother: Why may not our Dread Sovereign, the Possessor of the
Holy Confessor's Religious Badge (so strangely and ominously Recovered) go out
of England (Si fas sit ita loqui) into Normandy, and Recover and Annex it to
its Pristine Union, being His rightly descended Dukedom? ( Nihil loquor de
Andegavia, de Comit' Pontino, Aquitania, etc.) He being a Prince certainly Born
for Great Actions, and Blessed with a continuation of Lucky Omens.

Vnanimes cuncti quae semper habeto precemur. How Benignly and Courteously, by
His Means and Encouragement, are the Exiled French Received by Us? A Royal
Brief being granted by His Majesty, for a Liberal Collection toward Their
Relief.

I have by me an Ancient Book, written at first in the German Tongue, by
Sebastian Brandt, Doctor of both Laws, and Professed Orator and Poet; and Styled
by him, the Ship of Fools, laying open the Folly and Frailty of all sorts and
conditions of Men; a Book very expedient and necessary to the Reader. This Book
Jacobus Locherus Translated into Latin Verse; and from him one Alexander
Barcklay, Canon of St. Mary Ottry, having Perused it in Three Languages, Latin,
French, and Dutch, (as he Solemnly Professes in his Epistle) Translated into
English Meetre. In his Chapter of the Ruin of the Holy Catholic Faith, and
Diminution of the Empire, by the Turks, he Exhorts all Christian Princes and
Potentates, to join Hand in Hand against the Incroaching Infidels. Now, whereas
Brandt and Locher place all their hope in Maximilian, King of the Romans, as a
most fit Leader: Our English Canon transfers it (by a Poetical Digression and
Diversion) to the Famous King James the IV. of Scotland. Let us hear first the
Latin, and after the English Poetry of that Age; and, first, for Lecher.

Maxmilianus adest, quo major Tempore nullo
Rex fuit, a digno Stemmate Sceptra gerens,
Invideat quicunque velit, non justior illo
Principe, non Heroes clarior ullus erat.
Caesareum vultum praefert, inque ore nitescit
Majestas, mores Nobilitatis habet.
Fraudibus attentat nihil hic; nihil ille Dolosum
Concipit, at plano Tramite vita meat
Hunc non insani fastus, sed Candida virtus
Elevat. Hic solus faedera pacis amat,
Hoc duce crescet Honos terris, etc.
Hoc duce Sarmaticas gentes superabimus, atque
Euxinum Pelagus Bistonicosque lares.
Now comes in Barcklay, whose Translation is Paraphrastical; and from whom we
gather what an Opinion the World had of James the IV. aforesaid, Predecessor to
His Present Majesty.

But ye, Christian Princes, whosoever ye be,
If ye be destitute of a Noble Captain,
Take James of Scotland for His Audacity
And proved Manhood, if ye will Laud attain;
Let Him have the forward, have ye no Disdain
Nor Indignation; for never King was Born,
That is of War so much a Unicorn.
For if He take once His Spear in Hand,
Against these Turks, strongly with it to Ride,
None shall be able His Prowess to withstand,
Nor before His Face so hardy to abide:
Yet this His Manhood, Increases not His Pride;
But ever shows His Meekness and Humility,
In Word or Deed, to high and low Degree.
In Prudence, peerless is this most comely King;
And as for His Strength and Magnanimity,
Concerning His Noble Deeds in every thing,
One found on Ground, like Him, there cannot be:
By Birth born to Boldness and Audacity,
Under the bold Planet of Mars the Champion,
Surely, to Subdue His Enemies each one.
Let Him be foremost; then doubt ye not at all,
For only His Look, so Bold is His Courage,
The Turks Pride shall make Decay and Fall.
Like to a Lion, in Deeds He shall Rage.
Thus He being Guide, the Fury shall assuage
Of the false Turks; so that they shall be fain,
Our Christian Lands to Us to yield again.
If the English Lion, His Wisdom and Riches,
Conjoyn with True Love, Peace, and Fidelity,
With the Scotch Unicorn's Might and Hardiness;
There is no doubt, but then all Christianity
Shall Live in Peace, Wealth, and Tranquillity,
And the Holy Land come in Christian hand is.
This our Poet concluded his Translation, 1508.23 Henry the VII. as he says,
Page 259. But I perceive, by some Marginal Notes, 'twas not Printed till Henry
the VIII. began His Reign. And I cannot but take notice of his Heraldical
Allusion, expressing the two Kings of England and Scotland, the First by His
Arms and Supporters; and the Last, by the Last; which accidently I imitated in
a Distich I composed, when an over-confident Report was of the French King's
Death, in Aug. 85.

Lilia Flaccescunt, and fit Carbunculus ater;
Mars Moeret, summus ejus Alumnus obit.
French Lilies hang their Head, and Navarrs Radiant Stone
Grows dark; Mars grieves, his dearest and chief Pupil's gone.
Now as to the Unicorn of Scotland, and the Poets Allusion aforesaid, read
Numb. 23.22, and 24.8. and Job 39.9, and 10. Verses.

But I return to James the IV. He was (as well as very Valiant) a Wise and
Politic Leader; for, at the Battle of Flodden Field, observing the great
number of English Horse, (and those of large and strong size, the Scotch Horse
being small) He told His Nobles and Commanders, We shall do no good with our
Horses: We are as Valiant and Strong, as to our Persons, as our Enemies; We
must make Foot work of it. Stow describes the Battle at large, and says, The
Scotch Spears did twice sore endanger the English Forces; that the King
himself, even in the foremost Rank, Fought right Valiantly, encouraging His
People, as well by Example as Persuasions to do their best. In fine, the Lord
Dacres, with his Horse, was the cause of the Scotch Defeat; and the King most
Valiantly Fighting, was unfortunately Slain. See Weaver, Page 394. We have
heard Barcklays Elogiums of this most Heroic Prince; and Stow's Testimony of
His Valor; let us hear what others say.

John Johnston, in his Historical Description of the Scottish Kings, concludes
one of his Stanza's thus, to his Eternal Praise: Quod si animis ortisque tuis,
sors aequa fuisset,
Imperii fines ultima Terra daret.
If to Thy Mind and Aim, Fate had been Just,
The World unto Thy Rule submitted must.


Again; Illum fama vehens late Circumsona Olympo
Aequat, pro tumulo maximus orbis erit.
The Universe His Funeral Pile shall be,
Whom by Fames Trump to reach the Stars we see.


And in Camden's Remains we have an Epitaph for him, concluding thus, as if
speaking to His Royal Self: Si mihi dent animo non impar fata Sepulchrum,
Augusta est tumulo terra Britanna meo.


Which intimates That if the Fates had given him a Monument equal to His Great
Mind, not a small rais'd-up heap of Earth; [As Anciently was the Custom; See
Weaver, Page 6. and Virgil, Lib. 7. speaking of Caietas Monument, Aggere
compesito tumulus; and so Aeneid 11.

-- Fuit ingens monte sub alto
Regis Dercenni terreno ex aggere Bustum.
Thus Translated by Doctor Thomas Twine: -- Beneathen Hill full hye,
The Tomb of King Dercennus, raised up, aloft does lie;
With mighty Mount of Laureat Ground, etc.


See Stone-henge Restored, Page 27. and 30. quoting Leland: In Egestis per
campos terrae tumulis, quos Burghos appellamus sunt Sepulti.] I say, Not a
small heap of Earth, not a mean Berry or Barrow, but all Britain it self,
should have been His Funeral Mole and Pile.

The Magnanimity of our present Sovereign cannot make us believe otherwise,
than that the Virtual and Warlike Genins of this Famous JAMES, is, by
Generative Descent, I (will not say, Pythagorean Transmigration) streamed down
into himself.

I must not omit one thing: The late Duke of Norfolk having the Sword of this
Valorous Prince (as an Heir Loom) in his Possession, taken by his Ancestor;
bestowed it, as a great Rarity, upon the Heralds Office. The present Duke,
presently after His Late Majesty's Decease discoursing with His Present Majesty
about it, He had a mighty desire to see it; so 'twas sent for, and the King
Poised it several times in His hands, with more than ordinary Pathetick
Impression; As I have been assured by the Porter of the said Office; who,
bringing it back, called at a place where I was with some Friends, to whom this
accidental Overture of seeing the Sword, was exceeding Acceptable and
Diverting: For my part, I have often thought of this Passage, When I considered
the Virtues of the Prince that wore this remarkable Weapon, viz. James the
Fourth; whom our Chanon of Saint Mary Ottry, would have had to have been the
Christian Prince's Agamemnon against the Infidels. -- I have said before, Qui
facit per alium facit per se. Now, if what the Chanon would have had done by
the Predecessor, be done by the Arriere-Nephew and Successor, his Wish is
fulfilled; and in Him; the Lion and Unicorn are united, viz. Henry the Seventh,
and the most Valiant James the Fourth, His Royal Names sake aforementioned.

Poets are a kind of Prophets and Seers. Now, Mr. Pain Fisher, in an Ode which
he made upon his Sacred Majesty's Inauguraration, concludes thus: -- Oremus
Vt Rex Jacobus diu vigeat,
Nec Britannus Orb's indigeat
Rege, nato de Jacobis
Donec adsit Shiloh nobis.


Which I presume to English thus: Let Us Pray our James may Live full long,
And that there never may want one
To Rule the Britains (Brave) among,
From many Royal James's Sprung,
Till it please God, Shiloh shall come.


Which Verses plainly Import, as if in that Name, some secret hidden Virtue lay
Divinely couched and enshrined.

In my Christian Valor Encouraged, set out 84. when the Venetians made their
Inroad into Morea; I strongly Insinuate the French King was the Man must be
mainly Instrumental to ruin the Turk: I recited several Prophesies; but
especially that of Joachim:

The Turk shall be Destroyed by Three Nations; By the French, Propter bonos
Equites, for their excellent Cavalry; By the English, Propter bonos Marinarios,
for their excellent Seamen; and, By the Venetians, Propter bonum Consilium, for
their Prudent Councils. This Prophecy is worthy of Remarque; and the French in
the Van. I go on, and add: The French Monarch is become Potent in Shipping; but
He is not King of the English Mariners, which must make up the Ternary,
according to Joachim.

Strange Revolutions have happened to England since the Year 78. That Generous
Maximus Ma^inus, mentioned in Day-Fatality (once Great Admiral of Arragon; and
till the Year 73. High Admiral of England, is now again, at length, re-invested
in all His Honors; and that in spite of that Crew, mentioned in Introductio
ad Latinam Blasoniam, Page 165. with strange Prophetical Heraldieal
Reflections: He, I say, is restored; Influenced by a Divine Power and Favor,
and the Benevolent Rays of Fraternal Love; The Love of the greatest Sea Prince
in the World, Charles le bon, and le grand.

Pray God incline the Heart of the Great French Cyrus; The Heart of the Great
Charles of Great Britain; And then the French Cavalry, and the English
Mariners, Influenced by the Auspicious Genius and Success of Prince Maximus
Marinus. His Royal Highness, will be Assistant to the Venetian Counsels and
Undertakings.

Thus I, in my said Little Treatise.

Since which (Sic dii voluere) Charles le bon is departed into another World,
and James the Great is become Sole Arbiter of His Brothers Power; and needs
none of His Brothers Influence; I say, no Influence, but that of God: Which,
let us pray He may never want, to Subdue the Enemies of Cristendome, as well as
Those of His own peculiar Kingdoms (faxit Deus).

Auxilium contra Turcas Rex inclite praele:
Anglus Venetis Gallus and addat opem.
An Liceat optare insuper?
Ferraram jungas Mutinae, Rhegioque celebrem,
(Imperii quam Sacra fames dis-junxit iniqu^)
Ducatus rapti quis promptior Arbiter adsit;
Quam qui Ferrariam Prolem jam duxit Herous
( Estensem natam dico) Successio cujus
Stemmatis eximii, jam mill cucurrerat annos
Ducentosque super, Pigna quae Scripsit.
Pignensia chronica firmant.
Thus have I finished This small Piece, Treating of the Wonderful Discovery and
Finding of that Sacred Relic, belonging to a Royal Confessor of that
Religion, which our most Serene Sovereign has Restored, and solemnly Professes.

When I had Published my Day-Fatality, Anno 1679. one whom I am loath to name,
(and whom I Answered in a Pamphlet Entitled, Mercurius Antiducalis Flagella
us; and have also mentioned with special Remark, Page 157. of my Introductio ad
Latinam Blasoniam) exposed me in his Popish Courant, as a Red-Letter-Man; and
Abused me most horribly in his Touch of the Times: What will he think of me
now? I only gently tell him, and all the World: -- In tali Relligione
Quali plura nitent moralia, cur ego paucis
Offendar dubiis? tolerarier ergo meretur
Nec minus a nostro jam Rege foverier almo
(Sic reor and raturus ero Stabilitus in aevum)
Diligo Romanae moralia Religionis.


I need not English this to the Author aforesaid, who began that part of his
Popish Courant (so Picquant to me) with a Quotation out of Horace.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line ult. for Plenas read Plenus. p. 11. l. 22. for Europian r.
European. p. 13. l. 23. for Cords r. Corpse. p. 19. l. 19. r. Excommunicata. p.
23. l. 2. for Edovardus r. Edwardus. Ibid. l. 15. for Rivalleness r.
Rivallensis. p. 24. l. 26. for Edovarde r. Edovardi. p. 31. l. 27. for Hand is
r. Handys. p. 32. l. 5. for accidently r. accidentally.


