Die Mercurii 24. September. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Symonds d' Eves, and
Mr Hollis, do from this House give Thanks to Mr Gibson and Dr Temple for the
great pains they took in the Sermons they preached this day at the entreaty
of this House at St Margarets Westminster, it being the day of Public
Humiliation, and to desire them to print their Sermons. And it is Ordered, that
none shall presume to print them, without being authorized under their hand
writing.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. De Com
I appoint John Hancock to print my Sermon.

SAMUEL GIBSON.



THE RUIN OF THE AUTHORS AND FOMENTORS OF CIVIL VVARRES.

As it was delivered in a Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons in
Margarets-Church Westminster, Sept. 24. being the Monthly Fast day, set apart
for public Humiliation.

By SAM: GIBSON, Pastor of Burleigh in Rutland; now Minister of Gods Word at
Margarets Westminster, Pro tempore; and one of the Assembly of Divines.

DEUTERONOMY. 32. 35. To me belongs vengeance, and recompense, I will repay; their
foot shall slide in due time; for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them, make haste.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for John Hancock, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
HONORABLE SENATORS;
WHen formerly I have been moved by friends to preach before you at the Monthly
Fast, I have always declined it, and earnestly entreated them not to make the
motion; being ready to say, as Ausonius to Caesar in another case, Non habeo
ingenium, I have not parts for such a service in such a Presence; or as Moses
answered the Lord, Exodus 4. 10.
Non sum facundus, I am not eloquent; for I never thought my Oratory worthy
such an Auditory: but when a learned Member of your House came to me in your
name, and signified your will to have it so, I could not say as that Poet did,
Obsequium (...) esse (...) Id: though not sine subdu^^ione and sudore.
Caesar sed jussit, habebo, as if he had wit at command, but the Senate
sending, I resolved, I must obey, and do as well as I can with Gods assistance.
Lips. Ep
Now having in obedience to your Order, both preached and printed this plain
Sermon, I beseech you take it with all faults, and connive. This I may say to
my comfort, it was preached in a good day, and we that then made our
Supplications for you, and with you, found not our prayers and yours fruitless,
2 Samuel 23. 10.
for the Lord wrought a great Victory that day; By Westchesier.
a good encouragement to you to continue your days of Humiliation, of which
you find so good effects. Often may you hear such News from your Forces, that
we may enjoy the benefit of your Ordinances in peace.

Worthy Patriots, it was joyful tidings to us in all parts of the Kingdom,
when we heard for certain, that there should be a Parliament, and that Writs
were out for choosing Knights of the Shire, and it was an augmentation of our
joy, when we heard of a Triennial Parliament; that I thought would be fraenum
or flagrum to all corrupt men, but when we understood that there was an Act
for the continuation of this Parliament, we had greater cause of rejoicing,
because by this means ye have opportunity to perfect those things, which
other Parliaments could but propound and begin, being sundry times broken up,
before they could do any considerable service for their Country. God forbid,
that that high Court which is now established by a law, should ever be
dissolved by the sword. Peace, 2 Chro. 12. 18.
peace be unto you, and to your Helpers, your God helps you. He grant, that
ye may prosper, and triumph in his Name and praise, until ye have finished
the work which he has given you to do, which is and shall be the prayer of

Westminster, October. 30. 1645. The unworthiest of your spiritual Servants, S
A: GIBSON.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 11. leave out Ezra and. p. 10. l. 19. leave out as. p. 13. l. 13.
for though read enough; line 14. read God shall be glorified.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at the monthly
public Fast, September. 24. 1645.
2 SAMUEL 17. 14. For the Lord determined to defeat the good Counsel of
Ahithophel, that he might bring evil upon Absalom.
AS Kings have their Counselors to assist them in the Government of their
Kingdoms in peace and war: so Absalom making himself a King had his Council of
War to help him to manage his Rebellion, and to advance his wicked design
against his Father, First, he sent for Ahithophel, who perfidiously deserted
his Master the Lords Anointed, and cleaved to his rebellious Son. After
Hushai D^vids friend by David's advice came in to him, who did better service
for him when he was amongst his enemies, than he could have done if he had
continued with him. Ahithophel began first and delivered his opinion of David
and his company, that they were weak and weary, and he offers to go against
him with twelve thousand men* and to surprise him* and take away his life; and
this his counsel was well liked at the first, but after Ahithophel had spoken,
Absalom desired to hear Ha^cats opinion and advice also, who rejects,
Ahithophels counsel, yet modestly with respect to his place and parts, and
delivers his opinion contrary, that David's men were not so weak as he
thought, Ira cos Fortitudinis.
but mighty and in wrath, which is the whetstone of fortitude, as a bear, etc.
and for military skill he was no novice now to learn that, but an old
experienced Soldier, and therefore would not so easily be found, and that there
might be great danger if some of Absaloms men were slain, others would faint
and fly, and therefore his counsel was, that they should go stronger, not
with twelve thousand, but rather gather all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, and
that Absalom should go himself in person to countenance the war, and animate
the Soldiers, and then which way soever David took for his safety, they
should be able to find him and overcome him and all his company, and not leave
a man of them alive. When Absalom and his party heard this, they generally
approved it as the better way, and preferred Hushai's counsel before
Ahithophels; Absalom and all Israel, etc. And in the words which I have read,
the reason is rendered of this their unanimous approbation of it; For the Lord
determined to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel that he might bring evil
upon Absalom. And thus ye see the occasion and coherence and sum of the
words; They hold forth unto us two things specially; First, Gods action;
Secondly, Gods intention: His act was the defeating of Ahithophels counsel;
his intention was to bring evil upon Absalom: the one made way for the other;
and after the intention soon followed execution, he did bring evil upon him
and his partakers. That which is translated, determined, is in the Original,
commanded: and so in the Greek, when it is said, his good counsel, the meaning
is not that it was so morally, but respectively, it was wise counsel and
conduced to his ends and Absaloms, and it had been good for Absalom to have
followed that counsel. When he says evil, he means destructive evil: in
the Greek they read, (...), all evils; and so much briefly for the sense of the
words for the present.

From the connection of these words with the former, we may learn that there
is nothing in man independent, neither his judgment nor his affections, but
there is a secret divine operative power that overruleth all sorts of men, and
turns their minds this way and that way, as God sees good to turn them in
mercy or in judgment to themselves or others. Here are two Counselors the one
against the other, and at the first Ahithophels counsel was liked, and after
Hushai had spoken, it was disliked, and rejected, and Hushai's counsel was
preferred before, for the Lord, etc. A place parallel to this we have, 1 King.
12. 15. there are two sorts of Counselors, one old and the other young, and
Rehoboam hearkened not to the old men but to the young, and by that means lost
ten parts of his Kingdom, and the Lord said it was of him. Jer. 10. 23.
The way of man is not in himself, says the Prophet Jeremy, neither is it in
man to walk and to direct his steps; not the way of his feet, as theirs that
say, James 4. 13.
they will go to such a City, and get gain, and never ask God leave; he
teaches them to say, if the Lord will, etc. Prove. 16. 1.
nor the way of his tongue, the preparation of the heart is in man, but the
answer of the tongue is of the Lord. Numb. 21.
Which may be seen in Balaam, who intended to curse the Lords people, but
being overruled, blessed them; nor the way of his heart; which may be seen in
Ezra, Ezra 7. 27.
and Artaxerxes, God put it into his heart to beautify the house of the Lord;
Prove. 21. 1.
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turns
it whither soever he will: the reason is, because as God alone made all the
world, so he will be absolute Master over all, and so rule and overrule, that
it shall not be in the power of men or Devils to cross him in any thing, but
his will shall be done and not theirs, and his counsel shall stand at all
times, maugre all their presumption. But here a question will be about sin and
error, whether this do not make God the author of that. I answer, no; he is not
the Author, but the Ordinator, or he that orders sin, and that always in a
righteous way; he constrains none to do evil, but restrains many; he
withheld Ahimelech that he should not sin against him; Genesis 20. 6.
and he keeps back his servants from presumptuous sins; he restrained Joseph's
brethren when they would have killed him, and restrained Satan when he would have
killed Job; and having suffered evil to be done, he draws good out of evil,
and often turns even the sins of men to his own glory, and to the good of his
Church and children: Gen 45. 5. 8.
it is said that Joseph's brethren sold him, but that God sent him into Egypt;
they thought evil against him, he meant it for good, to save them and much
people alive. Here was a gracious ordinating of an ungracious act. When the
Sabaeans and Chaldaeans plundered Job, he attributes it to God, Job 5. 21.
and says, The Lord has taken away; now they did it with a felonious intent,
and the Devil in malice against Job set them on work; but God with no ill
meaning to him, but to prove the integrity of his servant, when it was
questioned by Satan, and to exercise his patience for a time, and to do him
good at his latter end; and therefore as he said, so may and ought we to say in
such a case, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Chap. 16.
When Absalom went in to his Fathers Concubines, that was done which God said
to David he would do; and as it was the punishment of sin, it was just with
God to do that which he did; David was right served, when he was punished in
the same kind wherein he had trespassed against another: as it had rationem
peccati, the nature of sin, it was Absaloms; for he knew the Commandments, the
fifth, and the sixth, and the seventh, and he had no countermand, therefore he
did wickedly, and the worse because he did it with a wicked mind, to make
himself abhorred of his Father, and past reconciliation; the Lord is righteous
in all his ways, Psalm. 145. 17.
and holy in all his works, even in the way of punishing one sin with another;
as he is magnus in minimo, great in the least work, so he is bonus in possimo,
good in the worst act that is done in judgment upon the sons of men.

For the use of this point: first, it serves for the confutation of some
errors; I will name but two; first, of those that deny the divine providence,
as if God minded not the things below; Mat. 22. 29.
these err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power and wisdom of God; they
abundantly declare, that there is nothing so high that is above it, Psalm. 113.
nor any thing so low that is beneath it; Ludibria and joci naturae.
that great Creator thinks it not below his divine Majesty to move all things
as he does; Scal. in exerc.
and it is a vain thing to think that it is any trouble to him, as it would
be to men; as he created all things without any servile labor, or any labor,
only by his Word; Heb. 1. 3.
so he upholdeth all things by the word of his power; and being an universal
Spirit, and omnipotent, it is as easy to him to rule all the world as one man,
and to dispose of all things, as it was to create them, and by the same wisdom
that he did the one, he does the other.

The other error touching free will, tends to lift up nature and the vain
heart of man, as if it were in the power of men to repent, and believe, and
speak and do as they see good, pro libero arbitrie, whereas Paul may plant
and Apollo water, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
but it is God that gives the increase: Joh. 6. 29.
this is the work of God, says Christ, that ye believe; 2 Cor. 3. 9.
the thought is the least part of the work, Minima pars operis. Call.
and yet the Apostle says, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think;
Phil. 2. 13.
and, God gives both the well and the deed. Et ut velimus and ut valeamus*
Fulgent.


Therefore in the next place this makes for our humiliation, to keep us from
pride of any thing in us, and from presuming of any power in our selves to do
any thing; we know not what to pray, nor what to think, nor what to judge, but
are apt to mistake, and mis-Judge, Acts 8.
and to be misled. Simon Magus was willing to be accounted some great man,
(...).
but a better man said, 2 Cor. 12.. 1. (...)
I am nothing; he that thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing as he
ought to know, Joh. 15. 5.
1 Cor. 8. 2. And without Christ we can do nothing; he says not, nihil
magnum, no great matter, as Augustine observes, but nothing; and therefore
Honorable Senators, ye do well that every morning before ye go to the work
of the day, ye begin with prayer to God, for his direction, and assistance,
and blessing; I hope every Member does it with an humble heart, apprehensive of
his own impotency, and nothingness; for certainly neither the ablest
Churchmen in spiritual affairs, nor the wisest Statesmen in temporal, can
do any thing well without God, Ab Jove principium.
and therefore it is good to follow the old rule, and that is, to begin with
God, lest errors be committed for want of his direction.

Secondly, Observe what humane wisdom is, and all great parts without the
fear of God, and learn we hence, that Policy without piety turns to folly
and brings misery. What Ahithophel was for wisdom, and counsel, and State
policy, appears by that which is written of him in the end of the former
Chapter; Comparatio, non aquiparatio.
The Counsel of Ahithophel which he counseled in those day^s, was as if a man
had inquired at the Oracle of God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel, both
with David, and with Absalom. But what he was for Religion and conscience, may
appear by his forsaking David, and complying with Absalom his wicked Son, and
by giving counsel to Absalom to go into to his Fathers Concubines, and by
offering his service to kill David; a mere Politician, a Fox, wise to do evil,
skillful to destroy and to do mischief, but not wise toward God, or for his
own soul; his wisdom turned to folly, his policy proved vanity in the end.
What came of him, ye may read after; being crossed in his expectation, and
taking to heart the disgrace done unto him, by their preferring Hushai's
counsel before his, he presently rode home in discontent, and became selo de
se, a self-murtherer. Of Jonadab it is said, Chap. 13 3.
he was a very subtle man, but his counsel that he gave to Amnon came to
naught, to his own shame, and his friends destruction, and all for want of the
fear of God, which he did not set before his eyes. Genesis 3. 1.
That old Serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field, but his counsel
brought evil upon himself. Exodus 1. 10.
And the King of Egypt said, Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they
multiply, but the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew;
Dan. 6.
and that Daniels enemies plotted against him, proved against themselves, and
for him; and no marvel, for the wisdom of God is infinitely beyond the wit of
man, and it is for his glory, to defeat the counsel of the wisest of men, and
to establish his own: and the rather, because though they have nothing but
what they have received from him, and that they have is little in comparison of
that which he has, and they have not, yet commonly they are proud of that
little, and trust to it; specially if they prosper, they are puffed up, and
assume to themselves the glory that properly belongs to God, and they seek
themselves, and not him, and many times work against God and his servants and
people, and therefore they are infatuated and confounded by the hand of Heaven.

Which first may serve for admonition to all that are destitute of the fear of
God, and yet are wise in their own eyes, Jer. 9. 23.
and superciliously disdain others; Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom;
1 Cor. 10. 12.
and let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Wisdom, even
civil and worldly wisdom, is the gift of God, which he has given unto the
sons of men, and is of necessary use to end Controversies between neighbor and
neighbor* hence the Apostle writing to the Corinthians, that went to Law one
against another, reproves them and says, 1 Cor. 6. 5.
Is it so that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one, etc? As if it
were a shame for them, if there were not; for Religion does not make men
fools. It is necessary, specially in public persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
hence required in the choice, Take ye wise men and understanding; Pro. 18. 17.
He that is first in his cause is just, says Solomon; one would think he were
as honest a man as lives, and that he has had a great deal of wrong, then
comes his neighbor and inquireth, and all that hear both find, that one
tale is good till another be told.

Sometimes there is no witness, as when the two Harlots appeared before
Solomon, 1 King. 3. 22.
and both claimed the living child. Sometimes there are false witnesses, as in
the case of Naboth: 1 King. 21.
and therefore there is need of a great deal of wisdom to find out the
truth: and to do Justice in war it is necessary; therefore Solomon says,
Pro. 20. 18.
By counsel make war; for wisdom is better than strength. Eccl. 9. 16.
A poor man by his wisdom delivered the City. 2 Samuel 20. 16. 22.
A woman also by her wisdom. But if the fear of God be wanting in those that
are worldly wise, they will not prove very wise in the end, for themselves, or
for their own good, or others. Thou fool, (...).
witless man, says the voice, this night they shall fetch away thy soul, Luke
12. 20.
etc. They have rejected the Word of the Lord, Jer. 8. 9.
says the Prophet, and what wisdom is in them? The Word is that which
teaches wisdom, therefore David made that his Counselor; Psalm. 119. 24. 98.
and that made him wiser than his enemies.

Secondly, This may keep us from fear of our adversaries, in regard of their
wit, and policy, and counsel against us. Isa. 29. 14.
The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their
prudent men shall be hid. Psalm. 33. 10.
The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught; he makes the devises
of the people of no effect. As he did to Ahithophel, so he will do to those
that are like unto him; their policy shall turn to folly.

Thirdly, Therefore such as are not to be too much esteemed or followed, what
ever abilities they have, specially in things pertaining to God and his Church
and Ordinances, having no power of godliness in them. Mere Politicians are not
good Interpreters of Scripture, though they have read the Scriptures, nor are
they fit Judges in spiritual matters; they savor not the things of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
they cannot relish them; (...).
they perceive not the things of the Spirit, they have not the capacity, they
are beyond them; they cannot have right hearts to Christ and to his Ministers,
and to the pure Ordinances. Give me favor for an observation or two, in a way
inoffensive to candid hearers.

The French have a Proverb, that a Minister should know nothing but the
Scripture. Well, let that be free to us to know that, and to teach that in one
thing as well as in another, and prove all things, and hold that which is good.

The observation is this, that S. Paul was as much for the civil Magistrate as
any man; 1 Timothy 2. 1.
I will, says he, that prayers and supplications, with thankesgiving, be made
for all men, Romans 13. 1.
for Kings, and for all in authority under them: and, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: Tit. 3. 1.
and, Put them in remembrance, that they be subject to principalities and
powers, and that they obey Magistrates: but withal, Heb. 13. 17.
he says, Obey them that have the oversight of you, that watch for your
souls: and, the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: 1 Cor.
14. 37.
teaching us that Preachers should be referd to Preachers, that can best judge
of their doctrine, and Preachers should refer themselves to Preachers, and
submit to their judgment; if they will not, there is an appearance of a great
deal of arrogance in them.

Moreover, When there was an incestuous person in Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.
that had his Fathers wife, the Corinthians had him not before a Justice to
have him imprisond or otherwise punished by the Magistrate, but they informed
the holy Apostle of him, and he took order that he should be censured by the
Church, that he might be brought to repentance, and saved. And Christ, in whom
were all treasures of wisdom, was for Caesar, and would have him to have all
that was due unto him; but in case of trespass between brother and brother,
after graduall admonition, he says, Tell the Church* and if he will not bear
the Church, let him be unto thee as a Publican, and an heathen. Where by
Church, cannot be meant the Sanedrin, greater or lesser; for those Councels
consisted of unbeleeving men, which refused Christ the Head of the Church, and
persecuted his members; and it is not likely that he would have Christians to
tell one another faults to unbeleevers, and so expose themselves to derision
and abuses; and sure he would not have them accounted as heathen, and no
Church Members, that would not hear such a Council. The name of Church is
appropriated to Christian Congregations throughout the Acts of the Apostles;
and neither one Justice or the whole Bench is ever called the Church in the
Scripture. And compare that place in Mat. 18. with that of Mat. 5. 25. and Luke
12. 58. and there will appear a manifest difference between civil Officers
and Church Officers. In Luke, the civil Magistrate is called the Magistrate;
in both places, the Judge; and he speaks of his Officer, and of the prison,
the place of punishment for malefactors, plainly putting a difference between
those Governors of the Commonwealth, and Church Governors.

Compare place with place, and consider; for our part, we give unto the civil
Magistrate, as much as the word of God gives them, and if any give more, the
more shame for them, there is more flattery than honesty in it; for my own
part, I had rather be under government, than put to govern: if I did not
speak as I think, I durst not speak it in this place. My reason is because of
the burden, and the account to be given to Christ for miscariages, for every
Steward must give account of his stewardship; the civil Magistrate of his,
Heb. 13. 17.
and Church Governors of theirs; and if the same men will take both temporal
and spiritual government upon them, they will have such an account to make in
that day, as few are sensible of for the present. Therefore let all be advised
what they do, and take heed how they lean to the wisdom of natural men,
what parts so ever they have: in things of this nature rather hearken to those
that are religiously wise, and judicious, and conscientious; so Christ shall
have his right, and the civil Magistrate shall have no wrong, but power and
honor, though without trenching upon the Churches right, and God be glorified,
and many trespassers shall be brought to repentance, and their spirits saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus, which was that which the holy Apostle aimed at in
all Church Censures, and which we ought all to aim at, in the fear of God.
And thus much touching the act of God in defeating the good counsel of
Ahithophel, the great Politician of Israel.

Before I come to the process of the judgment against Absalom, a question may
be touching that which Hushai did, whether it were lawful or no.

I answer, it was a military stratageme, and he had instruction from David to
do what he did. Judge. 20.
And in sundry places of Scripture we find examples of such practices. Josh. 8.
3.
God taught Joshua to lay an ambush for those of Ai: Diodorus Siculus. l. 17.
as such things have been done by Alexander, and other famous men of war
among the heathen; Ad fallendum hostem.
so by the Israelites, and their Leaders of eminent note: having to deal with
such enemies as Hushai was to deal with, it was no time for plain dealing: not
that it is lawful for men in war to say and do any thing: there are certain
cautions to be observed.

1. 1 Ne veneno aut sicarus agatur.
That no poisoning be used, or privy murdering.

2. 2 Ne fides data frangatur.
That faith once given, be not broken.

3. 3 Ne jura belli violentur.
That the law of arms be kept and not violated. There must be respect had to
Honor and Honesty. There is no comparison between that which Ahithophel did,
and that which Hushai did: there was cunning, but honest cunning; for it was in
a good cause, and for the public good: it was to save David and the godly
party with him, and he showed fidelity to his friend that confided in him. Let
there be a fair interpretation of his words, and a favorable judgment given
of his doings, and that which Hushai did, is rather imitable than culpable, and
may be done in the like case without offense to God; and it may be observed in
the text, that God owned that which he did, as his act and deed; had any served
David as Hushai did Absalom, it had been wicked: the wicked may not do that to
the righteous, which the righteous may do to them: Psalm. 109.
the righteous may pray against the wicked, so may not the wicked against the
righteous: the righteous may and ought to despise the wicked, Psalm 15. 4.
but the wicked may not despise the righteous: Psalm. 13. 4.
the righteous may hate the wicked, as David did, but the wicked cannot hate
the righteous without sin: it is said, Psalm. 34. 21.
they that hate the righteous shall be desolate; it is never said, they that
hate the wicked shall be desolate: a charge is given to Kings not to touch his
anointed servants, Psalm. 105. 14.
and to do his Prophets no harm, and he reproved Kings for their sakes: Zach.
2. 8.
he that touches the righteous, touches the apple of his eye: to those that
speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 4. 5.
it is threatened that they shall give account at the day of judgment. God
would have them know that he puts a difference between the Egyptians and
Israel, Exodus 11. 7.
and he would have all to know that he puts a difference between the
righteous and the wicked; Mal. 3. 16, 17.
therefore we are to judge the best of that which Hushai did for the righteous
against the wicked, and rather justify it, than condemn it.

I come now to the end for which the Lord defeated the counsel of Ahithophel,
that is, that he might bring evil upon Absalom, Finis operantis, and finis
operis.
which was both the end of the worker, and of the work.

I might hence deliver, That God will surely bring evil upon those that do
evil, but then I should enter into a large field, and now I have not time to
expatiate so much; I shall therefore keep me to that which is punctually
pertinent to the Text, and to the present occasion: and the point is this; That
God will find a time and way to bring evil upon those that rise up against
the righteous, and are the authors and fomentors of an unjust war, and that
without respect of persons. Absalom for birth, was the son of a King, and one
of the best Kings that ever reigned; for person, he was extraordinary; in all
Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for beauty, from the
sole of his foot, even to the crown of his head, there was no blemish in him;
2 Samuel 14. 25.
for his attendance, it was Prince like, he had chariots and horses, and fifty
men to run before him; for fair carriage and winning behavior, he exceeded
other Princes, to ingratiate himself with the people, so as he was the
Favorite of Israel: but aspiring to be King before his time, and to drive his
wicked design, raising an unjust war in Israel, God determined to bring evil
upon him, and did it; coming forth to battle against David in his own person,
God so ordering it, that riding under an Oak, his head light within a thick
bough, so as he could not get it out again, and the beast he rode on going
away, he hung between heaven and earth, till David's servants came and smote him
dead; Behold the judgment of God upon him for his wickedness; the tree caught
him, the Mule left him, Joab darted him, the young men slew him, the company
earth't him, and there lay Absalom, the young man Absalom, his Highness
beautiful Absalom, in a deep pit, with a great heap of stones cast upon it.
Ahithophel was his Counselor, and fomented the war, to make way for that which
he intended against Absalom; God defeated his counsel, which Ahithophel so
took to heart, that thereupon he went home and hanged himself, and there lay
Ahithophel, with a halter about his neck. The Israelites that took part with
Absalom were routed and slain, and there lay 20000 of them dead corpses: the
sword devoured them, and the wood devoured more than the sword; and though
Amasa escaped in the battle, and was after spared through David's clemency, yet
he was soon cut off by the deadly hand of Joab, who smote him under the fifth
rib, and shed out his bowels on the ground, and there lay the General. Sheba
also after this being seditious, and rebelling against David, they soon took
from him his head, and cast it over the wall. Saul rising up against him
unjustly, when he was his servant, and pursuing him without cause, he came to
an ill end, and Doeg and other of his enemies that incensed Saul against him;
and Saul's house after, warring against him, God cut them off also, one after
another, Ishbosheth and Abner, etc.

Not to speak of heathen Kings and Armies that warred against Israel, and fell
before them, of which ye may read frequently in the Scripture, it came thus to
those that caused civil wars in Israel, 1 Kings 16. 1.
Adonijah exalting himself, to prevent Solomon, it was to his own ruin and
theirs that were his abettors. The Benjamites would protect abominable
Delinquents, Judge. 20. 13. etc.
and rather take arms against all Israel, than deliver those wicked men, that
Justice might be done upon them, and evil taken away, but they paid dear for
it in the end, it cost many thousands of them their lives, and in a manner the
whole Tribe was cut off through the just judgment of God upon them, Chap. 21.
3. 6.
in so much as the Israelites bewaild the breach. Jeroboam rebelling against
the house of David in Abiiab his time, 2 Chro. 13.
though he had the ods by far for number of men, 800000 against 400000, he was
overthrown, and it is just with God that it should be so:

First, Because of their unthankfulness to him, when they are not content with
their estate, but seek to advance it by unlawful means, and the better their
condition, the greater their ingratitude. Ahithophel lived well enough under
David, in great esteem, and could not serve a better Master. Absalom lived
like a Prince, and his Father was at first but a Shepherd that followed the
Ewes great with young, and yet he was not content, but would be greater by
violence. And as no Son had a more indulgent Father, so no people had a better
King than David; He fed them according to the integrity of his heart, Psalm.
78. 72.
and guided them with the skilfulnesse of his hands; and therefore it was
execrable ingratitude in them all to rise up against him, and they were worthy
to suffer all they suffered, and more; and so others that take the sword
without a just cause and calling.

Secondly, Psalm. 146. 8.
The Lord loves the righteous, and is engaged to them, and being Judge, he
will favor their righteous cause, 2 These. 1. 6.
and do justice upon those that molest them.

Thirdly, War is of all evils of this life the greatest; the first of those
four judgments mentioned, in Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 14. 21.
and civil wars are worse than foreign, and tend to the ruin of the State
and Kingdom; hence called, (...).
The great evil: experience shows that in time of war, houses and towns are
set on fire, and many persons and families impoverished, and undone, and
Counties desolated; and therefore the authors and fomentors of civil wars
are of all ill members and instruments the worst, and no punishment is too much
for them.

Fourthly, Their fall and destruction is furthered by the prayers of the
righteous, that call upon God in their trouble, Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
who will arise in due season, and turn his hand against their enemies. Use.


This shows what we may expect touching the authors and fomentors and
promoters of the present wars in this Land. Phil. de Com.
It is written by a foreign Writer, that there were never civil Wars in
England, but the lot of misfortune (so he expresses it) light upon the
authors and fomentors of the war: and God is the same that he was, and loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity as much as ever he did; he is the Lord of
hosts, and the God to whom vengeance belongs, and he will repay, and render
unto all men according to their works.

The adversary party say, they are for the King.

I answer, 2 Samuel 21. 16.
If any should do to the King as Ishbibenob did to David, that would have
slain him, he were worthy to be commended, that would do as Abishai did, that
succored him; but who goes about to take away the Kings life?

Secondly, If any be for the King in a way for his good, and the good of the
Kingdom, it were praiseworthy in them; but many are for the King without wit,
and honesty: without wit, that make Kings more than men, and in a manner deifie
them, as if they had absolute power over their Subjects to command what they
will, without any limitation by any laws of God or man. Bilson of perpet. Gov.
Whereas Princes and Rulers have received power and dominion of God, to rule
under him, not over him, and to command for him, not against him, and to be
obeyed after him, and not before him. Without honesty, as Doeg that incensed
Saul against David, 1 Samuel 22. 1^.
and fell upon the Priests of the Lord, when honester men refused to do it; he
was for the King; and so are many that are given to plundring, and serve the
King as the Hawke serves the Fawkner, that being let loose, flies at the
Foul, not with any intent to serve his Master, but to get a prey for himself,
by means whereof, many go now in scarlet, that before the war could not be
trusted for a frieze coat. It is further said, that he is a good King, but may
not a good King be led to do unwisely? 2 Chro. 16. 9.
good King Asa is charged with that, and in broader terms than I speak. 2 Samuel
19. 6.
And may not a good King love his enemies, and hate his friends? Good King
David was charged with that; 2 Chro. 19. 2.
And may not a good King help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
Good King Jehoshaphat was charged with that by a Prophet of the Lord; And may
not a good King be led to shed much innocent blood? The good Emperor
Theodosius did so, and was zealously reproved for it by Ambrose, and kept from
receiving of the Sacrament for that fact; and Theodosius liked him never the
worse for it, but professed he liked arguentem magis quam adulantem, him that
reproved him better than him that flattered him; Psalm. 141. 5.
as did David. Beloved, we are all for the King, or else we dissemble with
God, and the world; for we pray for him, for the preservation of his body, and
for the salvation of his soul: He is prayed for constantly in our Churches and
families, and in both Houses of Parliament. Yea we pray for him and his
children, and some of them are with us, and educated like Kings children, and
like Gods children. And has not the Parliament bound all the Kings subjects by
a solemn Covenant, to preserve the Kings Person, and to testify that they
have no thought or intention to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness? And how often have they sought peace and his Return? But it is
objected, that they have taken Arms, and this is aggravated, as if it were
piaculum, in any case, though it be se desendendo. But what did David when he
was a subject, and Saul sought his life? though a godly man and a Prophet, and
Saul's son-in-law, to which he had preferred him who before was but a Shepherd,
he took arms for his necessary defense, and was never reproved for it of God,
but blessed and prosperd; and worthy men sided with him.

It is said, the Spirit came upon Anasa, 1 Chro. 12. 18.
who was chief of the Captains, and he said, Thine are we David, and on thy
side thou son of Jesse, Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thine
helpers, Deodat.
for thy God helps thee: A divine motion put him on to express himself in
such a manner, that his words, took impression in David, and caused him firmly
to believe that he and those that were with him were real to him, and not to
question their fidelity. The Priests of the Lord were for him, 1 Samuel 21. 6. 9.
eighty-five of them sufferd for him; Abimelech received him and his company,
and gave them hallowed bread, Chap. 22. 20, etc.
and Goliahs sword, and Abiathar escaping from the slaughter, fled to David for
refuge, and he undertook to protect him. Jonathan the Kings Son was for him, a
virtuous Prince, next heir to the Crown, had it gone according to the course
of nature, he was for him, and spoke for him to his Father, and loved him
exceedingly, and gave intelligence from the Court when danger was toward him,
utterly disliking the Kings proceedings against him; nay, what say you to Saul
himself, when he was himself? he Justified him upon trial of his loyalty and
integrity; 1 Samuel 24. 17.
saying, Thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rewarded me good,
whereas I have rewarded thee evil. And was it lawful for David when he was a
subject, and but one man, to take arms to save his life, and is it unlawful
for the Parliament of England to take that course to save theirs, and those
whom they ought to protect? May not the State, and such a State that has such
power in their hands, do more than one man, of what rank so ever? And what if
they send forth to suppress insurrections, and to pursue Delinquents, that fly
the justice of that high Court? Does it not pertain to them to do it, even ex
Officio? And what if the great Council of the Kingdom seek to remove wicked
Counselors from the King, that usurp their Office to themselves? He was a
King, and the wisest of Kings, and upon a ponderous reason, much concerning the
good and honor of every King, Pro 25. 5.
that says, Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall be
established in righteousness. Must the State and those that hold with them,
learn of Delinquents that have deserved death, how to be for the King? or of
perfidious Covenant-breakers, to whom an oath of God is no more than a collar
to a Monkey, that he can slip at pleasure? or of rapacious Courtiers, and their
Public^n-Officers, that would exact upon the subject, and have no Parliament,
that they might never be questioned for any thing they do? Must they learn of
damme-swearers, that familiarly swear themselves into hell? or of Papists, who
are pleased so long as the King serves their turn, but would blow him up with
powder if they could, if he should execute the laws against them? or of the
wild Irish, and other Irish murderers, that first kill a hundred thousand of
the Kings Protestant-subjects in Ireland, and then come and offer their service
to him in England, with a desire to do as much here, if they can? All these
would teach and tutor their betters in this matter; but those that are wise
will learn rather of David, and Solomon, and other Prophets and good men what
to do; the judgment and way of such is much to be esteemed; and better it is
to suffer adversity with the people of God, Heb. 11. 25.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

Generally the ungodliest of the Clergy ran to Oxford when the war began;
the best of the Ministry out of all Counties throughout the Kingdom, came to
the Parliaments quarters for protection; if any of better note went the other
way, it was small for their credit or comfort, and it is supposed they repent
it. Mr Jo. Dod.
That unparalleld Saint of the Church of England, lately deceased full of
days, died an Orthodoxe Presbyter, and Presbyterian, constant against all
sects and sectaries, faithful to Christ, and firm to the Parliament. And it
is your honor and may be your comfort, Honorable Senators, that the hearts
and prayers of such men are for you, and that ye have the prayers of the best
affected in Scotland also, and in all Reformed Churches. Such as were for
David, are for you; such worthies as are like to Amasa when the Spirit came
upon him, Commanders in chief, eminent for valor and piety, fidelity and
humility, desiring that all glory may be given unto God in our days of
thankesgiving, and that they may be forgotten; pity it is that such Noble
Patriots that fight for their Country, should want any encouragement that the
Kingdom can give them. Honorable Gentlemen, discourage not the godly party,
quench not any degree of their zeal for you, by suffering any Officers in
Commission under you to favor Malignants, and to oppress your friends, by
neglect of widows, that are brought to that sad condition, having lost their
husbands in the Parliaments service, by rejecting just and lamentable
complaints, or by sending away sad Petitioners, crying one after another. Job
29. 13.
The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, says Job, and I
made the widows heart to sing for joy. Hos. 6. 6.
Fasts do well, but I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Prove. 21. 3.
says the Lord. And to do judgment and justice is more acceptable to the Lord
than sacrifice. Ye all stand in need of mercy, practice mercy, that ye may
find mercy in that day, and this day, and all the days of your lives. If ye
do well, shall ye not be accepted? if ye do evil, sin lies at the door, at
the Parliament door as well as other men's doors, for ought I know.

To return to our adversaries that are Protestants, with what comfort can they
help the ungodly, and such as seek the extirpation of the Protestant Religion
in all the three Kingdoms? The Pope is much beholding to them, they do as he
would have them; all the Priests, and Jesuits, and Papists in England, are
beholding to them, they do as they would have them: the Irish cutthroats are
beholding unto them, they do as they would have them, when they fight against
Protestants, and against the most zealous Protestants: but their Country is
little beholding to them, and the Church of God has little cause to thank
them, or the Lord Jesus the Head of the Church, for any service they have done
to him, toward the advancing of his Kingdom.

But many will say, they stand for the Common Prayer Book, and they will fight
for that as long as they can stand on their legs. A resolution fitter for the
vulgar Welsh, than for understanding Englishmen; for that book was never of
Gods making, and no wise man will venture his life, and shed his blood, for any
book made by man, were it never so good, for he can look for no reward of God
for it; therefore though some that be wise may talk for it, yet it is folly to
fight for it. But it has been often said, Take away the Common Prayer Book,
take away our Religion. Nay, our Religion is in the Bible, there is our God,
and our Christ, and our faith, and our Creed in all points. The whole Bible was
St Paul's belief; Acts 24. 14.
there are the Psalms of David, and his prayers, and the Lords Prayer, and
other prayers, by which we may learn to pray; we have still the Lords songs,
the songs of Sion, sung by many with grace in their hearts, making melody to
the Lord, though without Organs; there we have all the Commandments, though
they be not read so often as they have been; but when they were ordinarily
read, were they better kept? Were the second, the seventh, the fourth, better
kept then in Westminster, then they are now? Sure I hope, as some other
Commandments, so the Sabbath is much better kept now. Our Court-Prelates made
the King Lord of the Sabbath, and themselves Lords of misrule: Compelling
Parents, and Masters, and Ministers, and Magistrates, to suffer their sons and
daughters, and servants of both sexes, to play, and sport, and dance, if they
had a mind to it, and to profane a great part of the day. Here was trenching
upon Gods Prerogative: God must stand to their courtesy, how much of the day
he must have: had it not been for the Parliament, we had lost a Commandment.
They that were for the book of sports, would not endure the name Sabbath. As
for the Sacraments, ye have them still reverently performed without the book;
and that is the old way; that which they call the new way, Bilson perpet.
is the old way; for two hundred years after Christ, Gov. without Cross and
Surplesse.
they had no set form of prayer; they buried without the book, and baptized,
and administered the Lords Supper, and prayed and gave thanks without it; so as
the alterations are for the better, and none have just cause to clamor against
them, much less to fight.

Though there be less painting, there is more light; though there be less
ceremony, there is more substance; though there be less superstition, there is
more Religion; though there be less piping, there is more preaching; though
there be less of man, there is more of God, and of Christ, and of the Spirit,
therefore be patient and content. Beloved, it is David's Religion that we
contend for, Psalm. 110. 1.
and David's Lord, even the Lord Jesus, the Son of David, that he may have his
throne amongst us, and rule by the Scepter of his Word; we are for Christ and
Sion, they are for Antichrist and Babylon that are against us, therefore side
not with them, but rather help the Lord against the mighty. And let those that
are about his Majesty, if they love him, persuade him to quit the sword, and
to hearken to Propositions for Peace, and to return to his Parliament, and sit
there in royal Majesty with his Peers, as he has done. There was a good
Motto written over the gates at York, at King James his first entrance into
that City, Suavis victoria, amor populi, the sweet victory is the love of the
people; to win that, then come and welcome, the sooner, the better. If a King
will come like a King, with royal attendance, he will be received with all
love and joy, and honor will be done unto him by all sorts; but if they
persuade him to come like an Enemy, with martial attendance, with wicked
company, skillful and ready to plunder and to destroy, so as good people must
stand to their mercy, that have no mercy; other Cities will answer, as one did
in that case; Con:
We will rather live Soldiers, than die slaves. Pray for his Majesty, that
his heart may be turned the right way, for his own good, and the Public. Let
those that have misled him, and animated him to proceed in this war, beware
lest evil pursue them till they perish. Let the young Germane Princes beware,
who have rewarded evil for good unto this Nation. Let all that have been
active against the righteous in a hostile way, be warned by the examples in
this Text, Ahithophel.
and Story. Behold the man that made not the Lord his strength, but trusted to
his own wisdom, and the arm of flesh, his counsel being defeated, he went
home and hanged himself. Absalom.
Behold the man that was proud of his hair, and beauty, and favor, and
friends, and exalted himself, and caused an unjust war, without any respect of
his person, he was cast in and buried in a pit. Behold the men that took part
with the ungodly against the righteous, and sought to shed innocent blood, they
were beaten, and perished by the sword: even so let all the enemies of the King
and Parliament be as that young man Absalom, and that old Fox Ahithophel, and
those infatuated Israelites, that followed them; but let those that are found
faithful to God, and their Country, Judge. 5. 31.
be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might.

Now it is observable, that that which God did to Ahithophel, and so
consequently to Absalom, was the effect of David's prayer and request to God.

David said, 2 Samuel 15. 31.
O Lord, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness; and
according to his desire he defeated his counsel. The point hence is this, That
prayer with the use of the means, is prevalent against those that rise up
against the righteous. Chap. 18. 2.
David used the means, He set Hushai on work.
and neglected it not; He sent out a tripartite Army, under three Captains, and
that speedily; that was Alexanders way, (...).
and by that means he was victorious, and won much by making no delay, but
pursuing his conquests; but withal, David prayed, and thereby prevailed
mightily, as we see, and obtained of God a great matter. Three circumstances
illustrate the work of God mentioned in the Text.

First, That he defeated Ahithophel, famous Ahithophel, that was so renowned
for his policy.

Secondly, That he defeated the good counsel of Ahithophel, his wise counsel.

Thirdly, Tfiuua. Heb.
That he did it by his Word, only commanded, and it was done.

Moses crying to the Lord, Exodus 14. 15.
the Israelites saw the salvation of God; Chap. 17. 11.
and lifting up his hands, and praying, the Israelites prevailed against
Amalek. When a thousand thousand came against Asa, and his people, he cried to
the Lord, 2 Chro. 14. 9. 11, 12.
and the Lord smote the Aethiopians before Asa, and before Judah, and the
Aethiopians fled. When multitudes came against Jehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 20. 3.
he feared and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast: As a man
he feared, as a godly man he sought the Lord, as a godly King he proclaimed a
fast, and his enemies were miraculously overthrown. When the mighty Host of
Senacherib came against Jerusalem, in Hezekiahs time, he sent to the Prophet
Isaijah, To lift up a prayer, 2 King. 19. 4, 5
and he prayed and made his supplication to the Lord, and in the morning
fourscore and five thousand were all dead corpses, being smitten by an Angel
of the Lord. Thus the righteous have prevailed mightily against their enemies
by prayer to God.

The reason is, Zach. 2. 8.
the Lord is their God, and they are dear unto him, and he has undertaken
their protection, Exodus 23. 22.
and to be an enemy unto their enemies, and he has set them this course to
call upon him, Psalm. 50. 15.
and to seek his face in their trouble, and it is a commandment with promise:
Heb. 13. 6.
and he has said, He will not fail them, nor forsake them; and he the rather
hears them, John 8. 47.
because they hear him, and will glorify him for that he does for them, Psalm.
140. 6.
being sensible of his mercy, and of their own unworthiness.

This shows the happy privilege that the righteous have above others. Use.
The prayer of the righteous avails much, James 5. 15.
if it be fervent; Pro. 15. 8.
yea, the prayer of the upright, is his delight. It is not so with the wicked,
when they pray and cry to God, Pro. 15. 29.
the Lord is far from the wicked. Psalm. 18. 41.
David's enemies cried, but there was none to save them, even to the Lord; but
he answered them not; they are in no such esteem with God, they have no such
interest in him, Prove. 28. 9.
they will not hear him, therefore he abhors their prayers, Zach. 7. 11.
and will not hear them; Jer. 14. 12.
no, when they fast, he will not hear their cry. Therefore godly men have this
way a great advantage of their enemies, though their outward strength be much
short of theirs.

When David went out against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
it was thought a bold adventure, considering the disparitie between those two
for bulk of body, but calling on the name of the Lord, and trusting in him, he
soon laid the giant along. Psalm. 57. 1.
When Saul pursued him, he prayed unto the Lord, and made him his refuge, and
his enemy had no power to do him hurt; when he was near unto him, 1 Samuel 23.
27, 28.
and ready to surprise him, he was taken off, through the providence of God, by
news that the Philistims invaded the Land, and returned from pursuing after
David. When Absalom prepared a great Army against him, he prayed and prevailed.
Ahithophel looked upon David's company as a weak company, and undertaketh with
twelve thousand to vanquish him: but the man that was so confident, because of
the strength of the enemy, and the weakness of David, never thought what power
David had with God by prayer; but behold, though his Army was weak, his prayer
was strong, and God hearing his prayer, wrought for him, and defeated his
enemy. And it is said of Theodosius, that being in the field, Vbi est Deus
Theodosij?
and having the worst, he lighted off his horse, and kneeled down and said,
Where is the God of Theodosius? And after that his enemy fell before him; his
prayer was short, but fervent, and faithful. This makes much for the comfort
and encouragement of all the Lords servants, that in these times follow David's
way; it is a way very prevalent for defense and offense. There is the more
comfort in the present example, because he prayed and sped thus, after he had
committed an atrocious sin in the matter of Vriah: the fact was soul, and the
aggravation of it may be taken from the Parable of Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.
and the sentence that proceeded out of the mouth of David himself against
himself, little thinking then that he had been the man that had done so
wickedly against so honest a servant as Vriah was. When I think of his killing
that man, it puts into my mind Alexanders killing of Calisthenes, and of his
words to one that magnified his Conquests, Sen: Not. q. l. 6. c. 23.
He slew, says he, many thousands of the Persians; and Calisthenes, says the
opponent: and saying further, He killed Darius that had a great Kingdom; and
Calisthenes, said he that answered him. And again, saying, He conquered all
from the Ocean, and exceedingly enlarged his Empire; the opponent still
answers, but he killed Calisthenes. So if one would magnify David for his
piety and zeal for the house of God, and for his valor and exploits; some may
answer as that opponent did, and object his killing Vriah: He slew Goliath, that
Monster, that was such a terror to the Army of Israel; and Vriah, may an
opponent say: He killed many Philistims, that they sung, Saul his thousand, and
David his ten thousand; and Vriah, may he say; and if other of his victories he
alleged, tending to his honor, this might still be opposed, yea but he killed
his servant Vriah the Hittite: yet notwithstanding the atrocity of the fact,
and all the anger about it, and all the threatening of him and his household, in
his adversity he cried to God when his enemies rose up against him, and his
prayer was heard. At his latter end, 1 King. 1. 15.
he could say, that the Lord had redeemed his soul out of all adversity. This
much illustrateth the grace of God, and may strengthen our consolation in these
times. Surely there is hope for England and Scotland, we have had and have so
many praying days, and have so many praying men, praying Commanders, praying
Soldiers, praying Parliament men, a praying Assembly, and other praying
Ministers, and praying people, and we have had comfortable experience of the
good effects and events of our prayers, specially after our extraordinary
Fasts. After that which was kept before the battle at Naseby, when the Armies
were to be engaged, and the Gospel lay at stake, and we were in distress and
fear, we sought the Lord, and he heard us, and we had a great deliverance,
and a glorious victory; and a little after when our Army marched toward
Taunton, then strongly besieged, and were to engage again, we prayed, and the
Lord gave a gracious return to our supplications; the good people in those
parts were relieved by our men, and a formidable Army of the enemy was routed.
We have sundry times seen the salvation of God, when there have been failings
on our part, and great advantages on the other side, and when we have been in a
low condition, and the enemies in the height of their strength and confidence,
the Lord of Hosts has appeared for us, the God of our salvation has favored
our righteous cause, and brought out adversaries to confusion. After the
extraordinary Fast kept for Scotland, we soon had intelligence of a great
overthrow given to Montrosse, God did great things for our brethren of that
Nation, whereof we have cause to rejoice; they are our brethren and
confederates of the same faith with us, and have deserved our prayers and good
endeavors for them, by their prayers for us in our trouble* and the great
service they have done to this Kingdom, and to the Church of God amongst us;
they showed zeal and courage, and quickened us when we in a manner had lost
our selves, and there was little life in us; they have been instruments to
promote the Reformation which we have; that Church was famous in the Reformed
Churches, for doctrine, worship, government, and discipline, when ours was in
an ill name for corruptions; that Church had the honor to be in the Antitype
to Philadelphia, Brightm^^ in Apoc. cap. 3.
the best of those Churches of Asia, when ours was made the Antitype to
Laodic^a, the worst of the seven; and they have had the happiness to keep
their Church without heresy, or sectaries, for above fifty years; and greater
love than this has no man, than to lay down his life for his friend, and that
they have done for us; and many thousands in and about the City, that now sit
warm, might have sit cold, had it not been for them and had they been
overthrown, their fall, would have been our fall; therefore we have cause to
pray for them, and to rejoice that God of his (...) has heard their prayers
and ours.

It will be said by our adversaries, that they pray too, and why may not they
be heard as well as we?

It is true, they pray, some of them to our Lord, and some to our Lady, as they
call her: some say, Our Father, some, Pater noster, and Ave Maria, and some
make use of their Beads and Crucifixes when they pray; and many revile and
curse the godly party, yea they curse them bitterly that have come out to help
the Lord against the mighty: the generality of them read somewhat in a book,
but how many of them pray in the Spirit? Certainly, there is great difference
between their praying, and the praying on this side, and there is great
difference between the men that perform prayer on both sides, and those they
pray for: and were their praying in some respect better than it is, their cause
is naught, and their Armies are too like the Absalomian Army to prosper; they
are risen up against the righteous, and help the ungodly to destroy godly men,
and are bloudy-minded, as they were, and being like them in other vices, they
will be like Absalom to a hair, as I may say, affecting long hair, as he did,
not regarding what St Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.
that it is a shame for a man to wear long hair; making it a shame rather not
to wear it long. In some respects many of them are worse than the Absalomians,
namely, for superstition and damme-swearing, therefore God will not hear them,
J^r, 14. 12.
no when they fast, he will not hear their cry. To us, there is more ground of
hope for good, because there is more of David in our Commanders, and many of
our Officers and Soldiers, and in those that have sent them forth for the
defense of our Religion, and Laws, and Liberties, and of those that stand for
them, and we have seen that God has heard our prayers, and prosperd our
Armies in all parts of the Kingdom: We have had great encouragement from
heaven, and what if we have not obtained yet a cessation of the war, no more
did David in the war between the house of Saul and him? though he prayed at
first and constantly, 2 Samuel 3. 1.
yet there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David; but
he obtained, that he grew stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul weaker
and weaker; and the like we have obtained to our comfort, through Gods great
mercy, notwithstanding our sins* One circumstance more we are to take notice
of, and that is, that as David prevailed so with the Lord by his prayer, after
that he had sinned against him, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
so it was after his repentance, Psalm. 51.
and humble confession of it unto God; after that he was in statu quo with him,
upon as good terms as ever, 1 Chr. 1. 29. 28
and had mercy upon mercy to his dying day. Beloved, Repentance obtains
audience and pardon, James 5. 21:
that makes every sin venial, that saves the soul, Jer. 18. 7.
and that saves a Nation from ruin and destruction; Judge. 10. 13. etc.
Repentance causes God to repent, and makes him better than his word, Jonah
3. 10.
when he threatens evil, That very day the salvation of God was seen
wonderfully by Westchester. Sept* 24.
as both the Israelites and Ninivites found him; therefore to conclude, repent,
and pray, and wait, and ye shall still see the salvation of God.

FINIS.

