THE GHOST OF SR. JOHN PRESBJTER, Wherein he desires that the rest of that
faction may desist, and prosecute no further that Monster of PRESBYTERY.

Also, his advertisement to one of his dear children, whom he left out of his
Will, by reason of his great rage of his sickness.

woodcut of man in robes

Printed in the year, of the Presbyterian fear. 1647.

The Ghost of Sr. JOHN PRESBYTER, WHEREIN He desires, that the rest of that
faction may desist and prosecute no farther that monster of PRESBYTERY.
Dear friends that are enemies to that monster of the Presbyterian Government,
I must now confess, that it is such a devouting monster, that I hope the
people of England will not set it up; For by it the Priests that labor with
might and maine to set it up, who ever be looser by it, they will be sure to be
gainers, and will eat even as a Cancer in your estates: but the rust of them
so eaten by the Priests, shall be a witness against them, as you may see, in
the 5 of James and the 3 ver. and now my friends that do now oppose the monster
of Presbyter, I must confess that you did nothing but truth in resisting that
Scottish Monster, although when I was with you, you did tell me for my good,
that it was a Land-devourer, which now I find that your words are very true;
Therefore now my dear friends, take the view of the Presbyterian Priests and
compare their practices to the word, and see how oppressive they are, look
upon the 18 of Deuterinomy and the 3 ver. That when a Sacrifice was to be
offered up, the Priests were to have the shoulder, the two Cheeks and the maw,
and yet they will say that it is Jewish; but shall I tell you why it is ^ewish?
it is because their portion is too little, if it were the half, or the 3 part
of ^t, then it were somewhat like; look likewise, in the 1 of Sam. the 2 and
13. 14 ver. For the Priests custom toward the people was this, When a man
offered sacrifice, the the Priests boy came while the flesh was seething with
the flesh hook i^ his hand with 3 teeth in it, and thrust it into the Kettle,
Pan, Caldron, or Pot, and all that the flesh-hooke brought up was for the
Priest; but what now if he took up all, must the people have nothing but the
Broth? Nay, truly they might be glad if they could get that, for covetuousnes
is a thing that runs generally to all; look in the 6. of Jeremiah, the 13.
verse, from the least of them, even to the greatest of them, every one is given
to covetuousnesse from the Prophet to the Priest, they all deal falsely. Look
like wise, in the 22. of Ezekiel. the 25. verse They devour souls, and in the
28. verse. They have daubed with untempered Mortar, seeing vanities and
divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord had not
spoken. Now in the same kind, do the Priests of England, they say that their
borrowed Scottish monster of bitterness it self is from God, and that God
has revealed it to them, when indeed the Lord has not spoken to them; they
would feign make the people believe what they please, and if they said it is
truth, the people must believe it. Consider that 3. of Micah and 11. verse. The
heads thereof judge for a reward, the Priests thereof teach for hyer, the
Prophets thereof prophecy for many; Yet, will they leave upon the Lord, and say
is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come upon us. I pray God that text be
not true of the Judges, Priests and Prophets of England, and so be like them of
the house of Israel, and so the old Proverb be made upon them, never a Barrel
better herring. And truly my friends, shall I tell you why my Antichristian
brethren do hate the godly people of this City and Kingdom, I will tell you it
is because they are not of this world, even as Christ was not of this world;
For could the Saints of God hold with them in their wicked design that they
prosecute, then they should be one of them, and be very much respected by them;
But seeing that these oppose their Scotch Government they shall be opposed. I
have heard many say when I was with you, that when it did rain slowly, we
would say that it was but a Scottish mist, but it would wet an Englishman to
the skin: so now I must confess, and say of their Government, that it is but a
Scottish one, but if it be erected in England, it will rend and tare, and
divide the Kingdom, it will turn it upside down: and therefore now my loving
friends that was to me, I mean the Synod, did you but know what now I suffer
by pressing men's Consciences, to that Scotch faction, you would desist and
prosecute that ill begotten Monster of Presbyter no further; Therefore let my
torment though unseene and unfelt by you, be such an example to you, that you
may for ever bless God that Sir John Presbyter deceased and that his Ghost
should communicate such evils as is wrapped up in that Government; for truly I
must confess, that it is heretical and obnoxious, and will undo King and
State, you all know that I did as much labor to bring it about to erect it, as
ever you can do; but now finding that it is so abusive, both to God and Saints
that were, I now amongst you again instead of setting of it out in pomp and
glory, I would discover the ill consequences that are in it; for truly when I
was as one of you, what did we labor but only to get wealth into our own
keepings, although it was to the woe and grief of the Inhabitants of England,
nay our holy Convocasion that was in King Henry the 7. Chappill, what did we
treat on there, but only to tie men's Consciences to what we believed, and if
we believed that the Church of Rome is a true Church, the people must believe
it or else they shall be bannished; we thought then that our designs were
gallantly carried on, if we could get Mr. Henry Wilkinson to treat with
Stapleton, Manchester, and Hollis, to carry on our wicked designs; we could
make them believe that white was black, and black was white, and they being
intoxicated by the Priest, could intoxicate the truth of their unjust; never
the like heard of practices in the brains of other, and they must believe it,
because it came from the Priest, and so of necessity it must be truth; and so
the poor people must believe that the Minister cannot err, even as the Priest
believes that the Pope cannot err; but to another of the same faction! O Mr.
Love, truly it is to be feared, nay I am confident, that you love your self
more then the glory of God? why do you still persist and incense the people
against the Army, in telling them that it does not belong to Officers and
Soldiers, men of War, to look after Justice, and Judgment; whereas if you
were a true Minister of Jesus Christ, you should encourage the people, and give
glory to God, and look upon them with admiration, that God should stir up men
of War to see that Justice and Judgment might run down as a mighty stream.

I would not have you to make a Trade and Traffic of the Gospel; do not tell
the people any more that it is the Ordinance of God that the Gospel that you
preach to, should maintain you, though you have sufficient means of your own,
or else what man of parts and quallity will be a Minister, truly Mr. Love. I
was once of your mind; but now were I out of torments, I would do the work
for the works sake, and I would with Paul in the 3. of Philippians and the 8.
verse, account all things but dross and dung in comparison of the excellent
knowledge of Jesus Christ; and therefore let this my torment be a means to
hinder you from prosecuting that will worship; for were it not paynefull to the
Priests, they would never labor so to set it up; therefore all ye Priests and
people that are for that Monster of Presbytery, do no longer keep Christ out
of his Throne by laboring to set up an Antichristian Government, I am
confident if you do, it will c^st England dear the modulising of it; but if it
should be erected, you Priest of the new found Monster out of your exorbitant
great pains, that you will get by it, you cannot in conscience but requite the
Clergy of Scotland for helping you to so much pain by such a Monster that was
begot in Hell, nursed up in Scotland, and what now England will you be such
fools to bring it up to is full groath, and maturity, truly if you do, you
will bring up a bird to pick out your own eyes.

And now a word more to another of my newer able brats! O Mr. Edward? what
still Rebeckah like, no amendment, such, a Father, such a Child, indeed you
are in a very high esteem with the Devil; for he says you are one of the best
Chaplins that ever he had, because you do in no ways degenerate from him; but
if now the question be asked, why the Devil has his Chapling so far remote
from him, I will tell you the reason of it, is because he does him a great deal
better service in England then he can do him in H^ll; for he can tell the
people lies, and then show them reasons: Fathers and politic wrighters for it;
the Devil he is an accuser of the Brethren, and you accuse that faithful and
never to be forgotten Army, under the Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax; what accusations and aspersions do you cast upon them, in saying that
Sir Thomas and his Army Christianed a Horse; well thou Gangreen, he that set
you a work will pay you your wages, that you above all shall not need to
Petition the House of Lords for Tithes for your part, the Devil will give you
more then you will be willing to have; well Children Presbyterians, for your
sake, I am much troubled and tossed to and fro, and all because I would not
have you to tread the same path that I have trod, least you be as bad perplexed
as now I am, I was a great Episcopal man once, then the wind turned, then I
became a desembler, like the rest that met at the holy Convocation house, then
we must dance a Scotch Gigg, and the title of it must be a Scotch Covenant for
Englands Inhabitants, but truly now the case is altered with me; now I say,
must Scottish factions be Englands rule and example, and then we must swear to
suppress all Popish and popish innovations, and for the exterpating of Bishops
and their adherents, what now friend cut down the Bishops and raise up their
Government under another notion! O brave Priest, gallant desembler, truly if I
could tell where to get a bottle, I would send it to the Pope, for a bottel
full of holy water, to wash your desembling faces; I pray in the mean time,
take your handkerchers and wipe your noses, for you stink in the nostrills of
every honest man, where was all your histories, and Scollership, and Fathers,
and pollitick writers, what all the Bishops Liberaries pawned for Muskedine,
and rolls that you could not contrive a Church Government without the Scots,
but seeing that you have got it by hook and by crook, and up it shall go if
possible you can, seeing you will so persist in it; Winter is a coming, and you
cannot sit without fire; therefore let Docter G^ug be your Wood-monger, to
provide wood and Coals for that holy Convocation, because he has very good
skill in Coals, but this I must tell you, you must look very warily to him, or
else he will connive, and play underhand with you; but Countrymen, I much
wonder that we in the other world should hear as much now as you do in this,
let me tell you that the Devil has his host amongst you every day, and a thing
is no sooner* in agitation with you, but we have it with us, we can hear of
your new confessions of Faith that you made, and of the queries propounded from
the Parliament to you, and of the 50. questions propounded to you, but as yet
we can hear no answer to any of them, and I am confident never shall; Truly the
course that now you steare is wrong, it will never bring you to happiness; for
it tends to nothing but oppression and cruelty, or else why do you labor for
power to be given you into your hand, for the bannishing of all godly men out
of the Kingdom; therefore take this word of exhortation to you, desist from
laboring to set up the divellish Monster, and do no longer (...) against the
stream to keep Christ out of his Throne, for Jesus Christ will reign; truly
my fear, nay my confidence is that ^^ny of you draw near to God with your
mouth when your heart^ are far remote from him, you can make gallant
flatterings and desemblings how that you seek for nothing but the glory of
God, when intruth it is nothing so, your fair pretenses are but like (...)
body without a head, a shadow without a substance, you would feign show your
selves to the people to be milk white Saints, when indeed you are as yet black
Devils; for you do the drudgery of Hell; but God that sits in Heaven laughes
you and your doing to scorn, and this my time limited being expired, I bid you
adieu till the next opportunity.

FJNJS.

