IPPOS PYPPOS THE RED HORSE. OR THE Bloodines of War, Represented in a Sermon
(To persuade to PEACE) Preached at PAUL'S, July 16. 1648, at five of the clock
in the afternoon.

By Jo: Geree, M.A. and Pastor of St Faiths under PAUL'S.

And now published to clear the Preacher from Malignancy imputed to him by
some left-eared Auditors.

Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth, Gal. 4.16.
Oculis aegris odiosa est lux, quae puris est amabilis. August. LONDON, Printed
for George Latham, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the
Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard 1648.

To the Worshipful, the Master, the Wardens, the Assistants, and the rest of
the worthy Company of Stationers, Grace, and Peace.
Gentlemen,
BEing put upon it to Print this Sermon (as you may see in the Appendix
thereof) I began to cast in my mind to find out, according to the custom, some
fit Person to whom I might dedicate it: And remembering a courtesy lately done
(at my motion) by your Company, I resolved to testify my respect, and
thankfulness for that deserving act, by this usual expression of gratitude.
The Society of that famous and useful College at Dublin being like to be
disolved for want of bread, to the great prejudice of Religion, and grief of
the truly religious; I was entreated by one of the * The Right Reverend Dr
Usher. A. A.
prime ornaments of that Society to endeavor to promote some Charitable
contribution, for some small support to keep that Society together till this
Nation might be in a circumstance to make such provision for it as such a work
did require; In which good work while I was acting, I was by a Citizen (a
great lover of Learning) directed to make my address to the Companies of
London, as the likeliest way to get some speedy, and considerable supply: which
advice of his I presently began to put in prastice, in procuring the Master of
your company (wherein I had most acquaintance and interest) to move this
charitable work with you, which he did with that success, that he obtained
sudainly a considerable gratuity (the low ebb of your Company at that time
being weighed) toward it, your Society concluding that it was suitable to them
to go before others in the relief of a College, rather than expect others to
be precedents to them. To express my sense of your worth in this freeness,
and forwardness, in so choice an Act of Charity, I have presumed on this
Dedication: And I was yet further incited to this, by the intent of Printing
this Sermon, for it is a vindication of my innocence against ungrounded
Calumny; and in whose opinion should I rather desire to stand right than in
yours? To a considerable part of whom God has made me Pastor, and Preacher to
you all, the peculiar Sermons to your Company being to be Preached by me so
long as providence continues my interest in the Church of St. Faiths, where
they are to be Preached; And Sermons find acceptance much according to the
esteem of the Preacher, on their acceptance depend their efficacy, and
therefore it behoved me, that no sinister conceit of me should by any means be
bred and rest in your breasts; So hoping that this office of love will neither
be strange, nor unwelcome, with my Prayers for you, I take my leave, and remain

From my Study in Ivy Lane, August 3. 1648. Your engaged Friend and Servant in
the Lords work, JOHN GEREE.

THE RED HORSE: OR, THE BLOODINES OF WAR, Represented in a Sermon to persuade
to PEACE.
Rev. 6.4. And there went out another horse that was red, and power was given
him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill
one another, and there was given unto him a great Sword.
Sect. 1. The Introduction to the Text.
THe dearest of Gods Children are not exempt from sufferings: for if they
themselves should not need them for refining, yet the truth needs them for
sealing, and they must suffer to seal the truth which they teach, and
profess. And yet God ceases not to be good to them; for when their troubles
abound for Christ, their consolations abound in Christ. 2 Cor. 1.4. Nay, they
never have more inlargements of the inward man by grace, then when most
restrained in the outward man by unjust violence; was not David inspired with
the sweetest Psalms in his bitterest sorrows? And here you see Saint John
under banishment in the Isle Patmos for the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 1.9, 10.
was blessed and graced with this excellent Prophecy touching the state of the
Christian Church.

Of which Prophecy you have a general Preface, Chap. 1, 2. Seven excellent
divine Epistles to the seven famous Churches of Asia, wherein is not only
contained most useful instructions, but (as some think) a Type of the State
of the Christian Church to the end of the world. Afterward there is a
particular Preface to the Vision in hand, Chap. 4. Then the vision of a Book
sealed with seven Seals, with great sorrow for want of one to open it, which
sorrow was allayed by the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who was found worthy and
able to open the Book, and loose the seven Seals of it: for which the four
Beasts, and the twenty four Elders sung unto him a new Song of praise and
thanksgiving, Cha. 5. Thirdly, there is the opening of the Seals, with the
several events following, Chap. 6. The first Seal being opened, A white horse
was seen, and he that sat on him had a bow, and a Crown was given unto him,
and he went forth conquering to conquer. A lively type of truth prevailing, and
the settling of the Gospel with power notwithstanding all the bandying of the
world against the Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 6. But not
long after another Seal is opened, and Saint John being awakened to attention,
beheld as you have heard in the Text read, And there went out another horse
that was red, etc. which words I shall first endeavor to open, and then gather
and handle some observations, as God shall enable, and the time permit.

Sect. 2. The opening of the Text.
For the opening the sense of these words which are plainly allegorical, we
must first remember a rule in Divinity, that in Allegorical Texts, the meaning
of the allegory is the literal sense of the place. Now that we may find out
the meaning of this Allegory, it will be needful that we enquire; First, what
is imported by the horse. Secondly, what by his color, a red horse. Thirdly,
who is meant by his rider? Fourthly, what is meant by his work? Fifthly, and
what by his qualification.

1. What is imported by the vision of an horse?

An Horse is a swift and warlike creature, fitted to break through opposition,
and speedily to execute designs, and therefore (I believe) horses are not only
wittily, but sollidly conceived to be used in these Types to hint, that maugre
the opposition that men or devils can make, Gods designs shall be speedily,
and irresistably executed.

2. Why was this horsered, what does this color import?

By this color Interpreters generally agree Blood is meant; for Blood is red,
and it dies red that which it touches or lights on, and so it is used in other
places to represent blood. Who is this that comes with dyed garments from
Bozrah, etc. Wherefore art thou redinthine apparel, etc. I have trodden the
winepresse alone, and of the people there was none with me, for I will tread
them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be
sprinkled on my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. Isa. 63.1, 2, 3.
Here red does evidently import Blood, but the greatest difficulty is what blood
is here meant; Paraeus by blood here understands the blood of Saints shed in
Martyrdom; Equus rufus est Ecclesia rubens martyriis: The red horse (says he)
is the Church dyed red with martyrdom; which Lyra seems to restrain to that
Christian blood which was drawn by Nero, but this Paraces dislikes as too
narrow, and therefore extends it to the blood of the ten persecutions, and
concludes, Haec est communis interpretatio minime incommoda; This is the common
interpretation no ways inconvenient. But our learned Countryman Brightman is
of another opinion, interpreting this red color to import blood, but the blood
of war; Igneus iste color bellum, pugnas, cades, sanguinem designat, etc. That
fiery color does import War, Conflicts, Slaughters, Blood; and he is seconded
by another learned and godly Countryman of ours, Gyffard: This represents
(says he) the bloody wars, tumults, and cruel slaughters of the earth; and to
the opinion of these do I incline, for the reasons of Brightman seem to me
cogent: For first, this blood that was to be shed, was to be by taking away
peace from the earth. Earth we know is opposed to heaven, and in this book
says Brightman; Coelum veram sanctanique Ecclesiam denotat, Terra contra
significat impium mundum. Heaven notes out the true and holy Church, but the
earth signifies the wicked world. Now the blood being to be shed by taking
peace from the earth, which denotes the world, he gathers, the slaughter is by
War, not by persecution, which takes away peace from the Church, not the world.
He adds that this is further manifested by the declaration of the power given,
which is (...), and that they should kill one another mutually or reciprocally,
but the Church revengeth not her self on her enemies, much less is she
transported with rage of slaughtering her own; no, that is the stain, guilt,
and madness of our times, to be bewailed with tears of blood; he therefore
rationally concludes, that this blood that dies red is not to be understood
Depersecutione, sed de bellorum tempestate, not of a tempest of persecution
falling on the Church, but of war on the world. And this is lastly confirmed by
events, for in the days of Antoninus Verus, after the Roman Empire had been
long quiet from any remarkable war: for their rejecting and persecuting the
Gospel of peace, Pax aufertur hominibus illico, and omnia ardent bellis, peace
is taken from men, and all are on fire with war. First, the Persian, and next
the Marcomannian war, which was one of the forest the Romans had met with;
compared by Eutropius to the Carthaginian war, which brought Rome to her lowest
ebb.

3. But who is meant by the Rider?

Paraus thinks it probable to be Christ, whose Gospel not of it self, but
accidentally through the corruption of men takes away peace; Think not that I
am come to send peace on the earth: I came not to send peace but a sword. Mat.
10.34. Others understand it of Nero, others extend to all the authors of the
ten persecutions, but these understand the blood to be the blood of Martyrs,
not of war; Others interpret this Rider to be the Devil himself; So Gyfford
in his Paraphrasticall Sermons on the place, The Rider upon this horse is the
devil himself: for he is most fit for such a turn, he is a cruel murderer
from the beginning etc. And no doubt but he is the prime stickler or instigator
in all such bloody designs, and therefore we must understand it of him, or of
the Persians and Marcomanni instigated by him.

4. What is meant by his work?

This is twofold: Power was given him to take away peace from the earth; that
is, to throw a ball of contention among men, to interrupt their tranquillity,
and hurry them into a bloody war; but mark, power was given him for this, quia
non rem gereret suo arbitrio, sed alieno imperio, to show that he did not
manage the matter after his own arbitrament, but at the command of another;
he had had no power, had it not been given him from above, but then he could
set all on a flame; And that they should kill one another, this is plain:
peace is taken away by war, and in war men's work is mutual slaughter.

5. But what is lastly meant by the great sword?

Paraeus understands it of the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which does
accidentally by separation made in converting some, not others, and by sharp
reproves irritate men against the Church; but this supposes the blood here to
be the blood of persecution which being above manifested to be the blood of
war. This great sword must needs import that power that was given by
confederacies, and all requisites of slaughter, by the providence of God to
those that should be Actors in this Tragedy. And so you have the meaning of the
words.

Sect. 3. The division of the Text, with the several observations arising from
it.
In the words thus opened you have represented 1. an Horse; 2. His color red;
3. His Rider; 4. His work, to take away peace from the earth, amplified with
the consequent of it, that men might kill one another; 5. His commission (...),
power was given him; 6. His furniture, there was given unto him a great sword.
Many useful observations are held forth to us in these words, I will only name
some of them, and insist on two with reference to the time.

That the Church continues not long in any condition, but is subject to variety
of changes; That she may not surfeit on any administration, that she may have
opportunity to exercise every grace, and learn to bear every condition.
Strange not then at changes, but rather still expect vicissitudes of peace and
trouble, prosperity and adversity; that in the one you may not be proud for
fear of a fall, and that in the other you may be kept from fainting, by hope
of raising, for changes are not long away.

That Peace never is nor can be taken away without special commission from God.

That when God intends any work he usually raises up means answerable.

All the power that men have to act or accomplish designs, they are furnished
with it by the providence of God: it is he that endues with power to hurt or
help, but on none of these shall I insist, but on two others; the one gathered
from the thing represented, an Horse, another from that part of his work, that
by taking away peace from the earth, he should engage men in mutual slaughter.
First, from that God revealing what judgment he would bring on the world for
the contempt of the Gospel does typifie this; by a red horse we learn,

Sect. 4. The first Doctrine handled.
That the judgments that are designed of God against any people, will (when
Gods time is come) rush in upon them speedily, and irresistably,
notwithstanding all the opposition that can be made.

The frequent use of this type by the holy Ghost may be a full proof of this
point. So Psalm. 106.29. Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions,
and the plague broke in upon them, (...) The plague made an irruption upon them
like the waters upon a se a-banke, or a troop of Horse upon a band of Foot. So
on Senacharib, when the Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in one night an
hundred fourscore and five thousand. Isa. 38.36. So on Pharaoh, when God with
an high hand brought out his people out of Egypt that very day of his
designment, Exodus 12.14. notwithstanding the hardness of Pharaohs heart, and
the might of his hand; for in what they dealt proudly, God was above them.
Exodus 18.11.

Naball, 1 Samuel 25.38. The Lord smote Nabal that he dyed. So with
Nebuchadnezzar, while the word was in his mouth, though he were the only
Potentate on earth, the word was spoken from heaven, and the same hour the
design was executed: Dan. 4.31, 33.

Secondly, God can work by Angels that come upon us invisibly, and with
greater might then we have to oppose; It is true in a spiritual sense, we may
resist the devil a cursed spirit, so as he will be put to flight. James 4.7.
But in a corporal way if God let them loose, we can neither make resistance
against good or evil Angels. What way or means was there for that huge host
of Senacharib to make resistance against the Angel that slew them? what are
Swords, or Guns, or Armor of proof, to a spirit that cannot be annoyed by the
one, but can come within the other, and destroy?

3. He can work by the heavens to make them as brass, that the earth may
become as Iron, or open the windows of heaven to corrupt the creatures on the
ground, and what resistance then? Who can bind the moist influence of the
Pleyades? etc. see Job 38.31. Ier. 14.22.

4. If he will work by means that are in their nature resistable, yet he can
cloth them with such power, and put such spirits into them, that all shall bow
before them, as he did first raise up Nebuchadnezzar and strengthen him, Ezekiel.
30.24, 25. and after him Cyrus, Isa. 45.1, etc.

5. If he will use weak means he can make them bear down the strongest
resistance; He can make a barley cake overthrow a Tent, and Gideon, and 300.
with lamps and trumpets, discomfit an Army, Judge. 7. And deliver a great Army
into the hands of a small company of men, 2 Chronicles. 24.24. that so they may
execute his judgments.

6. If there be rubs in the way, and those as great in man's eye, and as
immovable as mountains, yet God can, and will make them plains, Zech. 4.7.
God rules in and over all those that should make opposition; They live move and
have their being in him, and he can take them away; he can strike them with
sickness, as he did that politic Nephew of the Popes, Caesar Borgias, and
frustrate their strongest contrivances: * Mihi dixit (says Machiavell) se ad
omnem rerum eventum, quem a patris morte futurum putaret, long in posterum
prospexisse, atque remedia comparesse: illud uaum duntaxat se praeteriisse,
quod scilicet nanqua^ putarat sub ejus morte, sibi etiam cum morte esse
consligendum. Nich. Match. prin. Cap. 7.
Who would have thought (said he) that I should have been sick when my father
dyed. He can strike them with terror that their hearts shall melt, and their
hands be weak, as those Nations mightier than Israel, Josh. 5.1. He can
befoole them, and make them hasten that ruin which they would avoid, by that
means which they think to avoid it; Thus did he Absalom, 2 Samuel 17.14. yea,
he can turn their own force upon themselves (as now upon England) if he
purpose to make them miserable, See Psalm. 37.14, 15. In a word, God has not
only such wisdom and power over all, that none is able to resist, but he has
that rule in all, that none shall have a will to resist what he designs shall
come to pass further than he orders the resistance to be made. Now put all
these together, and may we not well conclude that his judgments are fitly
represented as speedy, and irresistible? This may be improved three ways.

Sect. 5. The Uses of the Point.
just terror and useful awakening of all such as carelessly rush into sin, to
make themselves liable to Gods judgments; see what their condition is, how
quickly and surely their judgments will come when God appoints. Gods
judgments come on horseback, and so make speed, and are unavoidable. If I
whet my glittering sword (says God) and mine hand take hold of judgment, I
will render vengeance to mine enemies, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42. It is true, God is
long suffering, and not quick in designing judgments, and this men usually
abuse, Eccl. 8.1. Because sentence is not executed speedily, the hearts of the
sons of men are set in them to do evil; but when God once designs judgments,
then they sleep not, then he sends out his horsemen, whose names may be
Maher-shalal-hash-bas, Isa. 8.1.
for they will speedily do their work, and spoil us of our comforts; And
should wilful Sinners then be secure? Is not he afraid that is under the
displeasure of one that has a great Army, especially of horse, that can come
on him suddenly, and trample him down? Such is the case of men with God, that
live in ways of provocation; Oh consider this ye that forget God, and provoke
him to indignation with Oaths, Blasphemies, Whoredoms, Drunkenesse,
Oppression, Profaneness, etc. How can you be secure, and have to deal with
such a God? Or put far from you the evil day, when Gods judgments come one
horseback? Therefore learn to fear.

warning to all to take heed of provoking God to anger, who appoints his
judgments to come in such a manner that we can neither avoid them, nor delay
them; Why should we sin against such an one? Is not that to sin against our
own peace and weal? Ier. 7.19. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides
himself, fools pass on and are punished, Prove. 22.3. There is a foresight of
faith, as well as of Sagacity; and may not faith in these Types see the danger
that is in sin, that makes liable to swift, and unavoydable judgments, that
we may hide our selves by withdrawing from sin? Why has God revealed this
manner of his judgments breaking in upon us, but for our warning? And what
will this warning do but make inexcusable if not made use of? God has Justice
and Mercy mixed with his Greatness. He will not oppress us when innocent; Nor
reject us when supplyant: But if we go on stubborn in sin these will make us
inexcusable, and more pitilesly miserable; be wise now therefore and depart
from evil.

This may yield wholesome counsel to those that have already sinned. It is
their best way to make their peace, and that speedily: this is the counsel of
Jesus Christ, Mat. 5.25. Agree with thine adversary quickly, etc. that is, with
God whom thou have made an adversary by thy sin; you cannot meet him with ten
thousand, nor ten thousand times ten thousand; he can send out an Angel that
can destroy in a night. Therefore agree and that quickly lest it be too late,
for his judgments come on horseback, and a little delay may make it to late.
God may forbear, to wait for amendment, because he is long-suffering, and
would have men come to repentance, but when the time of patience is out, his
Agents horse and away; therefore defer not making thy peace with God. Yea,
this may further inform us of the way to secure our selves from the wrath of
God, not by force, but submission; his judgments come on horseback fiercely,
and irresistably, no safety therefore in opposition but in submission; There is
no Wisdom, Counsel, nor Strength against God. There has been dispute by
some, whether his grace were resistable, but none have been so hardy as to
dispute the resistability of his power; yet there is a way to overcome God, but
it is not the way of the Giants, but of Jacob; it is not by opposition, but
submission, by Prayers and tears of repentance, Hos. 12.4. You cannot overcome
the hands of God by might, but you may overcome the heart of God by melting; if
you be froward like briers and thorns you will find God as fire to burn; but
if you fall down and lay hold on him to make peace, you shall find peace with
him, Isa. 27.4, 5. Humble therefore, and submit to God to make your peace, and
the rather, because as the judgments of God are irresistible, so are they many
times unsufferable and destructive, as you see it follows, Commission was
given to this Rider to take away peace from the earth, and that they should
kill one another.

Sect. 6. The second Doctrine handled.
That they should kill one another, this is the effect of the loss of peace;
whence,

When Peace is taken away, mutual slaughter follows.

You may read this in the Story of the Bible. Judges 20.21, 25, 35, 48. When
peace was interrupted in Israel by the wickedness of the men of Gibeah, and
the frowardness of the Benjamites to protect them, there were slaughtered in a
few days twenty and two thousand, ver. 21. and eighteen thousand, ver. 25. and
twenty and five thousand men, ver. 35. besides, all the men, women, and
children of Benjamin that went not forth to war, ver. 48. So upon a breach
between Pekah the Son of Remaliah, and Ahaz King of Judah, Pekah slew in Judah
an hundred and twenty thousand in one day which were all valiant men, 2 Chro.
28.6. 1 King. 20.29. upon a quarrel between Israel and Syria, the children of
Israel slew an hundred thousand footmen in one day; but above all, upon a cir
ill breach between Abiah King of Judah, and Iereboam King of Israel there fell
down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men. 2 Chronicles. 13.17. But we
read this in our own Histories too, for in that one quarrel, when peace was
taken from England by the deposition (or rather forced resignation) of Richard
the Second, what slaughter followed of one another? Our Historians reckon 12.
set battles fought, fourscore Princes of the Blood slain, and above fourscore
thousand of all degrees, by Englishmen in our own Kingdom, besides those that
fell in France and Ireland by this occasion. But what need we go to Story for
proof? Since peace has been taken from England in our days, what
superabundant slaughters of one another have we seen or heard of?

and in war it is men's work to kill one another; as every particular trade
has its particular work, so the particular work of Soldiers is to kill
others, and he is the most famous in that Profession that is most dexterous in
slaughter. It is counted but a sport in war to kill one another; 2 Samuel 2.14,
15, 16. And Abner said to Joab, let the young men now arise and play before us;
and Joab said, let them arise; Then there arose and went over by number twelve
of Benjamin which pertained to Ishbosheth the Son of Saul, and twelve of the
Servants of David. And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and thrust
his sword in his fellows side, so they fell down together. This is the sport
of War; And hence it may be the phrase is borrowed of having the great or small
shot play upon opposites to slaughter them.

In war there are prepared slaughtering instruments; and as instruments are
more destructive, so are they more set by, Swords, Pole-axes, Spears, Pistols,
Carbines, Muskets, Murthering-pieces, Canons, Mortarpieces, Grenades, and what
not that is destructive; Eze. 9.1, 2. There see this in a Type, cause them that
have the charge over the City to draw near, even every man with his destroying
weapon in his hand; And where such instruments are on both sides subservient to
intentions of destruction, what mutual slaughter is like to follow?

In times of War men of fierce natures and dispositions are most employed, and
custom is a second nature. Men count it wisdom in all designs to choose
Instruments fit to execute them. Now War being to destroy, those of roughest
natures, that will not relent at cries and blood, are fittest timber for the
harsh work of slaughter; as Ex quo libet ligno non fit Mercurius, So nor Mars,
all tempers are not fit to make Soldiers of; Even God himself when he would
have execution done on Babylon, stirred up the Medes against them, a flinty
people, that would not be withheld from slaughter by price, nor pity, Isa.
13.17, 18. Where Nature is wanting, Custom makes supply, therefore no Soldier
to the old Soldier, not only because experience makes him prudent and hardy,
but hardened in heart too, that he makes light of the slaughter of friend or
foe; What is customary affects little. Nay, generally those that are made use
of in War are such as are loose and deboist, that have put off humanity in
regard of morality, and civility, and so cannot have much pity, for men given
up to vile affections become without natural affection, Romans 1.26, 31. Now
when such men have the use of such weapons, and that of purpose to destroy,
what slaughter is like to follow?

In time of War men have advantage by killing, which in times of Peace does
indammage them. In War killing is their safety; A man saves his own, by taking
away the life of others that seek his ruin: but in Peace he that takes away
the life of another (unless in judicature) forfeits his own. In Peace men by
killing forfeit their own goods, but in War they take the spoil of those whom
they have slain. In War they have honor by killing, but in Peace a stain and
blot. And so it is most plain, where Peace is taken away men do and will kill
one another.

Sect. 7.
Information, to evidence unto us what an heavy judgment War is in a Nation,
especially a Civil War, because in it men kill one another. The heaviness of
the judgment may hence appear in two respects: in respect of the guilt of it,
and the burden of it.

1. In respect of the guilt of it; War gives Commission to slaughter, and
man-killing is a grievous sin; Blood is crying, Genesis 4.10. God was
irreconcilable for this, 2 Kings 24.4. It is true that there is a just War,
wherein to kill is not to murder, but to do execution; as in Iehues War upon
the house of Ahab at Gods appointment; and the Wars of Ioshuah and David, which
were the Lords Battles; yet in such cases a lawful Act may be done unlawfully,
as in that of Iehu, whence that threatening, Hes. 1.4. I will visit the blood of
Iesreel upon the house of Jehu. It is an hard and rare thing to do execution in
War without corrupt aims which will contract guilt: But further in a Civil
War there must needs be injustice on one side, and so innocent blood must needs
be shed; Nay, sometimes both sides may be faulty, in not doing what is
possible, and as much as in them lies to have peace, which is their duty, Romans
12.18. which charge of the Apostle being given of private peace, where the
breach is not attended with so sad a consequence as blood, must needs be more
engaging in public peace to prevent War, which sets men on killing one
another; and where both sides are guilty, how is a Land defiled? Besides, in a
Civil War there is not only homicide, but parricide and fratricide; Sometimes
the Father kills the Son, and the Son the Father, and one brother another, which
propinquity makes more heinous; So this makes a Civil War grievous, because it
multiplies that mighty sin of Blood; while other crosses make white and refine,
Dan. 11.35. This of a Civil War does defile.

2. War is agrievous judgment in regard of the burden of it, which hence
appears, because it brings slaughter with it. Those judgments are heaviest
that are most destructive to those on whom they light, and that War is, for it
brings slaughter; It weakens and dishonours a Nation, for what folly is it for
a Nation to weaken it self? And whom does War destroy? Does it make any
distinction, unless in sparing those that are least considerable? But the
Captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, etc. 2 Kings 25.12. The
Sword makes no distinction of good or bad, Prince or Counselor; the Sword
devours one as well as another, says David, 2 Samuel 11.25. The precious Sons of
Sion comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, to
wit, in the prevailing of War, Lam. 4.2. A Bullet will kill a Prince as soon
as a Peasant: Nay, usually in War those are most attempted that are greatest,
as the most considerable opposites, the Captains and Commanders are most aimed
at, and there is most glorying in the slaughter of such, as most useful
service; when Ioab had dispatched Absalom, he sounded a retreat, and let the
rest escape. Now in a Civil War the public weal loses on both sides, the
Land is wounded and dies in both Armies, and is deprived of some of those that
are her strength, beauty, and glory; The mighty man, and the man of War, the
Judge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the Captain of
fifty, and the Honorable, etc. Isa. 3.2, 3. Oh then how proper and significant
is that expression of the Prophet? Ier. 16.5. I have taken away my peace from
my people, even my mercy and loving kindness. When peace goes, slaughter
comes, God does not spare or pity; and so mercy and loving kindness goes when
peace goes. How should we then carry our selves under such a stroke as this?
Should we not walk as they use the Phrase (...) Mal. 3.14. mournfully before
the Lord of Hoasts, walk in black, neglecting ornaments and jollity? should we
not carry our selves as filii sub ira, as Children under their Fathers
displeasure, sad and restless, so long as such a cloud of indignation hangs
over us? Is not this the day wherein God calls for fasting and sackcloath? And
shall we now brave it? Shall we now be as joviall as ever? A Sword is sharpened
to make sore slaughter, it is furbished that it may glitter, and shall we now
make m^rth? Ezekiel. 21.16. Certainly, if we humble not under such an hand, it is
a sign of blinded minds and hardened hearts to usher in desolation.

reprehension of those that kindle the fire of War in a Nation, or blow it up,
or add fuel to it, or hinder, or at least further not the extinguishing of
it, especially if it be a Civil War: War brings slaughter, which they are
accessory to that any way promote it, or hinder it not; Quod est causa causae
est causa causa causati. Now men may further and be accessory to War morally,
or Physically.

1. Morally: So such as are guilty of those sins that make God an enemy, and
provoke him to grant out a Commission (as here) for the taking away of peace.
Sin is the first moving cause of War: The Master wheel that sets all other on
work, and tampering with other things are usually frustrate till this be
rectified; And that is the apparent reason why so many attempts for
accommodation among us have been useless; whatever were the next cause, sin
unreformed was the remote and meritorious cause; What peace (says Iehu to
Ioram) so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabell, and her witchcrafts
are so many? 2 Kings 9.22. And therefore the Wars that have wasted the people
of God have been usually charged on their sins; that oppression by Iabin,
Judges 4. is charged on their Idolatry; Judge. 5.8. They chose new Gods, then
was War in their Gates, etc. That Civil War made by Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. was
but the scourge of David's scandal occasioning Blasphemy, as the threatening
shows, 2 Samuel 12.11. with 2 Samuel 16.22. Those Adversaries that molested
Salomons peace, 1 Kings 11.14, 23. and Shishakes drawing the sword upon
Rehoboam were but the punishment of their Apostasy, as was that also by the
Assyrians on Ioash, 2 Chronicles. 12.1, 2, 3. and 2 Chro. 24.24. Why was the latter
end of Asaes reign molested with Wars, but for his confiding in man, and not
resting on God? 2 Chro. 16.7, 9. Why were the Assyrians let in on the
Israelites but for their hypocrisy, and formality? Isa. 10.6, 7. Why was that
great desolation brought upon Israel by the Babylonians but for their sins,
chiefly for that of Oppression and Blood? Lam. 4.12, 13. The Kings of the
earth, and all the Inhabitants of the world would not have thought that the
adversary and enemy should have entered into the Gates of Jerusalem; For the
sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her Priests that have shed the
blood of the just in the midst of her. And what was the cause of this red Horse
following the white, but the contempt of the Gospel, and persecution of it by
the heathen Emperors, and their Agents, and Followers? And therefore those
that are guilty of these and the like sins, we may say of them as Jeremiah to
Zedekiah in case he followed not his counsel, Ier. 38.23. And thou shall cause
this City to be burnt with fire; So they by their sins, and impenitency have
ministered fuel to begin and prolong our civil flame which will be no small
aggravation of their sin, that this might awaken the sinners in Sion, and help
to break them for, and from their sins, that have such an influence on this
desolating stroke on their dear Country, and Brethren.

2. Physically, as proper efficients or nourishing causes of it; So some that
count it their trade, their harvest, and therefore now others have begun it
they will keep it up; They know not how to live or maintain their humor and
lusts without it. Others, that in another kind advance their interest by it;
they know how to warm themselves by that fire which burns others: They have
profitable offices, can command, and rule, keep off accounts, etc. Some well
affected to peace in the general, yet think this is not a fit time to
endeavor peace by Treaty, till all opposite force be laid, whose objection we
shall answer anon, what ever the cause be that make men averse to Treaty, and
so willing to prolong Civil War it wants not guilt: though the worse the
cause the worse is the effect that flows from it. These will be accessar, to
the slaughter of men, and judged cruel on whom the thought of destruction of
their brethren has no more working. Can any tell on which side the slaughter
will most fall? On which side soever it fall, are not the slain the slain of
the daughter of our people? And you know what a corrasive that was to Ieremiahs
heart when the people of his time were as wicked as those of our time be: O
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people, Ier. 9.1.
Surely such a temper would never have produced an impediment to the closing of
our breach by Treaty; I may therefore leave a black note on those that retard
the restoring of Peace, though with some distinction of bad or worse,
accordingly as there is weakness or pravity in the cause from which it flows.

to quicken us all to study the recovery of peace, because without peace
nothing is seen, or can be expected but mutual slaughter, and this slaughter
will not want bitterness, nor guilt, while we move not every stone for a well
grounded peace: All are for peace, but some would have it by the Sword; their
word is Ense pacem petimus -- Others would have it by Treaty. Now here is an
argument to incline to seek Peace by Treaty, because till Peace is recovered
men will kill one another: And to this we may add these following
considerations.

We have had experience of conquest on one side already, and have found that
the Sword prevailing on one side will not make lasting Peace, neither is this
apparent in modern experience only, but in ancient also. It was neither the
vanquishing of Richard the Second, or Henry the Sixth: No nor the death of
either that did, or could settle this Kingdom in a firm Peace, nor any thing
else, but an accommodation in the union of the Roses in Henry the Seventh,
Heir of the House of Lancaster, matching with the Daughter and Heyresse of the
House of York. This was the only cure under God of our longest Civil Wars: it
may be the Sword on the other side may make Peace, but with danger of that
slavery, that (I believe) you are sufficiently apprehensive of; but on the
other part, the Sword is not like to make a settled Peace without Treaty, and
Accommodation.

2. Consider our War is a Civil War, wherein the Land bleeds, and is weakened
on both sides, and loses those many times that may stand her in stead both in
Peace, and Foreign Wars; which consideration would be the more weighty if we
would remember that witty Observation of the Duke of Rohan, England is a great
Animal, that cannot dye unless it kill it self; being so warned, shall we
hold up the only course for self destruction?

3. Consider the dependence that one Church has upon another; that in the
strength, or weakness of one, all other are weakened, or strengthened: So
that in Englands wounds all Protestant Churches suffer, and will easilier be a
prey to any of the Limbs of Antichrist; and what a sad thing were it that
England, that has been a refuge to Protestants, should now occasion their
weakening.

4. Consider the little benefit that will accrue by bloodshed now, (if it want
guilt) In some ways and sufferings the loss of blood may yield sweet fruit,
and we may expect increase by it; Sanguinis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae: Martyrs
Blood, is the Churches Seed. So in our Marian sufferings, I am confident God
has blessed the Land with more faithful Preachers and Professors, by the
Preaching of our Martyrs blood (who being dead yet speak) then their labors
would have procured had they lived out that ordinary time, that in reason and
nature they might; but no such crop can be expected from the blood now shed.

5. The hazard that must be run: who knows where victory will light: and if
it light on the side of those that are most averse to Peace by Treaty, in what
case will that Liberty, and Religion, etc. be, that they most tender? It is not
good to hazard all, when we may by Treaty obtain that which we would and
might heretofore have rested contented with, and thankful for.

6. And what must become of poor Ireland? Must we still complain to God that
it is called an out cast that no man seeks after; and yet not take courses
that may hasten her relief? which sure is likelier to be hastened by our
closure by Treaty, than expecting an end by the Sword.

7. And me thinks it should somewhat move moderate spirits to consider who
they have been that have been most averse to an end by Treaty. Were not
Papists used to cry out on the one hand that they were undone when hopes of
Accommodation appeared, while the most Heretical Sectaries looked black on
the other hand? Are they not the most dangerous on both sides, that would have
no peace with a King, or with a Parliament? Sure then all that fear the
dangers of extremes should close in their desires, and endeavors for Peace by
such a Treaty as might preserve both King and Parliament, with the Royalties of
the one, and the Privileges of the other.

8. Nor should that be of least weight with us that is here hinted in the Text:
The Rider (as our Gyffard says) on this red horse is the Devil, his work it
is to take Peace from the earth, that men might kill one another; so that they
that lay any Remora in the way of Peace, they are but the devils Agents, who
does either blow up their corruption as in those Persecutors who played the
devil, Rev. 2.10. Some of you shall Satan cast into prison, not immediately,
but by his Agents, or else he does abuse their simplicity, as sometimes he did
Peter's to Christ, when he thus rebuked him, get thee behind me Satan, Mat.
16.23. But there is an Objection or two that needs solution.

Some may think that if we have Peace with Treaty, we shall not have all
truth.

Truth and Holiness are more precious than Peace, and we must not let go
either for outward Peace, for that were to part with God for man: Heaven for
earth: Inward for outward Peace; which were a sinful and foolish change; but
yet,

First, I say, by Treaty we may have publicly all the Peace that it is
lawful for us to fight for, which we have protested to maintain; that is, all
that is contained in the Doctrine of the Church of England, established by Law.

Secondly, I say, If any error be left we shall not be accessory to it, having
within our Sphere professed against it, and endeavored the eradication of it.

Thirdly, We may for our own particular hold all truth and purity, that is a
Legacy that Christ has purchased for us that none can take away: They may
trouble and molest us for it, but cannot without our own consent dispoyle us
of it.

Fourthly, We may have publicly more truth settled by Treaty than we are like
to have by Victory on either side; we have had experience on the one side
already; And I believe few of you doubt of my Assertion, if Victory should fall
on the other.

But some may think that this is not a fit time to Treat, till the Forces up
against the Parliament be reduced, but then it will be seasonable.

Though the oppositions that be now raised against the Parliament make it
somewhat inconvenient to Treat in some respects, yet in some other it makes it
more necessary. A Treaty, I confess, is not so honorable when in any degree
enforced, and it is convenient that it should be done with the greatest
tranquillity and freedom; but that opportunity being lost, now the Force that
is up does necessitate it, if we will prevent grievous and hazzardous
slaughter. And therefore, for my part, I cannot but wonder that any wise men,
though never so opposite to conjunction with other Forces risen, should not
think them a just occasion though not to precipitate, yet to hasten a Treaty,
seeing else so great slaughter is like to be, because now, as it follows in
the Text there is given to them a great Sword, that may shed much precious
blood.

But something is requisite in us to promote Peace besides endeavoring Treaty,
for we must study every one of us to be fit for the return of Peace; God gives
it, and God takes it away, and God waits to be gracious, giving mercies to his
people when they are fit for them. Now we are fit for Peace, first, when we
rightly prize it, which want of it should, and may teach us: for Bona carendo,
etc. Good things are best known in their value by our wanting them; when we
prize a blessing we will be thankful for it. Secondly, when we are fitted to
improve it, when we are broken for, and healed of all our abuses of it: when we
can look upon it as a gracious opportunity to do more good, and resolve by way
of thankfulness so to improve it. Thirdly, when God has done his whole good
work upon us by War, Isa. 10.7, 12. when we are refined, humbled, and brought
to repent of all those sins which have brought the judgment of War upon us, 2
Chr. 12.6, 7, 8.

2. We must study to make our peace with God; his Controversy with us is the
root of all Controversies among our selves.

3. We must not only petition men but God, and that with such earnestness,
sincerity, and importunity, as such a mercy should be sought, and then God will
return our peace as a river; which the Lord vouchsafe.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS
An Appendix holding forth the occasion of Preaching, and the cause of
publishing, this plain Sermon.
Christian Reader,
THou may understand that on Friday in the afternoon, July 14. an earnest
suit was moved to me from Dr. Gouge, and Dr. Burgess, to supply Dr. Burgesses
place at Paul's the Lords day following, and withal an offer made of sufficient
supply for my charge that afternoon. This suit being so pressed, and being so
small, for but the exchange of a Sermon, and by such Persons, I could not be so
uncivil as to reject; Prove. 18.24. He that has friends must show himself
friendly. The next day when I was to make my preparation, I fell into a
distemper with a cold affecting one side of my head and face, which unfitting
me in a great degree for study, I was forced to make use of old store; And
casting in my thoughts what subject to pitch upon, at length I determined on
this Subject, Rev. 6.4. For though I have always thought it baseness below a
Christian to serve the times, yet I have thought it wisdom requisite in a
Minister to suit the times with a fit Subject; yea, part of that prudence
whereby he is to show himself a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing
the word of Truth aright. Now at that time the City was intent upon Peace to be
procured by Treaty, which work, though generally well accepted, yet finding
some discouragement, I thought by the mischief of War to take occasion to
encourage them in the pursuit of Peace in that way that might soonest end, and
best prevent the sad consequences of our unnatural war; being thus called to
this Pulpit, and inclined to this Subject, I preached this Sermon in a great and
very attentive Auditory, and then thought that work had been at an end. But
contrary to mine expectation, not long after I heard of a rumor spread, not in
the City only, but even in the Country, of a notorious malignant Sermon preached
by me at Paul's; And this brought to me by, and from, persons not to be
contemned. This, I confess, moved me, for true Malignancy is of that nature,
and even reputed Malignancy of that evil consequence, that as Jerome says of
Heresy, it is an accusation that a man should not be patient under; patient in
regard of murmuring, fretting, revenging, we should be under all crosses: but
patient in regard of neglecting just and vigorous vindication we should not be
in such calumnies as this of Malignancy: For a Malignant notes out such an one,
as has evil will at, and does set himself to hinder the public weal of
Church or State. I know the term is usually cast by men in all times of
difference on those that side not with any Party in those ways that they deem
for public weal, though in themselves never so destructive. So Eliah was
counted a Malignant by Ahab, 1 King. 18.17. And Jeremy too in his time for
persuading submission to the King of Babylon, as weakening the hands of the men
of War, etc. Ier. 38.4. But true Malignity is enmity to weal public, and by
that imputation men intend to blast all those that dance not after their Pipe.
And he that is guilty of such Malignity is a pest or viper in that Church or
State which he malignes. Yet a while I contented my self with that brazen wall
of a good conscience, Murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi.
as thinking it sufficient defense against those arrows of the tongue; but
they increasing, and considering that observation of the wise Historian,
Periculosum est sola innocentia vivere, Livy.
In distempered times especially it is dangerous to have no other guard but
innocence; I thought some necessity laid upon me to vindicate my reputatition
from such a crime: And resolving upon defense, I knew no better, nor no other
than a naked representation of that Sermon to the eyes of all, that was so
severally relisht by the ears in hearing. And to this I was the easilier
induced, because, at the earnest desires of some that approved it, I had
engaged my self to draw out a fair copy of it. I remember a Story of
Sophocles. Who being accused by his Sons for dotage, that by the opinion of the
Judges they might enter on his Estate; in this hazard, having in his hands the
Comedy Oedipus Colonaeus which he had last composed, is said to have recited
that to the Judges, and demanded of them whether they thought that those were
the verses of a doter; Whereupon Sententiis judicium liberatus est, Cicero de
senectute.
The Judges freed him from the accusation: In like manner my Sermon being
accused for Malignancy, I knew no better way of defense than a publication of
it as near as I could verbatim (especially in Points whereat exceptions were
taken) with this appeal to the conscience of the Reader, Number verba haec
maligni videantur, whether these seem to be the words of a Malignant. Is it
Malignancy to charge sin as the greatest breaker of our peace, and sinners as
the greatest troublers of Israel? To press them by repentance to deliver
England out of the hand of the Lord? Is it Malignancy to set out the sin and
danger of War, to incline the hearts of men to embrace, and to quicken the
endeavors of men to pursue, Peace? Is it Malignancy, when God has put into
the hands of each side a great Sword, and the Land is daily wounding,
dismembring, and so disgracing, weakening, indangering it self, to persuade to
seek peace by Treaty, and that speedily, seeing we perish daily? If this be
Malignancy, I confess there was store in the Sermon; but Scriptures must be
made Apocrypha, and the nature of things inverted, before such lessons as these
can be noxious to Church or State. All pretend to Peace, nor will many be seen
to be against the way of Peace by Treaty. I have read an Expression in an
Answer to a Petition of the Seamen, wherein the House of Commons is said to
take notice of their approbation of the Votes touching a Treaty, for the matter
being for Peace, no good man but desires it. If peace be the desire of all good
men, and a Treaty be the readiest way to effect it, It is the most irrational
thing in the world to traduce a Sermon for Malignancy, wherein that is chiefly
aimed at that all good men desire. But when men are earnest for Peace, those
whose guilt or interest draws them another way, to burden them with
prejudice, cry out, they would have Peace on any terms; They would have Peace
without Truth: But how untruly and irrationally is this objected against them
that now plead for Peace by Treaty? Being so many and great things have been
often offered by the King to draw on Treaty in other things, which the pressers
for Peace do generally take for granted, that the King will still make good, if
Treaty on those Offers be granted, but if it still be denied, and
inconveniences follow, I am sure the pressers for Treaty would be most innocent
of those evil consequences that the Land is like to be endangered with for
want of it: And for truth or purity, I know not what cause any man has to
suspect the sincerity or measure of my respect to either; it being no great
secret that I have for respect to them neglected my own private interest above
this 20. years, being continually if not under a storm, yet under a cloud,
for adherency to truth and purity. And (me thinks) any man may very well
perceive now, that without Peace we are like to have neither truth, nor
holiness; Nothing being a greater blasting to either than a continued Civil
War. Who knows not that Religion has ever gained by suffering, Sanguis
Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, Martyrs Blood, was the Churches Seed: But who can
tell where it gained by warring? Our experience tells us that when Ministers in
England were bound, the Word of God was not bound; never were more converted
from nature to Grace, nor was there ever a more sensible increase of the power
of Godliness, but since the Ministers have been at large, has not the Word of
God been bound? The complaint being generally of the barrenness of the
Ministry, and but few converted in comparison of those who are scandalized and
perverted? And therefore I speak the truth in Christ; The main ground that has
moved me to that earnestness for Accommodation, which I have expressed
formerly, as well as of late, has been my tender respect to the honor, power
and truth of Religion which never suffered more by any accident than by this
unnatural War: And if there be not the sooner an honorable Peace, I am
afraid Conclamatum est, we may hang up our harpes for the exile of Piety, and
sit down and weep bitterly when we remember our Sion. Therefore if pursuit of
Peace be deemed Malignancy, I shall not only dye in it, but if need be (I hope)
dye for it: but other Malignancy (that is truly such) I renownce. Farewell.

FINIS.

