A NEW YEARS RESVLT, In favor of the POOR; As also in the behalf of all
Tradesmen, Necessitous Persons, and such others, as desire the increase of
Traffic; who mind the Exterpation of Intolerable Usury, and the anihilating
of the pernicious costoms of Forfeitures.

Together with that which may be justly expected from all men of Estates on the
like Case, who cannot be ignorant that such as endeavor not to promote the
Public good, are no better then Brutes with Hoofs and Horns.

All which is discust by way of Conference between Mean-well and Experience.

BY Sr. Balthazar Gerbier, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1652.

A New Years Result, In favor of the POOR and other Necessitous Persons, etc.
By way of Conference, between Mean-well and Experience.
Mean-well, WHen our Savior told his Disciples, That they should always have
the poor amongst them, they were likewise recommended to be provided for; and
therefore the administering unto them of a timely, and a possible relief, is no
less then a duty, That such persons who have tongues should not only speak
comfortable words unto them; but also that such as have wealth, should be
assisting of them; and finally, that such as have experience should not only
think upon expedients in behalf of the Poor, reflecting on the saying,
Foeneratur Domino qui miseretur pauperis: but also endeavor to bring such
results to a head, as may be effectual, and beneficial unto them; when as
alas! the poverty of many is so excessive, as that it works the same effects on
them, which some diseases do on persons, who at last cannot so much as tell
what they are sick off? nor, can they call for a Physician: and as this excess
of want does at last strike up into their brains, so it works on their senses,
making them rave and exclaim; yea, sometimes accuse every thing they see,
taste, feel and the like; nay, they even misconsture every word which is spoken
unto them by their best friends.

Now when as distractions happen in a Country, and amidst a Nation; the Poor
and such like necessitous persons are usually the first who suffer by the same;
And therefore all well meaning persons, are so much the more bound to apply
themselves, to think upon such favorable expedients, as might be effectual
toward the relieving of the poor and needy. To speak for them, to consult
with what experience has laid up in store for them; and finally, to represent
unto all those who may be in a capacity to reduce the same, into a result: To
the end, that the same being tendered unto Authority as then (according to all
probability) it may be crowned with desired effects, when as Authority cannot
choose but take it well at the propounders hands, who shall have opened unto
them the means whereby they may do good; nor can it be imagined that a good
meaning in that kind is like to be mistaken.

In regard whereof, it seems seasonable at present to call upon experience for
to tender its opinion on such things as may be effected on this particular;
they being no other save such as are grounded on the unquestionable ordinances
of God, and on the maxims of all good men: the former whereof, having been
manifested unto all Nations that are acquainted with Gods Word, cannot be
gainsaid, so likewise cannot those plausible maxims of godly men (who have had
a regard unto the Divinc ordinances) be rejected, although they are practiced
by any Nation whatsoever, or of any profession soever in Religion; for that a
good thing which is done, cannot be termed other ways, but what it is,
although it be wrought by a bad instrument: And therefore it is the part of
experience, freely to tender whatsoever is and has been practiced by others to
a good end.


Experience. Since every thing does naturally affect its increase and
preservation; That the most ravenous Vultures and fiercest Tigers, have a love
and charitable sense toward those of their own kind: How much the more ought
men, of what birth, condition, or profession soever to have a charitable sense
for each other; and therefore no distinction in the Tenants of Religion can be
a bar for good examples, which are not prohibited, neither by the laws of God
nor man; although they might happily be grounded on the practice of any who
should differ in a profession of Religion. And therefore, it cannot be
impertinent to mention such, as are in use even among the Papists our
Adversaries. Let us therefore but reflect on those courses which they took,
when as by the destructive fury of war, several parts of their Territories
were laid waste, their Cities burnt to ashes, their Shires, Towns,
Market Towns, Boroughs, and Hamblets, so destroyed and overgrown with Trash; as
that all the surface of those parts seemed to be a Wilderness; and that the
poor were enforced to betake themselves to Caves and hollow Trees for shelter,
there to become fellow inhabitants with Frogs, Toades, and other loathsome
reptilesse: Why, even as then? Yea, although they were deeply engaged in war,
some zealous men of those times resolved to raise a stock of monyes, not for to
disburse it at a clap on the poor and necessitous; for that they would soon
have made an end of their several alotments; but to employ that stock in such
an establishment as might serve to supply the poor for ever: and the which
might be even as a Source and Spring, which produces a continual torrent of
water, and the which makes that Mill go, whereby the Publicks corn is grownd,
and whereby all such as will bestir themselves may be employed, according to
the Dutch saying, viz Help your self, God will help you.


M. w. I, but can it be supposed that this being practiced here in England, in
a time of war may have the same effects which you seem to hint at?


Exp. Why not I pray you? since the same is extant in diverse well governed
Commonwealths and States, as in Italy, Loraine, the Land of Liege, Brabant,
Flanders, Artois, Heynault, and chiefly and most completely throughout all the
jurisdictions of the States Generals United Provinces.


M. w. Those I hope are not Papists?


Ex. The latter indeed are not; and yet if any Nation under the Sun be found
to practice more charity then the former (although perhaps it be in a way
about) then am I as yet far to seek in that quality which is supposed by my
Title, viz. Experience.


M. w. But if the Papists did rely as much on Faith as the Reformed Professors
of the Gospel (according to our English Tenants) do; or that the Reformed
professors did so much practice Charity as the Papists do? why as then, both
of them would doubtless run either to Paul's here in London, or to Peter's in
the Vatican? At Rome were both of those Churches capable to contain them all;
but to the point:


Exp. Go too then: A Neopolitan Cardinal named Aquaviva, (in English, living
water) at such time as those Cardinals (according to the Etimologie of the
word) made good their profession, which was to be a Deacon; and who in time of
persecution had a care to provide for the poor among the children of God: the
said Aqua-viva, did therefore issue forth his charitable spring at one gush, no
less then fifty thousand crowns toward the laying of a fundamental stock,
for the relief of the poor, which according unto the value of our English money
may be accounted to be fifteen thousand pounds sterling; wherein the said
Cardinal was seconded by many other charitable men; and also by a Pope, who
took upon himself the title of Pious.


Mean-w. Truly this Nation cannot be taxed of backwardnes in good examples of
charitablenesse; as for instance, the several spacious Hospitals, Almeshouses
and such buildings, with the vaste reveneues which were thereunto appropriated.


Exp. But by your leave, I shall explain my self in a larger extent, then the
providing for the lame, the sick, or the old decrepit persons may amount unto;
For that charity cannot be confined within the walls of Hospitals or
Almshouses, nor under the gowns of a small number of old men or women. That
which at present is requisite, reflects on a more general good; for as it must
extend it self to the relief of the very poorest sort of people, so must it be
favorable and beneficial to all necessitous persons whatsoever; as also in the
behalf of such as endeavor the increase of Traffic, as well as those who
mind the extirpation of intolerable Usury, and the annihilation of the
pernicious custom of forfeitures.


M. w. It were to be wished, that in the first place, we had such a spring
amongst us here, as it might gush forth such a charitable proportion toward a
like settlement, for the relief of the poor, as might prove a Lodestone to
attract unto it all the Iron hearts of this obdurated Age; that it might be
seconded by pious men in effect, and not in name; that so by our professing of
the Tenants, which are the most answerablest to the Word of the true and living
God, we might by unquestionable charitable actions (though not meritoriously
forestalled nor boasted off) make good the Scripture phrase, viz. Let your
light so shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your
father which is in Heaven.


Exp. As I before told you of the Cardinals and Popes gratis Contribution, to
so good and pious a work: In the like manner, the said Princes, States and
Magistrates did in their respective Dominions lay the foundations of such like
establishments; the which being most apparent and known, we shall not need to
exemplify in: Only, we cannot omit to mark how that Albert of Austria
Archduke of Brabant, and of the rest of those Provinces, together with the
Archdutchesse Isabel his Espouse, did issue forth of their own coffers a stock
of ten thousand pounds, toward the relieving of the poor in the abovesaid
manner; at whose example also, the Archbishop of Machlen, and the Chancellor
of Brabant contributed each of them five thousand pounds thereunto; besides the
Legacies of several pious persons in the said Provinces. The like were also
practiced and settled (as we have already said) in the Land of Liege, in
Loraine; and finally in the United Provinces under the States Generals
jurisdictions: unto which stocks of money were thus gratis, bestowed toward
the foundation, of a relief for the Poor, and such sums of money were
thereunto added, as could be taken up at Use or easy rates. And whereby, in
the first place, the poorer sort were relieved. Secondly, other necessitous
persons were supplied. Thirdly, New-beginners were settled in their several
Trades and Professions. Fourthly, Merchants were succored in their distresses.
Finally, Husbandmen and Seamen, were also included in the benefits and
advantages, which do acrew by such an establishment. Moreover, let all the
world judge how easy a thing it would be here in England to attain unto so
considerable a stock of monyes, whereby so good and pious a work may be
propagated. For that questionless, those who profess to open the Word of God,
unto their brethren, would in the first place, not willingly be out-vied by the
Papists Priests, who do closely attend all such as depart this life; and even
then admonish them to leave some part of their substance, toward the founding
of the said establishment; when as many of them reflecting on their Popes
recommendations in their Bulls, unto their Bishops, to pronounce Blessings on
all such as do contribute to so great and general a good; do not make any
difficulty at all to dispose of a considerable proportion of their personal
estates toward the same; to the end, that although death bereaves them of
their personal doing of good amongst men; yet their good works may follow them,
even after their departures.


M. w. And do you not think that it would be a shame for us, who take upon our
selves to be Christians? Nay, who account our selves to be the true select
Chrildren of God; more particularly enlightened by his most holy and blessed
Spirit, reformed according to the purity of his word, to be thus exceeded by
the Papists. Nay, is it not a disgrace for us to seem (with a cold and seared
up Conscience) to affect to have the poor always amongst us, and to suffer
them to be in a starving condition? But it is not your opinion, that the
Supreme Authority should be humbly sought unto, to command all such as profess
the opening of the Word of God, to make it a part of their Duty, to endeavor
to move their auditors, at seasonable times, to resolve on the setting a part
of some proportion of their personal estates toward the same?


Exp. Why? doubtless this would be a good way to compass the same: so likewise
might the Supreme Authority be pleased to order, that those said godly
Ministers might admonish all such persons, as attain unto estates, to bestow
voluntary gifts toward the said establishment, and to have a Box prepared for
the same. Item, That there might be a Collection twice a year throughout all
Churches of the Land, to the increasing of such a stock* Item, That all such as
take Degrees in the Universities, and on whom Offices are bestowed in the same,
should contribute toward the said establishment; as well as such on whom
Benefices are instated. Moreover, the Supreme Authority might be sought unto,
to the end that the Lord Major of London, and the several Major of the
respective Towns in England, might impose on all such as receive Offices under
them; especially, such as receive the said Offices gratis, (when as formerly
they were bought) the bestowing of a gift toward the said Establishment. Item,
That the Sheriffs and Aldermen might do the like with all their subaltern
Officers. Item That all the several Offices of the Customs, Excises,
Impositions, as well as the Postmasters, Clarks of the respective Committees,
and the like, might do the same. Item, That the same method might be observed
in the four Inns of Court; and that all such as enter themselves in the said
Societies, might be obliged to contribute to the Box, for the said
establishment. Item, That all Judges, Councillors, Lawyers, Atturneys,
Solicitors, and the like, who are admitted and depend of any Court of
Judicature, may do the like at their respective admittances: As also that all
parties, who gain their Causes, may contribute to the said Box. Item, That all
Officers of the Army, at the receiving of their Commissions, may do the like.
Item, That every Merchants ship, that comes home safe and richly laden, should
likewise contribute to the said establishment. Item, That all Innkeepers,
Taverns, Victualing-houses and Ale-house-keepers do the like, at the same time
when as they receive their Licenses from their respective Justices of Peace; or
at their change of habitations, or signs. Item, That all those who cause rich
gilt Coaches to be made, should not have them from the Coach-makers, unless
they contribute to the said Box. Item, That all those who keep a Kennell of
Hounds (on the which they spend only for their sports sake, more then would
maintain many Christian families) should do the like. Item, That such
Merchants as keep Country-houses, for their pleasure, and Barks on the River
for their recreation, should do the same. Item, That all those who purchase
Lands, Houses, (especially Merchants and strangers, under what disguised name
soever) should contribute toward the said establishment. Item, That all such
Heirs of persons of means deceased, who enter them with pomp and herses,
should contribute to the said Box. All which being (as its conceived) very
reasonable, and possible to be put in practice, by the Authorities approbation:
It cannot choose but produce a very considerable stock of money: besides, the
particular contributions of all such persons, as are to be employed in the
quality of Officers, in the said Establishment, which may be erected in the
several Cities, Towns, and Market Towns of this Land, in the same manner as
they are in other parts; and whereby the public may be informed at large,
whenever the Lord shall be pleased to move the hearts of men, to desire that
this said public good may take effect; and that they shall petition Authority
thereon. Moreover, such Officers as are to attend the said Establishment, will
find themselves in a very easy thiving way, and safe condition, drawing on
themselves the blessing of the Almighty, and of all good men: When as the
poorest and most incapablest of doing any work shall be relieved; So likewise
all such as will endeavor any thing, which depends of a Vocation and Calling,
may by some means be enabled and improved; Besides, all new-beginners of
trades, may be strengthened therein, by the said Establishment: All Merchants
relieved in their urgent occasions, when as for the want of such a help, many
are constrained to break, although some of them have their Warehouses full of
Merchandises. In the like manner, the Husbandmen and Seamen, (as aforesaid)
may by the same be provided for in due time; the former, by being enabled to
keep their Ploughs a going, and to put off their Grains, Fruits and Cattle, at
due seasons, and at the best rates; So also the Seamen, may be enabled to take
the opportunity of fair winds, by being assured of full fraughts and quick
returns. And as the said Establishment proves to be thus beneficial in all
places wheresoever it has been, and is erected; so likewise does it prove to
be the extirpation of all Jewish practices and intolerable Usury, the Cankers
of all Commonwealths; in the same manner does it abrogate the pernicious
custom of Forfeitures of Lands, Houses and Goods.


M. w. Why as then, let all godly people contribute to so good and necessary an
intent: Let all poor and necessitous people unanimously Petition the Lord of
Mercy and of Compassion, to grant unto the Supreme Authority of this Nation, a
seasonable convenience to pitch upon the ordering of such an Establishment* to
the end* that the poor, the desolate, the fatherless, and the stranger may
bless the Lord, and acknowledge the Parliaments commiseration of them; and
that they may not neglect those means which the Almighty has ordained for
their subsistances, nor seem to mistrust Providence by their not applying
themselves unto that Authority, which can and will relieve them.


FINIS.

