The General Remonstrance or Declaration of the Catholics of Ireland,
Received of George Wentworth, 28. December. 1641 Who received it from the Rebels
when he was prisoner with them.
WHereas we the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom of Ireland, have been
continual loving and faithful Subjects to His sacred Majesty; And
notwithstanding the general and hard oppressions suffered by subordinate
Governors, to the ruin of our lives, honors, and estates. Yet having some
liberty of Religion from His Majesty out of the Effluence of His Princely love
unto us; We weighing no corporal loss in respect of that great Immunity of
the soul, are inviolably resolved to infix our selves in an immutable and pure
allegiance, for ever to His said Royal Majesty and Successors.

Now so it is, That the Parliament of England maligning, and envying any Graces
received from His Majesty by our Nation, and knowing none so desired by us, as
that of Religion; And likewise perceiving His Majesty to be inclining, to give
us the liberty of the same, drew His Majesty's Prerogative out of His hands;
Thereby largely pretending the general good of His Majesty's Kingdoms. But we
the said Catholics and loyal Subjects to His Majesty, do probably find as
well by some Acts to pass, by them the said Parliament, touching our Religion,
in which the Catholics of England and Scotland did suffer; As also by threat,
to send over the Scottish Army with the Sword, and Bible in hand against us,
That this whole and studied plot was, and is, not only to extinguish Religion
(by which we altogether live happy;) But likewise to supplant us, and raze the
name of Catholic and Irish, out of the whole Kingdom. And seeing this surprise
so dangerous, tending absolutely to the overthrow of the liberty of our
Consciences and Country, And also our Gracious Kings Power forced from him, in
which, and in whose prudent care over us, our sole quiet and comfort consisted;
and without the which, the fear of our present ruins did prescrible opinion,
and premonish us to save our selves. We therefore as well to regain His
Excellent Majesty's said Prerogative, being only due to him and His Successors;
and being the Essence and life of Monarchy, hoping thereby to confirm a strong
and invincible Unity between His Royal and ever happy love unto us, and our
faithful duty, and loyalty to His incomparable Majesty; Have taken Arms and
possessed our selves of the best and strongest Forts of this Kingdom, to enable
us to serve His Majesty, and defend us from the Tyrannous resolution of our
enemies; Thus our Consciences, as we wish the peace of the same to our selves,
and our posterity, is the pretense and true cause of our present rising in
Arms, By which we are resolved to perfect the Advancement of the Truth, and the
safety of our King and Country. Thus much we thought fitting in general, to
publish unto the world, to set forth our innocent and just cause, the
particular whereof shall be speedily declared.

Dated the 23. October. 1641. God save the King.
We do declare unto God and the World, That what we do or have done, is for the
maintenance of the Kings, and our Religion. And for fear these our doings
should be misconstrued by our over zealous particulars, We thought good to make
known unto the World by this our Declaration, or Remonstrance.

1. THe several private meetings of factious and ill-disposed People, unto all
Government and Commonwealth at several places, plotting and devising our
utter ruin, and the extirpation of this our Religion.

2. Several men employed by them, with instruments ready drawn, for to get
hands thereunto, to be preferred to the Parliament of England; Whereby they
would have the Papists, as they call them, and the Protestant Bishops of this
Kingdom, when they join with the Papists, and have, as they hate the Papists,
the Bishops to be deposed, and the Papists banished; Or otherwise rooted out of
this Kingdom.

3. The Government of this Kingdom successively put into the hands of so many
needy and poor Ministers, who for raising of themselves, have by scruing
inventions, poll'd the Gentry and Commons of this Kingdom, that no Man was
secure of any thing he had.

4. We saw His Majesty, to whom we thought to address our selves, was so
oppressed by the Arrogance of such fruitless and disloyal Subjects, And as it
were cut off from all Prerogative, that we could not expect any release, as
long as they ruled in His Kingdom, as now they do.

All which we taking into our serious consideration, did fear we should be
circumvented upon the sudden; And for our security, did think fit to Arm our
selves for our own defense, and safety of His Majesty, from such wicked
perturbers of all Commonwealths: Where they get any superiority, that they
will not admit either of the Kings or Bishops. As well witness Germany as many
other places, which we will yield up, when His Majesty pleases to command us,
and take a course for securing of us, and the Protestants of this Kingdom, Who
are only His true and obedient Subjects. And such factious and seditious
Puritans, but disturbers of all States, and had brought the like misery on
Queen Elizabeth and King James, had they not been by them, and their wise
Council prevented: Which we thought fit to intimate unto the good Subjects,
That they may the more willingly assist us, until we be at better leisure to
make our great grievances known unto His Majesty, and He have more power to
relieve us.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


