Natura Prodigiorum: OR, A DISCOURSE Touching the NATURE OF PRODIGIES.

Together With the Kinds, Causes and Effects, of Comets, Eclipses, and
Earthquakes.

WITH AN APPENDIX Touching the Imposturism of the commonly-received Doctrine of
Prophecies, Spirits, Images, Sigils, Lamens, The Crystal, etc.


And the Propugners of such Opinions.

By JOHN GADBURY (...).

Non est muta rerum Natura, sed undique loquax, Erasm. LONDON, Printed by J.C.
for Fr. Cossinet, at the Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street; and Tho Basset in
St. Dunstans-Church-yard in Fleetstreet. 1660.

To the Right Honorable, Valiant and Successful, Sir GEORGE MONK, Lord General
of all His MAJESTY'S Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland: Master of the
Horse to His MAJESTY* Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter; One of his
MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy Council; AND Restorer of these (of late
distracted) Nations to their Pristine Splendour and Glory: Felicity in both
Worlds.
Right Honorable,
AMong the many and mighty Addresses, and Congratulatory thanks that your
Excellency is assiduously accosted with, for the Great (and once accounted
impossible) Deliverance, to these (of late) bleeding Nations, wrought by your
Honors most happy Hand and Counsels; I humbly implore your Honors most
Gracious Acceptance of this my mean acknowledgment. For of so universal
concernment have your most prosperous and heroic Actions been, that (as by the
Sun) the meanest receive advantage, as the greatest, though not in the same
quantity, or degree: For the which Ages to come, will instal you blessed!

Although I am a stranger unto your Honors Person, yet should I be so unto
your mighty and ever to be celebrated-Actions, I must then be the same unto the
Land of my own Nativity, which with loud Acclamations and Echoes of joy, has
owned your Excellency, as the only Instrumental cause of her present fruition
of Peace and Settlement, and of her future happiness and glory: and of the
truth of this, Men and Angles are witnesses.

My Lord! This little Book treating of things strange, Emboldens me the more,
to present it unto your Honors Hand: For if we search all Chronology, and dig
through the deep Mine of History, we shall scarcely find any one thing, so
eminently Prodigious and strange, as this -- THE HAPPY RESTORATION OF ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND AND IRELAND, TO HER FORMER AND MOST NATURAL GOVERNMENT -- MONARCHY!
AND THIS PERFORMED BY YOUR HONORS HAPPY UNDERTAKINGS, WITHOUT THE LEAST
BLOODSHED! which very thing, speaks so much of Gods most Gracious and especial
Providence, to your Honor, and these Kingdom's, that the true essential cause
of this most happy Turn, is to be read no where but in the Sacred Scrowl of
Divine Miracles. Which by the Fathers of the Church, are worthily ranked among
those things the Doctor of the Gentiles Terms, (...), the deep things, or
secrets of God; and therefore not fit for Man's inspection.

I fear (my Lord!) I am too troublesome: I shall conclude with a Petition, and a
Prayer. My Petition is, That your Honor would not only vouchsafe your
Acceptance of this little Book, but your Pardon also to its Author, who has
presumed to affix so great a Name, unto so mean and contemptible a work. My
Prayer is, that Heaven would be pleased to be as propitious to your Honors
Person, Name and Posterity, as it has made your Honor, to the three Kingdoms
of England, Scotland and Ireland. Which is the Cordial, Fervent and faithful
desire of,

Right Honorable, Your Excellencies most Humble Servant, and true Honourer,
John Gadbury.

To the Reader.
IT was no inconsiderable or left handed truth, that the Lyrick Poet
ingeniously maintained, -- (...). That in every thing or action, Seasonable
performance is a principal matter. And the Excellently learned and
Philosophical Emperor, M. Anton. (Lib. 12. Sect. 35.) lays it down as a fixed
Position or Maxim -- (...). That that only is good, which is seasonable.

Whether this my present Discourse, may come into the world seasonably, I will
not say, or take on me to determine; yet have I some reason to judge and
believe it may: for, if I consider, and compare the complexion of the times,
with the subject matter of this Book, I find them equally Prodigious; and
according to reason -- A Book of Prodigies is fit,
In times Prodigious to be writ.


The order of Nature now, (as in Tertullians time, Ap. Cap. 20.) is obstructed
by Monsters and Prodigies. And the several Prodigious Actions performed lately,
and now on foot in most parts of the world, speak the times disturbance, and
the unsetledness of the brains and humors of men. Every Post (almost) brings
news of some Protean Change.

But it is the trumpet of time that alone can proclaim its seasonableness, or
intempestivity: The breath of which, does either blast the credit, or blazon
the worth of all Books.

I have not troubled my self, or been at any large costs or expenses upon it,
for its journey into the world; but have trusted unto it, to bespeak its own
entertainment, according to its merit. The Fate of it (I foresee) will be, not
much unlike its Author's; that is, it will meet with censures of all sorts, as
he with men.

As Euripides said of a Lot, -- (...). So may I of this Book; That it is the
child of Chance: For it was produced without any large or curious study, or
long and serious contrivance: the method will plainly prove I did it in have. I
have run through the bulk of it, in almost as strange a manner, as some of our
(now-adays) Christians, their forms of Religion! or the furious Enthusiast his
visions and Revelations. And truly when I consider the constitution and
complexion of the work, to prevent the censures and back-reports of others, I
could be content to say, I have done nothing, unless danced with Saint Vitus.

Notwithstanding, had this Book been published by one who could have truly
subscribed himself a Person of Honor, or Dr. of Physic, Master of Arts, etc.
or by any one that had had some rattles to his name, it might possibly have
gained the worlds approbation for a painful collection, a learned and worthy
work; whereas now it is likely to merit no other applause (with the malicious
and ignorant) then the envious Epithets of a weak and indigested piece! for,
Atticus eximie, si caenat lautus habetur;
Si Rutilus, Demens. -- Juv. Sat. 11.
If Atticus keep open house, it is had
For Bounty in him; If Rutilus, he is mad.


But alas! we know full well, -- Non quicunque in aula vivit, Aulicus est; They
are not all Courtiers that live at the Court -- Aliud est piscari, aliud
piscatorum esse: Nor all fishermen that go a fishing. Nor are they all
Christians that go to Church! So likewise we know that they are not all learned
and ingenious, that have taken a degree in an University; an Ape sometimes may
be preferred before Aristotle. Kissing most commonly goes by favor; and honor
may be purchased as a Horse in Smithfield.

But I matter not how-ere the world esteem it, either for its own worth, or
Authors credit; it is like to come among them now. And if any Erastion (...), or
crooked Speaker, shall cavil at it, as their Patron of old did at the Physic
of Paracelsus, and the Divinity of Luther; it will utterly contemn and slight
their snarlings, and defy their taunts.

But if, on the other side, any better-minded shall object, that this Discourse
is of diverse sorts, as Joseph's Coat of Colors, Genesis cap. 37. v. 32. in that it
treats of several things; I shall then answer for it with the learned Arnoldus
de villa nova, who said, Nullum simplex medicamentum fine noxa: There is no
simple medicine without danger.

Yet let me tell the ingenious Readers, the discourse is only seemingly diverse;
for there is nothing touched on in the whole Book, but has some relation to,
or dependence on the subject of it, viz. Prodigies. I therefore presume that
the ingenious objector will forbear to censure. For it is a ruled case, --
Causa rationabilis, semper excusat transgressorem legis humanae. (i. e.) A
reasonable cause shown, always excuses a man, in cause he be found a
transgressor of some humane Law.

Besides, I know the world is filled with as many several fancies, as faces;
according to that Ancient and most true adage. -- Tot mundi superstitiones,
quot coelo stellae: There are as many vain conceits, superstitions and opinions
in the world, as there are Stars in Heaven. What if to please the different
fancies in the world, I have written diversely? Here, if some things displease,
others may make amends.

If thou art not delighted in the Philosophical part hereof, turn to the
Historical, etc. if that do not Palliate, try the Astrological. And if that hap
to disaffect thee, possibly the Meteorological part thereof may please thee:
read that, and thou will there find the true Physical causes of all Meteors and
Prodigies; And -- Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Thrice happy he
[above the chiefest Kings!]
That does but truly know the cause of things.


All that I have to say (now Reader) before I dismiss thee, is, that there is a
counterfeit Copy of this Nature published, by a covetous and mercenary wretch,
and preferred under my Name: it flees about, like an infection in a
Plague-time, under the silly title Miraculum signum Coeleste^; Or a discourse
of Prodigies since Christ; part whereof I confess, I was at the pains of
composing, but never perfected it, as may be seen by the method I laid down at
the beginning. This I thought good to advertise thee of, and the world also, to
prevent thy being cheated by the counterfeit; and to unmask the knavery of the
Bookseller, who has done it; and to acquaint thee, that both the Bookseller,
and the imperfect copy, (as surreptitiously published) are detested, and
dis-owned; and none but this acknowledged, by --

From my House near Strand-Bridge. Jo. Gadbury.

ERRATA.
In page 87. col. 2. l. 29. read 1659. p. 91. l. 21. r. divides. p. 125. l.
22. r. Marcley-Hill. p. 158. l. 9. r. Spectrums. p. 164. l. ult. for
Parcimeter, r. Perimeter. p. 181. l. 22. r. (...). p. 191. l. 31. r. only
simple. p. 190. l. 26. r. pretended.

Books printed and sold by Francis Cossinet, at the Anchor and Mariner in
Tower-street.
ADvice to a Daughter, in opposition to the Advice to a Son, by Eugenius
Theodidactus. Grace and Mercy to a sinner in time of affliction, or the
serious Meditations of Mr Thomas Ford. Geometrical Dyalling, or Dyalling
performed by the plain-scale, or line of chords: by John Collins. The Mariners
plain scale new plained, wherein Navigation, Triangles, projection of the
Sphere, is excellently and easily performed by the plain scale or line or
chords: by John Collins. Principles of Arithmetic: by William Webster. The
young Sea-man's Guide: by Tim. Gadbury. The Nativity of the King of Denmark, by
J. Gadbury; in which the Peace of the two Northern Crowns was Predicted. Child's
Book and Youths Book, teaching children the most easy and delightful way to
read true English, by S.T. (...), or the Doctrine of Nativities, comprehending
the whole Art of Directions, Revolutions and Transits; whereby any man (even of
an ordinary capacity) may be enabled to discover the most Remarkable and
Occult accidents of life; be they either good or evil. With Astronomical Tables
for calculating the Planets Places, for any time past, present, or to come,
more facile and complete then any extant. To be sold by Giles Calvert and
Daniel White, at their Shops, at the seven Stars, and Black-Spread-Eagle in St.
Paul's Churchyard. The Idaea of the Law, Government and Tyranny: by J Heydon
Esquire; to be sold by Tho. Basset in St. Dunstans Churchyard. The Rosie-Crucian
infallible Axiomata: a learned and excellent work, written by the same Author;
and will shortly be made public.
A Discourse Touching the NATURE and EFFECTS OF PRODIGIES.
DIfficile est judicium de quo caeremus exemplis multarum rerum in nostris
temporibus (says one:) It is a very hard and difficult matter for any man to
judge (or treat) of those things (or subjects) of which in our times we have
few or no presidents, or examples.

Notwithstanding the numerous and various Treatises that are daily penned and
printed, as well in Latin as English; yet are there hardly any that treat
particularly of Prodigies. Which subject of it self, is both lofty and
considerable; for as much as it treats of the causes of Natures wonders! and
might therefore have become the pains of the sharpest and most extensive
Mercurial fancy. All other subjects have been conveniently handled; and with
much zeal and affection (in this age of liberty) promoted, and exalted: and
this alone has layen dormant in the ashes of oblivion, as if there had been no
such thing as a Prodigy in rerum Natura. Now for to quicken or stir up some
more able Pen, and better composed judgment, do I make this (but mean) Essay,
toward the discovery of some of the many golden Truths that lie imprisoned in
this kind of Learning. And that I may not anticipate my Readers hopes with too
large a Preface, I will give him to understand what I purpose to pursue in this
Discourse, by these following particulars. --

1. Some disquisitions touching Prodigies. 2. A Catalogue of the most
remarkable Prodigies since the birth of Christ; with the Effects that
concomitated them. 3. Something touching Comets, Eclipses, and Earthquakes. 4.
Of Meteors in general, etc. how caused?
And the method thus proposed, I shall here prosecute; but more briefly, then I
once intended, because I would prevent the spreading of a surreptitious Copy of
this kind, that I hear has lately by the means of a mercenary Bookseller
invaded the world; and the conscienceless promulger thereof, is nor ashamed to
report it a true one, and owned by me. But this obiter: I shall come close to
the particulars propounded.

SECT. I. Some Disquisitions touching Prodigies.
IT is the Opinion of the Learned in Astrology, and Meteorologie, that
Prodigies are usually the antecedents of Mundane Catastrophes; and all
(otherwise learned) both Ancient and Modern Writers, have sufficiently sealed
the truth hereof; as it will appear by the second part of this tract at large,
and shall in part be showed before I come to the end of this first Section. But
before I come to instance in particulars (the subject of the after-parts of
this Discourse,) give me leave (in prosecution of this Section) to resolve
three Questions, which seem to stand up, and call for responses, viz. --

1. What a Prodigy is? and of its kinds. 2. Whether it have a Natural Cause?
3. Whether it be an Antecedent of worldly changes?
Quest. 1. What a Prodigy is? etc.

Resp. I shall not trouble my self about the etymology, or various
significations of the word, but leave that to the curious and nice Critic, or
exact Grammarian: But what the true meaning of it here must be, is thus, -- A
Prodigy is a thing (generally) that comes to pass beyond the Altitude of a
man's imagination, and begets in him a miraculous contemplation, yea, oftentimes
horror and amazement; and this by its coming to pass without his expectation or
thought. And hence the Latins term it prodigium, (i. e.) contra naturam, a
thing monstrous, mavelous, wonderful, and against the common current, or
course of Nature; a sight unusual.

Of Prodigies there are two sorts, viz. celestial and Terrestrial: I shall
begin with those of the later denomination first.

Terrestrial or earthly Prodigies are many; As, for a man to be born with six
fingers and toes on each hand and foot, Goliah-like: Or, twins to be brought
forth joined together, as in the year 1475. near Verona one was (or rather two
were) born with four hands, two heads, four legs, two privities, and joined
just from the Buttock upwards; or that in Flanders in the year 1567. at a
Village called Ubalen, where a child was born with two heads, and four arms,
and members in all parts for two bodies, save the legs, of which there were but
two only. Or for a child to be born hairie, having its Navel where its nose
should stand, and its eyes in the place of the mouth, the mouth in the place of
the chin, etc. as in the year 1569. at Arls in France there was. Or for one to
be born with a mouth like a Stork, and tail like an Ox, claws like a Hawk, and
belly like a Swan, and body hairie, etc. as at Arnehim a Town in Gelderland, on
November. 12. 1575. as is mentioned by Dr. Bateman in his doom to judgment, page
401. Or for one to be born with three arms, three legs, and three faces, and
yet but one head; as at Alsac in Italy, in the year 1578. the picture of which
may be seen in Cornelius Gemma his Cosmocriticis, lib. 1. Or for one to be born
with a head bigger then all the rest of his body; as in the year 1581. at
Chichester in England in the County of Sussex. Or for a birth to be two perfect
bodies from the Navel upward, and to have hands and feet, and all members else
proportionable for two, only joined at the Navel, and have their legs issue out
thence; as in the year 1552. at Middleton in Oxfordshire it happened, as is
recorded by Stow in his Abridgement. Or for children to be born any otherwise
monstrous or misshapen, as Hippocrates, Galen, Mizaldus, Peucer, etc. testify
of many such births; unto whose works I refer the curious Reader.

Then for children to speak in their Mothers womb, or laugh or cry there; as in
Marucina a child in his Mothers belly was heard to cry; and in Kent in England
a Boy was heard to laugh before he was born, as says Dr. Bateman in his doom,
fol. 70. Or for a child of six months old to speak, as in the year of the world
3725. one was heard at Rome at that age to proclaim a Triumph. And in the year
of the world 3417. when Cyrus overcame in battle Croesus King of the Lydians, a
child of six Months old is said to have distinctly foretold in a prodigious and
wonderful manner, That his Kingdom should be lost. For Dogs, Serpents, Oxen,
Cows, etc. to speak distinctly, as to Tarquinius once a Dog spoke very
articulately, and a Serpent also. Whence the ingenious Cap. Wharton thus
versified in's Hemer. 1652.

When Romes perverse, and giddy multitude
Dissolved (in Tarquin) their great Monarchy;
To doom the act unnatural and rude,
('It Is said) a Serpent barked. --
Livius tells us, that an Ox also was heard to utter this caveat unto Rome in
the year of the world 3774. Roma tibi cave: and the same Author says, that
about the same time a Cow was heard to utter words distinctly. For Wolves to
flock boldly into Towns and Cities, and howl there; as at Prema, in the year
171. they came yelling and howling in great flocks, and there with horrible
snarlings, strove with a company of screech-Owls.

For the Earth to quake and tremble, as in the year 806 Ante Christum it did in
India, and then clave the Mountain Erogo in sunder; and in Greece in many
places, in the 409 year before Christ. And in Asia, in the year of the world
3766. which shook Rhodes, and many other Cities therein, as Thucydides, lib. 5.
mentions; and Livie says that it quite swallowed some Cities up. For Fishes to
forsake their element, as a little before the Hollanders revolted from the
Spaniard, and refused to yield obedience any longer unto them, a Whale three
times came ashore at Amsterdam. For Birds to flock in great companies contrary
to their wonted Customs, and besiege places (as it were) as at Capua in the
year 1457. as is testified by Mr. Purchase in his Pilgr. For water to surpass
its ordinary bounds, as at Thrace in the year of Christ 545. which destroyed
many people. And in the year 1086. an inundation happened in Italy, and destroyed
many brave places. The Ocean in the year 1135. over-flowed the main Land, and
suddenly destroyed a great part of Holland, Friesland, and Flanders, with a
great number of men and beasts.

For the Earth to be watered with blood and milk, in the room or stead of rain:
with blood, as upon Mount Avetine at Rome, of which Livie speaks, l^b. 3. And
at Coere it rained blood two days together, in the year of the world 3838. And
(to pass all other prooss of the Ancients here) it rained blood at Pool in
Dorsetshire in England some few years since, viz. in 1653. It rained milk at
Gabia, as is reported by Livie. And in Anno mundi 3854. it rained milk in Rome
three days together. And in the year of the world 3847. When Cato was Consul,
it rained milk at Rome, as the same Livie reports.

It is also prodigious, for wool and oil to be poured from the Sky on the
earth; as at Veios, a City of Hetruria, in Anno Mundi 3842. it rained oil
extremely: And in the year of Christ 364. wool was rained out of the Clouds.
Then, for the Sea to appear in color like blood, as in the year of Christ 53.
it did, and seemed to all Spect^tors as if it had been real blood, diverse days
together. For noisome flies to increase, etc. as in the year of Christ 1092.
great swarms appeared in a strange manner in many Countries. For Toads and
Frogs to gender and increase after an unaccustomed manner, as in the time of
Hen. 2. of England they did in Wales, where they devoured a young man. For
Locusts and Caterpillars to cover the earth; as in the days of Pharaoh: and in
Italy, in the year of Christ 593. where they came in such vast numbers and
companies, and destroyed so much of the fruits of the earth, of all sorts, as
shortly after ensued a very great famine there.

For Bees (those Monarchical, and rarely well-governed creatures) to go a
progress: as those that came to Cassinum, and settled in the Courthouse at the
very time while causes were there a pleading. Or like those that swarmed in the
Temple of Salus: Or those in Germany, in the Tents of Drusus, that settled upon
the Pavilion of Hostilius Rutilius, Marshal of the field, in the year of the
world 3954. or those that came swarming through Covent Garden and the Strand
London, in the years of Christ 1653. and 1654. where one company fixed
themselves to the end of a Cart; and the other to the knee of a man's breeches,
as he passed along the streets.

For wheat to be rained on the earth, like as hail is, as it was in Carinthia;
which Dubartus attests, fol. 16.

-- Those dristing showers of wheat
Which in Carinthia twice were seen to shed,
Whereof that people made them store of bread.
For the earth to travel and remove out of its place, as it did in the
Territories of Modona, where two Hills being at an indifferent distance, were
seen fiercely to assault each the other, and retreated so far, that there was
seen a flame and smoke to go up between them. As says Ravisius, cap. 31.

We have a more remarkable story nearer home, viz. in the year of our Lord
1571. at Kinnaston in Herefordshire (as the Learned Mr. Camden reports in his
Britain, fol. 620.) a Hill they call Marcley-Hill, as though it had awakened it
self of a sudden out of deep sleep, rouzed it self up, and for the space of
three days together moving, and showing it self (as mighty and huge an heap as
it was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all things that
stood in the way, advanced it self forward, to the wondrous astonishment of the
beholders.

Mr. Speed in his description of Herefordshire delivers the Story more fully,
and tells us. -- That it began to journey the seventh of February, being
Saturday, at six a clook at night, etc. and carried with it sheep in their
Coats, Hedg-rows and Trees, whereof some were overturned, and some that stood
upon the plain are firmly growing upon the Hill: Those that were East, were
turned West; and those in the West, were in the East: in which remove it
overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and turned two highways near one hundred yards
from their usual paths formerly trod. The ground thus traveling near about
twenty six acres; which opening it self, with Rocks and all, bare the earth
before it four hundred yards space, without any stay, leaving that which was
pasturage in the place of Tillage, and the Tillage overspread with pasturage;
and at last overwhelming her lower part, mounted to an Hill of twelve Fathoms
high, and there rested her self after three days travel.

And (although I might relate many more, and those every whit as strange as
these mentioned, yet) this shall suffice in this place for the kinds of earthy
or Terrestrial Prodigies.

I come in the next place to speak of the kinds of Celestial Prodigies; and
they are many also. As those many very various and admirable Apparitions, which
in a wonderful manner have been observed in the Heavens, viz -- Armies of men
seen fighting in the Heavens, Charging and retreating as dexterously, as if
they were at a real pitched field or battle here on the earth. Such a prodigy
was that which appeared in the year of the world 3795. when Antiochus made
provision to go the second time into Egypt; where, in Jerusalem for forty days
together, were seen in the Air Horsemen running to and fro, having Guns of
gold, and Spears, as if they had been armed Bands; their Horses ran in order,
they met hand to hand; their Bucklers moved, and there were a number of men
with Helmets, and drawn Swords; there was casting of Darts, and Gorgets, guilt
Armor and Coats of Mail, etc.

In the time of the Emperor Charles the Great, and 803. year of Christ, before
Nicephorus set upon the Empire of the West, there appeared Armies of wonderful
greatness in the Air* as says Dr. B. in his Doom, etc. The same Author tells
us, that in the year 930. post Christum, the sixteenth of the Kalends of March,
in the morning, about Cock-crowing until the day break, there was seen in a
Country in France, all over the face of the Element, bloody Armies. And Anno
Christi 1116 in the beginning of the night, fiery Armies were seen in the
Element from the North unto the East, and afterward dispersed over all the
Heavens, to the exceeding amazement of the beholders.

Then for Castles, Cities and Towns, to be represented in the Air as if they
were really fixed there. And for whole Countries to be, and appear in the
Heavens, carrying along in them Hills, Woods, Valleys, Rivers, Beasts, Fowls,
Men, Women and Children, and all as variously and differently disposed, as they
are really and certainly known to be on earth. Thus Dr. Fulke in his discourse
of Meteors. For Monstrous and hideous shapes to appear in the Heavens, such as
the earth affords no similitude: Such as Livius says appeared at Rome, Anno
Mundi 3696. he reports them (for want of fit and convenient resemblances of
them among men) to be both ill-favored, and cruel.

Then, for Burials, Processions, Judgments, Combats, Weapons of all sorts,
Crowns and Scepters, Arms of certain Countries and Noblemen; For the Images
and shaddows of men to appear like penitential patients, after an humble and
repentant manner, asking forgiveness of whom they have offended. Of which sort
or kind of Apparitions and Prodigies have I both read and heard most strange
(yea, almost incredible) Stories: but I conceive it fitter to transfer them to
the second part of this book, they being more capable of claiming a place in
the Chronology, then to be mentioned here.

Then for Sybil-like Characteristical Oracles to be seen and read in the
Heavens; as that of Julian the apostate in Persia, the same day he dyed, a knot
or company of Stars were observed to make up these words, -- Hodie Julianus in
Persia occiditur (i. e.) This day shall Julian be slain in Persia. And
according to the report of Zonarus, he was so. I have heard some Astrologers
contend, that some skilful person might have the Nativity of Julian, and
(knowing the time he was to fight his enemies) observing the direction he was
then under, together with the Revolution and Transits concurring, he might
thence according to the influence (only) of the Stars therein, predict his
being slain; by his so fighting at an unfortunate time. The thing I know is
probable, and may be done by Astrology; but until I can see his Nativity, to
inform me thoroughly in what I conclude probable, I am content to let it pass (as
my Author has done) for a Celesti^l Prodigy.

But above all, that may be looked upon as a Prodigy in the highest degree,
which my worthy friend Cap. Wharton, in his Ephemeris for the year 1655. has
transcribed from one Tackius a Germane Doctor of Physic, which he (Tackius)
makes mention, out of one Casper, to have appeared in the year of our Lord
1554. not far from the City of Harmsted in Transylvania, which was observed in
the Heavens to be read, being in fair and Legible Characters, thus --

I. N. R. I. M. D. L. V. I. I. A. R. E. I. N. E. N. D. E. D. I. S. E. S. R. E.
I. C. H. S.

Nay, the same Author further averreth, that at Friburg the same year, on a
very fair day, -- Dom. nostrum Jesum Christum Iridi insidentem conspectum
fuisse: Our Lord Jesus Christ was beheld sitting upon a Rainebow, as if upon
his Tribunal, to denounce the universal judgment. For Castles, Cities and
Towns, to be besieged in the Air; and the many and diverse actions and gestures
of men, both Commanders and Soldiers pertaining thereunto; as it happened not
many years since in Poland and Muscovia; perhaps as the Messenger of that sad
misery the Polander has lately been sensible of. The like prodigious
apparition happened in the North of England in the year 1655. Nor has it wanted
corresponding effects.

Then for the Similitudes or likeness of persons known to the Spectators, to
appear in the Heavens; as that of the Emperor Charles, unto whom the Spectators
did obeisance (supposing it to have been him in reality) by putting off their
Caps unto him. Or that of John Frederick Prince Elector of Saxonic, who at the
same time was Prisoner to the Emperor.

And I very well remember, that in the year 1649. the very year in which Charles
late King of England was beheaded, it was generally (I will not, I cannot say
truly) reported, that he, without his head, was seen to hover in the Air over
White Hall (the place where he was beheaded) many nights together. Nay, I have
heard some affirm, That he was seen (sometimes) with his George upon his
breast, in the manner and form as he wore it, when he came on the Scaffold. And
that (sometimes again) he was seen to appear in his watchet-Wastcote only.
Neither of these sights did I ever see, nor can enjoin any ones faith to
believe: However, if the report were true (and I know not what advantage any
man can reap by reporting such things as these, if they were not,) it may very
well be aspected as a thing prodigious, and remarkable.

Again, for Circles, and Crowns, and Images, etc. to appear in the Heavens, of
different and various colors. And for Crosses also; as in the year of Christ
1568. in England, on the 25 day of January, at what time (as Mr. Stow
records) there appeared a great shining Cross in the Heavens, with a Star on
the top, and a Moon at the lower end thereof.

Then for chasms, chaps or gapings in the clouds; such as so often appeared in
the years of Christ 1644. and 1645. in England, the South and West parts
thereof. And in Scotland, about 1649. and 1650. after which (and very suddenly
after) that Nation underwent an unheard of Catastrophe or Change.

For darkness to appear in the daytime, without an Eclipse of the Sun, is a
celestial Prodigy, and a thing against nature; as that in the time of
Commodus, 187 years post Christum, when it was observed to be so dark, that the
Stars were seen all day long. And in the year 264. post Christum, there was
continual darkness at Rome diverse days together. Or that at the passion of our
blessed Redeemer, which Dionysius Areopagita being at Athens saw, and cried out
(as you may read in his Epistle to Polycarpus) Aut mundi Autorem pati, vel
machinam ejus dissolutum iri. (i. e.) That either the God of Nature then
suffered, or else the fabric of the whole world should be dissolved.

Then Comets and blazing Stars, etc. Peucer in his Meteorologie makes mention
of one that appeared in the year of Christ 607. and blazed for the space of
thirty and two days together. And the same Author tells us of another that
happened in the year 1043. which blazed for many weeks together. Alstedius in
Chronologia Com. 104. relates, that in the year 1363. there appeared a Comet of
immense Magnitude, and continued three Months together. Such also were they
that appeared in the Chair of Cassiopoeia, and in the year 1618. in Scorpio,
Libra, Virgo: and of late, that in the year 1652. which happened in and.

Then there are (...), parelia, or mock-Suns (i. e.) Solis imagines (as Peucer
calls them) images or shadows of the Sun. And (...), paraselenae, or
mock-Moons, (i. e. Lunae Imagines. Besides diverse sorts of Meteors (which in
their kinds are Prodigies also) caused of fumes hot and dry; as burning
Torches, such as were seen in the Air to burn, in the years 3871. and 3873. at
what time they blazed so strangely in the Heavens, that they made them to seem
all on fire, in the sight of the beholders. Or, that which appeared at Rome,
Anno Christi 999. January 19. which burned wonderfully in the Heavens, insomuch
(says mine Author) that not only they which were in the fields, but also
those which were within doors, were stricken with that so great a shining, as
with lightning breaking in upon them. Dr. Bateman is my Author for this
relation, Doom, fol. 207. Then burning Beams, such as were observed to fall
from Heaven in a most dreadful and hideous manner at Rome, in the sixteenth
year of Christ.

Then there are (according to Meteorologists, Fromundus, Meurer and others)
Pillars, both round and Pyramidal; Spears or Darts, Lances or Swords, leaping
Goats, wandering and licking lights, Ignes fatui, or foolish fires, shooting
Stars, flying Dragons: Besides many other sorts of Prodigies and Meteors, whose
causes, etc. I am content to pretermit here, that I may meet them the more
conveniently in the fourth part: This therefore shall suffice for answer to the
first Question, viz. -- What a Prodigy is? and also for the particulars that
append unto it; and so I arrive at the second. --

Quest. 2. Whether a Prodigy have a Natural cause?

Resp. That a Prodigy has a Natural cause, is resolved in the affirmative by
most Meteoroligists, and the greatest Students in Nature. And the Learned
Plutarch in the fifth Book of his Symposiaques) Ph^losophically concludes, --
That it is our ignorance only of things, that makes them seem to us both
prodigious and miraculous; whereas (says he) were the true cause known or
hunted out, the wonder would quickly abate, or seem less: And that which before
was deemed monstrous and miraculous, would become very common, if not
contemptible.

Dubartas, (as Translated by J. Sylvester) agrees it thus, in fol. 15.

He not deny, but that a learned man
May yield some reason (if he list to scan)
Of all that moves under Heavens hollow cope.
And the great Master of Reason himself concludes -- That such things which be
strange, may be derived both from Natural causes, and also include God the
chief and best cause of all things; by whose admirable providence each thing is
ordered; and by whose unspeakable wisdom each particular is decreed. Yea, even
in the course of Nature he both foresaw and appointed how things should happen;
although in respect of our weakness and want of skill, the searching of them
out be too abstruse and hard.

Lucretius puts so much weight in the scale to prove that Prodigies have a
cause in Nature, that he seems to neglect the first cause, and endeavors
with the strength of Reason and pregnancie of Rhetoric to persuade men to
believe so, or else to bring them within the verge of his check. --

Caetera, quae fieri in terris, coeloque tuentur
Mortales, pavidis quam pendent mentibus saepe,
Efficient animos humileis formidine divum,
1.6. Depressosque premunt ad terram; propterea quod
Ignorantia causarum confer deorum
Cogit ad imperium res, and concedere regnum, and
Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt; haec fieri divino Numine rentur, etc.
Thus Englished by one.

Those Bugbear Meteors which the Timorous eyes
Of pavid Mortals wonder at in the skies;
And those unfrequent Prodigies that appear
On earth [while their weak souls are fooled by fear
Are the sole charms that do Emasculate
And cheat men's minds to a belief of Fate,
And some vindictive Numen: for, because
Men understand not Natures Cryptick laws,
Nor ber occult Efficiency; they fly,
(To salve their ignorance) to divinity:
And idly rest in this; whatere befall,
'Twas caused by providence, that disposes all.
Here although Lucretius be in some part excellently Philosophical, and seems
therein to agree with the learned Plutarch before cited; yet is he somewhat
defective in this, that he goes about to exalt the positive power of Nature,
or second causes, above the superlative power of the Deity: unto which, if
Nature be not concatenated, (and this in all its operations) it most certainly
becomes empty of all power to act. Yet I will say again so far in favor of
this eminent Author, that it is below the courage and true spirit of a
Philosopher, or one acquainted with the secret wonders of Nature, to startle at
every uncouth (I might have said, not common) (...), or Apparition in the
Heavens. An evil (I must needs confess) unto which the vulgar Pate and heart
does unnecessary obeisance too too often.

It is reported of Charles the Great, that beholding that new Star which
presaged and preceded his death, he was very inquisitous and desirous to know
what it portended: one (who writ his History, Enigardus by name) returns the
words of the Prophet Jeremiah for answer, Et a signis coelorum ne
consternemini, quia consternantur Gentes ab illis, Cap. 10. v. 2. (i. e.) Fear
not the signs of Heaven, though the Heathen be afraid of such. Unto which the
prudent Emperor replies, Ne quidem metuere ejusmodi signa, sed signorum
op^sicem causam. (i. e.) That he did not indeed fear any signs of that Nature,
but the Maker or cause of those signs. A lesson most worthy to be learned of
every man, as well Philosopher as Christian.

And it is most certainly true, that second causes very seldom suffer any
detriment or suspension either in their motions or actings by God, which is the
first and chief cause; he never denying, or suspending, or withdrawing that
Concurrence or Conjunction of himself with them (without the which they
presently cease to act,) but only upon especial design, to be a remembrancer
to the world, that Nature and the chain of second causes are not Autocratorical
(i. e.) they do not perform what ordinarily they do perform, independently and
of themselves; but that he is the Sovereign Lord of them, and has all their
operations in his hand. Vide Mr. Good. (...), fol. 7.

Dubartas illustrates it farther, fol. 16. -- God, the great God of Heaven
sometimes delights
From top to toe to alter Natures rites;
That his strange works to Nature contrary,
May be forerunners of some misery.
The learned Dr. Fulke in his Book of Meteors, resolves that Prodigies and
Apparitions are the declarative signs and tokens of Gods Power, and may be
termed (and looked upon, as) Miraculous, but not so as they should want a
Natural cause. Nay, the greatest Sons of Learning always accounted Nature
nothing but the Art of God.

Thales Milesius (one of the seven wise Greeks) examining the sweet Harmony,
and Musical Symmetry and proportion of the Universe, and observing how orderly
and decently it is governed and conserved, most wisely sets up his rest in this
golden resolve, that (...). It is the Artifice or workmanship of God.

The excellently Learned Philosopher and Astronomer, Hieronim. Cardanus, in his
first Segment, calls the Heavens, or Nature, the Instrument of God, by which he
works, enforces, and effects every thing. From all which we may clearly
conclude, that God does nothing contrary to the order of second causes, or the
power of Nature; but does rather act Nature in an extraordinary way, to show
that he has by his overruling power a sovereignty sufficient to do what he
pleases, and is not tied to one way or manner of working.

When God sent a Star (as the happy (...) of man's redemption from slavery)
before the coming of Christ, it was a Star not miraculous, but natural. For,
had it been a Star miraculous, how then should the Astrologers or wisemen have
seen, or come to the knowledge of it, by the Science of the Stars? True it is,
that this Star was acted in an extraordinary way, and its motion might be
miraculous, it being moved for to declare the greatest of miracles. Yet this
proves not, but that the Star might be an ordinary Star, though made use of in
an extraordinary way.

I very well know, that may great Clerks there are, who contend it was a Star
created on purpose for that so wonderful and miraculous work, viz. The
declaring of a Savior to the world. And one in a Rhetorical verse has
asserted as much. --

Nova coelum stell^ depingitur,
Dum Sol novus in terris oritur.
Houd. l. 1. Chris quar. 38. As the earth with a New Sun is blessed,
So The Heavens with a New Star is dressed.
But it is only taken before granted, by this Author, that the Heavens were
beautified with a New Star, etc. For if it had been a New Star, the Astrologers
(as Mr. Ady, in his candle in the dark says) must be supposed to have had a
peculiar Revelation concerning its signification and portent; whereas it is
plain that they only observed the vercitity of the Star; and (as I have some
reason to believe, because it is inculcated by that wonder of learing for his
time Mr. Gregory of C. C. Oxon. and others not afew, that) in their travel
consulted with the reason of some ancient prophecies, by the assistance of
which, they came the more readily to the place where the young Child was viz.
-- Bethelehem of Judea. Whence I presume it will, upon very good grounds
follow, that the Astrologers or wise men, had no peculiar Revelation of its
portents or signification; and by consequence clear enough, that it was no New
Star.

Again, had it been a New Star, and created on set purpose to declare and
signify to the world the coming of a Savior, it might be more then probably
supposed, that the God of Stars and wonders would have unfolded its
signification unto some Babe in knowledge [for such things are often hid from
the wise and prudent, and revealed unto Babes] rather, then to the Astrologers
and wise men of the times, whose practice and study it was, to be acquainted
with the Natures and influences of the Stars. But God (you know, as holy Writ
teaches) directed the wise men only by the Star; as appears by Mat. 2.1. --
(...), (i. e.) behold, there came wise men, (...), (not others) from the East
to Jerusalem. And in verse 2. (...). We have seen his Star in the East.

Thus you see the wise men had the honor of being directed by the Star alone.
And hence it was that Gregory the Great observed an admirable convenience in
Gods directing of them by it, above others. Because that persons of meaner
knowledge and parts are tied both by the Laws of Reason, Nature and Nations, to
give credence to those that do excel; and by this means Christ's coming would be
noted the more, and believed the sooner; whereas if any of meaner parts should
have reported the same, it is more then probable, it would have been the more
slighted, and the lesser believed. The learned Gregory's words are these. --
Deus accommodate ad eorum scientiam docuit, ut qui in stellarum observatione
versabantur ex stellis Christum discerent. Very fitly, and conveniently did God
enable the knowledge of those wise men, that they (alone) should learn Christ
from the Stars, who were versed in the observation of them.

This may be aspected as a digression. However, it results, that when God makes
use of Prodigies, he does not neglect the virtue he first impressed on Nature,
but rather augmenteth, and further adorneth it (by his acting it thus
prodigiously and extraordinarily) with far greater honor and excellency; as
the Suns appearing, does not extinguish or put out the lesser light of the Moon
and Stars, but swallows them up by a more eminent and illustrious splendour.
Prodigies and Apparitions, have therefore a Natural cause; and God does, and
may, make them the forerunners of his principal and especial intents and
purposes; and yet act them in a course of Nature, although above, or beyond the
ordinary and common course thereof.

For if Prodigies should proceed immediately from God, and have no ground or
footing in Nature; it would roundly follow, that God should cease to work by
instruments, and consequently neglect the chain of Nature, or second causes:
but it is plain, God does not neglect the use of Nature (neither does he
withdraw that certain and secret power wherewith he first endowed Nature) for
the accomplishing and bringing to pass of his highest designs; no more then a
Prince or Emperor neglects his Laws and Statutes unrepealed, when he has an
occasion to make use of them. Howbeit, this does no way exclude God from being
the chief cause of Prodigies (as I have formerly urged) no more then a Prince
who delegates a Person of Honor under him, (and vests him with power
convenient) to reduce some Island, Plantation, or Country unto his obedience,
can be excluded from being the first and original cause of such an undertaking.

Thus per modum eminentiae: By way of eminency, God is the chief cause of
every thing; and this as he is primum ens, The first being of them: And as Sol
and homo generat hominem; The Sun and man begat man: So, Deus and Natura
generant Prodigia; God and Nature contribute to the begetting and producing
Prodigies.

As the Sun with his vivifying Beams, does cause the Earth to fructify and
bring forth, and so by consequence is the essential cause of all vegetables,
etc. So Deus est causa essentialis, etc. God is the essential cause of
Apparitions and Prodigies: Sed natura est causa Materialis; But Nature is the
material cause of them: For, from her pregnant womb they all spring, and in her
womb they are all generated. Yea, she is causa formalis also; it is she alone
that like a prudent Artificer, or Builder, fashioneth and forms them: So that
the formal cause of Prodigies is Natures fee-simple, and she cannot be robbed
thereof.

For as the Schoolmen teach, Deus ipse non potest supplere vicem causae
formalis, (i.e.) God himself (say they) cannot supply the place, or stead of a
formal cause: Yet (as I before showed) he is by way of eminency the cause of
every thing. As in natural or humane generation, the Father is more worthy then
the Son, and the Root more excellent then the Branch: So here in the production
of Prodigies, God being both the Father, and the Root, must be highly supposed
to be a cause infinitely and eminently beyond the Nature of them.

And therefore it is that the schoolmen teach again, Quod est causa causae,
est etiam causa causati. (i. e.) That which is the cause of the cause, is the
cause also of what is caused by the cause. So then, God being the Original and
Father of Nature her self, it will follow (sine dubio) that he is also, in an
eminent and transcendent manner, the Father and Original cause of all and every
of Natures Products. For if God (as Divines speak) be (causa causarum,) the
cause of all causes; we must of necessity (not only suppose, but) grant, that
he is the cause of all the effects caused by those causes.

This being then, both in a Philosophical and Divine sense true, and so granted
and taken; yet Natura est causa instrumentalis: If we will give Nature her
proper birthright and due, we must then acknowledge her to be the only
instrumental cause, and the bringer of Prodigies forth. It therefore freely
follows, and that by sufficient proof, That Prodigies have a Natural cause. And
so I descend unto my third Question.

Quest. 3. Whether Prodigies are the Antecedents of worldly changes?

Resp. For answer unto this Question, I shall begin with the authority of the
Learned Molineus, fol. 160. -- Non est negandum, and coelestia vel aeria
ostenta saepe fuisse praenuntia calamitatum. We may not deny (says he) that
the Heavenly or aerial Prodigies, are oftentimes the Messengers or Ambassadors
of misery and calamity unto mankind. In the year of our Lord (says
Lycosthenes, and from him Dr. Bateman) 1500. there appeared a Comet of a
dreadful greatness, for eighteen days together, in the North, under the
tropical sign Capricorn, and (says he) the same year the Tartarians spoiled
Russia and Polonia. Dubartas, (as paraphrased by J. S. in his second days work,
fol. 16.) goes farther, and says --

The Drops of fire which weeping Heaven did shower
Upon Lucania, when Rome sent the flowr
Of Italy into the wealthy clime,
Which Euphrates fats with his fruitful slime;
Presaged that Parthians should the next year tame
The Proud Lucanians, and nigh quench their name.
The clash of Arms, and clang of Trumpets heard
High in the Air, when valiant Romans-war'd
Victo^iously, on the now- cantoned Suisses,
Almans, and Cymbrians. --
One speaking of Prodigies, adorns this truth further, thus. -- Solet enim
benignissimum Numen ubi mensura flagitiorum nostrorum ad plenitudinem venit,
and vindictam hic potius temporariam quam aeternam parat naturalium istorum
effectuum occasion uti, and terrore illo ad poenitentiam and sui respectum
convertere. It is thus in English -- The wise Creator of heaven and earth, is
wont, when the measure of our wickedness comes to an height, rather to inflict
upon us temporal then eternal punishments; and to use for our amendments the
occasions of these Natural effects, thereby to convert us with the terror of
those sights, to a repentance and dutiful respect of him. And the same Author
speaking of Prodigies in another place, says, -- In mundo multos significant
effectus mirabiles. (i. e.) In the world Apparitions and Prodigies do signify
and declare many wonderful and remarkable effects.

Nec est quisquam nisi cuius animus ab religione plane obrutuit, qui ad fulmina
and fragorem tonitruum, aut cruenti cometae aspectum non tangatur metu. Cometam
qui dicitur Xiphias portendere bella, experientis comprobatum est, Pogoniam
presignificare mortem regum. Quam ominosa fuerit stella crinita 1607. testantur
tot calamitates urbium, Ecclesiarum projecta cadavera: Says Molineus --
Neither is there any, unless such a one who has no Religion, who is not
affrighted at lightning, and the clashing noise of Thunder, and the sight of an
horrible Comet. A Comet like a Sword, as we have sufficiently proved by
experience, portends wars. And a Comet with a Beard, does signify the death of
Kings: how ominous that stella Crinita, or Blazing Star, which appeared in 1607
was, so many calamities of Cities, and desolation of Churches, sadly testifies.

The Holy Scripture seals this truth, and adds abundant weight thereunto, as
most fully appears from that sign in the Heavens, which appeared to the
children of Israel in Egypt, Exodus Chap. 13. And that also in Joshua's time, of
the Suns standing still, Josh. Chap. 10. But especially in those two memorable
ones ^t the birth and death of our Savior, Mat. Chap. 2. etc. Nay, if we
consult History, we shall find, That there has never been any notable
Apparition or Prodigy seen in the Heavens, but it has been attended in the
seq^el with some more then ordinary (...), or change here on earth.

And it is a right-handed and sublime truth, that God makes use of the Heavens
and Elements for the discovery of his mind and intent unto the world, as well,
as of the tongues of his (...), or messengers, viz. his Prophets and Apostles:
yea, he speaks unto mankind by them, as the Kingly Psalmist hymneth, Psalm.
19.2. Dies ad Diem eructat Sermonem, and nox ad noctem ostendit Scientiam. Our
Translation renders it, Day unto day utters speech, night unto night,
knowledge. The intercourse of day and night, speaks or declares the mind of God
unto mankind generally: But when the days or nights are chequered with
Prodigies, or sights unusual, then do they discover the mind and intent of the
most high unto mankind more particularly.

Loquitur cum hominibus Deus, non modo lingua humana, per Prophetas, Apostolos,
and Pastores; sed non-nunquam etiam ipsis Elementis in formas and imagines
diversas compositis (says one) -- God speaks with men, not only with the
tongues of men, by Prophets, Apostles and Teachers; but sometimes also by the
Elements, composed or wrought into diverse forms and shapes. Tertullian, after
an enumeration of many wonderful apparitions and Prodigies, cries out -- Omnia
haec signa sunt imminentis irae Dei. That they are all signs of the imminent
wrath of God. Nay, Dubartas illustrates it yet further, Sec. days work, fol. 14.

Here in the night appears a flaming Spire;
There a fierce Dragon, folded all in fire;
Here a bright Comet; there a fiery stream;
Here flying Lances; there a burning beam;
Here seems a horned Goat, environed round
With fiery Flakes, about the Air to bound;
There with long bloody hair, a blazing Star,
Threatening the world with Famine, Plague and war:
To Princes death: to kingdoms many crosses;
To all estates, inevitable Losses:
To Herds-men, Rot; To Plow-men, hapless seasons
To Saylors Storms; To Cities, civil Treasons.
Then the which, what can be more plain, to prove, that Prodigies are (not
only the Antecedents, but the ordinary and usual) Antecedents of worldly
changes? I willingly pretermit an infinite number of examples in this kind: as
the many and admirable Prodigies pre-curring and presaging the death of Caesar,
and the innumerable company of Ravens seen in the Air before Alexander the
Great passed from Media into Babylon: and the perfect companies of Armed men
seen in the Air, at the time the Greeks had a conflict with the Persians: and
the fiery Spears seen in the Air before the Sabines invaded the Romans: and the
three Suns that appeared in the Heavens, and in a strange manner contended each
with other for superiority, not long before the cruel contention that happened
between Galba, Otho. and Vitellius, for the Empire of Rome. And the four Suns
that appeared besides the true Sun, in the year 1233. which presaged that
unappeasable quarrel between Henry the third King of England, and the Lords of
the kingdom: and also the forerunner of that sad devastation to England, by
fire and sword; it being then consumed and utterly destroyed from Wales to
Salisbury; with many more: reserving them for the second part of this Treatise.

And so I shall close this answer, with that divine saying of Herodotus -- Cum
Deus puniturus est gentem vel orbem, prodigiis id solet prius significare. (i.
e.) When God intends to punish a Nation, Country, or City, he is first wont to
give them notice thereof by apparitions or Prodigies. And this shall suffice
for answer to the three Questions; and for the first Section also, viz. of some
disquisitions touching Prodigies.

SECT. II. Being a brief Cat^l gue of the most remarkable Prodigies s^en and
observed since the birth of Christ; together with the effects that have
succeeded them.
ABout the time that our Lord and Savior was born, which was in the year of
the world 3849. and 43. year of the reign of Augustus Caesar, many wonderful
and remarkable Prodigies showed themselves in the Heavens; and this more
frequently, then in former years, as Josephus (in his Jewish Antiquities)
testifies. Which unusual sights occasioned the Magi or wise men of those times
in their predictions to conclude, That some more then ordinary person would
arise or appear in the world: which presages, some learned Persons applied to
Augustus Caesar, who then reigned prosperously. But the more divinely inspired,
interpreted them to signify him, who (as the Prophet Isaiah says) should have
his government upon his shoulders, Even the Savior of the whole world!

Now, the Birth of Christ (among Christians) being accepted of, as the most
principal Epochae, I adjudged it convenient to dig so far into the golden Mines
of Chronology and History, and hand unto the world a brief of all the
Principal Prodigies and Apparitions, since that time, together with their
effects; which take as follows:

An.Chri. Prodigies. Their effects. 5. Many Prodigious births in Germany.
Armies in the Air seen at Rome. Tiberius obtains a victory against the Cauchi
in Germany; he subdues the Lumbards: The Pannonii rebel. A very great Famine in
Rome. 6. 10. A terrible Ecli^se of the Sun. And Prodigious storms of rain, and
hail in Germany. The Pannonian war is ended. The second German war began; Varus
defeated, and kills himself. The Illyrians subdued by Tiberius. Ovid banished
Rom^. 12. In Cyprus a great Earthquake, that overthrew many Cities. Christ
disputes with the Doctors. A great and t^rrible Comet then seen. Athenaeus
slain by the fall of a House. Antipater and Philip build Caesarea* Philippi and
Bethsaida, in honor of Augustus. Caligul^ born. Augustus grants the Tribunes
power to Tiberius. 13. 15. The light of the was seen apparently to f^il. The
Heavens seemed to burn. Fier^ Beams fell from Heaven Bloody Comets seen*
Lightning s^^^kes out the first letter of Caesar's Name. Vitellius born. Agrippa
slain: and Julia starved to death. Germanicus overcomes the Bracteri and
Arminius. A counterfeit Agrippa raises Forces, and comes to Rome; Is betrayed
to Tiberius, and executed. Caesar dies. Ovid dies. 16. 17. The River Tyber
overfloweth Rome. Thirteen Cities destroyed with an Earthquake. Noisome Flies
in great swarms and companies in Germany. Guiderius in Britain refuses to pay
Tribute. Germanicus overcomes the Chatti, and Cherusci, and Angrivarii. Drusus
Tiberius Son rebels, but is subdued by Camillus. Piso corrupts Tiberius Army in
Germany. 18. 22. Blood rained in Rome. Great flocks of Grasshoppers. Armies
fighting in the Air, seen in Poland, and at Rome, etc. Pompey's Theater burned.
Sejanus (favorite to Tiberius) is executed for aspiring: his Son strangled;
his Daughter first deflowred by the Hangman, then put to death. Drusus is
poisoned. 23. 29. An Army of Soldiers seen in the Air at Rome. Fiery Torches;
a blazing Star like a sword, with many other wonderful Prodigies (now) seen in
Germany. The Arabians defeat Herod. The City Tiberius drowned. Tiberius turned
Tyrant, and in stead of being called Claudius Tiberius Nero; They named him
Caldius Biberius Mero. Otho is born. 30. 34. A very great darkness in the
daytime, which continued from six a clock until nine, and yet no Eclipse of
the, for it was at a full Moon. Christ the Savior of the world was crucified.
Agrippina (wife to Germanicus) starved to death by Tiberius. Tacitus says
Tiberius caused (now) above a thousand to be slain in Rome. 39. A very great
light seen in the Heavens, and a voice tancountred Saul (going to Dama cus)
saying, Saul, Saul, w^y persecutest thou me? This Prodigy was the (...) of
Paul's conversion. Some would have this to have happened in the 35 ye^r of P C.
Caligula would be worshipped as a God; commands it; executes diverse Knights
and Gentlemen. 47. The Heavens seem wonderfully to burn. A Comet of very great
magnitude appea^ed for many days together. Lightning fell from He^ven upon the
standards of the Pretorian Soldiers. Vesp^sian goes into Britain, takes the
Isle of Wight. The Romans overcome the Picts in Scotland. Herod dies: 20000
Jews slain between the Gates of the Temple. Messalina fo^c^th Salvis to
repudiate his wife; marries her: they both are slain. 48. 50. A Phoenix seen in
Egypt. And an Island of thirty fu^longs in length a^peared in the S ^, which
was n ver before seen. A very great Famine in Rome. Vertidius banished by
Claudius. Vannius expelled his power. Domitian born. The whole Country of
Trevers is wasted by Clodomore. 57. 53. Three Suns appeared at one time in
Rome. And in and about the Coasts of England, for certain days, the Sea seemed
as blood. Claudius poisoned by Agrippina. 3000 Romans defeated in Scotland.
Agrippa poysoneth Silanus, he poysoneth Narcissus for 17 Millions of money, and
he also poysoneth Britannicus. 54. 56. A Comet of a very great magnitude
appeared for a long time together in Italy. Nero begins his Acts of villainy.
Cartismand Queen of the Brigantes rejects Venutius her Husband: he wars against
her. The K. of Scots takes her, and buryeth her alive. 59. A terrible Eclipse
of. The Stars also were seen. Nero's supper burned with Lightning. An
Earthquake at Rome* eclipsed again and again, viz. 3 times visible in 3 years.
Many Jews perish at Caesaria. Nero commits Incest with his Mother. The Britains
slay 70000 of the Romans; and Suetonius destroys 80000 of them as he comes from
Anglesey. Saint Mark writes his Gospel, etc. 60. 61. 63. A great Comet appears,
and lightning falls before Nero's Table. A very great inundation in England.
Rome is fired by the means of Nero; he rejoices in that villainy. This y^ar the
Jews reb^l, and many of them are slain. 64. 66. The Ocean seemed blood. A
prodigious accident at Colchester in England, viz. the image of victory turned
back. An Earthquake in Asia. A Comet appeared six months. Another Comet and
three Suns together. Gessius Florus slain by the Jews. Bodice aided by Corbred
King of Scots, kills 70000 Romans. Vespasian sent against the Jews The Romans
take Jamnia and Lydo. The Gadarens yield. Nero attempteth to cut the Isthmus in
Peloponnesus. 67. 69. An Earthquake. A strange bird of notable greatness seen
at Rome. A blazing star. Two Eclipses of. contrary to astronomical
demonstration; she appears black and bloody. Armed men seen in the air.
Jerusalem taken by Titus, and many thousands slain Otho kills himself.
Cerealis with Forces goes into Germany. The Samaritans invade Maesia Rotterdam
in Holland built. Dardanus tyrannizeth in Scotland, and slain by Corbred, etc.
Cesennius Petus expels Antiochus. 70. 71. 72. 76. Many strange and wonderful
voices heard in the Heavens A great blazing star or Comet this year, viz 77.
The Silures subdued by Julius Frontinus. Hadrian born. A very great Pestilence
in Rome. Alienus and Marcellus conspire the death of Vespasian, and are
executed for it. 77. 78. This year there fell unto the ground three Cities
(with the force of an Earthquake) in Cyprus. Most part of Britain is subdued by
Agricola: he puts Karanoth the King to flight, and the Scots also. Vespasian
this year dies of a Flux. 81. A terrible Comet now appeared. The Tomb of
Augustus the Emperor opened of it self. Flames of fire issued out of the Hill
Vesuvius. Haldanus the Sweve restored to his Kingdom from which he was
expelled. Titus dies. Lynus a Bishop of Rome Martyred. Domitian repudiateth
his wife; marryeth with the widow of Titus. 82. 89. Blood rained in Germany.
Three Suns were seen at once in Poland: and there happened much lightning and
thunder that consumed many brave buildings. The Emperor sends two Armies
against the Goths, and they are both routed. Philosophers and Mathematitians
expelled Rome. Britain reduced to a single Province, and at the Emperor's own
dispose. 90. 98. An Elm-tree saluted Appollonius Tyaneus, and spoke to him with
a distinct voice The Sun is this year eclipsed. And a great earthquake in
Naples. Cocceius Nerva dies. Two Saxon Kings rebel against Froto; he
overcomes them, and makes them his Tributaries. S. John writes his Epistles.
Rome and France fall at odds. The third Persecution began. 99. 107. A very
great Earthquake in Asia. Many prodigious sights in the air, as fightings, etc.
in the Elements, seen and observed in Spain. The French and Saxons plant
Colonies in Germany. The Saracens and Arabians subdued. A Bisho^ of Jerusalem
crucified. Babylon and Seleucia taken. Nero's House is burnt. 112. An
Earthquake in Galatia. At Rome Lightning from Heaven consumes the Temples of
the Gods. An Earthquake at Antioch. Great Lightning and strange and unwonted
winds; Together with horrible noises in the Earth. The Romans reduce several
places into Provinces. Jews rebel in Egypt, and kill 200000 men. They force
those which survive, to eat the dead. They slay 2^0000 in Cyprus, and at last
are slain themselves. The Chaldeans rebel. Lucius sent against them; he
recovereth some Towns. 114. 120. In 120. there happened a great Earthquake in
Nice. And in the year 123. happened another there. Britains, Scots and Picts
rebel. Christians put to death in Asia. Britains reduced by Adrian. Apollodorus
slain by Hadrian. 123. 134. This year there happened two very great Earthquakes
in Palestina. And Milk in a Prodigious manner was also rained at Rome.
Christians persecuted by the Jews. The Jews rebel against the Romans. Julius
Severus goes against them. Armenia and Cappadocia are wasted by Pharosmanes.
140. In 140. a great Earthquake happened at Rome. A great fire also that
destroyed 340 houses, which were environed with water. In 142. a Serpent seen
in Arabia. The Northern Britains rebel. Lollius subdueth them. L ^t instituted
by Thelesphorus a Priest of Rome. Mogalgus grows odious to the Nobility of
Scotland, and at last they murder him. 142. 152. Frogs rained at
Constantinople. And three Suns appeared there (at the same time) with a Star
and a Rainbow. Polycarpus Martyred. Aurelius Caesar seeing a wonderful fire at
Rome, causes the persecution to cease by an Edict from himself. Hermogenes ran
out of his wits, and dyed. 162. A very great Earthquake in Bithynia. The Surges
of the Mediterranean Sea in a calm, elevated themselves to the top of a
mountain, far distant from it, and cast the foam a great way upon the main
land. Britains repine at the Roman oppression, and reb l Agricola subdueth
them. The fourth persecution began. Vologesus King of the Parthians invades the
Empire. Verus goes against him, and has good success. Diverse sects spring up
this year, and impede the progress of Religion. 167. This year there was seen a
wonderful fire in the Heavens, which seemed to pass from the East unto the
West. French renew their An^ient league with the Germans. The Germans with an
Army enter the Empire as far as Italy. Pertinax is sent against them, and
repels them. 170. Wolves howled hideously in Flocks near Rome. Crosses were
seen to sweat with tears. Rain mingled with fire falls from Heaven at Prema.
The Senate adjudge Cassius an enemy to the State; and be is slain by the
Soldiers. In this year was great jarring among the Bishops and Churchmen of
most Nations concerning Religion. 177. A great and Terrible Earthquake, and
many inundations at Rome. This year there were many strange fires seen in the
Air, and some to fall thence. The Marcomanni and Quadri rebel again. The
Emperors go against the Scythians, and overthrow them. Smyrna in Asia quite
destroyed: Antonius gives a great sum of Money toward its repair. 183. Great
swarms of Locusts were seen to cover the ground, and in many places to destroy
Cornfieldsd and Meadows. A great Earthquake in Asia. A Temple burnt in
Alexandria. The Britains war is ended by Marcellus. The Scots and Picts go back
again. Daci rebels; and is reduced to obedience by Albinus and Niger. Scots of
the Isles rebel. Goths do much harm in Austria. 187. The Stars were seen all
the day long at Rome. And some Apparitions hung streaming down in the very
middle of the Air. Perennius and his Son executed for treason. Apollonius being
accused for a Christian, is sentenced and executed. Hunno of France wars with
the Romans. 190. At Rome there fell a wonderful Lightning from Heaven upon the
Capitol, and the fire increasing, did burn the Library, and all the houses near
it. Cleander (who poss^ssed Perennius's place) is excecuted, to please the
people: 2000 die in a day of the Plague at Rome. Commodus removes the head
from the Colossus, and puts one of his own upon it. 192. Stars in the day
time continually appeared. All kinds of Creatures contrary to their Natures,
brought prodigious births this year. Fire consumed the Temple of Peace. The
Temples of Peace and Vesta, etc. burnt at Rome. Commodus grows ridiculous;
and the people taking notice thereof, he excecuted many of them. Commodus is
strangled by Martia his Concubine. Pertinax is consul 87 days, and slain by the
Soldiers. 194. A Characteristical Prodigy in the Heavens Flames of fire
descended from heaven. The Stars also appear very bright in the day time. King
of Scots slain by a Musician, for causing one of his kindred to be executed.
Severus goes against Niger, whom he beat three times, and then slew him at
Antioch-Herod besieges Byzantium 3 years together. 195. There were seen at
Rome three stars about the Sun very glorious. An Eagle alighted on the Image of
a soldier. Bees wrought their Combs upon soldiers Engines. A sudden fire in
the air toward the North. Severus follows the war against the Parthians.
Satrahel coming to rule Scotland, kills many of the old Lords of the Kingdom.
Constantinople taken by famine. Satrahel strangled by his servants. Britains
beaten by Severus. Albinus's head sent to Rome. 196. 303. A great lowing and
fire in the earth. A Whale comes ashore at the Haven of Augustus. A Comet for
many days together was seen at Rome. Scotland received the Faith about this
time. The fifth Persecution began. Many from Jerusalem flee into the Wilderness
to avoid the Persecution. The Romans wast Arabia. Strange Heresies broached by
Praxeus. 204. 208. A wonderful lightning fell from Heaven upon the Image of
Severus, and blotted out three letters of his Name. Severus was then going to
Britain, but never returned thence; 50000 of his Army die. Many of the
Calidonians upon a Rebellion were massacred cruelly. 219. An Eagle flying,
takes away the Cap of Diadumenus. Diadumenus is slain within fourteen Months of
that time. The Britains rebel, and invade the Roman Territories. 230. Sreames
of fire and strange lightning seen at Rome. Armed men seen in Muscovia and
Polonia. An inundation at Venice. The Persians invade Armenia, and the Romans
they wast the Roman Territories. Alectus slain in Battle. King of Scots slain
by his guard. The Emperor goes into Persia, and is overcome 237. A blazing
star seen at Rome, that extended it self a very great length, and was seen both
to burn and blaze many nights together. Maximilian com^th out of Germany, and
is slain by his own soldiers; his body given to be torn and devoured of dogs.
Goths at this time became terrible to the Roman Empire. 241. An Eclipse of the
Sun, which (as my author says) was so great, that it made the day to seem as
dark as the night. Athirco of Scotland kills himself. Strange Heresies spread
themselves. The Persian wa^ initiateth. The Persian is vanquished and expelled
Syria. 244. The Sun eclipsed totally. A great Earthquake, which caused the
earth to gape so extremely, that certain Cities, together with their people,
were swallowed up. Gordian is slain by Philip. Philip dies, and Marcus is chose
by the Senate, and dies within five days: Next Serverus Hostilianus is chosen;
who dying, Philip the Arabian is chosen, and Eusebius calls him the first
Christian Emperor. 257. Great Thunder in the earth, with terrible darkness and
an Earthquake. The Sea overwhelmed many Cities in Europe and Africa. The Goths
take Chalcedon, and spoil it. They take Nice also. The sickness rages in the
Roman Army. The Goths burn the Temple of Ephesus; they enter Macedonia and
Asia. 264. This year there were many exceeding great Earthquakes, and darkness
for many days together. Spears also were seen in the Elements at Rome. The
Germans and Scythians wast the Empire. The French mischief Italy. Claud.
Censorinus made Emperor in Italy, and slain there. Donald in Scotland usurped,
and kept the Nobility in fear, threatening to kill their kindred whom he had
took. 300. An horrible Earthquake at Tire, which destroyed many Buildings, and
an innumerable company of people. Many Monsters were also born this year.
Dioclesian assumeth the name of Divine Honor. Many Christians are burned in a
house at Nicodemia. The tenth persecution begins. 144000 put to death in
Egypt, and 700000 banished. The Persians and Goths worsted. 314. This year a
Banner with a Cross seen in the Air, and diverse Armies Fighting. Penitents were
also seen to hover in the Air in Spain. Two Councils called and held this year;
one at Arls against the Donatists: The other at Ancyra in Galatia, to restore
the lapsed. Arrius beg^ns to broach his Heresies, is condemned by a Council at
Alexandria. 315. 320. This year was a hand seen in Lateran at Rome without a
body, which in the sight of many men writ upon a wall, these words: Hodie
venonum Ecclesiae infusu^us. To day he will pour Poison into the Church. Rome
beautified by Constantine. Lamps and Wax-candles in the day time, used in the
Church first. Constantine goes into Gaul to appease a sedition of his
Soldiers. French aid the Samarte against the Romans, and in a Battle kill
46000 men. 323. A Fountain ran with oil in Italy. There was also a terrible
Comet seen for many days together at Rome. Constantine and Licinius met at
Chalcedon: Licinius is overthrown. Octavian Flees into Scotland, and by the
aid of Fincomore recovers Britain. Licinius is put to death. 340. An
Earthquake in Asia that overthrew many Cities. A child of six months old
Prophecies in Rome. Constantine the Eldest is slain. The Siege of Nisibis is
raised. Constans raises forces against the Gauls; he subdueth them. Athanasius
is exiled. 343. A great and terrible Eclipse of the Sun. And an Earthquake
whose force was so great, that it overthrew many Cities in the East. Paul
banished. Hermogenes slain in a tumult. Constantius persecuteth the Clergy.
Julius entertaineth Athanasius, and other banished Catholics; the Arrians are
offended at it. Arrius his heresi s spread at Antioch. A persecution in Persia.
Constantius is beaten in Persia. The Heathen Templ^s shut up. Nisibis besieged
again by Sapores. 344. A great and terrible Earthquake that shook Antioch, and
most of the Eastern parts, for a year together. 349. A great Earthquake that
overthrew a City into the sea, all of it except the Church Dirachium fell with
an Earthquake, and Rome was shak n three days and three nights together;
together with diverse Cities in Campania. Constantius gives battle to the
Persians, and overcomes them; but his soldiers drunk with wine and beer, as
well as with success, the Persians come suddenly on them, and make a great
slaughter. Magnen^ius conspires against Constance, although he had once saved
his life. 362. An Earthquake in Persia, doing very much harm. This year an Ox
is said to have spoke in Italy. Nicodemia overthrown with an Earthquake.
Vandamore taken by Julian. Constantius makes peace with Sapores, and shortly
after dies. Christians persecuted. Julian to Constantinople, prepares for the
Persian war, is slain at Chresiphen. The Temple of Apollo Daphneus burnt. 369.
A great inundation or overflowing of waters in Sicilia; and a general
Earthquake over the whole world. Romachus defeateth Angusian and the Picts; He
tyrannizeth, and the Nobles cut off his head. Valence puts Athanaricus to
flight. 377. A Comet of wonderful greatness, and another general Earthquake in
Cicilia. The Scots and Picts are set at variance by Maximus. The Goths turn
Arrians; They wast Thrace, Thessaly and Epirus. Gratian kills 35000 Germans.
384. This year appears a terrible sign in the Heavens, in all parts like unto a
fiery P^llar. And the River Tiber overflows her Banks again. Maximus kills
Gratian treacherously, and possesses Britain, France, Spain and Afric:
Vandals and Lumbards quarrel. Priscillian is executed at Trevors by Maximus,
after an appeal to him from the Council of Bourdeaux. 392. A new star in the
Heavens, that appeared in the form of a sword for forty days together. Armed
men and Castles seen in the H avens at Greece Valentinian strangled at Vienna.
Eugenius is made Emperor. Honorius wars against Eugenius. King of France slain
in battle. Romans impose a tribute on the French. 399. Strange fiery Clouds
seen in Constantinople. An Earthquake and great Hayl. A star like a sword seen
at Rome. In many places hailstones fell which were bigger then a stone of eight
pound weight. A great snow, a great Eclipse of the Sun: other strange meteors.
Goths divide into two factions, and consume themselves with Civil War. Gildo
kills his children; is forced to fl^e, is taken and strangled. Temples and
Idols destroyed. The Sybils Books burnt at Rome. Gaina the Goths General
rebels, is taken and slain by the Prince of the Huns Alaricus wastes Pannonia
and Dalmatia without opposition. 430. 412. This year the earth at Eutica, as if
it had been sensible, mourned for 7 days together with a horrible lowing. At
Rome great flocks of Grasshoppers were seen in the Air. Arthaulphus warreth with
the Vandals. The Spaniards Country parted between the Swedes and Vandals.
Pelagius a Monk in Britain broaches his opinions. Heraclian is slain by his own
Soldiers. 434. It rained blood at Tolosa. A Comet of wonderful Magnitude
appeared in the Heavens this year. In Swethen a Dragon was seen flying in the
Air. A great Famine in Constantinople. Pope Bassus dies. The French besiege
Archillas. The Emperors make peace with the Vandals. Goths break peace with
the Romans. The Britains war with the Scots. 454. Apparitions in the Heavens in
England. Spears burning seen at Rome Many earthquakes. Moon Eclipsed. A Comet
this year appeared ten weeks together. This year Aelius is slain. Catigern and
Horsa slain in Battle at Aylesford in Kent. The Britains beat the Saxons, and
drive them into the Isle of Thaner. King of Goths slain. 463. A great
Earthquake in Rome, and in many parts of Italy; with terrible showers, and
great storms of Hayl. The Goths wast Illyria. Beorgok is slain in Italy by
Ricimer. The Popes privilege is obstructed by Hilarious a Deacon of Rome. 471.
An Earthquake at Vienna; Wolves and other Beasts wander all the year through
that City, and devour men. The Kings Palace is consumed by fire. Ricimer
aspireth, and being discovered flees to Milan; he proclaims war against the
Emperor. Besieges Rome; kills Arthemius. Lusitania and Burgundy wasted by
the Visi-Goths. 483. In Russia Armies of men were seen in the Air. An
Earthquake also; and two wonderful blazing Stars appeared. A Rainbow
encompassing two Suns. Gyles King of Soyssons is slain; and Clovis takes many
Cities. A persecution of learned men in Affrique. Zeno gives himself to ryots
and cruelty; he puts many to death. 507. This year there fell a great and
fiery Dart from Heaven in Africa. And dark spots were also observed in the
body of the Sun. The Emperor gives the Goths money to depart his Dominions.
Clovis warreth against Alaricus for Religion, and kills him. Italy wasted by
a present sent to Clorus of 100 Ships, and 8000 men. 529. Wonderful lightning
at Antioch. An Earthquake at Constantinople. Legible letters seen in the Air at
Rome. It rained blood in the Valleys of Lucern and Peidmont four days together.
The Persians war against the King of Colchos and the Emperor. The Vandals put
their General to death. The Jews are suppressed. The Emperors General [Mundus]
defeateth the Getes, who wasted Thrace. 539. A famous Comet seen in the regal
sign Sagittarius. And flocks of Ravens seen at Rome. The Emperor and Persians
break their peace. The Persians take Antioch, and wast the Eastern Provinces.
The Emperor purchases his peace. People ordered to pray toward the East. 546.
The Sea flowed up four miles into Thrace, and swept away many people. A very
great Earthquake in Constantinople. The Emperor wars with the Lazii. The Goths
setting upon the Romans at the siege of Septa, are all slain. Totilas besieges
Rome, and tak^th it: Belisarius recovereth it, etc. 555. A fiery Lance in the
Element appeared from the North to the East. The Heavens seemed to open in
France, and lights shined out for two hours space. An Earthquake shook
Constantinople for six weeks. The Ostro-Gothique war ends in Italy this year.
Narses wins Liguria and Venice from the French. The Romans rout the Persians
at Phasido. The Jews and Samaritans persecute the Christians, and burn their
Churches in Caesaria. 570. At York in England the Fountains ran blood. Blood
also fell from the Clouds in Lumbardie. In Kent a boy laughed in his mothers
belly; and at London Trees seemed to be on fire. The Persians begin a war with
the Romans. The Emperor enters into a league with the Ethiopians against the
Persians. The Huns break into Germany, and are expelled by the French. The
Persians invade Armenia; and take Antioch and Daras. 590. A great inundation in
Constantinople. A Comet this year that blazed a Month together. In the River
Tiber were seen a Dragon and many Serpents. It overflows Rome. An infinite
company of Grasshoppers in Lombardy. Many Locusts in France. A famine so great
in Britain, that the people assembled themselves together in flocks to cast
themselves into the Sea. Romanus gains from the Lombards. A Plague so great
in Rome, that 800 men fell dead in an hour, in the time of Procession. Antharis
is poisoned at Papia. Huns invade Europe and Thrace. Emperor goes against
them, but is forced to return. 597. A horrible Comet seen in Constantinople.
The Elements seen to burn in Poland: A fiery Lance seen in the Heavens at
Rome. Pope Gregory redeems many Captives. The Sclavi wast Thrace. The Britains
and Scots invade the Saxons. France and Poland are miserably wasted. 618. A
grievous Earthquake in Palestina. A sign in the Heavens like a sword, flamed
thirty days together. A Comet appeared for a month together, and was seen at
Jerusalem. Brunchild a Daughter of France, found guilty, of the death of Ten
Kings; she is tied by the hair of the head, and by Arms to wild horses, and
torn to pieces. Romans and Persians at odds. The Emperor defeated in Thrace.
639. An Earthquake at Antioch Horsemen seen in the Air in Muscovia. And blood
rained at Naples. The Saracens become Lords of all Mesopotamia. Sigebert the
East- Saxon dies. Dagobert becomes the sole Monarch of France. The Pope
loses his treasure by the Exarques. 651. A wonderful Storm at Constantinople
that spoiled Fields and Gardens. A fiery Dragon seen in the air there also. The
Saracens invade Isauria, and for a great sum of money grant the Emperor a
peace for two years. The Pope imprisoned at Constantinople. He is banished and
starved. 674. This year there appeared so horrible a fire, and a Rainbow in
the Element, that many men cried out the world was at an end. Rain with Thunder
and lightning which slew both men and Beasts in Italy. The Saracens besiege
Costantinople seven years, and at last 30000 of them are slain; their Fleet is
fired by Carrinicius, who revolteth from them. Bamba warreth against the
French. Egbert of Kent dies. Lothaire slain with a Dart. The Visi-Goths
overcome the Gascoigns. 687. A very great Comet at Christmas near the
Constellation which is called Virgiliae. Mock-Suns seen in England. Great
controversy in Rome about a new Pope. King of Scots slain by the Picts. The
Emperor defeateth the Sclavi. Kenwin the west- Saxon dies. 722. In Campania
Wheat was rained from Heaven, also Barley and Poulse in other parts of Italy.
Two Comets of great Magnitude were seen in this year. The French recover many
of their possessions. They go into Germany, and subdue the Bavarians and
Almans. Italy began to choose themselves several Dukes this year. 735. In
England a most prodigious Hail Fire seen to flame in the Heaven at Rome. An
inundation at Constantinople. The French enter the Territories of the Goths,
and destroy their Castles. The Lombards aid the French, and expel the Romans
from the siege of Bononia. Pelagius die^h. 746. Oil rained in Spain. A Comet in
the fashion of a Sword seen this year. Crosses fell from heaven upon men's
garments. An Earthquake in Palestina. Fire rain^d in many parts of France. A
Pestilence in Constantinople for three years; which devoured so many, that they
wanted men to bury their dead. Selred the East- Saxon slain. Emperor beats the
Saracens at Cyprus. The Huns General slain in Transylvania. 761. In the month
September this year there happened a very great ecilpse of the Sun. A blazing
Star in the East for many days together. Ethein of Scotland invadeth
Northumberland, and is slain. A rebellion in Galloway, The Bulgarians invade
the Empire. Dominico deposed by the Venetians for his tyranny; his eyes put
out. 778. A great Eclipse of the Sun. Armies of men seen in the Heavens at
France. It this year rained blood also. Earth and ashes fell from Heaven at
Rome. Telerick the King of Bulgaria is expelled by his people. Ethelred leaves
England. Alswald is murdered by Siga. The Spaniard against the Moors; they are
aided by the French. The Emperor slays 6000 men of the Saracens. 794. The
River overfloweth its Banks, and does much prejudice. A very great Earthquake
in Crete and Constantinople. Alphonsus kills 70000 of the Moors, and tak^th
Lisbon from them. The Danes invade England, but all of them almost perished.
The Armenian Legions rebel. 808. The Sun and Moon this year eclipsed contrary
to Nature. Armies of men appear in the Heavens. Mercury seen in the Sun like a
black spot. Blood rained in Holland. The Moors expelled Barcino^. Th. P^cts
wast Scotland. The Bulgarians kill 6000 Greeks, and take Sardis. The Danes
subdue Frizia. The Saracens disperse themselves into diverse places under six
Princes. 820. A great and wonderful storm of rain fell, that rotted all the
Corn in the Fields; and inundations that hindered the Countrey-mans sowing.
Fiery apparitions often seen in the Elements. Emperor sends three Armies
against the Hungarians. A great Famine and Pestilence in France. King of
England slain by the East Angles. Asia is wasted. Constantinople besieged.
Regner King of Denmark expelled. 840. Sparks of fire like stars were seen to
run up and down the Heavens. A Comet appeared in. A great Eclipse of the.
Swarms of Bees in Westchester in England. The Saracens overcome by the
Emperor. Danes invade England, and do much mischief there. The Moors wast
Italy, and are expelled. The Saracens take Amorium, and many Captives. Lothair
wars with his Brethren, and 100000 men slain. This year was prodigious for many
Earthquakes, Hayls, and whirlwinds; and many wonderful Thunders and Lightnings,
that happened in most parts of the world. The people of Toledo and Corduba
rebel. The Scots overcome the English, who aided the Picts. The Danes enter the
Thames with 250 ships. They take Canterbury and London, and expel the King.
870. Great Hayl and Thunders and Lightning at Rome. Lightning burnt a Church at
Worms. An Earthquake in England. Danes expelled Holland. Saracens expelled
Ancona. They war against the Persian. The Danes land in Fife, and challenge
Pictland for their King. 882. The Sun so much obscured, that the Stars appeared
in the sky in the day time. An Earthquake in Normandy. A blazing Star this year
which was Vertical to Spain. Britains invade Scotland, Constantine their King
is killed. Saracens break into Italy, and are expelled by the Emperor. The
Sclavi wast Austria and Bavaria. Guido rebels, and joins with the Saracens
against the Emperor. 912. Four Rainbows seen at once in Scotland. Fiery
Torches seen in the Air. Many great Floods in Saxony. A great Comet and stars
were seen to run glittering to and fro in the heavens. Vandals invade Greece,
and many Cities become their Tributaries. Saracens take Calabria, and many
Cities in Italy. The Emperor sickneth and dies, it is thought for his losses
to the Hungarian. 928. Diverse mocksuns seen in Italy and Spain. A winter
wonderful for the excess of cold. Emperor subdues the Vandals, and wastes their
Country. The Pope is imprisoned and strangled. The Scots assist the Danes, but
are overcome. 940. The Sun appears for certain days together as if it bled.
Three Comets for a fort-night together were vertical to Germany. An Earthquake
in France. Gonsalvus poysoneth Sancho with an Apple. The Russians in a
malicious manner persecute the Christians. The French King and the Emperor
reconciled: diverse Conspirators against the Emperor executed. 956. This year
produced many strange Prodigies; As that wonderful Hayl at Oxford in England.
Strange lightning killing many Priests in France. Mighty Thunders and tempests,
etc. Hungarians invade the Emperor; are reconciled to him. Bishop of Saltsburg
calls 100000 Hungarians into Bavaria; they are all slain there, and the
Emperors eyes plucked out. The Italians war with the Pope. 968. Fire falls from
Heaven. A great Earthquake in France. A Comet also appeared. Crosses from
Heaven fell upon men's Clothes. Wonderful increase of vermin, as of Rats and
Mice. The Empress with Zimisces conspires the death of the Emperor. Besda
overcomes Leo Phocas, who rebels in Asia, and sends him and 100 of his
confederates into Chios. Donald murthereth the King of Scotland for refusing to
pardon a Thief of his acquaintance. 979. An Earthquake in Scotland. Armies of
fire seen a whole night together in the air. This year also, there was one born
in Rome having two heads. Harold King of Denmark is slain by an Arrow. The
Danes land in Scotland, and waste diverse places: the Scots put them to flight.
They land in Kent, and spoil the Isle of Thanet. 992. Fire rises out of a River
(says my author) and burns many places in Rhene. In Spain three swords
appeared in the Heavens like fire. The Duke of Bavaria dies. The Danes invade
England with a very great Fleet. The King of Denmark is slain by one of his
servants. 1002. In Lorraine, a Fountain of water turned into perfect blood. A
Comet very horrible to behold, casting out flames on every side. The Danes
being worsted at Oxford, fly to Church, and are there burnt. Otho poisoned with
a pair of Gloves. A Marquess banished the Court, and afterward slain. 1022.
Swarms of Locusts in France. Milk rained at Rome. A very great Eclipse of the
Sun. This year there was such unseasonable weather, that many dyed through too
much heat. Diverse Polonians rebel against the Christians. The Emperor
overcomes the Greeks in Italy. Bodessaus of Bohemia loses Cracovia.
Polanders subdue Russia, and make it Tributary. The Vandals wast Saxony, and
take Brandenburg. 1043. A multitude of snakes were seen this year at Rome. Five
Suns at once appeared in England. Stella Crinita, or an hairy Comet very great,
appeared this year. The Emperor overcomes the Russians, who invade his
Territories. A great Famine in Germany and France. The Prussians invade
Polonia; and there are 15000 slain, and 2000 taken. The Irish and Welsh enter
Severn, and do a great deal of harm. 1058. A great encease of Rats and Mice.
Stones of a mighty greatness mixed with Hayl, fell from Heaven and killed many.
Two blazing stars this year vertical to Poland. The Saxons rebel against the
Emperor. 26000 are drowned in a Pitfal, by the stratagem of two Bishops in
Holland, as they came against the Earl of Flanders. Russians rebel in Poland,
are reduced by Boleslaus. 1076. Three Suns seen at Naples. A fiery dart ran up
and down in the Heavens. In Italy women appeared in the Air, of admirable
shapes, which mightily amazed the beholders. The Emperor deposes the Pope;
and the Pope the Emperor; and also excomunicateth him. The Turks take Rhodes
and Cyprus. The Hollanders overcome the Frisons. Northumberland in England
wasted. 1086. A great inundation in Italy. Four Moons at once in France, seen
also in England. Many tame fowl became perfectly wild. The Saxons defeat the
Emperor. The Turkish Emperor dies. The King of England dies. Edmund and
Ethelred banished by Donald their uncle. They die in England. 1094. A fiery dart
in the Heavens, that through its violence flew from North to South. A great
Earthquake in England. Horrible noises in the ground, with strange groanings at
Rome. The King of Poland envied by the Nobles, causes many of them to be
banished. Piedro of Spain takes Osca, and kills 30000 Moors. The English
invade Normandic again. Bretislaus obtayneth the Kingdom of Bohemia by the aid
of the Hungarians. 1101. This was a year very remarkable for Monsters. Syracuse
shaken with an Earthquake. Three Suns, a sword, and crown seen in Germany, in
the Heavens. A Comet of wonderful greatness. Conradus dies in Italy. The
Russians invade Polonia, and are expelled by Boleslaus. In England the Earl of
Shrewsbury warreth against the King. Earl of Flanders takes Cambray: a League
between the English and the Scots. 1116. Fiery Armies in the Heavens seen in
Germany. Many Earthquakes, and very great whirlwinds. Earl of Campeign
rebelleth; is aided by Henry. Bruges in Flanders burnt. Polonia wasted. The
Emperor excommunicated by the Pope. 1135. A very great inundation in Flanders,
Holland, and Freezeland. In England a great Earthquake. Great whirlwinds in
France. The light of the sun and moon (ad visum) fails. Many people perish in
Flanders. Judea miserably wasted by the Infidels. King of England surfeits of
Lampreys, and dies. Baldwin de Redvers fortifies Exeter against Steven: Is
taken and banished. 1147. Great Thunders at Rome. An Earthquake in England.
Several bowls of fire seen in the Heavens. A multitude of small worms. Blood
rained. Strange lightning in Rome. Lewis of France with an Army invades Syria.
He is taken prisoner by the Greeks; rescued by the King of Sicily. Alphonsus of
Spain takes Lisborn and Saint Iren from the Moors. The King of Sweden slain.
1158. A very great pillar of fire appeared in the Heavens in Germany. A great
Eclipse of the Sun. Two Dragons seen to fight in the air in Swedland. The
Emperor goes against the Armenians. The Pope submits to the Emperor:
Repents thereof, and excommunicateth him. Venetians deny aid to the Greek
Emperor against the King of Sicily. 1169. In this year there appeared three
Suns and three Moons besides the true ones. There happened also a very great
Earthquake. Syraconus kills the Sultan of Egypt. English invade Cumberland.
Catana in Sicily destroyed, with 19000 people, by an Earthquake. The Romans
raze Alba. 1178. A wonderful inundation in England. Two Armies were seen in the
Heavens in Italy to fight a fierce battle. An Eclipse of the sun this year.
English and Scots Quarrel. The Spaniards take several Places from the Navarrs.
Miscelaus by the help of Casimir, recovereth his Patrimony in Polonia. Wars
between the French and the Flemming. 1185. This year a very great Eclipse of
the sun: A great Earthquake also. An Eclipse of the Moon likewise, and armies
in the air environed with fire, seen in Greece. The Moors defeated by the
Spaniards, and their King slain. The greatest part of Bruges burnt. Baldwin
King of Jerusalem (the fifth of that name) poisoned by his mother. A rebellion
in England. The Greeks loose 70 Sail of Ships by Pirates. 1198. Great Stones
rained from Heaven. An Earthquake in the East which overthrew many cities.
Blood rained in England. Two fiery swords in the Heavens seen in Spain. Castile
and Arragon invade Navarr. The Sultan of Iconium swallowed of an Earthquake.
Harold Earl of of Cathue in Scotland cuts out the Bishops tongue, etc. And the
King puts out his eyes, and hangs him, and causes his Male Children to be
gelt. 1212. A Comet appeared for 18 days together. Shapes all bloody were seen
in the Heavens. A star with a Cross, and a half Moon seen in Italy. The
Spaniards slay 200000 Moors. The Pope gives England to Philip of France; who
striveth for it. The Flemmish with the English take 300 sail of ships from him,
and burn 100 more. The King of Arragon slain. 1234. A great Eclipse of the Sun,
strange sights in the Moon, viz. she (which of her self is Globular) appeared
with six squares. The sun darkened so much, that the stars were seen. King of
Bulgaria puts out the Emperors eyes. Vienna subjected to the Empire. The
Latins besieged in Constantinople, but relieved by the Venetians. The King of
England and his Nobles quarrel, but are reconciled. The King of Poland dies.
1243. A great Comet fearful to behold. A hill of an immense magnitude removes
out of its place. A noise like Trumpets in the air heard in Italy. A great
Plague in Greece. A miserable Famine in Constantinople. King of the Cumans
slain. The Infidels take Jerusalem, and slay many Prisoners. 1255. A great
Comet appeared. Strange lightning from Heaven. The sea overflows in many places
of England. Dismal and strange noises heard in the air. The Geneveses take
Venice, and are expelled again. Duke of Lituania invadeth Massovio and Prussia.
Five petty Kings of the Moors expelled Spain. Venetians take Padua. Eccelin
comes thither, and kills 12000 Citizens. 1277. A very great rain at Rhene. A
sky at midnight as bright as the day, in Poland. Four suns in Russia. An
Earthquake in England. The Turks win all the lesser Asia from the Greeks. The
Pope is slain by a fall. Empeperour kills 14000 Bohemians. The King of England
forces Wales to a Peace. 1285. A great Earthquake in Italy. A Comet of notable
greatness seen this year. A great swarm of diverse colored flies, and an
inundation in England. The Norwegians invade Denmark for the Queens Dowry.
Hungaria wasted by the Cumans. Helvetians war against the Emperor, they are
subdued. The King of Sicily dies. 1300. Lances and Darts of fire seen in the
Heavens. A great snow A Comet of wonderful magnitude. In Germany, armed men and
horses were seen in the air. The English beat the Scots. The Turks invade the
Empire, and do great mischief there. The Pope writes himself universal Lord in
Spirituals and Temporals. Flanders is invaded, and many Nobles taken prisoners.
1310. An Earthquake in England. The Elements seem to burn many days together. A
boy born with four arms and two bodies. Polonians subdue Pomerania. Rhodes is
taken from the Turks. Robert Bruce wastes Scotland, and expels the English.
Earl of Cornwel banished. The Emperor burns Brixia. 1322. In England for six
hours together, the sun appeared as blood. In Germany a great Earthquake. Two
Crosses appeared in the Heavens. And there appeared a fiery Circle about the
sun. The Scots oppose the King of England, and put him to flight. The King of
Bohemia takes Silesia, and diverse places in Lusatia. The Emperor is taken in
battle, and is imprisoned three years. 1337. This year there were two Comets
together, one of which continued four months; the other but three. Blood
rained in Rome. Wonderful flocks of Crows and Daws seen in Germany. The
Lituanians burn themselves, their wives, children and goods, to avoid the
taking. The French burn Southhampton in England. The Scythians wast Thrace, and
take many Captives. King of Sicily dies. 1348. Diverse mocksuns appeared this
year. The Heavens seemed to burn. There were diverse small beasts rained from
the Heavens in the Eastern parts of the world. A great Plague in England. The
English beat the Scots, and recover much from them. Polanders conquer Russia
fully. A great Plague in Venice, which consumes many people. The English do
much spoil at Lowthian in Scotland. 1365. In England there were armed men seen
in the Heavens; and fiery Lances in Italy. Grasshoppers cover Switzerland like
snow. The Russians which rebelled in Poland, are subdued. King of France
expelled his Kingdom. The King of Swevia taken in battle. The Turks expel the
Christians from Adrianople. 1376. A Comet with a beard seen in the Heavens many
nights together. Grasshoppers spoil France. Inundations in Germany. A very great
Earthquake there. In Gand 5000 houses burnt. 17 Towns in Flanders drowned. The
Christians kill 2000 Turks in Bosna, by a stratagem. The French burn Rye and
Hastings, and take the Isle of Wight. The Scots burn Roxburg. 1388. A blazing
fire in the Heavens which burned for two Months together. At Oxford the Image
of a head spoke thus, viz. Caput decidetur; Caput elevabitur; Pedes elevabuntur
super caput. The head shall be cut off: The head shall be lift up: The feet
shall be elevated above the head. A great Sedition in Oxford among the Scholars;
many of them dislike the Government. An Army of 40000 raised by the Duke of
Gloucester, Earls of Warwick, Darby, and Notingham, with 50000 Christians,
slain in the plains of Casovia. Very great Factions in France. 1399. A running
River in Bedfordshire in England divides it self. A blazing Star this year,
that shot wonderful beams of fire from it. Scotland wasted by the English. The
Frisons rebel in Holland. Sigismond executed 32 of the Nobles in Hungary. The
Pope imprisoned by the King of France. The Duke of Hereford being Banished,
returns into England. 1415. Strange Prodigies this year in Britain: A Dragon
encountering a Lion in the Air. Armies of fire seen fighting and overcoming in
the Heavens. An Eclipse of the sun. The English and the French fight: the
French loose 20000 men, 10000 killed upon the place, and other 10000 taken.
Pope Gregory dies. English invade Normandy. King of Spain sells the Canaries to
the King of Sevil. The Valentians made tributary to the Turks 1428. Great snows
in Germany. A mighty Earthquake in Italy. A Winter wonderful for cold to all
parts of the Northern Countries. Danes spoil 30 ships of great valve that
belonged to the Vandals and Hamburgers. The Turks take Thessalonica from the
Venetians. The English lose much in France. 1439. A Comet of mighty magnitude
in Poland. Swarms of Bees in England go a progress. An Earthquake in Hungaria.
Emperor goes against the Turks, and dies. Polanders waste Silesia. France
twice beaten by the English in Normandy. The Marshal of France burnt for
sorcerie. King of Bohemia dies. 1484. An Earthquake in Naples. A wonderful
snow in Germany, and fiery darts seen in the sky. The sun is this year
Eclipsed The Tartars invade Podolia, and are expelled. English invade Scotland,
but are repelled. Huniades defeateth the Turks in Russia. The Vatican Library
erected. 1460. In England three suns appeared. A mighty Tempest at Venice. In
Poland there was seen (says my author) an Image of Christ crucified, with a
sword, to pass along the air, from West to South for two hours. King of England
is taken at Northampton. Venetians war with the Turk. The Civil war of France
begins. The war continues in Germany about the Archbishopric of Mentz. A
rebellion in France against the Queen, for the Princes death. 1470. Hail of
wonderful greatness fell at Rome, the stones whereof weighed 8 ounces. In
Germany Hailstones fell as big as Goose eggs. The Turks take Sabotz in Hungary.
They waste Germany. King of Sicily, with the Venetians, war against the Turks.
The Venetians spoil Lesbos, and Pergamus. 1478. The Sun darkened without an
Eclipse. Flocks of Grasshoppers in Italy. A glorious star seen to run along the
Firmament. Armies in Switzerland. Fighting in the Air this year also. The Turks
waste Carinthia. And the Tartars waste Podolia. The Hungarians defeat the
Turks, and take 30000 Captives from them. The Inquisition instituted in Castile
against the Moors and Jews. The Transylvanians overcome the Turks. 1492. Great
^nundations in England. An Eclipse of the sun. A great Comet; three suns in
Pol^nd. Another Comet lasting two months. In Rome the kie was seen to be on
fire many nights together. The English go against the French The ^^ws exp^lled
Spain. The King of Poland dy^th. The Ganthoys rebel in Flanders. The Hungarians
enter Mysia, and return thence with much booty. 1500. A great fiery Dragon and
of monstious shape seen at Lucren. A Comet for 18 days together in Poland. An
inundation in Germany. Turks take Modon^, and many other places from the
Venetians. A Rebellion in France. The French and Spania^ds ex^el Frederick from
Naples. The Turks dest^oy many of the French, Spaniards and Venetians. 1510.
It Is strange to relate! for in this year (says my Author; there fell twelve
hundred stones from Heaven, some weighing sixty pound, others more, viz. 120 l.
which (if true) serves as a good Argument to prove the other Planets habitable.
The Lubeckers waste Denmark. King of England goes into France, and besieges
Turwyn. Bajazet the Turk is poisoned. The Spaniards take Tripolis. They war in
Navarr. The Lubeckers worst the Danes at sea. The Switzers invade France, and
do much mischief there. 1521. Three suns with a Rainbow seen at Vienna. A great
burning Torch suddenly after. A Circle and Cross appears with the Moon. A
burning Beam in Germany. Venetians aid the Hungarians against the Turks. The
French loose Milan. English and French quarrel. Emperor invades Picardy. King
Henry the Eighth writes against the Pope 1530. A very great Comet that passed
through Cancer, Leo, and Virgo, was visible to all Europe. A very great
inundation in Holland. In Holland 404 Parishes drowned, with all their people
and cattle. The Turks take Buda in Hungaria. Cardinal Woolsey dies. The Clergy
fined (and paid) to the King 100000 l. for diverse misdemeanors. 1539. A bloody
star and Cross were seen flying in the air. Armed men, swords and funerals were
seen to walk in the air in Germany* A blazing star this year. A great fire in
Constantinople, which burnt the Goal, and consumed 700 Prisoners therein. The
Irish Invade the English and are beaten. The Ganthois mutiny, and behead their
Magistrates. 1550. Corn rained from Heaven in Carinthia. Three suns seen in
England. An earthquake, and bowls of fire seen in the Elements. Armies of men
seen in the air in Saxony. The sun seemed to cleave in sunder. Great troubles
at Antwerp. The sweating sickness in England* the French War with the Emperor.
The Duke of Somerset in England executed for Felony. The Queen of Swevia dies.
The Pirates carry 6000 Captives out of the Isle of Gaul, near to Malta. 1562. An
Earthquake in Constantinople. Clashing of weapons in the Elements, and armed
men seen there. Much thunder in England. Five suns seen in Holland. English
take many Towns in France. A great plague in England. Muscovites invade
Livonia, 9000 slain at Dreux in Normandy, among which the King of Navarr. Danes
and Lubeckers invade Swevia. Polanders beat the Livonians. 1568. Many Locusts
in France. The Heavens seem all on fire in Hungary. In England (when the true
moon was under the earth) appears a moon and a cross, with a refulgent star at
the top thereof. Third Civil War in France. King of Swedland deposed and
imprisoned. Prince of Conde taken, and shot to death with a Pistol. Earls of
Northumberland and Westmoreland rebel. Selymus invadeth Cyprus. The Polanders
and Danes fight at Sea. 1579. A fiery Dragon and great troops of Ravens flew
through the air in Germany A great tempest in Bohemia. An Earthquak^ in
Holland. Armies in the heavens seen at Antwerp. Two armed men in Gelderland
seen in the air. Polanders take Livonia and Polotia from the Muscovite. Popish
Clergy expelled Antwerp by the people. The Emperor prohibit^th the protestant
Religion at Aken. Uraniburg Castle built by the most noble, and ever to be
honored Tycho Brahe. 1602. An Earthquake in Eng^and A Comet of very great
magnitude appeared. Armies of men seen in the air in France. Swarms of
Grasshoppers in Germany Spaniards invade Ireland, but beaten thence. Swedes
att^mpt Livonia in vain. Basta d ^e teth the Transylvan^^n, and kills the
Vayv^d of Valachia. The Turks loose Alla regalis, and 60000 men. Qu. of Engl.
dies. 1610. Fiery Darts and Lances seen in the heavens. Four Crosses seen at
once in the air in Spain: Very great thunder and an Ea^thquake there also.
Danes War with the Sweds. Persians invade Babylon, and kill 20000 m^n. Kin^ of
France is slain. Polonians overcome the Muscovites* 900000 Morisques ex^el'd
Spain. 1616. Diverse mock-suns in the West of England. An inundation in Holland.
The shape of an Elephant in the air s^en in Germ^ny. A Lion was heard (as my
author says) to roar in the air. Archbishop of Spalato into England. Venetians
war with Ferdinand of Austria. Hollanders beat the Spaniards in the South Sea.
The Tartars invade Podolia, they burn four Cities, and 400 Villages, and carry
with them thence much booty. 1622. Three suns appeared at Heidelburg. An
Earthquake in Italy. Many prodigious lightnings and rains in France. Circles
seen about the sun an^ moon in England The Jesuits and Papists expelled the
Netherlands. Duke of Brunswick lost his Arm in battle. A great dearth in
Moravia, and Silesia. Bergen in Norway almost consumed by fire. 1627. Two Army
were seen to figh^ in the air in Pom^rania A great fiery beam in France seen in
the air An Earthquake in England. Polanders recover many places from the
Tartars. Persians beat the Turks. English take the Isle of Ree, and loose it
again. The Hollander beats the Spaniard in the Indies. 1635. An inundation at
Rome. Five moons seen in No^mandy at once. Italy this year brought forth many
monsters. A Sickness at Rome. Division in Scotland about Religion Hollander and
Spaniard fight at Sea. A great Plague at Venice. The Spaniards beat the French.
1638. Six suns seen in Cornwall at once: several apparitions of men in the
heavens, preparing to fight with each other; also Navies of ships in 1639. An
Eclipse of. Scots begin to rebel against England. The King goes in person to
appease them. They rout the Bishops, and turn high Presbyters. The Hollanders
beat the Spaniards Fleet. The Irish massacre the English. 1645. Many
apparitions this year seen in the North of England. Diverse Parelia's or
mock-suns. An Eclipse of the sun in. All England together by the Ears. The
Civil war prevails. The Scots return home again in 1646. The English go into
Ireland, and subdue it. 1652. A great Eclipse of the sun. Two of the m^on. A
two-handed sword seen in the air in Cheshire. Armies of men encountering each
other in the air, seen in the North A Comet in and. The English subdue
Scotland, And beat the Dutch at Sea. They beat the French at Sea this year
also. The Lord General Cromwell in 1653. made Lord Protector of all Britain and
Ireland. 1654. An eclipse of the sun. An Earthquake in the West of England.
Apparitions in the air in the North of England. A very great rain in Bohemia.
The King of the Romans, and the Pope of Rome, dies. English take Jamaica, and
war with Spain. English and Sweds unite. Cardinal Ghisi made Pope in 1655. The
Polanders routed by the Swede. 1656. An Earthquake in Cheshire doing much harm,
viz. sinking the ground; and rending up many Trees by the roots, to the great
damage of the Country. In Nov. 1656. A fiery Dragon seen in the air in
Scotland. In 1658. August. A great Whale came up to Greenwich near London: a
thing seldom known before. The English land in Flanders, and take Mardike from
the Spaniards; they grow angry thereat, and wars between them grow high. King
of Denmark twice invaded by the King of Sweden. In 1658. Dunkirk taken by the
English. Oliver Cromwell dies. Rich. Cromwell confidently succeeds him in
Government, as if it had been his just due: Nay, the people of England send
such sugared Addresses to him, that he believ^d himself to be what they
flatteringly styled him. King of Sweden looses much, and dies. 1658. 1659. A
very great inundation in Holland, drowning 36000 acres of ground. A great
eclipse of the in Scorpio, Nov. 4. Lofty and strange unwonted winds An
Earthquake in Naples. Great rains in France. An inundation at Blackwall London,
overflowing many acres of ground. In May 1650. The long Parliament returned,
turn d out Rich. Cromwell: then turned out by Lambert and others th^mselves. A
Committee of Safety set up. Lord Genesis Monck troubled to behold the confusion of
the English Proceedings, marches out of Scotland, and (after the Committee of
Safety was fallen) brings in the secluded Members. The long Parliam dissolved.
They call another, which Restores his Royal Majesty King Charles the 2. to his
just Rights and Privileges; whom God preserve with a long and happy reign over
us. 1660.

Thus much may serve for the second part of this Book, viz. a Catalogue of
Prodigies remarkable since the Birth of Christ, with the Effects attending
them. Whence I journey to my third particular promised, and that is --

Something touching Comets and Eclipses. But first, note that many of the
things mentioned in the Column of Effects, did fall out (sometimes) the next
year following the time of the Prodigies happening; but mostly they are
attributed to the particular years, as any ingenious Chronologer may discern.
And let the Reader understand, that although I have appropriated those many and
several accidents of Countries unto the several Prodigies happening therein, yet
I deny not the Cooperation of the Celestial bodies therewith, according to
the strength of their configurations, in the production of such rare and
admirable Effects.

The ingenious Reader I judge is not so low orbed, as to stand in need of this
Advertisement. Ergo, I intend it not for his use, or instruction. But 1. to
prevent the overheated Conception of the Cynical adversaries to Art; (for I
foresee some such will happen on this Book.) And 2. to strengthen the weaker
fancy, who is often found willing to be wading in Rivers of this Nature, that
he may not in stead of refreshing, drown himself.

SECT. III. Something touching Comets, Eclipses and Earthquakes.
THis Section I shall divide into three parts or subsections; and those
subjections I shall sub-divide again, as the occasion or matter requires.

Subsect. 1. Of Comets.
Because things in order look the best, I shall divide this member or
subsection into the following particulars: 1. Of the names and kinds of Comets.
2. Of what they are engendered. 3. Of the color of Comets. 4. Of their final
Cause.


1. Of the names and kinds of Comets.
To let pass all impertinent Circumstances, and come closely to the matter in
hand, Cometa seu (...) (i. e.) a Comer, is so called from Coma, which
signifies the hair of the head, or rather a bush of hairs, after the vulgar or
more general acceptance; or (if we shall speak with the learned Cicero) it is
concinnatam Sydus, a Star having curled, or crisped hair. Or if you please,
thus: a Comet is an unusual apparition, consisting of Exhalations hot and dry;
the site and motion of which, is contrary to that of the fixed or Erratique
Stars.

Aristotle, that great master of reason, Lib. 1. Met. C. 8. makes only two
sorts of Comets or blazing Stars, viz. Crinita and Barbata. The first, are
those that dilate or extend their Rays or Beams, like hairs on every side
equally. The second, are those whose Beams are extended to a very great length,
or that seem to have a Beard, Mane, or Tail, directly poynting one way. Another
divided Comets into two sorts, a Motu and substantia, from their Motion and
substance. Alii ardorem undique fundunt, nec locum mutant; alii in unam partem
ignem vagum in modum comae porrigunt, and stellas permeant: (i. e.) Some Comets
there be, that stretch forth or extend their ardor and light on every side, and
do not change their place; and there are others that cast forth a wandering or
unconstant fire, like the hair of ones head, toward one part only, and so
passes through the Stars.

Astro^ogers (unto whom the study of such things does principally belong) Ab
efficienti causa, From the efficient cause of Comets, divide them into seven
Species or kinds, agreeable to the number and nature of the seven Planets, or
Erratique Stars: Terming some of them Saturnine, others Jovial; Some Martial,
some Solar, others Mercurial, etc. of which you may read in Franciscus
Junctinus his Spect. Astral. De Cometis.

But the great Naturalist Pliny, in his Natural History, Lib. 2. Cap. 15.
reckons up twelve kinds of Comets, bearing these following Names and Figures.

1. Crinita, An hairy Comet, horrible to behold, equally inflamed round with
bloody shagged hairs, like a bush, or hair of the head.

2. Barbata, A Bearded Star or Comet, casting forth his Beams or Flames to a
very great length.

3. Jaculum, A Dart or Javeling, because it brandisheth its rays in the form
or shape thereof.

4. Gladius, a Knife, Sword, or Dagger, the head of which appears like to the
hilt of a Sword; but the Rays rather resemble a Dagger or a Knife.

5. Disc^us, so called, when it resembles in shape or form, a dish or ^latter;
(i. e.) when it is of figure broad and round, and dilateth slender rays round
about equally.

6. Pithetes, which very much resembles the shape of a Tun, hiding the obscure
and smoakie beams in the very middle thereof, as in a hollow concave.

7. Ceratias, a Comet casting a flame crooked or bowed like a horn, or like the
head of a Crosiers staff.

8. A Lampas, or Lampadias, which bears the similitude of a burning Lamp or
Torch, issuing out flames in the Heavens.

9. (...), Hippeus, Equinum sydus, is a Star representing the mane of a Horse,
most swift in motion.

10. Hercus, a Comet environed with some kind of haits and a man^, seemingly
ro^gh and hairy, by the slender fibrae of its beams.

11. Argyrocomus, or Argenticomus, which is a Star or Comet silver-hair'd,
being very white and thin in it is shining.

12. Hasta, a Comet in the form of a Spear, which some Naturalists call veru, a
spit, or broach; and Perticam, a Perch.

These are the several names and kinds of Comets, according to the best of
Authors. I come next to speak --

2. Of what Comets are Engendered.
In this particular, Authors are very much differing in their opinions; for
some there be that think Comets to be souls of illustrious men triumphing in
Heaven, or fires conveyed to and fro by the power of spirits; and Bodine was a
chief maintainer hereof.

Others there are, that judge a Comet not to be any thing real and distinct
from other pre-existent bodies; but rather a mere Emphasis or apparency, made
by the reflection or refraction of Solar and Lunar Rays. Another sort think
them to be sublunary Meteors a^ising from the most subtle breathings or
vapors; but not so much inflamed as illustrated of the Sun. There are some
also who judge them to be made or generated de Novo, in Heaven, and of a
Celestial matter^ and by degrees afterward they are corrupted. And others
there are that think them to be both generated and governed by the Angels and
Intelligences.

But that opinion which seems most agreeable to reason, and to the Nature of
Comets, is, that they are engendered of ignean and fiery vapors, consisting of
abundance of Viscous, Clammy, Sulphurous, and compacted matter, attracted or
drawn from the earth. Or to speak with Aristotle, The matter of which Comets or
blazing Stars consist, is an exhalation hot and dry, f^t and clammy, attracted
or drawn by virtue of the heavenly bodies into the highest Region or part of
the Air, and sometimes into the Starry Region; where it is closely
conglutinated into a great lump, by reason of the constant and continued supply
it has from below, so long as there is a working to exhale it: and it being
thus compacted and exhaled, is set on fire in convenient time, by the excessive
heat of the place where it rests. It sometimes continues long in burning, and
sometimes but a little while, according to the paucity or plenty of the matter
whereof it consists. And this may serve for the matter of Comets.

3. of the Color of Comets.
The colors of Comets are much to be noted in their significations and
portents, as the writings of the Ancients testify at large; but their opinions
hereof are several.

Some there are that hold that the colors of Comets are principally three,
viz. 1. If the matter of which they consist be rare and thin, then are they
transparent, clear, and of color white. 2. If their substance be thick and
^iscous, then is the color ruddy, looking like unto fire. 3. If the matter or
substance whereof they consist be very thick, then the color of them is like
to burning of brimstone or, of a blew appearance.

Astrologers generally hold that there are Comets of seven several colors,
according to the number and color of the seven Planets, viz. --

1. Some Comets appear of a splendent yellow gold-colour; and those are
attributed to the Sun.

2. There are those that be of a leaden, pale, ashy colou^, and termed
Saturnine.

3. Those that appear very bright, clear, and glorious, are called Jovial
Comets.

4. But if they appear of color red and rutilant, they are termed Martial.

5. Those Comets that are of a bright illustrious silver color, belong to the
Planet Venus.

6. When any of them appear of diverse colors, as azure, red, yellow, blew,
green, etc. you may be confident they pertain to Mercury.

7. If any Comet appear of a pale brightish white, the Moon will own the color.

And this may satisfy for the color of Comets. Astrologers judge of their
effects as well by their colors, as by their forms or figures, or time of
continuance; as may appear at large by their writings; unto which I refer the
desirous Reader.

4. Of their final cause.
Most Philosophers and Naturalists agree that Comets are the Embassa^ours or
Agents of a highly offended Deity; and the Denuntiators of misery to mankind:
But this Opinion being too general, they have furnished us with Reasons for a
threefold end, that is to be observed in the coming of Comets.

1. Natural or Physical. 2. Political. 3. Theological.
First, Comets are or may be sent for a Natural or Physical end, that they may
by their attractive strengths and virtues draw up the spirits, breathings and
pestiferous winds, which are gathered together from Metallique liquors in the
Earth, into the air, from the common seat and place of mankind, that thereby
we may partake the less of their malice. For (says one) by being burnt out,
and consumed there, they are the less able to hurt us, then if they were below.
And if they should remain in the Earth (as sometimes they do) they would then
rend and shake it; or if they should remain in the near neighboring air, they
would infect or poison us sooner, then by their being above: For if the air be
infected when they are on high, and a great way from us, much more would it be
infected, should they be below and near us.

Secondly, They may be sent for a political end; and in this respect, they are
taken for heralds or proclaimers of future calamities and miseries; that men
thereby being forewarned, may be fore-armed, and provided, either to shun the
threatened disaster or mischief, or else with patience and moderation endure the
common and inevitable misery. It is a most certain truth, (...). Never yet did
any Comet appear, but it was the messenger or declarer of some evil. They are
ordinarily the prenuntiators of the death of Princes, Plague and Famine of the
people (which things in the body politic, are as the bleeding a vein in the
body natural) also Wars, Inundations, Earthquakes and Tempests.

Thirdly, in respect of their Theological end, I agree with that learned
Author Dr. Swan, that they are either a sign of calamity, or else the
efficient cause of them. If a sign of calamity, then their end is to be
Monitors, Instigators, and admonishers to repentance. But if they be the
efficient cause of misery and calamity, then are they sent as the instruments
of punishing some such enormous malice and contumacy, as would not be kept
under, or restrained by any humane law or device whatsoever.

Most true it is, That Comets (and indeed all prodigies) were always looked
upon, as the threatening eyes of divine vengeance, or the tongue of an ireful
and greatly offended Deity. The learned Naturalist Pliny, tells us, that a
Comet is a terrible Star, for the most part, and is not e^sily purged away by
sacrifice, etc. And the eminently learned Meteorologist Fromundus, lib. 1. cap.
3. after a large Discourse of this subject, concludes, Cometem non esse
Physicam causam calamitatum, etc. That a Comet is not a Physical cause of
Calamities, but rather a sign at the pleasure of God using the same to a
natural end, to terrify and amend Mortals; as he uses the Rainbow to signify
the Covenant ^^^e between him and mankind. And although Comets may be
fortunate (or ^^^m so) unto some, yet are they sent for this very end, viz. to
denounce more sorrowful things, and to heap up the death of Princes, and the
calamities of the People. And thus much for the end of Comets.

The Earth in vain did never gaze,
When Comets in the Skies do blaze.
Those that would judge of, or be acquainted with the particular portents and
significations of Comets, may adhere to the writings of Astrologers; where
according to the place, motion, duration, figure, and color of all Comets, or
blazing Stars, they may meet with singular and experienced Aphorisms, which
will be conveniently assisting to all necessary and industrious scrutinies
pertaining thereunto.

Subsect. 2. Of Eclipses.
1. What an Eclipse is?
An Eclipse is a privation or want of light in an opacous or dark body, which
at some times is beheld or aspected by a luminous body; and is therefore
termed of the Greeks (...), Eclipsis, (...), quod est deficere. A wanting,
waining, failing, or obscuring. And this accident (for such it is) happens most
truly in the opake or dark bodies of the Earth and Moon: yet more vulgarly and
commonly, (and therefore more improperly) believed of the Sun; whereas it is
impossible for a Luminous body, (and such is the Sun, yea, fons Lucis, the
fountain of light) to suffer either a privation or obscuration, as I have
elsewhere demonstrated. But to stoop to the most ordinary capacities, let it
pass for a truth, that the Sun (when the Earth) is eclipsed.

2. The Suns Eclipse, how caused.
The Eclipse of the Sun is caused by the interposition of the opacous and dark
body of the Moon between the Sun and our sight; which for a season obscureth or
hides the light of the Sun from our sight. Now this only falls out at a new
Moon, or when the Sun and Moon are in Conjunction. But you must know that it is
not every time the Luminaries are in Conjunction, that the Sun suffers an
eclipse; but when the Conjunction happens within the limits, or ordinary
boundaries of an Eclipse. And they are chiefly these following. --

First, if the apparent latitude of the Moon, at the time of the visible
Conjunction exceed 34. min. 51. sec. the Sun at that time cannot be Eclipsed.

Secondly, when the mean motion of the Moons latitude, at the middle time of
the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon, is distant from the North Node (which the
Greeks term (...) or Caput Draconis) less then 20 degrees. 40 min. or from the
South Node (which is called (...) or Cauda Draconis) less then 11 degrees. 22 min.
then may the Sun be eclipsed at that Conjunction.

Thirdly, if the apparent latitude of the Moon, at the time of the visible
Conjunction with her and the Sun, be less then the sum of their Semidiameters,
then may the Sun be eclipsed, or at the least, we may be deprived of his light:
but if none of these happen, at the time of the Conjunction, you may be
confident there can be no Eclipse.

Now Eclipses of the Sun are either total, and without duration, which
happens when the Moon has no apparent latitude at the time of the visible
Conjunction; or partial, which happens three ways, 1. when the Diameter of
the Sun is only darkened, as when the apparent latitude of the Moon is equal to
her apparent Semidiameter it will be. 2. when there is more then his
Semidiameter darkened; as when the Moons apparent latitude is less then her
apparent Semidiameter. 3. and lastly, when there is less then the Suns
Semidiameter darkened; as when the apparent latitude of the Moon is greater then
her apparent Semidiameters.

3. Of the Moons Eclipse, how caused.
The Moon, being (as you heard before) an Opacous and dark body, having no
light but what she receives from the Sun, by the inte^po^ition of the vast ^ody
of the earth between the Sun and her, comes to suffer an Eclipse. And this
happens always at a Plenilunium, or an opposition of the lights. But you must
know, that her Eclipse or want of light is not always after one and the same
manner, as may appear by these following reasons:

First, by reason of the inequality or difference of her latitude, which in
some Eclipses is nothing at all, and then the Eclipse is greater, and of longer
continuance or duration.

Secondly, when the latitude of the Moon is so great, that she falls but
little within the shadow of the Earth, and by consequence comes to suffer the
smaller Eclipse. You are to understand, that as the Sun is not subject to an
Eclipse every time he is in Conjunction of the Moon; so the Moon is not capable
of suffering a defect or want of light every time she is in opposition of the
Sun. But if you would know when the Moon shall suffer an Eclipse, and when not,
observe these two rules.

First, if the latitude of the full Moon be less then the sum of the
Semidiameters of the Moon and the earths shadow, the Moon may then suffer an
Eclipse; but if her latitude be greater, she cannot at that full Moon be
eclipsed.

Secondly, if the middle place of the Moon shall be distant from either her
North or South Node, ( i. e. the Dragons Head or Tail) less then 15. d. 12. m.
she may at that opposition suffer an eclipse. But if her middle place be
farther distant, she can then suffer no Eclipse at all, as being out of the
limits and boundaries thereof.

4. Of the portents of Eclipses, falling in either of the Triplicities.
It is notoriously known, that Eclipses of the Luminaries are of a sad import
and tendency to mankind generally; and this according to their quantity,
obscuration, duration, and part of Heaven they fall in.

An Eclipse of either Sun or Moon in the fiery Triplicity, viz.,,, denotes the
death or exile of some famous King to Prince, etc. death of whole herds of
Cattle; great Wars, burnings of Towns, many Murders, Slaughters, Thefts, hot
and violent diseases; strange ^pparitions in the air, many abortions in women,
scarcity of Fruit or Grain; grand mutations, chiefly in those places subject to
the sign wherein the defect happens.

An Eclipse of either Luminary in the airie Trigon, is the Precursor of Famine
and pestilential diseases, fierce sicknesses, high and stormy winds, blowing
down many Houses and buildings, yea, the very trees by the roots.

But if an Eclipse of either light happen in the earthy Triplicity, viz.,,, it
is the (...), or forerunner of a great scarcity or w^nt of grain, and all
sorts of things that grow upon the Earth, as herbs, fruit, etc. and sometimes
it presign fies Earthquakes.

An Eclipse of either of the Luminaries falling in the watery Triplicity,
viz.,,, presageth a rot or consumption of the vulgar people, many rumors and
discontents, great seditions and expectations of Wars, destruction of
waterfowl, and death of Fishes, great inundations and overflowing of the
Sea-banks. This for the signification of Eclipses in general: More particular
judgments follow.

5. What is signified by the Suns suffering an Eclipse in any Decanate or face
of the twelve Signs.
In.
Sol cum laborare visus fuerit in aliquo ex primis december gradibus, crebros
armorum and excercituum motus portendit, continuasque expeditiones, and
insultus bellorum cum tumultu plurimo: Seditiones, controversias and
intemperiem aeris ad siccitatem potissimum vergentis, (i. e.) When thou shall
observe an Eclipse of the Sun to happen in the first ten degrees or decanate of
the Ram, it generally portends rumors of Wars, motions of armies, continual
expeditions, seditions and controversies; great intemperancie of the air, and a
most excessive drought.

In sequenti vero decano, regis carcerem, etc. But if an Eclipse happen in the
second face of, it denotes the captivity or imprisonment of a King or great
Person; sometimes death, but always great sorrow to him or them; it bodes the
destruction of fruit trees, and a rottenness and putrefaction of such things as
grow on the earth; by the means of which, both men and beasts are afflicted.

In the last decanate of, it is the forerunner of lamentation and woe to most
men, and of the death of some woman of great note, also the destruction of
beasts and cattle of the smaller sort.

In.
In, vero denario primo negotiatores affligit, etc. but if there happen an
Eclipse in the first decade of, it denotes misery and affliction to all
Negotiators, Agents and Sollicitors, or such as are employed in Public
affairs; many will busy themselves in unnecessary employments, and bring
trouble to themselves thereby: it also presages destruction to corn.

In the decade of, an Eclipse fore-tels many difficulties and discommodities to
Travelers; many abortions to women; it presages the production of Monsters, or
unnatural births.

In the third face of, an Eclipse signifies both Plague and Famine; a mortality
among all sorts of great Beasts, as Horses, Cows, Oxen.

In.
In primis 10. Gradibus, Sacerdotibus, and in quovis ordine sacris initiatis
dissentionem, etc. An Eclipse falling in the first 10. degrees of, prenotes
dissentions, strifes, seditions, and contentions among Clergymen of all
sorts; and also among Merchants and Mechaniques; great hatred and contempt of
the Laws, neglect of godly and praiseworthy exercises, breach of Contracts and
Covenants.

In the second decade of, it denotes many murders, much robbing at land, manay
Piracies at Sea, fruitless Treaties, turbulent and scurrile Petitions, the
common people grate the ears of their Governors withal.

In the third face of, it portends the death of some Emperor, King or eminent
person, various losses and crosses to the republique; great trouble in the
management of civil affairs, much infortunacy to all sorts of people, both
superior and inferior.

In.
In december primis gradibus, aerem perturbat, etc. An Eclipse in the first 10.
degrees of, denotes much trouble in the Air; men will be inclineable to wars
and controversies, and apt to violate Leagues and Covenants; and many religious
deceipts will be put in practice.

In the second face of, fountains and rivers are dried up; there will be much
incontinency, knavery and circumvention practiced, among men and women.

In the third face of, many seditions and diseases are threatened unto the
inhabitants of those Countries subject to; small Pox, Dropsy, Morbus Gallicus,
pains in the stomach, Consumption.

In.
In, denario primo summi alicujus Principis mortem, etc. The eclipsed in the
first 10. degrees of, denotes the death of some famous Prince, or great person;
Great scarcity of grain, and of all things that grow on the Earth.

The eclipsed in the second decade, imports great tribulation and sorrow,
Anxiety and trouble, unto Kings and Noble personages.

In the third face of, many Captivities, besiegings of Towns and Castles,
robbings and plunderings, a profanation of holy places, and a destruction of
Horses by murrain.

In.
In, decano primo, calamitosum regis alicujus exitum, etc. An Eclipse of in the
first face of, shows much misery and sorrow, if not death to some King or
Prince: A slaughter of men, and a dearth of corn.

In the second face, it denotes famine, Plague, thin crops of corn, great
droughts, and many seditions among men.

In the third decanate of, it threatens misery to Mercurial men, as Painters,
Poets, Printers, Stationers, etc. they will be driven to extreme want. It
procuceth many murders, banishments, etc. stirs up harsh fancies in Satirical
Poets; by writing which, they will reap reproach.

In.
In 10. primis grad. aerem corrumpit, etc. An Eclipse in the first 10. degrees
of, corrupts the Air; whence a plague ensues; it incites youth to much
wantonness and vain delight; provision will be dear.

But if the shall be obscured in the second face of, it denotes the death of
some eminent King or Nobleman; s^irs up seditions, trouble about Customs and
Privileges; it is also the forerunner of famine.

If in the third decade of, it stirs up high and wonderful controversies
amongst the Nobility, and much damage and detriment will befall them in their
Estates, by prodigality: it portends the rooting out of an Ancient Family.

In.
In, denario primo tumultus bellicos movet, etc. In the first decanate of, an
Eclipse of stirs up wars and tumults, captivities, treasons, murders,
dissentions, and many mischievous underhand basenesses.

In the second face of, it presageth the destruction of some King or great
person, and declares him averse to Wars or Armies.

In the last decade of, it denotes the coming in of some stranger-tyrant, and
the odiousness of the present Governor, by reason of his sloth and negligence.

In.
In 10. primis Gradibus, seditiones inter Mortales manifestas ostendit, etc.
prenotes dangerous seditions among men, and that they shall be averse to all
manner of accommodations or Treaties; the Prince as well as the Peasant deeming
and dreading deceits in those that they hap to deal with.

In the second face of, death and destruction of those Cattle that bray, as the
Heart, Stag, Buck, Ass: and of the bigger sorts of beasts that are useful for
the support and nourishment of man.

In the third decade of, Horses shall be prejudiced and afflicted, and Armies
then on foot thereby: the Nobility and Gentry much crossed, and they most
simply and foolishly undo themselves.

In.
In decano primo, infoelices habet magnorum virorum casus. An Eclipse in the
first decanate of, portends unhappy Chances, and strange casualties to attend
great persons; and that some King or Person of eminency shall flit and shift
his place or habitation, by reason of the revolting of Nobles and vulgar people
also from him.

In the second ten degrees, Soldiers will contend with or rebel against their
Commanders, Emperor, or King; but they shall not prosper. It threatens a
scarcity of grain, and that many people shall die for want of bread.

In the third decade of, an Eclipse prenotes famine, great penury and want to
the Husbandman, bad Harvests: Also the tumultuous motion of a King or great
Person.

In.
In primis 10. grad. An Eclipse of Sol in the first ten degrees of, prenotes
public sorrow and mourning to Gentlemen, or men of the highest rank.

In the second decanate of, famine and an Earthquake, Monopolies, Robberies,
Rapines; and, which is worse, such things will be countenanced by men in power
and authority.

In the third face of, an Eclipse foretells the death of field-Cattle, and most
brutish creatures, and many times great inundations.

In.
In december primis gradibus, fluvios exsic^at, etc. The eclipsed in the first ten
degrees of, denotes the drying up, or draining of Rivers; and that the
Seacoasts shall be unfortunate, and fishes driven far from the shore.

In the second face of Pisces, an Eclipse is the designator of the death of
some famous or excellent man; destruction and waste of fish near the Sea-Towns;
it also bodes an Earthquake, and the questioning of some Churchman.

In the last decanate of, cruelty, sedition, and much bitterness of spirit is
threatened; much inhumanity among Soldiers; quarrels, and controversies among
Clergymen and Lawyers. Thus much for Eclipses of the in any decade of the
twelve signs.

6. What is portended by the Moons being eclipsed in any of the decanates of
the Twelve Signs.
In.
In december primis gradib. obscurat Luna, Febres futurus, adium incendia,
combustiones nembrum, ac aeris siccitatem ostendit. The Moon suffering an
Eclipse in any of the first ten degrees of, prenotes that fevers shall be very
rise; and the burning of Houses; and destruction of woods; the Air will be hot
and dry, and many Cater-pillars and destructive vermin will then appear.

In the second face of, it bodes a general pestilence, or fatality in most
diseases.

In the third decade of, many abortions and dangers unto women; great danger or
death to many feminine persons of quality.

In.
In denario primo, nece, etc. In the first decanate of, the murrain or some
pernicious disease reigns generally among Cattle.

In the second face of, it presages the death of some eminent Queen, a dearth
of Corn, and the barrenness of most things growing on the Earth.

In the third decade of, then follows a plague among noxious creatures, and all
sorts of vermin.

In.
In december primis gradib. In the first ten degrees of, it denotes the incursions
and rapines of enemies; fraudulent negotiations, violent Petitions, many
missives; much employment for Scribes and Secretaries.

In the second ten degrees of, the sudden motion of Armies; men are careful and
solicitous both of private and public affairs: Judges will take care that
justice be executed.

In the third decade of, it foretells the death of some eminent and famous man;
and he happily to be famous for learning.

In.
In denario primo, bellum omnino concitat. In the first partition of, men's
minds are stirred up and excited to War, Treachery and Apostasy.

An Eclipse in the second decanate of, prenotes bitter and sharp exactions,
intolerable assessments and burdens to afflict and oppress the commonalty;
also much harm at Sea.

In the last decanate of, there succeeds many diseases to women, and sudden and
unexpected death to many of the ignobler and meaner sort of people.

In.
In december primis gradibus. In the first ten degrees of, an Eclipse portends a
sudden evil to befall some great King or Prince, or the death of some eminent
and Noble person.

In the second face of, it presages the progress of a King, and a strange
Catastrophe in mundane affairs.

In the third face of, an Eclipse portends much discontentedness in people
generally, and shows them to be given to novelties, and desirous of new Laws,
etc.

In.
In decano primo, aegrotationes regum inducit, etc. An Eclipse in the first
face of, denotes grand sicknesses unto Kings and great persons, many discords
and dissentions universally raging among them.

In the second decade of, an Eclipse prenotes destructions and calamity to
Counselors, Lawyers, Solicitors, Secretaries, and the like.

But in the last face of, mankind is generally afflicted with many diseases;
there will be much scarcity of bread, and a paucity of all sorts of grain

In.
In december primis gradibus. In the first 10. degrees of, many hail-storms are
produced, much ill weather, turbulent winds, violent Tempests, etc.

In the second decade of, an Eclipse presages much mischief to Catch-poles,
Informers, Petty-foggers, Trepanners, and such like cattle; and that they shall
severely suffer for their knavery.

In the third face of, it denotes the death of some noted and eminent person;
and that men pretending religion, shall raise seditions in the Courts of Kings
and Princes.

In.
In december primis gradib. horrenda tonitrua and fulgura protendit, etc. An
Eclipse of the Moon in the first decade of, threatens oftentimes terrible
Thunders, great Lightnings and Earthquakes; And a multitude of destructive
Creatures in the waters.

In the second face of, presages that sharp and hot fevers shall afflict men,
and that siccity shall destroy the Olives, and infect the Air.

In the third decanate of, it is the prodromus of many murders and seditions;
and all manner of wretchedness will follow; mankind will be generally oppressed
with many obnoxions diseases.

In.
In 10 primis grad. Latrocinia, etc. An Eclipse in the first 10. degrees of,
denotes many thefts, murders and rapines.

In the second decade of, many diseases will range among horses and mules, etc.
And the Seas will be much troubled with Pirates.

In the third face of, generally a Plague follows, and very great evils
afflict mankind, and Consumptions will reign among men.

In.
In decano primo, suggillationes in homines movet, etc. An Eclipse of the Moon
in the first decade of, incites men to slander, scandalize, and asperse one the
other; and signifies that a great person, or man of eminency, shall come to an
ill en^.

In the second face of, soldiers will mutiny and make uproars; and make
incursions upon their neighbors Countries, where they will thieve much, and
captivate many.

In the third decanate of, the death of a King is to be feared, and many
conspiracies among the people; and there will be many mutinies.

In.
In december primis grad. In the first 10. degrees of Aquarius, an Eclipse
presages that much perplexity shall happen to a King, and that his health shall
be very much impaired.

In the second decanate of, an Eclipse plagues the poor countryman, and
hinders his seed-time and prejudices him much otherways.

In the last decade of, an Eclipse declares a wonderful mutation in all
affairs, and (many times) a change for the better: It also prenotes a
relaxation from many former oppressions.

In denario primo, Sacerdotibus and aeditibus, etc. When an Eclipse shall
happen in the first ten degrees of it is the forerunner of much sorrow to all
sorts of Clergymen and Church Officers. And the like.

In the second decanate of, an Eclipse is the denoter of the death of some
eminent person or persons.

In the third face of, Latrocinia and rapinas terra, etc. It portends many
robberies, and rapines, and villainies to be perpetrated both at Sea and Land.

Thus much for the significations of the Moons Eclipse in any of the decanates
of the 12. signs, and of my discourse of Eclipses at this time also.

Subsect. 3. Of Earthquakes.
An Earthquake of it self is so generally and experimentally known, that it
would be but to little purpose for me to present you here with a definition
thereof. I shall therefore pretermit that, and discourse of these following
particulars. -- viz.

1. Of the causes of Earthquakes. 2. Of the kinds, or Species. 3. Of their
Antecedentia. 4. Of their Consequentia
1. Of the several causes of Earthquakes.
Because the efficient cause is the most eminent among causes, I shall begin
with that first; of which some learned Naturalists give this account, viz.
Efficiens est calor Solis, and simul ignis subterraneus, quibus suppeditant
tres superiores planetae. The efficient cause of all Earthquakes, is the heat
of the Sun, together with the Subterranean fires, assisted by the astringent or
binding qualities of the three superior Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars.

Sed causa Materialis est spiritus seu vapor, in terrae visceribus, exire
contendens. But the material cause of them, is the spirit or vapor, imprisoned
or confined in the bowels of the Earth, striving or using all possible means to
break forth.

But, Causa Formalis est ipsa concussio terrae, and agitatio exhalationem terra
inclusarum. The formal cause of Earthquakes, is the concussion or troubled
shaking of the earth, and the agitation of the vapors and exhalations therein
enclosed.

And for the final cause of Earthquakes, that may be apparently observed among
their effects or consequentia. For God never (yet) sent any Messenger unto or
among the sons of men, that ever returned without a perfect delivery of his
errand.

2. Of their kinds or Species.
Diverse are the opinions of Philosophers concerning the kinds of Earthquakes;
for there are some that hold there are seven kinds of them; others, but five;
some others, but four: and the learned Aristotle, de Meteor. lib. 2. c. 8.
makes only two Species of them, viz. tremor and pulsus; a trembling and a
beating. But among all these opinions, that which admits of five several kinds
or Species, seems to carry the most apparent show of reason, there being a
manifest and apparent difference between each of them; and accordingly I shall
give you a description of each of them; and they thus follow: --

1. The first kind of Earthquake, is a lateral or side-long shaking; as when
the whole force or fury of the wind drives to one place only, there being no
contrary motion to let or hinder it. Many Hills and Buildings have been rushed
down by this kind of Earthquake, especially when the wind causing it, was
fierce and strong; for if it happen to be a weak and feeble wind, it only
loosneth or unfastneth the foundations; but if it be less weak, then without
further harm, the Earth only shakes like one sick of an ague.

2. The second kind is not so much lateral or side-long, as perpendicular, or
upright; and happens when the earth with great violence is so lifted up, that
the buildings thereof are likely to fall; and suddenly it sinketh down again:
for after the wind or vapor that caused the earth to swell, is broke out of
its prison, the earth returns to its old place, even as it was before.

3. The third kind of Earthquake is called Hyatus, a gaping, rending or
cleaving of the earth; one part thereof being driven so far from the other,
that whole Towns, Cities, Rivers, Hills, Rocks and Seas, and the like, are
swallowed up, and never seen again; like unto that which happened in the year
244. post Christum.

4. The fourth kind of Earthquake is a shaking that causes sinking, and is far
differing from the former; for now the Earth splitteth not, but sinketh; it
happening in such places, where though the surface or upper parts of the earth
be solid and firm, yet the foundation thereof is but salt; which being
moistened by water, being driven through it by the force of the shaking
exhalation, is turned to water also. And after this manner, according to the
testimony of the famous Plato, was the Atlantique Ocean from an Island turned
into a Sea.

5. The fifth and last kind of Earthquakes is different from the former: for as
before the ground sinks down, so now it is cast up; somewhat like to the second
kind mentioned; only with this difference, that now it returns not to its
place again, but remains a very great Mountain; like unto that of Mercley
Hill in Herefordshire which happened about an hundred years since, as is
mentioned at the beginning of this book.

And note, that if such a rising happen in the Sea, it does not only cause
overflowing, but also produces many Islands, such as were never seen before.
And thus much for the Species of Earthquakes.

3. Of their Antecedentia.
As for the Antecedentia, or the signs and forerunners of Earthquakes,
according to the best of Authors, they are chiefly these which follow.

1. A great Calmness, Tranquillity, and serenety of the Air, intermixed with
some cold: the reason of which is, because the exhalation which should be
blowing abroad, is wholly within the Earth.

2. The dimness and paleness of the Sun, for certain days together, although
there be no clouds to interpose. The reason whereof is, because the wind which
should have dissolved and purged the gross Air, is taken captive, and kept and
enclosed within the bowels of the earth.

3. A more then ordinary quietude and solitariness of birds (i. e.) if they do
not fly, but sit still, and are fearful to let any come near unto them: the
reason of which is, because either the pent exhalation sends some strange
alteration in the Air, which slenderly breaths out of the insensible pores of
the earth; which it may do, although the exhalation tarry behind: or else it is
by reason they are scarce able to fly for want of some gentle gales for their
wing (as they fly) to strike upon; it being a thing well known, that birds
fly more cheerfully and willingly when the Air is of such a temper.

4. When the weather of it self is calm, and yet the water of the Sea is
troubled, and rages mightily: and the reason that is given of this, is,
because the great plenty of spirits or wind in the bottom of the Sea, begins to
labor for passage that way; but finding none, is sent back again: whereupon it
soon after shakes the land: and this, says Dr. Swan, is evermore a certain
sign.

5. When the water in the bottom of pits and deep wells is troubled, ascending
and moving as if it were boiled; stinking, and is infected: the reason whereof
is, because the exhalation being pent, and striving to get forth, moves some
stinking minerals and other poisonous stuff to the Springs of these waters; and
they with the struggling exhalation do stir and attaint them.

6. When a long thin cloud is seen in a clear sky, either a little before Sun
setting, or soon after: and this is caused by reason of the calmness of the
Air; even as Aristotle observes, that in a quiet Sea, the Waves float to the
shore long and straight.

7. The seventh and last Sign, and that which cannot but be infallible, is the
great noise and sound which is heard under the Earth, much like to thunder or
hideous groanings. But yet some say, that this is not always attended with an
Earthquake; for if the wind find any way large enough to get out, it shakes
not the Earth. And thus much shall serve for the Antecedentia of Earthquakes.

4. Of their Consequentia.
And now the Consequentia, or effects of Earthquakes, are principally these
following.

First, the ruin of Buildings, and the death and destruction of many people;
and the like: as appears at large by the Chronologies of Eusebius and Lanquet;
also by Tacitus, lib. 2. and Fromundus, lib. 4. Meteor. The Examples whereof
are so many and so numerous, that to recite them here again, were to add
another Chronology. I therefore shall refer to what I have written thereof in
sect. 2.

Secondly, the turning of plain grounds into Mountains, as that of Marcly Hill
before mentioned; and the raising up of Islands in the Sea; as Thia in the time
of Pliny; and Therasia, which as Seneca witnesses, was made an Island even in
the sight of the Mariners, or whilst they were looking on. And after this
manner also, came Delos, Rhodos, and sundry other to be made Islands.

Thirdly, the throwing down, or levelling of Mountains, and sinking of Islands
and other ground: and thus perished by the breach of the earth, those famous
Cities of Achaia, Helice and Buris; of which Ovid thus writes. --

Si quaeras Helicen and Burin, Achaeidas urbes,
Invenies sub aquis; and adhuc ostendere nauta
Inclinata solent cum moenibus oppida mersis.
Which one thus Englisheth.

If thou would Helice, and wished Buris find,
The Achaean Cities, (never lost in mind)
The water hides them; and the ship-men show
Those ruined Towns, and drowned walls as they row.
And after this manner sunk the Earth, which once was where now is only to be
found that deep Pit in the County of Durham commonly called, Hell-Kittles, in
the 24 of Hen. 2.

Fourthly, the driving away, or the cutting the neck of some Isthmus from the
Continent. And thus was Britain separated from France, as Verstegan says; and
so was Sicily divided from Calabria; and Africa from Spain, according to
Seneca.

Fifthly, the translation of Mountains, Buildings, Trees, etc. from one place
to another; as that did a whole Town in Lumbardy, in the reign of Hen^ 1. and
that other in the year 1583. which removed a field of three Acres at Blackmoor
in Dorsetshire. Albertus calls this motion a vection or carrying.

Sixthly, the breaking out of Rivers and Fountains in some new places; which
happens by the breaches made in the earth amongst water-springs, through the
violence of the exhalation.

Seventhly, great winds and tempests, manifest changes and diversities of the
times; infection of the Air, and all that breath in it, chiefly of such
creatures that look downward: for the infection is caused by the poisonous fume
of the exhalation ascending upward. For putrid and Poisonous exhalations infect
the Air, and the Air us; according to Seneca and Pliny: besides, Hieronym.
Cardanus, lib. de Rer. var. speaking of such things, says, -- Terraemotus
magni bellum aut Pestem, nuntiant, vel Tyrannicum oppressionem efficient, and
segetum inopiam, and Famem. (i. e.) Great Earthquakes presage or declare a war
or pestilence, or at least some pernicious oppression; also a scarcity of Corn,
and Famine.

Eighthly, the wrath and terror of an angry and highly displeased Deity; who is
every whit as much honored by making men to tremble and fear before him, as by
his greatest acts of mercy and clemency. For it was his resolution of old, in
Leviticus, chap. 26. verse. 27, 28. Quod si hac ratione non auscultaveritis
mihi, sed ambulaveritis mecum temere, utique ambulabo vobiscum excandescens
temere, etc. But if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary
unto me; then I will walk contrary to you, in fury. It is the end of God in his
greatest and most important works, to strike terror into man, and humble him
for his highest and most provoking insolences! according to the wisemans
saying, Eccles. 3. verse. 14. and God does it, that men should FEAR before him.
And thus much may serve not only for the effects of Earthquakes, but for the
intended discourse thereof: and so I come to my last Particular promised, which
is, --

SECT. IIII. Of Meteors in general, how caused?
TO pretermit the nicety of a definition, because diverse things therein cannot
be conveniently comprehended in a narrow compass; I will come to the causes of
Meteors; and according to the best Philosophers, there are two general causes
of them, viz. by fumes and vapors: Which in themselves are nothing else but
certain exhalations drawn from the earth and water, by the attractive strength
and force of the Suns-Beams; and therefore they are termed Fumus and vapors,
(i. e.) a smoke or breath ascending or flying upward. See Wolf. Meur. Quest.
Meteorol. fol. 102.

Now the Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle, seems to make some kind of
difference between these two; regarding both their matter and quality, as they
relate unto two distinct Elements. For, says he, a vapor is a certain watery
substance or thing, and yet not water: And a fume has and does retain a
certain earthy quality in it, but yet is not earth. And this distinction may be
modestly admitted, according to the Ancient rule, -- Fumus est mediae naturae
inter terrum and ignem; vapor vero inter aquam and aerem. (i.e.) A fume is of a
middle Nature or quality between earth and fire; but a vapor is of a middle
Nature between water and Air. And these (as I said before) the Sun exhales from
the earth and water, according to those pithy verses of Dubartas, Sec. d. w.f.
16.

Two sorts of vapors, by his The Sun.
heat exhales,
From floating deeps, and from the flowery dales;
The One somewhat hot, but heavy, moist and thick;
The Other light, dry, burning, pure and quick.
And Meteorologists ( Fromundus, Meuror and others) thus distinguish between
vapors and fumes: Vapors (say they) are substances warm and moist, and will
very easily resolve into water; like the breath that proceeds from a man's
mouth, or from a pot of water that is boiling over a fire. But fumes are bodies
or substances hot and dry, like unto the smoke, and are by nature thinner and
lighter then vapors; for vapors are never attracted or drawn up above the
middle Region of the Air; for that the cold Air there, by thickning and
conglomerating them, presently turns them into clouds: and thence proceeds
Mists, Rains, Snows, Hayls, etc. Now fumes ascend and pass the lowest and
middle Region of the Air, and are carried up even into the highest Region: And
there by reason of their excessive heat, and neerness unto the fire, they are
kindled, and admit of and receive diverse fiery impressions; and being of a
viscous and clammy nature and substance, and diversely dispersed, they appear to
those that inhabit the Earth, like Dragons, Co^ts, Spears, Darts, Beams,
Torches, etc. and have these appellations given them, for that in their
appearance they resemble such like shapes and forms (ad visum) and also
represent them in their Actions.

Now I shall first treat of those fumes that are hot and dry, (because they are
the most prodigious and remarkable,) and show their several causes in nature
agreeable to their apparitions and shapes. And those be -- 1. Flying Dragons.
2. Dancing Goats. 3. Spears or Darts. 4. Pillars or Beams. 5. Torches or
Firebrands. 6. Flying Sparks. 7. Shooting Stars. 8. Illuminations or scatterd
fire. 9. Ignis Fatuus, or foolish fire. 10. Ignis Lambens, or licking lights.


And secondly, I shall show how wonderful apparitions or monstrous sights seen
in the air, to the terror and amazement of the beholders, are or may be caused.
But first of fumes or exhalations hot and dry.

1. Of flying Dragons.
This Meteor, Draco volans, or the flying Dragon, by many called a fire-Drake,
is, according to Meuror, fol. 117. (although in show monstrous to behold)
nothing else, but a fiery exhalation, very great in quantity, whose matter is
very thick, and as it were hard tempered together; and being conglutinously
conjoined, it ascends (or is rather drawn up) into the cold Region, and is by
that forcibly beaten back again: by the force and violence of which motion, it
is set on fire, and so violently pent and made crooked: for the matter being
glewed so fast together, that the repulse of the Region divides it not; but by
an (...), Antiperistasis, or encounter of contraries, is cast into such a
fashion or form, that it perfectly represents the shape of a Dragon.

Then, the exhalation being formed and fired, flies along in the air, and
turns it self to and fro, upward and downward, according to the motion of the
wind, and the cold clouds it meets withal; and so it begets the greater terror
in those that behold it. Some have thought that this Meteor, by reason of its
strange appearance, has been the Devil; because the Scripture says, That the
Devil is the Prince of the Air; And in another place, That he is a great
Dragon: Of which conceit, I read a merry (and I believe a true) story in Dr.
Fulk, where in his Discourse of Meteors, speaking of fiery flying Dragons, he
says --

That on a Mayday, when many young folk went abroad in the morning, I remember
(says he) by six a clock in the forenoon, there was news came to London, that
the Devil the same morning was seen flying over the Thames; but afterward came
word, that he alighted at Stratford, and there he was taken and set in the
stocks. And that though he would fain have dissembled the matter, by turning
himself into the likeness of a man, yet was he k own well enough by his cloven
foot. I knew some then living that went to see him; and returning, affirmed,
that he was seen flying in the Air, but was not taken prisoner. I remember also
that some wished he had been shot at with Guns or shafts, as he flew over the
Thames. But this learned Author divinely concludes -- As f^r this Devil (says
he) I suppose it was a fiery Dragon, -- very fearful to look on, as though he
had life, because he moved; whereas it was nothing else but clouds and smoke.
So mighty is God, that he can fear his enemies with these and such like
operations, whereof some Examples may be found in holy Scripture. Thus far Dr.
Fulke in his Discourse of Meteors.

There are some that hold, that this Meteor is made and fashioned into such a
shap^ and form, between two clouds of contrary or differing natures; the one
ho^, the other cold (which differs little from the former:) then the highest
part of the exhalation, by its being attenuated and made thin, appears and
shows it self as the neck of the Dragon: and the middle part, for that it was
^^tely in the repulse bowed and made crooked, does symmetrically represent the
form of the Dragons belly: And the lowest part thereof, by the same rep^lse,
turning upward, makes the Tail; which appears much smaller then the other,
for that it is commonly further off, and also for that the cold binds it. And
thus much for this Meteor.

2. Of dancing Goats.
Caprae saltantes, or dancing Goats, are so called, because like unto balls of
wildfire or squibs, they dance, skip and leap from one place to another in the
Heavens and the air. Wolf. Meur. fol. 116.

This Meteor is caused when the exhalation being hot and dry, is divided into
two parts or bodies, as when two Torches are seen near one another, and the
flame leapeth or danceth diversely; or when the exhalation is so compact, that
on the one side or other, it has some parts which appear as the appendices of
it, or joined to the main exhalation, somewhat thinner then it. So that the
fire running in the main part outright, it skips as it goes unto those parts
on the sides, making them to flame also; which being quickly performed, the
fire seems to leap and dance even as wanton Goats are wont to do.

3. Of Spears or Darts.
This Meteor shows it self in streams, and is of Naturalists called a Spear
or Dart. It is according to Meuror, fol. 119. generated, when a great quantity
of exhalations hot and dry, are set on fire in the midst; and because the
matter is not so compact, that it should soon rend or tear (as when thunder is
caused) the fire breaks out at the edges of the cloud, kindling the thin fumes,
which shoot out in a great number, like to fiery Spears or Darts; and their
streaming or flashing is so much the whirer, as the exhalation whereof it
consists happens to be thinner.

There was an apparition of this Meteor seen in London in the year of our Lord
1560. on the 30 day of January about eight a clock at night, the air in all
other places being very dark; but in the North-East (where this cloud burned)
it was very light; as light (says my Author) as when the day breaks, toward
the Sunrising; insomuch that the plain shadow of things opposite were seen.
The edge of this cloud was fashioned like a Rainbow, but in color very bright,
and oftentimes casting forth (almost) innumerable Darts of wonderful length,
like unto squibs that are cast in the air; only with this difference, that they
move more swift then squibs. Now these Meteors are observed to appear mostly in
the North and North-East parts of the Heavens.

4. Of Pillars or Beams.
These several Meteors in their various forms are mostly caused when the
exhalation hot and dry, being very long, but not very broad, and attracted or
drawn beyond the middle region of the Air, is set on fire all at once, and so
burns like a log or great beam.

Now the difference betwixt Beams and Pillars is this: they are then called
Beams, when they seem to lie at length in the Air; but they are called Pillars,
when they are carried upright, or perpendicular in the Air; the one end thereof
being more near the globe of the earth then the other. And the Pillars like
unto Pyramides are caused when the thinner and lighter parts of the exhalation
are ascended to the top, and the heavier and grosser parts continue and remain
at the bottom; so making it in the form or fashion of a Pyramide, viz. great
above, and small beneath.

According as the vapors thick or rare, Du-Bart.

Even, or unev'n, long, large, round or square;
Such are the forms, it in the Air resembles;
At sight whereof the amazed vulgar trembles.
5. Of Torches, or Firebrarnds.
These apparitions are generated, when the exhalation being hot and dry, is
drawn up beyond the middle region of the Air; the matter of which it consists
being long and broad, partly by its own heat, and partly by the heat of the
place it is attracted to, is set on fire at the end thereof, in the highest
region of the Air; and burns like a Torch or Candle, until the whole
substance thereof be consumed and quite wasted. And the reason why it should
burn at one end rather then at the other, is, because it is long, and stands
upright, having the most of its aspiring matter in the top, which touches the
heat in the fiery Region. And in this station ascending upward, it comes to
pass that when the upper end is advanced fully to the heat of the upper region,
it is then and there fired, and consumes by degrees: and then as a Torch or
Lamp, when all the matter that feeds the flame thereof is spent, it ceases to
burn any longer.

6. Of flying Sparks.
Scintillae volantes, or flying Sparks, are caused when the matter of the
exhalation is equally dispersed, and in all parts alike thin, but not
compacted, knit or joined together: and being not closely joined, some part of
it being carried up into the higher region, by the force of the heat thereof it
is set on fire, before another part of it that comes up after it; and being
thus kindled by degrees, it flies abroad like Sparkles out of a Chimney, as
when Sawdust or any such like matter is cast into the fire; insomuch that the
thin-pated vulgar people suppose an infinite number of Stars to fall down from
the Heavens, whereas it is nothing else but the exhalation that is thin, and
kindled in many parts, sparkling thus.

Some call this Meteor Stipula Ardens, or burning Stubble.

I remember in the year of our Lord 1640. to have seen this apparition at
Oxford, being near the place called Friar- Bacons Study, one Sunday night; but
what Month or Week it was, I do not now remember. But this is still fresh in my
mind, that the Sparks flew in a very strange and fierce manner toward Oxford,
and came from the South-East parts of the Heavens; but whether the motion
thereof was caused by the wind, or nor, I cannot say: for as then my knowledge
in the secrets of nature was but mean, (as indeed, yet it is,) I being then
very young; so my notice and observation of this apparition was proportionable.

But this I know (and so do many hundreds more) that within a short space
after, Oxford did undergo such a Renovation and change, as it had not in some
hundreds of years before: Yet I dare not place the principal grounds of Oxfords
visitations and sufferings therein.

7. Of shooting Stars.
Stellae Cadentes, or shooting Stars, are caused (if we will believe Meuror,
and he may be believed when the Exhalation being hot and d^y, is gathered
together into a round heap or lump as it were; but not so thoroughly compacted,
nor yet so apt to ascend as other fumes or Exhalations: Which is the chief
reason (among many) that it is beaten back again, when it comes near the cold
confines of the middle Region; and so hovering aloft, by an Antiperistasis, or
repulsion by the contrary on every part, it is set on fire: and then sliding
away, it appears as if a Star fell down, or were thrown down to the Earth.

Sometimes these Meteors are generated after another manner: for the exhalation
on being long and narrow, and by the heat of the upper Region is kindled at one
end, and burning swiftly, the fire runreth from one end to the other, as on a
piece of waxed third that is lighted.

Others there are, that say this exhalation is not so much set on fire, as that
it is directly seated under some one star in the Firmament in a direct line,
(as it were) and so receives light from that Star, seeming to be a star when
it falls.

Now against this later opinion there are two clear exceptions, the first
whereof is this: It is most certain, that those Meteors shoot or fall as often
obliquely, as perpendicular or downright; and so I have seen them often to
fall: Therefore it cannot receive its shining (as it is urged) from a Star.

The second exception is this -- In its falling, it appears to sight much
bigger then any fixed Star that is fixed in the eighth Sphere; (yea sometimes
bigger then Phosphorus (as I have seen) which is the biggest to sight of the
seven Erratick Stars, and therefore is by some called (...), The greatest or
fairest of all stars; because she is seen so glorious in the evenings, when no
other stars appear, or rather before they appear) and so appears lesser and
lesser, as it comes nearer the Earth: whereas if it were in a direct line
illuminated by the beams of a star, it would at its greatest distance from us
appear least full of light, as a star in his Apogaeon or Aphaelion: And would
show it self fullest of light when it does approximate us; even as a star in
his Perigaeon or Perihaelion: but we see the contrary to be apparently true;
therefore it cannot be kindled this way: yet some have thought it might easily
be demonstrated.

Epicurus his Opinion touching this Meteor is, that the stars fall out of the
Firmament, and that by the fall of them, both Thunder and Lightning is caused.
For the Lightning (says he) is nothing else but the shining of the star that
falls; which falling into a watery cloud, and being quenched in it, causes
that great noise which is called Thunder; even as hot Iron makes a noise by
its being cast into the water.

I shall not much question this opinion of Epicurus; nor trouble my self to
play the Critique with him about it: Although the learned Physician and
Philosopher Andreas Argolus affords me good ground so to do, in Tom. 1. fol.
29. of his Ephemerides; where he shows that the Sun and all the Planets are
vast distances from the Firmament; yea, many millions of miles.

Yet I suppose, I may modestly demand of any holding this opinion, If the Orbs
of the Erratique stars be so vast a distance from the Firmament, as Argol
averreth, Why should not the eighth Sphere, viz. the Sphere of the fixed stars,
be at full as great a distance (if not greater) then them? (unless they
conclude the eighth sphere to be the firmament; which I presume they do not,
because it is contrary to the rules of Astronomy.) And if hence it shall be
supposed that the fixed stars are any space (be it little or much) distant from
the firmament, why then should any be so ridiculous, as to affirm that they may
or do, fall from, or out of the firmament? But I shall pass this over, and
leave the discussion to abler Pens, and conclude with the divine Poet. --

That shooting stars, those some do fondly call,
As if those heavenly Lamps from heaven could fall.
8. Of Illuminations or scattering fire.
This scattering fire, or illuminations appearing in the uppermost part of the
lowest Region, is caused when many exhalations hot and dry, are drawn up into
the middle Region of the air, and there meeting with many cold clouds are sent
back again. Which violent and forcible motions backward and forward, are the
occasion of its being set on fire: And the parts thereof being not equally
thick or joined together, seems to the beholders as if fire were scattered or
spread in the air. Yea, sometimes the whole air seems to burn, and all the
Heavens do appear on fire: as they did in the year 1574. on the fifteenth day
of March, as is recorded by Stow, in his Abridgment.

Dr Fulks says, At such an apparition as this, the whole Air seems to burn,
as though it would rain fire from Heaven; and so (says he) it has come to
pass, that whole Cities and Towns have been fired.

9. Of the Ignis fatuus, or foolish fire.
This foolish fire is so called (says Dr. Swan) not that it hurts any, but
only fears or scareth fools; and is generated of a fat and oily exhalation,
which is heavy, in regard of the glutinous matter of which it consists; by
reason of which quality, the cold of the night beats it back again, when it
striveth to ascend upward: through which strife and violent motion or tossing,
it is set on fire, and falls downward, according to that of Dubart. in Sec.
days work.

If th'exhalation hot and oily prove,
And yet (as feeble) gives light above,
To th'airy regions everlasting frost;
Incessantly th'apt tinding flame is tossed,
Till it inflame; then like a squib it falls,
Or fire-wing'd shafts, or sulph'ry powder-balls.
And being thus fired, it passes forward and backward, upward and downward,
according to the motion of the Air in a silent night, by gentle gales, not
going or moving exactly toward one point. Note, that if the wind be high, or
any way sharply stirring, this Apparition or Meteor cannot appear at all. For
the wind disperses the matter whereof it is made, and will not suffer it to be
conjoined.

This kind of light is often seen in hot and fenny Countries, and in such
places where there is abundance of fat and unctious matter; as in Churchyards,
etc. where through the corruption and putrefaction of many dead bodies there
buried, the earth is full of such substance; as also in places where many
battles have been fought.

And this Meteor appearing in these places (as indeed there is most reason it
should) the ignorant and superstitious people have thought them to be the souls
and spirits of men departed, and accordingly have stood in a kind of slavish
fear of them.

Henry Cornelius Agrippa (li. 4. de occult. Philos. prope sinem) augmenteth to
this error very much, and endeavors to render pobable reasons of the souls
mourning (as he calls it) over his quondam partner, the body; thus -- Usually
where people are buried, you shall see many nocturnal Visions, Monsters, and
other hideous shapes to appear; and this is the reason that walking over such
places in the night time, it is the more terrible. And more especially where
executed bodies are buried, and where dead soldiers that have lost their li^es
in battle are buried by heaps: for (says he) the sacred rites of buryal being
denied to dead bodies, hinder the souls going further [admirable! and right
occult Philosophy, sure! that the soul should be thus sensible, without an
organical body] ^^t ^^epes them there until the day of Judgment.

But such fancies as these, with most ingenious persons, have been and are
deemed no other then Delirious Dotages and Ridiculous Assertions, altogether
unbecoming the tongue or pen of a Philosopher. And Noble Cornelius in his book
de vanitate Scientiarum, ingenuously acknowledges as much.

Object. But says the vulgar humorist, If these lights and apparitions be not
walking spirits, how come they to lead men out of their way: as it is (more
commonly then truly) reported?

I answer, The main cause why they lead men out of their way (if the phrase be
proper) is, because those silly wretches that see them, and pretend to be led
by them, being sore amazed, and aff^ighted at them, (not knowing their true
cause, you may be sure) do look so earnestly after them, that they forget their
way. And then being never so little out of their road (and frighted withal)
they wander they know not whither; sometimes to Pits, Rivers, and other very
dangerous and dismal places. And when at the last they happen into their road
again, and get home, (with their hair an end, and themselves sweating and
staring) they fall a telling their friends strange and incredible stories, how
that some devil or spirit in the likeness of fire, has led them out of their
way, I cannot (nor they neither very well, or truly) tell how far, or how long
time; and that it came so near them, it would have done them hurt, had not
their prayers or some heavenly cogitations (such no doubt as amazed men are
capable of) diverted it. When notwithstanding, all this while, the great
dangers those poor ignorant wretches dread, is in the depravedness of their own
senses! for there is none to them outward at all.

Now, the chief cause that this apparition seems to follow, or go before men,
is by reason of the motion of the Air, by the going or motion of the man before
or after whom it thus goes. Which Air being moved, drives it forward or
backward, as it is either placed before or behind the person.

Whence it will rationally follow, that it is not the fire that leads or drives
the fool, but the fool the fire: but when this fire happens to be at a greater
distance, the man's eye and the air moving, makes the man to think the fire
moves.

These lights appear also oftentimes at Sea as well as at land; sometimes one
alone, sometimes two together; which some Seamen and Mariners, alluding to the
writings of the Poets, have given names unto; and call that which appears
single, Helena; and those that appear together, Castor and Pollux. But I shall
not make any large discourse of their names here, but refer the Reader to more
voluminous treatises for satisfaction.

10. Of Ignis Lambens, or licking Lights.
This Meteor is called Ignis Lambens, or licking fire, for that it uses to
cleave or stick to the hairs and garments of men and beasts. It is caused
(according to the opinion of Philosophers) when many viscous and clammy
exhalations are scattered abroad in the air into many small parts; which in the
night, or after Sunsetting, (and sometimes in the day also, when the air is
condensed or thickened; as on February the second 1656. near Rumford in Ess^x,
where this Meteor fixed it self to the garments of a woman, as she was riding
to Market, and made her seem of a perfect flame) by resistance of the cold, are
kindled; and then falling violently down, do fasten themselves and stick unto
the heads and shoulders of men, or unto the bodies of beasts, as they are
passing along in the fields.

It is done after the same manner as the dew or hoar-frosts do fix and settle
to the hairs of men and beasts, or unto garments which have a n^p, or a very
high wool upon them, as Frize or Cotton.

There are a second sort of these flames; and they are caused when the bodies
of men and beasts, being rubbed and chafed, do send forth a clammy sweat; which
is in like manner kindled as the sparks of fire that are often seen to fly
from a horse that is of a black or dark color, being rubbed or curryed.

It is reported by Livius, of one Marius a Knight of Rome, that as he made an
Oration to his soldiers in Spain, they saw his head as it were burning on a
light fire, and Marius himself not aware thereof. The same Author relates a
like story of Servius Tullius, that as he lay asleep (being a child) his hair
seemed to be all on fire, and yet his hair not burnt, nor he in any measure
prejudiced or hurt thereby.

Julus, the son of Eneas, had his Temples encircled with this flame, as Virgil
in his Aeneids, lib. 2.

Ecce levis summo de vertice visus Juli,
Fundere lumen apex, tactuque innoxia molli
Lambere flamma comas, and circum tempore pasci.
Thus Englished by Mr. J. Ogilby.

-- In his sad parents sight,
Lo! from Julius C^own, a fl^ming light
Was seen to r^se, and harmless sire did spread
With a soft touch, and round his Temples sed.
Many are the stories that I could relate concerning this licking fire; how
that it has fastened unto men as they have been either walking or riding, and
unto sheep and kine as they have been grazing; but has never done harm to
either: unless at sometimes it has driven a fool to wonder! which cannot in
the least engage me to believe it were a whit the more harmful for that. And
thus much for the first particular.

2. Of wonderful Apparitions, and their causes.
In the beginning of this Treatise I have showed what a wonderful Apparition or
Prodigy is, according to the opinion and judgment of the best Philosophers;
and have treated there also of the several species or kinds of them, viz.
Celestial and Terrestrial. It remains now, that I show the chief causes of
them, in this place. And if we adhere to our best Naturalists, they may be
caused two ways, viz. naturally, and artificially.

First, they may be caused artificially; as by certain Glasses and Instruments,
made according to the secret knowledge of the Optiques; which teaches by
diverse refractions and reflections of the beams, how most visions and
apparitions are represented.

Cornelius Agrippa, in the first Book and sixth chapter of his Occult
Philosophy, maintains, that by the artificialness of some Optical Glasses, some
men may produce at a distance in the air whatsoever images or shapes they
please. Which (says he) when ignorant persons behold, they think they see the
appearance of Spirits, etc. when indeed they are nothing else but semblances
kin unto themselves, and without life, (i.e.) Their own shadows contracted or
dilated; which by the assistance and friendship of the Optical Glass, they have
the happiness to see, and the unhappiness to think evilly of.

The same Author very excellently sets forth the use of the Optiques by an
ingenious and not improbable instance, viz. Let any one (says he) take an
image or images, artificially painted, or written letters; and in a clear night
set them against the beams of the full Moon, whose resemblance heing multiplied
in the Air, and caught upward, and reflected back together with the beams of
the Moon, and any other man that is privy to the thing, at a long distance,
sees, reads, and knows them in the very compass and circle of the Moon. --
Greater things then these (says he) are grounded in the very nature of the
Air, and have their reasons and causes demonstrated in the Mathematiques and
Optiques.

The learned Author of that lofty Philosophical fancy (entitled The speedy
Messenger) who passes under the name of Domingo Gonzales, fol. 20, 21.
consents to the learned Agrippa in this particular. And although his book be
of a very facetious and most pleasant style, yet undoubtedly the Author's aim
was at somewhat more admirable and excellent, then the ordinary sense of his
language makes known; as may easily be gathered by an ingenious understanding.

Bodine, Theat. Not. Lib. 2. is of opinion, that such things as these cannot be
caused but by the illusions of evil spirits and Devils; And that they alone can
represent Castles in the air, Armies, Cities, Palaces, Spectrum, and all kinds
of wonderful Prodigies and apparitions. But most Philosophers laugh at this his
opinion, and deem it ridiculous.

Secondly, they may be caused naturally; and are so for the most part, viz.
when the temper and disposition of the air is suffi^iently able to receive the
impress or image of those things done on the earth. And because the air is apt
to receive diverse images and shapes in diverse parts or places thereof; those
monstrous forms, and strange actions, and stories, and characters, etc. proceed
from the joining of diverse forms and actions there.

It is the opinion of Albertus Magnus, that the effigies of all sorts of
bodies, may by the strength of nature, in a temperately moist air, be easily
represented.

And Aristotle relates of a man unto whom it happened, by reason of the weakness
of his sight, the air which was near him, became as a Looking-Glass to him; and
the optique beam did reflect back upon himself, and could not penetrate the
Air: so that whithersoever ^e went, he thought he saw his own image, with his
face toward him, go just before him.

And Agrippa says, When the air by the South Wind is condensed into thin
clouds, there are represented as in a Looking-Glass, at a great distance,
Mountains, Castles, Horses, and men, and diverse other things. Which when the
clouds dissipate, the apparitions vanish, and disappear.

This generally is the Opinion of Authors concerning the causes of Meteors and
wonderful apparitions. And for Meteors, they are by experience generally found
true, and therefore not to be questioned or suspected. And for wonderful
Apparitions and Prodigies, it is more then probable they are also true: But

This Tractate swelling somewhat above the banks of my intentions, causes me to
pretermit the giving an account of the natural causes of Lightning and Thunder,
Mock-Suns and Mock-Moons Circles and Crowns, etc. But these things being more
ordinarily known then those I have treated of, I presume the ingenious Reader
will not think it amiss to be referred to his own common experience for the
knowledge of them.

(...). FINIS.
A DISCOURSE Touching the DOCTRINE OF Images, Spirits, Prophecies, Sigils,
Lamens, the Crystal, etc.

With an Account of The Chief PROPUGNERS Of such OPINIONS; As Agrippa,
Apollonius, the Sibylls, Dr. Dee, Mr. Kelly, Mr. Pugh, etc. And their Errors
Retorted and Refuted.

By John Gadbury (...).

-- They shall proceed no further; for their folly [(...)] or madness shall be
manifest unto all men, etc. 2 Timothy 3.9. Then -- Si populus vult decipi,
decipiatur. London, Printed for Francis Cossinet. 1660.

A DISCOURSE Touching the DOCTRINE OF Telisms, Images, Prophecies, Spirits,
etc. WITH An account of the chief Propugners of such strange and conceited
Opinions.
THat there are Angels and Spirits, both good and evil, I never yet questioned,
nor ever knew any so to do. That there are persons endued with a more then
common or ordinary Speculation, or foreknowledge of things in general, I am in
a very great measure persuaded. But that there are either Angels or Spirits,
good or bad, within the compass or power of man's invocations or commands, I
seriously protest I am yet to believe. Or that all people that pretend to be
endued with the Spirit of Prophecy, are really possessed thereof, I deem
worthy the scanning and considering, before we too hastily concede thereunto.

I am not ignorant of the many strange and wonderful relations that pass for
current among the sons of men, concerning Angels, Spirits, Prophecies, Telisms,
etc. and of some persons being (as they pretend) so far illuminated, that they
are (by many believed to be) able to Prophecy of things particular to happen.
So common and general are these catching errors become, that it is now, a most
difficult and hard matter to distinguish a Plowman from a natural Philosopher
by his discourse. And (as one learnedly observes) as in former times, it was a
rare matter to find seven wise men in the world: It is now as difficult and
troublesome, to discover the same number of fools. Every man (almost) that has
scarcely arrived at the happiness of reading a Horn-book, accounts all things
that come within the Parcimeter or compass of Discourse, beneath him and his
Genius (as it is now as commonly as ignorantly worded) that treats not of the
raising of Spirits, of some Periapt, Amulet, or Magical Charm or Spell; or of
Theurgie, or the Crystal (forsooth) in which some pretend to show men's faces:
(their other ends, they may as well and as truly.) And (that which I most
disdain to think of) these superlative vanities, (to say no worse of them) are
commonly mixed with, and masked under, the honest and liberal Art of
Astrology: and the chief [pretended] promulgers thereof, are neither afraid
or ashamed to be the only favorers of such fictions. Thus

What men ingenious do conclude a folly;
Ignorant Quacks pronounce most pure and holy.
There are two kinds of Persons, that seem to me to be the principal Propugners
of these monstrous conceits, viz.

1. The first sort are those men, Who (to gain themselves Fame and Riches)
impose upon the understandings of simple-hearted credulous people (who are apt
to be born down with the pretended verity of Novelties) things impossible,
either to be done, or of themselves believed; And are therefore not (in reason)
to be excused.

2. The second sort, Are a company of poor melancholy crack-brain'd
shallow-soul'd creatures, born as well to spread lies and impostures, as to
credit and believe them. And these poor wretches err in the strength (or
weakness rather) of their understanding; and may therefore be the more
reasonably pitied and pardoned.

SECT. I. Of the first sort.
IN the number of the first (which seems to be the most intolerable of the two)
I may justly take notice of those famous and eminent impostors, Trithemius,
Agrippa, and Appollonius Tyaneus; of whose quaint skill and cunning, I shall
briefly acquaint the Reader.

1. Of Trithemius.
This Trithemius was an Abbot in Germany; and (without all peradventure) a
person most eminently learned: And he being desirous to fly or soar somewhat
above the ordinary Pitch, writes a Book of the heavenly Intelligences governing
the Orbs under God. (Which Book he dedicates to the Emperor.) But he writes in
so ambiguous a strain, that the subject matter thereof for verity, does appear
to an easy understanding suspicious. -- For (says he) Many learned men have
consented to this Doctrine; which opinion of their's, my self NOT AFFIRMING,
but delivering, do make manifest to your most sacred Majesty.

And at his last farewell (that you may see he writ what he writ, for Fame and
Honor, more then for any belief he had of the thing) he concludes -- Most
sacred Caesar! I have not wrote these things assertively, or that we must
believe them by any means. -- I protest with my own proper hand, and confess
with my mouth, that in all these things delivered, I BELIEVE NOTHING, or admit
of ANY THING, unless what the Church does hold: the rest, I refute, and contemn
as vain, fained and superstitious.

Thus far Trithemius himself. And would any man, that is but reasonable, and
well in his wits, engage his faith or belief unto that, which the Author
thereof professes to refute and contemn, as vain, feigned and Superstitious?

Besides, if this his doctrine of Intelligences, etc. were certain and true,
and not superstitious, vain and feigned; how should it come to pass that his
own disciples jar and disagree in their own craft and skill? One of them tells
us, -- That the world is now under the Gubernation of Gabriel, the Angel or
Spirit of Mercury; and says it is -- perhaps a sign we are afflicted with so
many novel opinions, etc. Vide Lil. worl. Catastrophe, p. 56. Another of them
acquaints us (from long poring and staring upon the same fictitious principles)
That the world is not (now) under the government of Gabriel, the Angel of
Mercury, but Hanael [names to fright folks, rather then feed their
understanding!] the Angel or Spirit of Venus. Which Angel [Hanael] (says he)
shall yet reign ninety one years, twenty four months; before whose reign be
ended, we may expect the arising of a great Monarch, and settlement of a great
Monarchy [pretty enthusiastical delusions!] the greatest and last that ever
will be. Vide Blag. Ephem. 1659. p. 1.

Again, if there were any verity or reason in this high-towring doctrine they
pretend unto, may we nor with much reason conclude both these [Angel-mongers]
mistaken? for according to the Principles of their Patron Trithemius, neither
Gabriel nor Hanael; but Samael the Angel or Spirit of Mars (to cope with them
in their own canting dialect) should have ruled this present Age of the world.
For he acquaints us, that under Mars's rule or dominion, wars were all over the
world; [what peace have we, in this age had, I pray you?] infinite thousands of
men perished; [Is our age behind hand with any age for that also?] Sundry
Battles fought; [Doth not this age of ours, by experience woeful enough, prove
the same?] Kingdoms lost their former bounds. [How conspicuous is this truth to
us also!]

Now, if Mercury had governed at this time, the world had then been busi^d
about novel fancies and opinions; secret plottings, and privy clandestine
conspiracies; and not apted or fitted for any such public or notorious
actions. And had Venus (by her Angel) reigned (as was urged) we should then
have been blessed with concord, pleasure, tranquillity, peace and quietude.
Ergo, it roundly follows, that (were we willing to suppose a truth in the
doctrine) neither Venus, or Mercury, or their Angels for them, could at this
time govern the world.

But when rash Assertors want arguments of reason to make good the things they
(so ignorantly) obtrude upon men's understandings, it is no wonder that they are
found guilty of such gross absurdities. I appeal to the whole world, whether
our scarlet Times have not more resembled Mars and his fury, then either the
changeable fancies or witty conceits of Mercury, or the serenity and smiles of
Venus.

Blood, death, and tragique stories, Mars does yield;
A Golgotha of graves, whose purple field
Died Crimson with his fatal Massacres, Ant. Philos. Sat. 5.

Craves bloody Ink, and scarlet Characters!
A pen that like a bullets force would reel
A marble conscience! --
By this short Annotation, you may judge of what worth and excellency the whole
is, although so prodigiously boasted of. For you see plainly, Trithemius owns
not the doctrine; and it is plainly to be seen also, that his disciples
understand it not; nor indeed do they know how to make use thereof, except only
to gild over their ignorance in honest and demonstrable Arts they pretend to
the knowledge of.

It seems as clear to me, as the Sun in his Meridian glory, that Trithemius
his design and aim was to get himself fame and honor; and to fix the Image of
his ambition in the beliefs and understandings of the ignorant and credulous
sort of people in the world; so to perpetuate his name and memory for ever, by
such an undertaking. [For you must know, that the world is not half so barren
of persons ignorant, as ingenious; and really I account it a providence, that
God and Nature have given to wit and ingenuity wings, that the Heavenly part of
the ingeniously learned, may bear them up above the dunstable resolutions of
the rustic or unlearned: otherwise, they would be most sure to be voted out of
their knowledge, as reason it self too often is, at a Grand Jury.] It is not to
be doubted, but Trithemius knew the vanity and fictitiousness of this pretended
Angel-skill. But had not Trithemius done something above the ordinary level,
how should he have (now) been talked of among us? he (alas!) has passed away,
and would have been remembered no more (or at least but a little while) among
the sons of men, but for such an undertaking. Now the better to obtrude this
his fancy upon the spirit of the world, he dedicates the story to Caesar;
submitting to his judgment, and the censure of the Church therein. And hence it
is come to pass, that the learning of Trithemius, and the authority and
greatness of Caesar his Patron, has born down as well the reason and judgment
of some persons very learned, as the yiedling brains of the ignorant. And thus
much for Trithemius.

2. Of Agrippa.
Henry Cornelius Agrippa, is the second person in my triumvirate; who beyond
all thoughts of doubt, was a most eminently learned man; or else surely he had
never been admitted Councellor to Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany; nor yet
judge of his Prerogative Court; both which honors Cornelius was possessed of.

This learned person being strangely possessed with the vanity of what we have
now under examination, wrote three books De occulta Philosophia, of occult
Philosophy; and therein to the sky (as we use to speak) magnified the Doctrine
of Angels, Spirits, Characters, Seals, and Images, etc. and thereby set the
fancies of diverse persons at work, expecting to be acquainted with their
genius; or at least so far with the virtue of a Sigil, that thereby they might
work wonders: who have indeed (after much pains and expense of money and time,
returned as wife from the search thereof, as they came first to it. Some (it is
true) that I know, will talk largely of their skill and cunning abilities; and
report with much confidence what they are able to do: but alas! they only act
the part of Vangoose in the Play, viz. pretend much, when they can do nothing
but talk.

Van: Vill you see somting? Ick sall bring in de Turkschen, met all Zin
Bashawes, and Zin dirty towsand Yanitsaryes, met all Zin whooren, Eunuken, all
met an auder; de Sofie van Persia; de Tartar Cham; met de groat king of Mogul,
and make deir men, and deir horse, and deir Elephanten be seen fight in de
air, and be all killen, and aliven, and noe such ting. And all dis met d^ Ars
van de Catropricks, by de refleshie van de glassen.

Such indeed is the skill that many pretenders have arrived at, by their being
credulous of things impossible to be performed! and while they have twatled of
raising spirits, and of showing faces in a Glass, and other such like
counterfeit cozening stories, they have laid their reputations and honesty low
enough, in the esteem of all.

I remember to have heard a story, of what happened between that excellent
Philosopher, and great naturalist Sir K. Digbie, and that Arch-pretender Dr.
Lamb. This Dr. Lamb would needs be thought a person able to converse with
Spirits, command Devils, and what not? which the learned Sir K. hearing of, and
desirous to be confirmed of either the truth or falsehood of the relation,
repaired to the Dr. who presently meeting the Knights request (supposing him
ignorant in his craft,) begins to show him some shapes, by the reflection of
some Optical Glasses upon a wall: which the Knight readily perceiving, found
him a cheat in his pretenses (for that there was nothing more in that knack of
his, of rarity, then what an ordinary capacity might honestly arrive unto by
the Optiques) and took him by the collar of his doublet, demanding of him, if
that were all the Devil he could show? He answered, Yes: the Knight replied,
You Villain! you deserve to be kick't down the stairs in recompense for your
knavery.

I am of belief, the application of this story will reach, (if not overreach)
the consciences and practices of some among us, that wear the golden name of
Astrologers; who very commonly under pretense thereof, make use of a Crystal,
and other pretended Cheats and Shifts, to Gull the sillier sort of people. Nay,
they are made use of sometimes to persons at very great rates, (viz. six pound
a call) as they (knavishly call it) even to their undoing, and to the great
scandal of Astrology, (which as it is dealt with, is the only Cover-cheat of
these times) and indeed to the Shipwreck and Ruin of the Practitioners
Conscience, Honesty and good Name. Nay, this villainy is grown so rife and
common now, among us, that he is not worthy (almost) to be deemed an
Astrologer, that cannot stretch both his conscience, and skill, like unto these
persons touched; who by their practices should be of Cacus's Progeny, because
they so eminently pretend to make with him -- Candida de nigris, and de
candentibus atra. Black things look white, and white to look like black.

No man in reason can be angry at this Discourse, unless he be guilty of the
error taxed. Which if he be, I wish his return to the truth; for there is a
secret justice that finds out persons of unjust practice before they be aware.
The wicked flourish for a moment, or small season; but their end is
destructive. I hope those whom this Aenigmatical touch concerns, will take
convenient warning by it; I point at none (though perhaps I might have done) by
name; but have been guided by that known Law of civility. -- -- Licuit,
semperque licebit,
Parcere personis, dicere de vitiis.
It Lawful was of old, and still the same,
To scourge the vice, and friendly spare the name.


And now I return to Cornelius again. As there are some persons born to believe
lies, fictions, and fables; so there are others that are brought into the world
to broach them. And such was this learned persons fate! and his Nativity does
excellently well demonstrate the same. For 1. Mercury who is Lord of the
Ascendant thereof, is combust, and in of. and the is in Opposition of him and
the Sun. 2. The Dragons tail is upon the very Cuspe of the East Angle. 3.
Saturn and Mars (who is the dispositor of, and a great significator of
inclination and manners in his Nativity, by being in of, and in of Lord of the
Ascendent) are in opposition from Angles; and the Ascendent is evilly beheld by
both of them, but chiefly by Saturn. Now I ask the honest Astrologer, whether
the owner of such a Nativity were not a fit person to coin and broach fables?
Behold the figure thereof, as the learned Origanns has it.

Nascitur Cornel. Agrippa, 1486 Sept. 14 d. 15 h. 24 m. P.M.


I the more willingly insert the figure of this Nativity, 1. Because Origanus
works are not very common and easy to be had. 2. That every one versed in
Astrology may see by the figure, that I do not impose upon him or any other,
ought else, then what the Scheam presents.

But, notwithstanding these notable Arguments in his Geniture for such a
purpose, this eminent Person retracted those his strange Opinions; as may be
seen in his Book of the vanity of Sciences: And happy would it be for all
others that are tainted with the same error, so to do. But a more remarkable
recantation of his, I find in the third book of his Occult Philosophy, prope
finem. --

-- Of Magique (says he) I wrote whilst I was very young, three large books,
which I called Occult Philosophy; In which, what was then through the curiosity
of my Youth Erroneous, I now being more advised, am willing to have RETRACTED,
by this RECANTATION, -- I formerly spent much time and Cost in these vanities;
At last I grew so wise, as to be able to dissuade others from this destruction.
For whosoever does not in the truth and power of God, but in the deceits of
Devils, according to the operation of wicked spirits, presume to Divine and
Prophecy, and practicing through Magical vanities, exorcisms, incantations, and
other demoniacal works and deceits of Idolatry, boasting of delusions and
Phantasms presently ceasing, brag that they can do Miracles; I say (says he)
all these shall with Jannes and Jambres, and Simon Magus, be destinated to the
torments of eternal fire.

Let now the Maintainers of these Fictions and reasonless Opinions, retract by
the president of their learned Author; If not in public (as he has done) let
it appear in their practices at least. But if they are resolved to ride it
through, maugre all that can be said in opposition to it; and will still hug
and retain this their art of cozenage and deluding the world; Let them show so
much of Honesty in the midst of their Villainy, that while they pick the Purses
of the people, they may spare their wits. For it is a double loss, for men to
be cogg'd out of great sums of money, and then to be cheated into a belief,
that they are Honestly and fairly used.

3. Of Apollonius Tyaneus.
This Apollonius is the last of my Ternary; and was a person that pretended
much skill in the making of Telismes, etc. In whch art (if we will believe all
that is written or storyed of him) he was so well versed, that thereby he could
work wonders! and do things so far beyond the reach of man's reason, that some
of the people of those times in which he lived, accounted him a petty God,
rather then a man, Hierocles the Stoic had so high an Opinion and esteem of
him, that he deemed him a better man, and one of more power then Christ, the
Savior of the World; Nay, such was the dotage of many people in those days (a
spice of which, we in ours still retain) that they accounted him a man so much
excelling the very best sort of men, that they thought him too sacred to be
lightly spoken of. Yea, so happy was the time in which he began his pranks,
[For it is not to be denied, but much is to be attributed unto times and
seasons!] or else his Geniture was remarkable and prodigious for such purposes,
[why not, as well as Cornelius Agrippa's?] that the most Orthodox themselves
began to deem him vested with power sufficient for a Deity; which occasioned
that so strange a doubt from Justine Martyr, as cited by the learned Gregory,
fol. 37. -- (...), etc. If God be the Creator and Lord of the world, how comes
it to pass that Apollonius his Telisms have so much overruled the course of
things? For we see that they also have stilled the waves of the Sea; and the
raging of the winds; and prevailed against the noisome flies, and incursions of
wild beasts, etc.

So strangely infectious has this his Doctrine of Telisms and Images been,
that it has not only infatuated many private persons, but whole Countries
also. For this Apollonius was (not only erring, but) errant in his practice;
and traveled and beat about to diverse places, boasting of his skill and
cunning, and so met with some of the more credulous sort (in most places where
he came) that employed him in his craft, to make Images, Sigills, or Telisms,
against Storks, Tortoises, Frogs, Scorpions, Horses, etc. And if at any time
the event happened to crown his business, he had then the honor of a God among
the ignorant; Albeit those things the people esteemed Plagues, might have
stopped or stayed, had he never used his skill or cunning.

But this Impostor (not unlike some subtle Physicians, who to gain themselves
the greater honor, persuade people they are dangerously diseased, when (in
truth) they have nothing of sickness on them, but their Doctors words) being
acquainted (peradventure) with the course of the heavenly bodies, might easily
conjecture how long a Plague or Malady would reign; and taking the advantage
thereof (as those subtle Knaves in Lapland, concerning the selling of winds,
etc. when at the same time, whether the cheated Merchant buy them or not, the
winds of course will rise; being moved and stayed again by superior Causes) he
might very opportunely, and with ease (and success) also, make Telisms against
the rage and fury thereof: And yet no reason why he should be accounted a
superlative Doctor for it at all.

From the example of this man's quaint skill, some persons among us, as well
principled, pretending to the Syderal Science, have undertaken the making of
Images, Sigils, Lamens, etc. to procure Peace, Love, wealth, and quid non?
which vanities are so apparently simple and reasonless, that it were a madness
or frenzy in the highest degree, to repose either confidence or credit in them.

I have heard of a person professing great skill in this craft here in London,
that meeting a friend of mine (a Captain of the Army,) casually, who was a
little indisposed in body, and desirous of relief against his malady: This Dr.
endeavors to persuade with him to try the virtue and power of a Telism or
Sigil. The Captain (covetous of health) demanded the price thereof: the Dr.
Answers, Eight pound. Quoth the Captain, That is too dear. Nay, quoth the Dr. I
can make you one for four pound; but it must not be then in Silver, but in
Copper. The Captain replied again, That it was yet too dear, and he could not
spare so much moneys at present. The Dr. rejoined, If that be it (says he) I
can make you one in Parchment, which may do the business; and that will cost
you but thirty shillings. Thirty shillings! answered the Captain; Is there so
much difference of the price, in the substance or matter of which your Telisme
or Sigil consists? Yes, said the Dr. the operation is all one. [Which I esteem
the most splendid truth in the whole story] But to be serious (said the
Captain) Dr. what will the effect of this business be? Or how shall I be
bettred by it? Oh! Never Question that, said Mr. Doctor, for it shall redeem
your health, make you rich and fortunate, and fit to be beloved of all sorts!
If this be true, replied the Captain, How comes it to pass, You get not one
your self? For I perceive you to stand in as much need thereof, as I. At which
reply, the Dr. did (as well he might) blush at his pitiful and ill-grounded
skill and cunning

Now, the pretended way of making these strange scare-crows, is as irrational,
as the things themselves unreasonable. And they seem to ground the same upon
the 9. Aphor. of Ptol. Cent. (...), etc. (i.e.) The generable and corruptable
forms of things, are wrought on, or affected by the Caelestial. Hence the
framers of images make use thereof, by observing the entrance of the Stars into
them. Which text of Ptolomy, although Trapezuntius understands, and indeed
interprets in favor of such conceits; yet most Astrologers have understood
it of the doctrine of Ascendents; and I presume they will not deny but that
doctrine is purely Anti-Telismatical. But if the framers of Sigils, etc. shall
pretend a claim (for the color of their cunning) to the doctrine of
Ascendents, it will stand them but in small stead: for there is no part of
Astrology less studied and more uncertain, then that. And it is no less then a
miracle to me, to consider, how it is possible the Ascendents of Cities and
Countries should be so exactly known in those days (for if I grant a truth in
the thing, so they must be, or else the imange-monger would be strangely out in
his Trade, and his Telisme, or Sigil of small worth) and so hard to be hunted
out in these? for it is more then presumed, that Astronomy was nothing so
perfect in the days of Apollonius, as in these of ours.

Besides, were there something of verity in this Sigilling Science, I would
fain be informed how it should come to pass, that the certainty thereof should
only be seen in the Ascendents of Countries and Cities, etc. and not in private
Genitures? since truth in any thing or Art, is like unto the light of the Sun,
appearing from a lesser to a greater degree, until it have arrived at its full
splendour. And it is also more then probable, that the Ascendents of particular
Genitures are more certainly known, then the other; and therefore should
Telisms, Sigils, etc. be of a more sure and indubitable operation in them,
according to reason; were there not a knack or cheat in the thing, fit only to
be known and connived at, by an Apollonius.

My self have (at some times, with others) been an admirer of these vanities
and silly conceits, but have found them to fail notoriously; Notwithstanding
the greatest and most exact ceremonies were used in their framing. And what
virtue, worth, or excellence there should be in any of these Telisms, etc.
unless by hap hazard, as an Emperick cures a disease, or a madman drops a word
offense, I protest really, I do not understand. Nay, the very persons
themselves, that pretend most to those things, notwithstanding all their tricks
and devices, are generally poor, despicable, and contemptible fellows;
oftentimes reduced to beggary: they cannot add a hair to their own condition by
all their cunning and skill; nor (as the learned Burton, in just derision of
them says) take either gold Letters, or any thing else, out of Crassus his
Chest or Mine. Vid. Anat. Mel. fol. 47.

It aptly follows therefore, -- That the persons professing these things may
deservedly be hissed at and derided, and the forgeries themselves, justly
ranked with the fables of Merlin, and Mother Shipton, and the rest of that Rank
and Rabble. And so I have done with Apollonius, and with the first sort of
persons in my division; who in reason are fit to be blamed, for obtruding such
reasonless, yea senseless vanities and fictions upon the judgments and
understandings of the world.

SECT. II. The second sort.
THe second sort, are a company of Melancholy Crack-brain'd Creatures, born as
well to spread lies and vanities, as believe them, etc. in which number I rank
the Sibyls and Quakers, Dr. Dee, and Mr. Kelly; the Author of those Prophecies
published by Mr. Pugh; with other Melancholy souls, fit to be pityed, but not
believed.

6. Of the Sibyls, etc.
The name Sibylla, is not a proper name, but an appellative common to all women
pretending to the Spirit of Prophecy; and is compounded of (...), (which in the
Aeolick dialect, is the same with (...)) (i. e.) God, and (...), (i. e.)
Council: because they pretended to declare the mind and council of God to his
people. Serve. Aen. Lib. 6. There were ten very eminent that bare the name, viz.
Persica, Libyca, Delphica, Cumaea, Erythraea, Samia, Cumana, Hellespontia,
Phrigia, Tiburtina. They are said all, to have Prophesied of Christ, and to
have related Prophetically other very strange things. Without injury to reason,
we may believe, they were a company of poor Melancholy creatures, that knew not
what themselves spoke. Some of them (as it is reported) would write their
fancies in sand; others, at the mouth of a cave in leaves of trees: which the
fierceness of the wind would oftentimes so scatter, that they could hardly be
brought into order again. Whence it was, when people were wont to express any
difficulty, they would use Politian's words -- Laboriosus est, quam Sibyllae
folia colligere: It is easier to gather together the Sibylls Leaves. Romans Ant.
fol. 52. Now, let us ask of reason, whether such actions as these are not
apparent Testimonies of Melancholy? yet so credulous have many learned (as well
as others) been, that when they would assert the reality and truth of any
thing, they would do it proverbially in these words -- It Is as true as the
Sibylls Oracles!

The learned Mr. Burton of C.C.C. Oxon, says, that Melancholy was the sole
cause of Sibylline Prophecies, if there were any such thing. Which, (says he)
with Casaubon and others, I justly except at. For, it is not likely that the
Spirit of God should reveal such manifest Revelations and Predictions of
Christ, and conceal them from his own Prophets. Anat. Mel. fol. 657. And
indeed, there was hardly ever any ingenious man (except for some self end or
other, as Catiline to Lentulus, for the better working his design about) that
ever credited them for any other, then a crew of
poor-silly-Melancholy-Crack-brain'd Creatures. And really, for any man to
credit, or give heed to vain, idle, and addle-headed women, and to esteem their
Predictions, or twarling stories, as prophecies, or Oracles, Is the greatest
Argument of Imbecility or weakness, that can be.

For my self, I will speak freely; my reason knows no difference betwixt a
Sibylls Oracle, and a silly Quakers conceited Revelation! And if we must still
be born down with the empty names of such like fictions and fopperies, I
understand not, but we may, with as much reason, credit the voices and
Revelations of Hannah Trapnel, and Dorcas Erbury: the parallel seems equal. For
the Sibylls in their times pretented to deliver their fantasms by inspiration;
so do these silly wretches. The Sibyls were scorned and contemned in their
days; which occasioned their living in caves and other obscure places: the like
are these poor silly souls subject unto. And if it be only the length of time,
that can make every melancholy, distempered, crack-brain'd Creature a Prophet,
or Prophetess, I know nor, but those silly poor Creatures (though now
despicable) at length may be esteemed of equal Authority with the Sibylls.

I have read most, if not all, that is extant, of the Sibylls Prophecies, and
profess really, I cannot espy any thing of worth or reason in them; simple,
rude, raw and scarce Pen-feathered conceits, calculated only for the belief of
the balder sort of understandings in the world. And as one said of the Turkish
Alcoran -- Totum Scriptum confusum, sine ordine vel color, absque sensu and
ratione; ad rusticissimos idem dedit, rudissimos, and prorsus agrestes, qui
nullius erant discretionis, ut dijudicare possunt: That it was a book full of
Nonsense, Barbarism and Confusion, without either rhyme or reason, or any good
Ingredient: First discovered to a company of rude rusticks, hoggrubbers, that
had no discretion, Art, judgment, or understanding; and by such is still
maintained: the very same may I say of the Sibylls, their Prophecies, Oracles,
and Disciples.

We are not un-acquainted with what desperate effects melancholy has produced.
Plutarch. Lib. de superst. calls it Turbulenta passio, hominem consternans -- A
turbulent troublesome passion, that utterly undoes men. Burton terms it
exitiosus error, and maxim periculosus, A most perilous and dangerious enemy.
It captivates the senses, destroys reason, makes every thing seem of a quite
contrary hew. It has caused men to conceit themselves Urinals, Sheep, Horses,
any thing. Some by reason thereof, have believed themselves to be dead; others,
to want a head; a third sort, to have serpents in their bellies, and what not?
when alas! there is no such thing, save in their Melancholy conceits. But as
the learned Gregory well notes of such that are vertiginous -- They think all
turns round, all err; quum error in ipsorum cerebro sit; When the error is
only in their own brains: So it is with these melancholy persons. And this may
suffice to signify the error of the Sibylls, Quakers, Dreamers, and the rest
of that rabble, and of those that believe or give credit to them, or their
conceits.

2 Of Dr. Dee, and Mr. Kelly.
For the ignorant and vulgar sort of people to be so deluded, cheated and
cozened, as has been shown, is no great marvel; but for the learned and
ingenious to be found in the same predicament, is (to me) no small wonder!

This eminently learned person (for whithout question such he was, as appears
sufficiently by his Mathematical Preface to Euclid, and his Aphorisms; two
things of such worth, that (in kind) I cannot tell what extant can equal,) as
is evident by the book lately set forth by Meric Casaubon D. D. under his name,
was a great Creditor of the Doctrine of Spirits and Angels; and had (if the
book say sooth, which I not a little question) Communication and converse with
them. But yet he confesses never to have seen any himself; but was still
beholden either to Mr. Kelly, Arthur, or Bartholomew, his speculators by turns;
and whatsoever they told him, he was contented to rest satisfied therewith.

It is the opinion of Dr. Casaubon, that Dr. Dee's aim and design was to bring
up a new Mode of Religion among men (we have now too many of them, without him
or his skill) and to obtrude a faith upon them, contrary to all that at that
present was professed. But be this granted, that it was his aim and intent so
to do; and will it not readily result, that there was not so much of truth or
reality, as subtilty and policy in the thing? Another thing worthy of good
consideration, I meet with in the Publisher thereof -- That had Dr. Dee but
lived in Turkey when he conversed with Angels and Spirits thus, there is no
doubt (says he) but they would have spoke as much for the Mahome^an faith and
profession, as by his being in Europe, they did for the Catholic or Christian.

And indeed if we seriously consider this Doctrine, etc. we shall find, that
both Angels and Spirits, etc. always fitted their Answers and Oracles to the
humors and customs of the times, and place or places in which they were
delivered. Which very thing proclaims the whole business to consist of nothing
b^t deceit and imposture! And really it is a wonder to me, that any person that
is ingenious should esteem of it otherwise.

I have read the ^ook seriously over, [whereas the Pu^lishers desire is but to
read a quarter thereof, before a man pass his censure or opinion upon it] and
protest really I find nothing in it, but a mere Romance Story, in a pretended
Saint-like Scripture Language; the style Platonic; and of so indifferent a
vein for eloquence and fancy, That I presume an ordinary wit might have flown
a far higher pitch. Ben. Johnsons Bartholomew Fair is far above it, both for
language and matter, plot and contrivance; and indeed, in all other respects.

There is one thing in it (above all the rest) worthy to be noted; and plainly
proves the designers of this newfound Whimsey, not so religious as they
pretended. It is this -- In the progress of these Stories, Dr. Dee and Mr.
Kelly could seldom agree. At last they resolved to invocate an Angel or
Spirit, to acquaint them with the reason thereof, they being of one and the
same faith, and professing and practicing one and the same thing. To be brief,
an Angel (as says the Book) was called, and the question being propounded, --
The Angel returned this in answer -- The reason of their disagreeing so much
was, because they were not cross matched. Upon the hearing of this answer from
the Angel. Dr. Dee and Kelly begin to interpret the same, To their not having
layen with each others wife. And this was the best and only gloss they could
put upon their Angels answer. Now to put this blessed work into practice, To
tempting the women they go; And (says the Book) the women cried thereat,
deeming the action sinful. And that which is the more intolerable, To these
Lecherous and filthy conceits, they were not ashamed to abuse the holy and
glorious name of God and of the Trinity.

Immediately after, to render the cheat (for no other can it be,
notwithstanding some account it of as good a stamp for truth, as the Gospel of
St. John) the more plain and clear; they subjoyn a question of Theft, answered
by Astrology, and the very text of Haly de judic. Astr. urged for the reason
of their judgment. Which had there been any thing of excellency or certainty
in their pretended Doctrine of Angels, I suppose they would never have been
beholden to poor Haly; or have craved the assistance of an Aphorism from him in
any case whatsoever.

In another place, they fall to their trade of Exorcising again; and an
unmannerly shee-Angel appears, and incontinently shows them her nakedness. Such
is the excellency and Religion of such Hyperbolical fooleries!

What this Kelly was, the Publisher tells you at large, that he was a
Philosopher undone by fire, or by seeking after the Elixir; (a thing that has
befooled the wisest of men.) Afterward he fell into some ill trade, or course
of living, that (as the Publisher says) he lost his ears in Lancashire; and
then fled beyond the Seas, etc. but for Dr. Dee's part, I believe him much
abused in the thing. For it is impossible for reason to conclude, a person of
so great learning and parts, a general scholar, one that had the advantage of
the best wits in his time, (which was of power sufficient to keep his reason
from sinking, or suffering shipwrak) and himself so great a Proficient in all
arts and sciences, could be so strangely deluded.

If we should admit that this Kelly (being as you have heard before, a person
reduced to a condition desperate) might once by his subtlety delude him; Or
that himself (in some more then ordinary Melancholy Mood) should willingly
yield to the trial of some such project: Yet I cannot conceive, but he must
easily have discovered the vanity and uncertainty, (to say no worse) of the
practice, before it could possibly grow up unto so large a book in folio.

I leave the modest Reader to judge of the thing. If it be falsely fathered upon
Dr. Dee, my estimate thereof is not then vain: if it be truly and really his
own, I then account it no miracle for vain and foolish things to confound and
destroy the wisdom, judgments, and understanding of the wise. Thus much for the
substance and excellence of Dr. Dee, and Mr. Kelly, in their large folio Book
of Spirits, lately published.

3. Of Pughs Prophecies.
The learned Frenchman James Gafferel, fol. 285. tells us, That the Astrology
of the Hebrews had not as yet lost any of its luster, so long as it was
practiced by those of their own Nation only. But so soon as the more Northern
Nations began to have any knowledge of it, they presently fell to venting of
such strange, wild fancies, and to increase the number of fables in such sort,
as that it is no marvel that the Science has been so much cry^d down

So, while the Spirit of Prophecy remained in its proper Channel, i. e. Among
persons ab Aeternitate appointed for such an office, it was most worthily
honored, (as indeed it ought still to be:) but when once the seed of Baal began
to abound, and the whole race of Pseudo-Prophets overspread the world; such
lies, vanities, forgeries and falsities, have been vented, under pretense of
their being acted by the Spirit of Prophecy, that it has occasioned many to
blaspheme the same, and think lightly of the true Prophets sent of God.

In the number or retinue of which vanities, I rank the Prophecies now in
question. Where in page 1. our Prophet tells us, -- That Elphin son of Gwidduo
Garranir having requested the benefit of fishing for one night, which being
granted him by his father, he rises early the next morning, and taking up his
net, finds no fish therein; but (instead thereof) espyes entangled about the
Net, a close leather bag, the which he took up and ripped open, and found a
child therein named [I know not, nor he neither, by whom] Taliesin. Page 2.
this wonderful child declares it self for the Protestant Religion: Albeit
Luther, the father thereof, was not born some centuries of years after. Elphin
is grieved he has missed his prize by fishing; Taliesin, page 3. promises to
be better to him then 300. Salmons. Page 4. this Taliesin pretends to have been
contemporary with Jonas, from whom he received another name, even Merddin.
(Duplex Nomen, Duplex Nebulo:) he was also with God before Lucifer fell; he was
also in the banner leading Alexander. He knows the number of the Stars (not
better sure then A^atus) from the North to the South. He was in the Ark with
Noah and Alpha. He saw the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. He was at
^ff^ick before the Building of Rome.

Page 5. He was Protector to Elias and Enoch. He was chief overseer at the
building of Babels Tower! (perhaps he there l^arnt to broach this strange
confusion.) He was at Dyon before there were Giants born. He has been at
Jerusalem among the Prophets: yet he sustained imprisonment at a King of
Britains Court in the Tower, for a year and a day. Page 6. He conducted Moses
through the Sea of Jordan. (But that is no other then a River.) He was in the
Air with Mary Magdalen. He received the gift of Poetry from the boiling furnace
of Caridwin, a she-Gyant that lived in Northwales. He will be upon the earth
till the day of Judgment, (though no body know where his residence is;) but
knows not really whether he be flesh o^ fish.

Page 7. He determines the years of Christ. (Which indeed are like Solomon's
Virgins, without number) Page 8. he tells a story how Panton made humane body,
and rested 500. years upon the Sandy Valley of Hebron, before he was made a
living soul. With diverse other frivolous, and impertinent, and most incredible
stories, of Adam and Eve, of Eve's cheating Adam, by which means Rye came into
the world.

They that can make head or tail, truth or sense, (for Prophecies, none but
madmen will accept them) of such strange complexion'd stuff as this, I envy
not their happiness: but I protest unfainedly, it is no company for my reason
or understanding. By this you may discern to what a height of impudence and
error men are grown, by allowing reins to their fancies to believe any thing;
and by subjugating their reason, and laying it in fetters, that it shall not
dare to peep up against such silly, senseless, and ridiculous trash. Let men of
reason halt no longer between two opinions: but let truth be embraced and
cherished; and falsehood and error, in every thing, (but chiefly in these
things, by reason of their evil) be discountenanced and rejected. And thus much
for this second Section; and for a conclusion to the whole discourse.

-- Percurrent multi, and augebetur cognitio. Dan. 12.4.
FINIS.

