THE NATIVITY OF That most Illustrious and Magnanimous PRINCE, Carolus
Gustavus, KING of SWEDEN, Astrologically handled; AND Published for the honor
of Art, and the satisfaction of all sorts of Persons generally, as well
Astrologers as Others; And particularly for the better Information of Mr.
WILLIAM LILLY.

WRITTEN By MERLINUS VERAX.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit:
Flatter, and Friends thou shall obtain;
Speak Truth, and Hatred thou shall gain.
LONDON: Printed in the Year 1659.

AD LECTOREM.
HE is but a left handed Friend unto the Art he professes, that when he sees
it sinking, will not use his honest and best endeavors to support it.
Astrology is now brought upon the stage of the World; and diverse envious
Spectators are big with Hope and Expectation, that it will be hissed off with
disparagement.

For prevention of which, I publish the Nativity of this illustrious and
magnanimous Prince; (he being the only blazing Meteor of this Age, at whom all
persons stand amazed!) having no better way at present to yield it the
assistance it requires. What I have written, is secundum Artem, as every honest
Astrologer knows; yet, I could with ease (like others) have written what should
more have delighted this Princely Natives Ears. -- But that had been only to
have danced after the Pipes of the Jewish Dreamers, who to flatter, and comply
with the current, could predict any thing.

Qualiacunque voles, Judaei somnia vendent: Juv. Sat.

The Jews will sell good News for gain
Of Silver, Pearl, or a Gold Chain.
As there are a sort of Persons that talk much of Robinhood, and yet never shot
in his Bow; so are there many pretending to Astrology, that know (God knows)
very little thereof; yet like that Babylonish Dream-teller Semajas, will be
twatling to the disparagement of Art, and (many times) to the dear-bought
experience of their Clyents.

The Phythian Prophetess abusing King Philip's Credulity, with her silly and
spurious Oracles, drew him into many eminent dangers; which at the last being
commonly noted and perceived, it was grown to a Byword in those days, -- That
Pythia did (...), that is, please or flatter Philip. I wish this eminent Prince
his easy nature, be not so wrought upon at the last, by some pretending
Astrology. A Princes Ears should not be fly-blown with flatteries: The
Parasite is (of all others) his greatest enemy.

And really, did I perceive either greater safety or danger to happen to this
valiant Hero, then what I have plainly noted in the following Discourse, I
should (for this illustrious Natives advantage, and the honor of Art) acquaint
the World therewith: But to write otherwise then I see an apparent reason for,
in the Art I do profess, I would not, were it most sure to spring me a Diadem.

What advantage has he, that in the power of a Lie flourishes for a moment;
when both his honor and memory shall be subject to the Scoffs and Curses of
persons yet to be born? The ignorant person is forbidden to judge hereof; the
censure of the judicious shall be esteemed most worthily welcome -- unto --

Jan. 29. 1659. Merlinus Verax.

The NATIVITY of the Illustrious KING of SWEDEN, Astrologically handled.
THIS Eminent and Prodigious Prince was born in the year 1622. on November the
7th. Stilo veteri, 14 hours 28 minutes P.M. or afternoon, at Stockholm, where
the Pole is elevated above the Horizon 59 Degrees. The places of the Planets to
the time given are as follows:

Longitude
d. m. 25 40 24 16 9. 12. 5. 2. R. 29. 19. R. 11. 5. 2. 12. 16. 12.

Latitude
d. m. 0. 31. South. 0. 16. 0. 32. North. 1. 35. 2. 38. South. 1. 0.

Ascentio Recta Solis 233. 19. Ascentio Rect. Temp. 217. 0. Added together 450.
19. Circle Substract. 360. 0. A.R.M.C. remains 90. 19. Add the Quadrant 90. 0.
Produces the O. A. of the Horoscope 180. 19.

For the Midheaven.
d. m. d. m. Next Greater 91 5. 1. R. A. 90. 19. Next Lesser 90. 0. 0. L. A.
90. 0. Differentia 1. 5. 1. 0. 19.

If 65 m. give 60 m. What shall 19 m. give? Answer, 18 m. fere: Ergo, the Cusp
of the Midheaven is 0 d. 18 m.

For the Ascendant.
d. m. d. m. Next Greater 181. 34. 1. O. A. 180. 19. Next Lesser 180. 0. 0. L.
A. 180. 0. Different. 1. 34. 1. 0. 19.

If 94 m. gives 60 m. What shall 19 m. give? Answ. 13. m. fere: Ergo, the Cusp
of the Ascendant, is 0 d. 13 m.

The Angles of the Figure being thus obtained, I gain the Cusps of the
Succedents and Cadents, by the Domifying Table, true enough. And then the
Figure is as follows:

figure containing astrological data CAROLUS GUSTAVUS King of SWEDEN, Born
1622. Nov. 7. 14 h. 28. m. P. M. Lat. 59. Degrees.


The Dignities and Debilities of the Planets in this eminent Persons Nativity,
are thus: Strong by 6 Testimonies. Strong by 3 Testimonies. Strong by 9
Testimonies. Strong by 13 Testimonies. Weak by 2 Testimonies. Strong by 2
Testimonies. Strong by 11 Testimonies.


By which Collection of Testimonies, it appears is Almuten of this Geniture. --
And that is the principal reason of this Eminent Natives great Fame, Adventure,
and activity, in warlike Actions and Attempts.

This Geniture was rectified (1.) by the Midheavens occurse unto the Body of,
which happened exactly in June 1654. when this renowned Native came to the
Crown of Sweden, and while that was in force overran all Poland. (2.) By the
Midheavens direction to the square of, that happened near the later end of
1656. at which time the Duke of Brandenburgh, and this Princely Native
differed, etc.

A general Judgment on this Nativity.
BEfore I descend to particular observations hereon, it will not be amiss to
premise -- That in this undertaking, I write not in hopes of reward; nor out of
any disaffection or prejudice to the Magnanimous Prince therein concerned: But
only to free Astrology from the ignorance and unworthiness of some, the
scandal and reproach of others; and (if it be possible in so small a room) to
yield satisfaction to all! Even to this Glorious Prince himself [He being a
person whose Name and Memory I honor, not so much for his unparalled
attempts, and eminent warlike actions; as for his being a constant friend to
the English Interest; a very faithful confederate and correspondent of ours;
and a great supporter of the true Protestant Religion.] And also to his friends
and Relations, who (with others) are gazing and admiring at him and his most
Prodigious Attempts and undertakings: but I shall not in the least reflect
upon, either his Person, Government, Actions, or Engagements; they being not at
all concerned in my present task; for I am to discharge my self Astrologically,
not Politically. --

-- And -- Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos:
What is above us, we may well neglect.


To begin then.

The very beginning of the Equinoctial sign, is here Horoscopical; and the
fiery Planet, is posited in the Ascendent; but he is in reception with the
benign Planet, Lady thereof. Mars (I told you before) was the best Planet for
strength in the figure; and of his significations let Origanus acquaint us. --
Mars solus significator morum fortis, His Inclination.
and been affectus, (he is so in this Scheme) efficit generosus, contemptores
aliorum gubernationi imprimis militum idoneos, animosos, fortes, iracundos,
crudeles, praeliatores, arma appetentes, vehementes manu, promptos, apertos,
cum quadam temeritate pericula non metuentes, vindictae cupidos, impatientes
servitutis and injuriarum, jactabundos, divitias parum curantes: (i.e.) Mars
being significator of Manners alone, strong and well affected, Argues the
Native to be generous, high-minded, valiant, and full of courage; a Contemner
of all things in comparison of Rule or Government: he is wrathful, violent and
fierce; in actions or words, sometimes temerarious or rash; yet fearing no
danger: given to boast, and desirous of revenge: impatient of servitude, scorns
to receive affronts or injuries. Orig. de effectib. pars 3. fol. 588.

Some Astrologers may perhaps quarrel at me, for not taking knowledge of his
being in Detriment, and so have rendered his significations of the Manners of
this Princely Native as being weak; which should have been thus, according to
the beforecited Author: -- Crudeles, injustos, rixosos, tyrannicos, Deum
spernentes, male suos cives regentes, truculentos, Thrasones temerarios, aliena
and propria destruentes, inverecundos, sumptuosos, ebriosos, turbulentos,
effusores sanguinis, feroces in lacessendo, and ubi adrem ventum est, timidos
autores discordiarum, praedones, arrogantes, seditiosos. But although Mars do
receive his detriment in, yet being in reception with, I look upon his debility
the less, and yet his dignity not to be so great, as if he were in his own
house.

This is most certain, that this Princely Native is a person of great spirit,
courage or resolution, of very great activity and forwardness; of a lofty
towering Fancy, and every way most worthyly accomplished, and fitted for Noble
and Heroic Acts.

Now for an eminent testimony of this Princely Natives Honor and Greatness,
His honor and eminency.
we find in the foregoing Scheme, in the M.C. viz. the Angle of Honor and
Dignity, and in his Exaltation also. The learned Argol, in Ptol. parv. lib. 1.
tells us, -- That posited in the tenth House of a Nativity, denotes great
Honors, Preferment and Dignity to him that is then born. And being here in
good Configuration of both the Luminaries, very much augments to the Dignity
and Renown his position there portends. Most Authors tell us, -- That if
Jupiter be posited in the tenth House, in Trine to the Sun, it declares the
Native to be a King, or otherwise a very eminent person.

But the all-conquering Alexander, who had a most glorious Nativity in the
general, yet had some particular unfortunate Positions therein, if we may
credit the learned Lyndholt. So also, has this most worthy Hero! which
seriously ought to be considered, and this eminent Native acquainted therewith.
For those persons that cry nothing but Peace, and pipe out nothing but Victory,
Conquest and Triumph to Princes, especially when there are Testimonies of
eminent Losses and Dangers (and this to their knowledge) impending, are enemies
more intolerable to them, then those that the most publicly oppose them. But
some persons there are, that value not the reputation of themselves, or the Art
they profess! Indeed what need they, when they have made their most and best of
it, and quite done their work? There is a certain slight or juggle of the
brain, as well as the hand; and those that claw and slatter great persons, are
no better then the Birds of a Bartholomew Fair: nay, a man can hardly
distinguish the one from the other, but by their terms, viz. The Smithfield
man's, last but a Fortnight; the fauning Flatterer (which is the greater Bird
of Prey) his term is without date, until his work, with his life, be done. Now
I shall return to the Arguments of evil, (having acquainted you with those of
worth already) and they are these:

1. The beneficial Planet, the only Promiser of Renown, Honor and Dignity to
this Native, is Retrograde, in Conjunction of, and Quartile of Lady of the
Ascendent; which should seem to threaten a great Rent or Chasm in this eminent
Natives Honor and Dignity, etc. Hear what the learned Argol (an Author
unquestionable with our best Astrologers) says -- When shall be unfortunately
posited in the tenth house of a Nativity, he protends much loss and damage to
the Native from great persons; sometimes Captivity, Restraint or Imprisonment;
much peril by falls from high places; (there may be an Allegory in the Phrases)
nay, he generally makes Shipwreck of the Natives Dignities, Honors and
Preferment. -- If he shall be in Leo, -- he portends Imprisonment and Bonds by
the sentence of a Judge. -- But if with there, (as here he is) the Native shall
then be in great Peril of sufferings, although he be no ways culpable, or
deserving thereof. Ptol. Parv. Lib. 1.

I acknowledge (and it is but reason so to do) that the presence of does very
much abate of the force of these most cruel significations; yet being there in
his detriment, and a sign so contrary to his own nature, is much more apt
(naturally) to do mischief, then possibly can do good. And they both being in
Quartile to Domina Ascendentis, the Governess of the Horoscope, argues the less
good to be expected.

in Quartile to, has signification of loss of Honor, Estate, and sometimes
portends the Native to be guilty of treachery and incivility; and the square of
to, denotes the Native to be subject to deceits, and inconstancy, a wavering
mind, etc. and that his joy and hopes shall be incontinently turned into sorrow
and misery. See Argol ut supra, and Augerius Ferrer. de jud. Not. Lib. 2. Now,
being afflicted, as has been at large showed, and he Lord of the sixth and
third houses, should most rationally signify this eminent Natives Honor and
Eminency to be unhappily undermined by his pretended Neighbour-Assistants and
Relations, etc. and that some of them should turn Apostates and desert him,
when he should most of all stand in need of their aid and assistance. This was
and is in some measure made good, by those late unfortunate (for such they are)
troubles and wars he was and yet is engaged in, against his near Neighbor
Princes.

2. As we have considered as posited in Conjunction of, and of, let us consider
him also by himself. being posited in the Mid-heaven, (as Mr. Lilly says, and
it is true enough) never suffers the Native to enjoy Honor long, but casts him
down headlong, when it is least expected; and being once dejected, the Native
rises no more unto preferment. Christ. Astrol. p. 620. The learned Origan says
the same in effect, -- in Medio Coeli semper objicit hominem periculis: in the
tenth House, always involves the Native in great dangers. Orig. de effectib.
fol. 717. For examples, I need quote no other then that of Ludovicus King of
Bohemia and Hungary, whose Genesis was something semblable to this Princely
Native's; and his sad Catastrophe, every one that is but meanly read in
History, cannot but remember.

And seriously if we consider the Mid-heavens direction to the body of (now
coming on) in, a Sign that so eminently hates, as being quite contrary to his
Nature, and opposite to, the place he most of all delights in: I say, if we
seriously consider this, we may justly acquaint this illustrious Native
(notwithstanding the flatteries that some have endeavored to tickle his
Princely ears withal) that he cannot be too careful of his honor and dignity
at the present; for very much danger and prejudice is threatened unto him
therein. And that the world may see I write not (like others) my own humors
and conceits, for, or instead of Art, I will produce the authority of the
beforecited Origanus, in the signification of such a direction. -- Ac in specie
Medii Coeli ad corpus directio, maximas indignitates, and odia Principum aut
Magnatum judicit; vario quoque malorum genere, dignitates, officia, honores
atq, favores subvertit; Negotia cum tarditate natum perficere facit, facinorosa
vero scelere excitat, and nonnunquam mortem lata judicis sententia portendit.
For the honor I bear this eminent Native, I shall not render the words in
English. But this I must needs acquaint my Reader with, -- That they are
Predictions of a very harsh sound and import, as they relate to the Nativity of
so glorious and so active a Prince. But Praemonitus, Praemunitus; a
forewarning, we say generally is a fore-arming. And thrice happy would it be
for this Kingly Native, if (before this most malicious and dire direction
assume its greatest violence and sury) he could but so order and dispose of his
great Affairs, let them belong either to Camp or Council, as to be at peace and
quiet with his Adversaries. The best striking is while the Iron is hot; and if
once the direction comes on too fast, his endeavors and means used for the
settling things, will be neglected, and never come to any good end.

There is a secret nick in restless time
To be observed --
Says the Poet -- which if it be made but use of by this magnanimous Prince,
may (yet) most eminently advantage him; but if neglected, the opportunity's
forfeited, and the wound grows the further from a cure. It is only by
prudence, and good policy (if at all) the wise man can rule the Stars. Sapiens
dominabitur Astris.

3. This Princely Native has ascending, and posited therein: and Ptolomy in
his Cent. Aphor. 37. plainly tells us -- That those persons who have or
Horoscopical at birth, will rashly be the cause of their own deaths. I have
known this Aphorism verified in many (although but very few Kingly) Genitures;
yet I remember that was ascending in the Nativity of Henry the fourth of
France; and it is eminently known, that he too carelessly and negligently
exposed himself to the cruelty and malice of Raviliac, who most basely
murdered him. But I most heartily wish, that this illustrious and noble-minded
Prince may not be sensible of so malignant a face. Yet I most seriously and
unfeignedly protest, it is but necessary for this Princely Native to be
watchful and wary in all his actions, even in those that promise the most fair,
and that seem to be the most safe and secure: For if we observe the position of
Venus, (Lady of the Horoscope) and the Luminaries, there is another Aphorism
that speaks aloud to this Princely Native, viz. Dominus Horoscopi in
signo-violento, vel a maleficis infestatus, and dispositor Luminaris, etc. --
The Lord of the Ascendent in a violent sign, afflicted of an unfortunate
Planet; and the disposer of the light of the time in a violent sign afflicted
after the same manner, portends great danger of a violent end.

This Aphorism took place to purpose, in the Earl of Straffords Nativity: let
it therefore be the prudence of this magnanimous Prince, to anticipate its dire
effects threatened in his Geniture. For here the Lady of the Ascendent, and
disposer of the light of the time, is all one, viz.; and she is in square to
(as I noted before) who is the Malicious Promittor of this Natives miseries.

4. The Sun and Moon are in opposition from fixed signs, which is a most
prodigious and unfortunate Position, and highly destructive to honor and
Sovereignty, chiefly in the Geniture of a King, or one of Kingly Race, and
happening in Cadent places of the figure, as here.

The learned Argol and Ferrerius tell us, That if the Sun and Moon be in
opposition (as in this Nativity they are) the Honor, Estimation and Happiness
of the Native, are subject to mutation; and the Native in every thing shall
prove variable and uncertain: it threatens great Riches, a strong invasion of
poverty and want; and that upon his large possessions of honor, there shall
fall mountains of unhappiness and dishonor; and after great health and sanity
of body and mind, he shall be subject to much weakness and discrasiness; and in
short, a general change from good to evil. See Ptol. Parv. Lib. 1. and Jud.
Not. Lib. 2.

It is the opinion of Mr. Lilly in his Introduction to Christian Astrology, p.
617. -- That if neither of the Lights be in Angles, or in signs of a Masculine
quality, those that are then born (although their beginning may be splendid and
glorious, yet) their end will prove unprosperous. But the benign Planet,
fortunating or befriending both the Luminaries with propitious Rays, may in
some measure qualify, but not wholly extenuate the force and vigor of the fury
portended by the forementioned Aphorisms.

I might have been much larger in the general Fortune or Fate of this Princely
Native; but my design is not to deal in it, beyond a present advice unto him,
and a correction of those many errors and mistakes which already have invaded
the world by reason of him. Thus much therefore shall serve in the general; and
I shall in the next place only compare the force of the Revolutions for this
year, and the next ensuing, with the Directions now operating; and so conclude
this Discourse.

The Revolution for this present year, began on Nov. 7. 7 h. 40 m. P. M. 1658.

degrees. min. The R. A. of Sol is 233. 19 The R. A. of time is 115. 0 Sum of both
make R. A. M. C. 348. 19 Add the Quadrant 90. 0 438. 19 Circle Substract 360. 0
Remains the O. A. of the Horoscope 78. 19

figure containing astrological data Figura Revolutionis, pro Anno 1658. Init.
Men's. D. H. M. Nov. 7. 7. 40. P. M. Lat. 59.


This Revolutional Figure is not very agreeable with that of the Radix; the
less good therefore is to be expected from it. Besides, we find the Moon (who
is Lady of the Ascendent) in quartile to the Sun, a general significator of
honor and dignity. And the malignant Planet, casts a malicious opposition to
the in the tenth house, and a square to the Ascendent from cardinal signs;
which portend this eminent Native to suffer much detriment and damage, not
only in his Estate, Honor and Estimation, but in his body also; by
melancholy, superabundance of ill and corrupted blood, and other noxious
humors; occasioned by cold and moisture predominating: for is Lord of the
sixth in the Figure, viz. the House of sickness.

And as is Lord of the seventh house in the Revolution, and the fourth of the
Radix, and he the principal afflicting Planet, he presages this Princely Native
to be subject to the frowns and fury of his enemies, in a very rugged and sharp
manner; and may perhaps be necessitated thereby to part with some Garrison,
City, Town, Castle, stong hold, or the like; for the fourth House has
signification of such: and this should be the more eminent and considerable,
and to his greater detriment, because the Horoscope and place of are in
Equinoctial and Solstitial signs; and the Natural significator of such
Actions, is in of Lord of the tenth.

But now, if we consider that the Moon is but lately separated from the body
of, not yet quite elongated from his Rays, and that the Sun is in to the
Ascendent and Mid-heaven, and in to Lady of the Ascendent of the Radix, and
upon the very Cusp of the second House -- considering these Testimonies, we may
(I say) conclude -- There will be some design or endeavor, and that in some
degree eminent and considerable, used to assist this most worthy Prince, with
men and moneys, and other things his present condition may require or stand in
need of. But his present impending fate (before at large hinted at) advises
him to accept the friendship offered, and not by neglecting such opportunities,
to prove an enemy unto himself.

February, part of March and April, may prove most unhappy unto him. For on
February the twenty fifth, there happens a of and from the fourth house, and
Ascendent of this eminent Princes Radix, and in ill Aspect to the Ascendent of
his Revolution also: which malicious Configuration threatens much damage and
spoils to happen to his Armies, and mightily wastes and consumes his strength
and power; and in brief, renders him unsuccessful in all his attempts.

Upon the second day of March, there happens an of and from fixed signs, viz.
and; being then in the eighth of his Revolution, and thence opposing in his
second, which scatters and consumes his substance, and procures him many
private and secret enemies: it portends also his public Adversaries to be
active; and in assistance and force, too powerful for him to deal with.

Then on April 26. the is eclipsed near the radical place of, and the
Revolutional place of: it will then be a time and season fit for Action, and
therefore [if there be any thing, at least, in Lunar Eclipses; in Solar, I
question it not!] the more eminently dangerous unto this Kingly Native. I like
it not, when the Heavens are set in Battalia against any person, be he either
illustrious or mean; for without controversy, they argue his fate to be the
more cruel and inauspicious.

I could wish that this eminent Hero would take the advantage offered him by
the Trine of the Sun and about the middle of March, which (happening (as it
does) from the tenth and second houses of the Revolution) will not only assist
him with Loans of Money, and a moderate advantage in all things pertaining to
his Estate, as his present condition requires, viz. Men and Shipping,
Ammunition, etc. but should also forward him in his Councils, Actions and
Negotiations; and methinks (if so be himself please) might also procure a peace
or agreement with some of his present Adversaries or Opposers; and in all
probability either May or June should perfect what at the time before
mentioned, should be set on foot for his assistance.

Let it be this Princely Natives wisdom to make use of the middle of the year,
for the advantage and support of his affairs both public and private; for the
beginning and the end thereof, are notoriously averse to all his undertakings.
What the beginning portends, you have heard already; and what the end of the
year signifies, the Eclipse of the Moon (she being Lady of this Revolution)
near the radical place of Cauda Draconis, on the 19 day of October, acquaints
us. It is celebrated in the eleventh House of the Revolution, in to the Cusp of
the second House, and to also, who is Lord of the tenth House, but posited in
the second.

Astrologically it portends a Catastrophe of his Hopes and Expectations; it
destroys several Engagements, Leagues and Truces betwixt him and some of his
Friends and Allies; it weakens his Substance, and in diverse respects threatens
him superlative prejudice.

And thus much shall serve for the Judgments of the Actions depending on this
years Revolution.

The Revolution for this eminent Natives thirty seventh year current, begins
1659, on November the seventh, 13 hours, 29 minutes P. M.

degrees. min. R. Ascension of Sol is 233. 19 R. Ascension of time is 202. 15 Sum
of both 435. 34 Circle Substract 360. 0 R. Ascension of the M. Coeli 75. 34 Add
the Quadrant 90. 0 Oblique Ascension of the Ascendent 165. 34

The Figure follows.

figure containing astrological data The Revolutional Figure for the year 1659.
beginning November 7. 13 h. 29. m. P. M. Lat. 59 d.


But a very little time, viz. three days before the Revolution begins, there
happens a great Eclipse of the Sun in his Radical place of this illustrious
Geniture; which, if we may give credit to honest John Schoner, is very
dangerous and prejudicial to the Natives life. His words are these -- An
Eclipse of either of the Luminaries in the Angles of a Nativity, or in the
place or places of the Luminaries therein, shows eminent danger of death to the
Native in that year. And it happening in a year when so dire a direction is
operating (as I have before mentioned) portends it the more cruel and malicious.

Mars being upon the Cusp of the tenth House of this Revolutional Figure, viz.
the House of Honor, Renown and Dignity, etc. thence casting a square to, a
natural significator of honor and greatness, is an Argument too sure (at this
time especially) of a Catastrophe, or destruction of this eminent Natives power
and greatness: it portends many heaps of bad successes; crowds of Scandals,
Ignominies and Disgraces, and many notorious Detractions, etc. for both and are
in the Houses of, in Bi-corporeal signs.

Besides this, the Moon is in her detriment in the fourth House, thence casting
a to the Cusp of the House of Substance, and by his bodily presence afflicts
the; which unfortunate Position scatters and consumes this Kingly Natives
Substance and Treasure; and this after an obscure manner, (comparatively) and
so privately, that he will hardly discover the same until it be too late.

Four Planets in the third House in, disposed of by, and he casting an to the
fourth House, and a to the Lord thereof, viz., will most of this year
unfortunate him, constantly in the conclusion of things; and in strong Holds,
Towns, Castles, Fortifications, etc. and this to his very great prejudice, and
retardation of his affairs.

Nevertheless, among all these thundering Arguments of infortunacy, we find the
Moon in to, and the Sun, and, cast their friendly 's to the Ascendent -- --
which should yield this Princely Native some convenient assistance or relief in
the midst of his misfortunes, and may in probability give him a little
encouragement by some unexpected victory, which should be performed by some
notable Stratagem, or nimble piece of Policy. But the significators of this
happiness being weak, and void of all essential Dignities, argues the same not
long to continue.

Lady of the Ascendent of the Radix combust, and near the body of in, portends
an ill habit of body, attended with many perturbations and troubles of mind; it
subjects him to many hazards and dangers. Combustus ut captivus, incarceratus,
vituperatus, absque posse, says Bethem, Cent. Aphor. 4. A Planet combust, is
as a man captived or imprisoned, without hope of getting himself free.

We find in this figure upon the radical place of, which extinguisheth his
Honors, Pleasures and Delights, and denotes most things to succeed crossly
with him, and very contrary to his Designs and Expectancies.

But to draw toward an end: -- As afflicts the, and the chief Angles of the
Figure by his presence, and Aspects, they portend this eminent Native to be
surrounded with much treachery; infidelity and perfidiousness of Officers,
Soldiers and Servants also, (for is Lord of the sixth) attends him. He will be
subject and apt to receive many wounds and scars in his Honor, Reputation and
Estimation also! I am doubtful, so many (and mighty likewise) that he will
(before this Revolution be ended) have occasion to curse and reprobate the
counsel and advice of those fawning Flatterers and Parasites that have (under
pretense of Art) puffed him up with conceits and expectations to the contrary.

These Revolutional Arguments of evil, being on the force of the
beforementioned Direction, which carries so much of blackness and horror in
it; Astrologers (with good reason) tell us -- Quicquid ligat, Solvit: And may
we not with as good reason conclude, That whatsoever does, undoes? If so, --
Then is this famous King in much hazard and danger of being deprived, by the
Mid-heavens occurse to the body of, of what the same significatour to the body
of gave him. And this I leave to the judgment and consideration of every honest
Astrologer! not as an Aenigma, or dark thing; but as a conspicuous Prediction,
deduced from the most rational grounds of Art; not from the Sybils Oracles, or
Theurgie.

The malicious direction before mentioned, is concomitated with three others,
of bad import -- viz. ad Ter.. (2.) ad Ter.. (3.) Ascendent ad Ter.. And these
are to be looked on as the more cruel, in that there is not one Argument of
good to assist (except before excepted) or abate any thing of their evil
portents.

The principal time this illustrious Native ought to provide against, is the
middle of 1660. for then the M. C. ad Corp., takes place in it is greatest
violence: but you are to understand, that as the greatest danger in a Bullet is
before it touch the mark, so it is in a direction; this Native therefore ought
to be securing himself beforehand. Most of this year, transits the place of
Lady of the Ascendent at birth, and the of the eleventh houses both of the
Radix and Revolution; which seem to accelerate the beforementioned dire
portents! From all which Evils and Dangers, good Lord deliver this most
glorious Prince.

In private Councils, and in public Wars,
Kings only act, as acted by the Stars.
FINIS.

