BRITAINS Royal STAR: OR, An Astrological Demonstration of ENGLANDS future
FELICITY; Deduced From the Position of the HEAVENS as they beheld the earth in
the Meridian of London, at the first proclaiming of his Sacred Majesty King
Charles the Second, on May 8. 10 h. 56 m. A. M. 1660.

And an Enquiry made into the Use and Abuse of ASTROLOGY, resolving whether it
be convenient to be continued or contemned.

ALSO, An admirable Observation of a Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars made in
the year 1170. by a learned Monck of Centerbury, communicated to the Learned in
ASTRONOMY.

Together With an Examination and Refutation of that Nest of Sedition,
published by Mr. H. Jessey, concerning Frogs, Dogs, etc. in his Pamplet falsely
entitled, The Lords Loud call to ENGLAND,etc.

By JOHN GADBURY, Philomathematicus.

Dei igitur altissimi coelum est instrumentum, quo inferiora agit, impellit
regitque. Card. Seg. 1. Aph. 58.

London: Printed for Sam. Speed, at the sign of the Printing-Press in St.
Paul's Churchyard, Novem 22 1661.

To the understanding Reader.
As a testimony of the Affections and good will I we to the Land of my
Nativity, I have here adventured to publish the true intention and
significations of the Heavens toward the same; having with a considerable
portion of pains and care observed them, as they weren posited at the time of
his Sacred Majesty's proclaiming, May 8. 1660. in the Palace-yard at
Westminster. There are two things that have principally prevailed upon me for
the composing and printing this Discourse:

1. The Quiet and Peace of these Nations, and satisfaction of the people
thereof. 2. The neglect of other Astrologers in forwarding so necessary a work.
1. The Expectations of the people generally are mounted (as it were) upon
Eagles wings, earnestly desiring; and seriously wishing to know, whether Peace
and Quietude be like to be continued to us, in these (of late) distracted and
bleeding Nations. whose wishes and D^sires, I hope, I have fully and
satisfactorily answered, in the following Tract; wherein I have written nothing
but secundum Artem, according to the true meaning of the Heavens. I have not,
with gay Flourishes, guiled over any thing; but taken a just Cognizance of the
very worst, as well as of the best of things. -- Flatery and sycophantick
Practices, ought as well to flee the face of a Princely Science, as it should
the Sanctuary of a Prince's Presence. 2. The neglect and backwardness of
Artists in so necessary a work, may seem to persuade with many, that things are
not likely to succeed so happily and well as they may expect. But this is only
a sullen silence in some of them, because they see no probable hopes of a
reward to follow such an undertaking; and Dull Jades never go well without a
spur. In our late times of confusion it was a hard matter to hold them from
showing themselves Incendiaries to purpose; then they could make Art speak any
thing. But now, although here be a far better ground to presage Englands
happiness from, under the Government of his sacred Majesty, this is hardly
worth the considering with them; they will rather, then take notice hereof,
hang down their heads like Bull-rushes, and obliviate their Art. This has been
a second Argument to Prevail with me for the publishing this Discourse.
What I have here written, and published, I have done with an upright intent;
not to sow sedition, but cement differences; not to set men's brains a madding,
but to season and compose them: Not to render any opinion odious, but to
rectify those that are overrun with Errors and Mistakes. I am not conscious
to my self of commiting any sin herein, either against the Art I profess, or
the honor of the Nation. I may (I presume) be as bold to write truth in the
defense of Englands peace, and be protected for so doing, as others are to
write falsities and untruths, and publish them to its prejudice. I may justly
expect as good quarter for publishing a fair and sober piece of Art, as those
that print Lies, Forgeries and Libels. I have no design at all, unless it be
to preserve such that would destroy themselves; and to render the Art of
Astralogie (as it ought to be)amiable. I would not be misunderstood; when I
plead for Astrology, and the honest Astrologers, I desire not the propagation
of Incantations, witchcrafts, and sorceries, Gaeodemologic, dealing with Angels
or spirits, Theurgic, calling up Dic-mie in a Crystal; with other to be
abhorted Devices, and hellish cheats: nor yet the toleration of Conjurers,
Witches, Magicians, sorcerers, Divinators, etc. that under pretense of
Astrology have set whole Nations on fire, with their black skill and cunning.
Nor shall I plead for any that have canred the downfall of kings, Nations, Laws
and Ministry, Lawyears, and Divines, etc. from Pictures and Prphecies, which
are the highest sorceries that can used; and against which there are very
particular and express Laws.

I desire and plead for the toleration of Astrology no further then it is
serviceable for mankind. As, by the Decubital and Critical parts thereof,
Physicians are befriended; by the Agricultural part, the Husbandman; by the
Nautical parts, the Seaman and Navigator; the Genethliacal part assists each
particular person with the good and adverse times of his whole life,
acquainting him (by gods permission) when he may with thankfulness receive a
benifit, and when with pious prudence, reverbirate, or at leaft mitigate a
mischief. these (with many others too long to mention here) I do d fend; there
being a Demonstration of the use, worth and excellency of them; as Bellantius,
Cardan, and sir Christopher Heydon, have largely proved; unto whose works I
refer the Readers. But for the beforementioned Villainies, and the Pract sers
thereof, they cannot be too severely dealt with; the Ruin of thousands cries
aloud against them; and every honest Astrologer abominates them.

Of my Answer to Mr. Jeffey, the reasonless and falseness of most of the things
by him Pulished, and his partial Applications thereof, were the main
inducements, no disrespect to his person at all. I desire to live peaceably and
quietly under the Government established; and hold is not a sin, but duty, to
proy for Kings. I earnestly wish Englands welfare. I envy no sort of person in
the world, yet am not of every opinion. If Episcopacy be held the safest way
for the churches settlment, and a means to mike England happy, I shall not
grieve to see it established. I esteem full as well of the commonprayer-Book,
as others do of their precatory Enthusiasmi. God preserve his Majesty, and the
Royal Progeny, and continue the (happily begun) Peace of these Kingdoms! Amen.

From my house without TempleBar, near Strand bridge John Gadbury.

Page 2. line 19. read. has. p.3.1.2.r. was first; and in the Ascendent of the
Figure, r. O.A. 219 d. 49 m. p.4.1.16.r. Dominium.p.9.1.21.r. hope.p.12.1.12.r.
Astris.p.13.1.21.r. per anitum.1.30 r. will.p.15.1.11.r. Bellantius.
P.20.1.23.r. were. P.21.antep.r. Auomalie. P.24.ult.r.21.P.25.1.6.r.
Harmenicon. 1.16.r. Apogaon. 2.28.21.29.P.26.1.12.r. Anomalia.
7.24.49.21.P.29.1.12 r. mildly. P.32.1.24.r. Etenim. In he Answer to Mr.Jeffey:
In the Title for Number, read Non.P.1.1.12.r. Ninus. p. 20 l.4.r. know.

AN Astrological Demonstration OF Englands Happiness, FROM The POSITION of
HEAVEN, At the time of his Sacred MAJESTY King Charles The Second's Being
proclaimed King of Great Britain, etc.
WHile the Moon sets, or keeps beneath the Horizon, not a Dog offers once to
bark at her; it is her shininig only that opens their venomous mouths: So
while his Royal Majesty was traversing the tedious Road of a twelve years
Affliction, being all that time debarred the Possession of his proper
Birthright and Kingdoms, few then snarled at him or seemed to express their
prejudice, or Currish Nature against him, because they deemed him then low
enough; as low indeed as possibly his greatest Enemies could have wished him, on
this side the Grave. But when by Gods especial providence there was room made
in the Hearts of his Subjects for him to ascend the Royal Throne of his
Ancestors, then behold how viperously do several of his Treacherous Subjects
(conscious to themselves of a more then common guilt) in Scandalous and
Invective Libels five out against him, and his constant and suffering Friends;
endeavoring to disparage his great and honorable Actions, and fly-blow his
Princely Designs and Intentions, Being not ashamed, to these their Lawless and
Rebellious Devices, to add Treasonable Threats not only against some
Honorable Personages by name, but the Government also. Which Malicious and
Chimaerical Designs of theirs, I shall demonstratively prove, had not the
least ground, save in their Enthusiastic Brains; and that they are only mere,
empty and idle Conceits, such as will ever be without that effect they wish;
yet of such unhappy consequence and import, that will most certainly, if long
embraced and cherished, sink the Ship of the Promoters thereof, and then both
may perish together.

Sic ego torrentem qua nil obstabat ennti
Lenius, and madico strepitu decurrere vidi.
At quacunque trabes, obstructaq: saxa jacebunt,
spumeus andfervens, and ab apice savior that.
Thus Englished by one:

I have sometimes a stream of water seen,
With little noise, and gently, gliding on,
Where no Obstruction in their way has been
But where by Dams of Timber and of stone
Their passage was denied, they in disdain
of being barred, swelled, foamed, and raged amain.
Behold with what a Princely Countenance the Heavens smiled that minute his
present Sacred Majesty Was proclaimed, by order of this present Parliament; and
then consider, oh ye wilful, obstinate, yet ignorant Creatures, how vain and
unsuccessful, yea, and dangerous, it must needs be for you to fight against the
Decrees of the Almighty, as they are legibly written in the Heavens.



In this Figure, we have the Regal Sign Leo ascending on the Eastern Finitor,
and the Royal fixed Star (...), the Heart of the Lion, Secundum Longitudinem,
arising therewith; it being the Degree of the Horoscope of his late Majesty of
blessed memory and the very opposite Degree of the Ascendent is (...) of the
long Parliaments first convening, Novemb^ 3. 1640. The Moon is in the Ascedent,
in Conjunction of that Fortunate and Benevolent Star Jupiter, between the
Sextiles of Saturn and Venus, and applying to a Sextile of Mars, of whom she
disposes in the House of Friendship.

All which Testimonies, plainly portend a happy, pleasant and durable Reign
into his Sacred Majesty, (or indeed to any King) being at so happy and
suspicious a time proclaimed, notwithstanding all the public Endeavors, or
Clandestine Conspiracies and Conservances of his known or secret Enemies used
to the contrary; and absolute impossibility of the long Parliament or Rumps
returning, which diverse wish, and pray aloud for; and a certain frustration of
all those Chimaeras and Enthusiastic, and Fanatic Fancies and Delusions, with
which the Fifth Monarchy Saints do so vainly solace and please themselves.

At si quando ascendens fuerit signum fixum, and Lundin bono loco Figurae
Dominum longo tempore durabit, maxim si fuerit in Leone, vel in
ejustriplicitate: If at the time of proclaiming a King the Horoscope shall be
fixed, and the Moon in a good place of the Figure, ( i.e.) Fortunate in an
Angle, or a succedent House, it portends that his Kingdom or Dominion shall
remain a long time; chiefly, if Leo shall ascend, (which in this Figure it
does) or a sign of the same Triplicity. Haly de jud. Astr.fol. 334. He goes
on -- Etiam si fuerit in Ascendente fortuna, significat bonitatem illius Regis,
and bonos mores, and bona facta, Haly ut supra. And if (faith he) a fortunate
Star shall be in the Ascendent, it signifies Goodness, Clemency, Worth and
Justice of the King so proclaimed, and intimates him also to be active and
freely forward in good things. I shall spare to Comment upon these most full
Texts, because I would not be esteemed a Flatterer: But were I minded to be as
free in my writing for his Majesty, as his sinewless enemies are proud in being
liberal against him, I could hence take occasion to speak such things, (and not
go beyond the limits prescribed a Writer) that the reading thereof should make
the Adversaries to the Peace of this (of late bleeding, but now flourishing)
Kingdom, hang down their heads, and blush at their Adust zeal, and Choleric
Confidence.

-- Pone Ascendens Leonem, sitque Sol tunc in Tauro in decima ab Ascendente,
sit etiam Luna in primo juncta Veneri aut Jovi, etc. faith Guido Bonatus, pars
3. fol. 480. When you would proclaim a King, (faith he) place Leo upon the
Ascendent, and let the Sun be in Taurus, in the tenth from the ascendent, and
posire the Moon in the first house, joined either to Jupiter or Venus, etc. And
here in this figure, You see the Rules in each Circumstance there of fulfilled
so exactly, as if Heaven had strove to (...) the Election of the most Loyal
Artist upon Earth. Ergo, it must be a most happy and propitious time for the
proclaimig of a King.

Hear Haly yet again, -- Si Jupiter fuerit in Ascendente, etc. When Jupiter is
posited in the Ascendent of such a Figure, (here he is so, and is in
Conjunction of Luna also) he portends the King or Prince that is then
proclaimed, to be just, prudent, and desirous of the good of his Subjects. And
that as he is honored with Victory, so will he be a great Cherisher and
Preserver of the Laws, and a Lover of all Acts of Clemency and Justice.

The Sun (faith the Learned Cardan) has signification of Kings, and the Moon
of Subjects; in this Figure both being fortunately placed, beyond peradventure,
happiness, from this so happy and glorious Turn among us, must emerge both to
King and People. The Sun, the grand Significator of Sovereignty, Rule and
Dignity, is Nobly fixed in the Angle of Dignity, in the House of the benevolent
Planet Venus, and Exaltation of the Moon; whence it is apparent that this great
Conversion and Change, will not only be for his Majesty's happy and peaceable
Reign, but the Peoples joy and delight: so happy an Intertexture is it, that in
the general, both Prince and People should endeavor each others safety. Away
with those Erratique Brains from among us, that wander only to do mischief.

-- Grextotus, in Agris
Unius scabie cadit; and porrigine porci,
^aque conspecta liverem ducit ab ^va.
-- One scabb'd sheep will spoil
A whole some Flock; thus Swine their Friends desile:
And sickly Grapes by lodging near the sound,
Force them partake of their ne'er-curing wound.
That the Government thus founded shall remain fixed and immovable, is seen by
the fixation of the Angles, the prime points of the Figure; but chiefly of the
fixed position of the Sun. -- Si fuerit in fixis, significat durabilitatem and
firmitatem longum tempus. (i.e.) If the Sun shall be posited in a fixed Sign,
he portends the Government and honor thereof to continue firm and durable a
long time. But besides his being located in a fixed Sign, and the chief Angle
of Heaven, he is in partile Sextile of Mars, the Patron of Victory and
Conquest, who is posited in the eleventh House; which is an eminent Argument,
and most clear Testimony, That his Majesty cannot want assistance and support
(should he (which I dare be confident he never will) stand in need) even from
the very best of men: ( i. e.) from those that are most active, powerful and
skilful in Arms. Nor should he be any manner of way less respected from those
of the meaner Rank, Quality and Degree: Is not Luna in Sextile of Venus, who is
Lady or Governess of the Medium Coeli? Is not Mercury Lord of the eleventh and
second Houses, in Gemini in the tenth, and he simply most strong in the Figure?
I know some may be apt to urge a backsliding in Friends from Mercuries
Retrogradation, and the Position of Mars in the eleventh House; but let such
know, that the Retrogradation of a Planet is no Essential, but Accidental
Debility: nor are the Planets retrograde per se, but per Accidens, as Dr.
Wilkins has learnedly and acurately demonstrated, Vide Nem Planet, etc. Lib.
2. Cap. 10. p. 226. Ergo, Retrogradation is no such eminent affliction as some
esteem it; chiefly, if a Planet be essentially dignified, as in this Scheme
Mercury is Nor is the Position of Mars in the eleventh House the prodromus of
any dangers, he being in Sextile of the (...). Besides were it not that there
was that happy Radi^tion between the Sun and Mars, yet the injury his single
position portends, is alleviated by the benign presence of Venus in the same
house, she being in perfect Amity with the Moon: for it is a known Rule among
Astrologers, Quicquid ligat Mars, Solvit venus: Whatsoever Mars by his ill
influence, harms; Venus by her benevolent Rays, helps. Therefore neither Mars
his position in the Angle of Friendship or Mercury's Retrogradation, can have
any evil signification that is not otherways over-balanced. Yet I will not
deny, but the Platique Squares of the Moon and Mereury, and of Saturn and Mars
also, may so far operate upon the overheated brains of some, and those
somewhat religious too, (is not Mars Lord of the ninth?) that their Actions may
render them most unfit to be either trusted, or connived at: yet I aver, those
that are the most desitous, and most powerful to do or act anything against
this most happy, and (to England) natural Government established, will in their
Actions and Doings be most suddenly discovered, let them in the management
thereof wear what kind of Vizards they please. Having therefore, answered the
Objection, I reassume what was built upon the a^oresaid Arguments, That his
Royal Majesty shall be assited and supported from and by Person of Power, and
those also of the most inferior Classis, viz. the Multitude.

And must not that Prince needs be happy, and reign honorably and
prosperously, whom the Heavens bless, and honor with the Assistance not only
of those that are of a superior degree, but the Multitude also? I should think
that the enemies to his sacred Majesty (were they not blind) might read their
inevitable Ruin in the concurrent Affections of the People at his Majesty's
proclaiming, and Reception! Who ever either saw, read, or heard of a more
general Unanimity and consent of Hearts and Judgments of all forts of people,
then there was at the proclaiming and coming in of our dread Sovereign? If Vox
Populi, be Vox Dei; if the Voice of the People upon be the Voice of Gods, how
dare any sort of people, upon the Cynical Cinceits or Humors, turn Separatists
and cant the downfall of that happy and blessed Edifice: which is built nor
only upon the Suffrages of the major part of the People, but of Heaven it
self? The Learned Strafford by experience found, (and it was his dying
expression) That the breath of the People were the Organs of Destiny. And
certainly, that which has power to abate of the Majesty and Greatness of the
one, has Potency also to make another Mighty.

Let me add yet a little further, (for I presume I may, and that rationally
too, while I have Authority for my support.) The Arabians in these manner of
Judgments, did make use of several parts, as the parts of Fortune; Victory and
Nobility, which (you may see) are all placed in the foregoing Figure, Aspice ad
partem fortunae, and ad partem Nobilitatis, quae accipitur in die a gradu Solis
in gradum ipsius Exaltationis -- and projicitur ab Ascendente. Aspice etiam
partem Regni and victoria, quae accipitur in die and nocte a gradu Solis in
gradum Lunae, and projicitur a gradu Medii Caeli. (Id est) In the Figure of the
proclaiming of a King, you should have regard to the Part of Fortune, and to
the part of Nobility, which by day is gained by substracting the Degree of the
Suns place, from the Degree of his Exalation, and projecting it from the
Ascendent. Behold also the part of the Kingdom, and of Victory, which both day
and night you must take from the Degree of the Sun, to the degree of the Moon,
and then project it from the Degree of the Mid-heaven. Then for the use of
those Parts, examining the same learned Author, he tells us -- Si quando he
paries venerint in bonis locis and fortunatis,and cum fortunis, significat
magnam nobilitatem and honorem illi domino, etc. (i. e.) If when any or all of
these Parts happen to be placed fortunately in the Figure, and with the
Fortunes also, they portend great Nobility and Honor to that Prince then
proclaimed, etc. -- Here you see these several Princely parts are posited in
the chief places of the Figure, and the Part of Nobility near the body of
Venus: beside, they are all near eminent fixed Stars, viz. the part of Fortune
near Cor Scorpit in the fourth House; and the part of Victory, etc. near Cor
Leonis, in the Ascendent or first house; and the part of Nobility in Cancer,
nearly in Conjunction of Ras-Algense, a splendid, shiming, fixed Stat in the
eleventh house: therefore I pronounce the Aphorism to take full effect It is no
mean Argument of lasting honor and happiness, in which the fixed stars are so
eminently concerned: For, according to Ptolomy, Stella fix a mirabiles and
ultra rationem faelicitates tribuunt etc. The fixed Stars do design most
admirable Felicity and honor, etc. prol. Cent. Aphoris.29.

The Reader must pardon my repetition, for I cannot avoid it here; besides, I
have a warrant from Cardan for so doing, Seg.4. Aphor. 85. Repetitio neocssaria
est, in hac scientia, vel ob difficultatem, vel ob necessitatem, velob
utilitatem ingentem, vel obcontradictionem. Repetition is necessary in this
Science, either by reason of difficulty, necessity, exceeding benefit, or else
to avoid contradiction. I must therefore (unless I should rob those weighty
Arguments of their Conclusions which are drawn from those parts before
mentioned) here again affirm, That hence also is portended a happy
continuation, and convenient duration of his Majesty's reign, and the
Government of these Nations, maugre the most malignant and subtle Designs of
the most inveterate Opposers thereof.

Now, as we have spoken of (and we have satisfactorily demonstrated) the glory
and happiness, and the happy continuance of this Heaven-favouring Return of our
gracious Sovereign, and Monarchical Government into these (of late) confused
Islands; so give me leave to add a word or two concerning all those that shall
set themselves against his Majesty by reason of his happy Restoration; or
against the Government of these Nations as it is now established.

The Enemies of his Majesty, and of Englands peace, are signified by Saturn:
Ergo, they are envious, malicious, covetous, jealous, timorous, suspicious,
sluggish, sordid and mistrustful. This is the true Character of the
inclinations and dispositions of those persons signified by Saturn When he is
ill dignified, as now in this Figure. Origanus de effectibus, fol.590. when
Saturn and Mars both are concerned (as here they are) in the descriptions of
any kind of Persons, he tells us they are Turbulentos, Seditiosos, (...),
immisericordes, implacabilcs, inftatos, gloriasos, ventosos, frandulentos,
tyrannicos, austeros, improbos, inhumanos, fallaces subdolos, etc. And a
little, further the same Author tells us, That if those Planets be ill
beholding, (as in our Figure) then they signify persons that are -- Raptores,
grassatores, maleficos, contumeliosos, insidiatores, furaces, sacrilegos,
sepulchrorum violatores and speliatores, per juros, omris humanitatis
violatores, voraces, etc, Ishall not English these words, because I would not
have the world be any more commonly acquainted with such a Generation of
Miscreants, or that there are such Creatures any where, save in Hell. We in
England have had our share of the Company of such a Race, for many years
together; many Ages will not wear out the memory of their Actions: They have
made greater Impressions upon the Happiness and Peace of Englands flourishing
Kingdom, then ever the surious Planet Mars by his being Promittor in a fiery
Sign, could make by that loathsome Disease termed (...), in the face of a
beautiful Virgin. But I return to Saturn again, and to his significations, as
he is placed in our Figure, because he is Lord of the seventh house, and placed
in the third in Scorpio.

The Learned Haly in this manner of Judgments, seems to decipher the Enemies
of a King, and their conditions also, by the Infortunes at large, as appears by
this Aphorism of his: Siquando infortumium fuerit cadens and:c sub terra
maxim, significat debilitatem, inimieqrum; and depressionem, and vilem, eorum
estimationem, etc. which sonnds to this purpose in English: If when the.
Infortunes shall at the proclaiming of a King be cadent, it fignifies the
Depression and Debility of hi Enemies; portnends their Credit and Estimation to
be vile, not only in it self, but in the eyes of men; ancf this shall happen
chiefly when they are cadent under the earth; as in this Figure. Hence it is as
clear as the Son. in his Meridian Glory, that all those who shall appear to be
Enemies, (I would not be misnniderstood; I mean only Domestic Enemies; for.
by this Figure I have to do with no other; but from other cause I dare also
include Forragin Enemies, but dare not do it here) I say, who shall appear
enemies unto this Kingdoms Peaces, will also prove such unto their own
Happinese and Quietude. For let their Designs be what they will, they are
appointed to fall and fail under them; and by prosecuting their cruel (nay, I
may add, accursed) Purposes and Designs, they will never Feable to bring the
Brat their Brains have conceived, and begin to grow big of, unto a perfect
birth: The Midwise Time become, and will continue their absolute Enemy and
Hater. This very Position of Saturn in Scorpio, in Square of Mars, will
discover their weakness and folly, and so far befool them in their
contrivances, that when they think to be at the most likely and probable point
of attaining to the Haven of their Wishes, they will meet their own
destruction, and sufferr such a sad Catastrophe, that will not only ruin and
destroy themselves but eclipse the Credit Fame and Estimation of their
Posterities for many Ages to come. Saturn you see is in Quartile of Mars his
Enemy; hear what Bethem says to such a Position, Aph. 10. Quando Tlanetaest in
aspectu sui host is, est ut vix timens hostem sunm: A Planet in Aspect of his
Enemy, is as a man fearing tosuffer, or be endamaged by him. And in the 31 Aph.
he since, Planeta in domo inimici sui, est, nt vir in domo alterins, inter quos
fame advenit odium and ira: A Planet in the House of his Enemy, is as a man in
another house subject to the Ire and Hatred of those among whom he is. Saturn
is not only in Quartile of Mars, but disposed of by him also. Ergo, these
Rules are the more to be heeded.

Let me persuade all you that are the pofessed and avowed Enemies to this
Nations Peace and Happiness, to change your evil purposes, and to turn the,
destructive current of your Treacherous Inclinations; unless you have a desire
to meet your Misery and Ruin in prosecuting the ill grounded Theme of your
insuling and reasonless prejudice; which is (I unrefeignedly protest) most
plainly to be read in the Heavens; and you your selves may also perceive it by
the diverse positive Authorities I cite.

I scorn and abominate to substitute my own Opinion in the room of Art; or to
wrack and torture the Science I study, with unwarrantable Devices, to force and
compel it to speak what the, Heavens do not intend or intimate. It is
sufficiently known I have made it my design all along to detect and discover
the Errors, Forgeries and Vanities of the highest Abusers of this noble
Science in our Age. And should I attempt any such thing, or wilfully suffer my
Pen to walk either contrary to, or besides the Rules of my Art, I should then
be as bad as he, who pretending to abhor Idols, was not ashamed to commit
Sacrilege.

Perhaps these my serious and seasonable Premonitions, because they are deduced
ex Artis from the Stars, maybe contemned, neglected and slighted; and my self
for the same derided, if not detruded, by those who are mostly concerned in
them, and ought chiefly to consider and observe them. It is a practice among
the ignorantly resolute in shawing a Foolhardy valor, rather to run into the
Jaws of Ruin, then be wrought upon by the most gentle Persuasions to reform.

I know Astrology. is suffciently under Hatches at this day in England, and by
tne major sort, of wise and ignorant, not only neglected, but condemned, by
reason of the Sychopincy, Leidgerdemain, and Grand Juggling of that
Arch-Parasite Merlinus Anglicus; who for many years together has been felsly
reputed the chief Astrologer among us. If f^ttery be the only distinguishable
Character to know an Artist by, the general Cry and Commendations will the more
easily reach him. But if true knowledge in the Art shall take place, I here
publicly.maintain, He is not guilty of the tithe of the knowledge that the
people have generally believed of him. This may seem somewhat Paradoxial and
strange, That a person that has born the Bell I cannot tell how many years in
the common Fame of the Nation, should not be most excellent in the thing he
pretends unto: but it is most true, and I dare publicly aver it, That his
skill is so mean in the Art he prerends unto, that he knows not how to
calculate one Stars or Planets place: nay, I shall go further 3 he scarcely
Knows how to reduce a Star truly from one Meridian to another

It is common for the major part of the world, whose judgments are unseasoned,
to be taken with pretended Flourtishes of skill, whether they be certain and
true, or not. I have heard of a Mustian who (with his Youth) was psaying before
it great number of persons; and the Youth having obtained a little superficial
skill, did with the same so enchaunt the Ears of the Auditors, that they brake
forth into a great Commendation of his rare skill: His Master observing this
their applause, came near to the Youth, and struck him on the Ear, saying,
Sirrah, If you had been true to your Notes, those misjudging-Ears could never
have commended you. So, if that grand Abuser of Astrology have been commmended
in all things he has written, it has been by unseasoned Judgments, Persons
that were not acquainced with his Wiless and lgnorance. Yet for his sake alone,
has Astrology been hardly censured, yea, plainly abused, neglected, scorned
and condemned.

It is not Astrology, but Sycophancy, and arch-Villany, to turn tide and tale
with every, interest. An houest Astrologer scorns to fawn, ftatter, and write
for and against a Parliament for.200 and l. 100.l. per anuum. Is he an able
Astrologer that shall trapan the King-of Sweden to his ruin, and yet receive
from him both money and a Goid Chain? Is he not a Villain rather?. Is he an.
honest Artist that shall traitorously traduce his. lawful Leige-Lord and So,
veraign, and call him Titular King, Pyratical Prince; threaten him with a stab,
or poison? Is he a Eriend to the Scince he pretends, that for a Bribe shall (
sine ratione) doom the. King of Denmark to ruin, and the Prince EleEtor of
Beandenburgh to repent in sackeloath and ashes? Is he not a Mercenary Killain
rather, that for a handful of earth shall assassinate the most splendid
reputations in the world? Nor dare I esteem him other then a rancorous hearted
Wretch that shall aggravate a difference between his own Prince and Subjects,
or that shall abuse his Royal Majesty's Friends by name, as the before
mentioned Merlin's Brat has ihe Earl of Ormond calling him arch-Rebel, and
indiscreet Earl, and threatening him with inglorious death; and Prince Rupert,
whom he villanously styles Plunder-Master-General, etc. Thus you see how
Astrology is come to be evilly spoken of, and for whose sakes also

Astrology is too Princely a Science to be thus a bused! but by the soil and
black Actions of this Proditorious Fellow, the Diamond, Luster and Beauty of
the Art, is the more excellently shadowed and set off. I abominate to threaten
or terrify any sort of men in the world with false fears, or indeed with any
at all! Howbeit, I shall endeavor to persuade all those that are wilfully
precipitating themselves into the Gulf of Misery, Ruin and Destruction, to
avoid running the Road that leads necessarily thereunto: If the cause be taken
away, the effect of course cease.

And that I may use a pertinent and proper Argument to persuade with them, I
shall acquaint them, and the world at large, That Astrology is not so vain, so
empty, or so idle a study, as the ignorance and villainy of the beforementioned
Person has seemed to render it. There is more Worth, Truth, and certainty
therein, then the weak and yiedling Brains of Men are generally able to
conceive or comprehend: And that may most probably be the ground of the Right
Honorable the Lord Chancellour's Caution in his Learned and Elegant Speech to
the Parliament, -- That we should not too much despise the influence of the
Stars. We do not (faith the Learned Dr. Brown) reject or condemn a sober and
regulated Astrology; we hold there is more truth therein, then in Astrologers;
in some more, then many allow; yet in none so much as some pretend. We deny not
the influences of the Stars, but often suspect the due Application thereof:
Pseud. Epidem. Lib. 4. p. 194. And what man of Reason, will deny the Reason of
this Learned Author? Shall we through a conceited or zealous ignorance,
confound the good use of the Art with the abuse thereof, for the knavishness of
a known Impostor therein? Are there no Grapes ripe, or fit to be eaten, but
those that are within our reach? Shall we wilfully damn and destroy all things
we are not able to understand? This were ridiculous, and most unworthy the
Reason of men! Is there no sober Distinction to be made between the good Wine
and the Dregs? between the skill of an honest Artist and the practice of a
Sycophantique Pretender? That it is unjust for any to blend or mingle the true
use, with the abuse of an Art, I shall endeavor to satisfy the world, by
remembering them of some few, but admirable examples, in which the true worth
and certainty of this honored Science has to the great credit thereof, been
verified.

And to avoid the repetition of those famous Predictions Lucius Bellanticus,
Gauricus, Cardan, Spurina, Guido, etc. (with whose worthy skill, and famous
Presages, we might fill some Volumes) I shall relate here only some few, but
remarkable things, forecold by the assistance of the Syderal Science, of late
years, and among us also.

I. Mr. H. Johnson in his Book called Anti-Merlinus, page 23. predicted the
ruin of the Long Parliament in these words -- That notwirhstanding the
Parliament shall stourish yet a while, yet in the end they shall be conquered,
and brought low; and many of them shall die a death shameful and ignominious,
etc. II. Mr. Wharton in p. 42. of his Hemerose, 1653. predicted the routing of
the Long Parliament most exactly in these words: Mars transits the Degree
culminating in the last Conjunction of and in the watery Triplicity, which will
manifest it self in one or other grand accident to befall some, and they none of
the meanest in power; but men (if I sin not in calling them so) of the first
Magnitnde: and this by means of the Soldiery, or of such persons as are
Martially disposed. And this (he faith) should happen at the beginning of the
year. And behold in April O. Cromwell turned out the Parliament that had sat
twelve long years, and upwards. III. In the year 1658. I verified theText of
Haly de judciis Astrorum pars 8. cap. 19. in predicting the death of Oliver
Cromwell Which came to pass exactly, as was foretold, See my Almanac of that
year, and page the 11th of the prognosticon. IV. In the year 1659. in my
Ephemeris, I plainly predicted the downfall of Richard Cromwell from the Text in
fol. 124. of Johan: Anton: Guiffus de Eclipsibus: and the Confusions of the
(then) Persons in power, I did foretell in Nudis verbis; and that from, the
great Eclipse of the Sun, as also from Prolomy and Origanus their Aphorisms and
Judgments thereof. V. The beginning of the same year, I published the Nativity
of the King of Sweden, viz.. when he was in all his glory; and therein did from
Schoner, and other Aurhorities, presage his death; and in February 1660. he did
die accordingly. VI. The same year I published his Royal Majesty of Denmark's
Nativity, and therein predicted his Recovery from his troubles; and the Peace
also (now confirmed and ratified) between him and the Swedish Crown. See
Nuncius Astrologious, lately printed.
I spare to speak of the most fortunate, happy, and heaven-favouring
Predictions that are to be found in my Ephemeris for this year, because the
Book it self (and things therein contained) is still fresh in each man's memory.
Not is it requisite for me to take notice of each auspicious Prediction my Pen
has been the Author of; otherwise for one of these, I could have produced ten.
But my business is only to prove Astrology useful and worthy; and that the
Predictions thence lawfully derived, ought to be seriously and carefully heeded
and considered. Shall we say that the Lute is a dull Instrument, because a poor
Piper cannot tell what to make thereof? Is AEsop's Jewel of no use, bacause a
Cock preferred a BarlyCorn before it? Astrology was never yet condemned by any
that understood it. And that alone preseves its honor with the ingeniously
learned.

Neither let any man under pretense of opposing Astrology to Divinity, take
occasion thence to give the less credit unto it. For. --. If there be a truth
therein, (as faith the aforesaid worthy Author) it does not injure Divinity: If
to be born under. Mercury disposes us to be witty, under Jupiter to be
wealthy; I do not owe a knee unto these, but unto the merciful hand that has
ordered my indifferent and uncertain Nativity unto such benevolous Aspects:
Vide Religio Medici, Sect. 18. Besides, Divines themselves have been the
greatest Propagators of this Science; as Junctine, Ficinus, Hartgil, Dr. Gell,
Burton, Origanus, Lindholt, Reeves, Swadlin, Carpenter, etc. And can we in
reason believe or conceive, that they would advance, or set up, any thing
contrary to their own profession? Nay, most of these have affirmed, That
Astrology is necessary in a Divine; for he cannot truly understand some
places of Scripture without the knowledge thereof. And that was the reason that
formerly in Egypt none were admitted into the Sacred Order without being
competently versed in the Science of the Scars.

This being now considered, I see not reasonably how the greatest Antagonists
can hood-wink themselves from the knowledge of Celestial Influences. Nor can
we understandingly conplude, that he which gave virtue to the Mazzaroth (or
twelve signs) the Pleiades, Arcturus, and the Stars of Orion, should refuse to
enstamp an insluence proportionable upon the rest of those glorious Creatures.
Nor ought we in reason to. condemn, slight and neglect all Astral insluence or
ponrer, for the Imposturisms of any one either pretending to or practicing
Astrology, any more, then we ought to make light of the Deity, because
Caligula and Lucian would nor grant any.

Will any man esteem him Wise or judicious, that like AEsops Dog lets slip
the substance to snatch at the shadow? Is it not a most blush-worthy fault in
any that shall catch at Vanities on purpose to carp at Verities? He puts the
greatest Fallacy and Cheat upon himself, and robs his Reason of its proper
food, that in derision and scorn of an Art shall hug, cherish and embrace the
Abuse and Imposturism thereof, on purpose to wound the true use and worth of
it. The Error of the Artist is but the Organ of his unwary and imperfect
Nature, and no impeachment to the honor of the Art at all. It would be highly
unjust in any to condemn the true use of Physic, under pretense of crying out
against the knavish and unwarrantable practice of Empyricks.

Astrologers seldom commit Errors, except when they (for bribes) turn
Parasites, etc. Amor odiumque ne vera eveniant judicia prohibent si quidem
minunt maxima, augent minima; (i.e.) Love and Hate will occasion great Error
in judgment;The one causerh the Artist to magnisie things trivial, and the
other to lessen things considerable, Ptol. Cent. Aphor. 12. The true Astrologer
therefore ought to avoid running upon, either of these Rocks, as carefully as
he would avoid the giving a false judgment.

But I wave this Apologetique Discourse, and would not indeed have spoke so
much here, but that the cause is so pressing; And to acquaint the world, that
Asthologie is not sit to be contemned, but continued, notwithstanding the
Abuses of the greatest Pretenders thereunto. I have partly proceeded thus far
in it, to check the vain conceits of Unbelievers: and to assure them, as there
is truth in starry Influences, and in the forementioned proofs thereof, that
Englands happiness cannot be endeavored to be undermined, but by the absolute
destruction and ruin of the Undertakers and, Projectors of the same: and this
without Flattery, or by-respect to any Interest, I send into the world, there
to remain an Astrological Truth with the rest of his Fellows, when the Author
of it shall silently rest Inter Mortuos, among the Dead.

Let. us but observe the grand Harmony between the Figure before going,
and-that of the Revolution of the world, viz of the Suns intrat into Aries; and
we shall find, that Luna in this Figure is in Sextile to her place in that, and
on the place of Jupiter also; and the Benevolent Planet Venus Lady of the tenth
here, upon the place of Luna in that Scheme; and the Cusp of the eleventh of
that Figure ascending here in this.

From all which auspicious Transits and Radiations, we may once more boldly
affirm -- That Peace and Unity is intended to these Islands by this so happy
Renovation and Change among us: and that there. will be both harmony, concord
and agreement between both Prince and people. And most wretched must that man,
or those men be, that shall endeavor to disturb our long-expected, and now
growing Felicity.

Thus much I have thought sit to publish upon this occasion; presuming, as it
may be of very good use to some, it can be of no bad consequence or import to
any that love this Kingdoms Peace.

AN Admirable Observation commended to the Learned in Astronomy
HAving an opportunity of the Press, I shall, for the honor of Astronomy,
present unto the Learned in that Act an Observarion more ancient then any
commonly extant, as it was made by one Mr. Knighton a Monk of Canterbury, An.
1170. Sept. 13. at midnight, and lately discovered by the reading of my worthy
Friend Mr. J.Childry, who (to the end it might be serviceable to the Lovers of
Urania, and claim their serious notice) gave me the same to publish in the very
words himself met with it, viz. An. 1170. Idibus Septembris nocte media, duo
Planet and it a conjungi videbaniur, ut quasi una eademque stella fuissent
appareret, sed illico ab invicem separati sunt: In the year 1170. in the Ides
of September about midnight, were seen two planets so nearly conjoined, that
they seemed to appear as it were one and the same Star; but they did suddenly
separate from each other.

Mr. Childry gave me also a Calculation of this Conjunction from the Tables of
Mr. Vincent Wing in his Astronomia Instaurata, by Mr. Rich. Fitz-smith, a
person excellently versed in this knowledge, (by which without trouble I knew
the Stars conjoined near Jupiter and Mars) with which I shall present my
Reader. But first I shall take the pains to try how near the Tables in my
Doctrine of Nativities will answer this rare appearance.

1. For the Suns place to that time given.
Mid, Long. 5 29 19 2 2 28 47 32 Apog. Sub. 2 28 47 32 Anomalia. 3 0 31 30
Log.. 500, 007. Equat. Sub. 2 2 40 true place. 5 27 16 22 27 d. 16 m. 22 s.

For Jupiter's place.
Long.. Aphel.. Node.. si. degrees min. sc. sig. degrees. min. sec. sig. degrees. min. sec.
Mid. Long. Aph. S. 1 25 31 52 5 27 21 27 3 5 41 13 5 27 21 27 Anomalina. Equ.
add 7 28 10 25 Log. 570, 758. 4 52 42 ParsCurt. 4. Ecc. place. Node Sub. 2 0 24
32 Log. Curt. 570,754. 3 5 41 13 Log.. 500,007. Arg. Lat. Reduct. add 10 24 43
21 T. A. 11 6 929,253. 0 28 Add 45 0 Ecc. reduced Place. 2 0 25 2 T. C. 56 6
9,82735. 5 27 16 22 T. 58 26 10,21154. Anom. Orb. of it. 3 26 51 20 T. 47 34
10,03889. 1 28 25 40 Tang. ad Elong. S. 1 17 34 0 3 15 59 40 true place 2 11 16
42 II 11 degrees. 16 min.. 42 sec. For Jupiter's Latitude:
Tagent of Inclination. 837656 Sine Elogation 998284 Sine Arg. Latitude 976164
S. C. Arith. Anno Orb 4955 Tangent of Latitude South 817059 0 d. 51 m.

For Mars's place.
Long. Aphel. Node. si. degrees min. sc. sig. degrees. min. sec. sig. degrees. min. sec.
Midd. Long. Aphel. Sub. 0 20 29 25 4 19 34 41 1. 9. 59. 38. 4 19 34 41
Anomalia. Equat. add 8 0 54 44 Log. 516. 591. 9 45 22 Curt.P. 1. Ecc. place.
Node Subst. 1 0 14 47 Log. Curt 516, 590. 1 9 59 38 Log.. 500,007. Arg. Lat.
Reduct.add 11 20 15 9 T.A. 34.19. 983417. 0 18 Add 45.0 Eclipt.place place 1 0
15 5 T.C. 79.19. 927565 5 27 16 22 T. 73.31. 1052885. Anom. Otb. of it. 4 27 1
17 T. 32.31 980450. 2 13 30 38 Tang. add Elong..s. 1 2 31 0 3 16 1 38 true
place. 2 11 14 44 II 11 degrees. 14 min. 44 sec. For Mars's Latitude.
Tangent of Inclination 850946 Sine of Elongation 998276 Sine Arg. Latitude
922878 S.C. Arith. Anom. orb 26409 - Tang. Lat. 0 degrees.34 min.South 798509

Long. Lat. So the places of them both in Longitude and Latitude are 2 11 16 42
0 51 South. D. 2 11 14 44 0 34 0 0 1 58 0 17

And their difference in Longitude, I min. 58 sec. in Latitude 17 min. a thing
inconsiderable both ways; and remarkably proves the exactness of the
beforementioned Tables in my Doctrine of Nativities, which are founded upon the
Hypothesis of the Learned Bullialdus.

In the next place, I shall present you with the pains of Mr. Fitz-smith on
this admirable Conjunction from Mr. Wing's Astronomia Instaurata; which, as it
was delivered me, take as follows.

The Sun's place.
si. de. m. sec The middle Motion of 5 29 19 28 The Apogaeeon of S. 2 28 21 30
The Anomalia remains 3 0 57 58 The Equation of Eccentrick substract 2 2 56 The
true place 5 27 16 32

viz. in nz 27 degrees. 16 min. 32 sec.

The places of Jupiter and Mars.
Jupiter. Mars. sig. degrees. min. sec sig. degrees. min. sec Middle Motion 1 25 34 2 0
20 28 33 Aphelion 5 28 17 3 4 20 17 31 Node ascending 3 5 22 43 1 11 20 42
Equation of the Eccentrick to be added 0 4 46 5 9 42 35 Place of from in his
Orbite 2 0 20 7 1 0 11 8 Reduction add 0 27 0 22 Ecliptique place of from 2 0
20 34 1 0 11 30 Parallax of the Orb from the earth add 0 10 55 15 1 11 0 26
Longitude of is 2 11 15 49 2 11 11 56 Latitude South 50 51 83 12

Hence their places in Longitude and Latitude, is -- d. m. s. Long II 11 15 49
11 11 56 m. s. Latitude 50 51 South. 38 12

Their Difference in both, od. 3 m. 53 s. -- 22 39.

I shall in the last place present you with a Calculation of this so famous
Conjunction from the Tables of my worthy Friend Mr. Wing in his Harmonicon
Coeleste, which differ very little from the Calculation thereof by the Tables
in my Treatise of Nativities.

For the Sun's true place, Ex Harmoni Coeleste.
Time given. Long.. Apog.. si. degrees. min. sec. sig. degrees. min. sec. 1101 9 16 14
11 2 27 9 54 60 0 26 56 1 1 38 9 11 29 49 15 9 15 Sept. 7 29 30 44 42 D. 13 12
48 48 0 H. 12 29 34 Middle Longitude Apogae^on 5 29 19 28 2 28 21 30 2 28 21 30
Anomalia Remaining Equation Substract The Suns true place 3 0 57 59 Logarithm
of -- 100001. 2 2 55 5 27 16 33 27 d. 16 m. 33 s

For Jupiter's place.
Time given. Long. Aphel.. Node. si. degrees. min. se. si. degrees. min. sec sig. degrees.
min. sec. 1101 3 9 11 30 5 29 33 30 3 3 37 38 60 21 47 0 1 0 6 0 13 0 9 9 3 14
48 9 1 1 57 Sept. 20 12 2 42 8 D.13 1 4 50 H.12 2 30 Mid. Lon. Aphel. Sub. 1 25
32 40 6 0 43 19 3 3 52 43 6 0 43 19 Did. a 508565 Anomalia Equat. add 7 24 45
21 Curt. Pars 47 4 40 24 Did. curtated. 501518 Ecc. place Node Ascen 2 0 18 4
Did. a terra, 100001 3 3 52 43 Sum 6015019 Arg. Lat. Reduct. add 10 26 20 21
Difference 401517 0 27 As Sum 3,77913 Ecc. reduced place. 2 0 13 31 To
Difference. 3,60357 5 27 16 33 So T. 58 d. 32 m. 10,21324 Anom. Com Half Sum.
Parallax Orb 3 27 3 2 To Tan. 47 d. 13,81681 1 28 31 31 10,02758 11 4 0 Sum
106.0 Angle Elongation. Differ. 11.4 Parallax earths Orb place. 2 11 17 31 II
11 d. 17m. 31 sec.

For Jupiter's Latitude.
As Sine Elongation, 74 d. o m. 9,982841 To Sine Angle Comitat. 62 d. 57 m.
9,9496987 so Cotangent Iclination, 0 d. 46 m. 11,873490 - 21823177 To Cotangent
of Latitude sonth 0 d. 59 m 11,840336

For Mars's place.
Time given. Long.. Aphel.. Node. sig. degrees. m. sec sig. degrees. min. sec. sig.
degrees. min. sec. 1101 11 28 25 54 4 18 52 29 1 10 40 4 60 10 24 59 54 1 12 54 0
43 36 9 9 12 37 8 10 56 6 33 Sept. 4 7 20 57 49 28 D. 13 6 48 46 H. 12 15 43
Midd. Long. Aphel. Sub. 0 20 28 22 4 20 17 8 1. 11. 30. 41. 4 20 17 8 Did. a
146270 Anomalia. Equat. add 8 0 11 14 Pars Curtration 4 9 43 49 Did. curtated
146266 Ecc. place Node Subst. 1 0 12 11 Log.. 100001 1 11 30 41 Sum 246267 Arg.
Lat. Reduct. add 11 18 41 30 Difference 646265 0 21 As Sum 3,39128 Ecc. reduced
place 1 0 12 32 To Difference. 2,66464 5 27 16 33 So T. 73 d. 32 m. 10,52932
Anom. Com. Half Sum Parallax Orb. 4 27 4 1 To Tang. 32 d. 25 m. 13,19396 2 13
32 0 9,80268 1 11 7 0 Sum is 105.57 Angle Elongat. Differ. 41.7 Parallax Earths
Orb. true place. 2 11 19 32 II 11 degrees. 19 min. 21 sec.

For Mars's Latitude.
As Sine Elongation, 74 degrees. 3. min. 9,982950 To Sine Angle Comutation, 32. 56.
9,735329 So Cotangent Inclinat. 0. 22. 12,193845 - 21,929174 To Cotangent
Latitude South, o degrees. 39 min. 11,946224

d. m. sec. d. m. Hence, the Lon-gitude of is II 11 17 31 Latitude 0 50 South
Hence, the Lon-gitude of is II 11 19 32 Latitude 0 39 South Their Difference 0
2 1 0 11

I hope the Noble Students in this Study, will consider of what worthy
advantage this choice Observation may be, and not grutch their pains hereon, if
hereby (as I believe)they may rectify Astronomy; since it is Price enough for
the pains of the true Filius Artis, if he have but the honor of elevating Art
a minute nearer the truth then at the present it stands. And of what Emolument
it might prove to this CoeIestial Study, if all Learned persons would follow
the steps of this Reverend Churchman, and communicate all their Observations
of this kind, that in their reading they shall have the good hap to meet with,
I need not inculcate. This one Example will (I hope) prove an encouragement
sufficient to irritate the more able Endeavors of the most knowing in this.
Science, toward a Restoration of what the ignorant world admires, viz.The
Motions of the Planets.

The Author vindicated from Lilly's Scandalous Imputations.
HAving been of late most unworthily taxed by that known. Traducer Mr. William
Lilly, (a common scandalizer of Kings and Kingdoms) and by his means in several
squirting Pamphlets untruly charged as guilty of that deformed and foul Crime
of Ingratitude; He pretending himself (though falsely) my Tutor in Astrology; I
having had the great unhappiness as well as many others) to be, to my cost,
formerly acquainted with him: upon which acquaintance, he protends to ground
his Scandals. And my being neglective of his S^omma's, and a mild for bearing
to respond unto any of his Nefarious Forgeries against me, has partly
persuaded many persons into a belief of his wicked Insinuations. Which to
correct with the Sovereign Antidote of Truth, I hold it requisite to acquaint
the world, how I came first to study Astrology, and unto whose memory I owe my
knowledge therein. Which make as follows. --

In the year 1652. going into Oxfordshire, in the way of a grateful Visit to my
honored Grandfather Sir. J.Curson, who out of his Nobleness was at the charge
of my Education; I took with me some Pamphets as, The Copies of the Times
Humors, to present him with. And among the rest, Mr. Wharton's Hemerosc. for
that year: upon fight of which, he was very well pleased, and began to enter
into a Discourse with me touching Astrology. And (although my knowledge then
was but mean therein) I answered his Demands according to the best of my skill.
In brief, he was so well pleased with my mean Returns, that he not only
commended my poor industry, but gave me somewhat to encourage me further; and
withal, expressed a greater respect and affection to the Art, then Gentlemen in
this Age commonly do; And advised me (for attaining perfection therein) to the
Study of Astronomy; acquainting me, that (which I since found as true as the
Oracle) he who was ignorant of the Motions of the Stars, must be so also in
their effects.

Finding my self so well entertained for that mean mite of knowledge, I was
resolved then to make a further progress therein, and (if possible) understand
the most abstruse parts thereof. And this my inclination wanted not an ample
signification in my Nativity from the Heavens. For I had then operating M.C.
ad, and this in, the greatest Dignities of, the true Patron of Arts and
Sciences. And upon the Effects thereof, I acquainted my self with that
eminently Learned Mathematician and Astrologer, Dr. N. Fiske; who, in little
time, had so far instructed me in the whole Art of Astrology, and a competent
part of Astronomy also, that in 1655. I was able to present my honored
Grandfather with an Almanac in Manuscript, which was afterward printed, and
has since been annually continued. And in that year also, I, together with my
Uncle Mr. T.G. began to reduce the places of all the fixed Stars in the
Heavens, as an Emendation of the Learned Hartgil's Tables. And these were
printed and published 1656. And in the same year I published my Celestial
Ambassador. In the year 1658. I emitted into the world my Doctrine of
Nativities. In the year 1658 I published the King of Swedes Nativity, and
Nuncius Astrologicus also. And in the year 1660. I published my Treatise of
Prodigies.

In all which works, my Enemles themselves cannot say, I have done Astrology
the least dishonor, or cast one blot upon the Divine Beanty of the fair
Urania. Howbeit, I must ingenuously acknowledge, that all these Rivulets are
sprung from the source of that great Seminary of the Mathematics, Dr. Fisk.
beforementioned: for to him, and to him alone, next unto Divine Assistance do I
owe all my knowledge in Art; and can boldly aver, I never learnt the meaning of
an Aphorism from any other man in the world.

I have been acquainted with the best and worst knowing in this Science in
England; and must acknowledge, there are more ingenious persons study if
privately, then any that practice it publickiy. I cannot discover either more
Art or Honesty in our highest Pretenders, then in the mear vulgar Astrologer.
Nor am I able to discern any material Difference between a famed Mountebanks
pair of Dials, with a Non Cogunt, and the poor Bill-Posters Astra non
necessitant,etc. only this, The one has quacked under an especial Protection
from the State, for a bribe of 100 l. and sometimes 200 l. per annum; and the
other perhaps better deserving, for want of Clyents; is compelled to the course
he otherwise hates and abominates. I honor Astrology honestly considered, but
hate the Sycophantick Pretender thereunto. I was more confident when I scarcely
knew a from a, then now I dare to be after nine years study. I have written
more of Art, then any man of this latter Age: yet have not prejudiced Kingdoms
or Families, or abused Kings, Princes. or meaner Persons, under pretense.
thereof. I have carefully endeavored to escape Tacitus his Censure, who reshly
concludes Astrologers -- Genus Hominus infiduns Principius.

I have had the happiness to read Astrological (and still do) to many ingenious
persons, and that satisfactorily, as many very well know: By which mean, I have
much embettered my own understanding: For, Decendo discimus, by teaching we
learn our selves.

And whereas person, as insolently, as unjustly, rearm me ungrateful, either to
Litty or any other, I shall desire them, First Arguere, then Readarguers first,
to prove the Crime they object against me; then, reprove me for it. I
acknowledge readily, that Ingratitude is the greatest of Crimes a man can be
guilty of. And it is a thing so contrary to my nature, that I desire no longer
to live, then to be grateful. And if I esteemed my self a dram behiad hand
with any man in this, I would return him a pound in satisfaction. Nay; the
beforementioned person that has objected Ingratitude to me, upon my demanding
his Reason, did before Mr. E.Carrant pronounce me (to him) the most grateful
man in the world. And I am confident he cannot, neither dares he say, (unless
it it be boastingly behind my back) that I ever learned a Line in Astrology or
Astronomy from him. The later of which I dare, and do here publicly maintain,
he knows nothing of; no, not to the Calculation of one Stars place, either
fixed or Erratique; both which I was sufficintly able to perform before ever my
ill Fortune directed me to his acquaintance: and how he should then prove my
Tutor, I cannor in reason see. Nay, I protest freely, (and this without any
boasting, or ambitious lifting up my self, for I know my knowledge is but mean)
I understood more Art before ever I was acquainted with Lilly, then he was ever
capable of learning in his life; notwithstanding his great Fame for (doing
nothing else in truth but) deluding the world. I mention not this by reason of
the Difference between him and my self; for in matter of Truth I so far divest
my self from Passion, that Reason might reign as King. Nor would I have any
hereby think, that Labhor to learn of an Adversary; for I have always made that
Adage my Companion, whicn says Etemin fasest, and abhoste doceri; It is both
just and lawful for a man to learn of his Enemy. And I should not refuse so
learn of him who has as arrogantly as falsely styled himself my Tutor, and has
taught others to cant so, if I conld perceive in him any thing by which my
understanding might be bettered.

But although I shall so far submit my self to the truth; as to bow the knee of
my Reason to any, and shall not refuse to stoop to the foot of a Shepherd, if
Ingenuity and Reason keep Court in such a Cottage; yet I hold it the highest
slavery in the world for any man that is discipulus ratiouis, to subjugate his
Reason so far, as -- Jurare in verba Lillii. I am too Masculine to believe the
King of Sweden shall be greater then Charles the Great, because Mr. Lilly
rantingly says so; except he give me a better Reason, then ipse dixit; and
Authority, then the Sibyls, and Mother Shipton. Or that we shall have no more
Kings in England, because he Sycophantiquely, and for base Bribes, (laying
aside his Art) writ so. I am too great a Disciple of Art, to betray my Reason
and Knowledge therein, to the by^ssed Interest of every confident Pretender.
And if to defend the honor of Art, and detect and discover the Treasons and
Cheatisms practiced under it, and lay the Persons open to the World, that thus
notoriously abuse it, be to be ungrateful; Sine Apologia, I desire to be
ungrateful still.

And whereas Lilly has printed it -- That lay it in my power, I would swallow
his Body, and spit his Soul into the Stygian Lake, I must tell him, The Fear is
as scandalous as the Conceit idle and foolish: For, it must be a Grave of far
larger Dimensions that must swallow his Body, had he not espoused himself to
Villainies that swell him so much bigger then he naturally is. But if he mean by
this Charge to set off my Hatred to him by a Sarcasm, or Hyperbole, I must
return him as egregionsly mistaken in this, as he proved himself in the Swedish
Victory, or R. Cromwell's continuance: For, I protest freely to the World, my
heart is furnished with no such polluted stuff. Nay, I dare be bold to affirm,
That were there an occasion offered me to try my Hatred toward him to purpose,
I should prove as great a Friend to him, as he is a man, as any of his
Hickshall Jury did in 1654. when he was indicted there for a Cheat.

And whereas Lilly is troubled that I have at any time reported him a Tailor, I
here again tell the world, I do therein but call a Spade a Spade. And he knows
I have not only his own Confession, and Witnesses yet living to prove it, but
good,sufficient and uncontradicted Authority in Print for so reporting him.

If Mr. Lilly have ought else to urge against me, I shall, God willing, as soon
as I hear thereof, return him a most seasonable, and civil Reply. This
therefore shall content me for the present to return in answer to some of his
scurrilities.

FINIS.

