A SEASONABLE SPEECH MADE TO THE LORD MAYOR AND Common Council of London, by
Mr. Harvey, being accompanied thither with many Citizens of Quality.

Concerning the great Distempers of the times.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1642.

My Lord,
We are all come with one Errand consisting of two parts; First, a discharge
of our duties, Secondly, the endeavor of our safety.

The discharge of our duty lies in acquainting your Honor, and your
Worships, with the causes of our fears, perplexities and dangers, with which
we are environed, which arise from diverse particulars.

My Lord, lest any here should judge our fears to be groundless, and but
fancies, give me leave to premise,

That as his Majesty is the head of this Kingdom, and our prayer, with all
loyal Subjects, is, and ever shall be, that his Highness may long, and
happily continue so to be:

So the two eyes in the head, are the two Houses of Parliament, the house of
Lords, and house of Commons.

My Lord, Naturallists tell us, that although the act and office of both eyes
be one and the same, yet each has his particular and peculiar distribution of
light and knowledge to the faculties, as appears, in that the soul receives
light and knowledge by one eye, when the other is fast shut, or wincketh.

My Lord, if one eye winck, yet the eye of the house of Commons is wide open,
it sees clearly, and by that eye only the Commons of England, which are not
stark blind, may receive knowledge of and discern their dangers.

My Lord, the Honorable house of Commons unto all their actions lay the line
of Judgment, and the plummet of prudence, and they have seen, and we by them,
our dangers, at a distance, and in the approaches, with the many good
provisions for our safety which that honorable Assembly have resolved upon. As
1. First, that the Kingdom should be put into a warlike posture of defense.
2. That a Navy of ships should be at Sea, to surround our Coasts, and to hinder
the invasion of a Foreign enemy. 3. That the Castles and Cinqueports and
other Maritine ports should be repaired, and put into the custody of persons of
honor and trust, deputed thereunto by the Authority of the King, to them
conveyed by an order of both houses of Parliament: all which the house of
Commons would not have done upon fancies, they being most studious how to
settle and compose, not to affright, charge, or distract, the people of this
Kingdom. 4. That Sir John Biron the now Leivtenant of the Tower is an unfit
man to be Co^mander of that Cittadell which has so great a command of this
City.


And surely, my Lord, it appears by the Merchants Petition, that his being
Lieutenant much hinders Trade, for those Merchants that formerly did Mynt or
put to coining are now deterred, both from importing, or coining of Bullion.

My Lord, we sensibly feel the smart of Trades decay. Who sees not the whole
Fabric of the City and Kingdom, whose foundation is Trade and Commerce, much
shaken, and, if not speedily repaired, like to bury it self in its own ruin?

My Lord, Trade is like a clock, if one pin or wheel be out of order, the
whole stands still, or moves disorderly.

And now my Lord, give me the liberty of an Orator, although I be none, to
end, and close with the highest.

My Lord, the house of Commons have long since resolved, that considerable
forces from England, and 10000. men from Scotland, should be sent for Ireland,
to relieve that poor gasping Nation, against those bloody popish Rebels, who
most cruelly and barbarously Butcher-like murder and make desolate that Nation.

The knowledge of all which resolutions by the house of Commons has been
communicated to the Honorable house of Lords; but there all still dwells while
Ireland and we in it bleed on to death.

My Lord, give me leave to soar a little higher; can any History relate so sad
a story, as that a Kingdom involved with others under one Crown, all holding
one faith and profession in Religion, was laid waste by an inconsiderable
party, as are those bloody Rebels, compared with the strength that England and
Scotland might afford them: and the desolation not made all at once, but
gradually, in three months space of time 30000. persons slain, 100000.
Families undone, and utterly ruined, and an innumerable company that have
tasted of life's sweetness, merely upon that consideration, turned to the
popish party, and none or no considerable forces to control that bloody enemy
dispatched? and yet all this may be truly predicated of England and Scotland,
in reference to Ireland.

And this day, my Lord, news is come from Ireland, telling us that Waterford,
and the County of Munster, is revolted. Who is not secure may see cruelty upon
the legs of fury coming in a Iehu march toward us. If any be as fast asleep
as was Peter, let him awake, it is now a time for Peter's prayer to be made use
of, there is now no time for neutralitie or indifferency, it befits all to be
positive, and let none think that if that flame which burns Ireland, an
already sore scorcheth us, be not presently quenched, but that it will totally
devour us also.

And now, my Lord, we are come to the second part of our Errand, namely to
endeavor our safety, for which we fight with the all-ages-allowed weapons, our
supplications, and in all humble manner pray your Honor, and right Worshipful
you the Aldermen, and the rest of this Assembly, to be pleased to join
together, heartily, effectually, and speedily, to petition the honorable house
of Lords, that the Kingdom may be put into a warlike posture of defense, and
chiefly that to Ireland may be sent speedy and sufficient aid, and that the
forenamed, or what other resolution of the house of Commons tending to
Englands safety or Irelands succor, and lie obstructed in the House of Lords,
may be thence discharged, and have life given unto them by executition, and
use, as may tend to the restoration and peace of the Kingdoms.

FINIS.

