A Glimpse of Joy for the happy Restoring of the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
OR, The Devoir's of a nameless Poet.
To the Generall's Excellence, and to all the Noble Sparks of Great Brittain's
Heroarchy, that have hopes to survive their Countries Sufferings.
portrait of Charles II

WHat Glimpse is that I see? A Rising SUN,
Let us with joy like Hyperboreans run
To tops of highest Mounts, that thence we may
Ken the first dawning of our welcome Day:
Let every Echo cry, a King, a King,
To welcome in the Flower of our Spring;
Our Hopes are high, let us not be dampt with Fears,
When in it he that is King of Kings appears:
This change is so like his, that all can tell
Who will not own it, must turn Infidel.
This Work of Wonder makes our Land to ring,
He that was born, is now created King.
Let Us not complain of Winter, and cold Weather,
If now two grateful Summers come together;
On Sions Mount let Sacred Glory dwell,
And Plume its Rays in spite of Rome and Hell.
Let from the Fathers Aromatic Urne,
Like a resurging Phoenix, CHARLES return.
Peers stand for Ciphers now, alas! but when
That Figure stands before, they will stand for Men,
And Statue it no longer; Skelitons
Will stand for Hundreds, Thousands, Millions.
Churches awake, rouse up, what had you rather
A Stepdame have, then your own nursing Father?
Countries awake, and do not give a Voice
To such as will not make a King their choice.
Lawyers awake, for I have heard a Cry,
That since you lost the Spring, your Streams are dry.
Soldiers awake, and hazard not a Limb,
Except you militate for Christ and Him:
All Is out of joint, and each Profession dead;
For what is a Man or State without a Head?
Poets awake, for when he is Crowned, his Rays
Will turn to Gold your Coronets of Bays.
Awake dull Souls; Britains Maecena's come!
Shall any of Parnassus Sons be dumb?
But stay, Our GOD is jealous and most High,
And hates the Sin of Anthropolatry;
Then let us not Idolize him, lest he prove
A Gift bestowed in anger, not in love:
He is not so much ours yet, but we may
(If still unthankful) sin him quite away.
Let us adore that heavenly hand that gave
Isaac our Nations blessing from the Grave:
He was the harmless Dove sent from our Ark,
And ever since has hovered in the dark.
O let us pray (since Floods begin to cease)
That he may bring our Olive Branch of Peace.
Let Wisdom, Mercy, and each Princely Grace
Shine in his Heart, with Splendor in his Face;
Let him descend like Moses from the Mount,
As sent from Heaven upon our Prayers account:
Oh may he in his Government inherit
Elisha-like his Leaders double Spirit.
Give such Physicians Lord as may abate
The Paroxismes of our Church and State.
Let Us run as far to meet him as there is Land,
And when the swelling Ocean bids us stand,
Let Us wait upon the Shore in Trained Bands,
Which may in numbers equalize the Sands:
Let Us wish all hearts of Stone that would undo us
Were turned to Load-stones to attract him to us.
The Sovereign of the Sea's let now be manned
To fetch us home the Sovereign of our Land;
And since he has been Exiled for our Sin,
Our Prayers shall be the Wind to bring him in:
And if the Ocean be at Ebb and low,
Our Tears of Joy shall swell it to a Flow:
Let heart be joined in heart, and hand in hand,
Till Charles le Boon be Crowned Charles le Grand.
Act but with Art and Heart this Loyal Game,
You shall not want a Trump to sound your Fame.
London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.


