THE AGREEMENT OF THE ASSOCIATED MINISTERS and CHURCHES OF THE COUNTIES OF
Cumberland, AND Westmerland: With something for EXPLICATION and EXHORTATION
Annexed.

1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment, etc. 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. Whereas there is among you envying,
and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? For while one
says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo; are ye not carnal? Romans 14.
19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another. Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man on his own
things; but every man also on the things of others. Romans 16. 17, 18. Now I
beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and offenses, etc. and
avoid them, etc. London, Printed by of for ^ VVaterson, and are sold at the
sign of the Globe in Paul's Churchyard, and by Richard Scot. Bookseller in
Carlisle* 1656.

PROPOSITIONS Agreed upon by the ASSOCIATED MINISTERS OF THE COUNTIES OF
Cumberland, and Westmerland.
WHen we compare the present miseries and distempers with our former confident
expectations of unity, and reformation, our hearts bleed, and melt within us;
we are become a byword to our Adversaries, they clap their hands at us,
saying, Is this the City that men call the perfection of Beauty? Piety is
generally decayed, most men placing their Religion in doting about Questions
which they understand not: Profaneness thrives through want of Discipline;
Error and Blasphemy domineers; Jealousies, Divisions, unmerciful revilings,
and censurings, are fomented among Brethren of the same Household of Faith; the
weak ones are discouraged and distracted by the multitude of Opinions, and
fierce opposition of each party, and that which is worst of all, Gods honor
suffers deeply, and the credit of Religion is brought very low; Is this
nothing to you, all ye that pass by?

Though these things can never be sufficiently lamented; yet seeing it is not
sufficient barely to lament them, without endeavoring to heal them: and
considering, that it is a duty incumbent upon all Christians, (according to
their several places and abilities) to promote the welfare of Sion; especially
when we have tasted so much of the bitterness of our divisions: And because a
brotherly union has so much of God in it, and consequently gives so much hope
that God will take that course in establishing his Church, when he shall arise
to build Jerusalem; and seeing it is an unjustifyable pettishness and
peevishness of spirit, to be averse from joining together in any thing, because
we cannot join in all things; therefore we resolve (setting aside all carnal
interests, and casting our selves, with all our concernments, at the Lords
feet) to walk together as far as we can for the present, not resting here, nor
tying our selves from further progress in union, (as the Lord shall give light
and satisfaction) much less binding our selves from a submission to, and
compliance with a more general accommodation, (if any such thing should
hereafter be agreed on) which might be more suitable and fitted for the
composure of the different principles of Brethren throughout the Nation.

In order to the carrying on of this great work, we lay down and assent unto
these general rules, as the Basis and Foundation which must support and bear up
our following Agreement.

1. THat in the exercise of Discipline, it is not only the most safe course,
but also most conducing to brotherly union and satisfaction, That particular
Churches carry on as much of their work with joint and mutual assistance, as
they can with convenience and edification, and as little as may be in their
actings, to stand distinctly by themselves, and apart from each other.

2. That in matters of Church Discipline, those things which belong only
Things not essential.
ad melius esse, ought to be laid aside, both in respect of publication and
practice, rather then that the Churches peace should be hindered.

3. That where different principles lead to the same practice, we may join
together in that practice, reserving to each of us our own principles.

4. That where we can neither agree in principle, nor in practice, we are to
bear with one another's differences, that are of a less and disputable nature,
without making them a ground of division amongst us.

Yet notwithstanding, we do not hereby bind up our selves from endeavoring to
inform one another in those things wherein we differ, so that it be done with a
spirit of love and meekness, and with resolutions to continue our brotherly
amity and association, though in those particulars our differences should
remain uncomposed.

Upon these grounds we agree as follows.
1. Seeing the Lord has called us out of his work, and has employed us as
Ambassadors, Stewards, Watchmen, and Overseers, in his Church, we resolve
through his assistance, to endeavor the discharge of our duty and trust
herein, unreservedly, and with all faithfulness, to the utmost of our power,
though hereby we hazard reproach, revilings, contempts, injuries, loss of
friends, and maintenance, or whatsoever else may be dear to us.

2. To this end we resolve in the course of our Ministry, to observe the
temper, disposition, and capacity of the generality of the people, and to suit
our selves not only in our matter to the people's conditions, but also in our
expressions to the people's apprehensions, that so our Sermons may be plain,
piercing, seasonable, and profitable.

3. Particularly, we resolve undauntedly (and yet according to the rules of
Christian prudence) to reprove the sins that most abound in our people, and
shall mainly bend the force of our endeavors to convince men of their carnal
security, to discover the rotten and deceitful props on which it is built, and
to press them to the acceptance of Christ according to the proffers of the
Gospel.

4. We will lay out our selves in keeping Lectures (as the seasons of the year
will permit) wherein we will more especially have regard to those places that
are destitute of preaching.

5. We resolve to catechize and instruct the people committed to us, explaning
to them the grounds of Religion, that knowledge may increase among them; and to
this purpose we conceive it most fit to make use of the Assemblies larger and
shorter Catechisms.

6. We resolve, besides the work of public preaching, and catechizing, to
instruct them privately from house to house, (so far as our public work will
permit) that so we may have an opportunity of being more thoroughly acquainted
with their state and condition, and of dealing with them more closely, and
particularly, as occasion shall require, striving always to improve our
occasional discourses and commerce with them to that end, having our words
seasoned with salt, that they may administer grace to the hearers.

7. Forasmuch as affliction and sickness does not only call for ministerial
help and advice in a more especial manner; but also gives opportunity and
advantage for counsel or reproof; therefore we resolve to be as diligent in
visiting the sick and afflicted, as other labors, greatness of our charge, and
ability to go abroad will suffer us; and that not only the rich, and those that
desire us, but also the poor, and those that send not for us.

8. Seeing we are in Scripture commanded to love all men, and as much as in us
lies, to follow Peace with all; and yet warned to reserve our Brotherly
kindness and delight for those that walk holily; therefore we resolve in our
Society, as well as in dispencing of Ordinances, to put a difference between
the precious and the vile; and though we intend not to deny that Charity, Help,
Civility and Duty that we owe unto the Scandalous, yet will we bestow our love
of complacencie only on those that order their conversations aright, lest by
intimacie with wicked men, we strengthen the hands of evil doers, grieve the
hearts of the godly, and ensnare our own souls.

9. Seeing the sins of Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Fornication and Drunkenness
are so abominable in the sight of God and men, and yet so frequent, we resolve,
besides the reproving of these sins in public and private, to endeavor to
bring such Offenders to the punishment of the Law, in thosed cases provided.

10. We will instruct our people publicly, concerning the nature of the
discipline of Christ, and shall press the necessity of their submission to it,
according to the Rule of Scripture.

11 Because it has been the commendable practice of the Saints of old, in
order to the Reformation of the Churches, publicly and solemnly to renew the
Covenant with God; and because in this Age, temptations to Apostacy, and
backslidings from the faith are strong and frequent, and because our hearts
are so ready to start aside from the Power of Discipline, that we daily stand
in need of all possible Obligations to submission; therefore we resolve to
require from our people an assent to the Truths of Christ, (contained in a
short Confession of Faith hereunto annexed) and a Profession of their consent
to submit unto, and accept of the terms of the covenant of Grace, to take the
Lord for their God; to walk in his Ways; to fear, love, honor and obey him
with all their heart, and with all their might, and to submit to Discipline and
Government. Yet

1. We are so far from resolving to satisfy our selves with the bare recital
and repetition of the words of the Profession, etc. that we shall endeavor to
make the people not only to profess with Understanding, but (so far as we can)
with feeling Apprehensions of what they speak.

2. Neither do we intend strictly to bind all to the same circumstances of
professing their consent, but (if any professing and owning the substance)
shall scruple at any particular circumstance, we resolve to use toward such,
all possible meekness and condiscention.

12. Besides a professed competent Knowledge of the fundamentals of Religion,
we resolve to require an unblameable conversation in all those whom we shall
admit to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, both these being necessary for the
discovery of peoples present fitness and right, In respect of the Church.
in foro Ecclesiae, to the actual enjoyment of that Ordinance.

13. Because the Ordinances of God may, on the one hand, be profaned, by the
sinful neglect and carelessness of the Church-guides; and because on the other
hand, people may be wronged by a rash and groundless exclusion; therefore in
the judging and determining of peoples present fitness for that Sacrament, we
resolve to set before us these following Rules, both in point of Knowledge and
Scandal.

In Point of Knowledge.
1. Because the truth of Grace is utterly inconsistent with a total ignorance
of the Fundamentals of Religion; and because such persons, not being able to
discern the Lords body, would eat and drink judgment to themselves; therefore
we resolve, not to admit any that upon trial shall be found to be such, to the
Sacrament of the Supper.

2. We shall not reject any as ignorant that have a competent Knowledge of
those heads of Divinity, mentioned by the Assembly in the form of
Church Government, page 28.

All such persons who shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
ought to know, That there is a God; that there is but one everliving and true
God, Maker of Heaven and earth, and Governor of all things; that this only
true God, is the God whom we worship; that this God is but one God, yet three
distinct persons, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all equally God.

That God created man after his own image, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and
true Holiness; That by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; that thereby they are
all dead in Trespasses and sins, and are by nature the children of wrath, and
so liable to eternal death, the wages of every sin.

That there is but one Mediator betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, who
is also over all, God blessed for ever; neither is there salvation in any other.

That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary; that he
died upon the cross to save his people from their sins; that he rose again the
third day from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of
God, and makes continual intercession for us; of whose fullness we receive all
grace necessary to salvation.

That Christ and his benefits are applied only by faith; that faith is the
gift of God, and that we have it not of our selves, but it is wrought in us by
the Word, and the spirit of God.

That faith is that grace whereby we believe and trust in Christ for remission
of sins and life everlasting according to the promises of the Gospel; that
whosoever believes not in the Son of God, shall not see life, but shall perish
eternally.

That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them, sorrow for them, and
turn from them to the Lord; and that except men repent, they shall surely
perish.

That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the word of God, in
holiness and righteousnses, without which no man shall see God.

That the Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of Grace in the blood of Christ;
that the Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord; that the outward elements in the Lords Supper are Bread and Wine, and do
signify the Body and Blood of Christ crucified, which the worthy receiver by
Faith does partake of in the Sacrament, which Christ has likewise ordained for
the remembrance of his death; that whosoever eats and drinks unworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord; therefore that every one is to
examine himself, left he eat and drink judgment to himself, not discerning the
Lords Body.

That the souls of the saithful after death do immediately live with Christ in
blessedness; and that the souls of the wicked do immediately go into Hell
Torment; that there shall be a Resurrection of the bodies both of the just and
unjust at the last day, at which time all shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the
body, whether it be good or evil; and that the righteous shall go into life
eternal, and the wicked into everlasting punishment.

3. We must not expect from the ordinary sort of people, (who through want of
breeding, and other natural defects, are usually unable well to express their
minds) a distinct or continued discourse of these things, and therefore we
shall be satisfied, if we can but perceive that they understand the substance.

4. We must take care not to make a Question more difficult by our dark and
cloudy Expressions; but must endeavor to propound things in the plainest terms
we can.

5. Though we may propound higher and more difficult Questions, for discovery
of, and provocation to growth in Knowledge; yet we will always (as near as we
can) make their knowledge or Ignorance in the points mentioned, the rule of our
discerning and determination.

6. And in case any give not that satisfaction we desire, we will endeavor to
discover whether it be, first, from their unacquaintedness with the terms and
words of the Question; or secondly, from bashfulness or shamefacedness; or
thirdly, from natural impediments; or fourthly, from ignorance of the thing it
self; and accordingly we will propound the Question in other words, or fetch a
compass, to see if they can take a hint from something introductory; however in
case no satisfactory account can be given, we will not set the parties aside, as
if we took no further care, but shall endeavor to instruct them with all
meekness and patience.

7. Because we find by experience, that many people speak of the Fundamentals
of Religion in a mere form of words by roat, without understanding the sense
and meaning thereof; in propounding our Questions we will of purpose forbear
the words and method of ordinary Catechisms.

In point of Scandal.
1. Forasmuch as scandalous sinners cannot be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper without great dishonor to God, defiling and abusing of that holy
Ordinance, sin and judgment to themselves, the indangering of the leavening
the whole lump, and uncharitable unfaithfulness in those that knowingly admit
them; therefore we resolve not to receive any (of what degree, quality or
relation soever) to this Ordinance, that can be proved to be scandalously
sinful.

2. In regard we can only take cognizance of peoples outward and
ecclesiastical right to Ordinances; therefore we resolve in matters of
scandal, not to proceed against any according to our private satisfactions,
suspicions, dis-satisfactions, or rumors; but according to outward, visible,
and full proof of the matter of fact.

3. Because all sins are not alike heinous and scandalous, some being such in
one single act; others only in respect of continuance, and other aggravating
circumstances; thereforefore we resolve to distinguish betwixt sin and sin;
wherein that we may proceed both more unanimously and safely, we shall take the
Assemblies direction for our rule, looking upon those sins mentioned by them in
the form of Church Government as scandalous, though but once committed.

Their words are these:
All scandalous persons hereafter mentioned, are to be suspended from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: that is to say;

All persons that shall blasphemously speak or write any thing of God, his holy
Word or Sacraments; all renouncers of the true Protestant Religion professed in
the Church of England; and all persons who shall by preaching or writing,
maintain any such errors as do subvert any of those articles, the ignorance
whereof does render any person excluded from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
an incestuous person, an adulterer, a fornicator, a drunkard, a profane
swearer or curser; one that has taken away the life of any person maliciously;
all worshippers of images, crosses, crucifixes, or relics; all that shall
make images or pictures of the Trinity, or of any person thereof; all religious
worshippers of Saints, Angels, or any mere creatures; any person that shall
profess himself not to be in charity with his Neighbor; all persons in whom
malice appears, and they refuse to be reconciled; any person that shall
challenge any other person by word, message or writing to fight, or that shall
accept such challenge, and agree thereto; any person that shall knowingly carry
any challenge by word, message or writing; any person that shall upon the Lords
Day use any dancing, playing at dice, or cards, or any other game, masking,
wakes, shooting, bowling, playing, playing at football, stool-ball, wrestling;
or that shall make resort to any Plays, interludes, fencing, bull-baiting,
bear-baiting; or that shall use hawking, hunting, or coursing, fishing or
fowling; or that shall publicly expose any Wares to sale otherwise then is
provided by an Ordinance of Parliament of the 6th. of April, 1649. Any person
that shall travel on the Lords day without reasonable cause; any person that
keeps a known Stews, or Brothelhouse, or that shall solicit the chastity of
any person for himself, or any other: any person, Father or Mother, that that
shall consent to the marriage of their children to a Papist, or any person that
shall marry a Papist; any person that shall repair for any advice to any
Witch, Wizard, or Fortune Tellers; any person that shall menace or assault his
Parents, or any Magistrate, Minister, or Elder in the execution of his Office;
any person that shall be legally attainted of Barrotry; Forgery; Extortion or
Bribery.

4. Much tenderness is to be used in judging of less sins that have more then
ordinary advantage against men by sudden surprisal* as Passion; etc. and in the
out-breaking of sins that have formerly been customary, but are now striven
against and weakened; in such ordinary failings as are daily incident to the
servant of God, in matter of Debt, Titles or particular interests; and in all
other things wherein the sinfulness is dubious and disputable.

5 We resolve in less sins to have regard to the constant tenure of the parties
life and carriage; as whether he be ordinarily otherwise strict or careless;
and to the circumstances of frequency, obstinacy, company, provocation, etc.
which might either aggravate or lessen the offense.

6. In case the party offending upon Reproof, shall manifest repentance by a
serious profession of sorrow, (not slight and merely verbal) he ought to be
received again.

7. And if the party professing repentance, shall readily return to the same
sin once, and again; or to any other scandalous sin, though he again profess
repentance, yet we will defer his readmission til we have trial of his
reformation for some competent time.

8. Because it often falls out, that men's actions are liable to
mis-constructions, and mis-apprehensions, especially amongst the weaker sort of
christians, and when the party lies under prejudice; and lest brotherly
inspection degenerate into an unbrotherly prying into, and discovering of other
men's actions; and generally for the avoiding of disorder, and other
inconveniences, we resolve not to encourage any private christian, immediately
to acquaint the Church with the private failings of a brother, till he have
first admonished him privately, and (in case he hearken not) before witnesses,
and when the fruitlessness of these endeavors shall necessitate the
publication of the Fact, yet will we not countenance the bringing of the matter
before the congregation, until the church officers be first acquainted with it.

9. Forasmuch as in the business of scandal it is unreasonable and uncharitable
to take up against men old offenses of any considerable distance from the time
present; and because in some cases it will be necessary to require some
testimony of humiliation, even for sins of ancient date; and in regard we
cannot punctually determine how far back into the time past we may look for
laying scandals to men's charge; therefore we resolve to proceed warily in such
cases, and not to do any thing without the advice of the Association.

10. We shall do the like in those sins that render men obnoxious to the Law,
either in regard of life, liberty or estates, as also in any other case not
foreseen, or provided for, in the foregoing rules.

11. We agree, not to press a declaration of the time and manner of the work
of grace upon the people, as a necessary proof of their actual present right to
the Lords Supper, nor to exclude persons merely for want of that, yet will we
accept it, if any will be pleased to offer it freely.

15. We agree, not to rest satisfied with the bare exclusion of an obstinate
scandalous sinner from the Sacrament of the Supper, but shall endeavor
faithfully and sincerely (as God shall enable us) to prosecute the rule of
Christ, Matt. 18. 17. against any such offender; and if he refuse to hear the
Church, he shall be to us as an heathen, and a publicane,

16. Because Members living much distant from their Pastors, and from one
another, must unavoidably be (in great part) deprived of the privilege, and
come short of the duty, both of constant inspection, and mutual edefication;
and also for the preventing of disorders and offenses, both in Ministers and
people, we agree, That we will not admit into any of our churches, those that
live in other congregations; execept, first, They have no Minister at all; or
secondly, One that is scandalous; or thirdly, One that has not competent
abilities for the Work of the Ministry. Yet

1. In case afterward a godly able Minister be established where there was
none, or such as were scandalons and unfit; then we will seriously advise
those, whom in the cases aforesaid we have admitted, to join themselves to that
Minister.

2. We resolve to consult with the Association concerning the justness or
unjustnefs of exceptions in point of scansdal, or inabilitie of Ministers, made
by those that desire to be entertained in other congregations, because we
conceive, That neither the people that desire to depart from such Ministers,
nor the Ministers with whom they desire to join, are competent Judges in such
an interested case; yet if the Exceptions be such as are approved of by the
Association, we conceive it fittest for the Reasons abovesaid, that they join
themselves to the nearest congregation, where a godly and able Minister is
settled.

3. Neither do we intend hereby to debar people from the occasional hearing of
other Ministers or from the occasional partaking of other Ordinances in another
congregation, so that this liberty be not used to the apparent prejudice of the
Ministry and Discipline of their own Congregation.

17. When a Minister is to be ordained unto a congregation, we agree, That
godly and able ministers of neighbor congregations, be called to be employed in
the examination and trial of the fitness of the party to be set apart to that
weighty Office, and in the act of Ordination.

18. Though we differ about the first subject of the power of the Keys, yet
forasmuch as we all agree, That the affairs of the Church are to be managed by
the Officers thereof, therefore we conclude that the examination and
determination of things in cases of admission and rejections, and other church
acts, shall be permitted by the Officers; yet so that the people have notice of
what they resolve and conclude upon, in matters of moment, that in case any
thing be done against which the people may (upon probable grounds at least)
object from the word of God, it may either be forborne, or their satisfaction
endeavored.

19. And forasmuch as we cannot all proceed according to the ordinary rules in
managing of the affairs of our particular congregations, through the want of
fit persons to be made church officers, and for other causes; therefore we
resolve by our mutual assistance to supply the want, because we may have
(according to Scripture warrant) recourse to an extraordinary expedient, the
ordinary rule failing, and because this seems to us to come nearest the
ordinary rule. Yet

1. We intend not that this should be perpetual, but only during the present
want, and in order to the settling of our churches according to the rules of the
Gospel.

2. Neither intend we hereby, to put into any Ministers hand, a superior power
over his Brethren.

3. Nor would we be understood, as making our many churches to be but one
particular church, or giving the Pastor of one church a true Pastoral power
and charge over other churches.

20. Albeit we differ as to the power of associated churches over particular
congregations; yet, we agree that it is not only lawful and useful, but in many
cases necessary, that several churches should hold communion and correspondency
together; and to that end we resolve to associate our selves, and to keep
frequent meetings for mutual advice and help, as occasion shall require.

21. We take our selves and our churches bound to follow whatsoever advice,
direction or reproof, (being agreeable to the word) any of us shall receive
from the Brethren in association with us.

22. And in case it should so fall out, that our brethren in association should
advise that which might seem less convenient in the judgment of the Parties
immediately and specially concerned, in the advice or reproof, or to the
particular apprehensions of any other of us, (it being of less moment, and not
apparently contrary to Scripture) then we resolve to submit to it, rather then
to endanger the peace of the churches, and to become examples and encouragers
of disorder by our dissent and refusal.

23. Particularly, Forasmuch as the censure of excommunication is of great
weight and concernment, wherein we are sure we can never be too ciruspect and
careful; therefore we resolve, first to advise with the association, before we
proceed, by that sentence, to cast any out of our particular churches; and
whosoever shall thus be cast out of one church, we will repute him equally cast
out of all, and avoid communion with him accordingly.

24. If it should so fall out, that any Minister or particular church, should
obstinately and wilfully, after many endeavors, and much waiting, reject the
direction and counsel of the association, in things apparently agreeable to the
word of God, then we resolve to draw the right hand of fellowship from such
Minister or church.

25. For the better carrying on of our intended association, we resolve to
observe these following rules.

1. We judge it convenient to divide our selves into three associations, (
viz.) at Carlisle, at Penrith, and Cockermouth, and shall meet once a Month, or
more or less, as occasion shall require, and the major part of the association
shall think fit; yet in this we do not intend to exclude any Minister (not
being scandalous) from any of the associations, that will be pleased to take
the pains to be present there, nor yet the Ministers of other Counties that
shall desire to join with any of them.

2. At these meetings we shall hear and determine things of common concernment,
endeavor to resolve doubts, compose differences, consider the justness and
weight of the grounds and reasons of Ministers removals from any place, when
such cases shall fall out, consult and advise about special emmergencies that
may happen to our Ministry or congregations in particular.

3. Because ministers being men of like passions with others, can claim no
exemptions from humane frailties and infirmities; and in regard their
miscarriages are more dishonorable to God and the Gospel, more offensive and
hurtful to private christians, therefore we resolve, impartially to hear
complaints made against any Minister in association with us; and to this end we
do all and every one of us (in case any exception or complaint against any of
us shall be made) freely profess our resolution to submit to the admonition,
reproof, censure or advice of our brethren; yet we would not be here mistaken,
as if we intended the encouragement of groundless and frivolous quarrels and
exceptions, either in people against ministers, or in one minister against
another; for as we purpose (the Lord assisting us) not to be too backward to
reprove and rebuke when there shall be just cause, so shall we endeavor to be
mindful of that wariness which the Scripture enjoyneth, in receiving an
Accusation against an Elder.

4. Though for conveniencie we divide our selves into three associations, yet
we resolve sometimes to meet all together, especially when there shall fall out
any thing of more extraordinary and public nature or difficulty, which cannot
be easily and satisfactorily decided in any of our particular associations.

5. If any that shall offer to ioyn with us in our association, lie under the
common repute of scandal, then we will deferr his admission till he have
cleared himself, or otherwise given satisfaction; and for the prevention of
offenses, we resolve not to admit any into our associations without the consent
of the whole or major part of them.

6. Lastly, we will endeavor a closure of affection, as well as judgment and
practice, and to that end we resolve, wholly to lay aside, and bury all names
and terms of difference, to carry our selves each to other as brethren,
forbearing (as much as we can) whatsoever might, either in word or action,
occasion mis-reports and offenses, or raise up grounds of jealousy and
exception one against another.

Omnibus hisce Consentimus, etc.

The Ministers of Westmerland gave their Consent in these words:

We, whose Names are here underwritten, do subscribe to the forementioned
Propositions, except what concerns the County of Cumberland in particular. The
Confession of Faith.
I Believe that there is one only Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 Chronicles. 8. 4. 6.
living and true God, I Believe in God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven
and earth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, Borne of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and Buried. He descended into Hell. The third day he pose
again from the Dead. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand
of GOD, the Father Almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and
the Dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost. The Holy Catholic Church. The Communion
of Saints. The forgiveness of Sins. The Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
Everlasting. Amen.
1 These. 1. 9. Ier. 10. 10.
who is a most pure spirit, Io. 4. 24.
infinite in being and perfection Job 11. 7, 8, 9.
. And that in the Unity of the Godhead there are three dictinct Persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one God, the same in
substance, equal in power, and glory 1 Ioh. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 13. 14. Mat. 28. 19.
.

2. I believe that God has revealed his whole counsel, concerning his own
glory, and man's salvation, in the Scriptures of the Old and new Testament,
which were given by divine inspiration 2 Pet. 1. 21.
to be the perpetual and only rule of our faith and obedience 2 Timothy 3. 16,
17. Ephesians. 2. 20. Rev. 22. 18, 19.
.

3. I believe that in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, Genesis
1.
and all things in them of nothing, in the space of six days, and all very
good; and that he upholdeth Heb. 1. 3.
all things by the word of his Power, and governs Ps. 103. 19. and 13 5. 6.
all things according to the counsel of his own will Ephesians. 1. 11. Mat. 10. 29,
30.
.

4. I believe that God created man after his own image, in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness; Genesis 1. 26, 27. Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.
And that he gave him a Law, Romans 2. 14, 15
promising life upon perfect obedience, and threatening disobedience with death
Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10.
.

5. I believe that man having broken this Law, lost the image of God, and
communion with him, Genesis 3. 6, 7, 8
and brought himself and his whole posterity into an estate of sin and misery
Genesis 2. 17. with Romans 5. 12. 18, 19. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. 3.
.

6. I believe that man not being able to deliver himself from the curse, Romans
5. 6. and 8. 3.
God so loved the world, Io. 3. 16, 17.
that he promised, Genesis 3. 15. 1
and accordingly when the fullness of time was come, sent forth his Son Jesus
Christ Gal. 4. 4.
who took to him our nature, Heb. 2. 14 16
and became man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Romans 5. 15.
being conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her
substance, and born of her, Luke 1. 27, 31, 35, 42. and 2. 7. Gal. 4 4
yet without sin, Heb. 4. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 2i.
who having fulfilled all righteousness Mat. 3. 15. and 5. 17.
was made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13.
suffered death upon the cross, Luke 23. 33 Ph. 2. 8.
was buried, and the third day he rose again, 1 Cor. 15. 4.
ascended into heaven, Acts 1. 9, 10.
and sits at the right hand of God Ephesians. 1. 20. Romans 8. 34
making intercession for us Heb. 7. 25.
.

7. I believe that all the fruits of Christ's Mediatorship shall be effectually
communicated to all, Act 13. 48.
and only Romans 11. 7.
those who in him were elected unto salvation, before the foundation of the
world, Ephesians. 1 4, 5.
which the Holy Ghost does certainly apply by working faith in them, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Ioh. 6. 37.
thereby uniting them in their effectual calling to Christ theirhead, Ephesians. 3.
17. 1 Cor 1. 9. Col. 1 88.
and into one Church which is his body, Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. and 4. 15, 16.
justifying, Rom 8. 30.
adopting, Io. 1. 12. Ephesians. 1. 5.
sanctifying 1 Co. 6. 11. Ephesians. 2. 10.
and bringing them into communion with him in all spiritual blessings 1 Co. 1.
9. Ephesians. 1. 3.
.

8. I believe Christ has appointed that those who profess his name, should for
the begetting Romans 10. 17.
and increase 1 Pet. 2. 2.
of grace and knowledge, exercise an holy communion together, Act 2. 42. 46.
under the administration of all his Ordinances, Neh. 8. 1, 2 3. Acts. 15. 21.
Mat. 28. 19, 20 2 Timothy 4. 2. Acts 2. 42. Col. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26.
Heb. 3. 13. Levit. 19. 17. Mat. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. ult.
which they are carefully to observe till his second coming 2 Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians,
4. 12. 13. Heb. 12. 27. Matthew, 28. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 26. 1 Timothy 6. 14.
.

9. I believe that Christ shall come again at the end of the world; Acts 1. 11.
1 These. 4, 16, 17,
and that then the Bodies of all those that shall be found dead, shall be
raised, and the rest 1 Cor. 15. 12. to the end.
changed, and all brought before him to judgment, which he shall pass upon
them according to their works, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
whereby the righteous shall be adjudged to eternal life in heaven, and the
wicked to eternal death in hell Mat. 25 31. to the end.
.

I do heartily take the Lord to be my God Deuteronomy. 26. 16
and chief good, Psa. 73. 25. to the end. and 4. 6, 7.
and Jesus Christ to be my only Savior and Redeemer, Phil. 3. 8, 9.
and the Holy Ghost to be my Sanctifier, Psalm. 51. 11 Ephesians. 4. 30.
giving my self up wholly to this one God, to love him with all my heart, with
all my soul, and with all my might, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Mat. 22 37. Luke 10. 37.
to obey him sincerely, and faithfully Josh. 24. 14.
in all his Laws contained in the Holy Scriptures, Numb. 15. 39, 40. Deu. 12.
32.
though never so cross to my desires, or interest of Credit, Pleasure, and
Profit, Mat. 10. 38 16. 24. Luke 9. 23. and 14. 26.
and all this to the death: Rev. 2. 10. Mat. 10. 22.
And in particular, I consent and resolve, in the strength of Christ, to hold
constant Communion with the Church of CHRIST in the public Worship of GOD,
Acts 2. 42. 46. Heb. 10. 25.
and to submit unto the Discipline and Government which CHRIST has ordained
Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.
for his own glory, and his peoples good, 2 Cor. 13. 10. and 108.
and that I may have the opportunity of the enjoyment of these privileges, for
the advancement of mine obedience, I resolve and promise to submit 1 These. 5.
12, 13. Heb. 13. 17.
to the Ministerial guidance and oversight exercised according to the Rules of
the Word, in this Congregation, and to the brotherly advice and admonition
Heb. 3. 13. Lev. 19. 17. Ephesians. 5. 11.
of Fellow Christians here.

TO ALL That proses the Name of the LORD JESUS, IN THE COUNTIES OF Cumberland,
and Westmerland, BOTH Magistratates, and People.
They that shall appear against the carnal interests and corruptions of men, in
the confident expectation of a calm Sea, and a general acceptance, do forget
that they deal with men whose distempers usually are awakened to the most
vigorous angry opposition, by the sma^^ of a searching (though never (...) and
necessary) medicine. Or, that they deal with English men, (pardon the
expression) whose former contentions and dis-satisfactions make their passions
the more ready to take up Arms, and become quarrelsome. Or, that they deal
with Satan, who will the more best it himself to kindle and blow the fire,
because he knows such undertakings are principally against his interest are
Kingdom: Yet they who shall be affrighted from their duty by the report of
Giants and walled Cities, (difficulties that attend it,) show so much
unfaithfulness in regard of their duty; so much blockish regardlessness of Gods
Honor, and the Churches good; [which are of far more value then all our lives,
if it should cost us so much,] so much sordid basenese of spirit, as not daring
to disquiet those humors, which if reuzed, might hazard them in their esteem,
peace or maintenance; so much Atheism and unbelief, as if the great JEHOVAH
were not able to bear them out, and to give unexpected success to contemptible
beginnings; or at least, to reward them plentifully for their toil and care:
That they declare before all the world, their unworthiness of that high Trust,
and those honorable Titles of Overseer, Guide, Ambassador, Steward, Stars and
Angels, which are then most glorious to a spiritual eye, when most scorned and
vilified by the World.

Upon these and such like Considerations, we have put our selves upon these
Resolutions, which herewith are presented unto you.
WE, who have engaged our selves in this undertaking, have (we hope) thoroughly
considered, what in all probability it may cost us, that while we look for
reproach and contradiction, which yet we would not willingly find, our
opposers may find that undaunted courage in our prosecution of this Work, which
they would not readily have looked for.

The great distance of this from the first undertaking, and Report of our
Agreement, does necessarily draw forth this brief Account of its Birth and
Progress. About three years ago some of us joined together in an Expedient much
of this nature, which we propounded to some of our Brethren of different
persuasions in these things, but it took not; whereupon we resolved to
prosecute it among our selves, and made some Progress in it: At which time
Worcestershire Association; with Mr. Baxters Explication, came forth: Upon
this we began to conceive more probability of some reconciliation (at least) of
different judgments, in matters of Church Government, then formerly, because
we hoped, the prejudice which possibly might arise from our single attempt, (in
a business of that nature) would be much removed, when they saw we were not
alone, and that the way was led by others of so much worth and ability; we
therefore resolved to take up our former design again, and to propound it to
the whole Ministry of the County in general. To that end several Meetings were
desired; and at last we agreed in these following Propositions, which were
cheerfully subscribed by several, both of the Presbyterian, and Congregational
Judgment. During the agitation of these things, some of us were much affected
to observe:

1. The Assent of men both able and judicious, and such as had thoroughly
studied the Congregational Way, and from whom (in proprobability) opposition
might have been expected, in case these things had been inconsistent with these
Principles.

2. That Prejudice (which like a hateful Monster, impoysons the best things,
seeks Fuel from its own ignorance and blindness, and from the very distance
which it self caused; like a Fiery Oven devours all that is cast into it, and
musters up all the Passions to fight against it knows not what) has the
greatest hand in hindering the Unity and and Concord of Brethren.

3. That the best way to cure it, is friendly and brotherly debates, especially
after it has tired it self with its own Activity, and evaporated something of
its Fury.

4. That the Churches Peace (if by all parties seriously laid to heart) is a
very forceable medium to infer a conclusion of Unity.

Yet all was not done when we had proceeded thus far; Action (the life of all)
was yet behind; Satan is enraged, (and surely that must needs be good which he
so furiously opposes) and endeavors to stiffle it in the birth; to effect
which, he disgorgeth from his hateful stomach, a swarm of Quakers; these, at
that very time, when all things were ready for practice, come upon us like a
furious Torrent; all is on fire on the sudden, many are unsettled, the
foundations shaken, and some apostatize; here we are beaten off, and are forced
to lay other things aside, that we might more fully bind our selves to quench
these flames. After a while this storm abates, and we begin to think of our
former Work.

But the last Parliament was then sitting, and because something of that nature
was expected from them, it was advised we should yet a little forbear, till we
might see the issue. The Parliament being ended, we encountered with an other
Demurrer which was this: The providence of God so ordered things, that many
Ministers in this County were unfixed, supposing they should be necessitated to
remove; and several did remove to other Counties, so that we were again forced
to let all alone, expecting what way things would be cast. And now all these
things being over, we have once more reassumed our ancient Resolutions,
casting our selves upon the Lord, and looking up to him for assistance, That
things concerning his Honor and House, with so much difficulty now brought to
the birth, may not miscarry.

When these were now ready, it pleased the Lord to give us this encouragement;
Our Brethren, the Ministers of our neighbor-County of Westmerland, desired of
us a Copy of our Propositions and Confession; and after they had among
themselves considered and debated them, they signified to us their free consent
to all, except what concerned the County of Cumberland in particular.

These things we speak from the Press; 1. Because we suppose it necessary that
you have Copies of these Propositions, and this is the readyest way to procure
them. 2. For prevention of mistakes and mis apprehensions, which might arise
either from corrupt Copies, or from Report of our bare actions, while men only
hear what we do, but are not acquainted with our Grounds and Principles. 3.
That this may stand upon Record as a Testimony of our desires of, and
endeavors for the healing of Sion. We know not what success the Lord may be
pleased to give to this: when we look upon our selves, we profess our selves
unworthy of that honor, of being employed in any part of Gods Work, and unable
of ourselves to do any thing in it; and it may be the Lords time of building
Jerusalem, is not yet come, or who knows but he may exclude you from such a
Privilege, while he grants it to others? Yet when we look upon his Power, his
Word, and his Work upon some of you, we are not without hope: How ever it
please the Wise God to dispose of this, we are sure it is our duty to do our
utmost in the prosecution of concord: And though our souls shall mourn in
secret, if our disunion and distractions continue; yet it will be no grief of
heart to us (especially in our dying hour) to consider that we did what we
could to prevent them.

It will not be requisite to speak much in Explanation, or Vindication of what
we propose; because in most things it is fully done to our hands, by Judicious
and Learned Mr. Baxter, in his Explication of the VVorceste-shire Association,
unto which we refer you for satisfaction, whiles we give a brief touch upon
something in the general.

1. Know that several things, as to Method, Phrase, and Omissions, (which those
that are versed in the Controversies about Government, will readily observe)
were not done altogether upon neglect, or inadververtency, but on design.

2. That these were not calculated for every Meridian; we were forced to have
an eye to the general temper of our people, as well as the differing Judgments
of one another: And therefore let it not be blamed, if it be found not suitable
in all things to other places.

3. Let it be carried in your mind all along, That through the contexture of
the whole work, our Debates were, what we ought to do for the Churches peace,
and not what each of us might do, according to the latitude and utmost extent
of the usual practice of different Judgments.

4. In all this Agreement there are no Principles broken on either side; and
nothing condescended unto by any, which has not the subscription and assent of
eminent men on both parties in their writings.

The chief Corner-stones of this Fabric, are four, which present themselves in
the entrance, whereof the first and last Propositions neither fear opposition,
nor require explication; if any should question them, such evidence and general
acception does accompany them, that they will find advocates in every place.

The second (we hope) will not be accused (by any that shall seriously consider
all) for entrenching too much upon the interest of truth. We acknowledge every
truth to be precious in it self, and profess our selves unfeigned lovers of it;
neither are we ignorant how much those overtures of Union, (such as Charles his
interim, and Cassanders design) wherein the difference is compremised with the
loss of truth, are generally and justly distasted: Neither can we blame those
primitive Fathers for sticking so peremptory to (...), refusing Concord, rather
then admitting one iota more to that word, where such a little litteral
Addition would make so great an alteration in sense and Faith; Neither do we
forget how apt the best men are (with Bucer haurire faeces) to suck in the
dreggs out of an eager thirst after peace.

But no such thing can be fastened on what we assert; we are not engaged to deny
or renounce the least Truth, much less any Fundamental: All that the
Proposition speaks of, is only a silencing and forbearing some truths. And
this Condiscention is, 1. Terminated only on Government. 2. On the confessed
lower, and most questionable Points thereof. And 3. This only so long, and so
far as the Churches peace requires it.

If any think that Union and Peace should be hazarded, nay lost, rather then so
great an injury done to truth; let them consider, Whether they be so great
friends to truth as they pretend; if the Church be broken through dissension,
we suppose Truth will bleed and groan under its Ruins. If the Pillar shake or
fall, Truth that hangs on it, will be involved in the same fate. What if Peace
borrow something of truth? will it not by that loan be enabled to repay all
with advantage? Truth indeed is the way to Peace, ((...) Greg. Naz. Orat. 12.
de Pace:) Yet when Truth is questioned, then Peace is the way to Truth; and the
main thing to be looked at for the securing of its interest, is union; (...).
Greg. Naz. ibid. In so narrow a point does Truth lie, that men are not likely
to have any full or certain view of it, till their Spirits be calmed, and their
eyes be freed from that dust which their contentious bickerings have raised.

But have not the Guides of the Church in all ages been forced to make use of
this Plaster to heal the Churches Wounds?

Did not the Apostles betake themselves to this expedient, Acts 15. 20. to
allay the difference betwixt the Christian Jews and Gentiles? And were not
circumcision and Mosaicall ceremonies of greater moment then our differences?
And were not those truths, about our Freedom from that Yoke, silenced for that
time, and the contrary practiced even by themselves? Act. 16. 3. and 21. 24.
26. This is so clear an instance, that it is frequently urged in this case; and
indeed, so strong for us, that we doubt of being acquitted by it in the
judgment of understanding men. Consider,

1. That the Laws concerning Mosaical Observations were abrogated at the death
of Christ, and therefore in regard of their present state (or else as some call
it) neither lawful nor indifferent.

2. The Apostle of the Gentiles had laid them aside as useless, nay had spoken
against them; and hence arose the contest about them.

3. When the matter was referred to the Synod of Jerusalem, (though before he
had preached publicly against them; yet) he is so far from asserting, That
every Truth must be published what ever become of peace, that he forbears to
speak publicly, and applies himself particularly ((...)) to those that were
pillars, and of Reputation, viz. Peter, James, John, etc. for Dr. Lightfoot,
Harm. N. T. p. 97. makes it the same journey with that mentioned Gal. 3. 2.

4. The Synod does determine not only the silencing of this truth, viz. the
abolition of ceremonies, and Christians freedom from them; but also permits the
exercise of these to the Jews, and injoynes the practice of some of them to
the Gentiles.

5. The ground of the determination was the churches peace, Acts 15. 21.

6. And in this regard they enjoin them as necessary things, which they should
do well to observe, Acts 15. 28, 29. till the church might have a competent
time and means of satisfaction. The sum is this: The silencing of some truths
for peace sake (both in regard of publication and practice) was by them judged
necessary.

Since the Apostles days, those who have most earnestly contended for the
foundations, and things near the foundation, have always advised to
condescension for peace sake. To recite all instances that might be given,
would be tedious: We shall content our selves with two or three in stead of
many.

Basil. ad Presb. Tarsenses Epist. 203. advises to concord as necessary for
the establishment of the church, and propounds condescension as a necessary
means of it; There is need (says he) of a great deal of care and diligence for
the helping of the churches, which cannot be but by uniting those that differ;
which union will be effected ((...)) if we condescend to the weak in things not
prejudicial to the soul.

Luther gives the same advice in an Epist. to the Divines assembled in a Synod
at Norimberge [ Meum consilium fuerit (cum nullum sit ecclesiae periculum, ut
hanc causam sinatis, vel ad tempus sopitam (utinam extinctam) jacere donec
tutiore and meliore tempore animis in pace firmatis and charitate ad unatis,
eam disputetis] My advice is that (seeing no hurt can accrue to the church by
it) this difference might sleep, at least for a time, (or rather indeed dye
out) till your minds were confirmed in peace, and united in love, then might
you more safely enquire into it.

Greg. Nazi. is as peremptory as any against purchasing peace with the loss of
truth; witness his Expressions [(...). Orat. 12.] Contention for Piety is
better then a vicious peace. And again, let none conjecture that I think all
peace ought to be loved and embraced ((...)) For I know that as some kind of
disagrement is good, so some agreement is pernicious. ibid. And more fully,
Orat. 32. p. 518. Let us not prosecute peace to the prejudice of truth. ((...))
Nay, in such cases he tells us, we should contend as much, as if it were
against Fire and Sword, and that he that in other things is most mild and
gentle, should here be most violent and pugnacious [(...)] Orat. 12. p. 198.
203. And yet he is as zealous for making way for peace, by silencing lesser
truths, as any: How earnestly does he urge a necessity of distinguishing of
truths? Some are (says he) suitable to our capacities, some above them; some
((...)) concern the time present, others the world to come, etc. and then
applies all thus: Some things are not at all to be enquired after, others with
moderation. Some truths are to be contended for earnestly; in others ((...))
condescension and forbearance to be used, etc. Orat. 14. P. 220. And afterward
he exhorts those that worship the same Trinity, to cut off and avoid
superfluous questions, as the common disease of that time, and as so many
((...)) suckers, which rob the tree of its sap and fruit, or crooked windings,
which lead the traveller into a maze and confusion; and in the close of that
excellent Oration adds, (...). Let us yield a little in smaller truths, that we
may receive that which is greater, viz. Concord: Let us yield that we may
overcome. And much to the same purpose also he has, Orat. 12. p. 203. but we
forbear.

To this purpose we might urge the example of Constantine the Great, who in
matters of greater consequence, ( viz. the difference betwixt Arius and the
Orthodox) propounds the forbearance of asking or answering questions concerning
that difference as a necessary means to peace; which he did as supposing it to
be of lower concernment, vide Soc. Eccles. l. 1. c. 4.

To the third we need say little; only to explain our meaning, know, That
there are several things which both Parties practice upon different grounds: As
in matters of Appeal, where one party gives power authoritative; the other
fraternal only; yet both own the thing: So in the exercise of the power of the
Keys, where though the (...), ( i. e.) the first subject be questioned, yet
all agree, that (in Churches Organical at least) the Officers are to manage
them.

To these may be added Ordination by Pastors of other Churches, and the
Church Covenant, etc. Now all we say here is this, That the difference of
principles by which both parties are carried to the same thing, does not make
our conjunction unlawful.

The 11th. Proposition we hope will not be quarrelled with by sober minded men.
1. None will say that it is unlawful to renew covenant with God. 2. Nor will any
deny the expediency and usefulness of it in reformation of churches. 3. Nor
that our particular churches (so overgrown with ignorance and profaneness, so
beset with Heresies, so weakened (as to discipline and government) through
licencious Liberty) have no need of it.

4. In this we cross not any Presbyterian Principle. Those that have most
opposed an explicit Church Covenant as the form of a Church, do not deny the
lawfulness and usefulness of the thing, but only the necessity of it, in
reference to such an end; and the extent of it, as to some particular Articles;
vid. Ruther. due Right, p. 85. An explicit vocal covenant, says he, we deny
not, as if the thing were unlawful, etc. p. 86. Nor deny we, that at the
Election of a Pastor, the Pastor and people tie themselves by reciprocation of
Oaths, etc. p. 88. Nor do we question whether such a Covenant may be lawfully
sworn; we think it may, etc. So also Apollonius, p. 4.

5. The grounds and ends mentioned, and only imposed in the Proposition, and
the draught of the Profession it self, will (as we hope) sufficiently clear us
from the two fore-hinted Exceptions.

6. The mentioning only of those Grounds wherein all are agreed, does not
exclude a reipsa, any other further end of covenanting, (if it have any such,)
nor bereave it of any of its proper effects: For so long as the thing is done,
it will reach all its ends of institution, whether we particularly discover
them or no. Divine institutions, in respect of the effects immediately
resulting ab earum positione and usu, are not enlarged, or narrowed, according
to the largeness or straightness of our apprehensions, no more then our not
apprehending the Sun to be appointed to concur to the production and growth
of vegetables, will hinder its effects that way. So that the Congregational
Brethren, being condescended unto in the practice of the thing, need not press
the disputable ends and grounds of it: And the Prebyterian Brethren need not
refuse the thing, they being not urged to do it upon those questionable grounds.

The twelfth Proposition shows our rule of Admission, and the rules which we
have propounded to our selves for our safer proceeding: We know that two
parties will take Exceptions against what we propound: some thinking us too
strict; others too open-handed.

Those that think this rigid and harsh dealing, let them be pleased to
consider; 1. That it is none but the ignorant and scandalous, which we shall
desire to debar from that Ordinance. 2. That by putting bounds to our selves,
we take away the aspersion of an indefinite, unlimited, arbitrary and uncertain
Government. 3. That in debarring such, the Church-guides go not beyond their
commission, but only execute that Office, and discharge that trust that God
has laid upon them: Are those not Rulers and Governors? and does not this
engage and authorize them, to prevent and hinder the polluting and profanation
of his Ordinances? Have those that are charged with holy things, a charge to
give only and not to debar? The Officers of the Old Testament, were to exclude
the unclean actually; the Porters of the Temple were not to suffer the Unclean
to enter the Temple, 2 Chr. 23. 19. and in Eze. 44. 7, 8. shall we think that
when God prohibits the unfit, he leaves the execution of this Prohibition
solely to every man's particular persuasion concerning himself, and leaves only
a Doctrinal declarative power to the Officers; and that though they may declare
a person unfit, yet they may not refuse to give the Ordinance to him whom they
declare unworthy; is the Juridical, Decisive Power in every person for himself?
Does not this as much disable them from debarring and men, or men actually
Drunk? If such intrude, can he do no more then declare them unfit? Or if he may
debarr these juridically, because they are not in a capacity of improving the
Ordinance, May he not then juridically debar others that are in a like capacity
of improving the Ordinance?
though from other causes, as ignorance, etc. And indeed, that the Officers may
juridically debar from the Lords Supper, cannot be denied, by those that will
acknowledge That the offended Brother must tell the Church; the Church then
has power to examine; else, to what purpose is it to make known the grievance
to it? And does not Examination infer more then a declarative power? neither
can it be denied by those that will grant excommunication; if they can
juridically cast out of the Church, then it must be granted, they can
juridically exclude from the Supper, for this Reason at least, Because the
former includes the latter. 4. The exclusion of ignorant and scandalous
persons, is not a novel invention, or new device, but that which carries the
Stamp of Antiquity upon it. The very Light of Nature seems to have hinted such
a thing to the Heathens; as their Proculite propahni at sacrificings
testifies. But if we look within the Church, we have abundant evidence.

Dionysius Areop. an ancient Writer (though Perkins and Illyricus give
sufficient reasons to evince that it was not he that was Paul 's scholar) in
Eccles. Hierar. cap. 3. p. 93. tells us, That the Catechumeni, and Energumeni,
and others under penance ((...)) were admitted to hearing of Scripture, etc.
yet they were excluded these mysteries, and the perfect only admitted. (...).
And afterward p. 96. and 97. extends this exclusion, (...), to the less
perfect and unholy, and gives this reason for it, Because it admits not (...),
that which is not altogether holy, or that which in some respect comes not up
to the image of God.(...), etc.

Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. is more express, and requites, 1. Professed knowledge:
It is not to be given ( says he) to any but (...) to him that believes the
Doctrine of the Gospel to be true, which includes professed knowledge. And
secondly, Holy life, (...).

If we should search the Decrees of Counsels, we might show you much to the
same purpose; but testimonies of this nature are collected by Gillaspie,
Rutherford, and others, and therefore we forbear.

Neither are our proceedings herein different from what was prescribed and
enjoined by the Episcopal Divines; knowledge was always presupposed as a
necessary qualification for the Lords Supper, and therefore catechizing was to
be used. And as for Scandal, the Canons of the church of England took care that
it should exclude, Can. 26. enjoynes, That no Minister shall in any wise admit
to the receiving of the holy Communion, any of his cure or Flock, which be
known to live in any notorious sin without repentance, or who have maliciously
and openly contended with their neighbors, until they shall be reconciled.

The same thing also was expressed in the Rubric of the Common Prayer; where
the Minister was not only to dissuade persons in malice to come to the Lords
Table, but not to suffer them: and not only such, but also whosoever shall be
found to be an open and notorious evil-liver, By whom the Congregation might be
offended.
or such as wronged their neighbor in word or deed. There is then no difference
'twixt them and us in the Rule, but only in the practice, in that they come not
up to their own rule. So that if you will be finding fault, you must blame them
for their neglect, not us for our strictness.

We might also show (against the charge of novelty) the Papists asserting the
same thing; though of all men it might least be expected from them, seeing they
affirm the Lords Supper to confer grace. Aquinas Part 3. Q. 80, in Art. 6. Art.
4, 5. Notwithstanding this, calls the scandalous man's receiving, Sacrilegii
crimen, peccatum multis al^is gravius, and affirms the party mortaliter
peccare, and sacramentum violare, and in Art. etc.
concludes thus; Divina Majestas and Evangelica disciplina exigit, ut
manifestis ac publicis peccatoribus, ctiam petentibus sacra denegetu Communio.
And for this cites Cyprian Lib. 1. Epi. 10. advising not to give the Supper to
Stage Players, etc. as being contrary to the discipline and honor of the Church.

Nay, those that plead most for a free admission, are so far from taxing this
practice with novelty, that they yield it to be a piece of the ancient and
usual discipline of the church, to exclude the notorious and open scandalous,
though not excommunicate; Neither do they so much plead for the admission of
the scandalous, as for the excommunicating of them first, before a debarment
from the Sacrament.

5. If there were no such power, yet so long as it is granted, that Officers
have charity, and may, and must use it to prevent our brothers danger, so long
surely may we do all this; if we had nothing else to bear us out, would not
this engage us to help you to examine your selves? (and is the matter of so
small moment, that you need no help?) nay, and to refuse to give you that which
we see would hurt you? will real love satisfy it self with a bare warning,
without endeavoring to prevent? will it only tell him it is poison he drinks,
and not also take it out of his hand? and have you any cause to be angry when
we tell you the truth concerning your estates, or hinder you from destroying
your selves out of love to you? that when we love our peace or maintenance less
then your good, you should so op-pose. When the Physician puts the Patient to
some grief, in the application of a necessary Medicine, is it reasonable either
to refuse his Medicine, or to abuse his person? That the Medicine is so sharp,
is your fault, not ours. The Lord knows we delight not in excluding, if we
could admit you without your own hurt; and if God laid not this duty upon us,
can you imagine that men that know what they do, would unnecessarily provoke
your hatred and opposition, when they might have love and good will? But when
we consider the weight of the blood of souls, and how bitterly many a poor
creature shall in hell curse his man-pleasing Minister, we are afraid.

Those that think us too large, let them be pleased to consider.

1. That God would not have the door so strait as many suppose; we know that
purity is amiable, and required of all in the Church, and that it has such a
lovely aspect, that many so fix their eyes upon it, as if that were only to be
attended and prosecuted in the constitution and reformation of Churches; yet
with some confidence we dare affirm, 1. That the strictest way of admission is
not therefore best, because strictest. 2. That it is much safer, in the
management of Admissions, and more acceptable to God, to be so facile, as to
hazard the admission of many unfit, rather then to exclude one that ought not
to be excluded: Mr. Cotton says, Rather ninety nine should perish through
presumption, then one humble soul belonging to Christ, should sink under
discouragement: Way. p. 58. 3. That the admission of some less fit, can neither
defile the Ordinances to others, nor hinder their Spiritual Communion: Non
polluitur communio, licet minuitur solatio. 4. That Censoriousness, Revilings
and Contempt of weaker Christians, Errors, Aversness to concede and yield to
Brethren of different Judgment in less things, for peace sake, (though they
make not so great a noise in the world) are sins of a more dangerous
consequence, more pernicious to the Church, in themselves more infectious, and
against which there lies more just exceptions, as to admission, then many other
failings which usually are excepted against in the weaker sort. 5. That those
Churches have most of Gospel Order, where unity and encouragement of the weak
is equally regarded and prosecuted with purity, going hand in hand, but one not
justling out another. 6. That if the best of men would but impartially weigh
their private failings in the same Scale in which they usually weigh other
men's, with the application of Matt. 7. 1, 12. and would put on charity, 1 Cor.
13. 4, 5, 6. with humility, they would not be so severe against others.

2. We cannot see any ground or Scripture-Warrant, for a stricter rule then
this we walk by: 1. The fitness which comes under our cognizance, is only
outward; whether they that are only outwardly qualified, have a real interest
in the seals of the covenant, before God, or not; we think it unseasonable now
to dispute; that which we assert, is granted by all of both parties, (that
understand their principles) that the seals are given to such; and that in our
Enquiries and Determinations, we are to go no higher, least we be guilty of
prying into things secret, and of usurping the Throne and Scepter of the
Almighty. 2. The rule which must direct us to judge aright of this fitness,
must of necessity have these properties; First, it must be general; or else,
how shall it reach all men? if it should be so short, or so narrow as to
exclude any admissable, it could not be acknowledged to be true. Secondly, it
must be public; the Officers are public, and so is the Act of Admission, and
so are the Ordinances admitted to: and therefore it cannot be granted, that
Officers must manage these things by private instructions, and let in by a
private door. Thirdly, it must be a standing rule; for if it be uncertain,
unconstant, and bending, how shall it direct us to make any steady or certain
trial?

3. The satisfaction wherein we are to acquiess, ought to be public and
Ecclesiastical; for if we were to admit only according to our private
satisfactions or dis-satisfactions, who almost then could be admitted with
some? Who sees not the uncertainty of such a Rule? If this were true, the same
parties, under the same qualifications, without any alteration, might be
lawfully admitted, and rejected by several Churches, nay, by the same Church at
several times, some being more easily satisfied then others.

Not that the use of charity in this case is denied, when we have made as
impartial a trial as we can; the standing rules of charity must be made use of:
But yet God has not so referred the matter to charity, as if none were to be
admitted, where our charity would not bring us up to a persuasion, or belief of
regeneration; we suppose this therefore to be a standing Truth, that we may
lawfully, and with peace of conscience, nay we ought to admit one, (if coming
up to the rule) of whose integrity we may have particular dis-satisfactions.

If this were well considered, the difference about rigid admissions would not
be so great. Mr. Noton, Cont. Apoll. page 11. is full in this point,
distinguishing 'twixt fideles (...) and (...), or Ecclesiastice fideles,
Believers that are really such, and those that are reputed to be such: And
plainly asserts, That we ought to carry our selves toward those, as if they
were really godly; and that we are not bound positively to believe every one
admissable into the Church to be regenerate: Nay, that the Church may sin in
not admitting one Ecclesiastically fit, although not really a Believer; and
that the judgment of charity, is not a persuasion of the integrity of a man;
but, in doubtful facts where the evil is not evident, an inclining to judge the
best, Negative and practice, as he speaks.

Or if any shall not be satisfied with this, let them be pleased to consider,
whether Mr. Burrows (Gospel Worship p. 238) does not speak more largely then
we in the instance of Judas; where he affirms our resting in Ecclesiastical
satisfaction so necessary, That though we had a private Revelation from heaven,
that such a one were an hypocrite, yet we are to communicate with him still,
till he so far discover himself, that his evil can be proved publicly by
witnesses.

If any Rule shall come short of these, we doubt not to call it defective; and
if any shall go further, we as little doubt to call it a strictness above what
is written.

That our Rule is adaequate to outward fitness, has the three forementioned
qualifications, and affords sufficient ground of Ecclesiastical satisfaction,
seems very clear to us, neither is it charged by any with defect, saving that
it speaks not of the declaration of the work of Grace, (which is further
required by some) which how far it suits with what we have now hinted, we leave
to the judicious to consider: And shall only add a Word or two concerning the
fifteenth Proposition, which expressly relates to this. Wherein take notice:

1. That it is not denied, but that men converted may lawfully and profitably
declare what the Lord has done for them.

2. That therefore we shall accept it where offered.

3. But the pressing of this as a (...) upon all, is that wherein we are not
satisfied.

1. Because some of us see neither Scripture-Precept, nor president for it: If
the Apostles had either pressed this themselves in their Admissions, or
prescribed it to us, good reason had it been we should have done 10. The most
probable place for countenance of this practice, is 1 Pet. 3. 15, 16. which yet
speaks nothing to a declaration of the work of grace; but only that in those
persecuting times, they should have so much knowledge of the Principles of
Religion, as might enable them to justify their profession, by giving a Reason
of the Doctrine thereof, which he calls hope, as Paul frequently does, Act. 23.
6. and 26. 7. and 28. 20. And that this is the meaning, appears from the
Context, v. 14, 15, 16, 17 which shows he speaks of giving this Reason of their
Hope to Persecutors dissatisfyed with their Doctrine, (not with their integrity
and truth of conversion) and therefore not a declaration of the work of Grace
to Church Officers for admission. To this some add Mat. 3. 6. which indeed
speaks of confession of sins, but nothing of a Declaration of the work of
Grace; they might acknowledge the sinfulness of their former estate, or
acknowledge particular offenses, and yet be far from that, for which some
produce this Text: Or if this Text would prove such a thing, it would only
prove it voluntary on their part, but not enjoined by John; nay, what ever it
was, it will be very hard to prove that it was public, or to John at all; and
as hard to prove it to have been before their Admission by Baptism, and not
after, vid. Dr. Lightfoot, Harm. Evan. in Loco.

2. Though it should be granted (which yet all will not) that the invisible
Church is the prime, and proper only subject to whom the seals belong; and
that saving qualifications are requisite to give a real interest in them; and
that we are to admit only upon such evidences, as may give proof of interest;
yet there are other more satisfactory evidences, viz. from the tenor of a
Christians life, then this; which would sufficiently demonstrate, (so far as we
either can, or are concerned to know) though this were laid aside. If we had no
mark but this, or none so demonstrative as this, or none sufficiently
demonstrative without this, or none less questionable, or less open to
inconveniences, we conceive much might have been said.

3. This is so inconsiderable an evidence, that it seems scarce any at all
(beside so much of it as is included in the former) to some of us; if there be
any thing in it, it must be from the parties own word, that is, his own
affirmation that he is converted; which we suppose to be no proof in this
particular. If you say there is more, it must be either from the thing spoken
in the matter, or in the manner, viz. the affectionateness of utterance. For
the former, we suppose none will say, That he only that has the real
experiences of grace and conversion, can declare such things, at least, as are
ordinarily spoken and accepted in such cases. As for the latter, we suppose it
will scarcefinde a Patron for its evidenceship: And if his Expression and
affectionateness should, yet still it rests upon his own his word, whether it
be so with him as he speaks.

We entreat those that think this so full a proof, to consider how frequent it
is, since this came into fashion, for vile men (some of us could give
instances, if it were convenient) to speak so affectionately of their
conversion, and tell you how they were cast down, and comforted, etc. that as
to expression, they would match the holiest Saint in the world.

4. It Is not adaequate to Saint-ship, (at least as it is pressed and urged by
some) and therefore unfit to try by, as not reaching all admissable, according
to the Rule of Christ. Who knows not how secret a thing the work of grace is
upon a soul, and how hardly discernable? The gradual, and still proceedings,
the long intervals of the spirits acts, the different method, the darkness and
fears upon peoples hearts; all these make it hard to be discovered.

5. We have seen some printed Books of Confessions, etc. which have as much
satisfied us against it as any thing. We are afraid of putting our people upon
these temptations and inconveniences, which in that course others have fallen
upon.

6. There is a holy modesty and bashfulness, which either does, or ought to
attend those passages and transactions (we mean the work it self, and not the
shameful miscarriages of our lives) 'twixt God and out souls, which may justly
excuse them from public view.

7. Those of our Brethren of the Congregational Way, do not press this as
necessary to Membership. Mr. Norton is full, Cont. Apoll. p. 3. Non necessario
quaerendum, etc. It is not necessary (in admission into the Church) to require
men to give a particular account of the signs of true grace, or the work of
Faith, and true Repentance: Mr. Cotton, Hol. Chapter Memb. page 19. admits those,
1. That profess (publicly) faith and repentance. 2. Subjection to Ordinances.
3. Inoffensive conversation. And excludes, 1. The ignorant. 2. Those that deny
the Faith. 3. The Scandalous.

Mr. Hooker insists only on these two, Part 1. p. 15. Persons, though they be
hypocrites inwardly, yet if their conversations and expressions be such, so
blameless and inoffensive, that according to reason, directed by the Word, we
cannot conclude, but in charity there may be, and is some special good in them;
these are fit matter of a visible Church, etc. And, Part 1. p. 24.;He that
professing the Faith, lives not in the neglect of any known duty, or in the
commission of any known evil; and has such a measure of knowledge, as may in
reason let in Christ into the soul, and carry the soul to him; these be grounds
of probabilities, by which charity, poized according to rule, may, and ought to
conceive there be some beginnings of spiritual good. And more fully, Part 3. p.
5. speaking of Admissions, and of private Members repairing to them, to enquire
the time and manner of their conversion, he says, I am afraid it is a presumed
kind of Liberty, which wants precept and example, for any thing that ever
appeared to me in Scripture. And that not only because it entrencheth upon the
Office of the Elder (as he says) but because the thing it self is
inconvenient. Hear his own words: All such pains misseth the end and fruit of
it; for the stress of the trial lies not there, nor can the last resolution of
judicious and reasonable charity issue there: whether the person be a visible
Saint or no? for there be many truly and savingly called, who never knew the
time and manner of their conversion, and therefore cannot relate it to others,
and yet express the power of grace in their lives, etc. And afterward, to that
question; What is the rule according to which satisfaction is to be regulated?
He answers thus: In a word, if a person live not in the commission of any known
sin, or in the neglect of any known duty, and can give a reason of his hope
toward God ( he means a professing of Faith, as before he expressed himself)
This casts the cause with judicious charity, to hope and believe there is
something of God and grace in the soul; and therefore fit for Church-Society.
So that the question is, Whether such a mark which is questionable in its
warrant, accompanied with inconveniences, more open to counterfeiting,
flexible, not general, and not insisted on as necessary by our Brethren, ought
to be rigidly pressed, to the hinderance of the Churches peace; when other
sufficient, more certain, evidential, and generally agreed on Evidences may be
had: And seeing it is put to this issue, we hope our congregational-Brethren
will not take offense at any condescension herein.

What we lay down, Propos. 16. wherein we confine our selves to our own
Parish-bounds for Membership, we hope will not provoke the distaste of any
Brother.

Some of us cannot behold the different practice of our Brethren in this point,
without amazement: Alas! that men should no more lay to heart the divisions of
the Church, the disorders, and other inconveniences which arise from this
Liberty, that men are so ready to take to themselves! How great a hand this
has in keeping of a closure of Brethren, we need not tell; look about, and see
it. Ingenuous and moderate Mr. Firmin, (a New England man) calls this a
dividing Principle, in his Epistle to his serious question, and the Practisers
of it, seekers of division; and for the regulating of it, propounds the same
that we do, in the forementioned Proposition; and supposes, That if
Congregational men would but yield in this one thing, it would much tend to the
healing of our breaches.

We earnestly beseech the contrary-minded, to consider seriously:

1. That the Presbyterians never pleaded for local limits, or Parishbounds in
this sense, as if Church Membership did arise from thence: They are as ready as
any to say, That co-habitation makes not men Members of a Church; though (it
cannot but be observed) that they are (by several) spoken against, as if this
had been their Assertion. Surely ingenious men will not threap that upon them,
which they with one Voice do so much disown.

2. All that they say, (in this case) is this, That it is necessary that
Church Members do co-habit; and that for order sake, it is fit that bounds be
set and observed. And does not Scripture and reason say the same?

1. In the New Testament, Did not the people of God, living in a Town or City,
always join together among themselves in a Church Way? For why else are
Churches denominated from places? as the Church of Rome, Corinth, etc. when
will it be proved, or what Scripture speaks it, that any lived in a
Neighborhood or Town, where there was a Church, and yet was a Member of a
Church in an other Town?

2. Is not this (as it is usually practiced) inconsistent with the ends of
Church Membership? Church Members may so live together, 1. That their Pastor
and Officers may reside among them for inspection and rule. 2. That they may
meet commodiously and frequently together for the enjoyment of Ordinances. 3.
That they may maintain communion for help and advice among themselves, etc. and
all this with ease and convenience. Now how this can be done as it ought, where
the Members live so much distant, (as is usual in many gathered Churches) let
the moderate judge?

3. How will contention, confusion and disorder be avoided, if this be kept up?
Is it nothing for one Minister (by the invitation of such a proclaimed Liberty)
to deprive another of the comfort of his prayers, tears and labors? Or for one
Church to bereave another of its help and comfort, in bereaving it of its
choicest Members? Or is it nothing to set such an example before the eyes of
the weaker sort? May not the pulling out of one Pin endanger the ruin of the
whole Fabric? Make the case your own, and then judge. Would you be willing to
be so dealt withal? Would you not think your selves wronged, if others should
go about to withdraw from you the Members of your Churches? It is wondered by
some, how men can so confidently appropriate the title of Gospel Order to their
Way, (but that glorious pretenses, and high words are more hopeful to prevail
with the greater part of men, then solid Arguments,) when it is so apparently
peccant against the Gospel rules of the God of Order? yet let not this be
thought an Accusation of all the Congregational Brethren. Many there are (we
know) that judge these proceedings irregular as well as we; and that are afraid
to boast in another man's line, of things made ready to their hand, choosing to
wait with hope for the enlargement of their Churches and comfort, from the
reformation and growth of those that are under their own Ministry, rather then
to make up their churches by entering upon other men's labors, 2 Cor. 10. 15, 16.

3. That the Principles of the Congregational Brethren come up so far, that we
think there would be no difference in this point, if they were practiced.

1. They say, co-habitation of Members is necessary, upon many spiritual
accounts. Vid. Hooker Survey, Part 1. p. 49. Such co-habitation ( says he) is
required, which is necessary for the dispensation of Gods Ordinances, and the
administration of Church Censures; for otherwise the end of the covenant would
be made frustrate, and the benefit of the whole prejudiced; and hence there
must needs be such a co-habitation of Officers, and a convenient company of
Members, that they comely and conveniently meet together, to the exercise of
all Gods Ordinances, Act. 14. 27. 1 Cor. 11. 20. and. 14. 23. To the same
purpose, Norton Contr. Apoll. p. 40.

2. They acknowledge our churches (at least, most of them) to be true Churches.
Mr. Hooker rejects the denial of this with abhorrency.

3. That therefore it is unlawful to separate from them, either for the want of
some Ordinances, or for the fin of some worshippers. Vid. Hookker Preface to
the Survey: and Norton, p. 156.

That these three Principles are owned by them, will not be denied; and that
they are inconsistent with the common practice of gathering Churches out of
other Parishes, is too evident. Will they call our Churches true, and yet
unchurch them, by taking our Members against our consent? Will they say, That
it is unlawful to separate from our Churches, and yet entertain and encourage
those that separate? Will they say, Co-habitation is necessary, and yet receive
those that live many miles distant?

If any seek to evade this by saying, That though many, yet not all
Congregations in England are true Churches.

We answer, 1. It should then first be proved, (and not taken for granted) that
such a Congregation as they desire to receive Members from, is no true Church.

2. But who (of all that take this Liberty) does make a difference 'twixt one
congregation and another, and forbears to take (if opportunity serve) from a
congregation, reputed a true Church.

3. How easily will this be objected against any Church whence Members be had,
That it is no true Church; and how must the controversy be decided? Facile
credimus quod volumus.

If it be further urged, that though our Churches be true, yet are they
corrupt: So that it may be lawfuli to withdraw communion from the same; as in
the Ans. of Elders of New England, to the 32. Quest. page 29.

Answ. We acknowledge with grief, That many of our congregations are corrupt.
Yet [1.] this does not in any wise justify the gathering of Members that
inhabit not within convenient limits. [2.] Nor the gathereing out of those
Congregations which are more purged, though not according to the hight of
strictness which some require. Ames (usually cited by our Brethren in this
point) Cas. Consc. Lib. 5. cap. 12. Q. 3. mentions but three causes of
separation from a true Church: 1. Participation of their sins. 2. Eminent
danger of Seduction. 3. Persecution. And yet these are not applicable to many
Presbyterian Churches, from whom nevertheless Members are withdrawn. True
indeed, Mr. Norton adds a fourth; Separation may be (says he, p. 168.) for
purer Worship and Edification, no great inconvenience ensuing. But there lies
much weight in the last words; otherwise upon this ground men might shift from
one Congregational-church to another for purer Worship, as well as from a
Presbyterian to a Congregational-church. But (3.) is it the best, most
warrantable, and most effectual course of curing a corrupt church, to take away
from it the best Christians it has? Or are you sure that you can justify
before the Lord, your weakening the hands and hearts of other Ministers, that
are upon the reformation of their more corrupt churches, which you unavoidably
do by this practice. Many have thought, that it were a better expedient to
disperse good members into less pure Churches, that so there might be most
help, where there is most need.

If any say, This is a grievous yoke for tender consciences.

We answer: 1. Tender consciences ought to be universally tender; Why also are
they not tender of breaking rule, and of being examples of disorder, and
introducing the many inconveniences that attend this practice?

2. We think we have provided as much for a tender conscience, as a truly
tender conscience can require. Do we engage them to be without Ordinances or
Membership, in case there be no Minister of their own? Or do we engage them to
scandalous and insufficient Ministers? If any will desire to depart when they
can plead none of these; we fear it be humor, or ignorance, more then
tenderness of conscience, To those that would plead that we may tie them from
Church-Ordinances, (as in case the Minister where they live forbear them upon
the general unfitness of his people.) It Is readily answered, we provide help
for that, he may enjoy them for the present in other congregations.

They that say, by this means they shall be hindered from some Minister with
whom they can most profit; may be pleased to answer these questions: Whence is
your profiting? is it from the Minister and his ability, or from God? Is it
likely that God will give the success you, expect out of his own way? We deny
not but the God of order may overlook your irregularities, and give divine
influence while ye seek it in a disorderly way. But what reason have ye to
expect it in your way? Do ye certainly know that ye have profited, or that all
your joy which you have got in this course is solid? Are there not sensible
consolations, even in holy men? And do not these run with a violent stream? May
they not mistake their own spirits upon that account? May you not profit more,
for ought you know, in humble waiting on God where he has set you? And might
you not more cheerfully expect it here then elsewhere? Many serious Christians
have thought, and found it to be the most hopeful, ready, certain way of a
speedy increase of grace, and of attainment of more real and lasting comfort,
for a man to bestirre himself in the instruction, reproof, and reformation of
the people with whom he lives (this affords opportunity and advantage for the
exercise of grace; and exercise is one of the best ways to increase it) rather
then to remove to the ministry of a man of quicker and abler parts.

Some may (possibly) except against the condescension of our brethren of the
congregational-judgement, in point of Ordination, mentioned Prop. 17. Let such
consider:

1. That Ordination by the people is one of the main occasions of offense to
the Presbyterian Brethren, who in this regard do not know how to own men, so
ordained, for Ministers; and then surely, if it were possible, this offense
should be removed.

2. This Proposition does not take away the election from the people, which the
congregational-brethren look upon as the chief thing.

3. We are agreed, That such Ordination shall be performed in the Congregation,
unto which the person is to be ordained.

4. Albeit, the congregational brethren affirm, that an inorganicall Church,
and homogeneal, may ordain; yet it is not against their principles, that
Ministers of other Churches do it for them. Mr. Hooker affirms as much out of
Didoc. Survey Part 2. p. 57. ( speaking of those that are to ordain) By
Eldership then is meant the Officers; but whether they were the Pastor and
Teacher, and the Ruling Elders of one Congregation, called a Consistory; or
whether they were the Officers of many congregations together, termed a
Classis: I could never yet hear any Arguments that could evince either by dint
of undeniable evidence. And more fully, p. 59. Though it be most comely that
those of the same congregation should exercise it, yet the Elders also of other
congregations may be invited hereunto, and interested in the exercise of it, in
an other church where they have no power. And the Liberty which they allow to
Ministers of preaching and administering the Seals in other congregations
besides their own, as also the requiring of the counsel and help of other
Ministers for the trial of a person to be ordained over an other church (which
is allowed and advised too by Ames. Bellar. Enerv. Tom. 2. and Norton p. 101.)
will also prove this condescension suitable to their principles. Mr. Allin, and
Mr. Shepherd in the defense of the 9. Positions, p. 132. grant, That a
Minister may put forth an occasional act of Power, or precariam potestatem to
those in an other Church, over whom he is no Officer (though it be not toward
them as over his own Flock) and that though an Officer of one Church, is no
Officer over an other Church, yet such an Officer may put forth acts of his
Officer toward those that are not of his proper Flock. And if so, why not this
Act of Power as well as an other? why may they not ordain, as well as
administer Sacraments in another Church?

Mr. Firmin (a Congregational-Brother, and one thus ordained) in his Epist.
before his serious question, gives us the report, that of late this is
practiced in New England; which also we have had confirmed to us by others. And
should not this then be yielded unto for the churches peace?

5. Although the congregational-brethren should think the peoples Election
greater then ordination, yet if they yield to Ordination as aforesaid, the
Presbyterian-Brethren can comfortably own them as Ministers of the Gospel; for
so long as they have both, there is no doubt to be made, but that they have all
essentials of an outward call to the Office of a minister; though we run up
several lines, yet we all meet in the same point.

One thing more there is which some may peradventure stumble at, which is the
supplying the want of Elders by the assistance of neighbouring-ministers, of
which in Prop. 19. The reasons of which practice are hinted in the Proposition;
and the cautions for the right understanding of it, are subjoyned to it, so
that we may say the less.

We would not have adventured upon any thing not ordinary; (...) did not compel
us. They that understand the controversse about Government, know, 1. That all
are not satisfied concerning Ruling Elders. 2. And others are not satisfied
concerning the power of a Minister to act alone in these things, where Elders
are not to be had. And such is the general state of our people, that in case we
were all satisfied in the first, yet can we not at present act in that course,
for want of fit men to be employed in that Office. So that such of us as are
not satisfied concerning the Ministers sole power, must either take some such
course, or do nothing. If our present case then be well considered, we hope men
will not be so ready to except against it.

That in such a case, where the ordinary course cannot be followed, some
extraordinary way may be taken, is not only our assertion, but the assertion
and practice of others (in other cases) whose authority we suppose will not be
slightly overlooked by pious and intelligent men; we mean the Assembly, who in
their advice concerning Ordination, lay this down as a certain conclusion,
which they prove 2 Chronicles 29. 34, 36. where the Levi^^s (which was beside the
ordinary rule) helped the Priests to slay the Burnt Offerings, they being too
few to do it by themselves. And also 2 Chr. 30. 3, 4. which Proposition will as
much justify us in this particular, as them in an extraordinary expedient for
Ordination; which as things then stood, was necessary; and for which this was
produced by them.

That this course is nearest to the ordinary rule, we think is apparent.

1. The work is done by Ministers, of which number the Minister of the
Congregation is one: Here is one part of the ordinary Rule kept up.

2. The end may be as well attained in this, as in the ordinary course: None
(we hope) will say this is a less safe proceeding, in reference to the justness
of admission and rejection.

3. Many suppose, that as in the planting of the first Churches, all things
were managed by Ministers in common, till the churches were settled; so in the
reformation of corrupt churches, things cannot be carried on any other way,
till the churches be brought into some order.

4. This is no other then what the Assembly advise, in the Form of Church
Government, where in the want of an ordinary Elder-ship, they direct, that such
a congregation should be under the inspection of the associated
Neighbouring-Officers.

Many other things there are which we would have insisted on, but others having
writ so fully of them, we shall pass them over in silence. Many exceptions also
we foresee, some of ignorant and wilful men, which we conceive not worthy to be
taken notice of; others of learned men, which we apprehend not fit to trouble
the weak withal. We are not ignorant, that the distinction of Forum Ecclesiae
and Dei (which we make use of) is questioned by some; as Mr. Blake Cov. sealed
p. 141. But the sense in which we use it, lies not open to his exceptions. We
deny not but that Forum Ecclesiae is a Court of Gods constituting, and in that
regard, it is also Forum Dei; but we only use it to express that external right
which Professors have, by virtue of those directions which God has given for
the regulating of Church Affairs (whether this be a real, or only an
analogicall right we meddle not) as it stands in opposition to the internal and
gracious acceptance of God.

The usual exceptions about scandals not enumerated, need not trouble us. When
we assent to the Assemblies directions, about sins scandalous in one single
act, though we say that we look upon all the sins mentioned by them as such;
yet we say not that we look upon them only as such. So that when any thing of
that nature falls out, we are agreed to consult the Association about it.

Some may likewise think our using the Assemblies direction (in those
Principles of Religion set down by them) for trial of Knowledge, to be
superfluous, seeing we might have made use of our Confession for that end. But
we have not done this without weighty reasons (as seems to us) which for
brevitie sake we mention not. And seeing the worst that can be said against
this, is but to charge us with an unnecessary redundancy (which yet judicious
men will not do) we are the less careful to spend time about it.

As for the Confession it self, we have added it as an Exposition to the Creed;
and yet not out of any affectaion of Novelty or Singularity. They that know any
thing of the History of the Church, know that it has not been unusual to
compose and recommend several forms of Confessions of Faith; and that in such
cases those things were most insisted on, which were then most questioned and
opposed; wise men (we know) will not take exceptions against the thing it self.
It Is not a new Faith that we propound, but that which was of old delivered unto
the Saints; none (surely) but blind and perverse men will think to bring it
into contempt by calling it a new Creed. If the exceptions lie against our
persons, as unfit to compose or recommend such a thing; we have this to say,
That as we conceived such a thing necessary, (as the case of the Church now
stands) so were we most desirous to have used what others have done before us,
rather then by our example to encourage a rash, indeliberate, or perverse
undertaking of men in this kind, or whatsoever inconveniences might follow the
common practice hereof. Yet while some confessions (which others use) pleased
not all, as to method, and form, and the like: It was propounded that we should
set the Assemblies confession and Catechism before us, as our rule, that a
short confession should be drawn out of them, and as near as could be in their
very words. And this course accordingly was agreed on: So that we would not
have you to look upon it as ours, but the Assemblies, only epitomized by us.

Having put you in mind of these things, we shall now conclude with
Exhortation.
1. We beseech you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus, prosecute union and
concord: Let the peace of the Church lie very near your hearts. This is so much
in men's mouths, prayers and wishes, that it would seem not to stand need of
many Arguments to enforce it: And indeed it would not, if men's endeavors were
but answerable to their expressions; but the thing is so precious, and men
(notwithstanding their complemental pretenses) so really backward, that it
requires more then at present we can say.

1. Our Profession is a profession of Peace; Concord is a necessary ingredient
of Religion, both in respect of its preservation and propagation. The Scripture
telling us of the bond of peace, and calling love the bond of perfectness, does
more then hint how much Religion is beholding to it, both as to life and
growth. The Gospel indeed does occasion wars, and thrives by them, while her
professors are at peace among themselves: But if dissension among brethren
arise, ruin hastens on, a Kingdom divided cannot stand. So much of Religion is
wrapped up in it, that God styles himself by that name. And Christ looks upon it
as one of his honorable titles, [ King of Peace.] And that we may know how
much he delights to have us resemble him in this, he puts that name upon his
Gospel, and Children. It runs through all the veins of Religion, and is as
inseparable from it as holiness, the wisdom from above is peaceable, as well
as pure, Sam. 3. 17.

2 How many engagements has the Lord laid upon us for unity? Would he have
inculcated his exhortations to amity and peace so often, if it had been a
superfluous, unnecessary, indifferent accident of Religion? What book almost of
the New Testament is there that recommends it not? Read Romans 16. 17, 18. and
15. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 11. with many places more; Or would he have pressed
it so earnestly, if he would not have had us forward in it? Paul exhorts and
conjures the Philippians chap. 2. ver. 1. by all the engagements of love
betwixt Christ and them, and by all the bonds of affection, pity and duty
betwixt himself and them, to be (...) unanimous of the same soul; his words are
affectionate and pressing; If there be therefore any consolation in Christ; if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies,
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, etc. And in Ephesians. 4. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. He
urges it by seven strong motives: David in Psalm. 133. calls it not only good
in it self, but also pleasant in its fruits and exercise. Christ makes it the
great Character of his Disciples, and annexeth large and glorious promises to
it. And besides all these, our own confessions of the happiness and necessity
of concord (wrung from our own lips, by the smart of our divisions) and our
prayers for it, as a choice blessing, are strong obligations upon us for the
prosecution of it.

3. Why is the rod yet upon our backs? Is not this one main cause, that we know
not how to agree among our selves? doubtless our falling out by the way is
displeasing to the Lord: When the Lord was about to heal us we have fallen
together by the ears, and set up Altar against Altar; Church against Church:
The Lord has seen it, and has turned us back into the wilderness: Shall we
not learn yet to be friends, when the Lord has been forced to whip us for our
contention? Doubtless we cannot expect the healing of the Land till our minds
are more peaceable, and the noise of the Axe and Hammer cease; The house of God
will not be built, till the materials be fitted for a close and orderly
conjunction.

4. Is it seasonable now to contend when we are upon the very brink of ruin?
If we were not asleep, or if God had not besotted and benumbed us, in order to
destruction, (for quos perdere vult dementat) would we not be more sensible of
our danger then to trifle and contend when the ship is now almost overwhelmed
with the waves?

What greater advantage can we give to the common adversaries? who looks upon
our divisions as the hopefullest stratagem to further their design? How easy
is the conquest when we have weakened our selves? what will they have to do
more then to look on, and gather the spoil? Foreign invasions is usually a
means of cementing a Nation, under civil Contests: And why do not we see this
necessary upon the Churches account? Is it not enough for Moab and Ammon and
Mount Seir to be against us, but we must needs be one against another? True,
divine anger has stirred up the waves, and made the Sea boisterous, and now
(as Basil Epist. 5. makes the comparison) we are ready to be destroyed, not so
much from the violence of the storm, as our clashing one against another. Oh!
remember it is easy to break a divided church; but if once broken, who knows
whether ever it may be made up again. Basil in Epist. 203. compares the Church
to an old garment which is soon torn, but not so soon mended; he says not at
all, ((...)) and speaks of its recovery as hopeless.

See how our strifes gratify our adversaries! 1. While we are busy one
against another, we give them opportunity to undermine us; the dust we have
raised, gives encouragement to them that work unseen, and also afford tools to
work withal, and advantages to work upon. 2. The scoffs they cast upon us keep
off many, and so weakens us by withdrawing a party; which though it close not
with them directly, yet they serve as a Blind to cover their secret
contrivances against us. 3. We put an argument into their mouths against our
selves; they conclude against the truth of our Churches from our disagreement.
The Papists, as Bellarmine, and all of that way that speak of the notes of a
Church, as also Quakers make use of this to prove us no true Church. How
quarrels and divisions among Christians occasioned the persecutions of the
Heathen Emperors, and were made use of to justify their cruelty, is too
apparent.

5. We not only hazard all for the future; but at present we taste so much of
the bitter fruits, as may make us lay aside our contendings: Who sees not how
much the honor of Religion, the glory of the Christian name, and of Gods name
too, is wounded by it?

We have striven so long about smaller matters, that others begin to question
all, and with a daring hand to shake the main Pillars of Religion. And these
strivings about Government gave the first hint of taking up notions, and
encouragement to those errors to appear boldly with open face, which otherwise
would not have dared to have peeped out of their graves. And those that adhere
to the truth, are not a little prejudiced by it, as to piety and growth in
grace: If that heat and diligence which has been spent in the pursuance of
these questions, had been laid out for the improvement of godliness, Oh! what
glorious Christians should we have had! How wearisome and tedious are these
civil broils? What mistakes, revilings, and unseemly expressions have they
occasioned? How much has our communion with God been interrupted by them? and
how much of our sweetness and inward peace, while we were necessitated to
study, and dwell upon such unpleasing subjects? O ye sons of peace! why do ye
so forget your name, your Fathers name, the Gospels name? why are you so
pitiless to the distracted Church, your distressed Mother? Has custom so
naturalized you to contention, that you will rather venture the reputation of
Religion, weaken your own graces, abate your comforts, straighten the passages
of intercourse 'twixt God and your own souls, then be persuaded to be at
peace? Doubtless, if we hold long at this, we shall have cause to value peace
at a higher rate than many of our questionings, when perhaps we cannot so
easily obtain it.

But this is a thing which (by virtue of divine Authority) will claim a greater
interest in our endeavors then our bare wishes and prayers will amount unto;
In Romans 14. 19. we are bid ((...)) to prosecute it while it flies from us; not
barely to meet and accept it, when it comes to us; it is a sad contradiction
(nay a self-conviction and condemnation) to pray for it, and yet not to pursue
it.

True, all would have peace; but then they would have others to come up to
their terms, while they in the mean time refuse to descend to others; so that
the hinderance is from hence, not that peace is not desired, but not rightly
prosecuted. There are fit mediums and foundations for peace, which we are
engaged to look after as well as peace it self; in the forementioned place the
Apostle bids us follow not barely (...) but (...) things that concern it, and
may conduce thereunto; would but men consider that they are engaged to this,
and conscienciously obey the divine command herein, peace would not long be a
Stranger to us.

We know some that eagerly press peace, propound no other foundation for it
then union of affection, with a mutual toleration of differences: But alas,
this will not heal the wound, nay scarce skin it over, so long as no course is
taken to heal our differences (especially in those things wherein we entrench
upon one another interest) it will be found a task next to an impossiblity to
cement affections: We know when all is done, there will be a need of that
principle; but yet it must be condescension in the smaller things of
difference, that must do the work They that will not sacrifice their
Punctillo's for the Churches peace, do not value peace of the Church as they
ought. The great controversy 'twixt believing Jews and Gentiles was thus
composed by the Synod of the Apostles, Act. 15. The Gentiles were so far to
condescend, on their part, as to submit to the four Precepts of Noah: And the
Jews so far to condescend to the Gentiles, as not to press circumcision and
other ceremonies upon them. Neither do we see how peace can be settled in these
Churches upon other terms; Shall the Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren
stand at a distance still? then they mutually hinder one another work, and
betwixt them endanger the interest of the Gospel: Would you have either of them
to drive on their way to the overthrow of the other? that is unchristian,
unbrotherly, unmerciful: Is there hope of convincing each other, and so of one
party to come over to the other? that is not to be expected: Is there a
probability of union of affection while the difference stands as wide as
before? Experience teaches the contrary; alienation of affections is the only
issue of different judgment and practice. What other thing then can be thought
of, besides mutual condescension in less things? And if both parties would but
stand to what has been written on either side, and improve their mutual
concessions, the composure of the difference would in a great part be effected.
And as for the remaining differences, if they were put to this issue, How far
we ought to yield for peace? it would (through Gods blessing) be quickly
compleaed.

The greatest difficulty is from the distemper of men's heads and hearts; the
distance of principles is not half so great as the distance of affections. The
due respect that (for conscience sake) is to be had to the common lafety and
welfare of the Church, together with what is already yielded unto by the
several parties, will take away a great part of the difference; the
disagreement in several other principles (though it should continue) need not
hinder union in the practice of those very things about which the disagreement
is, and an agreemen thus far is the most hopeful course to satisfy one another
in other things; to debate things in such a calm way, gives more hope of divine
approbation and blessing, and less advantage to Satan of working upon the
humors and passions of men, which usually darken the judgment, even of those
that seek the truth, and hinders satisfaction. If a composing design prosper
not, we suspect the hinderance will chiefly arise from some of these evils.

1. Some are pleased with nothing which themselves propound not; many are so
desirous to be Leaders, and have such an immoderate ambition after an ego
primus inveni, that they think it a disgrace to be followers, though in a
necessary work. This thistle will grow sometime in good ground, and good men
have cause to watch against it: the disagreement of Luther from Oecolampadius
in the business of pulling down of Images, is said to have sprung from this
root.

2. Ignorance (we fear) will prove as great an enemy to peace, as any thing
else: Many understand only the practike part of their own way, not fully
knowing the extent, limits, necessity, and indifferency of their several
principles: these even out of a zeal to truth, will stand off, as not knowing
how far they may safely yield.

3. Many are engaged, and they will find it a hard task to deny themselves in
point of honor and credit, which they will think must be lost if they alter
their course; this will stick in the heart many a time, when the mouth will be
ready to proclaim it to be the highest honor for any man to be conquered by
truth and peace.

4. Many Ministers (and yet they must be leading-men, if such a thing as this
go on) are so over-driven by their friends and members of their congregations,
that they dare do little for fear of displeasing them; an unworthy spirit in a
Minister of the Gospel.

5. Some are so imbittered and exasperated, that their blood is not easily
cooled, to condescend to those whom but now they opposed.

6. Some delight in quarrels, and are only whetted up to embrace a way, or to
continue in it because of opposition; their zeal is not so much from love or
conviction of the truth, as from an angry desire to contradict; like soldiers
of fortune, who, because they live by the wars, are unwilling to hear of peace.

7. Some want public spirits; others want public Principles; the former care
not, so much as they should, what becomes of other Churches, so long as they
have the ball at their own foot, and things go with them as they would have it.
The latter are so straightened and pinioned in themselves, that, if they would,
they cannot be very serviceable, these having but some one thing in their eye,
(as suppose purity or peace) prosecute that to the ruin and neglect of other
things necessary.

8. Some have drunk in such strong prejudices against their brethren, that
fancying the difference to be greater then it is, and supposing a closure
either unlawful, or scarce possible, they are the more backward to hearken to
any thing tending to a composure.

9. Some place too much of their religion in standing off from others, as if
the excellency and height of christianity lay in a rigid separation from those
Professors which are of a lower size; and therefore will be more hardly drawn
to remit any thing of their supposed necessary strictness, rather desiring to
please themselves, then to bear the infirmities of the weak, suspecting even
necessary provisions for the admission of such as favoring too much of
looseness, and that which may bring upon them a participation of other men's
sins.

10. Some (it may be) think, an utter refusal of peace with the Presbyterians
is but a just requital of that rigor and harshness which they used to others
when they had the chair.

We do not justify the failings and irregularities of any; all parties (we
think) have too much cause to acknowledge themselves guilty before the Lord,
and to be humbled; but if any make this a ground of distance, let him call to
mind that, in so doing, he becomes guilty of that which he condemns in them:
Nay, let him know, that whatever were the miscarriages of some particular men
at that time; yet the Assembly were even then no less desirous of concord with
the dissenting Brethren, then others are at this present: They that will read
the papers of Accommodation annexed to the Reasons of the dissenting Brethren,
may sufficiently satisfy themselves in this.

So powerful and so frequent are these distempers in many of all parties (we
intend them not as an accusation of any particular man) that except the Lord
command these proud waves to be still, and take down the loftiness of all our
hearts (which is the root whence all these evils spring) we cannot hope for any
great success in this design of concord, notwithstanding that our several
principles make so fair a way for it. If it would please the Lord to do this
for us, and withal to stir up a Constantine or a Theodosius, that might
rigorously press on this work, by countenancing it where it is endeavored, by
calling the Godly Ministry of the land to consultation, by charging them to
agree, and holding them to it, we should quickly see the face of things
altered; Ephraim would not any more envy Judah, and Judah would not vex Ephraim.

2. We exhort you to submit to the Discipline and Government of Christ: Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for
your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13. 17. The great
quarrel that carnal hearts have against Christ, is about the Laws and Scepter
of his Kingdom: this is that that renders him so unlovely to them. To such men
we shall propound four things, which we desire they should seriously weigh.

1. The Government and Discipline is not ours, but Christ's: True indeed, he
has appointed his Officers to manage it, and for that end has made them
Rulers over you, but yet they are over you in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 13. and as
those that must give an account for you, and therefore charges you to obey and
submit to such; not only to obey their Doctrine, but also to submit to their
reproof and censures, Heb. 13. 17. And because the consideration of their
inspection may be a means to prevent sins in you, therefore he commands you to
remember them which have the rule over you, v. 7. And in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
Know them which labor among you; that is, acknowledge (for (...) non est
simpliciter cognoscere sed agnoscere. Zanch.) them as Rulers appointed over you
by God, obeying and reverencing them accordingly; and that not only in their
teaching when they labor among you, but also in their Ruling-work when they
admonish you. And though the effect of this might be sometime displeasing to
you, yet notwithstanding he charge you to esteem them very highly in love,
((...)) very abundantly, more then exceedingly for their work sake. Oh! then
take heed of that rebellious voice, which cost Korah and his company so deer,
Numb. 16. 3. Ye take too much upon you; wherefore lift you up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord?

2. If ye refuse and rebel, you do not so much despise us as Christ, who has
employed us; the cause is not ours, but his; and the contempt is principally
against the king of peace: he fully tells you all this, Luk 10. 16 that hears
you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises
me, despises him that sent me. Say not in your hearts as those wicked ones,
We will not have this man to rule over us.

3. Consider the issue; will ye think to gain any thing by rejecting his
Government? Do you not remember that he has an Iron Rod, as well as a Scepter
of Mercy? If ye refuse the yokes of wood, can he not put an iron yoke upon your
neck? think not to bear out in a bravado against God, though like the wild Ass
in the wilderness, you should snuff up the wind, and traverse on your way, or
bend your brow against him; yet, will the Almighty be afraid of your frown? Or
will he make supplications to you? Oh vain man! bethink thy self how thou will
answer thy contempt if thou do continue.

4. There is nothing in the Government of Christ, that should make a rational
man refuse it, (we speak of Government and discipline in the main, and not of
the controverted points of it) That there must be rulers and ruled in the
Church, is not questioned; and that the ruled must submit to the direction,
admonition and reproof of their rulers; and that in some cases sinners must be
sharply dealt withal by public rebuke, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and sometimes by
excommunication, Matt. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 13. All these are evident. Now
though these thwart the carnal interests of men, and are no ways pleasing to
flesh and blood, yet seeing all is for edification, and not destruction, 2 Cor.
10. 8. and 13. 10. for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. What man is there, that
prefers heaven before hell, or the safety of his soul before bodily ease and
credit, that will turn his back upon these necessary, though sharp Medicines?
How then can you profess Christ, and yet refuse to submit to the righteous
Scepter of his Kingdom?

3. Beware, lest you also being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall
from your own stedfastness; be not children tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. It Is the glory of a Christian to be steady and unmovable,
holding fast the faith once delivered to the Saints. We would not be
over-tedious, and therefore shall set before you but some of those many
Considerations which might here be urged.

1. God does permit these swarms of Errors for the trial of his people, and the
discovery of Hypocrites and rotten Professors. Paul (in 1 Cor. 11. 19.) tells
us, Heresies must be, (they are not only possible but necessary) that they
which are approved might-be made manifest; and that they that went out from us
might be made manifest that they were not all of us, 1 John 2. 19.

2. Do you not see it frequently, that they who make shipwreck of faith, make
also shipwreck of a good conscience? Do not erroneous principles in wicked and
licencious practices? It is too visible in the carriage of many already, and of
others, you may easily guess what will follow, when they are more hardened in
error. And dare you take that for truth which has a natural tendencie to
looseness and liberty? How far these principles of following the Light within,
and of absolute perfection, (which will at last bring in either a denial of
Fornication and Lying, etc. to be sins, or to be theirs that act them) and
several others are directly improveable this way, we need not tell you.

3. Have you not observed how fickle and uncertain error is? when once men are
turned off from the truth, they readily fall into a dislike of the errors,
which at first they doted on, (after they are stale) for the entertainment of a
new Error, when grown into fashion; and so from one Error to another, till they
arrive at Atheism, if God in pity stop them not; like a stone, when once set a
going down the hill, it rowles still till it come to the bottom.

4. Consider the dreadful threatening of the Lord against those that received
the truth, but not in the love of it: Read and study well that text of 2 Thessalonians.
2. 11. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness. And forget not the danger of Apostacy: see
Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 26. It Is a sad sentence, (though we should take the
most favorable construction that is given of it) to say, There remains no more
sacrifice for sins, and that it is impossible to renew them again by repentance.

5. The hand of God is so visibly against them, that they that will not see it,
are inexcusably blind. What God has done in Germany, and of late in
New England, ought not to be slightly passed over. And how heavy spiritual
Judgments are upon Apostates, several of our own Counties are sad and
sufficient Examples: when God suffers Error to draw men beyond the bounds of
Reason, Modesty and natural conscience; when that which they seemed to have is
taken away; their gifts withered, and their former seeming religious
observation of duty quite dried up by the roots: surely his mind is, that we
should take warning by their dreadful fall.

As for the quakers, one would think their actions and principles would make a
man that had any of common reason left, to abominate and abhor them: Sure we
are, the prevalency of that madness, is not from any strength of rational, or
scriptural satisfaction, (we have seen many strongly and passionately possessed
with that, who yet neither understood it, nor could give a reason for it) but
from an (...) the efficacy and strength of delusion, through divine judgment
upon them: Shall we need to put you in mind of that which your selves know so
well, and are eye and ear-witnesses of, as well as we? How visible is the
devils (...) in the beastly nakedness of men and women in our Assemblies? in
what a strange unchristian temper of railing, reviling, (...), and lying do
they appear in public, insomuch that a scold with a Stento^^an voice, is the
fittest Antagonist to undertake a dispute with them. What gross principles do
they maintain? as of setting up their Conceits and Experiences, as being of
equal authority with the Scriptures; and that the Scripture binds not them, if
not let on their hearts by a present impulse: Their denying interpretations of
Scr^pture, under the name of Meanings and Additions: Their following the Light
within: Their pleading for a necessity of being saved, as Adam should have
been, by an absolute perfection: Their grievous conceits concerning Christ, to
the subverting of the Doctrine or his Nature, offices and satisfaction: Their
neglect and denial of the observation of the Lords Day and Ordinances, as
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, etc. We might tell you of their ridiculous
interpretations of Scripture, (interpretation of Scripture is a fault in other
men, but none in them) of their placing their religion in trivial things, as
Thou-ing, and keeping on the har, when yet the weightier matters of communion
with God, are neglected. As also we might reckon up their self-contradictions,
their ignorant and sottish conceits about the unlawfulness of using words which
the Scripture uses not, (as Trinity, Sacrament, etc.) or habits which the
Scripture speaks not of, when yet they cannot excuse themselves from what they
condemn in others; neither is it to be forgotten, that when they have stuffed a
paper as full of lying and nonsense as it can hold, (and we have many of them
in our hands) they blush not to father all upon the spirit of God. Consider we
pray you the case of those that have been entangled, and yet are plucked out as
a brand out of the fire. Consider the relation of John Gilping well, (you see
what pitiful shifts they are put to, when they would seem to say something in
answer to it) Observe what a favorable aspect all their opinions have to
Popery, and how visibly those poor creatures are acted by the Jesuits, as by
relation of the man of Bristol, and others, it appears. What progress in grace,
and true religious walking can you observe in them since their Apostafie? Where
is now their constant Family and private prayers? Where is that conscientious
fear (which sometime they seemed to have) of speaking evil of what they know
not? Lastly, Does not all that they say against us (under the reviling terms of
Baals Priests, or Priests of the world) strike also against all those Martyrs,
which in Queen Mary's time, and before, have laid down their lives for the
Testimony of Jesus? Oh! then beware, if you love your own souls; what is there
here that can be called Christian? We could tell you of some Christians in
Cumberland, that have thought it their duty to humble themselves solemnly
before God for their inclinations this way (when the error first appeared, and
was not then well known) and also to return thanks to God for preserving them
from the infection; and the reasons of their dislike of the quakers (given in
writing) were most of these that we have hinted to you. It Is good to learn the
danger of the snare from other men's dear-bought experience. Mark therefore them
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them: For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus, but
their own belly, Romans 16. 17. We shall conclude this with that of 1 Timothy 6. 3,
4, 5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, etc. From such withdraw thy self.

4. Lastly, walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called, and let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ; ye cannot be happy
without holiness; except you be redeemed from your vain conversation, and have
crucified the old man with his deeds, the flesh with the lusts thereof, and be
renewed in the spirit of your mind, ye shall perish, and shall not enter into his
rest.

Ye are sure that you can never be too holy, or that you can never do too much
for God. Gird up therefore the Ioyns of your mind, and run the race that is
set before you: Be not afraid of being too precise, or of being reviled and
hated for a Puritan: Take courage; you are unworthy of such a Prince of
Righteousness, if ye dare not own him; how will you deny your selves, and take
up his Cross, and follow him (and upon other terms you cannot be his disciples)
if a word or a frown of man do discourage you? Be not ashamed of Christ and his
ways, even in their strictness, lest he be ashamed of you in his kingdom, Mar.
8. 38 therefore walk circumspectly; avoid the appearances and occasions of evil.
Sanctify the Sabbath conscientiously: Set up prayer and instruction in your
Families: Deal uprightly with all men. Set a watch over your lips. Take heed of
giving offenses. Let your zeal and moderation be known to all. Forget not to do
good, and to distribute. Do not satisfy your selves with a form of godliness,
but labor after the power of it. Endeavor to grow in grace, and knowledge.
Edify one another; Warn the unruly; Comfort the feeble-minded; Support the
weak; Consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works. Keep up
Christian communion and society: Let those that fear the Lord speak often one
to another, Mal. 3. 16. but yet manage it wisely; let other men's miscarriages
in this kind be a warning to you. Keep within your sphere; Take heed of pride,
and contempt of the weaker sort. Lose not the end of Christian Society, by
doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes Envy, Strife,
Railing, Evil Surmises, Perverse Disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5. Let your discourses be sober, tending
to the promoting of grace, duty and assurance. These Counties of Cumberland and
Westmerland have been hitherto as a Proverb and a byword in respect of
ignorance and profaneness; Men were ready to say of them as the Jews of
Nazareth, Can any good thing come out of them? Let us now labor to become a
blessing and a praise, that people may say concerning us, Behold in the
Wilderness waters have broken out, and streams in the Desert; the parched
ground is become a pole, and the thirsty land springs of water; it does rejoice
and blossom as the rose. Therefore beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

