THE Lords Prayer UNCLASPED: WITH A Vindication of it, against All
Schismatics. Heretics, called Enthusiasts. Fratra cilli.



By James Harwood, B. D.

Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.

Mat. 26.44. And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time,
saying the Same words.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by G. and H. Eversden at
the Grayhound in Pauls-Church-yard, 1654.

To the Worshipful Citizens and Inhabitants in Paternoster Row.
THrice noble and much honored Citizens, Give me leave to present to you that
prayer which Christ presented to all Christians. The more enemies it has
found, in the Name of Christ Jesus, the more I beg of you to countenance it,
and befriend it. Though some in these sad times have underprized our high
calling, yet none must doubt to call this our Lords Prayer: Religion is at a
low ebb, when Gods Ministers and Christ's own Prayer is little or naught set
by. Justly have we been punished, and righteous O Lord art thou in all thy
works: yet what ever we suffer, I beseech you in the name of God and Christ, to
be the Patron of this Prayer; which among some called Christians has found as
many scorners as Christ its maker among the Jews: mockers, when you speak to
God, ere you end, be pleased, thus to pray, Mat. 6. and this to say, Luke 11.
The one Evangelist registring the Rule to pray by, that other recording the
subject matter of our prayers: and both intimating thus much to all ages, if we
lay by this prayer, we lose the rule to pray by: if we say not this prayer, we
miss much, if not most our Christ commanded us to pray for.

I will not trouble your religious ears with those horrid profane speechos
uttered, and in public against this pious prayer.

It Is no wonder to me Christ's own prayer has so many enemies, where the Devils
Doctrine has so many fast friends. But this is condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness better than light, falsehood than
truth, and a fantastic Enthusiasme, more than Christ's own Orizon.

I desire rather to pity than to reproach the brainsick Humourists of our
times, whose disloyal censures, like disloyal subjects, have scandalized
their supreme Sovereign, the King of Salem, the Son of God. The cause, because
he prescribed this set form of prayer: and hence it is pretended, the spirit is
stinted, for that the matter and form prescribed.

But have you not heard how he who had a larger portion of the Spirit than all
living, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God the Father, in the
Garden of Gethsemane, prayed three times, and every time used the self same
words -- Let his precept there, Luke 11.2.
his practice Mat. 26.41.
there, encourage your worshipful society to patronize this book of Prayer:
nay, the very name of your Abide shall make me more confide; as God has placed
you in such an Eden, who knows but it is to protect this Prayer which came out
of the Paradise, the Breast of our Messiah? your earthly Lot is fallen to you in
a fair soil, while the plat of ground you inhabit is P. N. R. as in that Row
you have a corporal residence, so you shall not want a true Beadsman to be
earnest with God at your end, you may live for ever in his Bosom from whence
came this prayer, a prayer I beseech you, often to iterate, for a speedy post,
which will convey and in a trice all your supplicats to your great Master, God
Almighty. A rare preparation, which fits you for your passage from Egypt unto
Canaan. In a word, this prayer is that salt which seasons all your
undertakings. Nor do I attribute this virtue to the bare outward saying your
Pater noster, but as being joined with the hearts sincerity; nor would I the
outward form totidem verbis to be neglected: for know it, as thou may be an
hypocrite, and do God all bodily service, so thou can never be a good
Christian, and deny to do it. I would you therefore exercise this set form of
prayer, to show you are no Enthusiasts; to join also with your voice the
spirit of understanding, to show you are good Christians. That command Luke 11
of Christ, shall be your warrant, to go down to this his forge to sharpen your
blunted goads and mattocks.

I speak not this as a despiser of them, have the gift of making a prayer: that
I say is to comfort such as have a mean portion of the gift of prayer. It Is may
purpose then not to pick a quarrel, but prevent a duel, and tell you what is
justifiable, a set form, not to implead to pray as the spirit moves, so be
joined with it the spirit of understanding.

To conclude, our Christ his precept has made this Prayer legitimate, and when
we pray, let us understand what is that we pray, and this shall stop the mouths
of all oppugners. I will add a widows mite to this work, by recommending once
more this prayers, unfolding to your protection; which if not, for love to me,
who owns naught, to merit at you hands; yet for the honor of Christ, I doubt
not but you will accept of the tendered service of

Your Wel-wisher, J. H.

The Epistle to the Vulgar.
MY two years Catechismes I have put in print for you to peruse, and that which
was delivered more at large, is now thus Short.
concise: here you may spy much matter in few words; and if any word you
understand not, I have made this star * to direct you to the marginall note, to
give you light and let you see my plain meaning. As I was loath to unfold this
sacred subject in a Base.
sordid style, so to help your conceptions, I have not disdained to english
English words, and let you know by the Margent, the meaning of that, which
otherwise might have passed your understanding: I know it for the truth of God,
better are five words in a known tongue, than five thousand in an unknown. It
is this that has made me stoop in explaining, down to the meanest of your
capacities; yet if you understand not, what comes first to hand, mark what
follows, for commonly my following words explain my former. I desire to be
counted foolish, to make you wise in Christ Jesus. If ought here offered,
outstrip your relish, blame not altogether me, but in part your apprehensive
wit for the world, and dullness to conceive the things of God. God of his
goodness make you all wise unto salvation.

To the more Ingenuous Reader.
READER,
IT is the fashion of quick and nimble wits to value naught, if not
accommodated with some rarities, though I have made the margent not for you who
are all eyes, yet the matter of an attractive power to draw nigh your ears: be
pleased to peruse this little Book, and either all or none; it may be you may
find a somewhat you never met with. I dare not promise much, it is
presumption; nor underprize my pains, since some say it is a sly vainglory,
and a begging by refusing.

I much desire you would not discourage these my first endeavors, and if you
chance to spy a blemish in Venus her face, not to eye it more than all her
beauty, which if you do, you have got a bargain, but lost a chapman: every one
can say, it is an easier thing to find fault with than to mend. And he that
will mend what here is amiss has leave to find fault with what he list. I
speak not this to make a variance, but salve a difference; assuring my self he
is not a Scholar, that will carp. I have put my self to the worlds wide
venture, and aim at my Scholars.
Coat to defend my cause. Humorous heads who have more words than wit, and
censures than solidity, they can gain naught at my hands by their opprobries;
these have a good word for none, not then for me. It is the ingenuous
auspicious Reader I rely on for his favor, whose favorable report shall make
my printed paper his debtor, and my self his devoted.

To the Author of the Prayer.
THE Author of the Book in all humility begs leave to dedicate these few
ensuing lines to the Author of this Prayer, Christ Jesus, God blessed for ever,
Amen.

O my God and my King, the holy Penman of this most holy prayer; thou art one
who wast, who art, and to be forever, God, and yet man, man and yet God. In
thee the Godhead is hominified, in thee the manhood is deified; thou art an
immense Majesty, present with us in earth, and at the same time Lord President
in Heaven. Thou art one in person, yet have two natures; one of the three
Persons, yet all the three but one in substance; begot before all Time, born in
the dispensation of Time; not to increase thy honor, but to set us from
thrall, Thou taughtest Exemplo. Thou taughtest Praecepto. Voce, By learning us.
Prece, By praying for us.


Thou prayedst to thy Father for us: Thou preachedst to us how we should pray
to thy Father, not as we will, but as thou have wil'd; thou teach us what to
say, and we are bound to say thy prayer; Thou have taught us how to pray, so
ties us not at all times to the same words. O thou wisdom of the Father, let
me learn wisdom from thy lips; Who to furnish the meanest of In Understanding.
men, prescribes them a Plat-forme, who so sets down a platform, as licenses
the more gifted to exercise their gift of prayer.

Thy prayer, O Christ, is not given to stint the spirit, thy prayer is lent to
support it. Blessed be thou my God and my Christ, who have not only purchased
for us to be called Gods Sons, but taught us to say, Our Farther --

Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I give over thy prayer, I
honor its Author, I reverence its matter, I admire its method; it was made by
Christ God, made by Christ for man, useful for all men; never could so much be
contained in so narrow a room, but that of Gods making, the Sons penning, the
Holy Ghost his inspiring. Let the Enthusiasts slight it, the fratra cilli lay
it by, as men conceiving they are come to an acme of perfection, yet such as
fail I find in the best of my expressions, that let them be the protasis, this
shall be the apodosis; and if with my own I begin, with our Lords Prayers.
I desire to make an end; the Lords Prayer is the summary of all things
necessary, and when I have prayed for all I can, in this as in a glass, my
Christ lets me see the face of all my desires: while I am expounding this
sacred Prayer, Lord let thy sacred Spirit descend down upon me, so shall thy
Name be honored, and I enabled to discharge this great work I have in hand. O
thou who made this prayer, make me understand its meaning; and while I am in
hand with this work, blow the spark of my meditations into a flame, let my
paraphrase be set Carbo and lampas, a light shinning, and lamp burning; by this
light, guide babes in knowledge on to a set form of prayer, by it confute all
Heretics who deny a set form of prayer. O my Christ I will shut up my too much
boldness of speech to thee with admiration of thee, who art all in all unto us
all; bread to feed us, wine to cherish us, the white robe to cover us; thou
have slain our sins by thy passion, quickened us to a life of grace by thy
Resurrection, provided a mansion for us by thy Ascension: we may enter in, for
thou art the door; no danger by the way, for our Christ is the way; we can have
no better assurance then from him is the truth; nor let us fear the sting of
death, for we are servants to the Lord of life, to him who is the way, the
truth, and the life. O my Savior, I bless God for thee, I glory in thee, I
cast my self upon thee, upon the bended knee of my body I beg thy blessing,
praying in thy own words saying thy own Prayer:

Our Father which art, etc.

The Author of the Book his Speech to the Prayer.
O All heavenly Prayer, the very language of the Lord Jesus, the Christian A
good Word till abused.
Directory, The Rubricks Epitomy, short in words, copious in matter, which
gives God his Due, begs all needful for us all: all thy precious petitions, it
is my every days prayer, may be writ with the pen of a Diamond in my heart. O
Divine Prayer, I am purposed to give thee every morning the visit, every night
to hold conference with thee; the first to salute, the last to take my leave
of. Thou have taught me to bless God, my here welfare, my hereafter
happiness; what to seek, a Kingdom; how to ensure it, by doing what thou will, as thou will. O most holy prayer, which suites God for us all, and for
all needful, which teaches us how to unravell our debts and discharge them, to
prevent sin by praying against sin; yea prays in the midst of our temptations
for safe deliverance. Thou art magnum in parvo, yet say little; yet when we
have said all we can, we can say no more. I admire thy brevity, short yet
sweet, few words, yet full as the Patriarchs sacks: understood we at length
what thou comprehendest in short, we would every day lengthen our esteem of
thee, lessen our opinion of our own barren expressions. But I am sorry thou art
so slighted by those who think themselves nonesuch, and for my part I would be
very sorry to be such as they are -- O most sacred Prayer, whither will thou
go, the Enthusiast his hasty conceptions will be thy death; the Sectarian
Minister, for fear of popular displeasure, is feared to acknowledge thee in the
Pulpit, yet thou have one fast friend, the orthodox conformist, who has bid
thee welcome home to his house, and shames not to walk with thee to Church. He
prays in thy Dialect; and when he uses other words, Saying the, thou
epitomizest all he had said before.

The orthodox Conformist is thy fast friend; the unstable Schismatic a friend
in summer; the old Heretic at all times at odds with thee. But let who will
despise thee, I will honor thee, I will honor thy Author, I will give due
honor to thy divine matter; thou art part of Gods Word composed by Christ who
is the Word: and every of thy words are of weight. This considered, who can
deny it, but our Lords Prayer has had hard measure? God forgive them, who for
popular ends have laid thee by; God open their eyes, who prefer their own
before our Lords Prayer: God give us Conformists grace so to say our Lords
Prayer, that we may have all, in it, granted; even for his sake grant it good
Lord, who made it, who taught it, who left it for us to learn; it is our
Savior has commanded us to say it; it is a Christians duty to do it; he is
an Atheist that does deny it: I will use it for my pattern to pray by, for a
platform, and say it, not as tied by it from all other prayers, not at all
times lay it by, but sometimes I will borrow all its words, sometimes pray to
the same sense; now making it my rule, anon all the petitions of my prayer. And
thus O sacred prayer, I will assoile my soul from all superstitious conceits
of thee, as also from the least disrespect of thee: and while I use my own
words, I will bind me to thy method; and when I take not that large, I will
quit my spirit within the circumference of thy Petitions. Thus in honor of him
who made thee, I take my leave mannerly of thee, wishing the next Age may not
pretend Gods Spirit, and despise our Lords Prayer, lest their contemning
Christ's Ordinance, denounce all such to be Heretics --.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Lords Prayer.
THere are four species or kinds of pouring out our minds to God Almighty, and
they are all involved in one verse in the holy Bible, in that place where the
Apostle said, Let there be made supplications, 1 Timothy 2.1.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for all men. And now mark what is
meant by each, and which is meant in this place.

1. Supplication is a prayer framed to God, for forgiveness of sin, or its
prevention.

2. Prayer, is a pouring out our mind to God, framed, to testify our seeking
God with an holy and an humble heart.

3. Intercession, is a suiting God for others; as Wife, Children, our K. or
Country.

4. Thanksgiving, is a pouring out our spirit to God, framed, to testify our
thankfulness to God for benefits received.

And what now I pray you is prayer, largo sensu, but either a thanking God for
some good turn, a begging of God to be good to other, an humbling our selves
in Gods presence with fear and reverence: or else a desiring God to forgive us
all our sins?

But to what does, what has been said, tend? To certify us, that the Lords
Prayer is for species or kind; a supplication for begging forgiveness of
sins: A prayer, (...), implying none ought to say it, sed humili voce, in all
humility: A request or intercession, for we here pray for others as our selves,
to God for God, to God for man, only while we say this prayer, we give no
thanks; and I think it is to put us in mind, how many, I had almost said, the
most of our suppliants are cousen-germans to the nine Lepers thanklesse persons.

Be pleased kind reader to lend a look, and behold

The Name of this Prayers. The Substance of this Prayers.
Its Name, is Dominica oration, the Lords Prayer; for it is called the Lords
Prayer. This sacred title, Lord, I find, predicates of two, de die, de
oratione: we have a day called the Lords Day, and a prayer called the Lords
Prayer. Implicitly, it implies, that that day is a day of prayer, and this
prayer appropriates that day, it is said, to the Lord.

But come, Why is this prayer called our Lords Prayer?

For that made by our Lord, our

For that directed to the Lord, our

Two passages have made open proclamation, how this is a most excellent prayer.





1. The compiler of this prayer was our Savior, Two Extracts.
which dignifies it, and desires me to mind every word in it.

2. This prayer is put up, and it is to God the Father, the supreme head over
all the Angels in Heaven, men on earth, devils in hell: here is another call
upon, to move our vulgar to learn the meaning of every parcel of this prayer.

O my God and my Christ, The Avowry.
since ye are both interessed in this prayer, when I say it, it shall make me
mind every word that is in it.

As this prayers Name procured two to proclaim the excellency of it, no less
does its substance: the two, the substance, or subject matter of this prayer,
have sent out to sound abroad the unparalled excellency of it, Are its
Brevity. Are its Fecundity.


For the first it is proverbiall, short and sweet, as if short things were sweet
things; here is a short prayer, I know none sweeter.

But it is demanded, Why think you this prayer more excellent for its brevity?

I will give you six Reasons why I think so.

1. The shorter, the sooner learnt; long lessons are long a taking out. 2. The
shorter, the better may it be remembered: what can you say perfecter then your
Pater noster? 3. Ofter may it be said over: the knights of Malta say it over an
hundred and odd times a day. 4. Here Is no relish of tediousness, it begins
and ends in a trice. 5 It may soon be understood, if will be at home, in a
week. 6. It Is an assurance to me, God quickly can hear.
A prayer whose concisenesse does demonstrate, that our God stands in no need
to be cried on from morning until noon; as was Baal, 1 King. 18.26.

Behold as an exceeding short, so a most fecund or fruitful prayer; and at
large, it highly extolls its excellency, while here is neither God nor man
forgot.

Secondly, There is neither good we want, nor evil that we would be freed
from, but here we pray sor't; for God to give us the one, remove far from us
the other: Vnico verbo, in one word, here is involved, what good every man
stands in need of: again, all the evil of all men, with a boon to be delivered
from it.

Since thus much is comprised in this little, The Avowry.
this little prayer has prevailed with me to prize it above all the prayers of
all us mortals.

Our discourse has gained us this knowledge, that this is a most excellent
prayer.

But objected,

Yes, Res.
for this read Mat. 24.20. Orate ne fuga vestra, pray that your flight be not
in the winter.

But we be wiser then Christ, he said, When ye pray, say, Our Father.

By those words, When ye pray, say Our Father, perchance our Christ gave us a
hint, that in conclusion all Christians shoud close alike, making this prayer
the Last.
period, not the First.
praeword; the (...), not the (...), as if our own words we had showed a
weakness, by his should be made amends.

O my God, The Avowry.
while I speak to thee in my own language, I will not pretermit to conclude as
thou have taught to say, Our Father which art in Heaven.

The substance or subject matter of this prayer consists of Two parts: The
Preface. That Placed after.
post-put.


1. The Preface is wrapped up in the six first words before the prayer, which are
these; Our Father which art in Heaven.

2. That placed after. Are, 1. Petitions six. 2. The Reasons three. 3. The
Conclusion; one only word, Amen.


The preface, is that I first mean to intermeddle with, of which I will speak
Conjunctim, in whole. speak Divisim, by parts.


And first in whole, before our prayers we stand in need of such a preface.





1. For the first, we should not have has Zebedees wife so impudent, if before
her prayer she had placed such a preface, she would have been lowlier minded,
if she had minded that the highest heaven had been Gods habitation.

Man, it is the nature of him, and he learnt it of a woman, to be too saucy in
his suit, and more to aim at his own honor, than Gods glory.

Again, the Gadarens for the loss of their Hogs, could not have been so
clownishly uncivil, but have used better words to our Jesus, had they praeput
such a preface as this.

The ignorance of what God is, makes mean man unmannerly, and petition Gods
departure, rather then his presence.

2. The second reason, this preface had need be said, for that, in this time we
have time to recollect our whole soul, and mind, and spirit to pray. O
consideration does well what we are to do, ere we do it. An hasty zeal brings
forth an untimely birth, in which there is often more have then good speed.

An inferior, when he speaks to his better, he sets before a, May it please
you, If it please your worship; A protospeech, as to win audience, so to get
breath, and briefly, a short time, wherein men gain a brief, or recollect of
their longer intended after discourse.

Thus have we cause to count of this preface, as a time in which to make a
Collect of all to be said.

In this Idea, I have much presented, and whilst I cast a glance on this
prospective glass, I see to the utmost end of my suit, by a divine kind of
contemplation. It were well we would weigh in the balance of our
considerations, these passages recommended in this preface, which as I have
spoken of in whole; by parts now give me leave to prosecute.

O my God, I am ever resolved, The Avowry.
so thou will assoil me presumption, to pry yet more and more into this ark of
thy Covenant.

This preface shows unto us,


1. What God is, our Father.

2. Where he is, in Heaven.

He that is our God, is our Father, and this our Father he is in Heaven: all I
have said, is witnessed, while said, Our Father which art in Heaven.

Here our God is described, Relative Relatively. Possessive Possessively.


The relation we have to him, is as nigh as the child is to the father. And to
show what kind of father, next follows the possessive, our, a pronoune which
protests God is not a step-father, but our own Father, Our Father; his name is
Father, not named Lord, not my Lord Judge: Here is a term which sents neither
of Lordly overlooking, nor of Judge-like sentencing; He is neither troubled
with the port of pride, and disdains to cast his Eye upon us; nor yet is
clothed in Pontius Pilats apparel to pass sentence against us; nor assumes he
yet this name, Father, to make us only credulous; he has washed his hands, and
will not be guilty of our blood: it imports, as a father loves his child, so
God us, which God grant.

We will go take notice what this Expression puts us in hopes of. Expression
binds us to do.


For the first word Father puts us in mind of 4 things; 1. Of the love of God.
2. His commiserating compassion. 3. His fear that we fall. 4. His best help
when we need.


First, For Gods love to man, I may Lazarus, Lord how thou lovedst him! David
admires, Psalm. 8. Jonathans falls far short of it, though his love did surpass
the love of women, 2 Samuel 1.26.

But come, Can a woman forget her own child? The Quaere implies a
possibility, but a rarity; yet it is aver'd, the Lord will never leave us nor
forsake us. And thus the natural love of the mother, the faithful love of
friends, the love of God to us surpasses; it parallels it self with Christ's to
Lazarus, who showed then his love unto him, when he unable to do him a
pleasure, when he dead and in grave, when he stunk in the grave.

O Lord how unutterable is thy love toward all us thy sons and daughters!

Father, puts us in hopes of Gods commiserating compassion. O he pities our
distressed estate, that the patrimony he gave us prodigals, is spent; that we
who are his, are forced to feed on husks and akorns; that fallen amongst thieves,
and what is left is taken from us: O how his bowels yern within his belly, to
see us so poor and needy and naked, not like that we were! it grieves him to
see us so ill like; but most, that we in misery, and yet the fondlings make no
matter of it.

1. Apparent by his injunction served upon the Angels to pitch their tents
about us, Psalm. 34.7. 2. By his passing by our elder Angels.
brethren, who had fallen, but we having fallen, he sent his own Son to help us up
again.


O God the greater has been our misery, the more cause we have to admire thy
mercy.

Fourthly, God is called our Father,

The truth is, our help stands in the Lord our God, who made both heaven and
earth, and blessed be his name world without end.

Secondly, God is our Father, and

It Is inquired what is that 1. Ask him blessing. 2. Do him reverence.


1. The title, Father, advises us to crave Gods blessing: O, says Esau to
Isaae, father bless me, even me also. He will not leave him till he bless
him, Esau his earnest suit shall teach me to make an high estimate of Gods
blessing, yea, to esteem of Gods blessing better than Jasons golden Fleece, He
speaks it in respect of his high esteem he has of Gods blessing above all else
he wants.
or yet the great Chams, Tree full of Pearls hanging by clusters.

I stand in need of much, yet give me this, and believe me, I have got more
than all else I want. Our little ones desire twice a day our blessing, gentle
monitors which in a still voice solicit us, to crave Gods blessing. God is our
Father, we our childrens, we look they should ask us blessing: as much God
expects of us.

2. The word Father puts us in mind we must behave our selves reverently
toward God, and at two times in special, When we speak to God. When God
speaks to us.


1. For the first, I have often admired of that carriage of Elisha to Elias, who
thus cried out after him, O my Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof: If Gods good Prophet have such high styles, much more owe
we to God himself.

First, our honorable additions, such as Almighty and most merciful Father, it
were well they were called in to be witnesses, when we speak to God, that it is
with all reverence.

Again, let our reverence be made to appear by bespeaking God in a low voice;
the high God loves to be bespoke in a low language, ( cum plurima humilitate,
with much humility.) When we speak to him, let us take our terms with us, when
of our selves, say as did the Prophet, I am a worm and no man: as did the
Patriarch, Minor sum Domine, I am less a Lord than the least of thy mercies.

God our Father cannot abide to hear us his sons and daughters mouth the word
Merit.

Let me tell thee and truly, he that will tell God he deserves heaven, God will
do him no more but justice, yet reward him with hell.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I had rather cry when I pray, God be merciful to me a sinner, then to brave
it out, Lord, I am not as this Publican: yea, and by professing of meritlesse,
I will gain the more.

2. You must reverence God your Father speaking to you, this he does so often as
we do: as St. Paul says, We are Gods Ambassadors, and God entreats you by us;
whilst you hear us preach the word of God, God expects you hear it with all
reverence, as words proceeding forth of his own lips: and yet we have a sort,
who neither the four and twenty Elders, who vaild their Crowns and laid them at
his feet; nor yet the Abissines, who pull off the shoes in the Church Porch as
they go in, can move them to come mannerly into Gods house the Church to hear
him.

Howsoever those saucy sons of Zebedees wives, and their mother came to speak a
good word for them, they should miss their Gods.
Fathers blessing.

The next thing to be prosecuted and explained, is intimated in the word, Our.
This is the relation we have to God, he is, Our Father: I will not here speak
upon the diverse ways how the word Father is taken, only so much say, as may
direct us to this possessive, our God is called Our Father Distinctive. Our
Father Praerogative.


And first by way of Distinction, And that tripartitely 1 Generaliter. 2
Specialiter. 3 Singulariter.


1. Generaliter; so God is the Father of us all, all our Fathers; for this
read, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Is not he thy Father? has he not made thee?

2. Specialiter; sic Justorum per adoptionem, so God is the Father of us his
adopted; for this read Mat. 5.48. Be ye perfect even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect.

3. Singulariter; so God is Christ's Father by eternal generation; and so the
word is used Mat. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me of my Father. A
review.


God generally is all our Fathers, first by creating us.

Specially, our Father only on whom he has bestowed a portion of grace.

Singularly, God is Christ's Father, no so ours, as his, for Christ is his
eternal offspring without beginning.

Now we see here why not Christ, but Christians say this prayer, for that God
is our Father, not as his.

Secondly, why the adopted saints say Our Father, for that they are all his
adopted children.

Thirdly, why we admit even of the most wicked with us, to say our Lords
prayer, for that he is Father of good and bad, all our Fathers by creation.

All the world by creation, have a like relation unto God, and may call him our
Father.

All sanctified Saints have a more nigh tie to God; and may call him our
Father, by creation, by adoption, yet more then the elect in special, or the
world in general, may Christ say, and call God, my Father, not by creation,
not by adoption, but by generation.

Straight then is the tie of God the Father to Christ his Son, for Gods
natural Son.

Next is the relation of the Saint to God, who is his Father by adoption.

The most remote relation is that of the wicked to God, who is called their
father, for that he made them, so did he the beasts of the field, and fowls of
the air. All then this word, our, our Father, as used by the wicked, can put
them in hope of, is Gods general providence, to provide for them as his other
creatures.

That which the word, our, our Father, as used by the elect, ought to put us in
hopes of, is Gods special providence, that he will be with us to deliver us
out of all our trouble.

The word, our, our Father, as used by the elect in special, world in
general, not by Christ in particular, protests, he that is our Father, yet he
is Christ's Father, after a more miraculous manner, than any other.

And yet to our comfort this possessive, our, proclaims God is not a
step-father, but our own, Our Father.

O how does prayer link us on earth to the God of heaven; makes us, of as nigh
alliance, as father and son, own father and own son.

Now since so nigh a tie, our carriage is base if our Father disinherit us.

I am resolved for my own part to carry my self to God, The Avowry.
like a son to his Father; lest God our Father, whilst he provides a portion
for his other children, disinherit me his son.



Res.
A crown of immortal glory.

But demanded,

The case of disinheriting.
To this I answer, If thou be a natural. If the son be a natural, the father
does disinherit him, it holds likewise in spiritualibus, though thou can
prove that God's thy Father, and he confess thou art his son, yet thou shall
never heir one of his mansion-houses in heaven, if thou be a Natural.

1. Two sorts of Fools.
By this Natural, I understand either David's fool, who has said in his heart
there is no God. Psa. 14.1.
Or,

2. Paul's Natural, 1 Cor. 2.14.
the natural man who perceives not the things of God.

Here are two sorts of Fools, The Atheistical Fool. The Carnal minded Fool.


The child which does deny his father, why should his father let him inherit?
here is David's fool.

The son which heeds not his fathers instructions, does run the same fortune:
here is Paul's Natural or the carnal mind fool.

Well, that I may not befool my self, The Collect
, and so become incapable to be heir, heir of God, and joint heir with Christ
Jesus; I will both confess a God, and acquaint my self with his most sacred
word.

But inquiry must be made, why we say not, My, but, Our, Our Father.

The reason is tripartite: Propter pacis conservationem. Propter superbiae
expulsionem. Propter mului auxilii subventionem.


And first, Propter pacis conservationem, We be brethren, allay the quarrel
betwixt Lot and Abraham?

The remembrance that we came from one, The Product.
, makes us all as one, and live in unity.

Secondly, Propter superbiae expulsionem, we have all in common, one common
parent, occasions, whilst in the world promoted, in the heart humility.

This paternall Tie, The Product.
, which links in alliance, poor and rich, swayes down aspiring hearts, He means
than the meanest.
whilst it forces this confession, * We are no better.

Thirdly, Propter mutui auxilii subventionem, to procure us one another aid
and assistance, when we consider we have all one Father.

Lord, The Product.
how it will work with us to relieve one another, and do our best devoir to
fetch him fair off, who is left in a forlorn hope!

The Collect.
I will use this phrase Our.
of speech in my prayer, that for the time I pray, I may be put in mind, To
do good to all, subject my thoughts, and live in peace.

The Preface professed to tell us Two things: What God was. Where he was.


The first part of its promise it has performed.

The second, it is now about it, that now the preface is going to do, is to
tell us where.

This father of ours, is, in heaven.

Apparent, while said, Our Father which art in Heaven.

That here I take notice of, is 1. Man's parle with God. 2. Gods place of abode.


Man's parle with God, the word, Art, ensures it; Gods place of abode we have
here espied, its Heaven: Our Father thou art in Heaven.

For the first, this word, Art, is vox loquentis, the sound, or voice of one
speaking to another, not of another, but to another. And now since the party
speaking is man, the party bespoken, God; since it is man that prays, God that
is prayed to; since man goes not about to get to Gods speech, by Angels or
Saints; but at first Gods self is spoke to, which is apparent by this, Art,
this shows the privilege of such as live! within the pale of the Church; Note.
We may all of us have free access to God himself: Moses had he been alive,
would have deposed it. The Angels stand before his face, and we may call on the
Lord and he will hear: says Dawid, I called on the name of the Lord, and he
heard me.

That I note is, Note.
, We may call on God, and he will be within our call.

It Is a comfort Audience, and Dispatch.


Of the first Audience.
, we are here insured, which furthers, dispatches business.

It shall be my greatest comfort in my greatest want, that my prayers go
straight to God.

Thou art his child, how will he commiserate thee? He is thy Father, how will
he tender thy cause? No sooner have thou spoke it, but he hears it.

It was the misery of a great Emperor, that three days he lay at the Popes
gate Penitentiall-wise, and could have no audience: (My God and my Lord is more
lowly, who at first, grants us access.)

Now to the place of Gods abode or residence, of which I will speak A Part
ante. A Part post.


A part ante conjunctim.

A part post divisim.

A part ante conjunctim, as Heaven glances back upon the foreword, Father.

A part post divisim, in respect of the last word Heaven.

For the first, the place of Gods abode, it is Heaven: God our Father thou art
in Heaven.

That Gods our father, it shows his willingness to help us.

That he is in Heaven, it shows his ableness to help us.

I have viewed the Preface from Dan to Beersheba, from one end to the other;
and it tells me, he that would get good! by prayer, must be persuaded, God is
both willing and able to help him: if he were willing, not able, alas his
wishes could do me no good; if he were able and not willing, all his might
were not worth a mite to me: Now that he is both willing and able, I am sure he
will do for me all he can; and it is enough.

If thou mean to be bettered by prayer, come not despairing neither of Gods
Will, nor Can.

I read of a couple, the one doubting of Gods willingness, the other of his
ableness: Mat. 8. 2. says the Leper Master if thou will thou can make me
clean. Mar. 9.22. The man whose son was possessed, said, If thou can do any
thing for us, help us.

He that makes such Ifs, and Ands, in his prayers, God will give him such an
Item, it will not well please him.

Now will I speak of Gods place of abode, a part post, divisim, as led to it
by the last word in this Preface, Heaven, Our Father, it is thou we pray to, who
art in Heaven: I will make this my method, give you, 1. Several acceptations.
2. Tell you which is meant. 3. Show what it may put us in mind of. 1. The word
Heaven signifies the God of Heaven: Luke 15.21. where said, Father I have
sinned against Heaven. 2. The seat of the blessed: Mat. 5. 19. Where said,
Great is your reward in Heaven. 3. The visible Church on earth: Rev. 12.7.
There was a great battle in Heaven. 4. The Spheres and Orbs: Psalm. 19.1. The
Heavens declare. 5. The air next us: Mat. 6.26. The birds of Heaven labor not.
6. Heavenly creatures, as inanimate so animate: as Angels, Job 15.15. The
Heavens are not clear in his sight. 7. A great height: thus Deuteronomy. 1.28. The
cities are walled up to Heaven. 8. The bodies of the Saints, here God is said
to abide, ut in Coelo, 1 Cor. 3. and 1 Cor. 6.



I find only these 8 acceptations of Heaven in the holy Bible, and though one
be but meant, I will give you two to make choice of, far distant, both
significant; the one Above.
supra, the other Below.
infra; the one the place of the Church triumphant, the other the mystical
subject of the Church militant: first, then by Heaven may be meant the seat of
the blessed, that majesticall place of magnificence, as I may so say, Gods
chief Manor House in the Highlands.

Or if you mind not to look so high, you have nigher at hand an Heaven: the
righteous Saints on earth, they are the Temple of the living God, yea, and he
dwells in them and walks in them: here it is God dwells, these are his Temples,
Gods house above is Heaven; and his Heaven below, the Saints.

The letter makes us subscribe to the first exposition; the Spirit causes our
acknowledgement of the second; Dame Nature has set her hand to the one, its
the Lady Grace persuades us to confess this other.

And ut potenter, God is said to dwell above, sic virtualiter here below: his
Highland House Heaven displayes his power; This his The Saints on earth.
house in these Netherlands, his efficacious work in us.

Well while I acknowledge the sense litterall, The Avowry.
I will not let pass the sense mystical, viz. that by Heaven may be meant the
elect on earth.

Nor wants there some semblance betwixt the Saints, and Heaven: they shine,
sicut luminaria in mundo, and as the Heavens lend us light, so are the Saints
willed to let their light shine before men: and ut sol in Coelo, sic mundi in
mundo; as the Sun is the lightest part of Heaven, so of these says our
Savior, Vos estis lux mundi, Ye are the light of the world: the Death of
these, is like the Suns Eclipse, the Life of these, that high noon, or Sun at
height, which is a guide to all that are not blind,

O ye Saints, The radiant rays of your good works, have given me cause to
conjecture how like you, is that Heaven whither you are a going; as also to
presume, I have not much miss't of Heaven, while met with such so like it.

But come, what may these two interpretations put us in mind of?

The first of something which concerns God.

The second of something which concerns our selves.

The first does divulge what God himself is.

The second, what we ought to be.

Our God his abode is in heaven, The Extract.
which proclaims he is an immortal Majesty dwelling in light inaccessible.

By Heaven likewise may be meant, us men in whom God dwells, as in an house;
Extract.
O what ones then behooves it us to be? The wicked are the Devils house to which
he is returned, Mat. 12. Look at his house, though a base beggarly one, yet lo
how it is kept fine and neat, swept and garnisht, formality, garnisht with the
gilt of hypocrisy.

And yet to consider how we let this mansion house of Gods, in the Isle Man
lies full of Mamholes, we may be ashamed of it; in very deed we let all lie
forlorn. To please our friends against they come, we make all trim, Lord, why
should we not do as much to please the Lord? And yet in every corner of that
Hall, Heart, you may spy an ash-heap of evil imaginations: Genesis 6.
That back room Memory, is filled with old ill done deeds: That upper room
Judgment, with error and heresy: Those out houses, Ears, are filled with
rubbish of news; State news, what done in Court, Country news, how rules
price of Corn, ribauldry news, obscene songs; our Eyes are full of vanity, our
Tongues full of deceit: and now while neither in-room, nor out-room, soul nor
body is trimmed up, nor cleansed, how can the Lord take delight to dwell in us?

A fair caveat to go make fit to dress our house, yea, all in this Isle of Man.

I am resolved against my Lord come, The Avowry.
to make ready, lest my Lord and Master take dislike with his own, and in stead
of taking it up for an house of prayer, he leaving it, it become a den of
thieves.

Thus much for the Preface.

Now I purpose, Deo juvante, God enabling, to speak upon that post-put and
first of the Petitions: and in brief, to make this my method to take notice of:
1 Their Division. 2 Their Equality. 3 Their Order. 4 Their Precedence. 5
Subject matter mued up in each Petition.


First, for their Division, they are of two several sorts or kinds: the first
sort of them concern God. Second, our selves.

Secondly, for Equality, they are three and three; three concern God, and three
man.

Thirdly, for Order, this order is observed, Gods three precede man's, man's
three come behind Gods; ours are set after his, his before ours.

Fourthly, their Precedence prays us to take a view of each particular
Petition, as set before one another.

Fifthly, their matter makes us privy to what is begged of God in each of these
petitions in special.

For the first, these Petitions are divided into two sorts: First sort or kind
are divine, and cast a glance at Heaven. The second sort are humane, and cast a
glance at earth: first looks at God, the other at us.

1. Now this Division implies an union, Three Extracts.
and that when we send out our supplications abroad, we let them walk hand in
hand.

Such a compound should be our Prayers, Petitions, sharing out requests meet
for God and us jointly.

2. By this Division we are taught, man was not made for himself, he is to pray
as well for Gods glory, as his own good; many remember themselves, forget God,
in their prayers; few remember God, but themselves, in their prayers. A Sect
here found fault with, A platform, which teaches them a better lesson: yea,
this division of these Petitions into two sorts or kinds; the one concerning
God, the other us: tells us, That who prays aright must pray for Gods glory, as
well as for his own good.

3. Thing this Division informs us of, is, that as discords make the sweetest
harmony; so prayers sound best in Gods ears, which consist of sharps and flats,
risings and fallings, which are now, in alto, as high as Heaven, Anon in Basse,
as low as earth. I mean prayers consisting of two parts; Gods glory who lives
above, Man's good who dwells below: he that would avoid the name of simple, must
make his prayer a compound of these two several sorts of simples. And thus
while God and he meet in prayer, it is my hopes they shall do the like in Heaven.

There go at least two things to make up whatsoever is, Matter, and Form; and
it is not one but two join together to procreate this prayer, Petions Divine,
Humane, God and man must be in conjunction, that as for matter, so for form, a
right prayer may be brought out, it must bear in its front, the Image of God
and us. And therefore he that has made a prayer, and not praised God, has
produced a body without life.

He that praises God, never prays at all for himself, gives a form to a
nothing. Single petitions for Gods glory only, or for Man's good alone, are no
better then Zeuxis Berries, they have a being, but imaginary: A right prayer,
is produced whose form is Gods praise, whose matter is man's necessity.

Well, I am resolved while I pray for my self to remember God in my prayers,
and while I beg, God may be honored, to crave somewhat, for my self, He cannot
wish another happiness, that wills not his own welfare: nor is there hopes
that man shall fare well at Gods hands, who forgets to give God his honor.

A passage, The Avowry.
which I protest shall cause me to poise my prayers in even scales and hang
them even betwixt heaven and earth.

The second thing worth your consideration is the Equality of these two sorts
or kinds of Petitions. They are three and three; three concerning God, three
concerning man; as many for God and his glory, as man and his good; as many for
man and his good, as God and his glory: here are petitions as even divided, as
Canaan was to Israel; as the Israelites had their Manna, none have too much,
none too little, each alike, alike pittance; God and man the like measure
number, while three belong to God, three to man. Three Extracts.


1. Heaven will not be behind incourtesie, but what respect we who are but
earth, offer God, God gives leave of requital unto us. O Humanity worthy to be
admired, when Gods Son proffers as much kindness to us mortals, as we mortals
tender the immortal God. 2. That secondly I surrender up to the use of your
remembrance, is, Gods readiness to repay, for parity no ofter can we engage
our selves to honor God, but God is as often in readiness to recompense: and if
we come with our request for the advancement of Gods glory, he will allow us to
put in another, for our benefit. A passage I profess shall make me give God
more, since I may get as much. 3. This license or leave for our Petitions to
equalize Gods avows, Christ who penned this prayer, had one eye looking about
how to help us, as the other how God should be honored.
The even number proclaims Christ's dear love he bore as the Creator so the
creature.

O my God and my Christ, A Soliloquium.
let me weigh thy affections beyond desert, while my desert does merit no
parallel with thy Father.

I now come to the third thing nemarkable in these petitions, and that is their
order, how these petitions are set down.

The three which concern God first, our three are set down after: Ride on O
Lord with thy honor.

The first triumphant entrance, it is Gods; the Trumpetters blaze this, are his
three first petitions, his precede, ours follow; what shall it teach us naught?
doubtless lessons worth our learning.

1. This order for priority protests, Two Extracts.
first thing God has a care of, is his honor: himself says, My honor I will
not give to another. He is Lucifers brother, would enthronize himself in Gods
honor: an Haman, hanging is too good for him, that thinks himself worthy the
Kings honor: we have a sort of proud Hamans would be jetting in Ahashuerohs
his clothes of state, a company of saucy beggars would be served before their
Master.

But as a beggar before he begs, bids God bless Master and Mistress, and then
asks his alms: so this great Master, God, is first to be blessed; or poor man
who comes naked into Gods Hall, should dare to ask him any thing: thus if he
do, he is like to fare better; thus if not, God will not take it for well done.

2. Again, this order of setting down the three Petitions, which concern Gods
honor, first learns us a mean, how to obtain a Boon for our selves: Its thus,
first by tendering God due reverence. Zebedees sons had not learnt this manner,
and it may be, mist therefore what they would have had. A forethought for our
seles, fixed before the thought of Gods worship; It is the cause while we look
at much we catch little. A worldling that will thrive, has himself first in
his thoughts. An heavenling that will get what he does want, God is first in
his mind, and on his tongue end. A spiritual bankrupt then breaks, when he
does aim to receive all before he does disburse ought. Well I will pray my God
to accept of a talent of worship, or I will dare to petition him for a fee-farm
of eternity, his praises I will place before, they will make room in his
presence for those needy ones, my petitions.

A poor man who has noblemen to be his spokesmen to his Prince, is in hopes to
be heard.

It Is we who are poor, and needy, and naked; our noble spokesmen who move the
King of Heaven in our behalf, are petitions commendatory of his Majesty; after
they be come in, who indeed are of a very nigh alliance to our Lord. Then our
heavenly Prince will be pleased to give us audience, to read our petitions and
subsign them: O that we would weigh this well.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I will not forget, first to do God reverence, lest my neglect, cause his after
denial of my suit.

Fourthly, my method obliges me to speak of these petitions precedence, as
every one of these Petitions precede one another, I mean go before one another;
we must begin with the first, hold on to the Jast; and see, if we can spy why
thus Christ set these petitions in their places.

In the first petition, 1. Petit.
we pray for the hallowing of Gods name. In brief that the name of the great
God may be among us in high esteem. This is it, is first taken care for, and
first prayed for, to put us in mind.

His name, its Honor, Its Extract.
he does more set by then all else he has; more than his Kingdom: Truth is,
God weighs the honor of his name above a world of wealth: and therefore in the
first petition, Gods name and its renown is first prayed for: then his
Kingdom; but in the second place in the second petition, which is this.

Thy Kingdom come: This is it we are commanded next to intercede for; 2. Petit.
that Gods Kingdom may come, and that before that Petition, Thy will be done:
The cause, Its Extract.
because here impossible the will of God should be done, till his kingdom of
faithful subjects first flourish. Let God here first have his Church, and he
shall then have his will: Hence it is, for it we first pray, and it coming
among us, for by Gods Kingdom, may be meant Gods Kingdom of Grace, that is,
his Church, consisting of a multitude of believing Christians, till the King of
Heaven have a Dominion of such subjects on earth, there is no need to hope for,
much less to pray for, his will may be done. Before a Prince come to sway the
Scepter, he may command and be withstood, when his kingdom is come, his will
shall be done. Thus authority must precede command, and a power over be had, or
the precept be obeyed. An occasion made Christ will we should pray, first, for
Gods regality, That his Kingdom may come, or he would a word to be spoke of
it, That his will should be done.

And thus I come to the third Petition in the Lords Prayer, 3. Petit.
which is this, Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven: this third
petition precedes that fourth, in which we pray for all things necessary for
this life: now I say, this third has prehemency of place before that fourth,
and it is to certify us, he that would have granted all necessaries for this
life, must first with Christ saying pray, and praying say, Father, not my will
but thy will be, done: The Petition, for begging ability to do Gods will, is
set before the petition for getting goods. A good monitour which shall make me,
Its Extract.
to get what I want, to do what God wills.

By these petitions placing, I am informed, the performance of Gods will,
guides on to the attainment of whatsoever needful for the life of man. This I
am taught, while thus learnt to pray: first, Thy will be done; Then, Give us
our daily Bread.

And thus I come to the fourth Petition for bodily sustenance, 4. Petit.
which is set before our petitioning God for the remission of sins: nor can I
for certain determine what should be Christ's meaning, in placing a petition for
our bodily good, before the petitions for the remission of the sins of our
souls; yet I verily imagine, to show, he would have man's natural life first
supplied with what needful, and then set down what he should crave to get a
life God gave leave on its behalf, first to petition.

Or else it may be Christ did it to detect what man most longed for, goods more
than forgiveness; we have a better appetite to Bread corporal, than
spiritual, and love Meat more than Manna. Its Extract.
This petition then had this place signed perchance covertly, to discover, man
is more sensible of bodily want than of those sores, the sins of his soul: and
that he has a greedier desire to have this worldly goods, than to discharge
his old debts, in which cast by the default of Adam and himself. Well while I
cast my eye upon the situation of this petition, I will not forget what I am
taught, when I come to suit God, most runs in our minds these bodies of
ours, and the begging bodily necessaries, daily Bread for bodies sustenance.
But come, while I have seen Christ by placing this petition, picture out man's
own mind, which runs upon the world, so by that which follows Christ tells me
what man more needs, whilst I in stead of this one petition for the body,
Christ causes two petitions to be put upon his poor souls behalf.

The first of which two but fifth by descent, 5. Petit.
from the preface is this, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that,
etc. I am as yet to look at naught save this petitions precedence, it is set
down before, And lead us not into temptation: now the precedence of this
petition to that following, Its Extract.
foreshewes, it is neither the sin which hangs on, nor hanging over; but what
past, and commit, we are first to ask God forgiveness for, what first
perpetrated, God must first be petitioned to pass it by. The placing this
petition before, implies it is sin past most endamnifies us, more than either
the marching on toward us of temptations, or the now le^gre of evil lusts.

O my God, The Avowry.
whilst I cannot forget what I now do, I will call to mind what long since I
have committed.

And now the last petition has none to precede, 6. Petit.
nor is it the least for that the last placed, for in this last petition we beg
a double boon, deliverance from future and present evil. Thus what may seem by
undersetting to be set light, for last, this last comprises in it a double
boon, that so it may have a like renown, or else perchance it possesses this
place, that ever in this upshot of our devotions; we should bear in mind what
is the upshot of this prayer, a petition for preservation, now the Lord
preserve us, and defend us. Again, perchance this petition is last set down,
which involves a duplicated request, to teach us, As at the beginning, so even
to the end of our prayers, we must be very earnest with God in our suit.

And now to period all these passages, all and every of these petitions
comprehend more matter than my tongue can utter, or the eye of reason can
discern; when I have seen all I can, I may say as did the blind, Lord that I
may receive my sight.

Moses upon Mount Nebo saw the good land; but could not from it make a full
discovery of all the good things in it: no more, though walked up to the Mount
of Meditation, and I see this fertile soil, am I able to judge of all the
hidden Treasure buried in the bowels of these petitions: what I see I have set
down, and in writing, that so not my own only, but other catechumenists may
bear it in their remembrance.

This Lords prayer contains 6. petitions like 6. shires, in which I spy a
world of rarities; come let us range among them. As I enter into the frontiers
of the first petition, these words I find written to the honor of the great
God, and our Father, Hallowed be thy Name: such a land, such a language, this
little prayer is Gods little Isle, the first words the inhabitants have on
their tongue ends are these, Hallowed be thy Name. Thus they are learnt at
first to speak and say, Hallowed be thy Name: a pretty speech, as concise as
the Laconians, as significant as Caesar's three words. Here is magnum in parvo,
much prayed for in few words; we pray to God, for God, sinful man, that
Holiness it self may be hallowed: a petition whose subject matter my
methodobliges me to unfold, and to show unto you what is meant by this said,
Hallowed be thy Name.

In speaking upon the subject matter of these six petitions, this method
through one, through all I mean to observe; 1. Explain the words. 2. Give you
the full meaning of every petition. 3. Collect some natural observations. 4.
Extract out some Cases of Conscience. 5. Show what grace waits on every
several petition. 6. What vices each petition petitions us to banish out of
the coasts of our hearts. 7. The Divine Contemplation upon every petition.


There are two words needful to be explained in this petition, 1. Petit.
verbum, nomen, and nominis praedicatum, that one word, Name, and its
predicate, Hallowed, this is it is here begged, that Gods name may be hallowed;
which word, Hallowed, since it is first named in the Petition, we will afford
it the first place in our Exposition.

I have two ways facere ut innotescat to make it manifest what is meant by
Hallowed, first by setting it by one very like it, Sanctified, a seeing glass
which gives a reflex of knowledge, so that know the one and know the other,
they are all one, though of a several name, and in very deed, what Adam said
of Eve, may Hallowed say of Sanctified; This is bone of my bone and flesh of my
flesh. Hallowed then is all one with Sanctified, yet there are diverse sprung
out of this Hallowed.
House.

It would be known what they are, and which this is.

1. There is an Hallowing which has Principium a Jove, God for its Author, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Not here meant. 2. There is an Hallowing the offspring of us men,
by which I mean, man's hallowing, which he generates.
First, while he imployes that to a holy use which God has appointed, as his
Sabbaths, Exodus 20.8. Not here meant.

Secondly, while he makes an acknowledgement, or acknowledges what is on his
tongue end in his heart for hallowed, meant here. Now the Hallowing then here
spoken of, is not Divine, but Humane; not of the lineage of the immortal God,
but mortal man.

And more in special that meant by Hallowed, is, man's acknowledgement that God
is holy: as much then is intimated by Hallowed, as, O God and Father of us all,
Thy name we acknowledge is most holy.

But what is meant by Name?

That is the second word to be explained, Res.
and that you may the better understand it, know it, Gods Name has a twofold
acceptance.

Psalm. 76.1. where said, In Jury is God known, his Name is great in Israel:
there Name is taken for Honor, not so here.

Name is taken for all things, whereby God is made known; and so here, which I
reduce into four heads: Gods 1. Titles. Gods 2. Properties. Gods 3. Word. Gods
4. Works.


Gods Titles, such as Jehovah, Adonai, etc.

Properties of Mercy, Justice.

His Word, Legal, Evangelicall.

Gods Works Celestial; spoken of Psalm. 19.1. Terestriall, such as we men, the
workmanship of God, yea it is our good works we must so let shine, that others
seeing them may glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16.


This Exposition is the perfect guide to lead us on, and the gainest way unto,
the true and genuine meaning of this petition. And it is this:

O God and Father of us all, give us grace to acknowledge thou art the Holy one
of Israel, and to declare it by reverencing thy Titles, acknowledging thy
Properties, obeying thy Word, as also by leading our lives Holily, Soberly, and
Justly.

As Nicolaus de Lira says, they are deceived, who think here we pray, quod
aliqua sanctitos Deo acereseat, That by our prayers God may be made more holy.
That we pray for is, ut sanctitas quae aeternaliter ei inest xeluceat amplius,
that that holiness which was in full perfection in God from the beginning, may
shine more and more, The Collect.
and may be more evidently discovered in us his creatures, by our honest lives,
by that respect we show his Word; by our reverencing his Attributes and Titles.

For as a Prince, Simil.
it more divulges his princely Majesty, when his Titles are counted sacred, his
Justice and and Mercy magnificent; his Laws and Decretals approved for holy,
just, and good; when all his subjects do Note.
our Lord God: Yea, what a glory is it to him by reflexing not adding, when
Gods name is in high renown among us, when we confess he is just and
merciful; when we take his Word for our rule; when we strive, quantum in
nobis, to be what the Apostle would, we were holy, For quality
as he is holy!

Here Is the way to glorify God, and this to hallow him, Lord enable us.

The sense and meaning of this petition I have given you; that is past, the
points of Doctrine are yet remaining, to make a discovery of them, which are
natural from this and the other petitions, we must be beholding to the
division of this prayer into parts.

It wills us to take notice Whom it concerns in general. What it concerns in
special.


The parties whom this prayer concern in general, are God and us; God in
heaven, us on earth; God who is the giver, us whom are but beggars: the
petitioned is God, the petitioners, we our selves; petitioning God for God, God
for us.

1. We petition God for God, Two Doctrines in general.
by way of vote, or word, or wish; and what are words, of what worth, what add
they to the enlargement of Gods renown? O say when you have done all you can,
est vox, praeterea nihil, a poor man, wishing him well, a new Empire, a bigger?
here is all for which God is beholding to us: it were well though we pray much,
we would think less, and not be too brag when beggars, and can better God with
naught but words and wishes.

Again, here we pray to God for God, as for our selves and our good, so God and
his honor.

2. This quashes, and all to pieces crushes a scornful proverb, and too rife,
Every man for himself, and God for us all.

3. Every one of us must aim for more than the good of us our selves, likewise
at God and his glory. An homeward thought, an eye too much to our selves
divulges we are more man-lovers than lovers of God.

a somewhat more. The more I think I have, the more I want; Let me be sensible
of my want, and rely upon the Lord for more, if we mean to improve our
spiritual estate, we must put up to God, a supplicate, Now we have found the
road, God give us grace to keep the way.

Be pleased to peruse this prayer in special; and now let us take into our
consideration, the points of divine Doctrine deductible from the first
petition, Hallowed be thy Name.

Here I have in view, The Mood. The Matter.


The Mood, one and the same in all the petitions.

The Matter varies in all the six.

The Mood is Imperative,

Secondly, it shows what to be feared Romans bundle of wands we stand in need
of; yea, by an imperious mandate to be pusht on to the work as much as Israel
was to his task.

Well, The Avowry.
while in the tract of pi^ty I am learned to march on for the honor of my God.

This Mandate shall make me suspect my pace, and that with Lots it is lingering.

The Matter commanded, is to hallow Gods Name: apparent by this said, Hallowed
be thy Name.

This is first cared for, to honor him first, and be the foremost.

There Is good reason, this last should be first, in honoring God; the first of
creatures, and his first of works.

Let us lead the Round so the dance be David's, and fall to this labor, before
trying oxen, seeing farms, or marrying wives; though these earthly things we
have leave to think on, yet not first to think on. Gods honor must go before
man's good or goods. The fourth and fifth petitions bear me witness; this ought
to take place in our hearts, then those.

Self-love forbids what I say, grace serves an injunction on us to do it, and
warnes us to prefer God before our selves, our pleasures, our profits, our
lives, yet further went Moses, Exodus 32.32. Paul stepped on as far as he, Romans
9.3. Such well wishers to Gods renown, as they preferred it before their own
salvation.

These superlative affections shall make me set back my own suit, The Avowry.
at least, till God be served.

This sacred Theorem is full foully fallen out with such as have in their minds,
Meum and Tuum, before on their tongue ends, Mary's Magnificat: it is natural
for our love to descend, but supernatural for it to ascend; it falls upon
earth, must be heaved up to heaven; and therefore we rouse you up with a sursum
corda, lift up your hearts, we will shake hands and be friends, so you will do
as you say, lift them up unto the Lord.

I am resolved upon it by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
to banish out of my heart, earthly Mammon, lest the love of Earth, and
earthing in it, make me out of love with our Lord and honoring him.

The Cases of Conscience are knocking at the door of our hearts, and if you
please, we will call them in, and hear what they have to say. It Is this.

1. That many neglect to hallow Gods Name, whilst his Titles, Attributes, and
Word are misused, and men misuse themselves: their works testifying to their
teeths their disglorying God.

But it is desired to particularize and poll out who they are, that neglect to
hallow Gods name.

First such as in stead of reverent taking Gods Titles in their mouths, Swear
by his Name Vainly. Commonly. Idolatrously. Perniciously.


Now who these are, I will tell you, who can inform you: 1. One called common
discourse. 2. Intelligencer is the Alehouse. 3. Lives in Pharaohs house, he was
an honest man's son, his name is Joseph the son of Jacob. 4. Informer points at
Ahabs two false witnesses two sons of B lial.


I will resolve to set a watch over my tongue, The Avowry
not come at Belshazzars house, not live in Potiphars, nor yet to have the
least acquaintance with Jesabels pickthanks; Lest while I gain credit with an
earthly Queen, The Collect.
the King of Heaven come to loss by me; lest while I honor Pharaoh, I
dishonor God; lest while I please my palate, my tongue offend: an lastly, lest
while I talk much, my Masters Name be taken in vain.

2. Such neglect to hallow Gods Name, who wrong Gods Attributes, or Properties
of Mercy. Properties Justice.


Who wrongs them?

I will tell you,

1. The first his name is Inconsideration, what God has done for us men: as
the Father made us, his Son redeemed us, the holy Ghost came to be our
Comforter.

To ruminate upon it, what Heaven has done for Earth, would make us who are
but earth, glorify the God of heaven. The want of this, is the death of that,
and makes me while I gain much, mar my market, and turn bankrupt out.

Well, The Avowry.
for my own part, I am resolved upon it, to ponder in heart what God has done
for me in hand; lest my not notice taking of his mercy, make me owner of no
more.

2. The second is an ungrateful person, akin to many of our countrymen; he is
called unthankfulness for Gods benefits conferred upon us; we have them who
have received thousands of favors at Gods hands, give not God a good word for
it: health and wealth, food and raiment, peace and long days; they have had
time enough to do it, but they are akin to the nine Lepers, who take all, will
part with naught, no not so much as thanks.

Ingratitude is a beastly vice. Hist.
The Stork in Norway, when her brood is hatched, in token of hatred to
ingratitude, leaves her Landlord one of her young ones; let fools of the
earth, learn of fowls of the air.

Again, no sin offers more indignity to Gods mercy showed us in Christ Jesus,
than unthankfulness: this wretched impe of the Devil, has done much mischief
to that pious property of God.

I am resolved to part with the one, The Avowry.
that I may enjoy the other; and study to be thankful, lest God cease to be
merciful.

3. There Is a third offers much wrong to Gods Mercy, call's Conceit; a conceit
we are something, when nothing; and have deserved the good turns God has done
for us, when naught less.

A peculiar overprise may hinder a special bliss, Sentences
when we make our challenge by due, what we have got, ere long we shall be set
without it. There Is no greater enemy to Gods Mercy, than man's merit; one much
cracked of, yet cannot go, while we countenance that Romish bastard Merit, we
make Mercy, whose offspring is from God, go pack and get her gone.

I am resolved not to fancy that Chimeara conceit of merit, The Avowry.
lest while I fall in love with man's merit, Gods Mercy depart from me.

Who wrongs Gods Justice?

1. One who is a very natural, Res.
called fond fancy; or a foolish fancy, that God is a mere compound of mercy,
while we humor our selves God is more merciful than just, we lose his mercy,
but his justice meets with us, and yet this superplus conceit of the one,
vilely vilifies the other: in this Presumption has gotten the master head over
Despair, while warned Gods mercy more to be hoped in, than his justice feared,
if we rely on Gods mercy too much, we wrong Gods justice not a little.

I will poise my Spirit betwixt hope and fear, The Avowry.
and to balance even, while I hope for mercy, fear justice.

2. Wrongs God Justice are two brothers, both sons to carnal security.

The name of the one is called Careless heed taking of Gods proceeding against
malefactors.

The name of the other is, Non-notice taking of the general Assize to be
holden, when every one must answer for all he has done in the flesh, as avowed
2 Cor. 5.10. Gods justice is much dishonored while men neither mind what
inflicted, nor what is threatened against impenitent sinners.

We love to dandle in our hands Gods staff or support, will not cast so much
as an eye at the Rod of his wrath, God has holden his corrections these many
years, prescribing diverse their penances, Measels, Small Pox, Plague, and the
Sword dipped in blood, have all certified, thousands have taken penance in white
sheets, God it is to be feared, is about opening a vein, and putting us to a
new penance, non flumine sed sanguine. This was upon the first entrance of the
Scots.
And what shall be the end of these things, it is not hid from us, it is upon
record, that without repentance we shall perish. All this is true, which
blazes, O God how thou art just, Luke 13.5.
yet how little is thy justice feared, O it is our careless passing by of Gods
visitation past and to be holden, which makes us set his Justice.
corrections light, and live so, loosly, lewdly.

I will call to mind what horrid punishments I have seen, The Avowry.
and pray I may believe what denounced, A mean, while I admire Gods mercy to
make me fear his Justice.

3. Such neglect to hallow Gods Name, who wrong Gods word.

Who be they?

There are three offer it injury, Res.
one is very many unwritten Traditions, full cousin-german to old wives tales,
whose word is in credit with Papists not Protestants, will be taken in Spain
and Rome, but in none of our K. Dominions, our sacred Synods did never give
them hearing: and yet Tridentinum concilium una cum veteris novique Testamenti
libris, traditiones etiam pari pietatis affectu and reverentia suscipit ac
veneratur: The Council of Trent, esteems unwritten Traditions as highly as the
old and new Testament. Vox Dei and vox hominis, are in the weigh scales: what a
wrong is this to Gods word, for man's word to parragaud with it; for unwrittn
traditions to face it out they will be as well trusted, as Gods own written
word.

I will make a more high estimate of Gods Word than all other, The Avowry.
lest while I admit of a parity, to honor Earth, I dishonor heaven.

2. Ignorance is another does offer much wrong to Gods good Word men esteem not
what they know not: a barley corn is better liked by the midden Cock than a
pearl. It was but an Ass fell to the thistle and left the fertile soil,
Heraclitus laughed at him, Hist.
we will be sorry for these, who are so very ignorant, they know not: they know
naught, their gross ignorance has made them undervalue that inestimable word,
the Word of God, insomuch diverse have better appetites to hear a play acted,
then a Chapter read, or a Sermon preached, especially by an orthodox Divine.

For my own part I am resolved, The Avowry.
to fall in love with knowledge, lest my want of knowledge diminish my love to
the Word of God.

3. The world is a third that wrongs Gods Word not a little; Gods Word has no
greater enemy than this world, Lord how many fly draw offs has it to withdraw
us from reading it, hearing it, medicating on it! How does it shuffle by all
religious duties, proponing either pleasure, and go to the woman's house in the
Proverbs, or profit and go to Mammons, or ease and stay at home all Sermon
time: he that will be counseled by the world was never known to wish the Word
well.

Well though the wicked so far make use of God and his Word, The Avowry.
as that he may enjoy the world and its goods; I am resolved only so far to
make use of this world, and its good things, as that I may enjoy God and, his
Word.

4. They neglect to hallow Gods Name, who live but lewdly; the honor of the
Prince is laid to the stake, when the subjects are exceeding lews and live
wickedly.

But who hinders our country men from living well and doing good works,

There are six of them, Res.
1. Insensiblenesse of sins. 2. Want of true faith. 3. Want of charity. 4.
Incredulity that God will not repay back. 5. Love of this world. 6. Fear to
need.


Six Orators, and all to draw us from good works; and since I cannot stay to
decipher to you out, nor portray the perfect portracture of these wicked
wretches, I will send you to a sort of my very good friends: who are able to
rid you of all those idle consorts.

1. Repair to a troubled conscince, one can free thee from an insensiblenesse
of sin.

2. Repair to Abraham, who against hope believed; I mean to a true and lively
faith: this will send misbelief a packing.

3. Have thee on to the house of unity: thou shall there meet with brotherly
love will banish malice.

4. Go me on from hence and get to speak in private with Consideration; I mean,
consider with thy self, what largesses received already. Hear is one will
thrust Diffidence by the head and shoulders out of the door of thy heart.

5. There is a fifth, his name I have forgotten, yet his Motto is this, I desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ. This is he, is only able to drive away
and cause to depart out of thine heart, and in post-hast, love of this world.

6. Let Solomon be the sixth, whose very language (the creatures neither spin
nor labor) is of strength sufficient to free the from that slavish bondage, in
which thou were, to fear, fear to need.

Since I have these six to oppose those six, The Avowry.
I am resolved to fight under the banner of Gods Graces, lest poor soul be
ensnared in the ginne of hellish vice.

The fist moiety of my method warns me to give a call, upon those graces,
prayed for in this petition, yea, and to provide them house-room in my heart.

Graces two.
They be two Sincerity. They be two Vigilance.

Sincerity, The Parallel.
a Jonadab whose heart is upright.

Vigilance, a David, whose eyes prevent the night watches.

Behold the Mine without dross, Sincerity.

The Court of Guard which guards it, Vigilance.

That Is my riches Sincerity: This their keeper, Vigilance.

How much do I want, and want that Sincerity
First?

How much may I lose, and let go this Vigilance.
Latter?

For my own part, I will pray my God to enrich me with Sincerity, and Lest I
lose it, The Avowry.
to guard my heart about with vigilance.

The first grace we have in Commendum, Sincerities Character.
is Sincerity, a true upright Nazarite without fraud or covin. This is one
persuades us to speak as we think, and think as we speak; to do as we say, and
all we say to do: our lips and hearts must be made kind friends; say well and
do well, walk hand in hand together: God delights not in specious pretenses,
where there is no such meaning; he would have us be what we seem to be; not say
one thing, and think another; not cry Hail Master, when we come to hale away
the Master.

I am resolved to affect sincere dealing when I deal with Ged, The Avowry.
and to have my heart intent on that which my tongue bath undertaken to indite.

Vigilancies Character.
The second Grace which this petition petitions us to give harbor, is
Vigilance; there are others call it Watchfulness: we may mean well, yet have
the foil and fall, without we entertain this Man at arms to aid us. An eye
over all ill willers of the great Gods renown, inables me, while I spy much,
to prevent more. I have a Fabius for an Hannibal, an honorable personage able
to deliver my soul from the snare of the fowler.

And that I be not intrapt in the ambushment of disrespecting God; The Avowry.
I am resolved to set a watch over my ways, words, and thoughts.

The Vices prohibited, The Vices two.
the graces have given us information of them,

And they be two Hypocrisy. And they be two Security.

Hypocrisy, The Parallel.
one never walks in his own clothes.

Security, one cares not what he pucs on, ought or naught.

Hypocrisy, who never speaks as he thinks.

Security, who never parts with his old thoughts, let all the world say what
they will.

That first, is fair spoken, and badly meaning.

This latter, means as ill, makes no matter who knows it.

It is Hypocrisy is quick of hearing, every peal rings him into the Church.

It is Security is deaf, whom all the peals of Church ordinance cannot get him
to come on, and, in and hear, and be saved.

For my own part I am resolved to send a defiance to these two, The Avowry.
and ever to stand upon my guard against them, considering the one dissembles
in all his actions: and the other weighs not the outrages that he acts to the
dishallowing the Divine Majesty.

The first Vice we are warned to set a packing, Hypocrisies Character.
is Hypocritical dissimulation or dissembling Hypocrisy. This is one goes in
the guise of an Angel of light, but is a Devil incarnate: has ora Virginum,
ungues vulturum; speaks full fair, means no such matter; brings to the. Church
a face like a Saint, but is cloven footed.

O Hypocrisy is a seafaring man, which rows one way, looks another.

Sometimes our next neighbor discoverable while lends God his lips, whilst
his heart is far from him: A vice has got pranking up into our lofts and pews,
God keep it out of the Pulpit. Truth is, we are all too ready to welcome
dissimulation while all too prone to profess more than we practice.

I am resolved for the honor of God and glory of his name, The Avowry.
to shut my door upon Joab and Judas, lest a worthy in Israel be wronged by me.

The second vice which is forbid, is Security, Securities Character.
a careless companion say what you will unto him: one weighs not who enters
in, so he be not intermedled with: if you let him take out his nap, God will be
injured by him, while no judgment is feared, our God is dishonored; the not
fear of God, is a fearful dishonouring God. I have heard say the let pass of
peril is the inlet of profaneness; and none are more profane, than those
cryers, Et quando ad nos venit. God has other things to do then to take post,
and high it in have, to see, what we do. Let the carnal heart with Solomon's
sluggard, yet take a nap in the duffie downy bed of carnal security, yet that
my God may, and by me, be rightly honored.

I am resolved to beg of God to awake me out of my sin, The Avowry.
and give me a call as he did Samuel.

A Divine Contemplation upon the first Petition.

Hallowed be thy Name.

Soar aloft my soul, and eye nos what is on Earth, but the God of Heaven.

Thou art at this time to be one of the Quire of Angels; take thy tune not in
Basso, but in Alto, and give all laud, and glory, and praise to him who sits
upon the Throne.

Let thy prayers begin with praise, the subject be thy God, the object his.
Attributes, the end adoration of his Name.

Come poor soul, let me school thee and tell thee, when thou art first in thy
own thoughts, thou art furthest from Gods acceptance; the Ear of gracious
audience. is shut, till the tongue tuned to the glory of God be first heard.

The Angels Ditty has taught me my duty, first to sing, glory to God; then to
pray, for peace upon earth, good will toward men.

Give me leave to contemplate upon the Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion of
that Dominus Dominantium.

A forethought what he is, how great he is, how good he is, is the wheel turns
about my heart from all earthly vanity. It is a service well pleasing to God,
profitable to my soul.

When I have given God his due honor, I may better expect my Masters reward.

O my God and my King, though I be subject to do it, yet by thy grace prevent
my unmannerly suting thee my God and Savior. Let not the eager desire I have
either after goods or forgiveness, make me forget in the first place to give
all glory and praise to thy Name. O let me give thee praise, then beg thy
mercy: Let me first sound out thy glory, that done, put up my own petitions to
thy Divine Majesty.

Though I can add naught to thy holiness, to thy honor, to thy power, yet I
can add to those celestial Attributes; my acknowledgement, how thou art a
God, most holy, most honorable, most powerful.

As Confession must precede Absolution; so my God and my Chirst, confession who
thou art, what thou art, must be sent on before, to usher in, my Home resenting
supplication.

O I will, or I dare to pray for my self, pray that thy great Name, thou great
God, may be hallowed, not by augmentation, but promulgation of it, from Dan to
Beersheba.

Let the trumpet of my lips first sound thy praise, that done, let my tongue
crave A somewhat for my self.

Let the first He mess his first petition.
born be my prayer to God for God; then let the needy ones my own petitions
come out after, who are borne to naught; yet by begging, may get a Blessing of
old Isaac the ancient of days; when I am first in my own thoughts, I am the
last in Gods Book.

Let me set my self and all my wants a while aside, till God be served; let his
glory be my aim in prime, the second place will serve all my needs. In
glorifying thee, a glorious good redounds to me.

I will not clip thy coin of glory, lest I go not for current in thy kingdom
of grace.

O that thou would enlarge my heart to give thee praise, lest the want of
this Foreman, cause the rest of the Jurore, my petitions to be excepted
against, in the presence of thee, the Judge of Heaven and Earth.

The second Petition.
THe second Petition now succeeds by name, Thy Kingdom come.

I will, God willing, speak upon The Number, The Nature, of the words to be
explained.

First for number, here is but one word difficult to be understood; two in the
former, one here; Can we learn no lesson from Gods plaining his speech? O it
shows us, 1. The more we acquaint our selves with God, Three Intracts.
more plainly he will speak to us. 2. As we grow in devotion, we shall grow in
understanding. 3. That Gods Word, with modesty the more we dive into it, the
more knowledge God gives to hold up our heads from drowning in the gulf of
false exposition.


I am resolved to hold out my Rosary, The Avowry with the Collect.
reinforce my genius to peruse the Scriptures, and all to prevent misprision,
augment my talent, and enucleate the Text.

Here is only one word to be explained, Kingdom: This word may be taken four
ways.

1. For the Scripture: thus Mat. 21.43. where said, Auferetur a vobis regnum
Dei, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you. 2. For the visible Church,
thus Mat. 5.19. where said, He that shall break one of the least of these
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven. 3. It may be taken for the grace of God, Luke 17. where said, The
Kingdom of God is within you. 4. For the Church triumphant, Mat. 8.11. where
said, Many shall come from the East and the West, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Now all may be here meant though in prime but one.

1. And then we pray in this Petition, That Gods Word, and its understanding
may come among us.

2. That upon earth there may be a fellowship of faithful professors visible.

3. That Gods grace sent by that said his Spirit, in that Chariot the
ministry of his Word, may visit our hearts.

4. That these days of misery being perioded, Gods Kingdom of glory, we may
be seated in it.

In one word, we pray for four things.

1. That the word of God and its sound may be heard in our land. 2. That we may
be Gods visible Church on earth. 3. For Gods grace. 4. And for heaven at our
ending.
Of this last, what hopes without that precedent?

A circumvolution of the four fold sense.
Again its presumption to brag of grace; and live without the Church. Lastly,
it we aim at all we must do a somewhat more. It you purpose to be members of
the Church, be inspired with the Spirit, hereafter have heaven, let the Word of
God dwell plentifully in your hearts.

I am resolved for my own part to make much of Gods Word, The Avowry with the
Collect.
a mean to make me a member of the Church, aequire grace, and gain heaven.

You may be bad ground and sown with this seed, A review.
the Word, where this seed, Interpretation, 1.
the Word, for so its called, Luke 8. is not sown, that most fertile soils,
manured with Ethics and the humane arts, brings out but figtree-like cursed
fruit. Hence it is, we pray, way may be made for the Word of God, and it may
come, ut adveniat hoc regnum, that the kingdom may come. So the Latin
signifies, which makes us sensible of Two things, Extracts two.
1. Our Condition. 2. That in Expectation.


1. Of our Condition, that we are dronish in our devotion, and love our ease
more than our gains, apparent while we pray, Thy Kingdom come to us, we walk
not on to it.

2. This in the second place, makes us sensible of what in expectation. That
since, advenit verbum, the Word is come into our towns, oratories. ears, that
now prayed for is, that the Word may enter into our hearts.

I am resolved to take notice of my backwardness in devotion, The Avowry.
and all to make me more eager, now this Messenger.
said Gods Word is come, to open the door of my heart and give it harbor.

Now this word its hieroglyphick or resemblance, is a Kingdom, for whilst we
pray Gods Kingdom may come, we mean Gods Word the word of truth.

And in these particulars, the resemblance holds,

1. For Kingdom like, Resembances.
Gods Word is of power to correct, instruct, and reprove. 2. It Is of force
sufficient to make all outlawes, inlaw themselves to Gods Law. 3. Has strength
enough to meet in the field, and to oppose all opposers, be they Schismatics
or Heretics; Schismatic in Discipline, or Heretical in Doctrine. 4. The
Nerves of a Kingdom are meat and ammunition; such is the Word, we live by it,
Deuteronomy. 8.3 it is called, the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. has in it, to
feed at home, and defend abroad. 5. The best of Kingdoms Canaan had its
commendation, for abounding with milk and honey: such is this whole land, the
word, and therefore called sincere milk, 1 Pet. 2.2.
And therefore aver'd when the Prophet Ezekiel had put in his mouth a morsel
of this earth, that it was in his mouth, as honey for sweetness, Ezekiel. 3 3.

I have traveled through the land of the Philistims, and the wilderness of
Sin. A Supplicat.
But now O Lord strengthen my resolution, to set up my resting place of abode
in this he means the word Taught.
Kingdom.

That here we pray for, is a visible Church, Interpretation, 2.
thy Kingdom come, that is, Lord let us enjoy a Church visible. This
interpretation I next bring in, for that unmeet to be a Church, until it have
received Gods good word.

Here we have leave to pray, as against an Elias his paucity, and the 7000.
enforced concealment: So for liberty to continue daily in the Temple, and to
find the favor to preach and hear the Gospel, Act. 2.46, 47.

We pray then in this petition, and it is allowed, for God, by this second
Exposition.

1. That God may add daily unto the Church, Extracts two.
such as shall be saved. 2. For the flourishing estate of the Church to the
outward eye of the world.
Diverse can endure the Queens Church.
Daughter to be all glorious within: but not, that her Raiment should be of
pure gold.

They cry all for sincerity within, will tolerate no honorable train without.
Others would have the Church in worse case than Nebuchadnezzars Image, an head
of clay and arms of iron: Supremacy they wish not well: the Clergy they make no
more count of than iron metal, or S. Judes trees, as if our silver Chalices
brought in wooden priests; nay rather our rich Tithes have brought in a Sect, a
sort of devilish damnable Church Robbers, who mean to go to heaven another
way, than ever their deceased ancestors; those went by building Churches, these
by robbing the Chruch of her Tithes: I wonder that these should make such a
show of holiness, when so full of sacrilege: they abhor Idols, and yet, etc.

But come, what is it here we pray for, in this petition, while heard saying,
Thy Kingdom come?

State of the Church.
That is, Lord let there be a visible Church upon Earth: yea, let the Church
seem, when Seen, 1. Like a Kingdom, not like a carrion, with nothing on, but
skin and bone. We have a company of poor Vicars and Curats in our Country will
swear she is almost as ill like. 2. Not like a solitary Cottage with naught
left, and as few in it. Nay, as a Kingdom has a superplus of inhabitants and
habitations: so all good Christians ought to pray, may be the state of this our
Church; Kingdom like, the professors innumerable. Kingdom like, the Churches
profits proportionable.


To what purpose patter they over this prayer, whose exorbitant lives are the
death of those should be subjects of this Kingdom, the Church, the visible
Church.

They prate, they pray not, who pray for the coming of this Kingdom, that is,
the visibility of the Church. But while they have an eye on the Steeple, lay
unlawful hands on the Tithes, and leave not this innocent The Church.
Ewe till they have shorn off her fleece, and left her as sore wounded as was
the poor Traveller.

God she may once meet, The Supplicat.
with an honest Samaritan may show her some compassion.

That here we pray for, Interp. 3.
is the grace of God; as a visible Church, so invisible grace: by means of the
one, we are able to manage our selves, maugre all mutinous mankind; and by
this other to support our spirituals, against that unclean spirit with seven
worse than himself, spoke of, Mat. 12.47. Now this exposition I set here after
the other, for that in ordinary we must first have a subject, or in hopes of an
adjunct, a being in the Church, or the least expectance of our well being, I
mean of our being true sanctified members of the Church.

That then which according to this Exposition, we pray for, while we say, Thy
Kingdom come, is, that God would beslow his grace upon us: A magazine of Grace.
a magazine full of which you have laid up, in Gal. 5.24.

That I infer, is, since by Kingdom may be meant the grace of God; 1. That
grace is of great force. Extracts two.
2. He that is inricht with it, may thank God for it.


The first deduction my Master Christ made good, when he said to Paul, My grace
is sufficient of thee.

The latter that demand determins, Quid habes, quod non accepisti? the question
putting it out of question, that God is the author of every good and perfect
gift.

And new O Lord give me of thy grace, The Supplicat.
and I will fight it out against the greatest Goliath that comes down to
upbraid the Israel of my God.

By this Kingdom, Interp. 4.
may be meant the Kingdom in heaven, or Church the Kingdom in heaven, or
Church triumphant: and this I place after the Kingdom of Grace,

Quod non possumus venire ad deum per gloriam, nisi ipseprimo veniat ad nos per
gratiam, If thus we interpret this petition, this is the meaning, Lord, we thy
Church on earth desire a fight and seat in thy Church in heaven: and that we of
thy Church Militant, may be made members of thy Church Triumphant; Cujus erit
possessio sine timore, usus sine fastidio, refectio sine cibo: In which
kingdom thou may live without fear, eat without surset, be fed full fat and
fair, need not go down to Egypts barns to buy bread; nay what, being an
indenized Citizen in the heavenly Kingdom, can thou want? Desire thou
Beauty? Three Extracts.
fulgebunt justi sicut Sol.

2. Or agility of Body? eris sicut angeli.

3. Or long life? ibi erit aeterna sanitas, there thou shall live for ever.

O my soul obtain this boon, Solilequium.
and in getting it thou gainest all.

I will ever pray for Heaven, The Avowry.
since having I cannot want, what is in most repute upon earth.

The third part of my method, warns me to forage these words, and gather up,
of them the points of Doctrine which grow upon them. To help us do this, we
must make use of the division of this petition into parts, naturally it
dissects it self into two parts: In Objectum. In Actum.


The Object of the petition is Gods Kingdom.

The next in sight is the Act, let is come, thy Kingdom come: Or, Lord let thy
Kingdom come.

The object of our supplicat, is, O God, thy Kingdom: Take it by way of
superexcellency, as primarily meant of Gods Kingdom in Heaven, to which the
Word points, the Church leads, and their parts, to prepare us for Gods heavenly
Kingdom. While the Word begets, the. Church brings out, and Grace trains up us
mortals, making us fit to be made immortal inhabitants of that everlasting
Kingdom, Gods Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven, which is here described By its
Propriety. By its Immensity.


By its Propriety, Thy.

By its Immensity, Kingdom: A word avouches, Heaven carries the Bole and Bulk
of a Commonveal.

1. The propriety prays us to take notice, Thy.
possessive, pleads Gods right to it, and estates him in it. This earth God
has bestowed on us, Heaven he has reserved for himself, and to it, he has
right, Ratione Creationis. Gods title to Heaven.
Ratione Possessionis.


1. By right of Creation, a Deo creatur, God made Heaven, Genesis 1.

2. By right of possession, est Dei seeds, it is Gods Seat, Isa 6.1. and 66.1.

And to show Gods absolute power over, and owning Heaven, you shall read in the
Revelations, how the Elders in heaven reverence him. And in the second of Luke,
how a multitude of heavenly soldiers praise him, singing, and all to the
honor of the great God, A song of 3 parts, in Alto. Basso. Medio.


1. In Alto, Heavens prisksong.
Glory be to God on high.

2. In Basso, Peace upon earth.

3. In Medis, Good Will toward men.

To let pass his soldiers love, his Elders reverence his long possession, and
from first creating, make up a good plea, and entitle God to the Kingdom of
Heaven.

He that has made thus much, The Avowry.
and is owner of no less; for my own part, I am resolved upon it, his right of
inheriting not once to question.

2. For Immensity, that begged is a Kingdom, the Kingdom of heaven: Hence take
notice,

1. For spaciousness, For spaciousness.
speciousnesse it has no fellow: he that stands upon his pantables, is never
so high in his own conceit, might there have room enough to turn him in.

Again, though straight be the way, yet wide is this high land, Heaven. It is
verily imagined, that look how much wider is the world, than the least prison,
so much is heaven bigger than earth. And if diverse stars, as the Astronomers
teach, be bigger than the whole earth, of what immense unmeasurable bigness
are the Heavens, in which are fixed so many millions of stars?

2. For speciousnesse, 2. For speciousnesse.
it is neither the wavie Curtains of the air, the flowery Carpet of the earth,
nor yet the whole host of Creatures, have half that luster, spendor, as in
heaven.

There Is to be seen that City, whose pavement is of pure gold, and as it were
transparent glass. The four and twenty Elders with their Crowns on their heads,
twelve thousand of every Tribe following the Lamb. Yea, it was there St. Paul
saw such things for state, not sit to be spoken of, or uttered.

I am resolved to make strong suit to God, The Avowry.
and be earnest in prayer with him, and all that I may have an inheritance, in
that place so spacious, specious.

The object Heaven, I must now part with it, yet it is my hopes, I shall once
meet with it, and to the purpose.

The Act is next in sight, let it come, a Boon we beg of God, O God, thy
Kingdom come; as much as, Let thy Kingdom come.

The note is worth writing down in the table books of your remembrance.

It is this, take livery and seisin: he that has the most in hand, has not
this, while this life lasts, a bar is put in, hindering our possession of the
Kingdom of heaven.

It was never heard corruption could inherit incorruption, we must have
patience and wait, till this corruptible, put on incorruptibility, and this our
mortal, immortality; after our change, we shall find a change, and forgo
earth, and own heaven.

This lifetime is a school-time, whilst it lasts: we, though schooleboyes,
may be heirs, and have right to inherit; but while school-time, not admit to
take this our estate in possession: there is not an heaven upon earth. Four
sorts of Seekers and Missers.
It Is not to be found at Dives his board, though the Epicure be gone thither to
meet with it.

2. Nor yet at Belshazzars feast, all there in sight is, pot-luck, and wit-lack.

3. Our impropriators are seeking for Heaven in the Chancell and Parsonage
house, among the gleabe and tithe; but I never heard of any had so good hap, as
whilst he was robbing Gods house, to hit on Gods Kingdom.

4. The Usurer makes his gold his God, and it makes me imagine, he thinks his
counting house his heaven; without all doubt it is his conceit, he showed
himself a wise man in getting so much, but a fool, for thinking too well of it.

Saul, while he sought his fathers Asses, hit of a Kingdom; here are a company
imagine they have found the Kingdom, however we have hit upon the Asses.

A word is enough to the wise, we befoole our selves, if we, whilst earth,
humor our selves we have heaven, let us wait for the time, in the mean time
possess our souls with patience, neither conceiting we have heaven, nor yet
despairing of what to come.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I am resolved to comfort my heart with what I may have, yet not mis-spell
posse for esse, nor take a reversion to come, for a plenary possession in
present.

The next part of my method obliges me to bring in some cases of conscience,
and so draw more close home to this petition.

The Cases are three, 1. Case.
the first is this, whether do any doubt there be such a thing as prayed for,
called Kingdom of Heaven, or the Heavenly Kingdom.

Know it, some believe no more than they see: some say they believe more than
they do. The one his eye is the founder of his faith: the other his belief is
no better than lip-labor; the incredulous Atheist, the hyppocriticall
Formalist; the one is an open enemy, the other a close underminer, and both ill
willers to this Thesis, vid. that there is such a thing, as an heavenly
Kingdom.

1. There is such a fool as has said in his heart, there is no God, no marvel
he swear there is no heaven, of all fools this is the fondest.

Had this fellow had Martyr Stevens eyes in his head, he might happily have
been made see more and believe, not so little.

But every one cannot have an eye like an eagle; yet some we see, have no more
wit than they stand in great need of, whilst not faith like a grain of mustard
seed.

2. The bare Formalist says that in public he doubts of in private, vid.
whether such a thing as called the Kingdom of Heaven, he can be content to pray
for it, does not much believe it.

But I am resolved on it, The Avowry.
as there is provided an Hell for miscreant believers, so an Heaven for Gods
elect Saints in Christ Jesus. Yea and for my own part, The Collect.
I profess I will never wilfully deny with the profane Atheist, nor covertly
make doubt, with the bare Formalist, of the real existence, and being of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Second Case is this, 2. Case.
Whether shall all living go to heaven? I am no Hickman who believes an
universality of salvation, nor no Novatian debars all such as have sinned
mortally, post baptismum, from being saved: the former is too charitable, the
latter too severe; as not all, shall be saved, so no all those he means who
have committed actual sin after Baptism.
be damned.

But come, let us neither with the one, be too strait-laced, nor with the other
divulge our opinion to smell of Libertinisme. We must let these he means into
heaven.
In to confound the Novatian: and send Judas to his proper Hell.
place, to confute Hickman.

I have a record can witness with me, Case resolved.
there is a sort shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven. Paul has copied it
out, and you shall find it in that first Epistle of his to the Corinthians,
chap. 6. verse. 9, 10. If you be such you must not inherit, which who is not, I
would know the man.

A Soliloqium.
O my soul, shall I conceal the truth, what a lust have thou had to actuate,
how has conceived lust contaminated, though not brought forth, yet brought my
Christ to aver it, He that looks after a woman to lust after her in heart, has
commit adultery. Let Christ be true and all men liars, his ipse dixit is
sufficient, and must make such who hope the best, fear the worst: who is he,
can excuse himself, as not conscious, or dare profess he never did, no not one
of those works Gal. 5.19, 20.
of the flesh? If thou say thou have, then hear what God has to say unto
Verse. 21.
thee, they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

O my God and my Christ preserve me from sin, The Supplicat.
lest my sin debar me of thy Kingdom.

But what shall all they be damned,

Now give heed to what sall be said, my answer I mean to poise in even scales,
and let neither Hickmans tongue, nor Novatus his pen, I mean neither
presumptuous thoughts, nor despairing imaginations have the draught one of the
other.

All that live and die in the prequoted sins, Res.
shall be damned; it is thy sin makes thee guilty; it is thy persevering in thy
sin, that damns thee: the act of evil makes thee damnable; the act of evil
makes thee damnable; the continuance in thy evil, carries thee down into hell:
the Law is a Book-case, which opened by Gods Counselor, Moses, finds thee
guilty.

The Gospel is a Writ, called Melius ad inquirendum, and thou should fare
better if thou livedst not still as ill.

For by own part, by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
I am resolved upon it, what I have done to do no more, lest a worse turn
betide me: and as I cannot assoil my soul of evil, no more am I resolved to
hold on my evil courses.

Third Case is this, 3. Case.
Who shall be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven?

1. My answer is this: Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into
thr Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven.

God loves not him is naught but wind, thou may speak like an Angel, and go
to the Devil: know it, God is better pleased with deeds than words; works
among hand, please him at heart: let me tell thee, if thou neglect to do that
God bids, then look not to come where God lives: we must be men of action, if
we mean to go to Heaven, yea, and the square of our work be Gods will.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I am resolved upon it, to beg of God ability, what I say, to do; and that
which at large I profess, at leastwise in some poor measure I may practice.

2. Persever anti dabitur, to him that is faithful to the end, God will give a
Crown of life. O hold out and have Heaven, the promise is not past to him who
is to day a Protestant, to morrow a Papist; nor yet to him that begins in the
Spirit, ends in the fesh; nor yet to him who puts his hand to the plow, and
pulls it back; nor yet to Sir Henry Horspur who puts on fast at first, is soon
tired: who like the bird Glott is, Hist.
flies fiercely in the forenoon, but in the afternoon, lags and comes behind.

The Woodcocks flight is unfortonate, to make such have, and so soon be tired:
mistake me not, I dislike not, your taking up your dough on your shoulders, and
in haste to high out of Egypt. That I inveigh against, is, your not holding out
to your journeys end, but sitting down with Gad and Reuben on this side Jordan.

For my own part, I am resolved by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
as I have begun, so to go on: yea, with Elias to hold out my pace, till I come
to that heavenly Horeb the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Petenti dabitur, ask and you shall have: Let us pray for what we want, and
we cannot want what we pray for; dumb men get no land: The land of Heaven.
Canaan, in it expect no portion, if not bespoke. He that speaks to God by
prayer, comes to him like a beggar, is sent away like a King, with a Kingdom.

It Is no time now to be tongue-tide, when hearty prayer procures thus much.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I am resolved upon it, never to give over praying to God, lest my forbearing
to pray, deprive me of Gods Kingdom.

4. Vincenti dabitur, He that can conquer earth sahll own heaven: command O man
thy self, and heaven is at thy command; never am I so sure of an excelse The
Kingdom of heaven.
fortune, as when my lofty imaginations I bring low; If I can overruled my self
here, it is Gods will I shall rule with him in heaven. Here is a this flesh
Goliath I must overmaster, or no hopes to succeed in the Kingdom: he that
inthrals-himself to his lust, has got a new keeper, and one will keep him from
going to heaven.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I will do my best devoir, not to let sin reign im my mortal body, lest my
letting it here keep a quarter, exclude my doby and soul out of heaven.

The fist moity of my method is this, to divulge what graces we have from this
petition, given in Commendum: They be two, Faith. Patience. Graces two.



The Paralle.
Faith to believe the Kingdom to come.

Patience to wait till it do come.

Faith, whose eye is ever intent upon on a remote object.

Patience, who only eyes, and none else but it owner.

It is Faith which estates me in the heavenly Kingdom.

It is Patience which procures my stay, till the Kingdom come.

The first, Faith, makes my tack good

This latter, Patience, the This life.
interim, no annoyance.

I am resolved to be earnest with my God, The Avowry.
to give me two such gifts of grace, as both assure me of kingdom of heaven.
that I want, and without the least repining, overcomes mean man to wait the
Lords leisure.

Faith is that Jacob's Ladder, Faiths Character.
by which I ascend up from off earth into heaven.

It is Faith, intitles me to a Kingdom in reversion, though I have not a
molehill in possession. Faith is the evidence of things not seen, and as
needful as is Evidence to lay claim by, to an inheritance; as requisite is
faith for a suppliant to estate him in the Kingdom of Heaven. He that with an
honest heart to God will put up this petition, stands need of Faith to believe
an heaven. Though my reason fails me to comprehend, my faith overcomes me to
believe a Kingdom to come, my common sense can reach no higher than to
sublunaries, it is my faith reaches to Celestials; my prayer is neither pithy
nor patheticall, if my reason be nor interlared with faith.

I prate, I pray not, if I sall short to believe an heaven. And here though I
have leave to live in an earthly Kingdom, want faith, and I shall never enjoy
the Kingdom of Heaven: as my tongue must be guided by reason, so my heart led
on by says, or else in vain I say this petition: my faith must be founded on
Gods Words, and his Word is the wafter transports faith to my ear, All said is
true, and for certain. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
preached: it is then hearing brings believing, and what I only hear of, I am
ensur'd of belief, yea though I cannot set my eye on the Kingdom to come; the
eye of faith makes conspicuous what my bodily eye cannot discern. He that has
not faith to belleve what here prayed for, may pray all his life, yet miss
what he prays for.

For my own part, The Avowry.
while I pray with my tongue, I will believe with my heart, lest my want of
belief bereave my prayer of a blessing.

Secondly, Grace given here in Commendum, Patiences Character
is Patience, a mere stranger, whom we have often heard of, and I Wish we were
better acquainted with, one deceives the time, and brings a dismal day to an
happy end, one can make us content with what in hand, till we acquire what we
are to have: and assures us of that hereafter, which yet we never had: when we
rush fast on, with more have than good speed. It is Patience persuades us to
take time and wait the Lords leisure.

Behold a curious color of a fiery spirit, and the best delayer of the burning
fever of present desire. When I long for what I want, here is one overcomes me
to wait till my want be supplied: and where as by promise I have past me
heaven, Patience advises to pass by the present expectance, in hopes of future
performance. O thou qualifier of my desire, who wills me not yet to look for,
yet still to hope for; in whose repute is neither time past nor present, but to
come:

Since thou can procure me time to stay, The Avowry.
I am resolved to wait, yea and possess my soul with patience, till it be Gods
good pleasure to give me the Kingdom.

The sixth moity of my method, wills me to give you warning what Vices are
prohibited in this petition: They be two Misbelied, The Vices two.
and Impatience.


The Parallel.
Misbelief, all doubts.

Impatience, all anger.

Misbelief, which comdemns before the Assize.

Impatience, which is provoked before cause.

It is Misbelief makes me miss, of that I might have.

It is Impatience purveys for me, what I would not have.

I lose by the one, Heaven.

I get by the other, au Enemy.

It is this has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to banish both, since both enemies, impatience to my here-peace, misbelief to
my hereafter-happinesse.

Misbelief is of nigh alliance to incredulous Thomas, Misbeliefs Character.
one is more swayed by his own will, than Gods Word. An Heretic in judgment,
and since condemned to hell, believes no Heaven.

A licentious libertine, who lives as he list, while he list not believe. A
lover of this world, more than the world to come; whose love so dotes on what
he has, as makes him doubt of what to be Heaven.
had. Other limbs of the Devil offer the Kingdom of Heaven violence: but this
eldest son of Beliall, labors utterly to deface that all glorious Bilief that
Heavenis.
Architecture. It is misbelief abrases heaven out of men's thoughts, copes men's
thoughts and makes them earth in the burrow of terrene felicity, as though this
world were the chiefest good, as though there were no heaven, but on earth.

O how this Vice disglories God, and robs him of his Crown, Throne, and
Kingdom!

I am ever resolved to live at odds with him is so great an enemy of the
Kings; The Avowry.
and to dilate my dear affection to Gods Kingdom, I will ever live at deadly
feude with infidelity.

Impatiences Character.
The second Vice this petition warns us to banish, is Impatience, one I must go
talk with, yet care not much for his company. This is filius ante diem, a base
bred brat, brought out before due time; a hasty fellow, and too forward, minds
not, what is prayed for, must be stayed for: and that bad desert must rest
content with after owning. This is he, is more forward than wise, and would
have, what none here living have, Heaven in hand. How do we wrong our Fortune,
when we will needs have it before our time. Though I desire to be dissolved,
and be with Christ, yet will I wait till the Lord give and the Lord take. I
will not unmannerly haste God till he please, lest I displease God with my
haft: we must first work, then have wages; yet some would have wages ere they
work; yea be glorified, ere have suffered, as if Christ wore not a Crown of
Thorns, before a Crown of Glory.

Let me resolve upon it, to abandon all impatience, The Avowry.
and suffer till the eleventh hour, since afterward in hopes to have paid at
the evening of my life, a penny of glory in the Kingdom to come.

A Contemplation upon the second Petition.

Thy Kingdom Come.

Can I say this petition and not sigh to think how far from home? An high
fortune, and yet but in expectation.

O I would not pray for that I want, but that I want what I pray for.

It is my misery, that I dwell with Meseck; I should be happy, could I get to
Zoar: O the day of my deliverance is not yet come; while here I abide, my day
is turned into night: after this transitory mometary life time, my night of
sorrow shall be turned into a day of everlasting joy.

Let me poyse my soul betwixt fear and hope, and fear while that I hope, yet
hope in the midst of fear.

I will not despair, for a Kingdome's to come; I will not presume, since there
is a cast at hazard who shall inherit.

How slow-footed is my soul, must the Kingdom come to thee? Will thou not go
on to it? Let me advance on to grace, and glory will give me meeting: let me
not go down to Pall, Lud, Tubal, nor yet to Javan of the Gentiles, let me with
the two men go up unto the Temple; The Church way, is the way to the Kingdom:
come I see, I must take pains, and walk on to the Church militant, I shall
never else be a member of the Church Triumphant. O Lord let that Kingdom thy
Word, dwell plentifully in me, then shall thy kingdom of glory be inherited by
me.

But O my soul, take some more solace in these high fortunes to be had in
future. Thou have a sons portion in hand, thou shall have a Princes patrimony
in reversion.

O let me press on then to the prize of my high calling: I am called on to be
a Kings, and to enjoy a Kingdom, shall I trifle away time, till it be past
time; there is but one way, and it is a narrow way; but one gate, and it is a
strait gate, which leads unto this Kingdom: Let me not be numbered among the
foolish virgins, who stayed behind till the door was shut: But O with
Mephibosheth I am lame, Lord that my ankle bones may receive strength; suffer
me not with Gad and Ruben to stay on his side Jordan, ferry my soul, through a
sea of tears, to a land of joy; while here, I am by the banks of Babel, and
cannot tune that instrument my Heart, to warble our an Israelitish note, bring
thy servant to that place of eternal bliss; and then O God and my King, my
lips shall show forth thy praise, and my spirit shall rejoice in God my Savior.

The third Petition.
NOw succeeds the third Petition, Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

The old method shall still be observed.

First to explain the words difficult to be understood.

This is the third petition, and here are three words to be explained in it.

The first word difficult to be understood is the word, Will: it has been a
received opinion, Gods will is twofold Secret. Revealed.


Gald by the School men Voluntas finis, and Voluntas medii.


The first, is the will of God concerning the end.

The second, the will of God concerning the means leading to the end.

The first of these has relation to the glorified in heaven, the punished in
hell.

The other to the Saints exercising gracious life, but never to sinners living
a lewd life.

To bring these home to the Petition, here we pray for Gods will to be done,
that voluntus finis segregatim, it may stand with the secret will of God in his
good time to glorify those predestined.

Non conjunctim, we call not of him to will the punishing of the reprobate in
hell.

Secondly, we pray to God his will may be done, that is, voluntas medii: the
overture of the means of grace may be offered to us, and we lay hold of it; yet
was it never Gods will: that the means, sins which bring men to hell, that they
should actuate, and abominable and blasphemous were it to pray for it.

1. We pray then that Gods will may be done, that is, that it may be his
actuated will, that such as he in secret has predestined may be glorified,
we pray not it may be Gods will, any to be damned.

We pray that the revealed means of grace, mediums to glory, may be proffered
and profitable to all: but the means leading to Hell, which are sins, God never
wills; have we any cause then to pray him to will them?

It is Gods will, and we pray for it, the means of grace, not the means to damn
man. The first, God wills, not the latter. It is Gods will, and we pray for it,
the glorifying man in heaven, not the punishing any in hell; both which God
wills, only the first we pray for.

But to leave these acute passages, primarily, as I conceive, Gods revealed
will we pray may be perfected, that it may be done, which looks ad Deum.
Hominem.


The object of Gods revealed will.
Being twofold, respectu Sui. respectu Nostri.


We pray the will of God quatenus ad Deum speciat, may be done by him, as that
whereas he has willed it, he may do it, convert the Gentiles, call home the
Jews, and let the sound of his Word go through all nations. And yet S. Cyprian
persuades me this is not the will we are willed to pray may be accomplished:
who says, Non petimus ut Deus faciat quod vult, sed ut nos facere possimus
quod Deus vult: we do not pray in this petition, that God would bring to pass
what he has said he would do: but here we pray for an ability for us to do as
God wills.

Respectu nostrum, we pray, what is Gods will, we may have power and strength
to do it.

Thy will O Lord, not my will, thy will only, not thine and mine, thy will let
it be done, though I have been unwilling.

Whatsoever God in his word wills, we must pray for ability to do it.

And thrust back, will the natural, our will the corrivall, wilful will would
bear all the sway, stet proratione voluntas, like good subjects, let Gods will
stand for a Law with us. That we pray for then, and it is allowed for good in
this petition, is that Gods will may by us be accomplished.

The two then in the scales, are Gods will, and man's work, this is to be
directed, by that preponed.

As if, what man did, should sent of what God willed, as if what is Gods will
may be our work.

Well then I will not live in any notorious sin, Res.
lest while I say this petition, and desire power to perform, I blaspheme.

Secondly, I have learnt out a fit mate to match with my works, it is Gods will.

Lord that we could spy these two and for ever together, our works then would
have no such adulterous offspring.

For my own part I am resolved, The Avowry.
the will of God shall be the square of my work, neither will I undertake to do
that work is opposite against Gods good will and pleasure.

The second word to be explained, is Earth, apparent while prayed, Thy will be
done in Earth; such may be the stones as be we, if God will, such were we, as
the earth, at the beginning. There being such consanguinity, betwixt that we
tread on, and we that tread on it, may put us, and in doubt what is meant
whilst said, Thy will be done in Earth. That in chief, is, that Gods written
will may be done.

In this Earth, pro loco, by us who are Earth, pro materia.

Here we pray that all the inhabitants upon the earth, may apply their best
endeavors to do what God wills, were our practice suitable to our prayers, our
prayers protest we should all the practis of Divine duties.

Well, The Avowry.
while we put up this petition for all on Earth to do Gods will, I will call to
mind what we all should do, but bemoan, our tongues and lives are at odds.

But while we talk of Earth, Heaven must not be forgotten, which is the third
word to be explained. And as by Earth, is meant men on earth; so by Heaven
Angels in Heaven.

And are Angels set to be men's samplers? pretty patterns, and could we take
them out, our Master Christ would take it for well done.

O thou who made us in thy own likeness, The Supplicat.
vouchsafe of thy wonted goodness, that thy will may be done by us as by the
Angles.

Nor is this all, other acceptations are at hand, would you be pleased to
accept of them.

1. Some understand by Earth Infidels, by Heaven the faithful. The faithful
are the lowest region of Gods Heavenly Kingdom. The Infidels are the upper
regiment of the Devils earthly dominion: and yet it is prayed for, that Gods
will may be done by the one, as by the other; by the Infidels, as by the
faithful.

O my God, His Vote.
for all that all thy servants study to do thy will, yet will I beg that, that
many may be made more by the conversion of the Infidels.

2. Again, This flesh, its original is earth: the mind of man, a kin to an
heavenly being, which has caused some to harbor this conceit, that by Earth
may be meant this flesh of ours, or part unregenerate, by Heaven the mind or
part regenerate; to which if we condescend, we must thus then read this
petition, Thy will be done by the flesh, as it is by the mind; by the flesh
which serves the Law of sin, as by the mind which serves the law of God. Here
are two parties in this Isle of Man; the one holds of God in Heaven, the other
of the Devil in Hell; and as Israel was divided betwixt Rehoboam and Jeroboam;
so this Isle of man is made a divident: All is not for God, a corrupt part,
takes part with the Devil.

This is it shall make me petition God, His Vote.
that as that part of my mind, which is regenerate, so more of me may
subscribe to do Gods will.

3. Some by Earth may understand the Church militant, while by Heaven, Christ
the head of the Church triumphant, and would have this the meaning of this
petition, Thy will be done by the Church in Earth, as it is done by thy Son in
Heaven. Here we pray the Chuch on earth may take Christ in Heaven for a
sampler, and that we the members of this his Church would make his will our
rule.

O God, we of thy Church will study to do thee service, yet confess, The
Avowry.
we have every day cause to beg we may come nigher the sampler of true
obedience, Christ Jesus.

This distinguishing upon the three words, which seemed difficult to be
understood, is, the porter has brought the sense of this petition, to the
sense of your hearing.

The genuine meaning, is a collect of what said, and now we have speld, let us
put together. Prime loco, here we beg of God he would enable us men on earth to
do his will as do the Angels in heaven.

Which is, Alacriter, Joyfully. Celeriter, Readily.


Not by constraint, as some come to the Church, more for fear than love, not
latchingly, as those who came into the vineyard at the eleventh hour, meaning
to have much for doing little: when we go about Gods business we must be merry
countenanced, and nimble footed, look blithely, and dispatch speedily.

These two they crown the action, and shows the willingness of the whole man
to serve his Maker, such a suppliant though he cannot lay claim to ought by his
own merit, yet may presume of Gods mercy, whereas a grumbling servant, a
delatory delayer, when as he thinks he has done Gods work, may be paid in the
Devils coin. As what we must do, must be what God wills, so all we do, be
dispatched, Angel-like, with alacrity, with celerity, this is the choice sense
of this petition. And yet here is involved a boon for Infidels to do Gods will
as do the faithful, for this flesh of ours to inlaw it self to the Lord as
does the mind regenerate.

Lastly, that this Church of Gods upon earth may conform it self to the will
of God as did the Head Christ.

And now what we have said, The Supplicat.
that it may be, and really performed, Dear Father, grant us thy children this
one boon, that thy will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

We are next to produce the Doctrines, to find them out, we will be beholding
to the division of this petition, dissecting it self into two parts: 1. The
subject matter. 2. The restrictive manner.


The subject matter prayed for, is, Thy will be done in Earth.

The restrictive manner, as it is in Heaven. What God wills, we pray we may do,
yet not as we will, but as the same is done in Heaven.

The first part of the petition, petitions us, to take these particulars into
our considerations.

1. Whose will it is we must beg ability to actuate, it is gods, not ours; the
Prououne Thy
possessive will depose this is true. 2. The ubi, or place where, it is here in
Earth: this place must be no privileged place, Gods will must be done in
Earth.
First we pray for ability to actuate Gods will, here is no noise of ours, but
Gods, as if ours unworthy, or our selves self-wil'd, and led more by foolish
fancy, than rectified reason. Every beggar affects his own brat, how ever
deformed, for this cause, here is express charge, and from the Kings own son,
to suit God to give us grace to place his issue before our imp, and that not
the offspring of us, our wills, But O Lord that thy will be preferred.

O it comes hardly off with us to do what God wills,

Christ prayed not, My will but thy will be done. And that he might subset his
inferior or natural appetite to save life, to Gods decreed will to lay down his
life for us all. Romans ^.


What the law of nature without a taunt might plead for, Christ prays it may
not stand against Gods determinate counsel.

It gives us just cause of surmise now nature is corrupt it is untoward. And we
forward enough, to will what God would not.

The modest petition of my Messiah without sin, The Avowry.
shall make me sinful man confess my refractorinesse, to do the will of the
Lord.

Let us now walk on to the ubi, the place where Gods will is to be done, in
Earth.

This life time is no privileged time for following our own wills and
appetites, do what they like. There is not a day exempt from Gods service to
serve the Devil. All our days we must devote to God, and live to him:
religion in the name of God, claims a right in thy youth and age. Till earth to
earth, that is all this life, we must subscribe to what God has willed we
should do, here while we stay, hear what we must do, Gods will in Earth as it
is in Heaven.

But what continually to be in our devotion, is this your meaning?

What I have said, is no enemy to honest pastime, nor yet to Christian
employment. But as Schoole-boyes the most their time, is set apart to ply and
con. A little time is licensed to recreate them in. So God and the lessons he
has to teach us, require the major part. The minor part, there is a
connivence, for pursuance of pleasure profit, always provided, so it be in the
Lord.

I will mind what I am made for, and while I have to do with the world, The
Avowry.
call to mind my life must be devoted unto the Lord.

Now I come to the Doctrines deductible from the restrictive manner, we must
beg of God ability to do his will in Earth as it is in Heaven.

See you not Heaven is set to be Earths pattern, Os homini sublime dedit, says
the Poet, God has made man to look up, as ever to have an eye on his masters,
such are the Angels, Gods servants, but our Schoolemasters: and as the Master
is more perfect in the Lecture than the shooleboy, so they than we. We desire
to know, they do know: we desire to do what we know, The Parallel.
it is they can do what God has made known unto them: in our works are many
weaknesses, in theirs not the least of imperfection: we procrastinate, they cry
haste, haste for his Majesty's service; yea their wings witness their
readiness, willingness.

I will resolve upon it, The Avowry.
while earth to cast an eye at Heaven, and to make those all The Angels.
glorious creatures, the samplers of my readiness, willingness to do the will
of my Father which is in Heaven.

Again, the three persons by turns have all of them undertaken to teach us.

Angels, scholars in their uppermost Lecture, are set to be our samplers to
guide our Our wills and affections.
feet in the ways of God.

That I note is this: We have diverse schoolemasters,

Five things I infer from this Thesis.

First, God would we were good scholars, so much pains is to make us profit.
Secondly, we can want no teaching, no whilst a God, Angels, or any creatures.
Thirdly, there are no few lessons to learn, where many messengers, many
messages. Fourthly, we are hard of learning, with Fambo, some are nineteen year
a learing one line. Fifthly, here may be a strong surmise by these many eyes
over us, we would play the Trewants: in very deed, man naturally has no heart
to what is good.
But since I have so much teaching, The Avowry.
I am resolved by Gods good assistance, not to lose my time, byt ot mind what
it is my Master has to say unto me.

The Cases of Conscience are the fourth moity of my method, which are three.
First is this: Whether is a perfect obedience to Gods will required? I. Case.


To this question I give this resolution. Christ would never have set us to
pray for it, if God had not looked for it: it were needless for man to pray
for so much, if his Creator would be content with ought less. I am enjoined by
God, to do, what my Christ wills me to pray I may do. A perfect obedience then
is required at our hands, and we must do what God wills, as do the Angels.

Since now, O Lord, The Avowry.
I have thus much to do. I will dismiss my worldly business to follow this my
heavenly calling.

We have seen what we should do, 2. Case.
now let us see what it is we are able to do, and so I come to the second Case,
Whither are we able to do, all God does will?

1. My answer is negative, No, apparent first by our every day confession we
break all Gods commandments.

2. By Esays evidence, we are all unclean, all our righteousness is like unto
filthy rags.

3. By our prayer put up, we need not beg that which is within our reach, it is
that we pray for, we have no power over, my beseeching God to grant, shows my
want: and since I pray for ability to do Gods will, it assures me, the good I
would I cannot.

I will confess my frailty, The Avowry.
and always acknowledge, though to will be present with me, yet I find no
means to perform that which is good.

And so I come to the third Case, 3. Case.
how we are made capable to attain to do, what God does will we should do.

To this I answer, To will, is of our own power, but to will what we should and
do it, is God: the instrument is ours, the right use of it from God. In me is a
something, vid. to will, That it object, is good, I may thank God for it, of
whom is both the will and the deed, that is the willing good, and doing the
good I have willed. But my last avowry prefers a quere to be discust, and tells
us, even man in the state of grace, who has a will to do good, finds no means
to finish the work, he has willed.

But know it, that is not meant of a total defect, but a plenary performall,
though he fail in most, not in all.

It seems then by Gods good aid, Gods child may both will and do good, yet not
all the good, God does will in his Law.

To this I answer, God has a twofold Law.

There is Lex Operum, Lex Fidei,
the Law of works. the Law of Faith.


The Law of Works requires an exact and fingular obedience, at all times, in
all places, to all particular statute Laws enacted by the Lord, I pray for
this, cannot attain to it height; pray for progress, though fail to fulfill.

The Law of Faith requires a full belief, what I cannot do, my Christ has done
it for me, for which I pray, and may attain.

But can you prove, a man may be made righteous without the Law of Works, that
is, without exact keeping all the Commandments.

Believe not me, Res.
but S. Paul, who Rom 3.21, 22.
says, the righteousness of God without the Law, that is, without the Law of
Works, is made manifest, even the righteousness of God, which is by faith in
Christ Jesus, unto all, and upon all them that believe; here are Faith and
Works met, they are at ods about reconciling man to God. But here is one
inspired with Gods own Spirit, Paul the Apostle, he certifies us, it is not
works the Law of Works, but faith the Law of Faith, which justifies and makes
the believer reputed a fulfiller of Gods will. The Law of Moses had been able
to have saved us, if we had been able to have observed it: now that we cannot
observe the Old Law of Moses, God has made a New Law, we shall be saved by
belief in Christ Jesus, and this is called the New Covenant. When God gave out
the Law of Works first, it was not to save any by it, for God knew, none could
do what he commanded: but the Law of The ten Commandments.
Works was given, First, to discover man's infirmities, Three ends of the Law,
to discover, to humble, to guide on.
like a glass in which to let him see the warts and wens growing upon the face
of his Conscience. Secondly, that Law was given to humble man, whileft seeing
he had enjoined so much, and had failed in all. Thirdly, that Law was given, to
be a Schoolmaster, to teach man the way to his Master, which Master, is our
Lord and Savior, who has done for man, what man cannot for himself, whose
belief Christ has done it for him, brings all home, and makes, it man's own.


How can Christ's fulfilling the Law be made mine?

Let me ask thee, Did not one sin, Res.
and all became guilty? Will thou not then admit this ones righteousness is
able to make many righteous? If thou will not, I will prove it, by an
undeniable witness, Est Deus test is, God is my witness, whilst he says,
Isa. 53.11
By my righteous servant, shall many be made righteous: that place will
persuade thee to subseribe to what delivered.

The sin of one brought death upon all, and the righteousness of one, should
it restore life but to one? since the sin of the first Adam was made mine, why
may not the righteousness of thesecond Adam be made to appertain to me?

The disobedience of one has spoiled me, and shall not the obedience of
another better me? It is my belief, and this my belief is grounded upon Gods
word; that as by one man came sin into the world; so by that one man Christ
righteousness. And as we whilst Adam did transgress, were reputed for
transgressors, so we, Christ fulfilling Gods Law, are reputed to do, what is
Gods will in the Law. The honor of the deed is dayed us, yet not by the Law of
Works, but by the Law of Faith in Christ Jesus, while our belief in him estate
us in his Works. The Avowry.


For my onw part, I am resolved upon it, to beg of God the gift of faith, which
can interest me in that I never swet for, yea, and though I fail in much, make
me reputed one who has done Gods will in earth, as it is in Heaven.

We stand in need of two Graces to put ut this Petition, Wisdom. Graces two.
Resolution.


Wisdom to discern what is Gods will. The Paralle.


Resolution to do as God wills.

By the advice of wisdom I make my choice.

By Resolutions assistance I follow the chase.

Wisdom discovers, Resolution pursues: and what that first presents, this
latter lays hold on.

This is has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to duplicate my Boon, and to beg of God, both these Graces, that so I may be
enabled, both to discern, and do Gods will in Earth as it is in Heaven.

The Grace in chief, Wisdoms Character.
when I say this petition, I stand in need of, is Wisdom, as hard to be found
as the Philosophers stone, the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God,
and it we often meet. This sacred wisdom we seldom meet with, yet when we meet
with it, it makes us much set by; tells us among many proffers which to be
preferred, in an harvest of employment, whose work we must do, when many
masters, at whose bid we must be. In a case of doubt, lo the best resolver;
when cross commands, lo the sole dictator, and one upon whom rests the Spirit
of the Almight: This is one can acquaint Earth with Heavens mind, sent out
Gods from the Devils, gives us Gods in the wind, wills us to outrun the Devils:
yea, one can sever out from the droke of lustful command, the pure grain of
Gods good will and pleasure. The Sun seems a little body of light in this great
world: Wisdom is that great body of light in this Man.
little world, it gives more light to the soul, than the sun to the Body. The
one lets us see what is betwixt heaven and earth: the other lets us see, the
will of God in heaven, down to earth.

Since it is wisdom has the spirit of discerning, The Avowry.
I am resolved, when I pray, to beg the grace of wisdom, that so I may discern
Gods will, which is to be done is Earth as in Heaven.

The second grace prayed for in this petition, Resolutions Character.
is Resolution, one of the worthies of Israel, who makes his way through an
host of Philistims: a May at arms, and means to do what bid, or die in the
field. this resolution is of an high spirit, and will on at what peril soever.
He is more taken with the deed than danger; and has ever showed himself a man
of action, you cannot take him off, on what bent, but in despite of the devil
he will do what God commands; he weighs not who gainsaies, but goes on, he
makes his way through a sea of troubles, and marches on through a wilderness
of stinging serpents; he stands to his Commander Christ, though beset with
staves and clubs: and if his honor be called to the Bar, his worship will be
hard by, want this assistant resolution, and thy endeavor will perish in the
blossom, and though it bud, will never bring out unto perfection.

I will by Gods good assistance hold on my resolution, The Avowry.
and resolve while I live, yea all my life resolve, to do Gods will in earth as
it is in heaven.

The Vices prohibited are two, The Vices
Foolishness. Cowardice.


Foolishness, The Parallel.
which wants wit.

Cowardice, which wants heart.

Foolishness, which cannot what God wills.

Cowardice, which dare not what God wills.

The one of those Vices, is deficient in wisdom: the other in fortitude.

While that first has heart to attempt, wants judgment to go about.

That second has judgment to go about, wants heart to attempt.

Since the onset of either disinables me to do whatsoever God wills, The Avowry.
I am resolved to pray my God to give me heart I attempt and judgment to go
about, yea, and to do his will in Earth as it is in Heaven.

Foolishness is the Vice I am here forewarned of, Foolishnesses Character
and a vice for which S. Paul did blame the Galatians. It is spiritual
foolishness I now speak of, which is the Devils purveyor, but the souls
improverisher: one makes God neglected, his precept be passed by, and his will
lightly looked on. This vice will not let in master overcharge his head piece,
makes him let of, or ought put in; its resetter is troubled with hemeans that is
good.
naught, for has not so much wit, yet encumbered but not about what bid, and
busy but to no purpose; he finds himself enough to do, whilst he does
naught, and makes others jest his earnest; he minds all but Gods will, for his
wit will not serve him to see what God wills: he has this part of an innocent
in the swaddling belt; the infants head, as if begun newly to live, yet all his
life he is to learn: he is yet to go to the school, and let him have never so
good a Master, he proves a bad scholar; you may as well hold your tongue, as
tell him of heaven, and certify him, what is Gods good pleasure and it is all
lost labor. I know one in spirituals so foolish, as when bid say his Lords
Prayer, he told his Minister he was brought up with hard labor, not used to
learn, to give you it in his own English, such bible bables. How does this vice
underprize that of highest price, like the dunghill cock the precious sone.

For my own part, I am resolved, The Avowry.
to beg of God, by the foolishness of preaching, to expel out of my soul,
this foolish natural, left this natural, spiritual foolishness, be my
hinderance to do Gods will in Earth as it is in Heaven.

The second Vice we are warned to banish is spiritual Cowardice, Cowardizes
Character.
a child of the Devils own begetting, he dare not Peter, resist the Devil and
he will fly from you.
stand his ground, and this his brat is skar'd with every bugbear: I wonder a
coward, and got pranking into the heart, except to hide him. It is this
spiritual cowardice in abstracto which has prevailed to call back resolution,
his nigh admittance to the heart and alliance in blood to all in the Isle of
Man, makes this weakling thus strong: the feebler he is, the more potent in
power; a paradox in nature, yet verified for truth. How does this one
spiritual Cowardice infeeble the heart, stonish the understanding, and make
will, which would do good, retreat. O experience can teach what harm this one
does a Christian, made the seven thousand in Israel hide their heads, and when
Baal was to be worshipped, not a man for God to be known to the Prophet. The
fear of the arm of man is an enemy to the will of God: and his will is little
set by, when the word of man strikes a terror. O the noise of Gebal and Ammon
and Amalek if that daunt, down goes Gods cause. A heartlesse proffessor, the
less his heart, the stronger is his party, to with-let what God would: let
this Cowardice be billeted in the heart, and there quarter, and this one will
be the death of all the horse Gods gifts and graces.
men of Israel, they will fall in a swound, suddenly retreat, and in their
retreat get their death-blow. But in contempt and scorn of this
unchristian-like cowardice, which will not go on when God commands; this shall
be my Motto, I weigh not what man can do unto me. For this dastard I have, a,
dare, and Joshuas, I will, wounds him to the death.

For my own part, by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
I am resolved upon it to quit my self like a man, lest while I harbor an
unmanlike heart, my heart fall off to do Gods will in Earth as it is in Heaven.

A Divine Contemplation upon the Third Petition.

Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.

Here I see what I should do, but I Lord how I fail in the performance. Thou O
God have set me a pattern, but I come as far short of the sampler, as the
Heavens are distant from the Earth; I can soon learn to know what I should do
all my life is too little to learn to do what I know. O God my God, though
thou have given me an understanding heart, yet I find in me my flesh a
perverse will, even one who is wonderfully unwilling to do thy will in Earth as
it is in Heaven: What have thou left undone to teach me to do thy will. The Law
of Nature, the Law of Moses, the Gospel of Christ Jesus: they spell and put
together thy good will and pleasure.

Thou have given me these to teach me, Angels to guide me, and all to lead me
to know and do thy will in Earth as it is in Heaven. If I would plead igrance,
thy unwritten Law in my heart condemns, thy written Word, the Law and Gospel
bear witness against me. Nor is this all, but those my samplers, thy Angels,
shall one day cry to thee, to take vengeance on me. O how ought my heart to
relent, when in secret I think upon it; what pains thou have taken, and yet how
unprofitable a scholar I have been in thy school. Those to whom thou give
much, of them much is expected: I have received a large portion of instruction,
but O the lesson of obedience is not yet taken out. Dear Father, I confess my
wickedness in thy presence; I pray thee have merey upon me, have mercy upon
me, and after the multitude of thy many mercies in Christ Jesus, forgive me all
my sins and trespasses.

O the thought what is to be done, and how it is to be done, assures me I am he
means without mercy.
undone.

This is thy Will, and these are my Works; Was ever light and darkness, truth
and falsehood more opposite the one to the other? Had I but half an eye, I might
see, what will be my end without amendment.

O thou who delightest not in the death of a sinner, heal the disease in my
soul, my soul is sick to death, yet Lord, say the word, and thy servant shall
be healed: O thou Physician of souls, give me a potion of faith, faith to
believe, and the cure is wrought. It cannot be my acting, but any believing,
how Christ has exactly acted my part, must make my weak works well, and gain
them my Gods good liking.

Let my belief in thee beget a willingness in me, to do thy will; Then my God
for Christ his sake will accept of my will for the deed. Tack up then my Soul,
and look up to that brazen Serpent Christ. In him, and by him, thou have done
the deed: yet when all is done, say it is no morel, but Christ who dwells in
me. But if out of Christ, thou art out of hopes, to do Gods will in Earth as it
is in Heaven

The natural man is the impotent man, and can neither the Quid nor Quale: It Is
no marvel, for says S. Paul, He perceives not the things of God.

O my soul, while thou art in the state of corrupted nature, thou art in an
hell of disobedience. Let the noise of the Law awake thee, the voice of the
Gospel allure thee, to march out of Egypt, out of Sodom, out of thy natural
state and condition. Soul, why stand thou gazing? while in Nature naught can
be done, neither what God wills, nor as he wills.

O thou God of all Spirits, create in me a new heart; take me out of the old
Adam, engraffe me in the new: make me a branch of that Vine, Joh. 15. and I
shall bring forth clusters of grapes. Of my self I have no power to bring
forth: only in Christ I live and move in an Angelical sampler of obedience. I
must go out of my self, ere I can get into the footsteps of they Angels. Let
the Archangel of the Covenant enable my feeble soul, to do thy will in Earth as
it is in Heaven.

The fourth Petition.
THe fourth Petition presents it self before your presence, in which a Boon is
put up for man to God, witnessed while said, Give us this day our daily Bread.

Here I find one only word needs explaining, Bread, we want of our wills, if we
have not Bread every day in our mouths: our head-pieces must now give it
harbor, that as the material bread pleases the palate, so the marrow, A
Paraphrase upon the petition, what we pray for.
I mean its meaning, may satisfy our understanding, here we pray for bread,
that God would give us bread: this day bread, daily bread, our daily bread; for
substance, bread; for proportion, this day bread; for condition, such as we use
daily; for appropriation, our daily bread: A Review.
not sell, but give; not one, but us; not us here, but us all, not this meals
meat, but this days meat; not this days [only, but daily; not that is
another, but that is ours. A paradox, our need is daily, our daily need, daily
bread: the daily bread we need, is this day our daily bread; this is it we
beggars beg of our good Rabboni, give us this day our daily bread: this last
word, bread, is the first word I will fall in hand with, I hope all your
stomachs in like sort stand to it.

There are three sorts of Bread as Bonaventure well observes, Corporal
Spiritual. Eternal.


The Corporal Bread, is Simple, and Single; or, Mixed, and Miscellan.


1. By Corporal Bread fimply understood, I mean bodily Bread made to feed on,
and sustain life with, and thun the word is used, Mat. 15.33. where it is said
by Christ's Disciples, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness,
as to fill so great a multitude? and this I call feeding Bread.

The mixed corporal Bread, made as it were of Miscellan; by it I mean Bread
made up of a proper and signification, not only such bread as we eat, but all
things necestary for this life, and thus Bread is taken, Exodus 23.25. where
said, I will bless thy Bread. Prove. 20.13. I will satisfy thee with Bread: by
it is meant, God will give a supply of all earthly necessaries for this life.

2. There is a Sacramental Spiritual and Sacramentell.
bread; that this is so, turn to 1 Cor. 10.16. The Bread which we break, is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? And this I call signifying Bread, or
Bread symbolicall.

3. There is a third bread, bread Eternal; to prove this, turn to Joh. 6.
where said, Ego sum panis vivus, I am the living bread: this bread is Christ. A
piece of this bread, who so tastes of, shall never hunger, and this I call the
lasty Bread.

Now here we pray for corporal Bread, bodily sustenance, sacramental Bread,
to have still a taste of that consecrated shive which shows out Christ's death.

Here we pray for that eternal Bread, for Christ, that God would give us
Christ, interesting us in him all, his Birth, Death, Resurrection, Ascension.
And thus while we say this petition: 1. We pray for Bread to nourish our
bodies. 2. The Sacrament to strengthen our feeble faith. 3. For Christ to feed
our souls to life everlasting.


And these are the three sorts of Bread shadowed out by the three loaves in the
Gospel: the first loaf whereof can suffice humane life: the second loaf
conserve spiritual life: the third loaf preserve life eternal.

Now Lord ever give us of this Bread, The Supplicat.
that so Lord here we may live, live well, and live with thee, hold out the
life of nature, The Collect.
live the life of grace, and attain to the life of glory.a

All these three sorts of Bread are included, yet all, as I suppose, are not
intended, not the Sacramental Bread, for that was asked in the second petition,
As it is conjectured by some, viz. Bread in the Church keeping, by which I mean,
not Shewbread, provided for Priests, but Communion-bread equally by us
Ministers distributed to the receivers; nor yet is the Bread eternal here
meant, for here we pray but for a days Bread; that lasts for ever, this ends
with supper.

The Bread then primarily here meant is corporal Bread, not restrained
literally to bodily Bread only as meat for, the belly, this is not all we here
pray for; but the Bread here meant is corporal Bread, meant at large
figuratively. And the petition involves a Boon, that God would bestow on us all
things necessary for this life.

And so I come to give you the sense and meaning of this fourth petition, Give
us this day our daily Bread.

That is, Good father of us all, be pleased to bestow on us all things
necessary for this life: yea whatsoever thou see in thy wisdom behoovefull
for us.

Lo an immense Boon begged in one line, all we want, and in word, a short
expression, but a large, look for, not much said, yet much craved, apparent
whilst only bread asked, and in asking it, all neceffaries.

But how comes so much meant, when so little said? here is only Bread asked, can
it involve all things else?

1. I answer, this is named in stead of all, propter excellentiam, quod instar
omnium, want it, we had as good want all, no comfort can be taken, and take
this away; neither in apparel, pleasure, profit, diet, or ought, indeed it is
one gives a relish to all earthly bliss.

2. We name Bread for all, propter capacitatem, give us food to live by, and
while life is preserved, threr is a step on, to what not, to the attaining of
every good and perfect gift of God, Temporary, as health, wealth, etc.

3. Propter singularitatem, it is the staff of life, and notes out, he that
God gives food to, gives him as great a blessing as is upon earth.

I will, though I have no more, God The Avowry.
praise for what I have, and account his dole of Bread, a blessing supper
exceeding.

The Doctrines deducible from this The petition, The Doctrines.
now next come in; the division of the petition into parts must help us to make
privy search to find them out: the parts of the petition are two: Which tell
us Of whom we beg. Which tell us What we beg.


1. He of whom we beg, it is God our Father.

2. That we beg, is this day our daily Bread.

For quiddity, it is Bread or such Bread we use daily. For quality, daily
Bread, or such Bread we use daily.
The quidddity begged, being Bread, prays us to take notice of these Two, Panis
quantus. Panis cujus.


Panis quantus, how much Bread is begged, but a days Bread for this days Bread.

Panis cujus, Note.
who owes Bread begged, it is ours, we pray God to give us ours, that what is
ours by the law of man by the Law of man we owning it, the God of heaven may
interest us in it, confirming our earthly possenssion, by his heavenly blessing.

I will endeavor to increase my earthly talent, The Avowry.
yet never conceit my title is good to it, until the Lord confirm my humane
get by his heavenly grant.

We have taken a general view, let us now take a special survey of every
parcel of this petition.

The first part of its division certifies us, of whom we beggars, beg all
earthly necessaries.

It is of God the Father: He is the full furnished housekeeper, we the poor
needy ones, and we are come to beg of him a supply; what need we beg, but that
we want? why would we ask of God, if God had not enough to give? our desiring
God to give, must make us all grant.

It is God can supply all our wants, equal power. Historians say, nigh
Edenborough, is a fountain of oil, take never so much, there is never the
less: if all the earth come and draw out of this fountain, God, they shall
find as much left for them to come, as when they first came. At his right
hand, id fullness for ever, he feeds all with his blessing, clothes the
Lilies, provides for the Ravens, satisfies the hungry Lions, and is he, who
gives us our meat in due season; What want we which God cannot furnish us with?
is it peace? says Christ, my peace I give you: want we victory? he causes our
enemies to fly seven ways before us: want we issue? he has an Isaac for a
Sarah, a Baptist for an Elizabeth: To come home to what instanced; want we
food? he can make the ravenous Ravens bring it to his Prophet.

Well, The Avowry.
I will rely on him is such a worthy, who with his least word can supply all I
want.

A doctrine which is full foully fallen out with diverse, Herod who is seeking
honor, but of the Plebeans.

Simon Magus, who thinks to get power apostolic, but by his money.

Saul, who hopes to find ease, but by the instrument.

Dives, who imagins he shall get his souls Requiem but by building his barns
bigger.

Adam, who thought there was no way to be better like, but by eating of the
forbidden fruit; all these have left God, and run after the imaginations of
their own hearts, The Collect.
forgetting who it is, has ability to preserve life, give earthly content,
peace of conscience, the gift of the holy Ghost, magnificent majesty.

While all these walk will, The Avowry.
and have lost their way, should lead them to hit of what they want, I am
resolved to suit my God, and none else for whatsoever needful.

Now be please to take notice of what it is we beggars beg, this day our daily
bread, for quiddity, it is bread; for quality, household berad: not Manna bread,
not manchet, but such as we use daily.

For quiddity, that begged is bread, what bread begged.

That in the name of all, and for all, till begged it, we are born naked, to
note our beggarly generation, when we be come to man's estate, what have we that
we have not received? nor receive we ought, till we have asked it: a modest
word, but founds the same with begged it, we are beholden to God for all we
have, and have due to naught, till Da domine demise it. What have our children,
but from us? what have we, which is not given by our heavenly Father? Since it
is all O Lord thou give, Lord what a largess is it that thou give? since
from none else we receive, it is thee only, O Lord, to whom I will give thanks:
since it is all we who want, and all sorts of necessaries, Lord whaten beggars
be we, as poor and needy as the Church of Laodicea, as the poor man had all
taken from him, hence we are bid go beg, go ask, but asking goes before
having, and has avouched, we wanted till we asked.

I am resolved to acknowledge my needy necessitated condition by nature, The
Avowry
and for supply, to repair unto my Maker.

The quiddity begged, bread, wills us to casta glance at Panis quantus. Panis
cujus.


The panis quantus, or the how much bread begged, is this day bread, bread for
this day, as it were weighed our for a day, we have leave to crave no more; it
shows our requests must either be limited for the world,

And for this cause it is, here is set up an Hercules pillar, to march no
further: a non datur ultra, a not go beyond, lo a bound to our desire, a pitch
to our petition, a landmark not to be removed; we must not enlarge the bounds
of this our boon, but limit it within the Lords leave.

How much does this Thesis tax, Midas his wish, I mean a sort who are
malecontent, have they never so much, who the more they have, the more they
crave. I shall meet with these ere they aware, and before I have done this
petition, stab them with a spiritual partizan.

In the interim, The Avowry.
it is my resolution to limit my just and not let it frisk out, to covet what
not conceded.

The next thing in this part of this petition we are to discourse of, is panis
cujus, which certifies us whose bread is begged, we our selves beg that is ours.

Ours and begs it, this may call into question, what interest we have in the
creature.

There is a right a priore, a foreright. a posteriore, an afterright.


A fore right in the state of innocence, by the creative law God conferring.

An after-right in this state of misery, by law national man assuming.

That first was a grant to be Lord over all, demized to the species.

The second an act to have and to hold this or that, demized to the individual.

That first and great Charter we lost in Eden, it is saln to God by excheate
again.

The less and underling Patent we retain, and have right to what we have, jure
humano, vix jure Divino, and therefore we call it ours, yet therefore we pray
it may be ours.

And that as the law of man has made it mine, so the grant of God may confer
it fully. And pray we to God, and to give, and what is ours.

And shall it not lend me eyes to see, Adam forfeited by default, we have rein
stored by a supplicat; Ne putetur a nobis, dicimus D^ nobis. Aug. epist. 143.
nor must we think we own that we have, till that we have be made our own by
prayer and supplication: it was Adams act disannulled our right to the
creation, we are to be re-estated, but how? by prayer; here is naught now to be
had by command, but by entreaty: and let us pray to God, and God will give what
we pray for, even us, this day our daily bread, that is, all earthly
necessaries.

I am resolved never to be brag of what I have, The Avowry.
nor yet to reckon my goods mine own, until my prayers have procured a
Certificate, the Lord has put into my hand that my talent.

This for the quiddity, bread; for quality it is such bread, is begged as is
used daily, it makes me conceit it is household bread, no curious cate, no
delicious dish, no cluster of grapes, nay rather it is Judiths parched corn
made up into a cake this simple fare and no better, Daniel accept of the dole.

1. When I consider what I have, Three motives to move us to moderate appetite.
is more then I deserve, may it not make me content with what I have? I will
cast an eye at my own unworthiness, a means to moderate my otherwise
instatiable appetite.

2. When I consider he to whom God has given least, God owes him less then
naught; how much cause have they to bless God, who have much; while I no cause
to repine who possess the less?

3. When I consider a modicum, a very little is satisfactory, and can support
nature, I will not then, to pamper nature, displease my God by greedy grudging.

But rest satisfied, The Collect.
while I call to mind, this is sufficient, more then owed, or I deserve.

How irreconcilably is this divine Doctrine fallen forth with the sole soul
affecters of Jonathans purple: Dives his demeans, Hamans honor, who think they
are not, if they have not, court countenance, large revenues, and rich
clothes, whose thoughts aspire like Pyramides, and with the Lark mount up,
with the Hawk tower up inthe air; I like not this Jersaulkons flight, to whose
sudden soar up, is ever concomitant a sudden speedy fall flat. A moderation of
mind, is a blessing of God, who resists the proud, decrees not many rich, and
avers man being in honor, lasts not long: since this I know, The Collect.
this I resolve, to period my appetite with agnad po, and bound it like the
boundless Ocean within the banks of moderation.

The Cases of Conscience come now to be discust, they are three; first
discussable, is this.

How comes it to pass, 1. Case.
that I who ost pray, get so little?

The default is not in the supplicated, aliquid amplius, a somewhat beside to
it: To the outward action, inward devotion, heart and tongue must be in the
same tune, else our prayers will be as little set by, as those against whom God
cries out, you come nigh unto me with your lips, but your hearts are far from
me.

I will not sever those God would have joined together, The Avowry.
lest the separating my heart from my tongue in prayer, procure a separation
betwixt my supplicat and Gods grant.

This is a received Maxim in Divinity: that, 1. God will neither give his
child every thing he asks. 2. Nor always that one thing he asks.


1. For the first, God knows, too much makes us too dissolute, and therefore,
will not, we have all we hold out hand for, he will carve us out what fit, will
not we have all we cry for; out of the depth of his heavenly foresight, he
keeps us with an appetite, for knows welcome is a bit of bread, to the
hunger-starved: in truth if God were profuse of his blessings, we might have
more, but perhaps would thank him less; abundance of earthly bliss, is the
clipwing of devotion: whereas a want of the quantum, is a qualifying
affliction, which makes me worse like, but more thankful to my Maker.

2. God does not always give his child that he asks, he will give us a shive
of what loaf he likes, not what we please.

1. Perchance thou prayest for health of body, Two instances.
God denies it, and gives thee, mentem sanam baud in corpore sano, a good heart
in a sick body: shall I now complain of my God, who denies me the minus and
gives me the majus; withholds the pejus, and confers upon me the melius?

O my God, The Avowry.
I will for ever give thee thanks, whilst thou deniest me temporal blessing,
but bestowest on me thy spiritual trousures.

2. Perchance thou prayest for wealth, and God visits thee with poverty; thou
missest what thou look for, yet it may be gettest more then thou prayedst
for: God who detains what thou would have, can recompense thee with that thou
stand more need to have; yea repay the loss of thy expectance with the gift
of contentation.

Well, The Avowry.
I will bid farewell this terrene, fail for this heavenly, hit of, which makes
me find more savor in my dough cake, than in all Dives his delicious fare.

Lord bestow on me thy bliss, The Supplicat.
and be it little, I will count it more of worth, than they that have their
store of corn, and wine, and oil.

Is this, How comes it to pass, 2. Case.
wicked who pray not, get much earthly means, and much more then the godly:
David understood not this case, till he went into the house of the Lord, verbum
Dei est Dei domus, Gods Word is Gods house, we have been in it, and now hear,
what here we have heard; it is this, first that riches as a bliss are obtained
by prayer: riches as snares are got without, the good man, God gives an estate
to be his here comsort: the wicked he likewise gives, but to leave him
Inexcufable.

1. There is a grant to inherit to the godly, a connivence only for the wicked
to acquire, which whilst he has license to possess, he uses hasty and
unhonest means to attain; he multiplies amain, but by what means he makes no
matter: his Brokers to bring in, are of ill report, such as overreach, cozen,
that can, sell time, oppress the poor, swear't out, lie at length; these the
wicked worldling imployes in his service, and with them serves his turn; by
whose unconscionable fetches he comes to outgoe, in getting, the good man, and
gets more in a year, then he in ten: yet to the comfort of Gods servants, hear
what S. Austin says, bonis divitioe dantur ne putentur mala, malis ne putentur
bona, God gives good men riches, that riches might not be counted evil things:
riches are given to wicked men, and then the name of good thing they are
deprived; and thus when the elect does get, it is no hurt, when the wicked, it
is no good; a passage may moderate our admiration: considering since those
their goods, are no good things, so called, not so being; so esteemed, not so
indeed; the default being in the occupiers, not that in occupation; which no
marvel the wicked own in such abundance, since their very selves have spoiled
their nature, and as wares of no worth, as counteerfeit coin they keep them,
making a great show of them, but no true use of them; like he that has a bag
of bad coin, which serves to rattle, not to run for current.

Secondly, know good Christian, the wicked who have so much, have it for a
short space: says David, I looked at the wicked, and he flourished like a
green bay tree, I looked again, and he was not: lo in a very trice the case is
altered, his house desolate, his children vagabonds, and in the next generation
his name is quite blotted our; what he has is only durante vita, for his life
at longest; which what is it, but a span for length, a post for speed: thus as
a thing of no continuance, he enjoyes his joy, and his term is ended with Fonas
gourd: or say his means stay by him, he cannot long stay by it, but must be
gone and depart.

Thou say the wicked has more than thou that servest and fear the Lord:
alas, when one has all his estate laid on an heap, it makes a fair show, but
that in show is all. In very deed, the wicked has all his portion in this
life, naught is behind; whereas the heir Gods child thinks himself of better
estate with a scant allowance, while he does remember what to have hereafter:
and thus with the purchaser, he is content with a clod in hand, though Tenant
at will, like: the wicked have in occupation the whole earthly demean, O he is
overgladded with it, to think upon it, that sod of earth ensures him of the
fee-farm heaven, like the bite of bread the body of Christ.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I will not weigh what I have, but what it is I have, ensures me of; nor will I
judge of Gods kindness by earthly courtesies, while Gods little ensures his
largious.

Is this, 3. Case.
With what cautions may I pray for riches? this case speaks home not ot our
possessing them, but our praying for them: and know it, as there is a danger in
their use, so in our asking; when we come to put up this petition, our tongues
are often too glib, and our hearts over intent; now lest while we expect a good,
we get harm, observe these cautions in praying for worldly riches.

1. Pray for a mediocrity; Three Cautions.
for as too little discourages, so too much makes proud and puffes up: Hagar
was sensible of this, and therefore begs neither riches nor poverty; he knew
extreme want was an hinderance to the practice of piety, and therefore begged a
somewhat: he knew much misled, and withdrew from God, and therefore begged not
abundance: let me tell thee, and for the truth of God, he whose tongue is all
in it superlatives for this world, his heart harbors diminutive desires to
inherit the world to come: when I take leave to ask much, my much endamnifies
me mightily, when I cry Da Domine quod vis, my God tees my needs, and that he
gives. Physicians, say, a grain of Opium procures sleep, more, danger and
death: so a little of these called Opes, riches are beneficial to nature,
whereas a superplus is dangerous, often death.

I am resolved to petition God for a little of wordly riches since helpful,
The Avowry.
not for excessive riches, since ensured exceeding hurtful.

2. Pray not for riches in the first place: we are allowed to beg them of God,
but God will not they be first begged, he would have our prayers witness we do
not overprize these worldly riches, and to testify our desire to have, to
ask, yet so to ask, as to divulge our affections are not set on things below:
He that commands me, first to seek the kingdom of Heaven, has schooled me to
pray for this earth in the second place. I may spoil my petition by misplacing,
and in stead of a bliss, be answered with a Nescio vos, he that has given me
leave to sue to him for health, wealth, honor, counts it his dishonor, that
any should ask his Kingdom after them: commonly what is first on my tongue
end, is first in my mind, and it is apparent my mind is most on the world,
whilst my tongue, imprimis, petitions God for it. This is the bewrayer of my
unlawful desire, and that it is more than beseeming, the spoil prayer, viz. to
pray for goods before Gods Kingdom.

I am resolved upon it, The Avowry.
to put earth after, till Heaven be prayed for, and to make my prayer
legitimate, I will first set my affections on things above, then on things
below.

3. Pray for riches respectively, Caut. 3.
not simply, as a help on, not as an hinderance; which like poison if
qualified, may do good; if not, naught more dangerous. Pray for riches to be to
thee not as the broken reed of Egypt, which if thou lean on, runs into thy
hand; but as the poor pilgrims staff, which he uses when he is half tired, to
ease himself on; and as the weak pilgrim, who waxes weary, desires his staff
to lean on, and go with: so know it, we are pilgrims and strangers, our home
far off, our Affections.
feet sore surbet, we would on, but unable; and it is lawful for us to call
for this staff of maintenance, to ease us and further us in our heavenly
pilgrimage: if the world encumber, we must lay the very thoughts of it by; if
it further, we may pray for it; yet as the pilgrim makes use of his staff, not
for it self, but as a support to set forward, a safeguard to defend: so we must
pray to God to put this rod and staff into our hand, which as David's staff
was a comfort for defense and furtherance, The Supplicat.
the Lord grant such to us, may be our earthly riches.

I am resolved to sipplicate my God for riches, and for no other end, The
Avowry.
than to make use of, as pilgrims do their staves, yea not for the love of
them, but the help I have by them, to go more actively on, in the path of pious
duties.

The graces which this petition commends unto us, Are two, The Graces.
1. Confidence. 2. Contentation.


1. Confidence, The Parallel.
which persuades me to believe my God can provide for me.

2. Contentation, which makes me rest satisfied with that God gives.

Confidence, a grace which looks upward unto. God.

Contentation, a grace which looks down at me may self.

Confidence, a grace ascending.

Contentation, a grace reglenting.

That first, is stella erratica, and courses on from me to my Maker.

That latter, is stella fixa, and I am the orb in which it does move.

I am resolved to keep these celestial stars, The Avowry.
radiant in the orb my heart, that so they may lend light for me, man, to walk
unto my Maker.

Confidence, is a grace transcendent, Confidences Character.
whose giver is God, whose receiver is man; whose object, that which man does
want: the want of that I would, sets a work my confidence, and whilst I have
no more, it is this grace Confidence assures me my God will provide, and
sufficient. This is the horn of man's hope, and the incredible creditor of the
great God, whose word we take, power we rely on, mercy we hope for: and all
this is brought to pass, by the Rhetorical oratory of that only one
Confidence. O Confidence, it is thou that ensurest me how ever it go, yet it
will go well with me in the end: how often haft thou made me to cast my eye on my
God, and with Abraham against hope to believe, with just Job in the face of
death to despise its malice; and in my most horrid perilous dangers to fear
naught, but stoutly to cry it out, Lo, though the Lord kill me, yet will I
trust in him. This fiducia spei sets me to work, and makes me rely on my God
for reward, to hope for the water of the well of Bethlthem, and to land at
Candan in despite of all opponents. This Christian confidence is filius
nobilis, of a great blood, and allied to the best, it is the eldest son of
Faith, Hopes fastest friend, and Charities chiet companion; the Physician that
prescribes them cordials, and heals the running issues which sore vex these
Theological virtues: it is my confidence in God strengthens my feeble faith,
keeps my hope from headache, and makes my charity to actively agill, that able
to walk on to heaven.

I am resolved by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
ever to retain the grace Confidence, since while I keep Confidence in the
house my heart, the chief of my family, Faith, Hope, and Charity, though they
le sick yet their sickness shall not be a sickness unto death.

2. Contentation is a grace of a rare virtue, Contentations Character
this makes the poor man rich, the captive conqueror, and the oppressed take all
for well done; let me welcome this one, which supplies all my worldly needs,
and vows he that has most, has not more: this is that one which makes my
little, more, and the more I see others have, the less it owner to repine: my
forked heart, it is this that fills, and makes what ever it is to fully
satisfy. I had rather own this one, than Croesus his wealth, Jasons golden
fleece, or the great Chams tree full of pearls hanging by clufters; what will
all I have do me good, and go without it: the more I have, the more I will
crave, till contentation stop my mouth. A grace, which whilst I look upward at
the wealthier, walks further from from me; a grace which no gainer way I can
get to, than by often walking by the poor man's door. O, the thought not how many
richer, but how many poorer, paddles me out the track to meet with
contentation. This is the perswafive orator makes Kings content with their
confines: Rectors with their Tenths, Lawyers with their Fees, Gentlemen with
their Incomes Tradesmen with reasonable gain, and quiets the poor cottager
within his thatched house: in a word, this is the pacifier of all people, which
quiets the world with me, and me with my means.

I am resolved to beg of God the gift of Contentation, since want this, The
Avowry.
and I can have no peace upon earth.

The Vices.
Two Vices are here prohibited, Diffidence. Covetousness.


The Parallel.
Diffidence, a vice which doubts of all.

Covetousness, a vice which wishes all.

Diffidence, a vice which looks for naught.

Covetousness, a vice which would escape naught.

It is Diffidence has an evil heart.

It is Covetousness has an evil eye.

The former vice offers violence to my Maker.

This latter to my neighbor.

Whilst the one makes me distrust God, the other heart-eat my neighbors goods.

For my own part, by Gods good assistance, I am resolved upon it, The Avowry.
to banish out of the coasts of my heart, Diffidence, Covetousinesse, lest
letting them ledger in my Isle, I be taken for a common enemy to God and man.

1. Diffidence, is a vice we are to find out and set a packing: Diffidences
Character.
as I am informed its dieted at the Noblemans house of Samaria, countenanced by
all Israel: it is yet alive, and has made a march from Canaan to this our
Kingdom. So many as dare not rely on God, so many have given it welcome: this
is a vice offers injuries to Gods velle and posse, and makes a doubt of Gods
willingness, ableness to provide for us: it is not only man's ill desert begot
this diffidence, but man's subordinate conceit of the worth of God, is this
sinful vices sire. This Diffidence, makes the carnal wretch, that he dare
part with noughts, for fear he want, and wills him to hold what he has, for
no more is to be had. This is Gods Embaser, its owner under, and the poors
impoverisher: a vice which makes the poor be sent away without: it owner be out
of all hopes of more, and God accounted of, as one not able to make me a man.
of means
Of all vices, this is the most villainous, which dispoyles God of his power,
the poor of our dole, the distrustful soul of all heavenly supply. What a
mass of mischief does this one make me? the God of heaven to withhold from me,
and my own heart to distrust of better. How is my heart drowned with
Diffidence, and my God displeased, while I want an heart to rely on him! This
is the vice which would persuade me, my want is more, than God has to instore,
and will needs avouch, the good God can do me no good. The object of
Diffidence, is sometimes Gods mercy which it despairs of, sometimes earthly
means, of which it puts us out of all hopes: this is an enemy to all worldly
felicity, and my felicity in the world to come; it makes me incapable of Gods
dole on earth, and Gods glories in Heaven.

For my own part, The Avowry.
by Gods good assistance, I am resolved to part with him hinders me from having
a part in Gods mercy, glory, and to set this vice a packing, which persuades me
to think, my God will not, has not wherewith in this life to supply my needs.

Covetousnesses Character
2. Covetousness is the vice, to which Ahab who was sick for Naboths vineyard;
and Judas who betrayed Jesus for 30. pence, were partners: this is one would
have all he can lay his hands on, and though he have much, yet more: he is in
love with never a parable in the Gospel, but that of the talents; yet this he
loves, for that it is like metal to his mine, and no geld gilt, but hegets
more; not one none, but five ten. Had it not been, that covetousness is
Idolatry, and makes his gold his god, he would not have listened to the letter
of that text, however the spirit of it he has past it by. But come let us look
this wretch Govetousnesse in the face, this is he does horribly incumber his
Master with coveting, getting, keeping, increasing; either he persuades him to
covet to get, or get to keep, or keep to increase: this is the miser never
lays out, but to bring in; nor leaves he to bring in, till at last the Devil.
A King of this land, seeing the Danegilt gathered, cried out he saw the Devil
and would none of it: if our covetous misers should see all Devils in hell,
it is only a may be, I cannot say for certain, whether it would make them
disperse and repay back with Zacheus, their ill got goods. But lo, what a
gross vice is covetousness; this is it Masters Master, and will not he be
free to one nor other: it makes him want what he has, and starve his paunch to
sill his purse. Behold the Owl, which all the birds in the field fly about as
distasting: it is this miserly Covetousness, whose owner is like an hog,
unusefull, till laid on the shambles; he is never a good Commonwealths man,
till quartered and coupned out, and then he that has fleeced many, feeds many:
and whereas at other men's deaths there is weeping and lamentation, at his mirth
nd merrinesse; his friends all his life had ill days, their only good day is
his dying day, whose death makes them live better, whose whole life is not so
beneficial as his now death: the good man does good works in his life, all good
the miser does, is at his death: this is he would make himself Executor, but
not suffered; and would put in a bar as next a kin, but that taken bound hand
and foot and cast into utter darkness: he that had so much, has now as
little; and for all his wealth, but a winding sheet.

This is it has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to banish all covetous desires, and to rest content with that my Christ has
willed me to crave, even this day our daily bread.

The Divine Contemplation upon the fourth Petition.

Give us this day our daily Bread.

Come down high thoughts, your Master is no better than a beggar: I thought he
had been a man of means, but has not meat to put in his mouth, and yet how do
thoughts rise in his heart, so soon as revelling among the bowls of the
Temple? Friend came thou honestly by so much, and wast owner even now of so
little? There is as much danger in waxing suddenly rich, as in hiding thy
talent in a napkin.

But will thou see thy perfect picture? look at the man traveling from
Jerusalem, he had all taken from him, and thou have nothing, nothing of thy own.

O! I am fallen into a melancholy fit to think upon it, how poor, how proud,
and what a Nebuchadnezzar! and yet will vaunt it out, I have built this Babell
for thie honor of my name: Take heed, if we speak thus high, we shall be cast
low, brought to feed with the beasts of the field. He that will not
acknowledge, how all he has comes from God, shall have his commons changed
from a princely Diet, to a Sallet.

O! when I think upon it, how much God has given me, what an unthankful
wretch I have been, it puts me in a sear to lose what is dear and near unto me.

When I am in fear to lose what I have, what hopes have I to get what I need?
yet I am upon my knees, and begging of thee, my God and my King, all earthly
necessaries. This is it I beg, but why do I beg so often, and go without?

O! I have a false heart to my God; he knows it, and I suffer for it: were my
heart as upright to God, as Jonadabs was to Jehu, he would not only here care
for me, but take me up at my end, into his princely Kingdom of Heaven.
Chariot. I wish my heart were the bell to ring me God In into my soul; then
should my body he the Temple of the holy Ghost; my heart is a bell, my tongue
is the clapper, yet surely there is a flaw in that, there is such a jar in this.

O thou founder of this metal, cast me in a new mould, and I shall ring a peal
to thy praise. Thou that made me a man, make me a man of God, then shall I
ask and have, beg and it shall be given unto me, corporal bread to feed my
body, spiritual bread to feed my soul; bread eternal, able to feed body and
soul to life everlasting. You see I aim at much, yet not master of a
molehill, as poor as the Church of Laodieca, poor and needy and naked: I am
fitter to take than to give. Solomon begged neither riches nor poverty. A mean
would do well; my prayer protests, I am in a sadder condition; I own naught,
till Gods grant confirm it. O proud heart, lower thy top-sail; God keeps a
warehouse, where thou lodgest, and God can remove the Mart at his pleasure:
Thou have heard it cried, Bellisarius was a General.
Date obolum: How is the world turned upside down, cannot the sword-man keep
possession? O no, it is praying, not fighting must do the deed. Let me tell
thee, what hands cannot do, tongue may do; so heart and tongue go together. O
my God, whom thou have joined together, let no man put asunder, lo the twins
can overcome my God to supply all my wants: But I must come then to him like a
praying Publican, lest speaking in the Dialect of the proud Pharisee, he set me
packing like a saucy sinner.

Lord, my want is great, learn me to beg a right: and when I pray, bow the
Heavens and come down. And for the merits of our Jesus, grant me all my prayers
and supplications.

The fifth Petition.
THe fifth petition is this, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that
trespass against us; my method has me at command, and overrules me to
observe this rule: first to explain what word is difficult to be understood.
All here is one, yet this one is twice used in this petition, only the number
is varied: the word ambiguous is, Trespass, in the singular number, and
Trespasses in the plural number.

This one only word has a double object, 1. God. 2. Man.


1. As it has reference to man, it signifies to forgive damage done a man's
estate or person [and thus the word is used, Numb. 5.6. Levit. 6.2. Mat. 6.15.]

2. As it has reference to God, it signifies to forgive sin committed against
God: and thus sometimes by this word, is understood violence offered. God,
sometimes violence offered our neighbor; God wronging, man injuring; the one
by ungracious sinning, the other by unjust dealing. The neglect of religious
duties ushers in trespasses against God; the want of civillized morality makes
me to trespass man: and whilst we trample underfoot the two great
Commandments of the Law, viz. Love God above all, the greatest: the second
like to that, thy neighbor like thy self: we break a gap open, by which we
come to commit grievous trespasses against God and man. In a word, my inner man
is a God trespasser, my outward it is the man trespasser: and as man is
visible, so the the trespass against man is commonly discernible: and as God
is invisible, so my trespass against God more commonly is covert; and this is
that makes one so sore fret at, the other we so little fear, and yet here is
but one name for two, to note out sins nature, that it is a trespass,
aggravated for that against God; which how insufferable is this soul
trespassing God, since a bodily wrong, there is this ado to make us put it up.

O! man it is the nature of him, Note.
often to offend his God, and make it a matter of naught; but if injured by his
like, to make it a matter of moment. And so much, as God must be engaged to
forgive all, or he a trifle, all his sinful trespasses, as he the terrene
trespass against him.

And thus I go on, having done with the explication of the words Trespasses and
trespass.
ambiguous.

To give you the Sense and meaning of this fifth Petition, it is this, If a man
would have his sins committed against God forgiven him, he must not nick on the
score the ill turns his neighbor does him; God will have us even on earth, or
else he will be at odds with us in Heaven: The truth is, he will not be
friends with us, till we shake hands one with another; my sinful debt runs on
to God, and increases, if the wrong my neighbor has done me, be not blotted
out of my debtbook Memory


I will therefore forgive man, The Avowry.
that I may be forgiven of God, and release my just cause of grievance against
my neighbor, lest whilst I work my private spleen, I procure Gods endless
wrath.

He that for an halfpenny would have a broken head, A review of the point in
hand.
I had rather be master of his wealth than wit. There are a sort as much
overseen, who say, they care not what come of it, they will be revenged, they
get costs and damage, but soon may count their gains A miserable gains, when
the recovery of their damage, divulges there is a writ of enquiry sent exforo
Coeli for God to be satisfied in strict point of justice for all their
trespasses committed against him.

I will cresse out my debt-book, The Avowry.
and tean in pieces my process, lest my toe strict calling to account every
idle word, and prosecuting frivolous suits in Law, debar me of tho benefit of
the Gospel, I mean the forgiveness of my sins.

Having sented the Sense, let us go collect the points of Doctrine deducible
from this fifth petition.

The Division will direct us the readiest way to do this, which prays us for
our furtherance in so good a work to take notice of these two: 1. The materia,
or matter which we pray for, it is Gods forgiving us our trespasses against
him. 2. The modus or manner to be forgiven, as we forgive others that trespass
against us.


This is it we first pray for, that God our Father would forgive us our
trespasses.

1. The party we supplicate, is God the Father. 2. The Delinquents or offenders
craved forgiveness for, are us. 3. That we would were forgiven us, are by
nature trespasses; Which for Plurality, are many. Propriety, ours.

Now few, yet set fasts, nor some man's, but every man's, as in special this
man's, so in common all men's.

And as all are interessed, so all in too many, too many are all our sins and
trespasses.

But come, let us cast a glance at him to whom we pray for forgiveness of
sins. The party supplicated to forgive sins is God; this leads us by the hand
to see this for the truth of God.

That it is God can forgive us our sins and trespasses:

Though the Papists have rased the second Commandment out of the ten
Comandements.
Decalogue, we are not very kind, but we will fall foully out, if they offer like
violence to this article of remission.

I will confess the faith, The Avowry.
and maintain this for truth, that it is only God can forgive us our sins and
trespasses.

As he, so only he, which what power then he has left to the Church, I will
defer the decision of that, so much quered, I mean our absolution to a case of
conscience But the case could not gain an imprimatur.


The Offenders.
delinquents craved forgiveness for, are us, not us here, but us all,
wheresoever, whosoever: This, us, is an universal, and reaches from Dan to
Beersheba: It predicates of all people, and proclaims every singular sold is a
sinner: you must not doubt of this, Christ.
judge for the benefit of our Gospel.
book. We read Genesis 5.6. that the imaginations of our hearts are continually
evil; and as after a stone be cast into a pond, Simil.
one bubble begets another and so circular bubbles till all be set with beastly
bubbles: so ever since that infernal, original sin, was hurled by Adams hand
into man's heart, our hearts have risen up with bubbles of beastly vices, and
they have not left to spread, till they have wholly overspread all this pond
the heart. Look as a fountain whose springs ever cast up an incessantly, so it
is with the heart: its springs are opened, will never be shut. But what springs
up? waters of Mera, Evil thoughts.
brackish, unsavory and unwholsom till healed by the Lord. You Will scarce believe
what a corrupt fountain is the heart of of man, but turn to Mat. 15.19. there
you may see what springs out of it: Out of the heart comes evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies: Here
are seven springs, and not one wholesome one among them all: here are seven
measures of seed in the sprout, yet all that comes up, are tares sown by the
envious man: Here are seven sheaves ripened and fit to be inn'd, and not one
ear of good grain to be seen in any of them: What degenerate ground is this
heart of man? how much brings it out, and how little to be set by? We are Gods
husbandmen, but alas, how have we let lie Unhusbanded.
uncultured this vineyard of the Lords, Heart? It Is not one, but all of us,
have need with strong cries to beseech the Master of the vineyard not to lay it
to our charge, but forgive us our trespasses.

3. Now I come to that we pray God to forgive us, our trespasses, he that has
as mean fight as the man, Mark 8. who saw men as trees, may see by trespasses
are meant sins: In two things our sins resemble trespasses.
that which I already have noted, and again desire you to take notice of, is
this: 1. That our sins are of the nature of trespasses; for as unneighbourly
trespasses sow dissension betwixt man and man, so our sins betwixt God and us,
they are just cause of grievance, and urge him to commence a suit against us in
his court of justice. 2. As he that trespasses his neighbor, his neighbor may
recover damage, so our sins cast us in damage. And it is no little, amounting
to more then all our goods, to the loss of our lives, to the first death,
death of body, and without God be merciful and remit, to that second death,
death eternal, a paslage would be well thought on; which may make us admire
how much our mild and merciful God puts up at our hands, we may say God is a
good neighbor, who bears so much with us, and that earth has no cause to
complain of heavens hard neighborhood.


I am resolved to take notice that so maity sins are so many trespasses
committed against God, The Avowry.
That so my notice taken of my sin, may work a wonderful amazement in me at
Gods mercy.

I have diverse yet to go visit, and I will on, next in sight are a sort of our
overnigh alliance, even, our trespasses.

1. Which for plurality are many, for trespasses. 2. For propriety they are
ours, our trespasses, and we own them.
First, for plurality they are many, what need I collect that so apparent and
from the text? Phoeylides the Heathen, Hist.
who every night ere he went to bed, recounted over thrice all the evil that
day he had done. O what a sort of all sorts of sins would be within sight! as
many might we spy, as the hairs of our head, sand on the shore, stars in the
firmament: the misery of a man is, he is a sinful creature; his greater misery
is, Man's greatest misery.
he takes on notice of his sins. How has the God of this world blinded the eye
of our understanding! Juglers make what not, seem to be; Satan what is, as not
to be: that enemy which lives in our own house, is the Devils fast friend; our
evil heart, this labors to hide from us all our evil deeds. If there be a
wonder upon earth, it is this, The worlds wonder.
That man who is all sin, sees no sin; and as he that is drunk, tell him of it,
he will scarce believe it, Simil.
but will walk out, and vaunt and vault as if none such: so is it with us all,
we are drunk, but not with wine, have swallowed with the Leviathan an Ocean of
sin, yet we walk and jet abroad, as if not such sinners as God knows we are.

I am in have, yet amresolved, The Avowry.
to try my heart and search my reins, yea to sift out my conversation, and all
to find out those I am sure do harbor In my heart.
here, even a multiplicity of sins and tresyasses.

Judge how much should be our sorrow, Rachel, let our weeping be like the
weeping of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo: we read how Mary wept much, for
she had sinned much, and shall we sin much, and sorrow little? God forbid. Let
every sin cause us to shed a tear, which if we did, I am persuaded we might
sail to heaven by a sea of tears; what a shame then for our tears as yet, not
to have watered our cheeks? pray to God those Tears. Ezekiel. 47.
temple waters may rise and increase from the ankles to the knees; from the
knees, to the loins; from the loins, to be a river impassable. Take my word
for it, there was never any went to heaven by dry land: there is no way to
heaven, but by water. It Is the water of tears through which we must sail, which
the deeper the less danger; the faster they flow, the more secure is the The
penitent sinner.
passenger from being run a ground on shelves, and shallowes, and sands.

I am resolved to fear a shallow, The Avowry.
when not feart a deep; and to think my self never more safe from being a cast
away, than when I have store of sea room, of watery tears to steer in.

This for the plurality: the propriety is the next in sight, intimated in this
word, Our, Forgive us our trespasses. This Our
possessive protests, sin is allied in full blood to Adams brood, It is bone of
our bone, and flesh of our flesh: it is a branch sprouts from us the bole; a
slip, and we the knot; a spread weed, and our heart is the ground has given it
nutriment, grows faddoming. The bark has not nigher relation to the bole,
the sap to the heart of oak, than our sins to us; we are become one
incorporated body, of one name, nation, family; nay more, its we are sins
procreating parents, and like none more then the viper, Hist.
we bring them out which bring us to our deaths: yet while there is the least
life in us, these our offspring will not be shook off; they foot it after us,
as Cains dog did after him: seem we to deny these to be our imps, they will not
be said, but rame it out, we are thy works, and we will follow thee:

For my own part I am resolved, The Avowry.
as to believe what I may be ly grace, so to remember what I am by nature; yea
to bear in mind, the whole posterity of Adam are incorporated into evil.

The modus or manner is the last parcel in this petition considerale, we beg
pf God to forgive us our trespasses; after what manner? as we forgive them that
trespass against us.

1. We will cast a glance, at this last part of the petition, as all the words
have relation to what foregoing.

2. As one only of them to one foregoing: for the first we beg forgiveness as
we do forgive; Christ commands thus to ask forgiveness of our trespasses at
Gods hands, as we forgive our neighbors that trespass against us, and it
shows,

It is our own metwand, our sins must be measured our by: it is our own scales
our sins must be weighed our with; as we weigh out to others down weight of
recompense for their trespassing us: as we cut them out by the standard, a
retaliation of justice for wrongs offered us, even as we do to others, so shall
it be done to us. Christ himself says, With what measure ye mete out to
others, it shall be meted out to you: as if Christ had said, if ycu look for
satisfaction for man wronging you, so will God for wronging him, it you put up,
not calling to account, so will the good God even strike off your reckoning. O!
our hearty forgiving our neighbors the trespasses they have committed against
us, binds Gods hands, he cannot take vengeance on us for our trespasses against
him.

A passage prays us, as we tender our own good, to be good one to another. The
adage was, Homo homini lupus, if it still be so, let me tell thee, est lupus in
fabula, he that is a wolf to his brother, holds a wolf byth'ear; and while he
looks to right his wrong, does himself the injury: how may this work like good
physic upon all Gods good people, and purge out the old Malice?
leaven of the Pharisees. Three assurances we forgive


1. Let us forgive one another not by piecemeal, but by wholesale: The cross
week chapmen the Londoners little set by.

2. Let us forgive not for a time, but all our life time, this Termi for life.
durante vita makes us freeholders, and in heaven.

3. Let us forgive not in word, but in deed, and from the heart. This reality
with man, shall make me a man with my God, and God to forgive me my trespasses,
as I forgive others that trespass against me.

And now if we had no more to move us to a composure of all differences among
us then this, the forgiveness of our sins, Lord how should it work with us?
Let this cause us to shake hands, and be hearty good friends; here live in
peace, that hereafter we may live in glory; here love one another, that in
heaven we may be beloved of our Lord. I will conclude with David in admiration
of the worlds concord, Psalm. 134. Ecce quam bonum, and quam jucundum, Behold,
how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity!

There is one word yet to be weighed in the balance of the sanctuary in this
last part of the petition, against one other in the forepart of the petition,
Trespass with Trespasses.

The first word is of more Trespasses.
weight, the latter is the Trespass.
lighter: what a pressure implies the former, predicating, and in the plural
of man's many fins against God? how light is this latter, which predicates of
man damnifying man, whilst that without count, this within count; whilst this
latter finite, the former infinite.

How do this lead us by the hand to see the goodness of God to us humane
creatures; he puts up much, will we do so? our sins against him exceed all
number, and all damage all men living do us; shall we then seek revenge? he
forgives much for little, shall I to satisfy me a little, lose that much?

I am resolved both to confess my many sins against my God, The Avowry.
as also to comfort my heart for That ensured.

Upon what terms will God forgive us our sins and trespasses?

Let me be sorry for my sins, Res.
and God is just to forgive me all my sins. Let a serious contrition go before,
and a plenary pardon posts after: if I here can find a sorrowful soul, I am
sure to. meet with a merciful redeemer; I must lament for that I have brought
out a sinful burden, then my sin shall be no burden to my conscience: let me
grieve for that constrained to live with Meseck; it is the way for me to be
delivered from the Tents of Kedar. O Lord, I was shapen in sin, and in iniquity
did my mother conceive me; I can no way have washed off me these my leprous
spots, till I reckon up all my sins in the bitterness of my soul: all my lise
I have fed upon the delicious pasture of deceitful sin, I shall surfeit upon
it, without I take a large taste of the bitter herbs of true repentance; yet
more, this my sorrow must be of the best, else I am as bad as the worst; if I
counterfeit with God on earth, I cannot go for current with him in heaven: such
then as has been my sin, Three manner or kinds of repentance.
such let be my sorrow.

1. Timely; good Christian, seek thy Creator in the day of thy youth: O defer
not to do that which must be done, or thou art, and for ever, undone. I
confess true repentance is never too late repentance, yet late repentance is
seldom true repentance; one at last gasp repented, that hou may not despair:
but one, therefore do not presume: He that may have assurance of his pardon to
day, and puts it off till to morrow, it is an even wager he shall be denied
that to morrow, he sets so light to day. Since God has given me time, God give
me grace to make use of my time; yea to day while it is day, to turn unto the
Lord our God.

2. Do thou sorrow in abundance for thy sins. You have read, how Mary she wept
much, for she had sinned much; we say, A large sore must have a large plaster;
as there must be a diet drink of faith inwardly given, so a searcloth of sorrow
applied to the partill-affected: our sins are out of number, our sighs must be
past count: when God sets down our misdeeds in figures, and we our repentance
in ciphers, there is not expectance of forgiveness. It is time, therefore
considering how long, and how often we have spoke the speech of Ashd^d, to go
tune our voices to Jeremiah's Lamentations, lamentations, weeping, and mourning.

Be now for a short momentary lifetime a Benoami a son of sorrow; and thou
shall, and for ever, be a Benjamin, thy fathers darling; O blessed are they
that mourn, for theirs is the Kingdom.

3. Repent cordially, from the bottone of the heart repent. The Tree Mallabon
brings out but one apple in a year; Hist.
but it grows up from the root, utinam a cord fructificarmeur, would God and
from the root the heart we would bring out fruit worthy of the name of
repentance, Says God, My Son give me thy heart; it is a little legacy, but
very well liked of; it is the wheel in the clock, makes all move and do their
duty: my knee bow, my tongue confess, my eye water, and all the man put on a
mourning suit; where this inward sorrow is, the outward man conformes
presently: outward duties are so far from superstition, that they are
inavoidable waiters upon that man whose heart does act the part of true
repentance; and as salt, so hearty repentance seasons all my undertakings; it
is the best evidence to testify my sins are forgiven me.

Is this, 2. Case
If a thief upon the gallows, who cries he forgives all the world, and does
remit the ill turns done to him, will God his?

I am not of opinion, that his release can gain Gods acquittance; yet know I
it, without he forgive his neighbor, God will not forgive him: what is
forgiveness, but bonum opus, a good work? which through the wicked liver
cannot be saved by, yet not without, I thus then determine this Case, the thief
must forgive, if he will be forgiven, yet the naked act is not enough, this
plain stuff is naught, without it be well watered; I mean his forgiveness
must be rawed and streamed with tears of true repentance, for his own offense
committed against our good God.

Let me see such a thief, and to dye to day, and I dare say, that night he
shall be with Christ in paradise.

I will die in hopes of Gods forgiveness, The Avowry.
for that I can forgive my neighbor, yet never conceit my sinful score is
crossed out, till my true repentance bear witness.

Will God forgive him, 3. Case.
forgives not his neighbor: Christolog. faith, Qui sio petit iste se etiam
accusat, He that so prays, himself accuses, and there needs no other witness
to condemn him: he desires God to deal with him as he deals with others; whom
while he seeks to be revenged of, pulls on his own head the vengeance of God:
God who in all things else is our director, in forgiving, would have us to be
his pattern; Man, God means to make his sampler by, to forgive.

And as man forgives man, so will God, man: it is but a veil for mischievous
villainy, which the Council of Trent has found out; who by the parties in the
petition, profess is meant the Church, avouching this is the petitions
meaning: That we desire God to forgive us our trespasses against him, as we,
that is, say they, the Church forgives others.

Thus they refer that to the species, predicates of the individual, and by
this their gloss, lay the reins in the neck of malice, making no matter of
private malice, since the universal Church remits him whom I malice.

But I am resolved, I will never rest content, The Avowry.
for that the Church is at unity with him, has done me wrong, till I my self
forgive him my self has done me wrong.

The Graces which this petition commends unto us, Are two, Purity. The Graces
two.
Humanity.


Purity within the house. The Parallel.


Humanity without doors.

Purity, the souls consort.

Humanity, the bodies beautifier.

By Purity, I am enabled to carry fair to God.

By Humanity, to be boneer to my neighbor.

It is that first reconciles me to God in Christ.

This other appeases me toward all of my kind.

How much pains ought I to take to enjoy the society of such two as can quiet
heaven with earth, and us who are earth one with another?

I am resolved to affect being holy as God is holy, The Avowry.
that so my Creator and I his creature may be kind: I will also resolve upon
it, to give entertainment to humane courtesy, since my kindness to man,
makes my God more remiss to me.

The first Grace given in Commendum by this fist petition, Purities Character
is Purity: one who took Angels for his fast friends, but found in them no
steadfastness, Adam for his nigh alliance, but never since he wore his first
breeches: this is he many make show of love to; that is all, are lip-friends,
not heart-friends, and entertains this Purity like a kinsman that is as far off
as Adams, and yet this is that one own brother to the Queens daughter, who is
all glorious within, of full blood to the spouses best beloved, so rarely
qualified. O Purity, was it not thou did keep my Christ company in his
journey, from heaven to earth, whose us possess thee who came from heaven? At
Christ his Cross we took acquaintance, our acquaintance, we must now go renew
it; yea be renewed according to the inner man; Whatne men ought we to be,
shaving put on the linen Ephod, purity of heart, which is Gods gist, man's
bliss, and the Devils undoer.

Let me keep Purity company, I stand in need of much to be forgiven, my needs
will be less.

Let me be never so deep a debtor to God, and the income of this one strikes
off all my reckoning: say I have trespassed God, and exceedingly, here is he
can end the quarrel: God who is much displeased that I have lived ill, is
twice as well pleased, that I live better: he looks not at what I was, but what
I am: and my now conformity persuades him, not to question my past impiety. He
sets his estimate of goodness, on us, by the time present; and if he now find
us holy, our past unrighteousness he forgives.

I will beg of God the grace of Purity, The Avowry.
that so my now reformed life may ensure me, even in this life, of the
forgiveness of all my sins and trespasses.

The second Grace recommended to us, Humanities Character.
is Humanity, a virtue veiled under an earthly vizard, whose glorious splendour,
Lord let it shine through me and glent on all, What makes me more manlike then
Humanity; and affiances me more than this, to all others?

This is the tie of humane nature, the Make-friend among men; and that one
which cancels all unkindnesses, when dabate makes discord; this makes friends;
when spleen spits venom, this sucks it out; when wrong bids right it, this
bids put all up: How lightsome does humanity make me! a plausible pleader, and
advises, if possible, to have peace with all men; it vows my quiet in mind,
recompenses; the offered me injuries by others, let me thus overcome.

And it is with honor, repay favors for frowns; good words, for ill deeds;
yea, pray for my very enemies: O Stephen, I will take thee for my pattern, and
beslow Lay it not to their charge, on those, who take up stones to stone me:
Behold the Dove which has no gall, it is Humanity; the innocent Ewe, which
opens not its mouth before the shearer, He that is accoutred with this grace,
will part with much, makes no matter of it, suffer out of measure; not measure
out by the same measure unto other. O Humanity, thy courtesy to others,
endears thy God to thee, while thy silent let pass, of worldly wrongs, wrings
mercy from thy Maker: Let me put up all, the way to wipe off all, and remit
trespasses against me, the mean to get my trespasses against, forgiven me.

I am resolved to effect all humane affability, The Avowry.
and that to allmen living, that somy affable carriage to such as do me
injuries, may bind my God, and by his word, to remit me, my sin sand
trespasses.

The vices two.
The two Vices prohibited are Soul soyling. Heart hatred.


Shoul soyling, The Parallel.
a Colonel of the black guard.

Heart hatred, a Captain under his command.

Soul soyling, a continual makebate betwixt my God and me.

Heart hatred, a no seldom dissension-sower betwixt me and my neighbor.

Soul soyling, the author of inward uproars.

Heart hatred, the cause of outward Garboyles.

The first cause forain wars.

The latter, civil sedition.

While the one makes by God and me fall out; the other, me with my neighbor.

I am resolved by the grace of God, The Avowry.
to bandy all my forces, to force these graceless Seminaries of sin to be
gone.

The first Vice forbidden in the first petition, Soul soilings Character.
is Soul soyling: This is the Vice, the Schoolmen call malus habitus an evil
habit, consuetudo peccandi, custom of finning; altera natura, that other
nature, which makes sin natural, eustomable, habitual: a vice breeds and
nusles us up in evil; a vice which makes us common annoyancers of God, and no
more set by finning, than eating and drinking, walking and talking.

This Vice of all other, is the devils darling, Gods accursed, and man's mischief
maker; that Absalom that steals away the hearts of the men of Israel, and
allures us from our allegiance to our Lord God: This is that one can do more
with the wag of his finger, Hist.
than Pompey with the stamp of his foot; and has, and no few, at as much
command as the Centurion his servants; where this malus habitus inhabits, men
are made very slaves; whom this vice bids go, he goes; come, he comes; do
this, he does it.

Behold the rudder which turns about the ship, soul; The Commander which with
a word has at command all in our I Will. How does the Sons of men like Sampson,
dote on this Dalilah, which while it promises content, causes the Spirit of the
Lord to depart from us: this is the vice proffers us peace, but upon worseterms
then the men of Jabesh Gilead; they were to have put out every man his right
eye; this leaves us not an eye to see with: he that habits himself in sin, sees
not that he sins, his evil habit has made him senseless he does evil. O!
custom in sin makes no conscience of sin; and the ofter the sin's committed,
the seldomer the sinner finds fault with it; a daily trespasser is a stiff
out-facer; and what is every day done, the doer of it thinks the less shame
of, though it deserve more to be reproved, yet it less grieves, and by much.
Mark how the first gross offense made the heart sob, when again committed, not
so much, when after, scarce at all: the increase of sin, is the decrease of the
sense of sin, which how much more all the man is soiled with, so much less
matter makes he of it.

This habitual evil is a vice which pleases man's palate, displeases his God,
increases man debt, disinables to satisfy, bids us take our fulth of pleasure,
takes from us an heart to bear't in mind, after that, man must be called to
judgment.

I am resolved by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
to pray my God to guard my heart from this overspreading sin, soul soyling,
lest while I entertain it, it stop my mouth and make me careless to crave of
God to forgive me my sine and trespasses.

The next Vice prohibited, Heart hatreds Character
is Heart hatred, Cain gave it first birth-dom, the world ever since
house-room, and the envious man welcome. This is the vice souses the soul in
blood, which if it grow up, becomes a A feeder on man's flesh.
Cannibal, none is more out of charity, yet none seems more charitable, while
it will take naught, but repays A Box on the Ear.
it back; it restores what we would not have, and is ready to give, or any to
receive; it makes its master think of his neighbor, when he has no thanks for
his labor; and bestow on him much pains, but to his neighbors costs and
damage: this is a spark hid, which ere long barns out, an hovering over cloud,
which presently dissolves into a deluge: a pest which will break out, and some
are sure to dye for it.

The plague is not more perilous, the flood more furious, the fire more fierce,
then this vice, which who so once falls into, finds it a fury of hell, a
firebrand of the Devil, and a Devil incarnate: How does the potion of
opportunity alter this vices The malicious man.
owner, in a trice, changes his looks, tone, complexion, makes the man double
in his speech, tremble with his joints, and be ready to kill or be killed. This
is the man who means to be even with his neighbor by living at ods with him,
who wrongs himself, by seeking to right himself, and now will go do that in an
humor, he will have cause to rue ever after: The maliciousmans three
assistants.
he has three sturdy Assistants, whom he sets a work, to work his neighbors
ill fare.

1. The first is Anger, which is brevis furor, a Bedlam, and makes us more like
mad men, then men of reason, and unreasonably mad for a fit.

2. The second is, Choler, who cares not what he does, so it be done, and to
his neighbors damage, and irrecoverably.

3. The third is, Spleen, who toadlike, is full of the venom of evenge, and
swells up the maw whith malice, and means as much mischief as may be: It is this
vice, and these the aiders are perfect Arithmeticians in the rule of Addition,
who reckon up all discourtesies, and discover, and in a moment a world of
malice. Whilst they seek for revenge, they pull on their owner the vengeance
of God: whose repay back the trespasses done him by man, reduplicates his sins
and trespasses unto God.

I am resolved to beware of this one, The Avowry.
lest overcome by these three, whose joint force captivates diserention, and of
a wise man makes a very fool.

The Divine Contemplation upon the fifth Petition.

Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.

I have now got notice what I am in debt, and how to clear it; I have a long
score, here is a way to strike off all the reckoning. When first I pursed Gods
Debt-book, I gave it for granted, I was bankrupt. The condition of the
obligation revives my drooping spirit.

O my God, I am deep in arrears to three, give me grace to make thee my pattern
in forgiving, and the debt's discharged.

But O how happy am I, have met with so good a Creditor! I van have much
forgiven for a little.

I now see, I had been utterly undone, had I not fallen into the hands of a most
merciful redeemer --

O God my God, I will eye my misery, the more I shall admire thy mercy.

But what am I? a sinner: whom have I offended? God: How often? it is past count.
O this piece of my prayer protests, the best of us have finned against God, and
exceedingly.

This is my grief,
My sins can not be numbered.
This is my Joy,
They can be forgiven.
Well, I will not sin, that grace may abound, yet rejoice my soul and again; I
say, rejoice, that Gods grace is sufficient for thee. The petition is a
prospective glass, And lets me see My hard fortune, that a sinner. My goodhap,
how to be assoyled.


It is a picture, Look here at it, and I am any ugly creature. Hold it close,
then I look like the Kings son.

O mighty God, thou show thy wisdom in the discovering my deformities: thou
show thy goodness in insuring me the cure of my sore. Unhappy, I, who have
sinned against thee; how happy I, who for forgiving Man, can have God to
forgive me! This is no strange news to hear I am a sinner: This is the wonder,
that upon these terms God grants forgiveness. It was Elisha his saying to
Naaman, Wash and be clean: and it is Christ has said it, Forgive, and thou
shall be forgiven. O the depth of the wisdom of our God! He has found out the
way to keep heaven and earth in peace. One of us with another, and himself with
us all: God will be friends with us, so we will be friends among our selves.

But O my native soil, have thou not cause to fear the wrath of my God, when
such superlative hatred in the land; For the divisions of Ruben, are great
grief of heart.

Thou who have the hearts of Kings and Commons at thy disposal, incline our
hearts unto a peace: say to the devouring sword, it is sufficient; let us not
increase our sins by increasing our malice, lest our malice to men, make our
God to hate us.

The sixth Petition.
THe river which runs by Chester, changes her channel every month; in
like sort the stream of our discourse has found out a new channel: it is a
drain of Christ's own making, and the Jordan we mean to bathe in. Give me leave
as did the Angel, a while to move in this Petition.
pool; the troubling of this water-work, may work a cure upon some, and make
them more sensible, I mean of the sense and meaning of this petition. Yet here
are two passages to be opened, that done, we may march on without stop or let,
to the meaning of this petition: What are these two passages, but two words we
must pass by, by fine force, that is, by the power and help of explication:
Temptation is the one word, Evil is the other; into the first of which we beg
to God not to lead us, and from that other to deliver us; and thus we have to
do with two, two worse than which, rake hell, and they have no fellows; for
the one is the bait, and the other is the hook; by Temptation we are drawn on;
by Evil we are hung on, the hooks of vice: Lo the lure to entice, Temptation;
and the net to entrap, Evil. Since such is our danger, let us fall to prayer,
and pray to God, not to lead us into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Now that you may know what temptation is here prayed against, know it,
Temptation is Probationis. Perditionis.
Commonly called the Temptation on the right hand, and Temptation on the left
hand. The right hand Temptation, or Temptation celestial, is when God tempts
man, which what is his Temptation, but his making a trial of man's obedience,
sometimes by sacrificing, as Abraham sometimes by advising to sell all and give
it to the poor, as the rich young man in the Gospel: sometimes by our
suffering crosses and calamities to be laid upon us as on Just, Job, all of
which Temptations, count it, says S. James, exceeding joy, when you are
thought worthy, to fall into them: these are not evil of themselves, but
approved proofs to discover to the world what we are, and to us our selves,
whether God has a part or no in us: against such we pray not in this petition.

There are Temptations of a lower and baser descent, sublunary Temptations
called Temptations on the left hand.

Now these are of two sorts, either Temptations Ad extra, or Ad intra.


Ad extra, are two, 1. Terrestrial. 2. Infernal.


Terrestrial are 1. Foreign. 2. Civil.


1. Terrestrial foreign Temptation, ad extra, is when man tempts God: tempting,
that is, making an experiment, whether he be of power, can know or be present,
Gods omnipotence, omniscience, omni-presence we so often tempt, as call in
question, his Can, his privity, his presence.

This is an immediate presumptuous act of man against God, to cry out, Can God
provide bread in the wilderness does God see or regard, or is God among us?
Three sentences which savours of the language of Ashdod, and Make known.
divulge man tempts God with an high hand, while his power he questions, Psalm.
78.18, 19. his knowledge, Psalm. 94.7. his presence, Exodus 17.7.

I am ever resolved, The Avowry.
to pray my God to free my from being ensnared in that sin of Temptation, which
makes the creature doubt of the power, privity, The Collect.
and presence of the Almighty.

2. There is a Terrestrial civil Temptation, ad extra, which is, when man
tempts man: Thus did the Pharisees Christ; and the woman in the Proverbs, the
young youth, subtle questions and passing pleasant proffers are the midwives
give birth to these Temptations: diverse have had their bosoms full of these
Temptations, wherein men make show more of their wit than grace; and women more
of their courtesy than honesty.

I will pray my God, The Avowry.
as from presuming to tempt him, so likewise, that none neither by subtle
craft, nor proff red kindness may tempt, or draw me on to do evil.

2. The next kind of Temptation is infernal, which is when the devil of hell
tempts man on earth: 1 These. 3.5.
that he tempts us, S. Paul can witness, how he does it, that is most covert.

The dispute is not de facto, that is granted; de modo, that is the doubt, and
scarce discoverable, of this so secret and sly a work of the Devil: let me say
somewhat, since on all sides acknowledged, Satan tempts us to sin, 1 Chronicles. 3.1.
since by so few the manner of his march up to our hearts is discovered, I
confess the Scriptures are sparing in setting down, the Devils manner of
tempting us: and where God has said little, I will not have a mouth to speak
much.

The Devil tempts us 1. Per alium, by a second. 2. Perse, by himself.


1 Per alium, by a second; thus he tempted Eve, speaking in the serpent to the
woman, as the Angel in the Ass to Balaam: the serpent and the swine have both
harbored him: the one to their own, the other to our undoing; so much mischief
he made us, when our mother Eve he thus overcame by Temptations; that just
cause we have to try each spirit ere we trust it.

2. The Devil tempts perse, by himself: and this I find to be two manner of
ways, Nostra, and Sua forma.


1. In our shape. 2. In his own.
In our shape, thus he tempted Christ, Mat. 4. who finding no secret assault as
a spirit could penetrate Christ's heart, meets him, as conceived by some, like a
man, as less suspicious, by proffers proving to enthrall his eye: how usual
is this, and at this day? it is not only Christ.
Innocence the Devils mortal enemy, but Witches his fast friend, and their
confessions have made Certificate, that thus the devil tempts and no few.

2. The Devil tempts sua forma, in his own shape, as a spirit; and thus two
ways; By Alluring the sense By Working upon the affections
Ad Extra. Ad Intra.


1. By alluring the sense, which that he can, who questions? for if Magicians
can goll and delude the sense by making us believe we verily see what is not
indeed: no doubt their Master is of as much, and much more power to bewitch
man's sense, and cause in his eye, such a female to be most beautiful, whose
eye presents that object liked to the common sense; which common sense being
misused by misinforming, the man is allured to what lewd.

2. Again, the Devil does yet more to draw man on to sin, for if by these
outworks, the senses, the Devil can get no message conveyed to man's heart to
tempt him to do evil, he works more closely upon our afftctions, his dear
sriends by suggestions: and that after this manner he knows our humors, and
which predominates, and so, to what sin appetite is most inclined: in such sort
he suggests, bespeaking us men, not by word of mouth for a spirit, but by
suggestions for one of those spiritual wickednesses. Thus he propounds and
proffers but inforces not, yet he reaches out what often is laid hold of; which
the sooner we lay hold of, for that it samplers the good like of our own
constitutions.

But I will not, lest I walk wide, or wild wander too far in this mystery of
iniquity. God it may be, conceald the modus, the manner how the Devil tempts,
to make us spend more time, de materia, about the matter concerning resisting
the Devils temptations.

2. There is yet another kind of sublunary temptarion, called the Temptation
adintra, and this I call the Household, or home.
domestic Temptation; which is, when a man is tempted or drawn away of his own
lusts, and enticed, were it not for this Devil incarnate, all Devils in Hell
could scarce harm us, we need neither fear the Devil nor the world, but for
this flesh of ours, which S. James calls Lust, it is then carnal lust that
tempts us, set a work, by our old man man, Original corruption; which original
corruption since has wafted over from Adam to us Guilt, and Filth.


And this lust made us yet more filthy than before; for what is lust but a
filth or spot spreading all over our nature? this uncleanness bred in us,
which is lust, remains more or less in the best of us, and is called (...), the
disorder of all the faculties and powers of the mind; not only of the
inferior part of the soul, called sensuality, but of that upper part of the
soul understanding and will: I take this spotted Lust.
beast to be the first spawn of original sin, who every day we uprise, goars
us and pushes us on in have, to commit evil in the sight of the Lord.

The old man, Original sin, sits in his Heart.
chair of state, and sends abroad, Lust, to draw all in our Isle from serving
God to serve him.

It is then by carnal lust, the old man's servant, that we are drawn away, that
is, tempted to do evil; the master sets his man to work; the man miserably
overmasters us poor men, and we are led captive by our lust, yea while God
leaves us, our lust leads us captive into that strong hold, called Temptation.

I am resolved, The Avowry.
since so sore beset with the master and the man, to provide me of a second,
even Gods spirit, that so I be not taken and led into temptation.

The second word to be explained, is Evil, now though this word admit of
several acceptations, yet I will muster here no more than meet and pertinent
to our purpose: You have malum re, and You Have Rem malam.


By Malum re, as says S. Chrysostom, is meant the Devil.

By rem malam, S. Austin says, is meant sin.

And thus you see, it is the Devil, and sin, we desire deliverance from, from
the Devil the Sire of sin, from sin the author of all our ill: two strong
enemies for us weaklings, without supply by Prayer, to hold our against; for
the one commands hell, that is the Devil: The other, us, Lord are we not said
too much by our sins?

But lo what does Evil, more full predicate of, than of these?

The Devil it is his old style, and Sin such is its condition.

The Devils malice, and sins effects can afford neither a better epithet: such
is the Devil, Evil, such is, Sin, no better, fratres in malo, brethren in
iniguity.

I am resolved to period my prayers with this part of the petition, The Avowry.
since this part of the petition preferred prevails with God, to deliver me both
from sin and Satan.

Having explained the words difficult to be underftood; now I mean to give you
the sense and meaning of the petition. It is this.

Good God and Father of us all, let us not be ensnared in the Gin of
lest-handed Temptation, by daring to experiment what thou can: no nor let
those of our own kind overcome us, those of our own house harm us, nor yet the
Devils, who bears us so much ill will be able to do us the least annoyance,
let me not fall into the fowlers net. Lord I pray not, the net be not set, but
that I be not caught in it; I pray thee not, to take the weapon of Temptation
out of the Devils hands, but I pray thee, preserve me, that I be not wounded to
death by that weapon; Lord, Lord, after the sword be brandisht, the net set,
deliver my soul out of the snare of the fowler; Lord deliver me from evil that
is from the Devil and sin.

From the Devil who is all evil; from sin which makes all of us evil: in
whole then here we pray, that we be not hurt by the Temptation.
weapon, nor taken by the Devil and Sin.
warriors. We pray against the danger of that, and deliverance from those,
that we may escape that one mischief perpendiculous, Temptation, and be
delivered from sin and Satan, so much has fooled and foiled us.

And now to eseape all sorts of complor whatsoever, The Avowry.
I am resolved to beg of God, not to let us be led into temptation, but to
deliver us from evil.

After the Sense, in come the Doctrines. 1. Division.
That we pray against is the Lead on. 2. That we pray for, is deliverance.


Against the Lead on into Temptation; and for deliverance from evil.

By the first I lose, by the second I gain; whilst the one to me is perilous,
the other propitious.

I am resolved to suit my God, The Avowry.
both to keep off me, these soul-harming assailants, Temptations, as also to
set me free from those two do me now damage, The Devil, and The Sin.


That prayed against, is the Lead on into Temptation: not, not to be tempted,
but ensnared by Temptation. Thy trials, O Lord, are good, so thou enable us to
ftand out in the day of trial.

Nor is it meant, that it is Gods proper act in this kind to tempt; but so
does it happen by desertion, when he leaves us, God is said to do what be
hinders not to be done; Sicvauss sine qua non, of our leading into temptation.

I Will collect some observations from the generality of my exposition, that
done, descend on to particulars.

You must bear in mind the word explained, Temptation.

And how Mantempts God. And how One man tempts another. And how We our selves.
And how The Devil us.
From it take notice, How Man's an Enemy to his Maker. Four observations
How Man's an enemy to man. How Man's an enemy to himself. How The Devil is
all our enemies.


That saying of St. Paul, Sapiemtia Carnis, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
with God:

That old Adage, Homo homini lupus, oneman would eat another.

That Tragic sentence, fera mulla ut inse saviat tam fit fera, no brute so mad
a man, to be his own undoing:

That saying of the Scripture,

The Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom of us be may devour:

All witness my Doctrines are undeniable.

Shall I sear naught, When I am at odds with God. When all other at odds with
me. When my self's not true to my self. And the Devil waits on me with an ill
turn?


By this petition putting up, I am made sensible of all this, which shall cause
me,

For my own part, The Avowry.
to resolve upon it, To stand upon my gurad against the Devil, not too much to
trust my own flesh; to try my friend ere I trust him, The Collect.
and forthwith to goemake my peace with my God: and Hie labor, and hoo opus.

Now let us dissect into parts the petition more particularly.

From the forepart of the petition put up against the Lead on, Take notice For
whom we put up this petition Take notice For what we put up this petition


For whom, it is for us, Lead not us.

For what, it is for avoiding damage by Temptation.

For the first, which is pro queis vel quibus, for whom this petition, to
prevent the Lead on into Temptation is put up, it is for us, Lead not us.

The first of these three last petitions has been put up for necessaries we
want.

The second to forgive what we owe.

And now this third, for our defense from harm catching by temptation; jointly
that I am led on to light on from this us, as it casts a glance over these
three last petitions, is this tripartite consideration, To meditate.

How miserable is man that has not, must have Remit, and without a writ of
protection is still undone. It is we are poor, have naught to pay, yet bold to
crave the Kings protection: what can he think walks with a procetion? but how
gracious his King, how prodigal the spend-thrist, and what woe would follow
him, but for mercy.

I am resolved, The Avowry.
whenever I come to this latter part, of my Pacer noster, to period it with
an admication of Gods protection of him, The Collect.
has naught, is in dept, and daily-in danger.

Now see for what we put up this petition, as well can witness the exposition;
it is put up, and to this end, for avoiding of damage by Tempration, not for
avoiding the field, but foil; not for avoiding the fight, but defeat; not for
avoiding the battle, but ominous overthrow in the battle; we pray not against
our life being a warfare; no, we must be right Spartans, born with Lances,
fight the good fight, with beasts, as Paul at Ephesus, with great overgrown
Giants, as David did, with spiritual wickednesses: these are our enemies. In a
word, the combat must be continued against these three, the Heroglyphicks of
the world, the flesh, and the Devil.

We pray not then against the war, but being wounded in the war. There will be
war while life, and must be prayer for preservation in the war, from wounding.
In war, to prayer, Note.
Heart must play its part as well as hand. In this life militant, I expect an
onset, and will pray for a prevail: I matter not whom I meet, so God enable me,
to lift up to him my heart, as Moses did his hand.

My prayer put up in this spiritual warfare, makes the odds on my side, two
to once, my heart and tongue give the onset on him that sets upon me, I mean
Temptation, when I am weakest to wage war with spiritual wickednesses; it is
prayer revives my strength: I learnt this divine stratagem to reinforce my
force afresh of Samson, who when half starved, blind of both eyes, a poor
prisoner, yet by prayer, received power to be revenged of his and Gods enemies,
the Lords of the Philistims. The Result of all.
How great soever be the man of sin, come out to upbraid Gods little champion,
the least of Ifrael, a poor Saint shall have strength enough to bring to his
knees the tallest son of Anack, what assaulting sin soever.

I am resolved so soon as I find my sont set on by my spiritual enemy, The
Avowry.
to retreat back to prayer, since my retreat back to that advantageous ground,
assures me. I shall give the man of sin, the fall and foil.

But take an observation more natural to the text, we put up this petition
against the Lead on into temptation, Note.
that is harm happening by it. Lo a very wound we must have life, but limbs; as
to escape death, so damage; as a mortal wound, so a green wound, which may be
healed.

This care had David, apparent by that he said, Lord I will take. heed unto my
ways. The Evangelist warned the Jews to have a care of this, when said to
them, Think not to say within your selves, here is provision taken, against an
open assault and a small skirmish.

O that this care were had over our bodies and sold, then we might play at
foiles, and not receive so many disgraceful vinnies. The Avowry.


I am resolved to have an eye all over, and to stand upon my guard Head to the
foot.
a capo pe, since required to take heed to the least harm carching in the
encounter.

Now see what it is we pray for, Deliverance from evil.

I will not divide Deliverance from Evil, since Evil without Deliverance
delivers us up to death: Let us tie these two, a good and a bad together; and
though the wolves guts being placed nigh the sheeps tharmes fret them all to
pirces, yet it is my hopes this Innocent shall have the better of that
Malefactor: and that the nigher Deliverance makes his approach, the suddenner
downfall will betide Evil. Let us team then these two together, as Samson did
his foxes to burn up the land of the Philistims. But to save from spoil, the
Soul:
land of israel: 1. I mean, let us treat upon Deliverance and Evil,
conjunctim, our Deliverance from Evil. 2. Then upon Evil all alone.


First, these two, Devil and sin, are comprehended under this one only word,
Evil, from which we pray for Deliverance, to deliver us from Evil, and what
to deliver, and us, and from these thus named.

This sewes us, Note.
the Devil and sin are our worst of enemies; that abroad, this at home; that
without doors, this within doors; that the prince of the air, this which we
heir from Adam, and earths in us, and dwells in us, in our bodies, in our souls.
These two seek the destruction of our souls and bodies. Whosoever hears the cry of
the Crocodile, immediately he is a dead body. O fear not him can kill the body,
but these can kill both body and soul. Let me count of these for foes, who are
of force to be my undoing, the undoing of all me and for ever.

Secondly, what worse enemies than these, which are always at odds with us.
Earthly enemies, are not ever in action, take sometimes truce with us, the
truth is, these two never take truce, no not a minute, a moment. Devil his
daily journey is to compass the earth, and all to make us hellish proselytes.
Sin like the Sun, is in continual motion, like the fountain ever bubling.
Hence says our Savior, Why do thoughts arise? and you shall see what arise
and turn to. Mar. 7.21.

Streams of waters of Mara, and amin, and so many, able to drown the Israel of
God, as the Red sea all the host of the Egyptians.

Thirdly, it is the Devil and sin seek to destroy, and unum and unitatem, not
only this or that person, but the species, Hist.
the whole kind and posterity of Adam. Nero wished all Rome had but one head,
that so with one blow he might be their utter overthrow; what he wished these
have wrought, even all our overthrowes. The Mirandillian Butchery, the Parisian
Mattens, the Sicilian Evensong, fall all far short of that these two have
complotted, acted, against Adam and all us his offspring. And honce issues out
my ill conceit against the Devil and sin.

Yea their hate to our kind, The Collect.
their continual hate, which stretches out its limits beyond this life to
deprive us of a life everlastign: this foul fact of these two, has made me
resolve upon it, to repair to those three, to the trine Unity or Trinity in
unity, and all to put up to them this petition, Lord lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Let us now go take notice from what we desire deliverance, it is from Evil.
By which word, Evil, you have heard is meant the Devil and Sin: this is their
style, nones else.

That I note is, Note.
naught is more evil than the Devil and Sin.

1. For antiquity, sio fuit a principie: ever since Devil was a Devil, and
sin sin, these have been evil. 2. For spite or malice, know you not, devil
makes God out of love with us, and sin, us, out of love with Gods Law. 3. For
Complots, the Devils device to harm Job, and sins insinuation to bring Ananias
to his end, reveal they are horrible evil. 4. The Devils Epithites, the evil
spirit, the unclean spirit, Mat. 12. and sins effect, By one man came sin, and
by sin death; make me give them this title, Evil; and deservedly.
I am resolved, The Avowry.
since this they are, to beware, yea to watch and ward over my heat, lest my
heart admit of acquaintance with these two foul fiends, the Devil and sin.

The Cases of Conseience now next come in, and they be three.

The first whereof is this, I. Case
after what manner, does Lust and Concupiscence temps us to fin, or entice or
draw us on from serving God, to become the servants of sin.

This is the hardest thing in the world to discover, and therefore much pains
must be taken to complete an answer satisfactory. Such a serious subject as
this is, slighting of it is unseemly, and the Orator should be as ill thought
of, Hist
as Alexander thought of Cherillus, who gave him money to hold his peace.

1. It is and for this cause that I am resolved first to demonstrate, how lust
effects this feat by a simile.

2. To make the point more perspicuous, I purpose, God willing, to describe
lusts sick days march through the heart of man, and all to captivate poor foul
and take the Man prisoner, and lead him into that strong hold called Temptation.

First this may be made appear by a Simile drawn from flowers, how lust or
concupiscence entices or draws man on to sin.

You know there passes from flowers a subtle vapor, which the sense of
smelling draws in, and which draws away the sense with delight after it. So
lust which sprung up in the Garden of Eden after Eve had finned, from it, as
from a flower, passes a subtle vapor of evil thoughts.

And as the sent of the flower, goes on by the organ of smell into the brain;
so a sent of lusts, even evil thoughts, are carried by that organ the common
sense into the heart.

And as the delightful smell makes us in love with the subtle vapor: so the
pleasures of lusts make us affect the vapors of evil, which come from lust.
Nor are those evil vapors a few, but full many, apparent by those already
quoted words of Christ, Luke 24. Why do thoughts arise in your hearts? These
are infectious vapors and more dangerous to the soul than fenny mists to the
body, if not scattered and blown a way by Gods Spirit: they poison soul, and
cast understanding, will, and memory, the souls public Notary, into Fever
sits.

This is it has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to beg of the good gardener God, to root out of that plat of ground my heart,
that weed Lust which if left in it, at least be suffered to like, its sent and
savor will infect my soul and all in it.

Secondly, Lusts six days march.
that every Christian who will take pains to peruse this Case, may be made
conscious, how carnal lust or natural concupiscence draws him on to sin.

Lusts six days march through soul must be made to compere.

Lust the lewd, imitates God the good; God, six days wrought, to perfect the
creation.

Lust takes as many days pains to deface the map Man, the model of all Gods
great work, that great work of creation.

1. Lusts first days march is made when it pricks on to the first motions to
sin: now this days march is begun and ended, when carnal lust has turned man's
heart after a vain object; in the Commonwealth, as of pleasure, prosit, honor:
in the Church, as after superstitious rites and ceremonies, and more to set by
the shadow than the substance.

This is that spiritual vertigo Paul taxed the Galatians with, for being
troubled with, Gal. 4.9. when they turned again to the weak and beggarly
rudiments: would man but mark, he should find this march lust, called
Concupiscence, had made into his marches, turned his thoughts from Godward too
much, to eye a vain object.

2. Lusts second days march is made through heart, when thou O man marchest on
to like that, to which thy heart turned, now this liking is not all alike, for
it is either on the sudden, like a guest unexpected, or else a more impressed
liking, like a Seal out and carved; That is sudden surprisall, this other a
permanent good like, and these two are shadowed out by that in Job 20.12, 13.
where the wicked man is compared to one has sweet poison in his mouth, he
feels a sweetness in it, yet fears it is poison and spits it out. Then this is
only a sudden passion, but if he hide it under his tongue roots, if he favor
and forsake it not, but keep it in his mouth, then this is a permanent
affection, a piece of durable Duretta, a stay by, by us, would thou O man,
but mark, thou should find this second days march lust has made through
thy heart: while thou likest the evil of sin, to which thy heart first gave a
turn.

3. Lusts third days march, is made through the heart, when that plundering
horseman is spyed trotting through hearts confines, called Consensus in
delectatione, in English, man's overjoying delight he takes in that evil, to
which his heart has turned and liked: this Rakes merrily on, and there is two
of this name, I mean, Duplex consensus, Operis, Duplex consensus, Mentis.


A consent to do evil, forbid in the nine first Commandments.

A consent in heart, forbid in the last, the tenth, which is, when in heart and
mind, the man takes a pleasure and a certain delight, in the thought and
thinking of his Mistress sin, his Dalila darling sin: have you not spyed, tell
truth, this overjoying delight in the heart to do the evil of sin? Simil.
every of us has a sin relishes in our thoughts like a sugar plumb in our
plats. The discovery of this is the witness, Lust has made a third days
march through thy heart and mind, and of this I am insured, while thou O man,
have an everjoying delight in the sin like't and turned to.

4. Lusts fourth days march is more flow, but the more perilous; in this
days march, lust takes leave to stay and look about him all soul over: this
days march begins and ends morante delectatione, with a delaying, or staying,
or dwelling upon the thought of doing evil; when this is discoverable, be
sensible, lust has made four days march O man into thy heart; now who, if he
search diligently, shall not find lust thus far got, ad morantem
delectationem, which the Schoolmen call, Articulatio faetus, the framing and
fashioning of all the parts of sin the womb of the soul, after man's turning to
eye the evil, after his liking the evil he even now turned to, has by a
kind of carnal copulation begot sin after his assent has given heat and
warmth to this, spurious sperm, and made it capable to grow from little to
more: then in comes one by a daily dallying, or a dilatory delight taking, in
what was turned to, liked of, assented to, and this is it which gives framing
and fashioning in the heart of man to the sin conceived; but as the vipers are
the death of their dams, so more we form of this imp of evil in the soul, the
more it ruinates the soul. They say the Bear brings forth a lump, Hist.
but licks it into form: O! our first conceptions of evil, are monstra
horrenda, horrible monsters, our licking, That is, our often Turning to, Liking
of, Assenting to,
volving and revolving up and down in the soul, has fashioned this savage
Bear, Sin. And for certain, this slow gate as 'twere loath to leave sins
remembrance, brance, but dwelling on it, avouches, it is Lusts fourth days
march, it has made into the heart. The Supplicat.
Now God send us well quit of it.

5. Now follows lusts fifth days march through the inner Temple the soul: this
march is made per aberrationem Cordis, while the heart wanders after evil, so
so as the heart begins to gad after that evil, I lookt-at, liked, assented
to, stayed to dally with in the fist place, my resuming to think again upon
that sin late out of mind, my suffering my mind to call it back again. This
discovers the fist days march lust has made through my soul. O who pereeives
not, he has been thus, forraged by the man of sin: O the sin which runs in our
reins, veins, is in our nature is natural to us, rakes up and down the inner
man, this is it does make us reassume and take up a thought, a delight in the
sin, we had surceased from; and when the spiritual watchman, enlightened
understanding spies this, be pleased to be informed by him, concupiscence or
carnal lust has made the fist days march through thy sout.

6. And now there is but noe days march more, the sixth, when this is finished
acumest, it is finished and carnal lust got from Dan to Beersheba, from one
end of the soul to the other, all soul over, were this days march overpast,
all is taken, all but a sort, of clay, thy earthy body; and when the Castle
has yielded, can the Town hold out? when the sword is taken, the scabbard is
for no service. This I say, to let you know, fro once this last days march be
made through soul, how presently our bodies become a prey to lust, whilst
carnal lust with aese inforces our actuating evil bodily.

Let us therefore take special heed to discover lusts six days march through
the soul, which the better we may do it, know all its way, its words are these,
Si tanta sit voluptas, quid si potiar? in English, if there be such pleasure in
the thought, will there not be more if the sin be bodily committed, yea thou
thy self know thou have thus chopped Logic, and framed this kind of
Syllogism which when it has gotten the consent of seduced reason, then our
fleshly lust has brought us to that haft, that we want naught but opportunity
to do all the evil bodily.

And thus I have led you on, and let you see Lusts march through that Isle the
Soul, and in a mystery, how far our Lust leads us on to do evil.

1. It turns our heart to it. The Collect
2. Makes us like it. 3. Then consent to it. 4. Then dwell in that delight. 5.
Then stray from God and dote on it. 6. Then in heart resolve upon it, hofaciam,
I will do it
Thus far as says S. James, every man is led away by his own concupiscence,
and enticed to do evil.

A misery incident to all men living, a misery from which in full we cannot be
delivered, during this life; a misery none is morefearfull yet the least
suspected, a misery is the root of all bodily abominations.

A misery, which let it reinforce us all to fall to prayer, and pray to God not
to lef sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts
thereof.

Second Case of Conscience is this, 2. Case
to be rightly informed, what counter-works had need be made to prevent lusts
march through the heart of man; at leastwise, to prevent its march in full
force.

I have counter-works in readiness agianst each of lusts six days march, and
first against, turning the heart toward evil.

1. Meditate, a look back again, may be a break fortune, remember Lots wife.

2. Meditate, every turn from God toward sin, is a turn face to hell, and who
that is wise would part with so fair an object for so foul a fight?

3. Mediatate every turn to sin is like a gap made in the vineyards fence, like
a close leak in a ship at sea, which sinks the vessel soul suddenly.

4. Meditate, no sooner look thou back to sin, but Devil steals into thy
soul.

5. Meditate Hist.
, sin is like the Aspedigorgon.
serpent bred in the Temple of Lucea,, which was the present death of him
turned his eye to it.

Now by these meditations like so many strong works, you may stop lusts first
days march, I mean turning heart toward Sin.

But say this first days march be made, and lust rise up to make the second
days march.

I have counter-works to stop lusts second days march through soul, I mean
preventions against liking sin.

1. Meditate, sin is the Bears birth shapelesse, an ugly monster, never of
Gods making, this will prevent liking it.

2. Meditate, the more thou fallest in love with earth, the less God in heaven
is loved: O ye cannot love God, serve God and Mammon; know it, one Dalila is a
damnable draw off, from our duties of Christianity.

3. Meditate, it is sins sweet, brings a smart, and the end of these things is
death.

4. Meditate, if I like sin, I am in the mind that none is in, that is good,
God threw it out of heaven, spurned it out of Paradise; and shall I take
pleasure in that, my God is, and that irreconcilably, displeased with? God
forbid.

But say this second days march be made, and lust rise up to make the third
days march.

I have Counter-works to stop Lusts third days march through the soul, I mean
preventions against consenting to evil.

1 Meditate, every consent is a stab and wounds to the heart.

2. Meditate, how thou of a freeman art made a bond and slave, and led captive
by consenting to thy lust.

3. Meditate how Eve fared after she had consented, she lost her Eden.

4. Meditate, consent makes conscious and before thou actuate the sin, makes
thee liable to the sentence of death and damnation.

But say this third days march be made, and lust rise up to make the fourth
days march.

I have Counter-works to stop lusts fourth days march through soul, I mean
preventions against letting evil thoughts be welcome long into the heart,
which is the fashioning of sin in womb of the soul.

1. Meditate, when sins birth is, thy death is, thou give sin a being, and it
deprives thee of being a Saint in Heaven.

2. Meditate, that which thou bear in the womb of thy soul, his name is
Esau, who for a mess of pottage will wave the heavenly inheritance.

3. Meditate, thou have him in thy womb will root out thy name.

4. Meditate, the welcome into the world, of this one, will eat thee out of
house and harbor, leave thee not a bit of bread in the strength whereof to
walk up to the heavenly Horeb.

But say this fourth days march be made, and lust rise up to make the fist
days march.

I have counterworks to stop lusts fist days march through soul, I mean
preventions against heart-wandring after sin.

1. Meditate, sin is that Ignis fatuus, that flame sent from hell, to lead the
will, and make thee lose the way to heaven.

2. Meditate, the longer thou padlest sins steps, the further thou have to thy
journeys end, I mean further off from heaven.

3. Meditate, white thy thoughts wander after sin, thou art looking for one to
be thy Butcher. O was there ever madness like this, for men to run upon their
own death!

4. Meditate, the pursue of sin is the turn-back of grace; and to go back to
Egypt, is to turn back of Canaan.

But say lust has had leave to make five days march through heart, and by
this mean, made thee turn to evil, The Col.
like of it, assent to it, dwell upon the thought of it, as also thy soul to
gad and wander after the thought of thy sin.

Know It, and to thy comfort, I have yet counterworks to beat lust back, and
stop him from his sixth days march; in which, (if withheld) he is neither
absolute conqueror, nor thou wholly overcome.

These counterworks are so many gracious preventions fortified with Canons of
proof, heavenly Meditations to beat lust back from, hoc faciam, resolving to
act the evil

1. Meditate upon it, thou art going down the lowest rung of damnation save
one, and that is doing the sin, step one step further, and thou art in an hell
upon earth.

2. Meditate how soul is evil already, and as though there were not enough
ill, must I go make all worse, misuse both soul and body, and make them a den
of thieves, a cage for unclean birds.

3. Meditate, that the punishment first threatened, was for bodily acting evil,
witness that Genesis 2.27. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the
death. O how great a preservative would this be to keep us from doing evil
bodily, to consider, it is that height of evil, that duplicated sin, of soul
with body, procures Gods heavy judgments.

For my own part, The Avowry.
I am resolved by the help of my God, to raise up my spiritual fortifications,
lest sinful lust in his march make an havoc, and as he is entered in, so
utterly overthrow all in this isle of man.

3. Case.
The third Case, How may I be sure of it, I have stood out and resisted the
evil of Temptation? Three ways: 1. If thou fly from it, thy departure does
depose thou have got the better: our gallants say, to stand to it is manlike;
the gracious they say, to betake thee to thy heels and run from harm catching
by temptation is Saint-like, and that thou may count such counsel no
disgrace, this is given in charge by General Paul, 1 Cor. 6.18. Flee
fornication; A Saint-like retreat from fin makes me a Sovereign over all the
unruly passions of my soul. 2. Thou shall be sure thou have triumphed by causing
thy temptation to give ground, and by laying load on it and cudgelling it with
Scriptum est, or sio dixit Dominus. 3. Resistit qui non consentit, he resists
who never consents, who if so weak he cannot run from the temptation, or it so
strong he cannot force it in the field to fly, yet know it good Christian, thy
stand out against it says, thou have quit thy self like a man, and let it be
as a cordial to comfort thy wounded conscience.


And now to comprise all in a line, I am resolved either my self to depart from
the evil of Temptation, The Avowry with the Collect.
or else by the aid of my God to make it depart and in haste from me, or
however by Gods good assistance not to assent but to stand out in the day of
trial.

We stand need of two graces, The Graces two.
to put up this petition, Timidity. Prospicacity.


Timidity, or a religious fear.

Prospicacity, or a quick divine foresight.

Timidity, to walk on warily.

Prospicacity, to look to our ways.

Timidity, which doubts the danger.

Prospicacity, which spies it out when we have fallen into it.

It is Timidity, sees naught, yet fears all.

It is Prospicacity sees all, that occasions all the fear.

I am resolved to pray my God to give me those two Graces, The Avowry with the
Collect.
both to fear, and to cast an eye all over, and all to prevent I be not led
into Temptation, but delivered from Evil.

Timidicies Character.
The first Grace given here in Commendum, is Timidity, which what is it but a
godly fear? let this grace, though no Anabaptist, be again Christened and thus
called, Godly fear; this godly fear is no coward, yet recoyles, no dastand, yet
dare not, will not on, without mature deliberation, like the Ram, it runs back
to give the bigger blow, and for a time stays, the sooner to stint the war.
This is the Grace bids fear the worst though it hope the best, and forecasts
what may happen, and weighs the end ere got half way. This Grace bids us hold,
and not be too bold, to beware what peril may ensue if we accept of the
proster, and if such be our works, seriously to consider what will be the end
of those things. It is this godly fear, keeps back Gods child from laying
hands on the Devils Mat. 4. All this will I give thee.
Donative, and makes him doubt to take, lest he lose by getting, and shun the
greeny shade, since sometimes it has sheltred a poisonous snake, yea forbear
to taste of the fruit so pleasant to the sight, since that sense may be
deceived, and the purchase be Edens Apple. O sins proffers are more pleasant
than profitable, and seem to content when kill, they allure but delude.

Now this it is has made me resolve upon it, whatsoever pleasing dalliance,
The Avowry.
sin motions to my soul, to beg of God this Grace, Godly Fear, for fear I be
undone, by being led into Temptation.

Prospicacity or a quick divine foresight is the grace I stand need of,
Prospicatities Character
to be delivered from evil, I mean not from the evil of sin, but evil of
punishment that I fell into, or ever I foresaw: the other this grace inables me
to foresee, that I fall not into it; I stand in need then of this Grace, not so
much to discover the income, as the end of evil; evil has overtaken all of
us, and actual evil, foresight is out of use, and has no part of employment
about preventing actuated evil already past and committed.

That then which this grace serves to inform us poor captive Samsons of, it is
this, what wages we shall have paid, for grinding in the Philistims common
mill of Evil: the work was sin, and the wages must be death: Sin and Death.
both these this grace spies, the one nigh hand, the other a life time off.
This grace is the eye of the soul, and lets us see, though a far off, Dives
in torments, as Dives did Lazarus in Abraham's bosom. It eyes as what has
happened, so what is hasting on: it stands upon the tower of Jehoram, and is the
watch man discovers deaths approach, Gods wrath, and Tophet prepared of old: lo
the one forewarns, and fore arms, which strengthens me, by the power of my
God, to take the main pillar of the Philistims Sin.
house in my arms, and endeavor to pull it down before my dying; and all lest
I fall into the same condemnation; though this grace cannot undo what done,
yet this foresight sets me to work, to take the water-work of Sin.
Mera, lest my soul be drowned in the deluge of damnation, as the Egyptians
bodies were in the Red Sea.

And now since this grace is of this use, to discover what harm approaching,
and by this discovery is able to strengthen our hands to prevent a new supply
from joining with the trainband of sin.

This is it has made me resolve upon it to petition the God.
King for supply of this grace, The Avowry.
which is of an heavenly force, and able to deliver us from evil.

Two Vices are here prohibited: The Vices two.
Presumption. Ignorance.


Presumption, which fears naught. Their Parallel.


Ignorance, which knows naught.

Presumption, as forward as wise.

Ignorance, as blind as forward.

It Is that first has more heart than wit.

This second more will than can.

The one leads us on, to be intrapt in the Ambush, Temptation.

The other delivers us up into the main battle, Evil.

It is this has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to beg of God to free me from presumption and ignorance, and for this cause in
chief, that I be not led into Temptation, but delivered from Evil.

Presumptions Character
This Vice Pesumption, is of an higher spirit than wit, comes out like a
Worthy, but proves a weakling; it fears naught, though has no defense, and
thinks it can bear off all the blows of Temptation, when the blast of an evil
thought is able to blow it over: a Vice lays us open to all advantages, and
goes out like a As if all over harnest a capo pe.
Curasier, when as bare of Armor as the Other Horsemen have on no harness.
Crabats, who have on no harness.

This is the vice makes us trust too much to our strength, and conceit we are
able to conquer, when not to keep, it makes us adventure on once Upon sin.
more, and when it is past, to press on again, and play a game at hazard, for
heaven, and stake soul, though sure to lose it. This is the vice which swears
we shall enjoy an everlasting inheritance, though we want the Faith and good
works.
evidence, and get in good time to heaven, though we be running to hell, the
quite contrary way. They say the knight of the Sun, walks and vaults as if a
Prince and mighty potentate, when has not so much money, as to discharge the
three penny ordinary: And thus presumption carries a high sail in a low wind,
and speaks in buffe, when a beggar, makes show of what not. Being full cousin
to the adverb, Quasi, may chance to look like a wise man, that is all, is a
fool, whose fond head, if we be led by it, our whole bodies and souls will fare
the worse for it.

This is it has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry.
to be earnest with my God, to give me more grace, than to be swayed by this
graceless one, Presumption, which fool, if I follow in his folly, sure I am to
be led into Temptation.

The second Vice I am her forewarned of, is Ignorance. Ignorances Character.
This imp is the offspring of the old world, who were manying and giving in
marriage, being ignorant what would betide them, till drowned in the flood,
Behold the sea-wreck is fast fested in our main Continent. The blind byard
discerns not what commit, and therefore considers not, what to come. That
natural to whom the Gospel is, a riddle, and the Law one of its light
acquaintance: This is the vice is a proficient in Temporals, a dolt in
Spirituals; and the very vice which makes men merry, when there is no cause for
it; hope well when at deaths door, and doubt naught, when naught but danger.
This is that one, makes us mistake our master, and to serve in stead of the
true God, the god of this world, our bellies, as if made to eat and end: our
backs, as if true happiness did consist in soft raiment.

Our lusts, as if my mind to me a Kingdom; it is this vice, and none but this,
makes me take quid pro, quo, falsehood for truth, shadows for substances, and
what now, for all to come, while I harbor this harlotary vice, I cannot but
commit the evil of sin, yet this is the vice leaves me not so much wit, as to
dread, the evil of punishment.

This is it has made me resolve upon it, The Avowry
to beg of God to bestow upon me, saving knowledge, able to expel out of my
soul, dammable Ignorance, which if left in the heart behind, it is impossible
to deliver us from Evil.

The Contemplation.
O how do I see in the Idea of my enlightened understanding, how my standing
guilty of sin, petitions to have me punished! Had this punishment been bodily
sensen of pain, my pains and griefs had been more senfible than they are.

Now as yet that my body scapes, let me not conceit all is exempt from
punishment, nor yet while God spares The body.
part, that part does acquit the whole.

O poor soul, shall thou live in me, and there be no more love in me to thee,
let me be sensible of a something goes beyond sense, and bear it in mind
there is soul punishment as hereafcer, in hell, so here on earth.

There Is a net set, Temptation, and soul's led into Temptation, an evil one,
Sin, and it is to be feared, soul will be delivered up to evil.

How is my soul caught in Actual evil.
that, tortured by Temptation.
this; it has fallen soul and fared full ill, Evil.
intrapt, and stripped.

My sin occasioned my insnaring, and to go still on in sin, that is my judgment.

To be guilty of sin, causes my summons, still to run on: This my punishment,
which the less man minds, the more is his misery, and the sooner he suffers;
and suffers, and does it not astonish. The world is grown careless of that we
ought to have the greatest care. Who is he does care for souls ill fare; we
sin, yet do not dream to go on in sin, is to go down to execution.

That we are sinful men, all grant.

This we pray against, is falling again into, sin.

The first falls out by natures, fault, that we are sinners.

The last falls out by Gods judgment.

That still we walk in the counsel of the ungodly.

When I consider of this, me thinks I see How misetable is man by Adam. How
miserable, his sin commit, has made him.


For Adams sin, man's to be arraigned for a felon. For man's own sinful works,
it is God who suffers man to be led into that strong hold, Temptation, and
delivered up to evil. Hels pains is the fruit of all sins.

That is, to be led into temptation.
This the effect of man's foregoing sin, for which first Adam was to be blamed;
for which second, my self and none else living; nor yet does God enforce man to
sin, but man's original sin frees God for delivering man from actual Evil.

O the thought of this strikes like a dagger to the heart, and may make the
best of us have bleeding souls and consciences!

To meditate on it; God's not tied to relieve us, to deliver us, when I know,
what already I am guilty of, draws down a doom to sin, the sense of my bad
deserts shall bring me every day to my knees, and make me beg of God as for my
self, so for all our Lords liege people, that he would not lead us into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.

The Reasons.
ANd now if you do well consider all the ways I was to walk through, I nothing
doubt but you will grant, I have made as much have as did the Israelites in
their passage through the Red sea.

The Preface is past, The third part of our Lords Prayer.
the Petitions perused, the Reasons next suceed; of which, not much, yet a few
words with your leaves: upon which give me leave to descant in short, then
discourse at large, as it were, first to run division, after to end with plain
song.

The last clause in the third In earth as it is in heaven.
petition may, so you please, be read at end of every of the first three
petitions.

And these three Reasons may likewise satisfy, for that superplus. And do as
much service to every of these three last petitions.

And thus Christ, By, in earth as it is in heaven
before has set us down a platform, for that which concerns God, and after
this, Reasons to persuade Gods grant for that which concerns us: we are taught
how to do by the former, why to hope for here, for that, O God, The three last
Petitions and the three Reasons in conjunction.
Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, the Glory.

Can we want? no thou have a Kingdom, we will live in hopes of a pardon, since
thou have power, nor will we doubt of deliverance, since all thou do for us,
redounds to thy glory.

Nay we are confident of thy providing for us all earthly necessaries, Their
second conjunction.
remitting all our debts, and trespasses, delivering us from all evil of all
sorts, and all for that thou have means, a Kingdom, Might, and art of Power, A
review retrograde or backward of all the three Reasons.
and it adds also to thy glory: it is for thy glory thus to deal with us: thou
art of power thus to provide for us, nor have thou strait room, a corner, but a
Kingdom: now Lord, what begged grant, for thine is the Kingdom, Power and
Glory.

It is to augment thy Kingdom and to enrich thee with mo heavenly subjects,
The Reasons reapplyed.
it is within the power of thy reach, and if thou say it, the Devil and
hell cannot control, nay thus shall thy Majesty be magnified, and a Court Mask
full of glory be heaped upon thy head: A short prayer pertinent to the matter
prespoke of.
and now O Lord be favorable to thy people, say to our bodies Ammi, and souls
Ruhamah, provide for the one, and be gracious to the other, let our want be
supplied and our woe repealed. Be pleased to provide for our bodies
necessaries, and grant our souls pardon: Pardon O Lord what past, prevent fins
second onset, and at this present be our protector from all evil.

But what inducement have we to draw God on to grant this Threefold.
triple boon up for us our selves,

A Triple Reason, Ref.
having relation to Gods Means. Might. Magnificence.


1. To his Means, he has a Kingdom.

2. To his Might, he has Power.

3. To his Magnificence, his is the Glory.

Let me pen my petition, put it up and presently, The first of the last three
Petitions and the Reason poised.
present it to his majesty: for since he is of means and has much, a Kingdom,
he will not then say us nay of a little, a bit of bread.

Since he can what he will, for of power, no doubt then but he will forgive us
that he can, 2 and 2.
and that is enough.

Since he inhaunces his honor by it, 3 and 3.
and lais is the glory, he will not, this considered, hinder our suit, but
grant a writ of delivery of us, out of all our Temptations.

And now since our Christ has tied our good God to grant, by this threefold
cord of Reason;

It is but reason, the three noble faculties of man's soul, should be called in,
to do service, to these Kingdom, Power, Glory.
three predicates de Deo.

Now let my understanding, The three faculties of the soul set their task.
be set awork to find out Gods Kingdom.

Let my almost unlimited will, so far it walks, by it in me, let me be led to
find in him, a power surpassing. Let my memory be made the register to book in
paper the variety of Gods glory.

But say my memory has lost her note-book of record in part, The three
Cardinal Vertunall Virtues, their assistants.
Gods charity to me, extracts a confession, that he excels in glory.

Say will be wilful, and will not ponder Gods Power, it is hope puts me in
hopes his power is surpassing and Transcendent.

Say my understanding fail to comprehend the worth of the heavenly Kingdom:
it is faith that leads on to believe Gods superexcelling Kingdom.

Blessed be that God has left some relics in me, What common to man.
as man Understanding. Will. Memory.


Given something to me, What proper to the man of God.
as a man of God, Faith. Hope. Charity.


By which twice three, I may find out these three: Thy Kingdom among us, Thy
power within us, And thy glory above us.


Let me dwell upon the raptures of Reason, and Faith.


Two fingers point out thy Kingdom.

Of Will and Hope, Coursers on to thy power omnipotent.

Of Memory and Charity, the public Notaries fo thy glory.

Nor do I mean thus to let these Reasons pass by me.

But more at large to discourse upon the three last petitions, and these three,
all the Reasons.

And first I will cull them out by couples, I mean, a Petition and a Reason.

Then place them in the file of four, three Reasons and a Petition.

That done, a word and away, of the perpetuity of Gods Kingdom, Power, Glory,
intimated in the word, Ever.

The pairs are the first and first, second and second, third and third.

Give us this day our daily Bread.

This is the first of the three Petitions concerns us. First pair.


For thine is the Kingdom: that is the first of the three Reasons, looks to
Godward, to gain his grant, and these two make the first pair.

How well are these matched Intimated in the first of the last three Petitions.
Want. Intimated in the first Reason.
Wealth.


Too little, and abundance of store; we the poor, God the Prince.

The pairs Emblenme.
Their Emblem, is Pharaohs fat and lean kine.

The lean, the emblem of this petition, which denotes out our barrenness. The
fat, the emblem of Gods Kingdom, which denotes out his fullness.

That is, the argument to gain Gods grant of the fourth Petition.
We want and thou have, this is the agrument: and with such a good nature, as
our good Gods, it will work.

The second pair, are the seconds, the second Petition, and the second Reason.

This is the second Petition concerns us; Forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us.

For thine is the Power, that is the second Reason, looks to Godward, to get his
grant.

How well are these matched, intimated in the fifth Petition:
woe, and Intimated in the second Reason.
worth, man's great debt of iniquity, and Gods grand purse-full of omnipotency:
man's exceeding sinful score, and Gods irresistible power, who has power to
discharge us, of what debt or sin soever.

The emblem of these, The pairs Emblem.
is the poor debtor, who cries on my Lords Steward for mercy: and the Stewards
Lord who had power to qualify what was laid in heat of choleron the poor
mansscore.

That first is the emblem or resemblance.
Hieroglyphick of our necessitated condition, imported in the second of the
three last petitions.

This other of Gods power, who in despite of who so lays ought to our charge,
can discharge us, our sinful debt is great.

Thy Power O Lord, a writ of protection, This is the argument to gain Gods
grant of the fifth petition.
to keep us from prison, spoke of Mat. 5. This is the argument, and with such a
good nature as our good God it will work.

The third pair is the third Petition, 3. Pair.
and the third Reason, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil.

This is the third petition concerns us, for thine is the glory, that is our
Reason to persuade Gods subsigning.

How well are these matched, Intimated in the sixth Petition.
fear of captivity, and Intimated in the last Reason.
ensured triumph, shame and confusion of face, and all honor and laud, and
praise, we weaklings who stand in jeopardy, and that worthy who by relieving
the distressed enlarges his glory.

Their Emblem is the Forlorn hope, The sixth Petition, and the last Reasons
Emblem.
and their down-bearing General, come to relieve them; or if you like it not:
The three hundred Lappers by all like-i lihood destinated to dye, and Gideon
their noble Captain by the help of whom they did escape and conquer.

The first is the Semblance of the evil likely to betide us, imported in this
last petition.

The other of our God and his renown and glory.

Our state we stand in is very dangerous. This is the argument used tol gain
Gods grant of the sixth Petition.


Thy renowned glory shall yet be made more glorious, by our deliverance, yea to
thee for the deliverance of us, shall be given all honor, laud and glory.

This is the argument, and with such a good nature as our good God it will work.

Again cast your eyes upon the three last Petitions, and these three Reasons,
for now that I have cul'd them out by couples, I mean to put them into a file
of four.

And to make up my first file, The three last Petitionsand the Reasons put into
a file of four.
I must go place together, the first of the last three Petitions, and the three
Reasons.

Then the second and the three over once more.

Then the third and the three the third time.

The first file.

These are of it.

The first is this Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread.

The second is the first Reason, For thine is the Kingdom.

The third, is the second Reason, the Power.

The fourth, is the third Reason, and Glory.

Their discourse.

1. The Petition prays God to supply wants bodily.

2. The Reasons second the suit, and avouch there is cause.

To give what we ask.

Since we are in Poverty:
indigency, and thou have it, for a Kingdom; and can it, for of Power; and
gettest by it, the Glory.

These three Reasons, are the three men at Arms, which cry of on our
Generalissimo, God, to subsigne what prayed for in the Petition.

The effect of the discourse.

There is hopes of an happy issue of the suite, for bodily necessaries, since
these are met for the good of us.

And it is said, When two or three be gathered together, God will be in the
midst of them -- to hear them.

The second file.

These are of it.

The second of the last three Petitions, and these three Reasons reranged: here
are all our old soldiers, all, I say, save one, which is this Petition,
Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Second, third, and fourth, are the three Reasons: For thine is the Kingdom,
For thine is the Power, For thine is the Glory.


Their discourse.

The Petition prays God to forgive us our sins and trespasses.

The Reasons second the suit, and vow there is Reason for God to do what we
desire.

Since we stand need of thy forgiveness who have enough, for a Kingdom, can
forgive, for of power; gettest by forgiving, the Glory.

These three Reasons are the three men at Arms, which cry on our
Generalissimo, God, to subsign what prayed for in the Petition.

The effect of their discouse.

There is hopes of an happy issue of the suit for remission of sin: since these
three are met for the good of us. And it is said, When two or three be gathered
together, God will be in the midst of them -- to consider of their suit.

The third file.

These are of it.

The third of the last three Petitions, and it is the last of all the Petitions.

The three Reasons come in as incessantly weary, to make up this broken file.
Here Is all our old soldiers, all save one, which is this: Lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from evil.

The other three are the three Reasons have been twice in action: By name
Kingdom. Power. Glory.


Their discourse.

The Petition prays God not to lead us into Temptation, but deliver us from
Evil.

The Reasons second the suite, and vows there is reason for it. Let us not be
delivered captive up to the world, flesh, or Devil.

Since thou have enough to rescue, for a Kingdom sull; can deliver, for of
Power; and since the less thou let us be led into Temptation, the more is
thy renown and Glory.

These are the three men at arms, which cry on our Generalissimo, God, to
subsign what prayed for in the Petition.

The effect of the discourse.

There is hopes of an happy issue out of all our Temptations: and a free
deliverance from them, since these three are met together for the good of us:
And it is said, where two or three be gathered together, God will be in the
midst of them -- to sign their Petitions.

The third thing to be done is to take into consideration the perpetuity of
Gods Kingdom, Power, Glory,
intimated in the word Ever: yea it is this Ever, has set me this task:
truthis, Iwant eyes to look back, and view the beginning or ending of any one
of these Kingdom, Power, Glory.
three. And yet we are called on, to cast an eye back upon both their beginning
and ending; and to look at those three, as far as our sight is able to reach,
and that a Part ante. Part post.


And first, a part ante; fuit ab initio Pegnum. Potestas. Gloria.
Thy Kingdom, Power and Glory have been from the beginning: what can I compare
these to, and not impair their perpetuity.

They are of standing with the Trinity, of their year, before the Heavens were,
says God, I was, and then these were thy Kingdom. Power. Glory.


We have matched them with him owns them, and they are his, and with him were
from all eternity, Gods Kingdom is from everlasting, Dan. 3. His power is of
no less length, for that named the strength of his arm.

And Manasses prayer proclaims his glory has been and forever. A gradation.
And thus he had a Kingdom, or the world was laid, or its foundation, and
power, or he showed his power in casting down from heaven the proud Luciferian
fry; and Glory, or ever an Angel could tune his voice to sing a Gloria patri,
or an Hallelujah. Ask the days of old, they will tell you these three are
their elder brothers: and as they are thus anciently descended a part ante, so
a part post, for ever to endure: for long beyond all time, are, to last Gods
Kingdom, Power, Glory,
Yea world without end Longer than all the Kingdoms upon Earth, longer than
Sun and Moon, longer than the sons of men. All these wax old as does a garment,
and after these perish, it is these three which break out and bud afresh like
Aarons Rod.

And yet if there be ought on earth to resemble their ever being, Being, it is,
Man, not man living to die, but dying to live; not this his corruptible life,
but his life everlasting. We had a beginning shall never have an ending; and
this no end of ours, is like theirs, but their beginning is like to Gods who is
without beginning.

O how long since they were, how long yet to last! O ever, everlastingly.

Such a King, such a Kingdom; Ever, everlasting.

Such a Lord, and such his Power, Ever, everlasting.

Such a State, and such his state of Glory; its Glory Ever, everlasting.

Let me not doubt to get, if I go to him who has enough to give, a Kingdom,
and for Ever.

Let me not fear forgiveness, but beg of him has power to grant it, Power for
Ever.

Let me not be discomforted, but still live in hopes of deliverance, since he
is my friend will rescue, who stands upon his Honor and Glory, and that for
Ever.

The Divine Contemplation upon the first Reason.

For thine is the Kingdom.

Lo, have I not hopes of a supply? I beg a boon of the King, I had not turned
a suppliant, but that he whom I invocate, is owner of a Kingdom: O God and my
King, give me what I beg, since thou have enough to bestow without diminishing
thy store; look not at me an unworthy beggar, but consider how much I want, and
how much thou haft: thou can give to none more poor, I can crave of none has
more to give; I pray the Father let thy wealth supply my want, since all my
want may easily be supplied with thy wealth: I have been the Prodigal, I have
spent my portion, I have fed on husks: I am now in a sad and sorrowful estate.
O like a father whose bowels earn with compassion, say to my soul, Welcome my
son, my son, I will own thee, I will enrich thee: thou have spent me much, I
have yet much more; more to give than thou can spend; there are treasures at
my right hand for evermore. O thou who ownest even all, who art Lord Paramount
of heaven and earth, I commend all my needs to thy bounteous liberality, thou will help, for art merciful; thou can help, for have, and a Kingdom. Dear
Father, since thou ownest so much, make me master of a little, of one poor
mansion; for thine is the Kingdom. I have, no, nothing, and can thou deny
me? thou have a Kingdom, and will thou not give me? O give me what I want,
since what I want thou have, and much more abundance: be so good to me, since
there is enough for thee, a magazine to supply my want, and maintain thy train;
I have a strong says to believe thou will, my illuminate reason assures me
thou can; now thy submiss son and servant is begging, shut not up thy
merciful compassion -- For thine is the Kindome.

The Divine Contemplation upon the second Reason.

For thine is the Power.

What were it to own a Kingdom, and want power to dispose of it: I serve a
Master has enough, and power enough; he has a Kingdom and all in it, and all
at his command: Angels in heaven, the hearts of Kings upon earth, and the very
Devils in hell? I am now ready to sing a Gloria patri, all glory, honor and
praise be given to him who sits upon the Throne, who sits betwixt the
Cherubims, and clasps the heavens in his hands, who dashes the heathen in
pieces like a potters vessel, who has put a stand to the sea, and his hook in
the nosthrils of the Leviathan; such a Prince is my Master, and such a Master
do I serve, who can what he will, O will what thou can, even the saving my
soul in the great day of the Lord Jesus: But I have many enemies, the world
about me, the Devil beheath me, the flesh within me, all are combining my
destruction: many to one, and that one a weakling, lame with Jacob, limping
with Mephibosheth; What shall I now go do? shall I despair? no, against hope I
will hope, I will put my considence in the God of Israel; and why? for have
faith to believe, thine is the power to vanquish, power to deliver, power to
exalt out of the dust, dunghill, to a crown of immortal glory. O God and my
King, I will fight with beasts at Ephesus, go out against great Goliath,
encounter the unclean spirit with seven worse than himself; I am sure to be
more than conqueror, so I fight under thy Banner; for thine is the power to
subdue Hell, death and the Devil. Othou the preserver of men, be thou my Lord
Protector; and I do not fear the fury of all the furies of Og and Magog, I
ask naught without thy reach, I crave naught more than thou can give; give
me strength to fight thy battle, ability to hold out in the day of Temptation:
then Lord, will I not fear the Tempter, since I am sure thou have the sole
power to support.

The Divine Contemplation upon the third Reason.

For thine is the Glory.

It Is an happy exchange, when both parties fare the better; can thou give me
naught, but thou gettest by giving? Lord supply thou my wants, and take thou
the honor of it: I have naught to retaliate, yet still I receive, give me more
of that I want, Mercy, and take what is due to thee, thy Glory. I am imboldned
still to beg, since my begging inhances the honor of thy name, who will not
give to gain? give me what I want, and the supply of my want shall be the
Trumpet of thy praise; It is my shame I am become so destitute of all good,
that I am supplied by the Lord for it, all glory be to the Lord. Thus our God
casts his bread upon the waters, not many days after finds it; we receive it
in lumps of Mercy, he finds it in a whole patch of Glory; he gives what we
need, he receives what he stands no need of: and thus he helps us poor
despicable creatures, and thus he heaps up a full measure of glory upon
himself. Ride on, O Lord, with thine honor, be thou to us a God of compassion,
and inhaunce in the sight of the Heathen. thy own Honor; While thou do good
to man, thou unmaskest thy Majesty among men: Lord stretch out thy hand to do
us good, yea, give us Grace, and take thou the Glory.

A Divine Contemplation upon Ever, I cannot see how this can be, Thy Kingdom,
Power, and Glory from all eternity. I had a beginning in Time, and therefore
incapable to conceivean Eternity before all Time: O now that Reason fails, lea
Faith support. And since, O my King and my Christ, it is thou have said it, I
am resolved never to dispute it; thou have given me an ear to hear, give me an
heart to believe the eternity of thy Kingdom, Power and Glory: were this
within the reach of reason, I stood in no need of faith: since it is above my
Reason, Lord I believe, help my unbelief: But come with the eye of faith, let
me look back, and take a view of what was, is, and to be for ever: Thy
Kingdom. Thy Power. Thy Glory.


Three that ever were, and three that ever owned, a Trinity of persons, a
Trinity of Majesty, and that for ever. For Ever, this is a note above the
Musicians Ela, a point without the seamans compass, a letter more than in our
Christ-crosse-row; yea, a word, which as yet, never could the heart of man
fathom.

Give me leave to admire this heavenly language, which we mean mortals cannot
learn, and as becomes a Christian to subscribe, not like an Atheist deride
this high mystery of eternity. Lo the vast distunce betwixt the Creator and
the creature, as in parity of nature, so in Eternity of Time. I am a child,
but as of yesterday, and to last little longer than Plintes Generated at morn,
dead at night.
flies. But thou arta God whose Dominion had no beginning, has no ending. The
Persian, the Parthian, the Roman Empire; we read and find their a, their o;
but when thine first begun O God, there is no Historian sets it down, no
Arithmetician can reckon, nor no Divine is able to prognosticate, they are all
silent, swallowed up with the thought of their eternity: Man's imagination can
wander and in an instant take a survey in the Idea of his understanding of all
that ever was, from the year of our Lord, to the year of the Creation; there is
the Hercules pillar, he can go no further; for all his have, there he takes up
his rest, and non datur ultra, here all his thoughts stint, as the Goal not to
be gone beyond: but what is this world of Time to this Ever and everlasting?
The thoughts of man are but a span in comparison of Eternity: All the Kingdoms
of the world are in their swaddling belt, compared with the perpetuity of Gods
Kingdom, Power and glory, they had no beginning -- Miraculum miraculorum, they
shall have no ending, for -- in secula seculorum. O my soul servest thou such
a King who owns such a Kingdom, such a Potentate whose Power is so expanded,
such a Sovereign whose Glory darkens the Sun and is more aged then the whole
Creation, yea whose All is everlasting, cast down thy self at his sacred
footstool, acknowledge his greatness, thy own meannesse, what thou art, as
naught; what he is, that divine Deity from everlasting to everlasting, whose
Kingdom, Power and Glory are for Ever.

Amen.
THis Ever must not be an everlasting subject, but be ended with Amen. And so I
come to the conclusion, The fourth part of my method, the conclusion Amen.
Amen, the fourth and last part of this prayer.

This is the upshot and end of it.

We have now got from Dan to Beersheba, from the hithermost to the utmost part
of this prayer.

All of it has been surveyed, and all the worthies in it, all save this one
Amen.

1. Let me tell you what Countreyman is this Amen.

2. Why made a native in every nation.

3. Since a stranger come from far, be pleased I may be to you his interpreter,
and tell you what he means.

First this Amen, if you look at him prima ab origin from his first original,
Amen, an Hebrew.
he is neither Greek nor Latin, but a Hebrew lad, and the last begot of the
line of Heber, and as ancient as the tongue in which the Old Testament was writ.

All this prayer else is of the lineage of the Grecians.

This one, only, Amen, is of the line of the Hebrews.

And with this Hebrew word Amen.
Jew, Jesus shuts up the womb of his Prayer.

How in a mystery do I meet with this contemplation, Two Contemplations.
that the Jews toward the End may get good by Christ and praying to him, And
that he who mixed the two tongues in compiling this prayer, compiled this his
prayer for the good of Jew as Gentile, latet secretum, in this Hebrew word has
laid hid this secret -- unseen till this time.

Well, The Avowry.
while I period this prayer with this Amen; this last word shall put me in
mind of Gods first Jews.
love, yea that there is hopes of the Jews home coming, and that those that
are not Gods people, may come to be called the people of the Lord.

Again this Amen is akin to the holy Tongue, and with that tongue this prayer
is perioded.

2. How in a mystery am I led to contemplate, Contemplat. 2.
my heart, to the end of my prayer, should be heavenly, since my tongue
presumes to close it up with the holy Language.

I am resolved by Gods good assistance, The Avowry.
my heart shall have a sent of such as is this last word here uttered. And that
as the last word of this my prayer is part of the holy Tongue, so such as is
that tongue, such shall be my Heart -- Holy.

The second thing I promised was to 0110 2 show why this, Amen, Amen, a native
in every nation.
is made a native in every nation; I mean, admit into every speech, all
Countries and Nations using it as usually naturally as their own natural
language; so that now it is naturalized through the whole Christian world. Its
common traffic with all forts of Languages will witness this.

Austin gives this Reason, ne vilesceret that it should not being made bare by
interpretation become more vile among the people. And therefore all keep to one
and the same word, Amen, ut honorem haberet velati secreti, to give honor to
it as to a veiled secret.

It may be it is thus kindly entertained into all languages, to note out,
hereby the consent of all nations Christian in the worship of God.

Or else this remainder of the holy Tongue is Spread.
diffusive. That the prophecy of Esa. 19.18. may the fulfilled, That the
Gentiles should speak the language of Canaan.

A word then to be used by Jews, A review of the three Reasons.
by Gentiles, and since by all nations, by all the natives in those nations.

By the Idiot, by the Learned.

This I believe, let the Carnotensian It forbids any of them to say Amen,
because they all count themselves learned; and for that it is said, that the
Idcot say Amen.
Canon say what it will: a word whose common use declares our serving one God
in common. And while we all in common conclude una voce, as one, with one and
the self same, Amen.

It has made me admit to prayers with me, the very wicked. Let the proud
Pharisee bid stand afar off, as often as he pleases. A word we all use, left
since all is to use it, so many several interpretations into several tongues
should uncloath.
denude it of it deserved due, and diminish its sense which is so much; yea,
its sense is so signifying, and its matter so much, and it self so hard to be
understood; that at this time I have proffered to? be it interpreter to you,
and tell you all it means.

And thus I am led to the third part of my method, See what is meant by Amen.
to tell you what is meant by Amen; And what it is it signifies: this done I
have done.

I find this Amen in chief, set at latter end of our promise past to keep Gods
commandments, and there placed, and by a Prophet.

2. Set at latter end of Church service, and so placed by the Church in the
Common Prayer Book.
Church Rubric.

3. Set at latter end of our Lords Prayer, and so placed by our Lord.

For the first, I find this Amen, Amens first sense.
set at letter end of our promise past to keep Gods Commandments, and by the
Prophet, -- And so Amen is, Nota faciendi voti, a note of a vow. This is made
apparent by that place, Jer. 11.5. though the Text the, So be it, the marginall
note, is Amen. And it is the Herald does blaze Jerremiah's vow of obedience to
keep Gods Commandments.

While then you cry Amen The Extract.
you Vow obedience to Gods Commandments.

Now to vow so often, The Taxation.
and break as often, is a foul fault.

This is to heap sin upon sin, while we vow we will serve God, and serve the
Devil. Thou had better never promise, then never perform, and say naught
than say Amen: and not mind to what that one word has bound thee.

Amen is soon said, but binds to much. And as nudum pactum, a bare promise, in
honesty binds to pay, so this only Amen to perform; that in foro mvndi, this
in foro Coeli; that to man, this to God. I would have men mark how far engaged,
and to cast up what their word is past for, to God -- to do.

Amen has made us all debtors to God. The Supplicat.
Now God of his mercy, and Christ for his merits clear our score.

Secondly, I find this Amen set at latter end for the most part of our Church
service, and so placed by the Church in the Church Rubric.

Nota assensus, a note of assent; And serves to show or declare what the Priest
has said, the people assent to.

And thus this word, Amen, is used, Deuteronomy. 27. from the 15. to the end of the
Chapter.

Amen then, is as much as all said, I assent to: in the Church service faid by
the Priest.

And let me tell you what I think, it is this.

How it is a laudable fashion and commendable custom in our congregations,
That when we have said Church Service, being agrreeable with holy Bible, for
the people to cry Amen at end.

Believe me, as it is the Clerks office, so your duties to cry Amen, your Amen
is the man, conjoynes Priests and peoples hearts together: nay know it, he that
has not a mouth to cry Amen, I dare say wants an heart to call on God. It is a
small request, if we say service, for you to say Amen; it is a great benefit
for a little disbursement, when one only word interests you in all the prayers
we have made.

My desire is, when I say service, to hear the whole Congregation say, Amen:
St. Austin.
Audiri veluti Coeleste tonitru populum reboantem Amen: I desire to hear the
people founding Amen as thunder from heaven. O! it shows that the prayer
said by the Minister, whereunto the people answer, Amen, omnium esse communem,
to be common to all; thou losest thy part by leaving out Amen: and know it, he
that will not lend God his tongue to say Amen, it is not probable God will be so
free hearted to him, as to grant him that of which there is not the least
testimonial he desired it.

To conclude, he must play the Clerk, that would profit by what uttered by the
Priest. Here is an happy way found out for the good of our ignorant, yet know it
to your comfort, by saying, though but in some sort understandingly, Amen. The
Preachers service is made yours, and you may come to gain as much by saying,
Amen, as he that says all the words at large in the Common Prayer Book.

An inducement sufficient to cause all to say Amen. We have our task set out to
read Service, this is yours, to say Amen: Church Service is half lest undone,
while you neglect to say, Amen; and the far greater part, for the people have
unacted their part: Ministers.
We put in our replication, while we say service, your rejoinder is unput in,
without, Amen.

Now Lord grant that while we speak to thee for us our selves, and for the
people: The Supplicat.
the people may join with us, and that their, Amen, to our prayers may
testify their good and godly meaning.

Thirdly, I find this Amen set at Pater noster Amens third sense is tripartite.
and so set and placed by Christ himself. Now in speaking upon this Pater
noster Amen, this shall be my method.

First, I will show you three several

Secondly, in a my sterie, I could tell

Thirdly, I will give you its complete

Fourthly, Since the Text is so short

Fistly, The first sense of my pater noster Amen.
He end all with two divine Meditations.

First, let me give you the three significations of my Pater noster, Amen: and
first of the first.

1. This pater noster, Amen, may here be taken pro juris jurandi nota, for a
testimony upon oath: thus Mat. 5.18. it is as much as Verily, and it is
Englished often, by Truly, or Verily.


Yet when thus Englished, incipit non desinit, commonly it begins ends not the
sentence.

Yet in this place, dum desinit affirmat asseveratione, while we end with this
word, we protest all said is our mind.

And now see when you have made an end of praying, this word, Amen, vows you
take your oath on it; that your prayer is your very hearts desire.

Amen, that is, Lord what I have prayed for, I take an holy on it, I defire it.
The Taxation.
A parlous protestation, and gives all those a vehement knock over shins, who
say one thing and mean another: With the Hawk in windy words towering into the
air, when their aim and end is on the earth.

The word being now understood, may make those change their counternance who
beg of God deliverance from the deceits of the slesh, Amen.
here they soar up, and yet mean when prayers are done, to have familiarity with
the slesh, her affections and lusts, here they fall flat down. These are
perjured persons coram Deo, Amen is my witness.

And now me thinks this should shame sundry of us; that as it is witnessed by
this Amen.
examined, have sworn these religious purposes are our mind, and yet mind to
do naught less. O it is a fearful thing to dissemble with God Almighty.

Now what good we say with our tongues, The Supplicat.
Lord give us grace to embrace in our hearts.

Secondly, this Pater noster, Amen, may signify ipsam veritatem, the very
truth. The faithful and true witness, and thus Amen is taken, Rev. 3.14.
where said unto the Church of the Laodiceans, write these things says the
Amen, that is, the faithful and true witness: there as it is interpreted by
common consent, Amen signifies Christ: And so may do here, and then see you not
to Christ's handwriting he sets his name, for Amen is as much as Christ: and
then thus this prayer is perioded with this word, this being its last word,
Christ.

How does this interpretation lead one by the hand, Three Inferences.
and lets me see, 1. How without Christ, first and last in my heart, nought's
to be had, 2. Without coming in his name, nought's to be gotten. 3. Without my
Savior Christ, my prayer has lost its favor.


Let me not leave off to meditate on it, and often, how Christ is the perfection
of our prayers; and certainly so he is -- O sacred sound which sweetens all our
prayers, and makes them all well pleasing to God Almighty!

The body of Moses interposed, stopped the plague: The name, Jesus, seals the
bliss.

Now blessed be this ever blessed Lord and 0664 2 Savior of all our souls, The
Supplicat.
Christ Jesus, and for ever.

I am resolved never to leave out in my prayer, The Avowry.
no not this last word, Amen, since this Amen is as much as Christ, which one
sound if from the heart uttered, and beleevingly, is able to procure Gods
bless on ail my prayers.

Thirdly, this pater noster Amen, may be taken pro signo subscriptionis, for a
token or mark set to, to assure our subscripbing to what forespoken: Thus it is
taken Romans 1.25.2 Cor. 1.20. and thus it may be here meant; here, Amen, is as
much as if the suppliant should say, Lord I do subscribe in heart to what my
tongue has uttered.

That I note is this, That Amen, Note.
does acknowledge all foresaid to be the suppliants true meaning: Amen is
Avoucher, avouches all said for truth and right when he comes in, I mean, Amen;
he justifies all before, he bends us to yield to all said, and brings us to
confess freely we like of all we have heard, Three Inferences.
uttered or read, An observation I may make a Tripartite use of. As,

1. If there be such worth in saying

Let not this godly prayer be read in thy ear, but have provided for it an
Amen; a word well becomes our mouths, every one is for the new cut, but come
keep in this old fashion, of saying Amen, as messenger newly alight, and the
last at that gate house, your lips, which witnesses what you have subscribed
to, you are persuaded is the very truth, and that truly you desire it.

2. This interpretation may serve to teach you, and you be not too old to
learn, to mind what read, before you set seal, Amen, to it; to mind what
said, ere you say Amen: I had as live hear a Wood-pecker whistle, and Owl
shriek, a Parret prate, as hear a parishioner say Amen, that minds not,
understands not prayer went before; such fellows as these were fit to make
hackney witnesses of, for whereas others would swear, but what they know is
truth, these will witness all is true, though they never minded what said.

But that with a good conscience, you may cry Amen, mind what said, it is thy
part, for thou art to pass thy censure on it: can the Jury pass a just
verdict, minds not pleadings? impossible.

The simile suits with thee, and warnes thee to note all thy Petitions pend or
spoke.
paper-books, that thou may be able to pronounce an Amen, that is a positive
sentence all is true.

when the Seminary says the prayer in Latin, cry Amen, which should not be
denounc't, but of what understood; he may as well curse them, as bless them,
for ought they know, and yet they cry Amen. A folly to approve for good they
know not what, a blind devotion when is out the eye, their understanding, a
custom inexcusable, that the ignorant people should cry Amen to Service read
in Latin. Surely they have assured confidence in their Priests: and I assure
you their Priests had need to have more honesty, than their hearers have wit.
But let them be never so honest, I see no reason for it, the peoples faith
should be pinned on the sleeves of their Priests good meaning.

3. I would have all my people to know what I say, and to say, Amen, but not
till they fully understand what said.

A duty the more I urge men to -- 1. For it begets devotion. 2. Makes us all of
one mind. 3. Interests each of you, in the hopes of getting something by
prayer.


The Avowry with the Collect of the three interpretations.
For my own part, I am resolved, while I say this Amen, to bear in mind, my
mark is set, Christ's name is writ, and oath is given for it, and all to conjure
what my heart did indite, may be upright.

And now in the second place without a misprision of judgment, give me leave
to make my promise good.

This Amen, Amens semblance.
may resemble the Almighty, it came out of the bosom of his son: suffer
therefore a word of it, which I desire more to balance with grace than wit, if
some want not wit to conceive it.

God that one essence Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The three Persons.

Betwixt these, Si liceat parvis componere magna, lo an Resemblance.
Analogy, which task I undertake to let the people know the prize less word,
Amen, Vt unus Deus sic hic unica vox, ut Tres personae sic his pro numero Tres
significationes: we have in hand, One and One, Three and Three.

That one God and this one Amen.

That one God divided into three Persons.

And this one Amen, admits of three significations.

God and Amen: I mean to set the one beside the other, and do you mark in what
Amen blushes the Almighty.

I Will pass by in that he is the Father, Rev. 3.14. The semblance betwixt Amen
and God, holds in five. things.
Amen the Son -- yet there is a blush: But take Amen for vox praeterea nihil,
wherein then lies the resemblance?

1. God is Alpha and Omega. This Amen is Omega, for always last. 2. God
comprehends all, sic Amen omnia praedicta, Amen comprehends all men's votes and
supplicats. 3. God undestands all Tongues and Languages: and Amen it is well
known is no stranger to none of them. 4. God is every where: sic Amen in una
quaque regione, you may find Amen in every nation. 5. God is the very same
yesterday, to day, and to morrow: Et hoc verbum Amen semper idem, ejus nomen
nunquam amittitur: and to show it is no changeling, it is set next secular
seculorum.
Since this Amen blushes noble a personage, The Avowry.
this shall make me ponder in mind, ere I say with my tongue, Amen.

In the next place, Amens three significations maintain this, Amen blushes the
three persons Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


And first, God the Father: while by Amen is meant an oath, it is the sole
decider of all in Earth, so he in Heaven.

Secondly, God the Son: Amen, is like him, if not him, Dum hoc verbum est
veritas.

Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost, while as he, so, this Amen is signum, the mark,
the seal, seals all assuredly.

I will ever have in high esteem that prayer upon whose last word is imprint
the Character of the ever blessed Trinity. The Avowry.


And now if you chance to dislike the allusion dislike not my endeavor which is
to satisfy, as some with common Cates, so some with a novelty Bit -- you know
ere cloth be taken away, novelties are expected or never.

Let each take a morsel of the meat will best digest with him; and not condemn
the Cateror for that at cost with variety. We see the dish set up upon the long
board of your understanding, called Amen. Let us all close up our stomachs with
this, Amen. A very taste whereof has put the people of God in mind, of one
God.

And God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


My vote for all Gods people shall be this, His vote.
that while to their prayers end, they have in their mouths and bear in their
minds -- God, so that God would be ever pleased to grant all their prayers put
up unto him.

The third part of my method moves me to give you the complete character of
this one Amen, Amens Character
I mean, its description in decurt short significant sentences. Amen then, as
you have heard, is an Hebrew by Nation, a Laconian by Language, and a traveller
by nature; has talked with sundry of sundry nations, and when they have said
all they can, gives them it all over in a word.

This is has marched through all the provinces in the Christian world, yet in
the rear, never in the front. The Officer at arms who draws up the broad Body
into a little circle. The son of Mars makes an end of all; he is placed the
lowest, yet is of greatest account, for comprehends quic quid in buccam venit,
the last yet the first while from the first to the last; all hangs dependency
upon this one, Amen. This is the pacifier of the people, which makes them of
one mind: the little map deciphers out their unanimous universal agreement,
the prosective glass in which I see a fort gone far before.

The notary bears in mind every petition put up. Lo the repeater over of our
prayers, which binds all us to bear in mind all said.

This Amen is a memento for man, and a testis to God: our remembrance of what
spoke, and the witness betwixt God and us, we meant as we spoke: this is he
says little, yet says much, while gives us magnum in parvo, much, in a
little, a word of weight, which if pondered, weighs as heavy as the whole
prayer. Behold the nut is naught but kernel: the fountain is sea-full, and the
ship is full fraught: this is it, fills and full the magazine, man's
understanding, and has to lay up a somewhat lest in the out-room, memory. Will
must not be a wanting, lest there be a want when search is made for what came
aboard.

I will board the booty in this bottom, The Avowry.
and desite my God to give me understanding to conceive, and memory to bear in
mind, all lies hid in this howl, Amen.

But come, what is it lies here hid? Sub tegmine Deus, sub tegmine Christus: as
much Amen signifies, God Christ, Christ God: himself says, I am the Amen.

If you end with God and Christ, have naught to do with the Devil; have you
Christ in your mouths? keep then Satan out of your hearts. Thou never with a
good heart say this prayer, but this last word shuts door upon the Devil.

Principium a Jove, finis Jesu, thou beginnest with the Father, endest with the
Son. Without doubt the Spirit is thy guide, and teaches thee to pray, teaches
thee thus to pray, teachers thee Pater noster.
this to say: let me tell thee, to have God in thy mouth, the Son on thy tongue
end, makes probable proof, the holy Ghost is in thy heart. So on the other side
to slight such a prayer, which begins with our Father, ends with the Son,
makes it more than probable, the Spirit of the Lord is departed from that
suppliant: take it for a maxim in Divinity, he that wilfully refuses to say
Christ's Prayer, is not inspired with christ's Spirit.

Let me tell you, I can see no other cause why any should lay aside, our Lords
Prayer, unless unwilling to use the name, God the Father at the first, and God
the Son at the end, in their Rosary. The Jews were so feared to take Gods Name
in vain, that they used another word in stead: it may be, we have such a piour
people, who fear to sin, if they should do what Christ bids them do, Say the
Lords Prayer: yet since Amen is in stead of Christ, there is no excuse, neither
ever took I those men to be squeasie stomach, who can strain at a gnat and
swallow a Camel; who make scruple to say Christ's prayer, yet stick not to rob
Christ's Church: in one work, who destroyed her Discipline, defaced her
Doctrine, unhallowed her sacred Sacraments: and do to many of Gods
Ambassadors, as Hanun did with David's, cut off their garments to the hams.

Believe me, those who have such strong stomachs to the maintenance of the
Ministry, I never knew bear any good will to the Doctrine of the Church: They
will cry Amen sooner to the one then the other. I will leave them, and pray for
them, the Lord awake them out of that surreptitious sin, Sacrilege.

And thus I pass on to the fourth part of my method, which desires, since the
subject is short, you would give me leave to extract an heavenly fancy from the
letters in this last word of our Lords Prayer. I know some will carp at it; but
for my own part, I am resolved never to write without a censure by some. But
know you it, the letters in this one word, involve a mystery, while all the
letters in, Amen, -- make up mane -- Mane. Mane.


Mane, the Adverb.

Mane, the Verb.

Mane the Adverb, which signifies Early.

Mane the Verb, which bids bide by it, stay at it.

That notes out the Time.

This the Term.

The time I must begin to pray, is betime.

The Term without interim.

The time the term of prayer Amen point forth.
Forth with his the time, Epigr.
the term no ending has.
Now T'le begin to day to pray, not rest;
Early, lately, prayer I Will make my feast.
Mane invites, bias come, come quickly pray:
Mane gives charge we stay, start not away.
Amen in one comprises both these two,
And to our tasks our beart does bend, does bow.
This divine fancy has brought out two twins, I mean two heavenly mediations:
and this is the fist part of my method, and the perfecter of my promise.

But I will extract them, and more properly from this very last, word of our
Lords Prayer, which word being, Amen, I look not at, as taken adverbialiter,
for them commonly it begins the verse, this ends the prayer: yet when Amen is
so used, it signifies Verily, very.

2. I look not at this present at this words as taken verbaliter, so it is set
at end our Church Collects, and sounds as much as So bet it.

But let me look at this Amen, as taken nominaltter, for a noon, for him who is
the truth, for Christ,

From this exposition which is the most lofty, and warranted out of the
Revelations, I will extract two Meditations Rev. 3.14.


For the first, What does Amen signify? Christ, Christ who is a and ohgr;, the
first, and the last, from all eternity, and to last everstingly: and with this
sacred sound, shut I up my prayer: that this is thus, this Amen is my witness.

The first meditation rises from hence is this: Since we end our prayer with
him was from the beginning, Joh. 1.1.

1. Meditate how this puts us in mind to have Timely thoughts: mane, early to
fall to prayers. Was Christ from the beginning, and shall I deferrer of praying
till the evening Of my life.
? What a late prayer to an early rising, Lord, such a prayer suites not so
early an one as this Amen; let this timely Lord, have timely petitions put up
unto him.

Meditate, how our first work must be to fall to prayers.

A duty there is no dispensation for; a task, haste must not hinder; a business
about which let us lay all our heads, betimes, begin you old men in the
morning, you young men ere old, you younglings in your side-coates.

Meditate upon it how you cannot begin too soon to serve God: for Samuel the
young, and Josias at ten are tendering their service. So soon as spring, grass
grows. This time of grace is springtime, let us see prayers put up as thickly
quickly as grass grows, else the work of nature will overgrow this gift of
grace, and there be found more barrenness in the womb of thy heart, than in
the heart of the Earth.

Beloved, bear it about in your remembrance, how, 1. We all are found guilty by
Law, Motives to further this first mediatation.
and what so soon as we can speak, shall we not pray, Mercy good Lord? 2. We
may be executed when God will call, and shall we then neglect time to call on
God? 3. We have naught of our own, as poor as the poor half-hunger-starved
prodigal; and shall we defer a day to beg a somewhat? O! our want may set us
to this work -- to pray. 4. We are beforehand with God for a thousand favors,
and say we begin to retaliate to God thanks to day, we hall scarce for all this
have day enough.


O! Gods bounty, our want, The Collect.
the uncertainty of life, the certainty we are guilty, give a loud shout in our
ears and cry, To prayers, to paryers.

By the grace of God I am resolved, The Avowry.
and do mean, this, mane, shall make me a morning man, yea my eyes to prevent
the night-watches till I have donemy devotion.

You see now what you should do, first fall to prayers, ere you open shops or
you make a bargain, this should be first done, pray to God: let me gripe you.

1. What say you now to those who with Martha are trouble about many things,
yet leave undone this unum necessarium, praying, it may be they think to wax
wealthier by working than talking; it holds in temporals, not in spirituals.

2. What say you now to those must be roaring of their peals of Ordnance on the
Lords days, when all the Bells in the Church have rung them a peal to come to
prayers, It may be they think there is more to be got by the sword than the
Word; as wise as he is he is deceived thinks so. Religion is not so far gone
down dike, so much foot-hold in our Island, Atheism I hope shall never have.

3. What say you now to those whom an early chapman makes them put off God to
another time. It may be they think more to be got by trucking and lying, then
beggin: but remember, the beggar is in Abraham's bosom; but as for all liars,
their portion is damnation.

4. What say you now to those, who all their lives have made show of Religion,
but that is all; are not the men, men take them for. The Hieroglyphick of these
outside Saints, is a Gallant in a Busse-coat, that never fought.

These look like Saints militant, yet never fought with Beasts at Ephesus --
They gild over their spiritual cowardice with divine formalities. These are
they accuse us for being overmuch ceremonious; and yet themselves have no more
but the form of godliness.

I speak not of all, yet of the most of all; almost all, of that Sect, society
think themselves something when nothing. They are taxt for it by St. Paul, Ephesians.

But let me tell these conceited professors, I say not proficients in their
profession: but such as only profess they are proficients in grace and
godliness, yet go as flowly on to Heaven, as that Beast of which it is
reported, he goes but a yard betwixt sun and sun.

This is it I am to tell you, Religion never makes a man have too good a
conceit of himself: true zeal is no braggadochio, he that thinks there is none
bettern, there is none worse: a windy professor is commonly a graceless
Gospeller.

Be thou the proud Pharisee, I Will be the poor Publican: and while thou vauntest
what thou can do, I am resolved to be sorry I can do no better.

But come, a word or two with thee who has the form of godliness, deniest
the poor of it; who talkess like a Saint, live like a devil: in private
you will not deny it.

Know It, God, of all kinds of creatures most dislikes Harpyes, which have ora
virginum, ungues vulturum, Virgins looks, Vultures claws.

Of all kind of pictures Nebuchaanezars whose head was of gold, arms of
filver, belly of brass, legs of iron, feet of clay.

The Ferriman rows one way, looks another way. It Is commendable in his
sea-calling, not in the calling of Christians. Sodoms Apples were fair to the
eye, but being touched turned to ashes.

O what a misery is this, to seem to be, and not to be!

Pageants please spectators eyes, you have another to please, even your Father
which is in heaven, who tries the heart and searches the reins.

I approve of a glorious profession, let not that be all, beware of hypocrisy;
a white Devil makes as fair show, and comes to the Church, and as ost with a
white apron, as in a white surplice. Either be what thou seem to be, orelse
show thy self in thy own colors. Straight what crookt, conversation,
conscience; that without doors, this within -- else the one will be odious to
man, both to God.

Bear't in mind, man judges of the heart, by thy words and deeds, and thou
may decived him: God judges of thy words and actions by thy heart, and him
thou can not deceive.

Though some of you, amongst so many, it is to be feared, some be akin to the
Adverb Quasi, as it were but such so zealous, yet it is my hopes there is but a
few such dossemblers among you, I should be sorry there should be above one
Judas in the house of Jesus.

A second meditation this Amen gives birthdome: and I thus deduct it from it.

Amen, which signifies Christ, is as a so w, as from everlasting, so to last,
and everlastingly. Parallel thy prayer with its Author, yea sample the one by
the other, there is no end of him, let there be no end of thine: O pray
continually.

Mane the verb gives us it in command.

Let us hold out our prayers as Joshua did his spear, lift up our voice unto
the Lord as Moses did his hand, let the waters of Eloim be our prayers emblem,
ever overflowing; let the continue motion of the Sun, move us continually to
move in the sphere of prayer.

Why should I not lengthen my devotion to God, since Gods calling on me and so
often, ere I would give heed, assures me, I shall not be heard for a word, when I
call on him: God has called on us a thousand times, and we would never hear
him, turned deaf ear to him, and think we to have God at a whistle when we call?

Too much we take upon us, too little we set by the Lord: shall we be so coy?
Why then should he be so kind? He calls, we care not; and for a call, is there
cause for us to exact his audience?

Dust and ashes is too presumptuous, to deny so often, to expect an answer and
for no more. Must we turn deaf ear to God, and must God be bound to hear us for
a word? With the sweat of our brows we are to earn our bread? And for a word
and away, think we to get bread of life of the Lord of life? Away unworthy
wretches, let the septuplate sound of the Trumpets, prompt us on to lift up our
voice like a Trumpet to the Lord, and aloud and often. The fearful Hare, for the
safeguard of her life, makes many doubles; doubra less there must be doubling
of our Prayers, to wind us our of danger of death: and Death stand we not in
awe of thee? I fear not to die, but to dye eternally; which let my prayers
increase as the waters did under the threshold of the Temple, Ezekiel. 47. Then
will I not doubt by this sea of deep sounding supplications to be ferried over,
and set a shore at the gates of New Jerusalem.

I come to a second Reason.

2. Hold out your prayers, since its importunity will prevail. Have you not
heard, if one word will not, a second onset may do it, if not a second, a
third. O! continual droppings of supplications, can cause Gods heart thou have
hardened against thee, give again. Gutta cavat lapidem, the stone is hollowed
with incessant drops: the unjust judge is move with the importunity of the poor
widow, she is not heard at first, cries again, again neglected, and again cries
out upon the unrighteous judge, whose ears so much she troubles, for her cause
he never weighs, till all he begs he grants.

That the parable imports is, importunity seldom gets a may say; and if not
with the unrighteous Judge, much less with the Judge of heaven and earth.

This is it has made me resolve upon it, to fall to prayers again, and if I
gain not what I go about, not to let God rest at quiet till my suit be signed.

3. This is Gods own counsel, pray continually, what shall his counsel be no
command? a shame so much should be enjoined, and so little done: here is a long
task, and a lazy genration, some never laying their hands to this labor, I
mean praying in private neither with their private families, nor in their
private closets. Some disdaining to join with us in Commonprayers, I mean in
the Church in public: What Is the cause? Where Is the defect? wherein smell they
either of Heresy or Superstition? would God any loved me so well they would
tell me, and where and wherein; I am not so obstinate, but I would give him
hearing, and thanks if he deserve it -- In time I may meet with such a Goliath,
but I trust I need not fear his weavers beam.

But as for those cry out of all printed prayers, I cannot but cry out of them,
and tell them to their teeths, while they cry out of superstition in many
things they are too superstitious, and in special, while they imagine there is
no printed prayer meet to have an Amen, but it made, and extemporary.

I have heard of two sorts of prayers have been mightily discommended by a Sect
suppose themselves nonesuch, and I would be sorry to be such as they are.
Prayer in print for private use, our printed prayers used in public.

For the first, what think thou all have the gift of prayer? There Is one
spirit, but diverse gifts, every one, the Text plain it has not all of them,
what then must he do, wants the gift of expressing himself to God by prayer:
these humorous heads debar such poor souls from penned prayers, and leave them
in a worse case than the Philistims lest the Israelites, without an instrument
to whet their blunted goads and mattocks.

For the second, Church prayers; why relishest thou not a pew-prayer, as well
as a pulpit-prayer? O! the ones in print, but the other is pend, and by the
spirit. I tell thee, and note it, an extemporary pulpit-prayer made by the
Minister in respect of thee, is a set form of prayer: and my reason to prove it
is this, for that thy spirit is bound to say, Amen, to what he has dictated.

And now since both are set forms in respect of the people, this in the pulpit,
that in the pew, why may not thou say Amen as well to Church-prayers made by
many gracious choice Divines, as to an extemporary prayer made by some one,
sometime, who it may be speaks nonsense to God Almighty.

I profess I pity the sullen humor of our times, and a sect who delight
themselves with naught but new inventions; as all that know me, know I hate a
very rag of Idolatry: So I detest the sick-brainnesse of diverse of this age,
who are fallen into a frenzy of righting by doing wrong, and of purging out, of
our Church -- Nay some are grown so impudently devout, that they dare say it,
it is not meet to say our Lords prayer --

Lord what impure purity is this, for flesh and blood to give a non placet, to
that Christ has given under his own hand, it fit to go for current, Luke 11.2.

It shall be my prayers that God 0 would root out of old England, all
Heretics, and all conceited Schismatics, who take scare both at our Lords
Prayer, and diverse other godly prayers of --

Our Lords prayer is authorized to be said by one of the three States of
Heaven, and what one says, all assent to. The other, our Common Prayers have
been allowed of by our three States of Parliament, once the reputed nerves and
sinews of our nation.

All the Members of which, when they meet, the Lord grant in all things which
concern this his Church, they may be directed by his holy Spirit. And to this
in a peaceable way to agree, let all true hearted natives say Amen.

Give me leave to end all with a Divine Contemplation upon Amen.

All our prayers are Epitomized in our Lords Prayer, and our Lords Prayer in
this one, Amen. How soon is it said? how much does it comprehend? I had need
take good heed, when I pray. And have I not as much need to mind, when I end
with this, Amen. I have been a long time unfolding my mind to God: this Amen,
is that one, which when I have opened it, claspes it up.

Have you not seen a book in quires, after that bound up: such is every single
petition, such an one is this, Amen. What in them laid severed, in this is
bound up.

The petitions in our Lords prayer, are much like the verses of a Psalm whose
tune is prick it briefs and semibriefs? Amen set at end, is the quickest
semi-quaver Time, and a well pleasing note in the ears of God Almighty -- my
petitioning Epistle I have put up to God: that is, my Prayer; the Collect of it
is, Amen.

You know there are abundance of sacred truths believed by us Christians, and
yet their Encheridion is our Creed, in like sort, here is a world of good we
beg of God, yet all sum'd up in this Amen.

I am resolved to carry about me both my eyes Corporis, Animae,
to spy out what here lies hid. Amen is a deep ocean, and full to the
superficies, though straight in the circumference, broad at the center.

O my God, enable me to recollect heart and mind and spirit, that I may
discern all hid in this, Amen.

But Lord how am I taught from the first to the last word of this prayers, to
discharge my duty and please thee: first I pray for that I need, then, Amen,
protests this is my mind. This Amen is my witness all my prayers are my
desire.

When I pray, dear Father, join heart and tongue together, and what with my
tongue I beg, let Amen make affidavit I desire it.

But come, when we have made long prayers, are they all comprehended in our
Lords prayer? When we have said our Lords prayer, is it breviated in this its
last word?

It makes me I dare not at all times give the plaudite to long prayers, nor
over censure decurt devotion: the most is not ever the best; let my prayer be
of the best, and God will be well pleased with my little, though I say no more.
Nor speak I this to lessen devotion, but to comfort those who are not so fully
gifted. God may be in thy heart, though thy tongue be not so long, and the
Publican be accepted with his short when the Pharisee, his Long, shall be
little set by.

Amen, set at end of our prayers and devoutly uttered, sounds better in Gods
ears than vain tautologies.

The Hypocrite has more tongue than heart; the child of God more heart than
tongue. Yet O Lord untie the strings of my tongue, and my lips shall show forth
thy praise. Yet since thou love not much vain babbling, set thou a watch
before my tongue, that I offend not with my lips.

Da Domine ut Haec recte intellingam, Luther.
magis ut haec faciam.

FINIS.
A Table containing the most remarkable points unfolded in this Exposition.
THE Preface. Four kinds of pouring out our minds to God by prayer. page 1 The
sacred title Lord predicates of two, page 3 Two reasons why called the Lords
Prayer, ibid. Two extracts from the reasons, page 4 The Avowry, ibid. An
excellent prayer for brevity made six ways appear, page 5 A most fecund prayer
apparent by two reasons. ibid. Two teasons why a preface, page 8 God described
Relatively, page 10 God described Positively, page 10 Why God called Father, not
Lord, ibid. The word Father puts us in mind of four things, page 11 It binds
us to ask God blessing, page 13 It binds us to do him reverence, page 13 Esau
asked blessing, page 14 The estimate of Gods blessing, ibid. We must show
reverence to God when we speak to God, he speaks to us ibid. Elisha his
carriage to Elias, ibid. Gods Ministers called Gods Ambassadors, page 16 The word
preached to be heard with much reverence, ibid. The 24 Elders in the
Revelation, ibid. The reverent custom of the Abissins, ibid. God is called
Father tripertively, page 17 A review of the particulars, ibid. Why we admit of
the very wicked to say the Lords prayer with us, page 18 How every Oath, how
every election, how Christ may be called God Father, page 18 The case of
disinheriting, page 20 Two sorts of fools, ibid. The Collect, where all
foregoing is abbreviated, page 21 Three substantial reasons why we say not my
but our Father, ibid. The first Product, 21. The second Product, ibid. The
third product, 22. The Collect, ibid. God's ever within call. page 24 Gods
place of residence, page 25 His ableness to help us, ibid. The point enlarge,
ibid. The Leaper, and the Man whose son was possessed with their If thou will,
ibid. The Leaper, and the Man whose son was possessed with their If thou can,
ibid. Eight acceptations of the word Heaven. page 27 Two may be here meant,
ibid. The semblance betwixt Saints and Heaven, page 28 An extract from the
literal sense, page 29 An extract from the mystical sense, ibid. Heart
compared to a house, page 30 The Avowry, Now the Petitions are to be spoken to.
ibid. The division, page 31 The Petitions are of two sorts or kinds, ibid.
Their extracts, page 32 The equality of these two sort of Petitions, three
concern God, and three men, 34. Three Extracts, ibid. The Petitions precedence,
or their going before one another, page 38 The subject matter of the 6
petitions compared to 6. shires, page 44 Two words to be explained, page 46 The
Sense of the petition, page 49 The Collect of all said, ibid. Two Doctrines in
general, page 51 Doct. 1. We must be resolute for Gods honor, page 53 Doct.
2. There Is a backwardness in the best of us to this duty, ibid. Doct 3. Our
care in Christ should be for Gods honor, page 54 The cases of Conscience. page
56 Three slight Gods word, page 61 The graces two, Sincerity, Vigilance, page
66 The Contemplation, The second Petition. page 71 Kingdom taken four ways,
page 76 Interp. 1. By Kingdom may be meant Word, page 78 The word and kingdom
alike in five things, page 79 Interp. 2. By Kingdom may be meant the Church,
page 80 Interp. 3. By Kingdom may be meant Gods grace, page 83 Interp. 4. By
Kingdom may be meant Heaven, page 84 The fourth Interpretation compendiously
couched together, page 86 Doct. 1. Heaven is Gods own, page 86 Doct. 2. He that
prays for heaven prays for no small thing, page 88 Doct. 3. We have no heaven
in hand, page 89 1. Case of conscience, whether any doubt there be such a thing
as called Kingdom for heaven, page 91 2. Case, whether shall all living go to
heaven, page 92 3. Case, who shall be admitted into this Kingdom of heaven,
page 95 The Contemplation, The third Petition; page 105 A twofold will of God,
page 108 Doct. 1. It comes hardly of with us to do Gods will, page 119 Doct. 2.
This life time is no privilege time for following our own will and appetite,
ibid. Doct. 3. Heaven is set to the earths pattern, page 121 Doct. 4. We have
diverse Schoolmasters, page 122 The Contemplation, The fourth Petition page
135 A paraphrase upon the fourth Petition. page 140 Doct. 1. It is God can
supply all our wants, page 147 Doct. 2. We have no right to ought till begged
it, page 149 Doct. 3. Our request for the world be limited, otherwise will
burst to be boundless, page 151 Doct. 4. My state to my estate is not good
till God confirm it, page 153 Doct. 5. Our request for the world must be
moderate, page 154 1. Case of conscience, How comes it to pass, that I who
often pray get so little, page 156 2. Case, How comes it to pass, that the
wicked who pray not get much eartly means, and much more then the Godly, page
159 3. Case, With what cautions may I pray for riches, page 162 The
contemplation, The fifth Petition. page 174 The word Trespass has a double
object, God, Man, page 179 Doct. 1. It is God can forgive us our sins, page 184
Doct. 2. Every sigular soul is a sinner, page 285 Doct. 3. Its many sins of
which we are conscious, page 288 A simile taken from a Drunkard, page 289 Doct.
4. Sin in allied in full blood to Adams posterity page 190 Doct. 5. We shall be
forgiven as we do forgive, page 192 Doct. 6. God will forgive much for a
little, page 195 Doct. 7. Our Trespasses against God far exceed our neighbors
Trespassing us, ibid. The Contemplation, The sixth Petition. page 112 Temptation
the bait. page 215 Evil is the hook, ibid. Doct. 1. In word to prayer, page
231 Doct. 2. Lo a very wound we must have a care to keep far from, page 232
Doct. 3. The Devil and sin our worst of enemies, page 234 Doct. 4. Naught is
more evil then the Devil and Sin, page 236 The case of conscience, after what
manner does, lust entice us to sin and draw us on from serving God to become
servants of sin, page 237 The Character of Timidity, page 254 The Character of
Prespicacity, page 255 The Parallel betwixt Presumption, page 257 The
Parallel betwixt Ignorance, page 257 The Character of Presumption, page 258
The Character of Ignorance, page 259 The perpetuity of Gods Kindome, Power,
Glory, page 277 Read the Contemplations upon the three reasons, Kingdom,
Power, Glory, page 280 A contemplation upon Ever, the fourth part of our Lords
Prayers, page 285 The conclusion, Amen. Amen an Hebrew, page 289 Two
Contemplations, page 290 Amen a native in every Nation, page 291 The reasons
why admitteds in every language, ibid. A review of the three Reasons, page 292
The Carnotensian Cannon, ibid. Amens first sense, page 293 The extract, ibid.
The taxation, page 294 His supplicat, ibid. Amens second sense, ibid. St.
Austins saying, page 295 The ministers replication, page 296 The hearers
rejoinder, page 297 His supplicat, ibid. Amens third sense, ibid. Pater noster
Amen its thereefold signification, ibid. It Is taken pro juris jurandi nota,
page 298 The taxation. ibid. His supplicat, page 299 It signifies ipsam
veritatem, ibid. Three inferences, page 300 The body of Moses and the name
Jusus, ibid. This Amen is sometime taken pro signo subseripri onis, page 401
Three inferences, ibid. A tripertite gain got by saying Amen, page 303 The
Avowry with the Collect, ibid. A man's semblance, page 304 The semblance between
God and Amen, page 305 It holds in five things, ibid. Amen its three
significations blush the three Persons, ibid. Amens Character, page 307 A
divine fancy upon Amen, page 311 Two twins or two meditations, page 313 Four
motives, page 314 Meditation, and what it is, page 319 The meditation
exemplified, ibid. Three reasons to force on the meditation, ibid. The fearful
hair, page 320 Old Church prayer neither smells of Heresy nor Superstition,
page 322 A Contemplation upon Amen, page 325
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 16. line 16. for of meritlesse read I mirit less, p. 16. l. 14. s. there
r. there, p. 37. l. 11. f. sons r. wife, p. 37. l. 12. f. this manner r. these
manners, p. 70 l. 6. f. whilst r. but, p. 81. l. 4. f. God r. god, p. 93. l.
6. f. believers r. misbeleevers, p. 95, l. 20. f. by r. my, p. 101. l. 14. f.
secondly r. second, p. 107. l. 20. f. and r. I, p. 144. l. 26. f. a word r. p.
149. l. 19. r. of, p. 161. l. 23. f. Hagar, r. Agur, p. 171. l. 17. f. under r.
undoer, p. 177. l. 12. f. Solomon r. Agur, p. 195. l. 10. f. doer r. does, p.
211. l. 3. f. pursed r. perused, p. 212. l. y. next 10 the word closed add to
my neighbor, p. 241. l. 2. p. 243. l. to. put out of, put must be added in the
begimming of the line, p. 310. l. 19. f. stomach r. stomach't.


