LIEUT. COLONEL JOHN LILB. TRIED and CAST: OR, His Case and Craft discovered.

Wherein is showed the Grounds and Reasons of the Parliaments proceeding, in
passing the Act of Banishment against him, and wherefore since his coming over
he has been committed to the Tower by the PARLIAMENT.

Here likewise is laid open the partial, corrupt, and illegal Verdicts of his
JURIES, both the former and later.

Being to satisfy all those in the Nation that are truly godly, and
well-affected to the Peace of the Commonwealth: And to stop the Mouths of
others; proving, what is done in order to his present Imprisonment, is
according to the rules of Justice and Equity contained in the moral Law of
God, and nature, or sound natural Reason.

Published by AVTHORITY.

Job 15.6. Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I, yea thine own lips
testify against thee.

Deuteronomy. 19.19. Ye shall do unto him, as he thought to have done unto his
brother.

LONDON, Printed by M: Simmons in Aldersgate Street, 1653.

TO All our Contrymen and Friends throughout the Commonwealth of ENGLAND,
PEACE and TRVTH be wished every where.
AS this Treatise is for a general satisfaction of the Nation: so we have
forborne all particular Dedications, that it may without respect of persons,
find acceptance alike with all men. We have little farther to say, then what
is contained in the Book, only desire that the same may be read over with
judgment: We have purposely left out our names, that the Reader may not wrong
himself either through prejudice or partiality, but look singly on the matter
as it lies before him.

It is possible some may think there was no need that so much should have
been written as in reference to a particular person, but less a great deal
would have served the turn.

To which we answer, 1. It is well known, that many honest minded people, in
regard of the several Pamphlets, which M. Lilburn has spread abroad, have
been very much abused and mislead by him, insomuch that without a large and
clear discovery of his particular Crafts and deceits, we doubted whether such
persons would have real and full satisfaction.

2 Because we find Mr. Lilb. boasting oftentimes of his quick and sharp pen we
have thought good to make one work of it; that is, to prevent his future Answer
and Replies, in doing so much at once, as not to be troubled any more with him,
but to stopp his mouth, and put him quite to silence.

3 The man has been so long a disturber of the peace of the Common-wea^th, and
acted such a multitude of seditious designs, as we could not in a little give
the Nation a just account thereof.

4 As our desire is, that those who are in Authority may go speedily forward
with the work of Reformation, so we conceive there being here full satisfaction
given to the people of this Commonwealth, a stumbling block will be removed,
which he by his subtlety and craft had cast in their way.

But some may say, you have spoken too much in the justification of bad men:
For answer: Here we can appeal to God, how far we have been from pleading
either for persons or things otherwise then what conscience, reason and justice
has guided us thereunto. It is chiefly the peace and safety of the Nation that
we have sought after: And for this National peace we are willing to spend,
and to be spent, and shall think our selves sufficiently rewarded, if by the
publishing of this Treatise we may undeceive such people, whom by his wiles
and falsehoods he has formerly deceived, and that he may no more draw parties
and factions after him.

For conclusion; As in the publishing of this Book, we desire a general good,
so in particular Mr. Lilburn. That he may see the error and evil of his ways.
No doubt it would be much for the peace and comfort of his soul another day:
If this counsel of ours were followed, namely as he has given occasion of
public scandal to the world, by his seditious and mutinous carriages, so to
make public acknowledgment thereof.

Howsoever, it shall be our desire: As persons looking into a glass, do
thereby amend what they see to be amiss, so this may serve as Mr. Lilburns
LOOKING-GLASS, wherein he may not only see those foul and gross faults, which
are as perspicuous and manifest, as the Leprosy on Gehaza's forehead; but may
under the sense and sight of them, truly repent, and seek unto the Lord, that
in the blood of Christ they may be washed away.

The general CONTENTS of the BOOK.
THE Authors Encouragement, and grounds to publish the Treatise, page 1, 2. The
Case stated concerning Harrenton Collierie, and the Commonwealths Interest in
it, p. 3, 4, 5. How George Lilburn and George Gray sought to defraud the
Commonwealth of the said Collierie, p. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Judgment of the
Commissioners for compounding, having heard what could be said on the behalf
of Mr. Primate by his Council, p. 10, 11, 12. Mr. Primates Petition to the
Parliament, p. 13, 14. The Petition being read in the House, how the Parliament
proceeded thereupon, p. 15, 16. Mr. John Lilburn not banished for any
particular or personal difference and contest between Sir Arthur Haslerigg and
him, p. 17. Grounds and Reasons upon which the Parliament might lawfully
proceed as to his Banishment, p. 18. 1 By that Law of God, concerning the
punishment of a false Witness, which is opened, and largely applied, p. 19,
20, 21. 2 Because the punishment of Delinque may be heightened upon Grounds and
Reasons of State: The which is proved in some particulars, p. 21, 22. Hence is
asserted that no man has been banished out of England, for greater
miscarriages then Mr. Lilburn has committed against the State, p. 23. The
which is proved, 1. Generally, as being an Enemy to all Forms and kinds of
Government, p. 23, 24 2 Particularly, wherein is set forth, 1 His railing
against Parliament men, p. 25, 26 2 His treacherous speeches against the
Parliament it self, p. 26, 27 The Authors Observation upon the same, p. 28, 29
3 What he has published against the Army. And here is showed: 1 What he
calls all the Army Officers in general, p. 29. And why? p. 30 2 How
scandalously and falsely he asperseth the Lord Fairfax, being Gonerall, p. 31
The Lord Fairfax his great patience toward him, notwithstanding the others
continual treacherous designs against him, p: 32 3 His false and railing
Accusatiens against his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, p: 33 General
observations given upon the said falsehoods and forgeries, ibid. 1 It is an old
State-destroying stratagem, for Incendiaries to asperse men of public
spirits, and such as deserve best of their Country, p. 34, 35 2 Seditious
persons, under the name of Liberty, and complaining against arbitrary power,
Tyranny, etc. have usually sought to raise commotions and hurliburlies among
the people, p: 35, 36, 37 3 How it is a politic design of ambitious,
malicious, and discontented people, to seek the raising of themselves, by
making disturbances and tumults in a Nation, p: 37, 38, 39 4 Lilburns
complaints against the General are groundless; for being ignorant of what is
just and good, he therefore speaks evil of it, p: 39, 40, 41 5 As his
Accusations against the General, are proved to be false, malicious, and
scandalous, so has he showed himselfes herein most inhumane and ungrateful,
p: 41, 42 The which in humanity and ingratitude, is demonstrated in several
particulars, p: 42 1 In the baseness of his speeches, ibid. 2 In rendering
evil for good, ibid. 3 Having no provocation or occasion so to do, p: 42. 43,
44 Lilburns End and grand design in opposing Government, and aspersing such as
are in Authority, and herein how like unto the Pope, p: 44, 45 The several
ways and wiles which he has used to bring his end and design to pass, ibid.
1 By instigating all people, Soldiers as well as others unanimously to rise
against the Parliament, and to apprehend them as so many professed Traitors,
Thieves, Murderers, etc. p: 45, 46 2 By making division between the Parliament
and Army, which is showed in several particulars, p: 46, 47, 48 3 By
attempting to destroy the Army, p: 49 The which is demonstrated: By persuading
the Soldiers to revolt, and cast off their Commanders, page 49, 50, 51, 52
Here some particulars are noted, as how he and his party have occasioned the
Soldiers to revolt, p: 52 1 By charging the principal Officers of the Army
with most scandalous, horrid, and base things, p: 52, 53 2 When any of the
Soldiers have acted any thing treacherously and dangerously against the Army,
their manner was highly to commend such mutinous and seditious persons, p: 53,
54 3 By urging and instigating other Soldiers, when their fellow soldiers for
causing sedition have been justly punished, to take severe revenge for it
presently upon their Officers, p. 54, 55 4 In stead of a Court-Marshall, Mr.
Lilburn appointed a Committee of Indemnity, whereby all Soldiers are
acquitted, as not to suffer for sedition, or any other crime whatsoever, p. 55,
56 Lilburns designs and resolutions far worse, and more abominable then the
former, p. 56 As how he resolved to murder and massacre several persons, ibid.
1 Sir Arthur Haslerig, p. 57 2 He has openly professed to the world, that he
resolved to kill the Lord General Cromwell at the Parliament door, p. 58
Reasons wherefore he did it it not. 1 For the love he bore to his Wife and
Children. 2 Because he was assured that he should see the Generals downfall
without the killing of him. And 3. Be an instrument himself, for the
restoration of Englands Liberties and Freedoms, ibid. Hence these Inferences
are made, 1 That Lilburns coming lately into England, was to effect what he had
promised to the Duke of Buckingham, Hopton, and others, p. 59 2 A singular
providence of God, that a design so desperate, should be made known by
himself, p. 59, 60 3 The Common wealth of England needs no such Actors. 4 The
intended murder confessed by himself, leads us (as by the hand) to the Author
and Instrument of the Libels and Pasquils which have been thrown abroad, pa.
61, 62. 3 It has not only been his resolution to stabb and kill particular
persons, but a whole Parliament of men at one time as so many Weasels and
Poulcats, p. 62, 63, 64 Lilburns first Trial, p. 64 The Act declaring what
offenses shall be adjudged Treason, page 65, 66, 67, 68, 69. That the witnesses
and proofs produced on the Commonwealths behalf, were full and legal against
Liuet. Col. John Lilburn in point of Treason, p. 70. 1 The Treason was confessed
by himself, p. 70, 71, 72 2 Proved by several legal, and sufficient
witnesses, page 72, 73 3 In the Book which he owned and and acknowledged
himself the Author, the whole Treason whereof he was accused, is there set
forth, page 73, 74 How impartial, illegal, and unjust the Jury was, p. 74, 75
How impertinent and vain Lilburns whole Answer is, p. 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80.
Lilburns slight trick: how he escapes at his Trials, p. 80, 81. Mr. Lilburns
actions and doings after his Enlargement, page 81. Here we find him a
Solicitor, attending the Committees, pleading in all Causes, where he might
have any advantage thereby, p. 81, 82. He who had formerly cried out against
the Lawyers, is more foul and criminal in the same particulars, p 82, 83
Having been so long versed in National Tumults, he is like a fish out of the
water, till his hand be again in public Commotions, p. 83. The Case stated
concerning Hatfield Chase, ibid. 84 The Riots and Insurrections there made,
ibid. Daniel Noddel gets to his assistance Lilburn, and Major Wildman, p. 85
How Lilburn cum socijs totally abolished and destroyed the whole Town of
Stantoft, 82 Habitations, and destroyed in Corn and Rapes, 34000 acres, the
damage not less then 80000 l. p. 86. An agreement between Lilburn, and
several men of the Manor of Epworth; that in consideration of 2000 Acres to
be given to Lilburn and Wildman, they shall be defended from all Riots past and
to come, p. 87 Lilburn's Lords days work at Stantoft, p. 87, 88. How he
instigates the people of Crowle to make Insurrections and Riots, p. 88.
Noddel's wager, that Lilburn would call the Parliament to an account, p. 89.
Lilburns land measured out, and by him taken into possession. ibid. Major
Wildman present, when Lilburn made the bargain, p. 90. Observations upon the
whole, ibid. 1 According to Cokes Institutes, Lilburn is a Traitor by his
Actions, p. 91, 92. 2 His unparalleld insolency, having but a little before
escaped punishment for raising tumults, would throw himself again headlong in
the danger, page 92. 3 Should such a president as this be left without due
Execution of Justice, in what danger were the whole Commonwealth, p. 93. The
original and chief cause of his banishment, p. 94. Lilb. actions and
proceedings beyond Sea, ibid. Here is asserted, that no English Exile in the
time of his Banishment, showed more malice, or contrived greater Treason
against England, then Mr. Lilburn did in the time of his Residence in the
Netherlands, p. 95. For 1. never was a State by the mouth or pen of any Exile
made more odious or execrable then he has rendered ours to Foreign Nations, p.
95, 96, 97. 2 Having made our Governors State-Hereticks, then be proceeds
(Pope-like) to cut them off, p. 98. The which is demonstrated By the
particulars whereof he is accused 1 Isaac Berkenheads Charge against him, p.
98, 99 2 Captain John Titus, p. 99. 3 Capt. John Bartlet, ibid. 100. 4 Richard
Foot, 100. How Lilburn like the Sepiae, seeks to escape by blacking the water,
p. 100, 101. The whole Charge cast into three heads or branches. 1 His
resolution to kill the Lord Gen: Cromwell. 2 To destroy the Parl. and Council
of State. 3 To settle King Charles (as h^e called him) in his Throne in
England, pa. 101. Reasons to believe that he intended to kill the General. 1
Because it is no more then what his own mouth has publicly spoken, that
formerly he intended to do it, p. 101, 102. 2 We cannot observe in his
practice and carriage beyond Sea, that there was any Change in his mind or
resolution concerning the murdring of his Excellency, p. 102 His rage and
railing was rather more then less, p. 103, 104. 3 His own words published,
when he was in the Netherlands, do amount to as much as by the witnesses is
asserted in this particular, p. 105, 106. Reasons to believe that he intended
to destroy the Parl. and Council of State. 1 Because during the time of his
Banishment in the Netherlands, he counted the Parl. no other then he did
before, viz. Tyrants, Traitors, Knipperdolings, etc. p. 107. The Author of the
history of Independency greatly commended by him, specially for some passages,
p. 107, 108. 2 Because, could such a thing be done, it would content him very
much, and the Authors of such Treason and Murder should be reputed by him to be
the true lovers of the liberties and freedoms of England, p. 108, 109. 3
Because, as to the means and way asserted by the witnesses, how he would
destroy the Parl. and Council of State: is the same which elsewhere he
declares publicly to the world, p. 109, 110, 111. What Lilburn had suffered
for his devices, had he lived among the Lycians, p. 111, 112. His gross
hypocrisy discovered by himself, that it was not the peoples liberty which
moved him to oppose Authority, but his own private gain and advantage, p. 112,
113 Reasons to believe that he promised the Lord Hopton and others to settle
Charles Stuart King of England (as he called him) in his Throne in England. 1
Because no man was more against the putting of the last King to death then he,
p. 113, 114. 2 Acknowledges Prince Charles apparent Heir to his Fathers Crown
and Throne, p. 114. 3 has persuaded the people to receive him and to join with
him, as being more justifiable before God or man, yea a thousand times more
justly then to join with the present ruling men, p. 114. 4 The great
familiarity which was between him and the arch Cavalliers, whilst he was
resident in the Low Countries, is sufficient to prove the same, p. 115. How
Lilburn would make the world believe, that the Cavalliers suspected him to be a
Spy, sent over by the State, to learn their Counsels, p. 116. 5 That corrupt
Juries and seditious people are so much for his enlargement, another Argument,
p. 116, 117. 6 As Tiberius would have Caligula to reign, that he might destroy
the people, so would he set up his King here to suppres honest men, p. 117.
Concerning Lilburns return, as to the time, manner, and other circumstances, p.
118. 1 As to the occasion of his coming over, here an Argument is framed to
prove, that the reason of his return was to murder the Lord Gen: Cromwell, p.
118, 119, 2 How he seeks for a Pass, no pardon, p. 119. 3 A mystery opened,
viz. how he had before vowed never to believe nor trust the General, and yet
petitioneth to him for his liberty, p. 120. 4 How Lilburn following the
ordinary practice of former Incendiaries, takes the advantage of our Change in
the Government of State: and thus for two Reasons, partly because things are
then unsettled; and partly, because at such turnings many men are unsatisfied,
p. 121. 5 Several passages are opened, which he writes in a Letter to his
wife, of seditious consequence, p. 121, 122. 6 If he have not his Pass granted
him, how he will take Major Gen: Harrison, for his principallest and grandest
Adversary, and what he has oonceiv'd already in his brain against the Major
Gen: page 122, 123. Some Observations upon it, ibid. 7 With whom Lilburn dined
and supped, when he was at Callais, immediately before his coming over, and his
Companions with him in the passage-boat, p. 124. The third Assertion: Namely,
no man banished out of England, being returned again, ever offered such
Insolences and high contempt against Authority, as he has done since his
coming over, specially for the time, ibid. 8 His great swelling words at
Canterbury, as that he needed no Pass, was as good a man as Cromwell, etc.
ibid. Lilburn scorns to have his mouth stopped, like the Geese in their flight
over Taurus, p. 125. 9 No sooner is he come at London, but he sends his Agents
and Papers abroad, to acquaint the people where he was, and how to come to him,
as intending to have made new Tumults presently, if the people would have
joined with him, p. 125. For his carriage since his coming over: 1 What he has
said. 2 What he has done.
Upon his Trial at the Sessions in the Old Bailie, he spoke as follows. 1
That the Act whereupon he was indicted, was a lie, a falsehood; it had no Law
nor Reason in it, etc. p. 125. The Answer to it, p. 126. 2 That the Parliament
could not make any Act of Parliament since the Kings head was cut off, ibid.
How he spoke Treason but covertly, p. 126, 127. By the same Law they voted him
to death, they might vote his honest 12 Jurymen, p. 127. Reasons moving his
Jurie to acquit him hereupon, p. 127, 128. 4 How he commends the Parliament
which was before the Kings head was cut off, p. 128. Two things observed
thereupon. 1 His notable dissimulation, ibid. 2 His gross absurdity and
contradiction, p. 129. How the Parliament never made good Laws, since Lilb. had
some money bestowed upon him, ibid. How Lilburn speaks plain English, and so
makes himself a Traitor by Cokes Institutes, p. 129. His Jury encouraged to
quit him, in hearing him to speak Treason so boldly, p. 130. How slightly he
speaks of all Parliaments, as having no power to send for him, or any other
man, etc. ibid. His great inhumanity toward the Parliament: As to take away
their weapons, and afterward to beat them, p. 131. His falsehood answered, and
ignorance discovered, p. 131, 132 How most unworthily he abused the Court, p.
132. 1 The Lord Mayor, ibid. wherein 1 He lied against knowledge and conscience.
2 Grossly contradicted himself. 3 Wherein he spoke truth, it was against
himself, p. 132 Another Reason to encourage the Jurie to quit him, viz. what a
stout Champion he would be for them in the great business when occasion should
serve. p. 133. 2 His railing at the Lord Keeble, as being a Part^^, and having
a sallarie, p. 133. Magna Charta for Traitors and Fellons, not for the liberty
and security of honest men, ibid. Why the Lord Keeble may not have 1000 l. per
annum of the State to suppress Riots and Incendiaries, as Lilburn to have 1000
acres for ever to maintain Riots and Insurrections in the Nation? p. 133, 134.
3 What he called Mr. Pridiaux Attorney Gen, p. 134. How like herein to the
Beast Duron, who seeks to escape by casting forth her dung against the hunters,
p. 134. 4 What he says of the Army, ibid. The Answer to it, p. 134, 135 5
What he calls his Jurie, to wit, his honorable Jurie, the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, Judges of the Law, as well as of the Fact, p. 135. How he
handles his Jury (as if they were like brass pots) he carries them by the ears
where he will, ibid. His base aspersing the present Parliament, p. 136. Wherein
is manifested the Jurie their disaffection to the State, ibid. Care to be taken
that the corrupt proceeding of this Jury be not left as a President to future
ages, p. 136. How he calls Jehovah to witness, and protests before God,
Angels and men, that he is not the John Lilburn intended in the Act, p. 137.
How such Asseverations and Oaths are frequently used by him, and the Reasons
why, ibid. How it is Machiavels maxim, and the doctrine of Jesuits to lie and
forswear for profit and advantage, p. 137. After his sayings his doings follow:
And here we find him at his old Trade, dispersing scandalous and seditious
Books, p 138. 1 A printed paper, Entitled, More light to M. John Lilburns
Jurie, wherein is asserted, that a Parl. has no power to contradict, alter, or
repeal any former standing laws, ibid. The Answer to it, wherein is showed
how Mr. Lilburn seeks to enslave the Nation, and to disquiet the minds of the
people by false suggestion: And such as ask his liberty, may as well ask our
Reason and understanding, p. 139. How a Jurie, though consisting of two knaves
and ten fools, yet are above Parliament and Law, and no Appeal is to be had
from their sentence, though never so illegal and unjust, p. 140, 141. How
inventers of evil things, and inducers to sin, are principally to be punished,
p. 141. 2 Another printed paper, called A word to the Army, wherein he speaks
nothing of the former divisions, which he had made in the Army, but seeks to
raise more, p. 141, 142. 3 A printed paper Entitled, Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of Enland, etc. p. 143. How Lilb. shows here his folly, in troubling
himself about Parliaments, which as he states the Case, signify little,
ibid. How he is proud, an ignorant man, as no^ understanding what fundamental
and standing Laws are, p. 143. How laws may be said to be standing, and
fundamental, and what such laws are, p. 143. How Lilburn is like the Mass
Priests, in Edward 6. his reign: And seeks to make Commotions and Tumults now,
as they did then, in the like seditious way and design, p. 144. How he
extracts something from all former Incendiaries, to be a Master workman as he
styles himself, p. 145. 4 Another printed paper, called, Lieut. Coll. John
Lilburns plea in Law, ibid. Here he undertakes to prove, that the Parliament can
alter none of the fundamental Laws, ibid. To which a large answer is given. As
showing, 1 What is power. 2 Government, or the execution of that power, p. 145,
146. His ignorance and nonsense, and how he seeks to enslave the Natian,
ibid. He goes backward to out-jump his fellow leapers in sedition, p. 147. How
like the foolish fish he swims to the hidden hook, ibid. Another printed
paper, called A word to the Jury in behalf of John Lilburn, p. 147 A door
for Lilburns sake, must be left open for all Incendiaries to pass through
without punishment, p. 148 How the Jurie took upon them, not only to be
Judges, but condemners both of Parliament and Laws, p. 148 What is to he done
by those who are in Authority, when they see, not only their persons, but
Authority it self, and their Acts and Laws trodden under foot, p. 148, 149.
Lilburns re^ued practice to divide the Army, p. 149. His unreconciled hatred
to the State, p. 150. Another printed paper called, A Plea at large for John
Lilburn, Gent. ibid. Here he prosecuteth the method which he propounded to the
Duke of Buckingham, etc. as to destroy the Lord Gen: Cromwell, etc. p. 150, 151.
How he cannot for his life forbear acting sedition, p. 151. Lilb. liberty not
to be desired, dangerous to the Commonwealth. Reasons for it. 1 Because
nothing will satisfy him but murder and blood, p. 151. 2 He knows nothing of
the present Generation-work, but one that scoffs and jeers at it, p. 152, 153.
3 Is a professed Enemy to Reformation: As to have things continue proper to
Monarchy, no way suitable to a Commonwealth, p. 153, 154. 4 No friend to those
that fear God, and love the Commonwealth, but he is for the Cavalliers, and
that party. Having so many Agents, (as he says) in the Land, it is fit he and
they should be kept asunder, as men keep fire and gunpowder apart, p. 155 6
The dangerous consequence of an ill president in the Commonwealth, p. 155. The
conclusion of Mr. Lilburn in that grave Council of the Senators of Troy, ibid.
Concerning Mr. Lilburns later Jurie, p. 156. Here the Reader is desired to take
the Marginall notes along with him. What the Jury fitly may be called, and why,
p. 156 The Examination of the Jurie taken before the Council of State, 157.
Thomas Green, foreman; why chosen by Lilburn? why foreman? p. 157. He will not
answer for Reasons best known to himself, p. 158. Michael Rayner; he confesses
they had a meeting all together at the Windmil Tavern in Coleman street, to
agree together, what answer to give the Council, p. 159 How he and the rest of
the Jury took themselves to be Judges of matter of Law, as well as matter of
fact, ibid. Thomas Tunman, a Salter: this man, though he sels salt, yet his
words were not soasoned with salt, witness his lying against knowledge and
conscience; in being asked whether they did not meet that morning at the
Windmill Tavern, he positively answered they did not, p. 159, 160. Immanuel
Hunt, he was not satisfied that the prisoner was John Lilburn indicted of
felony; About their meeting at the Tavern that morning: First denies it,
afterward confesses it, p. 160. James Stevens confesses the Council and
Bench told the Jurie they were only Judges of the Fact: But this they regarded
not, p. 161. Richard Tomlins tells the Council, it is one thing what he can say,
and another thing to accuse himself, ibid. He is not bound (he says) to give
any account of what he did in the business, but to God himself, p. 162 Will:
Hitchcock is resolved not to give any answer of their Action, ibid. He says and
unsays, and contradicts himself most grossly, p. 162, 163. Thomas Evershot,
though he pretends he was satisfied in his conscience in what he did; yet such
was his conscience, as he can lie against his knowledge, p. 163. Tho: Smith
refuses to give any Answer, ibid. Gilbert Gain, though he did differ from the
rest, yet at last yields to them for company, p. 164 Griffith Own was not
satisfied, that the Prisoner was John Lilb. p. 164. The Authors opinion
concerning the downfall of Juries, ibid.
LILBURN Tried and Cast: OR His Case and Craft discovered. WHEREIN Is showed
the Grounds and Reasons of the Parliament, in passing the Act of Banishment
against him, and wherefore, since his coming over he has been committed to the
Tower by the Parliament.
Here likewise is laid open the partial, corrupt, and illegal Verdict of his
Jury, both the former and later.
Being to satisfy all those in the Nation that are truly godly, and
well-affected to the Peace of the Commonwealth: And to stop the mouths of
others. Proving what is don in order to his present imprisonment, is according
to the Rules of Justice and Equity, etc.
THe 2 Samuel 15.12
two hundred men, which went with Absalom from Jerusalem to Hebron, in their
simplicity, and knew not any thing: had they clearly understood the real As
all vices use to cloth themselves with the habits of virtues, that under those
liveries they may get countenance in the world, so under the name of Liberty
and crying out against Tyranny, many unawares are brought into a snare.
plot and stratagem of him, which was to make himself King, and depose his
Father, they would not have followed him in so horrid and wicked an Action. In
the undertaking of this work, we shall endeavor to undeceive such people (
virtutem qui verba putant, ut lucum ligna, as Horace speaks,) who through
ignorance and mistake of things, are ready to comply with Mr. Lilburn, and
others, in their seditious ways and wiles against the peace and safety of
this Commonwealth. As for others, who are wilful and malicious, professed
enemies to the State, and of his mind who said, Non persuade his, etiamsi
persuaseris.
Though you do convince me, yet I will not be convinced: we shall
(neverthlesse) by this, leave them without excuse, to the righteous judgment
of God in the great day of Christ.

The searcher of all hearts knows, it is not Mr. Lilburns blood, or any hurt
unto him in the least that is here aimed at, we have better learned Mat. 7.12.
Christ, even Quod tibi vis fieri, hoc facias and alteri.
to do to others as we would be don unto: but to prevent the misery and
mischief, which otherwise, partly through the most effectual delusions, and
deep deceits of some, and partly through the ignorance and misunderstanding of
others, might possibly (by keeping silence) fall suddenly upon the Nation.

It cannot be denied, but that it stands with the Rules of Justice and Equity,
contained in the moral law of God and Nature, or sound natural Reason, and
with the Law of all Nations: that mutinous and seditious courses should be
prevented and hindered, yea and Initio sedicionum, quamprimum apparuerint
comprimantur. Cle. Templ. polit. lib. 4. c. 7. p. 424.
timely too; whilst they are in the nest, hatching like the Cockatrice Eggs
Contra vim atque injuriam licitam esse defensonem. L: ut vim de Just and jur l.
scientiam sect. quicum ad L. Aquil.
. Against force and wrong defense is lawful, says the Law: and Publicam
utilitatem priva^orum commodis praeserendam. Authen. Res quia C. commude legate.
l.
the public good is to be preferred before particular profit. Upon those
considerations and grounds, namely, that the Nation may be no more involud in
war, Tyranny in Church and State re-established, our liberties bought with a
sea of blood and millions of treasure lost again: but the great work of
Christ gloriously go forward in the world; we shall now (not following Mr.
Lilburn in his As Cocks fed with Garlic overcome others, with rankness of
breath, not with strength of body, so his victory by the pen, is by desamations
and railing at men's persons: Sober men not being willing to come near the
rankness of his breath.
railing and raging language, but) in the words of sobriety and truth, state
the true case of his sufferings, and how in seeking himself, and to carry on
his own Interest, he has all along endeavored to disquiet the Nation, and to
make commotions and divisions in our Councels, Army, and every where.

It is usually given forth by Mr. Lilburn, and his friends, and so understood
of many, as if the Thus he speaks, and writes and has published to the world:
Now the Civil Law says, It is unreasonable for any man, not having weighed the
whole cause, to give advise or judgment, some one part alone proposed. Civil
dig. 4. de leg^ Senatusque Consult.
cause of his Banishment should be of a difference arising between Sir Arthur
Haslerigge and him, and some words which he should speak against Sir Arthur:
but how untrue this is, and ungroundedly taken up, will evidently appear by
the following discourse.

First the Reader is desired, to take notice, how one Mr. Primate Citizen and
Letherseller of London, made claim unto three parts in four, to be divided of
all the Cole-mines in Harraton, in the County of Durham: by virtue of a
pretended Lease made by Sir John Hedworth, Knight: The which moitie Primate
afterward demised to George Lilburn and George Gray Junior, Esquires, etc. Now
to the end they might the better carry on their covetous design, and enrich
themselves by deceiving the Commonwealth of 3000 l. Per Ann. they take along
with them Liev: Colonel John Lilburn and some others, persons proper for the
work, and most fit to advance both their own and the others Interest. For as
the Cause was desperate and deceitful, so it was necessary it should be
managed by such Ambitiosi a liquot homines qui privatim degeneris, in publicum
exitiosi nihil spei nisi per discordias habent. Lipfius polit. l. 6. c. 4. p.
266.
instruments as would be resolute and restless, and with violence and
impudence, break through all oppositions, in spite of right or reason.

How these conspired together, to rob the State of so much treasure, will
appear by setting down the true state of that Case concerning Harraton
Collierie, and the Commonwealths Interest in it.

Upon the sixth day of August, 1649. Thomas Wray of Beanish in the County of
Durham Esquire, complained to the Committee of Durham, that George Lilburn and
George Gray, two of the Committee, All is fish that comes to the net.
had possessed themselves, of his Collieries and several houses thereunto
belonging in Harraton, which were sequestered for his Recusancy and Delinquency,
and had raised great sums of money out of the same, and converted it to their
own uses, to the great loss and prejudice of the Commonwealth. And upon
Examination of Witnesses upon Here Master John Lilburn has a Marginal note in
his book, Entitled, A just Reproof to Haberdashers Hal, page 9. And says,
But I am sure their depositions are no where to be found. But we are sure he
knows better, how Mr. William Roe proved it fully.
oath it appeared, that in the year 1644. Sir William Armyne and the rest of
the Parliament Commissioners, sequestered that Colliery then in the sole
possession of Mr. Wray, and sold a thousand pounds worth of Coals that were
upon the Staythes. And further, that in the year 1645. the Committee there
upon the Petition of Mistress Wray, wife to the said Thomas Wrey, granted an
order (Mr. Lilburn, and Mr. Greys hands being at the said Order) for letting
that Collierie to one Mr. Pearson, for paying of Mr. Wreyes Creditors, and that
Pearson was to give an account thereof to the Committee, and accordingly This
says Mr John Lilb. is the grossest utruth that can be told, for Pearson never
took the said Collierie. But it is a grosser untruth to deny it, seeing the
thing is so certain and clearly proved.
entered into the said Colliery: And it appears that the said Collierie
continued still to be wrought by Mr. Wrayes Agents, and for his use till June,
in the year 1647.

About April in the year 1647. Mr. Lilburn and Mr. Gray desired a meeting
with Mr. Wray about buying out his Estate in the Collierie: Now at this meeting
Mr. Wray told them, they knew his Collierie was worth about 3000 l. per annum,
and that he was out in moneys for that Collierie at least 16000 l. yet he was
content to sell them his whole estate in it, (in respect of the present
condition he was then in) for 5000 l. yet so, as he would have a thousand laid
down for his own use, and one thousand more to stop the clamours of his
Creditors, and that he would take further time to consider of days of payment,
for the other three thousand pounds.

Moreover it was proved, that Mr. Lilburn did then say, they would not differ
In this man's attempting to get the Collierie is made good. Vbi avaritia est,
habitant ferme omnia ibidem flagi^ia, impietas, perjuria furtes, rapine
frauds, atque doli insidiaeque proditiones, jurgia and infandae caedes.
for the payment of the first 2000 l. And Mr. VVrey and he having reviewed his
Evidences, Mr. Lilburn professed he did not think that Mr. Gray could have
produced so clear a title for 7. parts of 8. in that Colliery, but for the
eighth part he was not so fully satisfied: Whereupon Mr. Wray then told him,
that one Gomadale pretended a title to that eighth part; but he conceived, that
he had sufficient to prove the right in that part to belong likewise to him;
but howsoever he was sure (and so much he told Mr. Lilburn) that Comadale would
part with his interest upon very easy terms. Now no sooner was Mr. Lilburn
departed from that place, but he met with one Master Swain, to whom he imparted
the former conference, and that he was agreed with Mr. VVrey for the said
Collierie.

After this there was another day appointed for the payment of the 3000 l. but
by reason of the great rain which fell, and the rivers rising so high, they
were hindered of meeting at that time. Immediately thereupon, or very shortly
after, Master Lilburn and Mr. Gray went both to London, and made some Quisquis
ditatur rapidos miluos imitatur.
agreement with the said Comadale, for the eighth part as they pretended, but
nothing was showed to make it good: And coming down in June following, they
Callenuceus tells us of a noble man of Naples that was wont profanely to say,
he had two souls in his body, one for God, and another for whosoever would
buy it. These men by their practice, seemed to be of his opinion, they will
venture the loss of one soul come what may come, to enrich themselves and
deceive the State.
entered into, and possessed themselves of the whole Collierie, and it has been
wrought by them ever since to their use and benefit.

Now for as much as it plainly appeared unto the Committee, that the Collierie
was sequestered by Sir William Armine in the year 1644. and had been. solely in
the possession of Mr. Wray, and his Agents three years before, and that it was
let by the Committee of Sequestrations, in the year 1645. and no man had
claimed any right or interest in it, until Mr. George Lilburn and Mr. George
Gray, two of the Committee possessed themselves of it: And that there had been
no order made either by the Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, nor the
Committee there; nor that there had been any authority for the dispossessing
the state of their Interest, and that Mr. Wray a Recusant and Dilinquent, was
incapable of composition: the Committee ordered August 13. 1649. That the
sequestration should be continued upon the said Collierie, for the use of the
State, and that all those who have had any use or profit of the said Collierie,
since the same was sequestered; should forthwith make They write of the
Partridg, that she will steal the eggs of other Birds, and the young she never
hatched; but soon after the true mother calls them away from the theevish
Stepdame, and they all (being flag and can fly) leave her mourning, and
calling, when they are gone. Thus she that had many running after her for a
time, by and by has none at all. Here the proverb is true, All covetous, all
lost.
their accounts, etc.

Upon the making of this Order, Mr. George Lilburn sitting at the Committee
(and being one of the Committee) immediately desired a months time to make his
title good; the which being granted, he went thereupon to London, and by the
day appointed, brought with him one Mr. Levit, and Mr. Josiah Primate, who
being required by the Committee to make good their Title (they and their
Council being put upon it to show what title they had to the said Collierie)
affirmed by their Council that Mr. Wray had gotten their Evidences, and would
have had the Committee to have compelled him to have produced his title. But
the Committee replied, the matter was of very great concernment to the
Commonwealth (the Collierie being worth 3000 l. per annum) and that Mr.
Lilburn had made of it, after he had put the State out of possession, at least
15 l. per diem, for a year together, as they were informed by those that knew
it well: And therefore durst not be so false to their trust, as when the State
had been in possession above three years, to produce Evidences to divest the
State: Besides, what they desired was such a thing as was never heard or
granted in any Court, that a Plaintiff which sued for a possession of land,
should desire the Defendant to make him a Title to out himself. Therefore if
Mr. Wray had gotten their Evidences into his hands, their way was plain, to
exhibit a Bill in Chancery, and there they might compel him to produce his
Evidences in a legal way.

For conclusion, whereas it did not appear to the Committee, that either Mr.
Lilburn, Mr. Levit, or Mr. Josiah Primate would, or then could produce any
Evidence in the least, to overthrow or weaken Mr. Wrayes Title (he being then
present, and holding his Evidence in his hand, ready to make it good) but that
the right of the whole Collierie was clearly in him: They confirmed their
former Order (as in point of law and conscience they could do no less) and
afterward let the Collierie for the benefit and use of the Commonwealth; and
desired that Mr. Lilburn and Mr. Gray might be called to account for the
profits of the said Collierie, they being assured that great sums Were not
these faithful men to the State all the while, and fit to be of the Commit
for Sequestration, that they would take into their possession a thing which
they knew was sequestered before; and that the Commonwealth had an interest in
it; honest men being as they were, emploi'd by the State, would have been
ashamed to have meddled with that Collierie.
of money were in their hands, due to the public, they never having paid a
penny.

Thus we have most faithfully stated the case. The Law says Proffes
Probationes debent esse luce clariores l. scant.
ought to be clearer then the noon day. What we have here asserted, is not upon
Testes singulares non probant.
single testimony, or Testes deponens de auditu non probat.

Testes debet deponere per Corporis sensum, and non judicium in tellectus. l.
Test. c. and l. qui Testem. Sect. Am. A. de Test.


Witnesses speaking upon hearesay, or what men have thought and imagined, but
what many persons, and upon oath, have largely and clearly testified.

Moreover, we find by a Copy of a Petition, attested by Mr. Vaughan,
exhibited to the Lords and Commons for Sequestration, by Capt. Franc. Swain on
the behalf of himself and others, the Creditors of the said Thomas Wray, that
the said Wray, was legally possessed, for many years yet to come, under
several Grants, from Sir John Hedworth deceased, of the Collierie of Harraton,
charged by the said Sir John Hedworth with 2000 l. debts, which Mr. Wray was to
pay, and had the Collierie conveyed to him to that purpose.

But what for the discharge of those debts ( Wray being constrained to borrow
money of other men) and the times then being troublesome he lost the use of the
Colliery: besides being a Quere, Whether Mr. Lilburn had not more Reason to
fear loss and punishment, knowing his treacherous design against the State,
then this man knowing himself a Papist.
Papist, he knew if he should win and work the same, the Coals would be
Sequestered. Whereupon he treated with Mr. Lilburn and Mr. Gray, two of the
Committee, who had a great It seems they had a great desire to the Collierie,
for otherwise they would not have taken so false an Oath as they did before the
Commissioners of Compounding: Namely, in charging the Committee of the North,
as that they refused to do so and so, which was proved to be false, and
Lilburn and Gray foresworne. So that it is a true saying; In nullum avarus bonus
est, in se pessimus. Chrysostom.
desire to to the Collierie, and by cunning devises sought to defeat both Wray
and the Commonwealth thereof: As the event showed it to the full. But to
proceed, upon Treaty they agreed to give Mr. Wray about 5000 l. though it was
worth 16000 l. But it seems this was only pretended, and no way meant, for
presently they compounded with one Commondale, who had but some small part
thereof (and that very questionable) nevertheless, upon pretense of that
little, they boldly entered into the whole, and possessed the same, and so
through fraud and deceit, defeated both the Commonwealth and the Creditors of
their just right and due: Wherefore they humbly prayed that both Mr. Lilburn
and Mr. Gray might be warned to appear and answer, etc.

It is said of Clement: Alex: in Protrept.
Praxitelles the Painter that he made the silly people worship the Image of his
Strumpet, under the title and pretense of Venus. There are several Pamphlets
published under the name of John Lilburn, concerning the Colliery in Harraton,
wherein we may see for all the world, the like practice, even fraud,
oppression, covetousness, (the crafty inventions of his own brain) cried up
and pleaded for, under the name of righteousness, honesty, justice: and the
simple who believe every thing, are apt to give credit and trust to it.

The Case being so clear, and fully laid open before the Commissioners for
compounding, by Mr. John Reading, Counselor for the Commonwealth: and they
having likewise heard whatsoever could be said by Counsel, on the It has not
been known in any case of this kind, a more full hearing then this had, as to
what could be said, by Primate and his Council to the full. And this Master
Lilburn well knows, though he have published the contrary.
behalf of Primate, Lilburn, and Gray, gave their judgment upon it, thus.

By the Commissioners for Compounding, etc. 27 Febr: 1650.
Upon reading of our order 20 Febr: instant: Made upon hearing of the report of
Mr. Reading, and of Counsel on Vtramque partem ni audias, ne Judices. Aristoph:
in Vesp.

Qui statuit aliquid part in audita altera: Aequum licet statuerit haud aequus
suit. Sen: in Medea.


both sides in the Case touching the Collierie of Harraton, in the County of
Durham, and upon further hearing of the said Case this day, and of Counsel on
behalf of Mr. Josiah Primate, Mr. George Lilburn and Mr. Gray the Elder, as
also of Counsel on behalf of the Commonwealth, and consideration had of the
matter as it is before us.

Resolved. That we For this many reasons have been showed why they could not.
cannot admit of the depositions or Affidavits taken in Chancery in this Case,
as Evidence before us.

Resolved: That upon the proof before us But Mr. Lilburn would judge it good,
though there was no clear demonstration for it.

Omnia venalia nummis.


we do not judge the title of the said Mr. Primate to the said Collierie good,
as to divest the Commonwealth of their possession.

Resolved: That Mr. George Lilburn and Mr. Gray the Elder, and all others that
received any profits out of the said Collierie, since the same became
Sequestrable, for the Delinquency and Recusancy of Mr. Thomas Wrey, do account
upon Oath, for what they have received.

Resolved: That upon Mr. Primates, Mr. Lilburns, or Mr. Greyes Petition,
stating their Title to the possession of the said Collierie, The which time by
Mr. John Lilburn was ill spent: not reme^bering, Temporis praeteriti been
impensi suavis est memoria. Neither that saying; Nullum tacuisse nocet, nocet
esse locatum.
further time shall be given to them to prove the same.

James Russel, John Berners, Edward Winslow, Richard Moore.


And as they gave them further time to state their Title, and prove the same;
so it was almost a year, before there was a second Judgment. In which time,
nothing was unheard, nor unconsidered, which by Primate, Lilburn, Gray, and
their Solicitors could be produced: Whereupon at last, having fully heard, what
could be said by the Counsel on both sides, this was the Fundamentu^ perpetuae
commendationis and famae, est justitia, sine qua nihil potest esse laudabile.
Cic. l. 1. de leg.
Sentence.

By the Commissioners for Compounding, etc. 12 December. 1651.
In the Case depending before us, touching the Collierie of Harraton, having
heard the Depositions and Proofs taken therein, and perused the The which
Deeds upon Examination were found not to be so virtuall as to give Primate a
Right to the Collierie, in the understanding of the Commissioners.

Pulcra and honesta laudenda, sed Turpia vitupe^anda. Aristo.


Deeds and other writings offered to us on the behalf of John Primate, of
London Leather-seller, who claims an Interest in the said Collierie, by Lease
thereof from Robert Conyers, who pretends a right therein by Grant from Sr John
Hedworth: And upon hearing of Counsel, as well on the part, and behalf of the
said Josiah Primate, as on the behalf of the Commonwealth, in whose right the
same is Sequestered, as belonging to Colonel Thomas Wray, a Papist and
Delinquent, and having had several Debates, upon the said Proofs and Writings,
and what has been offered by the Counsel on either side do Resolve.

That it does appear, that the whole Collierie of Harraton was under
Sequestration in the year 1644. without distinction of Seames; That it does
not appear that the said Collierie or any part thereof was discharged from
Sequestration from the year 1644. to this time.

That upon Consideration of the whole matter, there does not appear to us
sufficient cause to take off the Sequestration of the said Collierie, or any
part thereof, upon the Petition of the said Mr. Primate.

Resolved: That we do leave all parties claiming any Interest in the said
Collierie to their course in Law, and do think it fit, that the possession be
established accordingly.

James Russel, John Berners, Richard Moore. Arth: Squibb. Will: Molins. Edw:
Winslow.


Having showed what the Commissioners did, and the grounds thereof: Now it
follows that we declare, what afterward was done by Primate, but especially by
Lievt: Colonel John Lilburn, who at this time was the chief man that acted and
appeared in his Unkles and Primates business, against the right of the
Commonwealth.

Not to speak of Entitled, A just Reprooff to Haberdashers Hall. Or An
Epistle written by Liev^: Colonel John Lilburn July 30. 1651. to four of the
Commissioners, viz. Mr. James Russel, Mr. Ed: Winslow, Mr. Will: Molins, and
Mr. Arthur Squib: Wherein is set forth their unjust and unrighteous dealing in
several Cases. With the Relations of the said John Lilburn, and their
captivating their understanding to the tyrannical will of Sir Arch: Haslerig,
who has most unjustly endeavored along time together, the extirpation of the
family of the said Jo: Lilburn.

The matter of this book was judged by the Parliament, to be false, scandalous
and malicious, and deservedly to be burnt by the hand of the Common hangman.


a Book which the said Lilburn had before published, and his charging Sir
Arthur Haslerig, with destroying and levelling our properties, subverting the
Laws and Liberties of England, and exercising a Tyrannical power over us,
against and without Law: There was Of which Petition it might be said as Origin
said of Celsus works; Non est periculum ut eis subvert untur ullus fidelium,
it was so false, scandalous and malicious.
penned and printed a Petition and Appeal against the Judgment and Resolution
of the Commissioners for Compounding. The words of the Petition are as
follows.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England; The humble Petition of Josiah Primate of London, Leatherseller;
Shows;
THat your Petitioner by Vnder-Tenants, George Lilburn Esquire, and George Gray
the Younger, Gent: both of the County of Duresm, being in the years 1647,
1648, and 1649. in a just and quiet possession of the Collieries or Seams of
Coal in Harraton in the County aforesaid, called the Five-quarter and
Nine-quarter Coal (and having spent near 2000 l. to win the same) which lay
drowned and lost from 1641. to 1647. Sir Arthur Haslerig in 1649. Innocens esse
nemo poterit, si accusasse sufficient.
procuring Colonel Francis Wren, one of the Committee of that County, and
Colonel George Fenwick to join with him, made an Order (against which the rest
of the said Committee present protested) to sequester the said Collieries,
under color of an The things that are not fair, seem fair to him that is in
love: So Daphnis in the Poet says to Polephemus: So it is with the promoters
of this Petition.

Though slanders and falsehoods are foul and gross vices, yet to them they
seem fair, and lovely, because they take delight and pleasure in them.


untrue suggestion: That Sir William Armyn had sequestered the same in 1644. as
belonging to one Thomas Wray a Papist Delinquent, and thereupon the said Sir
Arthur Vis vi propulsanda is good in Law. De male quaesuis non gaudet tertius
haeres.
violently dispossessed your Petitioners Tenants, and seized their Goods, and
let the said Collieries to Colonel Francis Hacher, and several of the Officers
of his own Regiment. That your Petitioner has petitioned to the Commissioners
for Compounding for relief, but by the A man that lets his hair grow too long
falling over his eyes, hinders his fight, and goes the worse: So Mr. Lilburn
having the light of his understanding darkened with malice against Sir Arthur,
mistaking the truth here, devised a slander.
power and influence of the said Sir Arthur upon most of the said
Commissioners, your Petitioner has been delayed and denied the ordinary course
of proceeding in all Courts of Justice, and at last coming to Hearing, the said
Sir Arthur appeared every day of the Hearing, and took upon him not only to
plead against your Petitioner (which is humbly conceived to be contrary to Law,
he being a Member of Supreme Authority) but also authoritatively to prejudge
your Petitioners Case, and to direct the said Commissioners what to Judge
therein by his power and influence upon the said Commissioners, he overawed
most of them, and full Hearing, Judgment being respited from day to day, the
said Sir Arthur kept private Correspondence with some of the said Commissioners
about finding of some Nothing of these things could Mr. Lilburn prove: in so
much as that ^y of the Poet may be applied to him, and his Case; Quaerit aqua^
in aquis: and poma fugacia Captat Tantalus, hoc illi garrula lingua dedit.
new color or pretenses to detain your Petitioners possession from him:
Whereupon he produced new pretended Evidence after full Hearing; and thereupon
the Major part of the said Commissioners not daring (as is humbly conceived) to
oppose the will and pleasure of the said Sir Arthur, have contrary to clear
Evidence before them for your Petitioner, refused to relieve him, and have
punctually pursued in their Judgment, the Direction publicly given by the
said Sir Arthur.

That the said Commissioners being the only persons authorized by the
Parliament, to hear and determine all Cases about Sequestered Estates, Your
Petitioner cannot be relieved from the Pejor est detractio in magni nominis
viris quam in plebeis. August. lib. 3. cont. Pet. l. 2.
Oppression and Tyranny of the said Sir Arthur, save by the Parliament, or
their special Order and Direction. And your Petitioner has been kept from his
Possession above two years; and the said Sir Arthur has declared the said
Collieries to be worth at least Whether he did say it is a question, but this
is without question, had not the thing been of very great value, Mr. Lilburn
would not have made so much contention about it: for his hand has bin grasping
great booties: Witness the business of Ha^feild Chase, of which more in it is
place.
5000 l. per annum.

May it therefore please the Parliament, in respect to the Public Justice of
the Common wealth, to cause the truth of the Premises to be speedily examined,
and to provide for your Petitioners relief from the Oppression and Tyranny of
the said Sir Arthur Haslerig, and for the Dispensation of Justice without fear
or favor, as to your Wisdoms shall seem most safe.

And your Petitioner shall pray. Josiah Primat.

The Varro.
Romans (as it is reported) kept in Capitolio certain dogs and geese, which by
their barking and gabling should give warning in the night of Thieves, that
entered in: But if they cried out in the day time, when there was no suspicion,
their legs were to be broken off, because they cried when there was no cause.
If the promoters of this Petition are (as Domesticum Testimonium stands no^
good in Law. Justin: Inst. l. 1. Tit. 10. Doctrina vana ratio ni accesserit.
Tull.
they say themselves) for justice and righteousness without respest of
persons, and against illegal and Arbitrarie actings: God forbid we should
speak against them: but if they are (as to the Parliament it did appear so by
their Censure) deceitful Workers, false Accusers, Defrauders, prejudicial, and
dangerous to the Commonwealth, we know no Reason, but they should have their
demerit accordingly. To the matter then.

This Petition being by Lilburn, and Primate given to several Members of
Parliament, and afterward in the House avowed and justified by them both: a
Committee thereupon was appointed, and power given, to examine upon Oath, and
to send for persons, parties, witnesses, and papers, and to make report
forthwith.

The Committee having sat Note the honesty and conscience of his honorable
Jury (as he called them) and who (as he says) are the Keepers of the Liberties
of England, these without any examination of what was done in the twelve days,
found him not guilty. Like Gnato in Turrence, Ais aio, neges nego, if you say
it is thus, so do I, if you say nay, so do I. But here how was that
remembered? Aequaliter utramque partem audire, an old Attical Law.
twelve days upon the business, and examined Witnesses, produced on both
sides, and heard whatsoever could be said. A report was made from the said In a
Pamplet lately printed, entitled, A Hue and Cry after the fundamental Laws
and liberties of England; it is there said, Many of the said Committee might
justly be suspected of partiality and greatly to favor Sir Arthur Haslerigs
cause, and as much to discountenance Mr Lilburns cause. Now we must believe
this because Mr. Lilburn reports it: As if neither the Committee nor
Commissioners, nor the Parliament were to be believed, but only his single
testimony and bare saying.
Committee, of their proceedings therein; and of the matter of fact
appearearing to them, and the Evidence given them.

The House after long and serious debate, Resolved upon several Questions, as
to the civil part of the Petition, and to the matter of Crime charged therein;
viz. That the Parliament does approve of, and affirm the Judgment and
Resolutions of the Commissioners for Compounding in the Case of Josiah Primate:
That the aforesaid Petition is false, malicious and scandalous: That Sir Arthur
Haslerig is not guilty either of Oppression or Tyranny in the carriage and
prosecution of this Business. In a word, whatsoever in the Petition contained
any charge of crime, as in reference to Sir Arthur Haslerig, or the
Commissioners for Compounding of unjust or unrighteous dealing, after due
Examination of all the particulars by the Committee, and a full debate in the
House, appeared to be (and so was judged and voted) falsehood and malicious
aspersions.

Whereupon it was Resolved by the Parliament, that all the printed Copies of
the Petition should be burnt by the hand of the Common hangman. A fine of 7000
l. Imposed upon Primate, and committed to the Fleet, there to remain until
the aforesaid fine be paid. The like fine of Not that either he or Primate paid
one penny of their Fines. Neither has Mr. Lilburns Estate been taken from him,
as he has complained of, and charged Sir Arthur Haslerig, as if he had
destroyed him, his wife and children. An absolute untruth (as we understand)
for he has enjoyed his Estate ever since, as having been received either by
his wife, father, or some other friend to his own use, so that nothing has
been taken away from him by Sir Arthur, as he most untruly reports.
7000 l. was imposed upon Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, and to be Banished
out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Islands and Territories
thereunto belonging, and not to return into any of them, upon pain of being
proceeded against as a Felon, and in case of such return shall suffer death
accordingly. Before we come to treat of the Act of his Banishment, there are
several things to be considered.

1. That it is most untrue which is by Thus he writes; Several of my friends in
England, may wonder why all this time I have not published the full state of
the case between Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Primate, and my self.
Mr. Lilburn and others affirmed, viz. that the Reason and Cause of his
Banishment should be of some difference and quarrel between Sir Arthur Haslerig
and him; whereas Sir Arthur was no further concerned in the business, then to
maintain (as he was bound to do) the due title and Right of the Commonwealth,
which (says he) some (combining together) wrongfully endeavored to out, and
defraud the State of it. It is no new thing, to hear Tacit. hist. lib. 12. p.
395. So Ahab charged Elias to be the troubler of Israel, whereas it was he and
his fathers house had don it.
men (suum quisque flagitium alijs objectantes) to lay their own faults upon
others; as to cry, stop the thief, stop the thief, being in the mean time the
only Robbers. Thus indeed it has been Lilburns practice all along, and his
Subvertit hominis vitam lingua garrula. Menon.
Master piece to asperse others, for oppression, injustice, illegallitie,
exercising an arbitrary and tyrannical power, etc. whereas no man has been
greater and deeper in the crimes then For what Augustine blames Seneca the
Philopher, may fitly be applied to him, in this he did the more wickedly in
that he did it lyingly, for he did it so as the people thought he did it truly;
so it is an aggravation of his evil, that he deceives the people by speaking
untruths.
himself, as not only here, but in many other cases: as we shall abundantly
prove hereafter.

2. Whereas there is mention made in the Petition, of Colonel Francis Wren, and
Colonel George Fenwick, and the Commissioners for Compounding of several high
miscarriages and gross abuses laid to their charge. Now upon Examination by
oath, before the Committee (appointed for the trial of the whole business)
those men appeared innocent, and no way guilty of the things suggested:
neither could Lilburn Cum socijs, make good any particular, or part of their
charge against them (as the Parliament understood) The Calumniatores fratrum
and detractores infames censentur. Cause. 6. Qu: 1. C. In fames.
Law says, Calumniators and detractors of their brethren, should have
burn-markes set on their forehead, for infamous persons.

3. For the Interest and Title which Primate made to the Collierie in Harraton,
when all his Evidences, Witnesses, and other proofs were examined, it did
appear to the House, that he had Avarus nunquam justus est.
not any lawful Right thereunto, but that it was a design of George Lilburn
and George Gray, Charior est auro non simulato fides.
(prosecuted by others) to Nescit prodesse qui nescit providus esse.
defraud the State by taking the profit and benefit of that place into their
own hands. Nevesson, a better Lawyer then an honest man, would ordinarily say,
He that will not venture his body shall never be valiant: he that will not
venture his Omnium malorum radix est cupiditas, transgressionis matter, magistra
nocen di, primipila iniquitatis, duriga malitiae, ficaria virtutum, seditionis
Origo, fovea scandaloru^. Petrus Raven:
soul, shall never be rich.

4. For the Commonwealths Title and Interest to the said Collierie (this we
understand) it was before the Committee proved lawful and good, all objections
made against it by Lilburn and others fully answered: Neither had they any
thing more or further to say: The Examination of persons, parties, witnesses,
papers, Records, etc. we have them all by us: which are too large in this place
to set forth: But the It is worth the noting how Mr Lilburn has set forth a
book about this business: Entitled, A just Reproof to Haberdashers hall: now
leaving aside his ^ayling against Sir Arthur, and some inventions of his own
head: there is enough in that book to condemn himself and his case, he thought
that either none would have read it, or none would have understood him.
substance of the whole as taken upon oath before the Committee, we have here
faithfully reported, as delivered to us.

We come now to the Act: that is, to consider and weigh the Grounds and Reasons
upon which the Parliament might justly proceed, as to the Banishment of him.
And here we will begin with that Law of God, concerning the punishment of a
false Witness; Deuteronomy. 19.19.
Ye shall do unto him as he had thought to have don unto his brother. The
Hebrew Doctors write on the place thus; It is commanded to do unto a false
witness, No marvel though the Law of God will have slanderers to be so
severely punished, considering honestus rumor alterum est patrimonium.
as he would have don by his Testimony to his neighbor. If they have testified
falsely of a transgression, for which men are guilty of stoning to death, they
are all to be stoned, if of burning they are to be burnt: and so for other
deaths: And if they testify of crimes worthy of beating, every one of them is
to be beaten. To the point then in hand.

Such We do not here set down by a great deal the crimes which he lays to
other men's charge: As Murder, Treason, Theft, etc. These things the Reader
shall see afterward.
persons as destroy Proprieties, subvert Laws and Liberties, procure other men
to join with them in unjust and unrighteous dealing, violently seize upon other
men's goods, and by their power and Influence so over-aw the Courts, as that the
Judges neither can nor dare do righteous things, etc. What punishment is due
unto such men, few but know: We have several Examples (former and later) of
persons which have been fined, imprisoned, banished, yea put to death for fewer
and lesser crimes.

So for Commissioners and Under Officers, to join hand in hand with a Tyrant,
and suffer themselves to be so basely corrupted, as the ordinary course of
proceedings in Courts of Justice is delayed and denied. Make unrighteous
decrees, oppress the poor, pervert judgment, serve the lusts, and satisfy
the will of corrupt men, etc. No doubt but they Now there is great reason why
men not doing justice should be punished, for aut sit justitiae locus, aut
certa ruina mundo, justitia quippe carere nequit.
deserve not only to be fined, and put out of their place, but out of the
Nation, and Commonwealth also, and justly too.

Now for application, Quod non tibi fieri vis, ne fac Alieri.
Ye shall do unto him as he had thought to have don to his brother: Hence we
infer, if Sir Arthur Haslerig, and the Commissioners for Compounding, had
worthily deserved a fine Note how Gaveston, the Spencers, and others, banished
the Realm, committed not the crimes which he has laid falsely to some men's
charge.
of 7000 l. to be imposed upon them, and to have been banished out of England,
Scotland, Ireland, and the Islands, Territories, and Dominions thereof: had the
things been proved and found true, which by Mr. John Lilborn were laid to their
charge: then by this Law of God, he being a false witness, and so proved and
convicted when he he stood before the Lord, and the Judges, the very same
punishment ought he to have: According to that old Suidas.
Verse: (...)
The law is just he should be caught,
In that same mischief which he wrought.


There is so much Equity and Reason in this law of Retaliation, as the wisest
of the Ab alio expectandum est, alteriquod faceris Seneca, Quae injuria est,
pari quod prior ipse feceris. Ibid. Vt phalaris tauro violentus membra per illi
torruit, infelix mibuit author opus. Ovid. l. 1. de Art. Aristot: Ethic. li. 5.
ca. 5. Gellius lib. 20. Noct. Attic. cap 1.

Quod quisque fecit, putitur: auctore^ scelus repetit suoque praemitur exemplo
nocens; As Seneca Trag. Act. 3 brings in Radomonthus speaking as a Judge.


Gentiles saw it, and have written for it: and it has been practiced amongst
them almost in every Nation. Neither has the Lord left this law with men, as
by them alone to be kept, but we find that he himself ofttimes has put it in
Execution.

And whilst we are speaking of this law, it is not amiss, that the Reader be
desired to observe what Rules and qualifications are set down by Casuists and
learned men, concerning the right and due practice of it. As 1. when it is a
combination, or plot designed of evil doers: this the Scripture expresses;
Deuteronomy 19.16.
If a false witness rise up against any man, etc. From hence the Ainsworth on
the place.
Jews gather, that by law they may not determine any sentence by the mouth of
one witness, but from the mouth of witnesses, either in money-matters, or in
matters of life and death. 2. Maliciously prosecuting the thing, with intent to
do hurt. And 3. when it is to disturb and overthrow the Mr Lilburn in all his
contests with particular persons, and raising up false accusations against
them, has always sought the disturbance of the Commonwealth.
public peace. When these things concur and appear, In procurando proximi
malo, eadem omnes plecti debent poena, says De Conscient. lib 5. c. 56.
Amesius. What evil or hurt false witnesses seek to procure to their
neighbor, the same punishment themselves ought to have.

That Mr. Lilburn and others were confederates, and intended by false
accusations to ruin and destroy other men, sought to make a general
disturbance and commotion in the Nation, it is unquestionablie certain, that to
his Judges it appeared so: And therefore this This Law is as good a Rule and as
lawfully to be walked by, as Magna Charta, or any thing in Cooks Institutes.
Law of God (as one Reason and Ground) may serve to justify the Parliaments
Act to the Fine and Banishment of him.

In Athens a youth was condemned, who took delight to pluck out the eyes of
Birds, and having made them blind let them fly for pastime. It was no birds
eye, that Mr. Lilburn has sought to pick out, and therewithal to He would not
use the base and fowl language which he does, but to make himself mer^ie with it.
sport himself, but the eyes of men, or rather that which is dearer and more
precious to them then their right eye; even their credit, good name, estates,
liberties, lives, etc. What less then (in point of Justice, This is justice,
Qui alteri exitium parat: exitium parat: eum scire oportet, sibi paratam
pestem, ut participes parem. Tull: Tusc. 2.
Equity, and Conscience) could the Parliament do, then following the
Commandment of God (having made diligent inquisition) to do unto him as he
had thought to have don unto his Brother.

But 2. The Supreme power of a Nation may as they have always don, highten the
punishment of Delinquents upon Grounds and Reasons of State: The safety and
preservation whereof, ought to be their Vt omnibus bonis expedit salvam esse
Rempublicam, quam portus est and Asylum civibus universis: ita nihil est
suavius, quam been rem gerere bono publico. Plaut. in capt.
Rule in all their proceedings. Now if John Lilburns course of life be duly
weighed, and what his designs and intentions have been against the peace and
public good of the Commonwealth; how often he has endeavored to embroil the
Nation in blood, by seeking to raise new wars, etc. It might be We would think
him an unwise man that would feed rats, mise, and other vermins to destroy his
bodily Estate. Ergo
wondered that a stricter and severer course had not been taken with him. For
this we shall affirm and make it good. That no man has been banished out of
England, for higher contempts, greater insolences, and more desperate and
treacherous designs and Actings, then he has don against the State.

When Shimei was to be put to death for going out of Jerusalem, Solomon
remembered him of the great wrong which he had don before unto David his Father:
and to say the truth, it was rather that, then the later which drew forth the
sword of the King against him. Thus it is with the Mr. Lilburnes former
Treasons are still upon the States score, he has not reckoned yet with them
though the corrupt Juries have quitted him.

Simile simili gaudet cum paribus facillime congregantur. Canem cani, bovem
bovi Asinum Asino.


higher Powers, when they are to give sentence upon an offender (specially a
public Enemy to the Commonwealth) they consider the condition of the person
(as what he has been, and what don before this later Act,) and so accordingly
either less or more proportion the punishment.

That we may hasten to our purpose: Had there not been found matter and cause
enough for the banishment of Mr. Lilburn in Primates business; Nevertheless,
as Had not Adonijah asked Abishag the Shunammite to wife, his attempting before
to be King had been forgiven and forgotten, but doing this later, his former
acting comes into question, and for it (specially) he lost his head.
Solomon put Shimei to death for going to Gath, considering the fowl abuses don
before to David. So this Act was justly made against him for being a false
witness, he having formerly committed much Treason against the State. Now
whereas it may be objected, that Mr. Lilburn was acquitted by his Jury. We
answer, so was Shimei pardoned by David, who could do it, and did it upon
Grounds of Justice and Reason, whereas that The law says (but they understood
no law grounded upon Beason and Equity) satius esse impunitum relinqui facinus
nocenti, quam innocentem damnari. Ulpian Jurisc. in Pandect l. 48. Tit. 19.
leg. 5.
Jury had neither Law, Equity, nor Reason for what they did.

Now to the matter; which is to show and prove, that no man has more deserved
to be banished out of the Commonwealth of England, for Grand misdemeanors
against the Republic, then Mr. John Lilburn.

1. It is well known to all those, who either know the man, or have heard of
his practice, that he is a professed Like Aglutaidas, who was never better
pleased then with displeasing others, nor ever relished any dish better then
what was distasted by others.
Enemy to every present Government whatsoever it be: As the Rainbow is never on
that side of the world, that the Sun is, but wheresoever it appears, it is
in opposition against the Sun: If the Sun be in the East, the Rainbow is in
the West, etc. Such an Opposite and Antagonist (for all the world) is Mr.
Lilburn to all Forms and kinds of Government: whatsoever is up, and
established (in what part of the Firmament soever the Sun of Government shines)
he will be sure to stand over against it, in aspersing and despising the same.

Who was more against the King, and kingly Government then he? how violent was
he against the House of Lords to have them down, and plucked up root and branch:
And Custom and use, makes those fashions which at first seemed very ugly and
abominable, to be accounted very good and commendable. In likelihood, the time
was when this man first began to resist the higher Powers, he was held
seditious and dangerous, but continuing thus against all Government: now his
practice with some men is well liked.
no sooner was there another Government established without King and Lords, but
he sets himself against it also, and with as much outrage as before, and so
ever since all along, what change soever has been, he has not changed
(specially when it crossed him in carrying on his own Interest) to rail against
it, and to seek the overthrow and ruin thereof.

At his trial the other day, he openly said; That the Parliament Quere: What
Parliament was it, that he writes against in these following words? We are sure
it was some Parliament before the Kings head was cut off; Truly Sir (says he)
give me leave to tell you, without fear or d^ead, had I come, or could have
gotten so many to have followed me, as would have enabled me with my sword in
my hand, to have don Justice and Execution upon those Grand treacherous
fellows and Tyrants at Westminster, that have not only tyrannized over me,
but the whole Nation, I should have made no more scruple of conscience, to have
destroyed them, then to have destroyed so many Weasels or Polecats. Juglers
discovered.
before the Kings head was cut off, and the Members taken out, were in their
purity a gallant Parliament, who were tender of the Liberties, and of the
Freedom of the Nation, and walked in the steps of their Ancestors and
forefathers, then were the days of their Virginity, and they made good and
righteous Laws, etc. But is this true? speaks Mr. Lilburn really and as he
thinks, or does he dissemble? For who was more active and forward then he, in
printing, talking, plotting against that Parliament, which here he does so
flatteringly cries up. But we know why he does it, it is to ingratiate himself
among the Royallists and Cavileers, and to highten and ripen their malice
against the present Power. But can they believe him (sic notus ulisses?) is not
Mr. Lilburn so well known to them: and the Antipathie between him and all
forms of civil Government, hat should there be a Parliament again, viz. such
as there was before the Kings head was taken off? of King, Lords, and Commons,
do they think that he would be quiet, and live peaceably under it? and not
seek to destroy it by what means he could? as he did then, does now, and has
don against all They who are out of the Temporate Z^nes cannot abide to be
subject, such is their savage and b^tish nature, that it urges them to live
solitarily and by themselves. As his disposition and temper agrees with such
people: so its great pity he is not with them
authority and power ever since.

Oh that I were made Judge in the Land (says Absalom! how well then should
things be carried. Alphonsus used to say, Si in principio mundi ipse deo
adfuisset, multae meliusornatusque fuisse.
If he had been with God in the beginning, things should have been contrived in
another manner then now they are. Those that are ambitious and love to have
pre-eminence, are always rash and heady Censurers, Despise Dominion, and
speak evil of dignities, proud boasters, as what they would do, had they the
power in their own hands. And why is all this? but to incense the Non est
concilium in vulgo non ratio, non discrimen, non diligentia. Cic. pro planc.
vulgar people against the Government which is established, hoping to raise up
themselves by the fall thereof.

But 2. To show more particularly, what an enemy he is to civil Government;
hearken to what himself has published to the world, against the Parliament,
or Supreme power of this Nation. It is true, his language is so base,
scandalous, scurrilous, as we are almost ashamed to express it. For no godly
man, no civil man, no man, but Lilburn would have don it. A little therefore
will be enough. The Parliament, he says, Legal foundamental Liberties. p. 35.
are a pack of dissembling juggling knaves, Hue and cry, p. 31.
knaves in the highest, Impeachment, p. 1.
a company of usurping Tyrants, Out cry, p. 2.
Men of blood, and blood bounds: Legal foundament. p. 74.
perfidious cruel Tyrants, a company of inhumane and bloody butchers of men
Lingua quo vidis? erecturam civitatem, and eandem rursus eversura.
, the most perjured, perfidious, false, faith and trust-breakers, that ever
lived in the world, and ought by all rational men to be most detested of all
men that breath; Legal foundam: page 41. 68.
A company of thieves, murderers, robbers, treacherous selfe-seeking tyrannical
men, usurpers of the name and power of a Parliament, most treacherously to do
what they list. Picture of State 2 Edit. p. 14.

Note, that is not to be understood of the present Parliament, But that before
the kings head was taken off, and so continuing.




Plin. Paneg.
Diffido occulis meis, and identidem interrogo, an legerim an viderim.

I suspect my sight, I question my Copy, I ask of my self again and again,
could Mr. John Lilburn write thus? Tantaene animis coelestibus irae; what a man
that pretends so much to honesty, Law, Reason, Equity. Some report of a people
in India, which speak not, but make a noise like a horse snorting, or barking
of dogs: certainly this is neither vox dei, nor vox populi, its a beastly
sound, but he knows what he does in Reviling the Rulers of the people; its
mirth and music in the ears of Malignants, whose Senis lingua suavissima est
se ni, pue^ puero, mulier mulieri jucunda: the speech of one old man pleases
another old man, a child contenteth a child, a woman a woman. Plutar. So
calumniators in reviling the State do exceedingly content such men as malign
the same as much as they. Magna inter molles concordia.
humors and base lusts he desires to satisfy. The Indian Idolaters, who
sacrifice to their Zemes, thrust a stick down into their throat, to bring up
whatsoever lies in their bowels, as thinking by such filthy trash to please
their idols best: Never would Mr. Lilburn let such fowl-stuffe come from him,
but that he knows its a sacrifice most acceptable to such men, who desire (as
himself) to see the Commonwealth ruined.

But is it not better to please God then men: the Scripture says, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Judges, nor curse the Ruler of thy people Quia
noveret deus, sibi non defuturos in hoc crimine vindicando, poena eorum
arbitrio relicta est. Rivet. in Loc.

Simler on the place has these words; There is here no punishment set down for
him that should rail on the Magistrate, but seeing he that railed on his Father
and Mother was to dye for it, much more worthy of death was he, which should
curse the Fathers of his Country.


. We find among the civil Laws of Nations, severe punishments appointed unto
persons which should offend this way: yea as the case might be, little less
then Crimen laesae majestatis: As when it was don out of a seditious design,
to cause tumults and Rebellion among the people, by rendering the Governors
odious and contemptible to them. The very thing intended by Mr. Lilburn, as he
professedly declares himself.

Again, Neither is he contented to asperse men's persons, but lets out the
venom of his mouth against the Government it self. The Parliament he calls,
Salva libert^ sent to Col: West.
a mock power sitting at Westminster, Foundamen: Law. p. 58.
an insufferable insupportable tyrannical tyranny: Arraignmen. p. 1.
No Parliament at all in any sense either upon the principal of Law or Reason,
but Arraignmen. p. 8.
a company of usurping Tyrants, and destroyers of our Laws, Liberties,
Freedoms and properties: Picture of the Council of State, 2 Edit. p. 14. 17.
a tyrannical and arbitrarie new erected robbing Government: A dead stinking
carkase: Those Gentlemen sitting at Westminster, have forfeited their trust,
and so the people dissolved from all obedience and subjection to them. A
Declaration of the Free Commoners of England.
All their Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Declarations, Acts, which are, or
hereafter they shall pass, are declared and protested against, as not binding
to the people. Outcry of the young men, page 11.
Again, Never will we by popular Petitions address our selves to the men
sitting at Westminster any more, nor take any notice of them, then of so many
Tyrants and usurpers, and for the time to come hinder (as much as we can) all
others whatsoever from subscribing or presenting any more popular Petitions to
them. So at his trial he spoke it openly, the Parliament that made the Act of
his banishment, was Here the Proverb is verefied, He that has once past the
bonds of shame, must be notable impudent.
no Parliament, nor could they make an Act of Parliament since the Kings head
was cut off, Hue and Cry, page 35.
whose death in Law unquestionably put a period to the Parliament. They have
filled the Land (says he) with their mocked or pretended Magistrates.

It was Eugm: Baron: Jure consu: l. 1. p. 120.
a Law among the Romans that whosoever passed not into their City through the
gates, but attempted to break through the walls, or to clime over, they should
be put to death. But how much more had he deserved to die, that should have
broken down the walls, burnt the gates, and so brought in the enemy to destroy
the City. That which Mr. Lilburn has been a long time struggling for, it is to
throw down the present walls and strength of the Nation, and to bring all things
to confusion ( England to a heap of dust and ashes) by moving the people to
Rebellion, and so to destroy one another in their Liberties, Properties, lives,
and all. What man ever spoke half the Reus est laesae Majestatis qui
seditionem in Remp: concitat, eum hostibus, patrinae Religionem aut Reipub:
hostibus nomen dat aut aliud quid vis ad Reipub: statum evertendum. Moli^ur, l.
1. 10. 11. hic. l. 5. eod vult Alihis: Dam houd: vid: Dam houd, c. 63 Odiss.
aliqui per l. 21. sect. 1. de cap. and post. l.
Treason that he does here? who lived under any Civil Government, that has
comparatively so abused it? what State ever stood still and suffered themselves
so intollerably to be reproached? What infinite massacres, murders, robberies,
insurrections have been committed, in Kingdoms and Commonwealths by far less
occasion then this given to the people of this Commonwealth?

When Demosthenes would set forth the improvidence and incircumspection of the
Athenians, presented to them an innocent Fool, who being smitten on the cheek,
laid his hand on the place where he had received the blow, and being stricken
on the other cheek, did the like, never using any of his hands to defend
himself from further blows. Those that are in Supreme Authority, when they
shall hear themselves publicly In that Act declaring what offenses shall be
judged Treason, it is thus said; If any person shall maliciously or advisedly
publish by writing, printing, or openly declaring that the said Government is
tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful, or that the Commons in Parliament
assembled, are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation, that Every such
offender shall be taken and judged by the Authority of this Parliament, to be
high Treason.
proclaimed, a pack of juggling knaves, butchers of men, bloud-hounds, their
Authority not only questioned, but denied, and said to be no Parliament, but
a Juncto, a mock-Parliament, a company of usurping Tyrants; and the people
loosed and dissolved from yielding any further duty or obedience to them.
(Just as the Popes used to do by their Bulls and Breves, when they deposed
Princes, and discharged the Subjects of their Allegiance.) When they shall see
such things (we say) before their faces, and acted at noon day, if Refert
bonorum exemplis puniri improbos.
they stand still, and hold their peace, what may they be accounted, but like
Demosthenes, Indulgentia and lenitas Magistratus minime seditionibus praebet:
quiadum quiscere Magistratus officia plebs videt, nullisque legum coerceri
repaculis animadvertit, ipsa sibi rapere gubernacula and quidvis audere
incipit, contemto Magistratu vel speimpunitatis concepta. Frid: Wendel: Inst.
polit. l 3. c. 2. p. 492.
Innocent fool, Idiots, Silly-bodies: or like the Gymnosophists, whose manner
was when they were molested with Waspes, and other stinging flies, not to
stir, or once offer to drive them away.

Although therefore such Incendiaries and firebrands, may be quitted by partial
and corrupt Juries, (men as treacherous to the State as themselves) yet are the
higher Powers strictly to look after those things, and to punish as the
Authors of Treason, so the Agentes and consentientes pari poena puniuntur.
Danaeus in 1 Timothy c. 5. v. 22.
partakers likewise, who wrapped themselves by unrighteous verdicts in the sin
and guilt of Treason: Howsoever the Magistrate ( Sane lentus in suo dolor
esset. Reipub: injuri as ne largiretur Tacit. Annal. l. 3. p. 109.
says one) may be as slow as he pleases in punishing injuries committed
against his own person, yet he ought not to pardon such as are don against the
Commonwealth: Unhappie prosperity first histo: page 180.
A Magistrate (says another) who has discovered a Conspiracy, and seems
fearful to remedy it, is as faulty as the Conspirator himself.

But to proceed: Neither has Mr. Lilburns As the swine spares not his mouth
from any filthy and unclean thing: So he spares none, whatsoever their place,
worth, or deservings are.
rage rested here, but it has as much appeared, and broken forth against our
Army, specially the great Officers, and such as command in chief. These are
called See his books, viz: The picture of the Counsel of State: Englands new
Chain, first and second part. The legal foundamentall Laws, Liberties, etc.
An Arraignment of Oli: Cromwell, etc. The Outcry of the young men, etc. where
all this and much more is expressed.
New Tyrants, perfidious cruel Tyrants, Apostatized Tyrants, Turkish
Janisaries, Traitors, Thieves, Bears, Wolves, inhuman bloody butcherers of
men, the scum, riffe-raffe, and trash of the Nation, Insulting Oppressors, men
that walk by no Rules or Principles, either of honesty or Conscience;
subverters of Laws and Liberties, setters up of the highest cruelty,
villainy, slavery, that can be imagined, even Tyranny at the hight: Thirsters
of the blood of such Soldiers, as are of action, for Common freedom and
safety, have enslaved the Commonwealth to their ambition, lust,
covetousness, domination; taken away men's lives for no other end, but to make
way for an absolute domination; have brought the Land into a more dangerous
condition by far then they found it, even the vilest and basest bondage that
ever English men groaned under; so that the cruel Tyrant Duke D'Alva, or
bloody Queen Mary, are not so bad as these; yea, the King is much more
excusable then they; so Hollis and that party.

Note (Reader,) how Mr. Lilburn here, is semper idem, Can the Blackmore change
his skin? In some fenny Countries where people are troubled with Gnats, they
use to hang up dung in the midst of the room, as a bait for the Gnats to fly
to, and so catch them, as being a net or snare provided for that purpose. We
know not whereunto this man's lying, railing, and devouring words, may be more
fitly compared, then to such Lilburn speaks of his Excrements which he judges
not mean enough upon equal terms to Balance against Cornet Den, and Jo:
Can, Arraignment p. 3. It seems he voyds them here, as hanging up his dung
for Cavileer-Gnats to stick at.

It is Evident enough, that the Malignants would not inquire after his
Pamphlets, nor read them, if it were not for his railing against the
Parliament, Council of State, Army. As for his talk and vapouring about the
Law, they regard it not, it is the dung and Excreme^ts which he voyds at the
mouth that the Malignant Gnats sly to.


a dung-Trap. Indeed he can speak it by experience, of a multitude of
Malignant Gnats, which he has already taken in this snare: in so much as there
is not almost a secret Conspirator, a false-hearted Traitor, a fling fire,
(...), a boutefue (as Nestorius was called) one that seditiously seeks to
destroy the Commonwealth, but this serves as a Trap purposely laid to catch
them.

Neither is he satisfied, to call them thus, Tyrants, Murderers, Traitors,
etc. altogether, but particularly and personally, the Lord Tunc tu^res agitur
paries cum proximus ardet, it had been well if some had remembered it.
Fairfax first (whom the Lord has made an eminent Instrument of much good to
the Nation) him he calls, An Impeachment of high treason, page 2.
A great Tyrant, standing by the power of his own will, and a strong sword born
by his vassals, slaves, and creatures: having no Commission to be General,
either from Law, the Parliament, or from the prime Laws of Nature and Reason.
Again, A Salva liberate to Col: West.
The General Lord Fairfax (and his Forces) has broken and annihilated the
formal and legal Magistracy of England, yea the very Parliament it self, and
by his will and sword (absolute Conquerour-like) has most tyrannically
erected, set up and imposed upon the free people of this Nation, a mock
Parliament, etc. The picture of the Council of State, second Edition, p. 14.
So in another place, the General (meaning the Lord Faixfax) is but their
stalking Horse, and a Cipher, The peoples Prerogative, page 55, 56.
one whom they lead hoodwinckt to the pits brink of his own ruin and
destruction. Again, The legal foundamental liberties, p. 38.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, were never such Rebels against Authority, as the
General (viz: the Lord Fairfax) and his Counsel are, nor the Anabaptists at
Munster: with You mistake the comparison: John of Leiden and John Lilburn are
alike. John Lilburn is styled Defender of the faith, An Alarm to the House of
Lords, Title Page: And John of Leiden his Title is, Johannes Rex Nove
Hierosolymae, Rex Justitiae super universum orbem.
John of Leiden and Knipperdullion, were never more contemners of Authority;
nor He forgets here his name sake John Li^istor a Dyer who at the same time
took upon him the name of the King of the Commons.
Jack Straw and Wat Tyler, nor all those famous men mentioned with a black pen
in our Histories, and called Rebels and Traitors, can never be put in any
scale of equal balance for all manner of Rebellions and Treasons against all
sorts and kinds of Magistracy with the General and his Council.

There is a great deal more and worse too, which his licentious mouth has
vomited forth against this honorable person, which is so base and scandalous,
as we are loath to repeat it. Flies as they are ingenious to do mischief on
grapes, so they are subtle tasters to choose the ripest and sweetest for their
pallat: As we had not then in the Army, a choicer man, nor a man more Pejor
est detractio in magni nominis viris, quam in plebijs. Aug. lib. 3. cont. Petil.
eminent and faithful then the Lord Fairfax, so he had not in the Land a
greater Enemy and Regnorum pessima pestis, feditio.
Traitor to him, and one who more sought his ruin (by raising mutinies and
seditions perpetually amongst the Soldiers) then John Lilburne: he was no
other but As the firefly leapes and danceth in the fire: so it was matter of
joy to him to see Commotions in the Land.
a fire brand where he came; and this the General well knew, and might have
said; Lucan: l. 9.
Noxia serpentum est admixto sanguine pestris,
Morsu virus habent, and fatum in dente minantur.
So hurtful are the Serpents teeth,
They pestilent the blood
Of man in biting, and his death
Can hardly be withstood.


Now howsoever the General, according to his place and power which he had,
might have prosecuted things against him, yea have tried him by a Council of
war, for many apparent Conspiraoies and Treasons against the Army, and
Commonwealth, and proceeded accordingly. And this he might have don, upon the
Rules of Justice and Reason, grounded upon the Law of God and Nature: For it is
an undoubted Rule in Joh. 11.50. and 18.14.
Divinity and policy, that it is more expedient that one man die, yea ten, an
hundred, a thousand, then the whole Nation should perish: Melius est ut pereat
unus quam pereat unitas. Aug. Melius est and justius, unum pro multis, quam pro
uno multos mori. Sueton: in M. Salu: Otho.
Better one, then one-nesse: Ure, seca ut membrorum potius aliquod quam totum
corpus intereat. Cic. Phil. 12.
Better one corrupt and putrified member be cut off, then that the whole body
thereby should be infected and destroyed. And the Law says; Frequentius vivi
sectione parts, eminentioribus locis suspendendas. Clav. D. number. 8. Damhoud.
Conspirators against the public peace are to be cut asunder alive, and the
parts of their bodies to be hanged up in the most special places of the Land.

Howsoever (we say) the General might thus have don, yet he let him alone,
being for disposition and quality of mind, the same which the Poet ascribed
unto Caesar. Est piger Ad poenas princeps, ad praemia velox,
Cuique dolet quoties Cogitur esse Ferox.
To punish slow, to war all speed does make,
A Prince, who grieves, though forced revenge to take.


So again for his Excellency the Lord Cromwell, how Some write of spirits who
will throw down stones upon men, but their blows do no hurt to them whom they
hit: It has pleased the Lord that hitherto his sharp arrows have not hit the
General: but are fallen upon his own head: like the Witch that had the disease
pass unto her that had bewitched another: thus the righteous is delivered out
of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead, Prove. 11.8. As some subtle fish
while they are laying gins and snares for other fish themselves are taken: so
here.
unreasonably he has abused him, by false and railing Accusations, it is
generally too well known: As Nebuchadnezzar, full of fury, commanded that
they should heat the furnace one seven times more then it was wont to be heat:
so has Mr. Lilburn don with the present General, made the oven of his mouth a
great deal hotter then before: other men had but sparkles, here we have The
Jews write that Rabsheketh was an Apostate from their Church: and by his
railing it seems it was so: Let any sober man, read what he has written
against the General, and he will say it was don by one who had cast off both
religion and honesty too.
flames, firebrands, and great Coals cast forth, as if his mouth were Aetna, or
some other burning Mountain. We think it will be better and more for the
Readers satisfaction, to give him some general observations upon the falsehoods
and forgeries which he has published against the General, then to set them
down.

1. It is well known unto all men, who have any knowledge in history, that to
asperse men in authority (especially if eminent, and men of public spirits)
as to call them Tyrants, Murderers, Traitors, etc. It is an old State
destroying Stratagem. Amsolom did do so, and Machiavel himself has it: And
for example Instanceth one Manlius Capatolinus, who being overcome with envy,
and not able to endure the honor and renown given by the Citizens of Rome
deservedly to Furius Camellus for his valor, and good service, and the general
good which the Commonwealth had thereby received, addressed himself (as
Lilburn does in his reproachful Libels and Pasquils) to the vulgar people; as
well knowing their temper, Municipale vulgus pronum ad suspitiones. Tacit.
hist. 11.
how prone they are to suspicion, Vulgus cujusque motus novi cupidum, Tac.
hist. 1.
desirous of new motion, Non delectu aut. sapientia ducitur ad judicandum, sed
impita and quadum temerita. Cic: pro plan.
judge things headily and rashly, Inopes bonis invident, odio suarum rerum
mutare omnia student. Salust.
envy the rich, and out of a dislike of their present condition, desire to
alter all things. Qui nihil sperat desperate nihil.
He that has nothing, fears not to do any thing.

Now hereupon (many falsehoods and calumniations being raised up by that
Incendiarie,) the people ran together, make head, fill all places with tumults
and uprores; and no doubt great mischief would have followed, had not the
Senate created a Dictator, who by Examination plainly found out the Treacherous
Conspiracy of Manlius.

The like Machiavel discourses, lib. 1. c. 8.
he reports to be frequently practiced at Florence (his own City) Envy is
like certain flies called Cantharides, who light specially upon the fairest
wheat and most blown roses: Such as this Nation has had most cause to love,
have been most hated.
Such men (says he) as had served the State best, and been employed in the
greatest affairs, were most slandered: of one, they said, he had rob^ the
Common Treasure; of another, that he had not performed his trust in the Army:
of another that through Covetousness and Ambition had sought his own Interest.
Hence grew hatred, thereupon division, from division to faction, from faction
to ruin. Again a little after; And this Course (says he) namely, to The
Hieron endeavors to fly above the Faulcon, and to wet his wings with her
Excrements, to make him fly heav^ly, and make his purpose unprofitable: So
Incendiaries, by falsehood (as the excrements of their tongue) seek to eclipse
the honor of other men, thereby to advance their own.
raise up false reports against men in Authority, is a ready way, whereby
many do serve themselves, as steps and helps to their ambitious ends. For
being to encounter with powerful men, they make the people their friends, by
telling them, they will take their part against the Tyrannical usurpation and
Encroachments of Great Ones, and procure their Rights and Freedoms out of
their hands. If we compare former things and persons, with things and persons
now, we shall find that saying most true; There is nothing new under the
Sun: Those that will compare the plots and designs of former Incendiaries
with Lilburn and his party, may see some ods, as thus.

1. The several kinds of treacheries which have been acted by diverse men, he
himself has don.

2. No man that has so openly sought the ruin of State, has escaped so long
from punishment.

3. Few have enriched themselves by seeking the overthrow of another, so much
as he has don.


As were the Plots, Conspiracies, and Treasons of bad men heretofore, both to
the designs, and the carrying of them on; namely, to asperse and belie men most
eminent and best deserving; and through their side, have sought to destroy the
Nation: So it is now, the very same imitated and practiced, by Incendiaries,
Mr. Lilburn being an Artist and deeply Learnt in this Machiavillian Mystery,
as all his writings (almost) loudly speak it out, being by any impartial,
unbyased, and judicious Reader looked over.

2. Those that do desire, and seek to hinder the peace of a Nation, by raising
commotions and hurlyburlies among the people; their manner is, to Cry up, the
sweet, plausible and much taking name of Palam speciosa protexunt nomina and
libertatem praeseferunt durumque and invisum servitutis jugum detestantur. M.
Frid. Wendellin. Instit. Polit. lib. 3. c. 2. These. 8. p. 494.
LIBERTY, A FREE PEOPLE, Complaining against Arbytrarie Power, Tyranny,
Oppression, pretending much to stand for the Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and
Interests of the people. And indeed this is a It was truly said of the Orators.
There is nothing don so evil, but with fair colors a man may defend it,
witness these men who have hid (as a dunghill under snow) the greatest Treason
that has been committed under the Sun.
snare so cunningly laid, as many honest and well meaning persons, have
sometimes unawares been caught in it. Thus the Pazzians at Florence, to draw
the people to their base Conspiracy, Cried out in the Marketplace, Liberty,
Liberty, but (plus aloies quam mellis habet) had they joined with them, the
Citizens from liberty and freedom had put themselves into absolute slavery.

So John of Leiden, and the Conspirators with him, laid this down as Motives
unto others of Rebellion, Sleiden Comment. lib. 5.
Free Commoners, an Equal and just Government, every man alike in respect of
Libertatis instaurationem and vindicias subditorum a jugo and Tyrannide
profiteri ausus. Spenhem: disput.

Nec destituerint de magistratibus tyrannide paratragaediare and inculcare
plebi, omnia natura libera esse and Communia; excutiendum esse principum aeque
Romani jugum, and quia illi bla^dis monitis haud quaqua^ cedent, sed bona and
capita subditorum libidini suae vectigalia esse velint, justissimis armis in
omnibus vincicandam esse, quod omnium esse deus voluerit. Ibid.


liberty, freedom, and safety, the yoke of oppression to be shaken off: and
for this they might lawfully take up Arms and resist the higher Powers. And
this so well pleased the seditious multitude, as following their Leaders in
Rebellion and Treason against the State, they come at length (when it was too
late) to see and acknowledge their great insolences, when deservedly they fell
under the hand of Justice.

Our own Histories yields us plentiful of Examples in this particular: seldom
has there been an Insurrection in the nation, but the Fomenters thereof, have
sutly conveyed into the hearts of the people, the poison of their tongues and
pens this very way. Thus Holins. Edw. 6. 1034.
Kets Rebellion was occasioned under pretense of Liberty and safety to the
Country: So Holins. Hen. 6. page 632.
Cades, that it should be profitable to the whole Realm. So Martin Rich. 2. p.
111. Holins. Hen. 4. p. 529.
Jack Straw and Wat Tiler, all was for Liberty, and to redress public
abuses: Hence they styled themselves, The servants of the Commonwealth: So the
Rebellion in the North several times, it was for Laws, Liberty, public
safety to suppress oppressions, etc. Here you may see as in a glass, Mr.
Lilburns design set forth to the life, his endeavor has been a long time to
ruin the Nation (especially ever since it was a Commonwealth) by Non aliter
salvos and incolumes se esse posse existimarit, nisi in publicis calamitatis.
a principal which he has learnt from the practice of old Incendiaries: Oh
what a noise makes he and his party about Magna Charta, Petition of Right, the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, etc. insinuating all are taken
away, Every freeborn Englishman is now a slave, so that there lies a
necessity upon all the people of England, upon the 16 of October: to take up
Arms and destroy the present Government, etc.

They which hawk for birds, do of purpose make a stale of the Owl; and so the
silly birds, whilst they come flicking about her are taken unawares: In Newrie
in Ireland certain old women used to make a fire in the field where diverse
little children drove out cattle in the cold mornings, and coming to warm
themselves were by these surprised, killed and eaten. Seditious persons and
their designs are like those wicked women and the fire.
Such a thing is Mr. Lilburns seditious railing against the Parliament, the
General, and Army, as sending forth a hue and Cry after the fundamental Laws
and Liberties of England. An Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver
Cromwell, etc. Instigating the people to take up Arms for their Laws,
Liberties, lives, proprieties, etc. Now note Reader whilst they are looking on
this, and wondering at the strangeness of it, (it being a night bird, and
shunning the light) are suddenly surprised by the fowler, who has laid such a
trap purposely to take them by.

3. Howsoever such men speak aloud of Common freedom, liberty, native
birthright, complain against Oppression, Tyranny, Arbytrarie Power: yet it is
well known, all this has been but a politic pretense, and a weapon taken up
of There goes a story among scholars of Aesops deceiving Mercury, he having
promised him one part of his nuts keeps all the meat and delivers the shells to
the other: So in dividing the spoils of the Commonwealth Lilburn intended to
have had the best share, viz. the meat, and the shells should have been given
among his followers.
mere advantage, whereby ambicious, malicious, and discontented persons, have
fought, (not the public good) but themselves and their own Interest. This
might be proved by all Incendiaries in every age and place; so that not to them
coulds Caesar's sentence be applied, Tu civem patremque geras, tu consule
cunctis, nec tibi nec tua te moveant, sed publica vota. Claud. ad honor.
NON MIHI SED POPVLO. As men Nihil est utilius aut opportunum quem in a qua
turbida ^scari.
trouble and darken the water, thereby to get the more fish: so in making
Commotions and disturbances in a Nation, it has been altogether for advantage
sake.

He that shall duly observe, Mr. Lilburns footsteps for some later years,
shall evidently see, that in setting himself against Authority, whereby to
disquiet the minds of the people, it has ever been to carry on his own design.
Those whom he thought, have stood in Are not all his complaints which he makes in
his printed Books against Sir Arth: Haslerig in reference to himself. Because he
pretends personal wrongs don to himself, all England must have an Alarm, Arm,
Arm: As if all our Laws, Liberties, proprieties were lost and taken away from
us, when he is opposd and crossed: The matter then is thus: if Mr. Lilburn may
have his will and his turn served: the Gentlemen at Westminster shall be a
lawful Parliament, and so no need of rising upon the 16 of October.
his way of gain and preferment, or would not comply with his Ends, them he
has reproached and slanderd, and rendered them to the world as odious as might
be; but for others (how corrupt and rotten soever) so they would serve his
turn, such he has rather flattered, then spoken against. Henry 4 of France
prepared an Army of threescore and twelve thousand, and made the world
believe, it was for Germany to attain unto the Imperial Crown: Whereas indeed
he intended to fetch the Princess of Conde from Bruxels for his base use.

In some such way, would Lilburn deceive this Nation, he seeks by slandering
the Government, to raise an Army, and gives out, it is to fetch home Magna
Charta, Petition of Rights, a legal Magistracy, Cooks Institutes, etc. But
Fistula dulce canit, volucrem dum decipit auceps.
The bird to woe the Fowler brings,
Whilst with his pipe he sweetly sings.


Therefore (Reader) It is said of Richard 2. Never was Prince received with
greater love and opinion of all men, and sooner lost it: Lilburn has soon
loosed the opinion which people had of him when he came to action. As when he
turned Solicitor, his actings were base and scandalous.
believe him not; for were he once in the head of such an Army, it is to be
feared he would march another way, and do as former Mutiners have don (Level
all) who pretended as much to Justice, Reformation, and public good, as ever
Mr. Lilburn has don.

But 4. And to come nearer to Mr. Lilburns charge against the General: If the
blind lead the blind, they both fall into the pit, says Christ: The truth is,
he being ignorant, what are the due Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of a
free People, runs headlong himself, and draws others blindfold after him into
the whirlepoole of sedition: He talks much of Fundamental Laws and Liberties,
(and many like Parats speak thus after him) meaning (as we conceive) that
there are some Laws left us by our forefathers, which like the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, must stand, and by no after power or Parliament may be
removed: But this He tells us often of Bondage and Vassallage, but no man ever
asserted a thing which leads to more perfect slavery then this: How are we a
free people, and not to take and make what Laws we will for our selves. The
shoes and other apparel which we wore being children were then fit, but now
they must be wider and larger: so Magna Charta and other things were su^eable
to the people then, but now not so.
is a false Assertion, grounded upon no Reason, Justice, or Equity, a mere
dream and fancy of his own head: Indeed Salus populi suprema lex: what is best
and fittest for the prosperity and safety of the Nation, that is to be
considered, and established by the higher powers then in being.

The Physicians of our time, will not follow Galen, nor any other, otherwise
then in their own judgment they see reason for it: So neither are
State-Physitians bound up to Magna Charta, Petition of Rights, or any other
former president, (which he calls Fundamental Laws,) further or otherwise, then
they see the same conducing to the welfare and happiness of the Republic, but
may lay aside either part or whole (as they see cause) and appoint something
else as more seasonable and proper to us, and as providence makes way for it.
It is an old saying, and very true, Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3.
Leges bonae ex malis moribus procreantur, Vt optima remedia expessimis morbis
nata sunt, ita optimae leges ex pessimis natae sunt moribus: Caroli Caesar.
Symbolum.
Good Laws are made from bad manners. As for Example, if the State shall see,
that to try an offender by a Jurie of twelve men (a thing practiced a long time
with us) be dangerous to the Commonwealth, and much corruption and Injustice
is committed this way: they may, yea and ought to lay it by, and to appoint
some other way and course for the trial of Delinquents, which Hence is that
saying of Plato; Tunc florent Respub: quando vel philosophus regit, vel Rex
philosophatur. So Aristotle; Vbi praeses est philosophus, ibi faelix est
civitas. Their meaning being that to have a Commonwealth flourish, there must
be wisdom and prudence, as to what Laws are made and executed.
is better and more for the safety and preservation of the Nation. And the
like holds true in all other cases.

Now if the Reader be pleased to observe well, what is here said, all Mr.
Lilburns Out Cries against the General, will appear to be wind and vanity.
For neither is his Excellency, nor the Parliament, bound (as we said before)
to continue in force any of the We would know of Mr. Lilburn, or any other man,
what Reasons they can show us, that we may not lay aside all the old Laws and
make new. Magna Charta, Liberty of Rights, Cooks Institutes, speak nothing
to the Question; They must prove that we and our posterity, (although a Free
People) are bound to keep any Law, whether fundamental or not fundamental, if
we see the same obnoxious, and so fit to be laid aside.
old Laws of the Nation, but (upon Grounds of liberty, and being a freer
people then ever our forefathers were) they may Establish new and others in
their place. So again for his filling of men's ears with Remonstrances,
Declarations and Petitions of the Army, at New Market, Triploe-heath, etc. As
to what has been promised to be don for the Nation, we suppose it will here be
understood, by all judicious and impartial hearers, that whatsoever the General
and his Officers Engaged for, it was for the good of the people, as in order to
liberty, safety, good Laws, etc. He that promises a man six pence and gives
him a shilling, breaks not his promise, but is better then his word: so the
General (if by the good hand of God assisting him) shall be an It was a spe^ch
of Augustus, Roman^ lapideam and incultam in veni, marmoream reliqui.

And the Epitaph given to Constantine was Libertatori urbis fundatori Quietis.
In what condition England was before the General engaged for the Liberties of
this Nation, it is well known, and how instrumentally he has bin for the good
of all good men, and we hope the Lord will so carry him on for the perfecting
of the work, that the formre sayings shall be applied more truly to him.


Instrument, to put this Nation into more freedom, and establish in it better
laws then formerly were thought of, here is no breaking of any Engagement, but
a doing more then was before promised.

When Nero was like to loose all, and himself too, nothing troubled him so much
as that his skill was impeached in playing; Quantus artifex pereo! says he; No
doubt it vexes Mr. Lilburn not a little, to hear that our Laws are likely to
be altered, which are (as the Lawyers handle them) like a Dutch man's hose, to
be worn up or down, turned any way: And Mr. Lilburn knows this well enough,
having gotten so much skill in the doubtful and double sense thereof, as he
dares speak and write Treason familiarly, being certain he can prevail with
It was spoken by one of the Jury before the trial: That Right or wrong they had
agreed to quit him; who would not stand for such a way of trial.
12 men, whom he picks and chooses, to say as he says, and not to regard any
witness or proof produced to the contrary, if it be against the Commonwealth.

5. And lastly, As the Accusations which Mr. Lilburn has published to the
world against the General, are malicious, false, and scandalous; so he has
showed himself therein, a person most inhumane and ungrateful. The saying is;
Arbor honeretur cujus nos umbra tuetur.
Much honored of us is the tree,
Under whose shade protect are we.


Many great favors has the General showed him: observe what he says
himself; Jonahs cry out of the Whales belly, page 2.
I must confess you took compassion of me in my bonds and chains, even when
I was at deaths door, and was princimental in delivering me from the very
gates of death in Anno 1640. and setting me We read of a Stork that cast a
pearl in the bosom of a maid which had healed her of a wound: Mr. Lilburn
confesses here, that the General under God did heal him and help him: but how
has he required him? instead of pearls, cast serpe^ts, snakes, firebrarnds at
him; thereby to have destroyed him if he could.
free from the long and heavy tyranny of the Bishops and Starr-Chamber, even
at that time when I was almost spent, and many particular respects since then,
and a large token you sent me since I came, etc. This was an Act of so much
goodness and love, as a man of ingenuitie and gallantrie would never have
forgotten it, at least never have abused so precious and loving a friend: But
this is not all; he tells us more; A just reproof to Haberdashers Hall, page 6.
At the Lord General Cromwels coming out of Ireland, he was Nobly pleased to
get me a Grant of settling Lands upon me for the residue of my money, for which
most Noble favor I must and do Quid verba audiam cum facta videam.
heartily declare, and acknowledge my self highly obliged to him. Thus
Scilicet ut sulvum spectatur in ignibus aurum: Tempore sic duro est inspecienda
fides. Ovid. Tris. ^. 1.
he.

There are three things here observable, as demonstrating Mr. Lilburns practice
to be Mr. Lilburn might have remembered his Case; Damnabitis nunquam, post
longum tempus, amicum.
evil above measure: 1. The fowl language which he gives the General: such
words as we are confident would not fall from any It seems Mr. Lilburn never
read that in the Poet; Stulium est hostem eratare, potentem: atque malum Mavis
tumidis sibi quaerere verbis.
mouth but his: hence it is that we purposely still forbear to mention them,
because they are so base. 2. How he renders evil for good; a vice abhorrent to
Heathens. 3. He has had no Nullam virtutem magis propriam imperij and
potestatis esse quam clementiam, qua qui praediti sunt, vere dij nominantur:
Zenophon in Cyr:
provocation or occasion so to do: but being crossed by others in his designs,
has powered out his malicious poison against his Excellency. It is a Riddle to
many, seeing the General (as he confesses himself) has been so real and
helpful to him, and never wronged him at any time ( And if the General had not
don so, it might have been said, (and no less could have been exspected)
Barbarus heu cineres insistit victor et urbem Eques s^ante verberebit ungula:
The victor rude upon our graves does tread, our City is with trampling horse
orelaid.
unless it were to quench the seditious fire which he endeavored to kindle in
the Nation) what should be the cause of his special spite and malice against
him: But here we see it to be true which a learned man well observes,
Guicciar: hist. l. 1.
That it does not always come to pass in taking away the occasions, the
effects do cease: for this man has not ceased his railing and false
accusations against the General, though all occasions have been taken away both
first and last. The Crow follows the Eagle with crooking, and daring him as it
were: but the Eagle lets her alone, keeps on his course as seeming not to
observe her: Whosoever shall read Mr. Lilburns books published, either before
he went into Holland, or there, or since his return, may perceive what the man's
intent and desire is; namely, by daring and insolent words, to provoke the
General to some personal quarrel with him, and to become his Enemy whether he
will or no Now whereas in all this, the General is Nihil est laudibilius, nihil
magno and praeclaro viro dignius placabilitate atque clementia. Cic:
silent, lets him alone, seems to take no notice of his false aspersions, but
exercises patience, as in reference to himself and his own particular wrongs:
in this (we say) he Acts according to a Christian, and shows one of the best
and choicest quality and virtue belonging to a General. Neither in this does
he walk alone, but men in the like place of power and command have don before
the same: Of Theodosius, Arcadius, and Honorius we read, that they would have
no man punished for speaking evil against their persons. Quoniam si illud ex
lenitate processit, contemnendum est: si ex insania, miseratione dignissimum,
si ab injuria, remittendum. Luni Siquis Imp: Maled: lib. 9. Cod: Tit. 7.
For (say they) if the thing proceed of rashness, it is to be contemned, if
from madness, it worthily deserves to be pitied: if of injury it is to be
forgiven. So Titus Vespatian, though a heathen, yet went beyond most men this
way, as thinking that Nemo me injuria officere, aut insequi contumelia potest:
propterea quod nihil ago quod reprehendi mereatur: ea vero quae falso de
medicuntur, prosus negligo. Melior est venia quam vindicta. Perdere posse sat
est, si quem juvat ista potestas.
No man by his tongue could do him hurt, or fasten a reproach upon him, as not
doing any thing whereby men might justly speak evil of him, and for what they
spoke falsely and untruly of him, he regarded it not. We do not speak this, as
if the Law has not made provision against slander, we have formerly showed the
contrary, but in that the General has hitherto been dumb and not opened his
mouth, as to Mr. Lilburns personal abusing and reproaching of him. In this we
think he has don very well, and therefore do mention such good Examples of
other Quo quisque est major, magis est placabilis ira: and faciles motus men's
generosa capit. Naso Trist. l. 3.
Great men, who have don the like before.

Having showed what Mr. Lilburn has Acted against the Parliament, the Lord
Fairfax, the General, and chief Officers in the Army: we come now to speak of
the End, or his Grand design therein. As the Pope first makes Princes
Heretics, then Excommunicates them, and afterward absolves the Subjects from
their Allegiance to them: We read of one Monarcho a frantic Italian, who
imagined that all the Kings of the earth were his Vassals: surely if Lilburn be
not a mad man, yet in his practice he is little less.
So deals Mr. Lilburn with our State: first he makes the persons of our
Governors, Tyrants, Murderers, Thieves, then Excommunicates them, and Quere:
Whether Lilburn can prove that he can do all this lawfully, by Magna Charta.
cuts them off, as being no lawful Authority. Afterward proceeds to Absolve
and set Free the people from yielding obedience any more or further to them.
But howsoever, in one thing here, he is worse then the Man of sin, and shows
himself to be more, the lawless one: For we do not find that openly and
avowedly the Pope does desire, that those Princes declared Heretics, and
Excommunicated by him, should be by the people afterward murdered and put to
death: what he secretly and closely does is another thing; But such Speaking of
himself he says; My soul abhorres to do that which does not become a man of
gallant noble and heroic mind. And in another place, He will not be single but
double John Lilburn. Does he not here make his sayings good?
a bloody Tenent is avouched by Mr. Lilburn, that whomsoever he makes
State-Hereticks, and casts out, are to be destroyed (Quicunque vult,)
Impeachment. page 7.
whosoever is able may lawfully do it: and so much we shall prove from his own
mouth, with the several ways which he has used to effect it.

1. By instigating the people A Declaration of the free Co^moners of England,
touching their Engagemen^.
Unanimously to resolve and engage one to another, Fundamental Laws, p. 44.
not to side nor fight for the Cameroes foliries and pride of the present men
in power: But to Fundament. p. 41.
apprehend them as a company of thieves and murderers, and for their present
usurpation having plucked up by the roots all legal and visible Magistracy
in the Nation: yea and justly may they be dispossessed by the first that are
able to do it. O famosum spectaculum, said Hannibal, when he saw a pit of man's
blood: so Valesas when he had slain thirty persons, O rem regiam. The proverb
went of Draco, that he wrote his Laws not with ink, but the blood of men: It
seems nothing will satisfy this man, but Had his treason taken effect,
England might have said; Venit summa dies: and ineluctabile tempus dardaniae:
fuimus Troes fuit ilium and ingens gloria Teucorum: ferus omnia Jupiter Argos
transtulit: Incensa donai dominantur in urbe, Virgil: Aeneid. lib. 2.
destruction of Authority. Again, Soldiers as well as others, are called
upon, to Picture of the Council of State, p. 14.
rise up against the Parliament, as so many professed Traitors, Thieves,
Robbers, and highway men, and to apprehend, secure Galen speaks of a maid
called Nupella that was nourished by poison; it seems the poison of Treason
will not hurt this man.
and bring them to Justice in the next Representative: This is called, A
Declaration of the Free Commoners of England
a coming into the way, and setting themselves with the utmost courage and
Resolution to free their distressed Country from the fears and captivity it
now groans under. Was there ever The idols of the Samoeds have their mouths
and eyes bloody: such a countenance has this man, feirce and terrible to
look on.
greater insolency offered to a State, or more desperate Treason ever spoken?
Among the Virginians he is the most gallant, that is the most monstrous to
behold: It is no marvel that Mr. Lilburn by some, is so much commended as to
be (Iste vir) a Nonesuch, surely there is hardly another that is so monstrous
in seeking to embroil the Nation in blood. But let us see how this is to be
effected: the manner and way: Thus it is ordered: We resolve with our An Outcry
of the young men and Apprentises of London, page 9, 10.
Burford Friends, or their Commissioners (running all hazard) to methodize all
our honest fellow-prentises in all the Wards of London, and the out-parishes,
to choose out their Agents to join with us or ours: to write Exhortative
Epistles to all the honest Freemen in England in all the particular Countries
thereof: to erect several Councels among themselves, out of which we shall
desire and exhort them to choose Agents or Commissioners (empowered and
Entrusted by them) speedily to meet us and the Agents of all our Adherents at
London, resolutely to Sugared poisons go down pleasantly, oh but when they are
down they gal and gnaw and gripe the very heartstrings asunder, if there be not
extraordinary remedy: Thus it was with those Burford Soldiers, who by his
occasion chiefly, were drawn to mutiny, ah how heavy did the remembrance of
their former sin lie upon their conscience, as rendering them liable to the
wrath and displeasure of God: as they sadly confess in their Petition to his
Excellency, subscribed by 340.
consider of a speedy and effectual method how to promote the Election of a
new and equal Representative or Parliament. Thus he.

Howsoever this was a cunning design, and the more likely to take effect, by
reason he had before rendered both the Parliament and Army, odious to the
Nation: Nevertheless the Lord in much mercy to his people frustrated it; to
the shame of the Author whilst he lives.

But 2. The former design not taking effect: the next was, to make division
between the Parliament and Army, as sometimes reproaching the Parliament to
the Army, otherwhile slandering the Sea Englands new Chain first and second
part, where so much is practiced to the full.
Army to the Parliament: thus like Note a speech of M. Lilburns, He that would
not have others t^l have Law, why should he have any himself? why should not
that be don to him that himself would have don to others? Preparative to hue
and Cry, p. 7 He has sought without Law to murder other men, Ergo He has
endeavored by falsehoods and slanders to undo others, Ergo, Heu patitior telis
vulnera facta meis.
a makebate or firebrand, whilst he goes between them two, seeks by sowing
sedition to ruin them both. It is said of Cato, that he would usually make
contention between his servants, and keep them so, because he thought their
agreeing together would be some hurt and damage to him; Mr. Lilburn well knew,
it was an obstruction to his Conspiracy, whilst the Parliament and chief
Officers in the Army held a good He knows that discordia est ordinu^
Reipublicae venenum, and therefore spits it at every word.
accord: And therefore night and day endeavored to sow dissension between
them. Hence it was that he and his Confederates petitioned the Parliament, that
they would Englands new Chain, page 6.
appoint a Committee of their own Members, to hear, examine and conclude all
controversies, between Officers and Officers, and between Officers and
Soldiers. Could there be devisd a stratagem more mischievous and treacherous
then this? to set them at variance, to the prejudice of both, and ruin of the
Nation.

Again, We have mentioned this before now, the truth is, such railing and
base language he never durst have used but spes impunitatis magna est peccandi
illecebra. Tull: pro mil.
It is (says he) as visible as the Sun when it shines in his glory and
splendour, that Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, of old were never such Rebels against
Authority, as the General and his Council are, nor the Anabaptists at Munster,
with John of Leiden and Knipperdullion, were never more contemners of
Authority, nor Jack Straw, nor Wat Tyler: nor all those famous men mentioned
with a black pen in all our Histories, and called Rebels and Traitors, can
never be put into any scale of equal balance, for Machiaevel Doctrine is, He
that will effect any thing by slanders and falsehood, must-charge, home, which
Lilburn has learnt it ad unguem.
ALL MANNER OF REBELLIONS AND TREASONS AGAINST ALL SORTS AND KINDS OF
MAGISTRACY with the General and his Counsel. It is said of one, That he had
the best weapons, but did the least Execution: no man (no not any of the
Traitors and Rebels whom he names) ever went beyond him, namely, in seeking to
have put the Commonwealth into war and blood: but praised be God, Hitherto
the p^t which he has digd for others, he has fallen into himself: and
justly; for Qui vendit vanos circum palatis, fumos subdolus: hunc fumo nonne
perire decet?
his wickedness has not prospered, which is no small vexation to him and his
party. It is well observed of Ambitiosi ali quot homines qui privatim
degeneres, in publicum exitiosi, nihil spe, nisi perdiscordias habent. Lips:
polit. l. 6. c. 4. p. 266.
Lipsius (and true here) Many ambitious men (being private and of little worth)
are mutinous and seditious in the Commonwealth, as having no hope but by
divisions and discord to raise themselves. But in the mean time it is
forgotten, that -- Raro antecedentem scelestum,
Deseruit pede paenae claudo.
Seldom Revenge, though slow of pace
Leaves ill forgoing men to trace.


3. And a threefold Cord is not easily broken. Mr. Lilburn well perceiving how
much it conduced, to the safety both of the Army and Nation, whilst there
was peace and concord between the Officers and Soldiers: for by this, they
Concordes fueritis validi invictique manebitis: si vero discordes, imbelles,
and imbecilles facilesque expugnatu futuri. Pluta^. Again, Concordia Victo
riam, discordia praebet excidium. Tiresias.
remaine-strong and unconquerable, whereas disagreeing, they were unwarlike,
weak, and easily to be overcome: he puts himself therefore among the
Soldiers, and here he leaves But here Lilburne cannot say, Labor omnia vincit:
But nihil labor, aversante furtuna, prodest.
no stone unturned, no path untroden, no means unattempted to destroy the
Soulderie, by making division. To follow him here in all his windings,
turnings, and close Conspiracies, it is unpossible (surgunt de nocte latrones)
what is come to light, we shall only report.

1. He and his Confederates cry out to the Soldiers to revolt and cast off
their Commanders The bloody project, p. 14. Juglers discovered, page 12.
. Let not the covetous, the proud, the blood-thirsty men sway over you, fear
not their high looks, give no ear to their charms, their promises or tears,
they have no strength without you. FORSAKE THEM, and they will be strong for
good, adhere to them, and they will be strong to evil.

Again, Those proud hypocritical Officers that are amongst you, that are
against freedom, and would do the work of the Lord by halves. PUT THEM OFF,
and choose honester in their room, and the only way is to take down their great
pay, and let them serve as you.

And a little after; If you be wise, The Soldiers which served Marcus Antonius
fell unawares on an herb which greatly distempered their heads. Mr. Lilburns
projects among the Soldiers was some such herb, for it put them into such a
frenzy as they forgot their duty both to God and their Country.
march not out of London, nor undertake for Ireland, or any other service, till
there be set up a new Representative of the Army.

Is there not here good counsel? could there be worse broached by any
Malignant of the Kings party? or the most treacherous Enemy we had in the
world, as tending more to a public ruin? No marvail Mr. Lilburn is so hugged
by No doubt but his Jurie, both the former and later know this well enough, and
therefore could not in their Conscience find him guilty, to wit, for doing that
which themselves would have done, but that Oderunt peccare mali formidine
poenae.
Cavalliers, and taken into their bosom, he having acted for them, and against
us more treacherously then any among them ever did, or durst.

But again, The hunting of the Foxes, p. 24.
all English Soldiers (say they) that have the least spark of Aliquid la tet
quod non patet.
true love to themselves and their Countries freedom, are bound to unite
themselves against those Apostates, those Juglers and Traitors to the people,
those that are the Levellers indeed: For what have they not levell^d? There is
no trust or confidence any more to be had in them, for they have broken their
faith with all parties.

Thus are the Soldiers stirred up to insurrrection: And as tinder does easily
kindle, when fire comes to it so were the Soldiers (at least many of them)
ready to mutiny as soon as those Firebrarnds of his were thrown in amongst them
A Declaration of the proceedings of his Excellency, p. 6.

But those Soldiers in following the treacherous counsel of Lilbu^n and
others, repented for it at last: Note what they say in their Petition to his
Excellency subscribed by 340. Your Petitioners are very sensible of the
odiousness of our fact how liable it renders us to the wrath and displeasure of
God, how destructive the same might have been to the being of the Nation, and
the good and welfare of the other two, and therefore cannot but acknowledge the
sentence of death passed upon us by your Excellency and the Council of War
very just and equal. And a little after: It will very much magnify your
Excellencies Christian temper in receiving such detestable offenders to mercy.
Foelix quicunque dolor Alterius discit posse carere suo. Tibul.


. By this means many of Commiss. Gen: Ireton and Col: Scroops Regiments were
occasined to revolt and cast off their Officers (an act not to be paralleled)
and as their business began to grow to a head, they sent their Emissaries and
Agitators to all parts (as we have good intelligence) pretending from on^
Regiment to another, that each Regiment had declared, that so by that Artifice
they might draw each to declare. To the Forces in Wales and in the West they
gave assurances that the Forces about London would revolt; and to those about
London, that those in Wales and the West would do the same: And to the Forces
in the North used they the like Arguments, and nourished also the distemper of
the Forces in the South. But Hor. Epad. 7.
Quo, quo Scelesti ruitis? aut cur dexteris
Aptantur enses conditi?
Parumne Campis, atque Neptuno super
Fusum est Britanni sanguinis?
Ah wretches! whether have you, to what end
Do your right hands to sheathed swords descend?
Is there so little yet of English blood
Powered on the Champion fields or Ocean flood?


Was not here a fire kindled, and likely to have been a flame, in which our
liberties, proprieties, and lives had even at once been consumed to ashes? As
the clock never stands still from running so long as the pieces and plummets
hang thereat; such a thing was Master Lilburn in the Army, a constant MOVER of
the soldiery to sedition in one place or other. But to proceed.

These soldiers being revolted, hereupon The unanimous Declaration of Colonel
Scroops and Commissary General Iretons Regiments at a randezvous at old Sarum,
May 11. 1649. Note Reader, how many falsehoods are here declared in a little. 1.
It was an untruth that they were sensible of the peoples burdens, for then they
would never have taken that mutinous way whereby to put the Nation to more
charge. 2. It was untrue that they regarded the sad condition of Ireland, for
they were the principal men that refused, and discouraged others from going 3.
It was an untruth that they sought the peoples ease; for they sought
themselves, as to fish in troubled waters.
they unanimously declare (no otherwise then as they had been taught) what was
the end of their Conspiracy and Insurrection: Namely, to free themselves out
of the hand of Tyrants. All their endeavor shall be for the settling of this
poor Nation, and the restitution of their shaking Freedom. (The same pretenses
which Jack Straw, Wat Tyler, Cades and the Munster Rebels used) They are forced
(here they left out Mr. Lilburn and some others, whom they might have named as
the Forcers) to deny obedience to such tyrannical Officers, whose unsufferable
proceedings tend manifestly to the obstruction of peace, the hindrances of
relief from Ireland, the inslaving of the consuming Nation. And howsoever they
shall be burdensome to some places and persons for meat and drink, yet that may
be well born withal, seeing they seek the peoples ease Birds in the Fable,
seeing the Fowler with Beads in his hand, and his eye looking up to heaven, are
said to speak one to another: We must not regard his eyes nor his beads, but
the blood and rapine that is in his hand. The moral is rightly appliable to
these men.
and their freedom from those intolerable burdens lying on their shoulders
whereof they are very sensible. Thus they.

Timotheus, Alexanders Harper, when his Master was at a Banquet, played such an
Allarm or assault as caused the King to forsake the Banquet, and take his
Armor: so that his spirits remaining vanquished or overcome, he was
constrained to obey the harmony that proceeded from the instrument. The Reader
may here perceive, how to the life Mr. Lilburn and that party can skilfully
play an Allarm of Rebellion unto the Soldiers: For as overcoming those low
spirits, they have been in a manner According to their saying before.
FORCT to cast off their Commanders, and to follow the charming Music which
they have made: And it will not be amiss if we here set down some particulars
whereby they have occasioned the Soldiers unto such Revolts.

1. As it is truly said, A Declaration of the proceedings of his Excellency,
page 6.
their foundation was laid of lies and falsehood, wherein they have not been
inferior, if not beyond those Enemies we had last to deal with. He that shall
peruse the very worst which has bin spoken or published against any
Army Officers in any age of the world, shall not find more scandalous, horrid,
and base things charged upon any, any where Male facere qui vult, nusquam non
causam invenit, and canem ut caedas facile invenias baculum.
then Mr. Lilburn and his party have cast upon ours, whom the Lord has most
eminently honored and blessed by his presence with them wheresoever they went. As
Nero, when he hurled the Christians to dogs, seeing the Mastives would not
touch them, he clad them in Bears skins, to kindle the fury of the dogs, that
they might take them to be beasts and not men. Just so has been their
practice, to set the Soldiers (as dogs) on their Officers, to devour and tear
them in pieces; first they would cover them with the Bears skins of their false
and slanderous tongues, as not regarding what they said, nor how untrue their
accusations were, so they might trouble and disquiet the minds of the
Soldiers, and move them to faction. And to say the truth, so The truth is Mr.
Lilburn with his tongue and pen has bin such a constant slanderer, as few
(Malignants excepted) but have counted him a most seditions person, and amongst
the godly that know him, was cast out as unsavory salt. It had bin well for
him, had he remembered Omnia si perdas, famam servare memento: qua semel amissa,
postea nullus eris.
excessive have their tongues and pens been let loose in this way of slander,
that had not the Soldiers evidently seen, and been satisfied, what was
reported of their Officers was false and scandalous, and taken up as a design
to divide the Army, there could not have been that lasting agreement between
the Commanders and Soldiers as there was.

2. In carrying on of their stratagem to divide the Army. Their practice was,
when any of the Soldiers (harkening to their Bonitatis verba imitari major
malitia est. Publ.
Counsel) acted any thing treacherously and dangerously against the Army,
highly to commend and justify such mutinous and seditious persons; calling
them English new Chain, second part, p. 14. 9.
honest and worthy Soldiers, the good men in the Army, the honest
Nown-substantives Peoples Prerogative, page 42.
, men most conscientious, and cordially acting for Common-good, and resolved to
stand for true Liberty An Out cry of the young men, page 12.
. Our true Burford friends, who were treacherously and wickedly defeated.

Thus, how seditious and dangerous soever their doings are, nevertheless, to
the end, the work of darkness may go forward; these Master Lilburn Whilst
an Ass is stroaked under the belly, you may lay on his back what burden you
will. Mr. Lilburn knew how to make Asses of some soldiers, he streaks them
with one hand, and calls the^ his white boys, and with the other hand loads
their shoulders with the sinking burden of Rebellion.
strokes, and calls them honest men, his true friends (as encouragement and
reason enough) to forsake and cast their Commanders off. It was a great honor
to Achilles, that his Deeds should be commended and set forth by such a man as
Homer: who would not raise sedition in an Army, refuse to obey the just
Commands of Superiors, make head against their General, being certain of Mr.
Lilburns pen and hand, ready to defend it, and to justify it to the world,
though an act not to be paralleld, (as the General truly said) for the
horridness of it.

3. To make good what we have before asserted, viz. that none have more
endeavored by division to destroy an Army, then Mr. Lilburn Cum socijs, have
sought to ruin OURS. This appears further by their urging and instigating
other Soldiers, when their fellow soldiers, for causing sedition have been
justly punished, to take severe revenge for it presently upon their Officers
The English soldiers Standard, p. 8.
. Is it not a shame (say they) that your fellow soldiers should undergo so
slavish, so It is the Jesuits doctrine that he dies a Martyr that dies for his
conspiracy and Treason against the State. M. Lil. though no professed Jesuit
teaches the same: But no Jesuit has openly declared himself such an enemy
to this State as he has done.
severe, and painful punishment, as to ride the wooden Horse, or to run the
Gauntlets, and be whipped for small particular offenses: and that He blames such
Soldiers of whom Lucan speaks, Nulla fides pietasque viris, qui Castra
sequuntur, venalesque manus.
you should suffer in the mean time your Officers and Commanders to turn
Tyrants, and never punish them at all for it. Is this to take up Arms? when
one man being your Commander, may (as the proverb says) steal a horse, and
you will hang a private Soldier for looking over the hedge? For what comparison
is there between a private Soldiers offense, and an Officer turning a Bear, a
Wolf, a Tyrant.

Again, suffer this, and suffer any thing; Experience shows, he that takes
one Note how he boasts that he gave the Parliament such a cuff under the
ear, as they will not shake off the pain and smart of it: but this they must
suffer, only private soldiers must resist, and not suffer any thing, how
justly soever they are punished.
box on the ear invites another; and when Soldiers that should be men in all
things, stand still and suffer their fellow soldiers to be thus abused, by a
pack of Officers, no marvail if their Officers turn Tyrants, presume to do any
thing to any man.

Here let the impartial Reader judge, how marvelously the power and goodness
of God has appeared in the preservation of our Army: Jehovah Jereh: In the
mount the Lord was seen. It is true, our deliverances many ways have been
wonderful, but in nothing Considering that of many Soldiers it may be said,
Nihil esse utilius aut opportunius quam in aqua turbida piscari. Again, Non
aliter salvos and incolumes se esse existimant, nisi in publicis calamitatibus.
more (all circumstances duly considered) then in confounding continually the
pernicious plots of those seditious men. Rocks covered with water are more
dangerous to Mariners, than such as stand obvious and open to their sight: By
how much the Conspiracies of Mr. Lilburn and others against the Army, have
been subtlely clothed with the spetious and plausible pretenses of Justice,
love to the Soldiery, safely to the Nation, public good, etc. by so much the
more have his designs (as Rocks under water) been pernicious and destructive to
the Army: And divine providence the more seen in preserving the same, that it
was not totally broken and scattered thereby.

4. That nothing might lie in the Soldiers way to rebellion, but do it freely
and without fear. In stead of a Court Marshall, Mr. Lilburn appointed a
Committee of Indemnity, whereby all Soldiers are acquitted as not to suffer
for sedition or any other Crime. The peoples Prerogatives, page 53, 54, 55 etc.
There is now no Marshal-Law, but its absolute murder in the General and
Council of War to put any Soldier to death for any crime or offense
whatsoever: The hunting of the Foxes, p. 18.
Soldiers only are punishable in the Courts of Justice, and according to the
Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom: so that the A Letter written to the General
by Lieut. Colon. John Lilburn, and Mr. Rich. Overton, April 27. 1649.
Council of War has no more right to inflict Justice then a Thief or a
Robber has to a purse which he takes upon the high way.

Excellent doctrine! and no doubt it is Take notice of the reason wherefore M.
Lilb. (though he conceal it) would have Martial Law and the Council of War
dissolved: he knew by the Articles of Martial Law, Whosoever shall utter words
of sedition, or tending to the making of a mutiny, shall be liable to a
sentence of death.
his own, it looks so like him: but here Mr. Lilburn runs Poena gravior gravius
peccantib. debetur. August.
faster and beyond his fellows, for we do not find that any former Incendiaries
(how dangerous soever) have denied the exercise of Martial law to an Army
before. When the Jesuits persuaded a Villain to murder the Prince of Orange,
for encouragement they assured him that he should do it invisibly, and escape
as not being taken. M Lilburns It is no good principle, for b^nis nocet
quisquis pepercerit ma^is. Again, Qui punit injallos in alijs fie^i injuriam
prohibet.
plot is little less Jesuiticall; he tells the Soldiers there is no Martial
Law, no Council of War, what danger then to revolt? to cast off all Command,
neglect duties, make uproars and tumults in the Nation? As for other Courts, in
this case Witness Mr. Lilburns first and second Trial, in both which he was
quitted by the Juries, though as great a mutineer as has been known in any
age. As the victories wonn by Alexander and Julius Caesar are not to be
attributed so much to their valor, as to the condition of the people in those
days: so Mr. Lilb. escaped not by his skill in Law, or truth on his side, but
through the fault and error of his Juries.
Mutineers will little regard them.

Thus we have showed what mischiefs to the Nation (by using others as his
instruments) he has attempted to do. We come now to declare wherein his
Designs and Resolutions have been far wors, and more abominable, even so in
humane and barbarous, as no tongue or penn but his own would have durst to set
them forth to the world: And this concerns his designs and resolution to Vbi
est fervida vindicta, non est temperata justitia. Cassiodor.
murder and massacre such persons (we speak here of his intent) who have
disliked his treacherous plots, and from time to time endeavored to hinder the
execution of them.

1. For Sir Arthur Haslerigg, what he meant to do by him, as to the taking away
of his life, he has published it himself: A just reproof to Haberdashers Hall,
page 6.
Meeting Mr. Pearson at the George in Channel-Row, this message by him he sent
his Master: As he loved his Masters life and welfare, I entreated him (says
he) to tell him I wore a good Dagger by my right side, and a good Rapier by my
left side, and if within eight days he did not send me all my money, or give
me some rational satisfaction, let him look to himself, for after that day
wherever I meet him, I would pay him for altogether, though I were cut in a
thousand pieces on the very place.

Judge READER, are these the words of a Christian, or rather a Heathen, and one
that seeks nothing but himself and his own Interest? what would this If a State
in a prudentiall way will not suffer devouring Beasts to be at liberty, whereby
men's Cattle might be destroyed: More careful should they be of shutting up
such beasts who openly declare, that they will stab and kill such men as refuse
to do what they require of them.
fellow do had he Sic voleo, sic jubeo sit pro ratione voluntas.
power in his hand, that threatens thus to stab and kill, in reference only to
his own particular Case.

The cruelties and infamies of Caligula are imputed to the Nurse that gave him
suck; the which being cruel and barbarous of her self, rubbed the ends of her
breasts with blood, causing the child to whom she gave milk, to suck them.
Whose milk this man sucked we know not, Dicearchus set up two Altars, the one
to Cruelty, the other to Iniquity, upon the which he sacrificed and prayed as
to the gods: whether Cruelty and Iniquity be not his great Diana, let the
Reader judge.
but this is certain (if out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks
It is without all peradventure, should this man and his party once rule, they
would make such Laws as might well be caled Officina scelerum and carnificina
sanctorum, shops of wickedness, and shambles of the Saints.
) he has taken in so much self-revenge, and seeds of crulty and murder, that
(like another Caligula) the peace of a Nation, and safety of men's lives lie at
the stake, where he has Freedom to act according to his Resolution.

But 2. concerning his wicked intent to murder the Lord General Cromwell, We
have here fulfilled what a learned Author writes. There is nothing endures so
small a time as the memory of benefits received: and the more great they are,
the more commonly are they recompensed with in gratitude; G^c. hist. l. 4.
he has openly avowed it to the world; that had it not been for the affection
which he bore to his Wife and Children, and the assurance which he had to see
the Generals downfall without his killing of him, and himself an instrument for
the restoration of Englands liberties and freedom, he had absolutely destroyed
him with his own hand before he went in to Holland. And that the Reader may
be fully satisfied in the truth of this, we shall here set down his own words.

Note that he makes mention of his intent to murder the Gen: in other places
besides what he says here. Therefore my Lord, sit as fast as you can in the
strength of the Lord God Almighty: (see how the wretched man prophanes the name
of God) have at you, if I perish; I perish As you were, p. 33.
If it had not been for the strong affection I bore to her, and my poor babes
(whom willingly I would not leave beggars when I dye) and for that I had some
grounded assurance in my own spirit that I should live to see his downfall,
and the full restoration of our English Liberties and Freedoms, and my self
be an Actor or Instrument to procure it without so apparent hazard to my life
as such an Act would be, The wonderful wisdom of God is to be seen here, that
this man's tongue should reveal the wickedness of his own heart, and that he
should glory thus in his own shame, as counting it his grace to be graceles.
I had with my own right hand at the House door avowedly ended the quarrel
betwixt him and me, and the rest of the freeborn people of England: With a
paper of Reasons in my left hand, ready to be sent unto the Speaker, and with
several others in my pocket, to justify to the whole world the lawfulness and
justness of such an Action, both by the laws of God, Nature, and Nations.

We need not It went as a proverb of Cranmer, Do my Lord of Canterbury an ill
turn, and you shall be sure to have him your friend for ever. If Mr. Lilb
continual treacherous dealing against the Gen: be considered, and his
Excellencies readiness notwithstanding upon all occasion to do him good: It
might be said of Cromwell as the proverb went of Crammer.
comment upon the speech, his unparalled wickedness is enough showed by his
own mouth: Notwithstanding, some things we shall infer from it.

1. Hence all men may clearly understand the end of Mr. Lilburns coming lately
into England: Namely to effect what he had promised, to the Duke of Buckingham,
the Lord Hopton, and others, So much is testified by Isaac Berkenhead, Je:
Titus, Joh: Bartlet, and Rich. Foot.
which was for 10000 l. he would destroy the Parliament, Council of State, AND
THE LORD GENERAL, and settle Charles Steward, King of England, in his Throne in
England It is true, he denies all th^s, but he knows the old saying, and in
loco facere, and in loco lequi.
. This upon oath has been testified by diverse, that several times he did
declare, that either he would kill the General himself, or set one to do it,
and declared this to be his intention upon his coming over.

Now what rational man will not believe all this to be true, seeing there is
no more said by those Witnesses, then what himself (in effect before)
professed he intended to do. For his declaring since to the contrary, it is not
to be That proverb ordinary in Rome, mentioned by Guiccard l. 6. of the Pope,
and the Duke Valentynois may be applied to this man, He never did what he
spoke, nor seldom spoke as he meant.
credited; he that will make no conscience to murder and destroy men, and
ruin a Nation, will make less conscience of lying and to forswear himself. We
may say here to Mr. Lilburn in another man's words, Testimonium tuum quod aliena
re leve est, hoc contra te grave, etc. Tull.
Thine own testimony which in another Case is of small weight, but this
against thy self is of GREAT MOMENT.

2. At his Trial in the Guild Hall at London, he mentioned a Maxim in Law,
repeated several times in Cokes Institutes, Actus non facit reum, nisi men's sit
rea; It is not the act, but the intention of the mind that declares the guilt.

Observe, how his own mouth condemns him, neither is this without the singular
Here we may see that Treason and murder will come to light according to the
old proverb, Quicquid nix celet, solis calor omne revelat. It is desired that
this may be Englished to Mr. Lilburn, for it much concerns him.
providence of God, that a design so desperate, dangerous, damnable, should be
revealed and brought to light, only by his own pen: And no doubt in much mercy
to the Nation, as seasonably Ipse sibi nocet is alium qui laedere quaerit.
to prevent the shedding of much innocent blood, which his malicious heart
extremely thirsted after, as we shall prove hereafter.

No marvail therefore that his restraint is Treason is loved, though the
Traitor be not.
so grievous to the Malignants, and such plotting for his liberty, considering
what his resolution was, (and to them well known) as to the overthrowing of
this present Government. The which may serve put our State in mind Hor. l. 2.
Od. 13.
Quid quisque vitet nunquam homini satis cautum est.
What daily by us should avoided be,
We cannot with sufficient heed foresee: Nemo diu lutus est, qui periculo
proximus est.



3. Neither is it to be forgotten, how he did forbear (as he says) to murder
the General, of an assurance which he had to be an instrument or Actor himself
in the restoration of our Liberties and Freedom. It is a true saying, Quae
dictu sunt turpia, ne factu quidem decor puta.
Whosoever is naught in word, we may not think that his actions will be good.

The truth is, we neither desire, nor expect any such We read in Jothams
Parable, that the Bramble would be King, and Lilburn speaks often of being
Uppermost. Now Valor. Maximus, lib. 9. describes such an one as we might
expect him to be, if Uppermost. Crudelitatis horridus est habitus, truculenta
facies, violenti spiritus, vox terribilis, ora minis and crudentis
imperiisreferta.
Instruments or Actors; we know the remedy here will be worse then the disease:
For the Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.
Liberty and Freedom which he talks so often of, we know what he means, lacte
gypsum male mixtum, its to raise up new Wars and Commotions under such glozing
pretenses. But we are by this time too well acquainted with his projects, as
thereby to be deceived. He has learnt tunc omnia jure tenetis, cum poteris Rex
esse; were he once Mr. Lilburn in Print styles himself John Lilburn, Defender
of the Faith. An Allarm to the House of Lords in the Title page: Now seeing he
takes a Kingly title to himself, why might not John of Leide^s Title be added
to it, Ioha^nes Rex Novae Hierosolimae, Rex Iustitiae super universu^ Orbem.
John, K. of the New Jerusalem, King of righteousness over the whole world.
Johannes Rex, Chief in place and power, what might the Nation expect? we shall
tell you, Saevum praelustre fulme^ ab arce venit. Again, fulmen est, ubi cum
potestate habitat iracundia.
a more cruel oppressor and persecutor (especially of men truly godly) would
not be then he: As the wolves (in the story) would have the sheep to put away
the dogs, that so they might the sooner and easier devour them: so Mr. Lilburn
has attempted by others, and intended to do it himself; namely remove by
murder such out of his way, who in a special manner do watch over the English
flock, that he might the more freely and fully destroy it.

4. This intended murder of his, confessed since by himself, leads us now (as
by the hand) to the In a Book entitled, L. Coll. I. Lilburn revived, there
are such villainous expressions ( as that he looks upon the General as his
grand Enemy, will not fight more against great nor small, but against him,
page 18, 19.) that whosoever shall read the same, may very well believe that
all those scandalous Libels which are cast abroad, are by his occasion.
Author or Instrument of those abominable and base Libels which are often
thrown abroad, as to the instigating and stirring up of some desperate villain
to the Assassination of the General and others in Authority. In former time,
no Libel came from Rome, but Parsons presently was supposed and noised to be
the Author; and the more vile, the more Parson-like: Such an opinion (and not
undeservedly) is now amongst honest men concerning Lilburn; if they hear of a
Libel against the State, it is generally thought and believed that he is We
shall here challenge Mr Lilburne and his party; that they cannot produce such
railing, insolent expressions, and base language in the Libels of any Seminary
or Jesuit against the English Government at any time, as we can ordinarily
show in their Pamphlets.
the Author; and the more seditious, treacherous, and barbarous it is, the more
Lilburn like, that is, the more are they persuaded that the Action is his: As
knowing that Parsons the Jesuit never intended worse, nor acted more
treacherously against the government then, then this man has endeavored by
all the means and ways he could devise, to destroy the Government now
established (we say) ever since we were a Commonwealth. As Protogenes no
sooner looked on the line which he saw in his shop, made in his absence, but
knew whose it was; Apelles has been here (says he) for no hand else could
have drawn it. Even so, if a man peruse the Metuebant in me omne: in Eunuch.
Libels which are made, he cannot but think, and say, Lilburn has been here,
this is his work; for who but he would write of stabbing, killing, murdering,
things so in humane and horrible, as no man that is conscientious and honest,
would retain a thought of such wickedness, much less boastingly and
pragmatically (as he does) express the same, but only such a one, as cares not
what evil is committed, so it be to the satisfying of his malice and lust.

But 3. Neither has it been the resolution of this man, to stab and kill
particular persons, but like an other Metuebant in me omne: in Eunuch.
Gnato, that the world might wonder at him, and be afraid of him, it has been
in his mind to murder and destroy a great number of people, It is worth the
noting what this man speaks of himself I have the affections of thousand of
MINE HONEST and endeared Friends in England, who I know do look upon me as a
single hearted honest, just, plain spoken English man, that has been valiant
and courageous for the regaining and preserving their freedom and liberty; and
if I should loose mine interest with my honest friends, I were but single John
Lilb. nothing at all considerable either to be loved or feared. John Lilb.
revived, p. 9. See Reader how he is double Io: and terrible Ioh and he must be
valiant in stabbing and killing (at least with his tongue) that he may not
loose his interest with his honest Friends.
a whole Parliament of men at one time, yea and as so many Weasels and
Poulcats. And that the Reader may see, we do not report any thing of him, but
what he has in the pride of his own heart openly declared, we shall set down
his own words without substraction or addition.

In a Letter to the Lord Faixfax (which is extant under his own hand) thus he
writes: Truly (Sir) give me leave to tell you without fear or dread, had I
come, or could have got so many to have followed me, as would have enabled me,
with my sword in my hand, to have done justice and execution upon these grand
treacherous fellows and Tyrants at Westminster, that have not only tyrannized
over me, but the whole Nation, I should have made no more scruple of conscience
with my own hand to have destroyed them, then to have destroyed so many
Weasels and Poulcats.

The power of the Spartan Ephori was very great, but not to kill any man:
Neither does he find any Law for this in Magna Charta, Cokes Institutes,
Liberty of Rights. Besides, he will not allow a Parliament to constitute a High
Court of Justice, as that any man in such a way should be put to death, though
never so great a Tyrant, Traitor, and Murderer. Nevertheless (and mark it
good Reader) It wa a cunning trick which Themistocles was once taught by a man
of Lacedemonia; that because they might not take the Tables away, wherein a law
was engraven: he should therefore turn them up side down, which was as good as
to take them away altogether. This is the trick which Mr. Lilburn has learnt,
though he cannnot take the Laws away, yet he can turn them up side down for
example, if he be a Traitor, yet must he be t^yed by 12. men of his own
choosing. If another be an honest man (but by him judgd a tyrant) he may kill
him, for the Tables are now turned
he can himself without the least scruple of conscience, kill and destroy men
as so many Weasels and Poulcats, yea and without his honorable Jury of 12.
men. This is John Lilburn, The Defender of the Faith, the Great Assertor of the
Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, A sufferer for all free Commoners.

After Nero had occasioned much mischief to the Commonwealth, he wrote to the
Senate (like Lilb. when he held a paper in one hand to be sent to the Speaker,
intending with the other hand to kill the General) Ad Senatum literas misit,
de caede Syllaeplautique haud confessus: vorum uniusque turbidum ingenium esse,
and sibi in calumn^atem Reip. magna cura huberimo: cunctas sibi curas amore
patriae leviores dicti^ans, vidisse civium maestos vultus audire secretas
quaerimonias. Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
Accusing some persons whom he had murdered, to be turbulent and factious men,
and that he had a mavelous care for the peoples safety; yea all the cares
were nothing in regard of his love to the Country, and that he had seen the
sad countenances of the Citizens, heard their secret Complaints, etc.

Whether Lilburn had ever seen this in Nero, and (aspis a vipera) learnt it of
him we cannot say; but as good wits often meet, so that Tyrant and this (Chius
ad coum) in their bloody design are alike. For had he destroyed the persons,
or any of them, (as he most wickedly intended) There was a writing to go
forth, wherein (as in Capital letters) might have been declared thus.

WHEREAS I J: LILB. LIKE NERO HAVE MVRTHERED SVCH MEN, IT WAS BECAUSE I DID NOT
LIKE THEM: FOR THEY WOULD NOT Mr. Lilburn speaking of a method which he had a
long time laid down, which is to destroy Generals, Patricians, Senators, or
Parliament Men, as the ancient Romans and Grecians did. He concludes thus; Let
my bloody and malicious Adversaries thank themselves in not letting me alone
to sit under mine own Vine in Peace and quietness. Lilburn revived, p. 10.
Now it is out: we ever thought that he sought only himself, though many ignorant
of his wiles, have been otherwise minded.
HELP ME TO MONEY AND LAND AS I EXPECTED: BESIDE I HAVE HEARD THE SECRET
COMPLAINTS OF SOME (AS TREACHEROVS TO THE STATE AS I AM) WHICH WOULD HAVE ALL
GOVERNMENT AND AVTHORITY TRODDEN UNDER FOOT AS WILLINGLY AS MY SELF.

Having thus truly laid open Mr. Lilburns Of certain turbulent spirits it is
said, Illis quieta movere magna merces videbatur. Salust. They think the very
disturbance of things quietly established, are only sufficient to set them at
work. The former particulars duly considered, this saying cannot be applied to
any man more truly then to Lilburn.
CASE AND CRAFT, we shall proceed now to his Trial. And here we purpose to Try
his Tryers, to the end it may appear to the world how honest and conscientious
they were, and what Reasons there are to continue Juries by 12. men, if the
State mean to allow and countenance Treason any longer.

First, for the Act declaring Mr. Lilburns Fact to be Treason, it was read to
the Jurie. The words are as follow.

AN ACT Of the 14. of May, 1649. declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged
TREASON.
WHereas the Parliament has abolished the Kingly office in England and
Ireland, and in the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and has
resolved and declared, that the People shall for the future be governed by its
own Representatives or National meetings in Council, chosen and entrusted by
them for that purpose, has settled that Government in the way of a
Commonwealth and free State, without King or House of Lords. Be it therefore
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, that if
any person shall maliciously or advisedly publish by Note how all men who have
acted by the principles of Reason and Nature, have been ever more careful by
strict laws to stop the publishing of seditious books. Thus Plato, Plutarch,
and the wisest of the Gentiles in their models and plat-forms of civil
Governme^, have always given order that infamous writings should not be
permitted, such as aspersed the Government, and tended to mutiny and faction
but the Authors thereof severely punished. Famost Libelli, convitia contumelia
detractiones, publicae, sunt a Magistratu coercendae, ut pax inter cives
maneat, Plato. l. 11. de legibus. So Plutarch, lib. de Civil. administrat.
Neither are there any Christian Statesmen but in their Republics say as much:
Libellos famosos, sive pasquillos magistratus spargi prohibeat eoru^que
authors and disseminatores graviter coerceat. Ketkerm. System. Polit. l. 1. c.
22. So our own Statutes: Seldom an Act was ever made concerning Treason, but
there is mention made of scandalous books against the State. Anno 1 Edw. 6.
Cap. 6. So Anno 8. Edw. 6. Cap. 1. Anno 1 and 2 Ph^ (...) ^o. Anno 1 Eliz. c. 6.
writing, printing, or openly declaring that the said Government is
tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful, or that the Commons in Parliament assembled
are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive, or
endeavor to stir up, raise Force against the present Government, or for the
subversion or alteration of the same, and shall declare the same by any open
deed, that then every such offense shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged by this
present Parliament to be high Treason. And whereas the Keepers of the Liberty
of England, and the Council of State constituted, and to be from time to time
constituted by authority of Parliament, are to be under the said
Representatives in Parl. entrusted for the maintenance of the said Government
with several powers and authorities limited, given and appointed unto them by
the Parl. Be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person
shall maliciously and advisedly plot, or endeavor the subversion of the said
Keepers of the Liberty of England, or the How he had denied the lawfulness of
their Authority, and thrown scorn and contempt upon them is well known. Qui
peccantur coram omnibus, coram omnibus corripienda sunt ut omnes timent. Aug.
de verbis domin.
Council of State, and the same shall declare by any open deed, or shall move
any person or persons for the doing thereof, or stir up the people to rise
against them, or either of their Authorites, that then every such offense and
offenses shall be taken, deemed, and declared to be High Treason.

And whereas the Parliament for their (...) and lawful defense, have raised ^d
levied the Army and Forces under the Command of Thomas, Lord Fairfax, ^d are at
present necessitated by reason (...) the manifold distractions within this
^ommon-wealth, and invasions threat^d from abroad, to continue the same, which
under God must be the instrumental means of preserving the well-affected people
of this Nation in peace and safety. Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid; that if any person, not being an Officer, Soldier or member of the
Army, shall (...) to ^ch h^ld of any to (...) with their ^ill, they will bite
and pull so hard to have it, that many times they break their own necks
withal, before they leave their hold. Never man plucked harder then this man,
in plotting, contriving, and endeavoring to stir up mutiny in the Army. So
that if this place of the Act had been duly prosecuted, he had broken his neck
for his (...)
plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up any m^tiny in the said Army, or
withdraw any Soldiers or Officers from their obedience to their superior
Officers, or from the present Government as aforesaid; or shall procure, invite
aid, or assist any Foreigners or Strangers to invade England, or Ireland, or
shall adhere to any Forces raised by the Enemies of the Parliament, or
Commonwealth, or Keepers of the Liberty of England. Or if any person shall
counterfeit the great Seal of England (for the time being) used and appointed
by Authority of Parl. That then every such offense and offenses shall be taken,
deemed, and declared by authority of this ^arl. to be High Treason: And every
such person shall suffer pain of Death, and also forfeit unto the Keepers of
the Liberty of England, to and for the use of the Commonwealth, all and
singular his and their Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels,
as in case of High Treason has been used by the Laws and Statutes of this
Land, to be forfeit and lost, provided always that no persons shall be indicted
and arraigned for any of the offenses mentioned in this Act, unless such
offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted for the same within one year after
the offense committed.

We shall not here take in the whole business, which (as Namely in a book
entitled, The trial of Liuet. Coll: John Lilburn, which he well approves of,
and is willing the world should see.
published) is an homaeologia, one thing said often over and over: but in short
this we say, That the Witnesses and Proofs produced on the Commonwealths
behalf, were full and legal against Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn in point
of Treason: And thus we prove it.

1. Howsoever the Statutes which he repeated, say, That no man shall be
condemned for Treason, petty Treason, or any such like crime, but by the
evident and clear proof of two lawful and sufficient Witnesses. Yet the same
Statutes do likewise say, If the offender himself confess the Fact, it is as
much as two, yea as tenn Witnesses: And this was Mr. Lilb. Case: TREASON
CONFESSED: Thine own mouth (says Eliphaz to Job) condemns thee, and not I:
yea thine own lips testify against thee. For the Objection which he made,
that there was no man there to swear it was his hand; It was the vainest and
absurdest shift that could be devised: What need was there for the Council of
the Commonwealth to prove that, which proved it self, or was Coke says (we
shall set down his own words) Cardinal Pool, albeit he was a Subject to Henry
8. and of the Kings blood (being descended from George Duke of Clarence)
brother to King Edw. 4.) yet he in his book of the Supremacy of the Pope
written about 27. H. 8. incited Charles the Emperor then preparing against the
Turk, to bend his force against his Sovereign Lord and Country: the WRITING OF
WHICH BOOK WAS A SVFFICIENT OVER ACT WITHIN THIS STATVTE. Note, that the State
needed no more proof to charge him with Treason, then finding his name at that
Book, as the Author: It was now for him to make his defense: here was
Testimony on the Kings part enough, unless he could quit himself of the
charge.
it self a proof. His name and hand was at the Treason, so that it lay now
upon him to make his defense to it. A man's own hand to a Writing, yea if it be
his name at a printed book, as the Author, it makes the thing to be understood
(whether good or bad) properly and truly his. For to this end are hands and
names subscribed, as to speak out, a man's propriety, and what he owns: Neither
is it necessary as to the certainty and truth of the thing, that there be any
other proof or witness.

If it be objected, that a man's hand may be counterfeited, and his name set to
a Book, as the Author, whereas its neither so, nor so.

We answer; here Reason, Justice, and Conscience has provided a good Remedy,
viz. by declaring that it is not his, which ought in such a case to be admitted,
nothing appearing or proved to the contrary. But for a man to set his name, and
hand to a thing, and being afterward questioned for it, then to call for
Witnesses to prove that the name or hand is his, it is most ridiculous, the
thing it self being proof and We grant that by law a man is not to accuse
himself: that is, where no offense appears, there he is not bound to be
witness against himself. But a man's name to a Book as the Author, is certainly
a Witness: (And note it) we say a witness either true or false: so that a man
is bound in this case to answer as to a witness, or rather witnesses. Neither
does he here accuse himself, but either clears himself of a false Accusation,
or falls under a legal and valid proof.
witness enough (as was said) unless he now can show reason to the contrary.

We observed before, how Mr. Lilburn without the least scruple of conscience,
could have destroyed some men as so many Weasels and Poulcats. In this our
Conscience hangs not so loose as his; For we desire to walk according to the
rules of Reason and Justice. But should there be seditious Pamphlets and Papers
dispersed abroad, full of Treason, and tending to the ruin of the
Commonwealth, with Some thought, that beause he used to vaunt of his
gallantry, that he would have scorned to have said, I do not own a jot, a
line, a word, or syllable of any of them. But rather would have said its mine,
and I will prove every jot, line, word, etc.
John Lilburns name to them, as the Author; truly in such a case were we either
his Judges, or of his Jury, and had him, and those scandalous books before us,
we could (without the least scruple of conscience) think him worthy to be put
to death: in finding his hand and name at the Treason (which we take for
confession) he not denying it, but Note Reader, how Mr. Lilburn is proved a
Traitor by Cokes Institutes, whom he so much extolleth: he expressly says,
where the party does confess his offense, or is mute (as Lilburn was) he shall
have Judgment as in case of high Treason. Instit. l. 3. c. 1. p. 14.
standing mute, only calling for Witnesses to swear the same to be his,
whereas the Act it self was proof and witness enough. The law says Confessio
superat omne probationis genus. Bar. in l. Si Confessus de Cust: Rerum.
Confession is beyond all other kind of proof.

Among other Insolences of the Jews done to Christ, it is said Luke 22.64.
when they had blind-folded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him,
saying, prophecy, who is he that smote thee? Just so would Lilburn serve the
Parliament, and Army, having Note how he brags of this himself: I gave them
(says he) such a cuffe under their other ear, as I believe they will never
thoroughly shake off the smart and pain of it whilst Cromwels beastly and most
gross abominable tyranny lasts. As you were, page 4.
smitten them with his venomous tongue, then he asks who did it? who called
you Tyrants, Traitors, Murderers, Usurpers? now here they must not say it was
Lilburn, for he has blind-folded them, as how? with Magna Charta, Cokes
Institutes, Littleton, Plowden, etc. All which as he has cited them and
applied them, were as a hood or veil cast over the face, whereby a Traitor (as
unseen) might thereby escape without just and condign punishment.

2. Neither alone was his name and hand set to the Treason, as to be the
Author; but it was likewise proved by several, legal and sufficient
Witnesses: that Mr. Lilburn delivering a book with his own hand to Mr.
Pridiaux, Attorney-Generall, Entitled A preparative to a Hue and Cry after Sir
Arthur Haslerig, told him at the same time: that the Book was his, and he
would own it, and so much he spoke in the hearing of Coll: West, James
Nutley, and Edward Radney, all which upon oath testified so much at his Trial.
Beside, Mr. Lilburn has since in another Book openly declared it: That Book
(says he) was proved at my Trial to be mine, saving the Printers Errataes,
which are many, called a Preparative to a Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Haslerig.

Now in this Book which he owned, and acknowledged himself the Author, the
whole Treason whereof he was accused, and laid to his charge, is there
maliciously or advisedly published, by writing and printing, etc.

For 1. there he expressly says, There is a great mystery in M. Lilburns words;
we may not call it a Contradiction, because possibly like the Vrchin he has
two holes, or like the old Oracles, can speak double. In his Letter to Mr.
Kiffin, p. 7. thus he writes; I have in all quietness both publicly and
privately walked in all quietness and uprightness toward the Genesis and
Parliament, since I owned their Authority, and neither directly nor indirectly
meddled with them, to give them the least offense, or to occasion in them the
lest cause of jealousy of me, of endeavoring to undermine their power and
authority. If there were no Parl. since the Kings head was taken off, when did
this man own their Authority? or when was it that he was so quiet. This is so
deep and inextricable a riddle to unfold, that we must confess our selves here
Davus, not Oedipus.
THAT THOSE MEN WHO SIT AT WESTMINSTER ARE NO PARLIAMENT, either upon the
principles of Law or Reason, page 2. An illegal thing, page 4. A Juncto, or
pretended House of Commons, p. 16.

Again, in the same Book he confesses himself to be the Author of the
Impeachment of high Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and Henry Ireton,
Esquires, page 2, 3. 14, 15. 21. 24. So the Author of another Book called the
Picture of the Council of State, page 3. 24. Besides, the Author of that
false, seditious, and most scandalous Pamphlet called The legal and
fundamental liberties of the people of England, revived, asserted, and
vindicated, p. 4. 26. 30. 36. In all which See Cokes Institutes, the third
part, Cap. 1. p. 14. where Card: Poole is said to be a Traitor for writing a
seditious Book. So the fourth part of the Institutes, Cap. 26. Brooks Treason
for writing of Letters.
Books confessed by himself to be the Author, there is as much Treason published,
as was ever by any Traitor either spoken or written against any Civil
Government.

It is reported that in Athens the Judges were wont to sit in a dark place,
that so they might not see, neither friend or foe that came to them for
Justice. We cannot say thus (and speak the truth of Mr. Lilburns Jurie) who
were so These never read it seems that Law which says, the highster supreamest
upon earth cannot pardon or free the guilty of the punishment due to him A de
Le: l. Non minus.
impartial, illegal, unjust, as that they walked not by any rules, either of
law, justice, or conscience.

For 1. Whereas the Act of Parliament had judged it to be Treason, if any
person should maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, printing, or
otherwise openly declaring that the said Government is tyrannical, usurped, or
unlawful; All which most evidently he had done.

Again, whereas Mr. Lilburn desired the Jury to take notice that no man was to
be condemned for Treason, petti. Treason, or any such like Crime, but by the
Evidence and clear proof of two sufficient Witnesses. Here now were We know
not how this Jury can quit themselves from palpable injustice, unless they say
as the Rulers of the Jews taught the Soldiers, whilst they slept Lilburn was
stolen away.
two Witnesses (yea more) who upon oath attested, they heard him confess, that
he was Author of the aforesaid Book (and so consequently of the others) wherein
most unparalleld Treason was maliciously or advisedly written, printed and
published by him, against the Parliament, General, and Army, tending to the
utter overthrow of the Commonwealth.

One thing more we desire the Reader to observe (which shall remain upon It is
reported of a Persian King, that being disconte^ted, he might not do something
which was against the Law; he was told by another, that they had a custom
their King might do what he would. This Jury took some such kind of liberty,
finding no Law, they presumed they might do what they would.
Record to the perpetual dishonor and shame of that Jurie) whereas in his
answers to other witnesses (as Newcome, Took, Lewis, Skinner, Dafforn, etc.)
he had many artificial shifts, as to evade the weight of their Testimony: but
here he has Here M. Lilburn showed himself to be one of Antonies Scholars,
mentioned in Tullie, who wishes men, if they be troubled about a hard
question, to say nothing to it. Cic. de Orat. l. 2.
not one word to say for himself, though a thing wherein he was most
concerned: And no marvail, for he saw well enough, that Cokes Institutes,
Littleton, and other Law-bookes were here against him, condemned him, and as a
convict Traitor by Law left him to Justice.

3. As for the Evidence which was brought in against him by Colonel West
Lieutenant of the Tower, it was so full and home, that had not his twelve men
resolved (perfas pernef^s) right or wrong, to have waved the principles of
Reason, Law and Justice, they must of necessity here, have found him guilty.
The Note, that in giving this title to his Pamphlet, his meaning seemed to be
thus: that he would accuse and lay aspersions upon men behind their backs; and
if he should be called to prove what he said or written, then he would not own
it, nor answer to it, a true character of a back biter.
Salva Liberate (as he called it) was delivered to the Lieutenant by Lilburn
himself, the Original (written with his own hand, to which he had himself set
his name) was produced in open Court. In which paper he says, The present
Government is usurped, unlawful, tyrannical, a mock-power, a company of
Thieves, Robbers, Tyrants, men of blood, destroyers of all Laws, Liberties,
etc. That this was Treason by Act of Parliament, is without dispute. But now
for his Answer.

1. I will If you will not look upon what you have done, yet look upon what a
Heathen says, Dij odere omne nefas animo moventes. Hor. l. 3 Od. 4. God hates
with just displeasure such as strive, in cankered hearts black mischief to
contrive.
look (says he) upon none of your papers, I am too old with such simple It
seems he is no tame bird, but ut noctuae aves mauspiccatae noctu gementes (nam
haec illis vox est) mortalium invident quieti. Ita virulentia linguae semper
aliud spargit quo concordiam hominum disturbet. Plin. l. 11. c. 25.
gins to be caught. 2. It is but a single Testimony. 3. The Lieutenant is my
Adversay. 4. I think the Tower is not within the jurisdiction of the City of
London.
Here that saying is made good, fallacia alia aliam tradit, one falsehood or
subtlety brings in another. But to reply: Though Mr. Lilburn will not look upon
the Treason which he has committed, nevertheless the Jurie for their
Oath-sake should have taken it into consideration; yea, and seeing it was as
clear as the Sunn at noonday, that it was his handy work, Justitia omnium est
domina and Regina virtuum, sine qua ne Jupiter quidem Principem agere potest.
they ought to have proceeded against him for it accordingly.

Again, for his saying it was a single Testimony, we say, sine capite fabula,
here is a mere cheat. For what clearer and fuller Evidence can be brought into
any Court of Justice, whereby to cast a man in his case, then when an Original
writing, with his own name to it (subscribed by himself) is produced against
him to his face. To say then he will not look upon it, its foolish and idle,
neither does it help him any way in the least: For as Coke says, standing
mute (but these words Lilburn did not read to his Jurie) he shall have
Judgment as in case of High Treason.

Besides, here were more Witnesses then one; for what was showed under Lilburns
own hand, was by another under oath affirmed to be his, as being delivered by
Lilburn himself to the Lieutenant, telling him it was his, and he did own it.

What Alcibiades said of the Athenians, may very well be applied to this Jurie:
You take things from other men not by trial, but by trust, and do them rather
of So that here that old verse was verified, in Roma vale piu la putana Ch^la
moglie Romana. In Rome the Harlot has a better life, then she that is a Romans
honest wife. No doubt this Jury who quitted Lilb^rn from Treason, had they been
in power and place, would have condemned an honest man for his faithfulness to
the State.
affection and will, then out of any sure knowledge you have of the truth of
them.

For the rest of his Answer, as calling the Lieutenant his professed
Adversary, and desiring that he might be called off from the Bench: that he
had an action against him depending before the Judges at the Kings Bench, etc.
So, whether the Tower be not in Middlesex. As these things are not capable of
answer, so we let them pass. Only it is worth the observing, how Mr. Lilburn
here, and so in the rest of his answer, deals with his Jurie, like the
Clapwing or Plover, who to put a man out of his way, flies before him, clapping
her wings, and making a continual noise of purpose that he may not find out
her nest. So he uses many words, sometime commending himself, other while
aspersing others, but nothing proper or pertinent to the matter. And to this
end, namely, That the Treason which he had hatched against the State (as
chickens of the Cockatrice eggs) might not discovered.

4. For the other Witnesses, as Newcome, Took, Lewis, Skinner, Daffern, etc.
By all these the Treason whereof he was accused, was manifestly proved against
him: As the Lord Keeble at the same time well and truly declared: For proof
(says he) The words of the Statute Anno 13 Eliz. cap. 1. are: No person or
persons shall be hereafter arraigned for any of the offense or offenses,
unless the same be proved by the Testimony, deposition, and Oath of two
lawful and sufficient Witnesses. It is true, by the words of the Stat. two
Witnesses are required: but it it is not said that to every particular act of
Treason there must be two Witnesses.
single, or double, or treble, as some of them do amount unto as witness in
this, yea that doubles another man's witness: If I swear this thing, and another
swear the same, and a third the same, that is double upon all their Testimonies.

Again, speaking to the Querie, whether the Jury knew the Law better then the
President: if so, how it does appear.
Jurie, You are not bound affirmatively to have two Witnesses, but one witness
with circumstances concerning that is sufficient; that which should prevail
with you, is to consider the strength of the Accusation. And a little after; I
do not know in one particular that there is a Testimony single, but it is
aggravated with many circumstances. And what he then spoke, was most true,
namely that the persons against whom Lilburn objected (as to be single
Witnesses) they were as to the matter of fact, or Treason laid to his charge
double, yea treble witnesses in Querie, If a Judge in giving direction and light
to a Jurie, shows them what the Law is in such a Case, and they
notwithstanding (regarding neither Law nor Reason) do only what is suitable to
their lust and will. Whether the supreme power that is above them may not Null
such an unrighteous action, and justly punish the wicked doers.
Law. Neither could he produce any thing out of Coke, Littleton, or any other,
where five or six witnessing one Treason, in several places committed, but
they are (not single) but joint witnesses, legally and formally, though but one
present at a time.

A man is easily persuaded to do that thing which he purposes and has a mind
to do. That the Jury without examining the Fact, or considering the Witnesses,
were resolved not to find him So that it is appare^t these men either knew not,
or believed not that saying Victima haud ulla amplior potest, magisque optima
martari Jovi, quam homo iniquus.
guilty, it is as clear as the light; for what Lilburn quoted out of Books, was
so falsely applied, as that every man which has but common sense may see it.

5. If we should go over the particular Exceptions in his answer, which he
took up against the Witnesses, this would very much aggravate the injustice (to
say no worse) of the Jurie, that they should be led aside from the rules of
Justice and Equity, contained in the Moral Law of God and nature, or sound
natural reason, and that only by As a Child will let go a pearl, if you put
a Babble into his hand: so these men were centented for Lilburns toys and
trifles to give up Law, Reason, and Justice.
wind and empty words. To speak of some particulars which may seem to have
most show of Reason.

1. Concerning the Errataes mentioned by him, what had the Jurie here to do
with them; the Law says L: qui habebat Ad: Man: Test. D^ctr.
Error in sylliba non vitiat Actum, mistakes in syllables excuse not Treason.
This business lay between him and the Printer; and if there were more Treason
published in the Book, then was in his Querie, how the Jurie could be
satisfied that there were any Errataes in the book, for he was but a single
Testimony in this case.
Copy, he might (if he would) have charged the Printer with it.

But 2. who could better tell then he, what those If some men should have made
an Errata to that Book, they would have advertised the Reader, instead of Sir
Arthur Haslerig, that he should read Lieut: Col: J: Lilb. a wi^ bloody, and
tyrannical person, who by several ways has attempted to murder, and by base
plots, conspiracies, and false witness to take away the life of the Genesis and
others. If i^ had been thus corrected, other things would have been tolerable,
and more true.
Errataes were, and of what consequence as to the altering of the sense, and
therefore as it concerned him, and no man else to look after that, so it was a
most absurd and idle Exception.

2. As ridiculous is that which he speaks of his Books: For any thing (says
he) the Jury knows they may be post dated, that is, made and written before
ever the Acts they are said to transgress had a being. O wit! surely the man
knew, he had a Jurie for his own turn, or otherwise would not have spoken so
vainly: For

1. The Books (proved to be given forth with his own hands) witnessed
otherwise, as to the date or time.

2. If such a thing had been so, yet it would no way have helped him, unles he
could have proved it.

3. A Jurie is not to enquire after Iffs and Maybees, but to look on the
present Charge, and what evidence and proof for it. Quae supra nos nihil ad
nos; and Augustine adviserh well: Melius est dubitare, de occulis quam litegare
de incertis, l. 8. c. 2. de Trinit.
It is better to doubt of secret things, then to strive for uncertain things.

3. Neither is that less froath and vanity, where he says, what he swears
(meaning Thomas Dafforn) is to a fact done in another County, and therefore his
Testimony is not worth a straw, its gone: Its invalid in Law, it signifies In
some Countries their money does not pass by weight or worth, but according to
the tale or number of the pieces. Its probable he thought the Jury only minded
the manys word he spoke, and not the worth or weight of them.
nothing, its not so good as a Spiders webb: By virtue of which the Marshals
Testimony, and the Governors of Warwick Castle, and also Colonel Purfroyes
need no other answer from me, but to pity them for their long journey they
have made to no purpose. It is truly said (and fulfilled here) (...). Eurip.
A bad tongue tells wonderful strange things. But did the man speak as he
thought? or rather remembering the proverb, The simple believes every thing,
he made account it was no matter what he said to the Jurie. If a man have
committed Treason, in ten or twenty several Counties; say in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, must he be sent to every County and Country, and there
be arraignd for each particular Treason, as in reference to the several places
where each fact was don? We need not enlarge here, he knew well enough when he
spoke these words, that both the He deals not unlike those wicked spirits
(commonly called Faries) who steal^ng the true child out of the cradle, do
convey (or suppose) and place instead thereof some Cha^gling of their own. So
what is Justice, law, and Reason, that he steals away, and gives the Jury a
Changeling of his own, as sometime self-praise, otherwhile cla^ours and high
words, and this contents them, as if it were the true Child.
Law and continual practice of the Nation was against him.

It is reported of one Oramazes, that he had an enchanted Egg, in which (as he
boasted himself) he had enclosed all the happiness of the world, but being
broken, nothing was found in it, saving wind. Mr. Lilburns head is like such an
Egg, in his conceit (and some others too) there is enclosed in it, all Law and
Reason: but the truth is, upon trial it does Like the ruin of Babel, at a
distance (they say) it seems great and high; but when a man comes near it, it
appears not so: So Lilburns Answer a great way off (not being inquired into)
may be thought to have Reason and Law in it: but come to a strict examination,
you shall find it vexnil praeter, as it is said of the Nightingale, Talk and
nothing else. A Disdiapason, or ill favored coupling of things together.
appear, that it is little else, then wind and emptiness; a multitude of
words, but nothing juditious, solid, or pertinent.

We have now dispatched the Jurie, and upon the whole shall only give the
Reader this Observation. Those that look on a Jugler doing his feats, or
playing Hocus Pocus, do admire at the sights they s^e, as thinking the same
almost impossible to be done. Whereas indeed, if they knew the way, it is
facile and easy, a very slight trick, and no other then what any other, even a
child may do. It is a So are all conspiracies mysterious at first: but as light
brought into a room, makes obvious and clear such things as were not seen
before: so this here as a ca^dle will let us see Mr. Lilburns Cabinet Council.
mystery, and a Riddle to many, how Mr. Lilburn, Arraigned for Treason,
appearing before so many Judges, Justices, Sergeants at Law, etc. The charge
brought in against him being of such high concernment, and so clearly proved,
should notwithstanding (for all this) be quitted, and not found guilty. Is not
this mirum? if not miraculum? a wonder, a wonderful wonder? But stay; its a
very Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus. M^s.
slight Trick, and easy to be done, if known: As how? why thus it is; Before
he comes to Trial, he gets the names of such men as are warned in to be of
his Jurie, and out of these (suppose thirty or forty) he chooses twelve, all
known to him to be as ill affected as himself to the present Government, and
such as are resolved to clear him Poets saign that Hercules brought help to
the gods against the Giants, and therefore was honored. Mr. Lilb. called his 12
men, the honorable Jurie. Could he do less then honor them, who had aided
him aganst Law and Justice?
in spite of Law, Justice, Judges, Proof, and Witnesses. Thus we see to Malum
faciliter esse, and bonum deficile est. Arist. l. 2. Nicoma^h.
do evil is no difficult thing, and Ad prave agendum parva satis occasio est.
Meander.
a small occasion here will serve. Neither shall he Male facere qui vult,
nusquam non causam invenit. Publ. Syrus.
miss the way and means to effect it, if he seek it.

Mr. Lilburn thus quitted (in the way and manner related) now we are to follow
him in his Actions, after his enlargement: And here we find him not long
after, A GRAND INFORMER, or Solicitor, attending the Committees, pleading in
all Causes, where he might have any advantage thereby. Yea so scandalous and
corrupt was his practice this way, as some of his own party were ashamed of
it, and reproved him for it, often to his face.

It is not unknown to many, Thus he blames Mr. Prudiaux Attorn: Gen: for
pleading all manner of Cases, and tak^ng large Fees. Le^er to the General, p. 2.
how vehemently formerly he had cried out against the Lawyers, for their
covetousness and corruption, in taking large Fees, and entertaining bad
Causes: Now in this, few before ever went beyond him, either in respect of the
one or other: Insomuch, what the King of France said of the Trent Fathers, They
would pare the nails of Kings, and let their own grow: So it might (and as
truly) be said of him, he would Mr. Lilburn here should have remembered that
saying of the Apostle, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, that
judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same thing.
cut the Lawyers short in their Takings, and blame them for undertaking
wrongful and unrighteous suits; but when it came to his own practice, he was
more criminal and fowl in the same particulars then they; Est enim proprium
stultiae a^orum vitia ^ernere, oblivisci suorum. Tul. de Offic. l. 3.
forgetting Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Unto a Teacher its no small disgrace,
When his own faults, reprove him to his face.


In the Apologue, the Countryman shuts his Catt into the Cupboard to keep his
Cheese: Now the Catt being there, devours both the Mice and Cheese too. Many
thought, because Mr. Lilburn had spoken so bitterly against the It is a witty
story of the Schol-master: a Scholar taking up a fig in the street, the Mr.
seeing it, was angry with him for it, and bids him throw it away, for it was
rotten and naught, the which the boy no sooner did, but the Master ran after
it, took it up, and ear it all up. It seems Mr. Lilburn had a mind to the
Lawyers Figg, in being so angry with them, to have them cast it away, and
afterward to take it up, and eat it himself.
Lawyers, that he would have pleaded gratis for his Clyents, or taken little
of them; but when they had made trial, they soon perceived, that from the
Cup-board, he was cr^pt into their purses, and sought, as to devour the Mice,
so the Cheese, the Lawyers, their money, and estates too.

Now howsoever for a while, he made this his Trade, to get what he could by
pleading at the Committees. Nevertheless, having been so long versed in
national Tumults and Disturbances, he was here, as a Fish out of the water,
until he had his hand again, in some public commotions.

About this time there was a dangerous Insurrection, and horrible Riots
committed in the North, with such (as malum malo) he closes, it being a
business most proper to his Genius, Maxima est vis vetustatis and consuetudinis.
former practice and experience: And howsoever he is not the first in the
mutinies, yet being once in, who but he, as to head the Faction, for the
effectual carrying on of that desperate design.

As we have not hitherto set down any thing of his miscarriages, but with care
still to the Mulia suavius est vera dicere, quam audere. Go^dis and auris,
mentis and singuae, rationis and oraetionis harmonia suavissima.
truth: so we shall here make a true relation, as the whole business has been
given in to the Parliament and Council of State under Oath, by many faithful
and eyewitnesses: The sum (as we have taken it from the Original) is thus.

At the expense of In former time men have been greatly honored and encouraged
for being instruments of bettering and improving the earth, and no doubt, had
this been his own case, he would have thought so to.
175046 l. or therabouts, there was drained or laid dry 160000 Acres of Land,
lying contiguous, within the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, not
worth before 3 s. and 4 d. an Acre, one with another, the which was made worth
some ten, other twelve, yea some twenty shillings an Acre. In the Manor of
Epworth the Note that we call them so here, in regard this narrative with a
Petition was presented to the State.
Petitioners had been in quiet possession of 7400 Acres for the space of ten
years, until the year 1642.

Now in June, 1642. many persons (whose names are in the Original) in a
tumultuous manner came into the Level, within the Manor of Epworth, and there
The Levellers will have no man to call any thing his, for its tyranny that a
man should have any proper land, particular propriety is devilish, the
mystery of Egyptian bondage, a destroyer of the Creation, a lifter up of the
proud covetous flesh, a bringer in of the curse again, a mortal enemy to the
spirit, and that which has brought in all misery to the Creature. New light of
righteousness, pa. 65. 58.
broke down the Fences, and destroyed about 160 Acres of growing Corn and Rape,
and others joining with those, continued rioting together from day to day, till
they had laid wast about 4000 acres of the drained land, and pulled down
several houses standing thereon.

Others afterward, several days (during the flowing of the Springtide)
violently forced open a Sewer, called Snow-Sewer, planted upon the River of
Trent, purposely to let in the waters; the which course they continued, till
they had This is according to the principles of the right Levellers. We declare
and protest (say they) against all Enclosures of Fenns, Forests, Fields,
Moors, Heaths, Parkes, Chases, which have been taken from the poor of the
Land, we are resolved to do our utmost to restore them again for the good and
benefit of the poor. A declaration of the Commoners of England.
drowned 8000. Acres of Here the Levellers went beside their Doctrine; they
say, When a man has need of any Corn he is to take the same from the next
Storehouse he meets with. New light of Righteousnesie, p. 47. But we do not
remember there is any thing said for drowning or burning of Corn: this
probably is Mr. Lilburns doctrine alone.
Corn and Rape then growing, and and the Corn-stacks generally half way, with
the greatest part of men's houses and habitations, by the space of ten weeks.
Now upon complaint to the Committee of Lincoln, order was given to open the
Sluice, and let out the water: but diverse people with Muskets and Pikes
defended the doors, and peremptorily refused to yield any obedience thereto.

Again in the year 1647. upon a Bill depending in the Exchequer by the
Petitioners, several Orders were made for re-establishing the possession with
the Petitioners, and order given to the Sheriff to assist them. But Daniel
Noddel an Attorney, with others came upon the place, armed with swords and
muskets to resist, whereby those Orders were altother fruitless.

The Petitioners being kept thus still out of their possessions, bring their
Bill at length to a further hearing; At which time the said Daniel Noddell the
Solicitor, had gotten to his assistance Mr. Lilburn and Major John Wildman: But
whilst the Case was in hearing, the Inhabitants began to riot on It is a
question among the Papists, whether a Priest may dispense with the traditions
of the church and give dispe^sations as the Pope does: It is resolved in the
negative; notwithstanding he may interpret any Order or Canon as to be the
Popes mind which is as effectual. This liberty we must grant Mr. Lilburne;
though he cannot dispe^se with the law, yet the sense of it lies in his
breast, and he can make it speak what he pleases.
3400. acres which were kept up before. When some certain fish appear at Sea,
it is a symptom among Mariners of a storm suddenly to arise: Mr. Lilburn
being now among the Rioting Levellers, there was nothing to be expected but
Tumults, and Insurrections one after another; and no doubt, all committed by
his advice and instigation. But to proceed.

Upon complaint to the Court of Exchequer, there was sent to the Sheriff an
Injunction, and writ of assiststance, to quiet the Possession till the hearing
of the Cause; but in his presence the Fences by multitudes were violently
thrown down, and the Rioters by force fetched away the Cattle of the Tenants,
the which they impounded; and refusing to admit any Replevins, constrained them
to redeem them upon their own terms, and at what rate they pleased.

In February, 1650. upon full hearing in the Exchequer, a Decree was made for
full establishing the possession again with the Petitioners, which was
published upon the place in presence of diverse of the Inhabitants, who having
gotten ( Noddel, Lilburn, and Wildman on their side) openly declared, that Here
the Levellers are practical to their Tenent, which is not to allow of any
Sheriffs, Judges, ^ustices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Aldermen throughout the
Nation, but all these as of Conquest and Tyranny, they will have plucked up by
the roots. Light shining in ^ucking: 1 part, p. 10, 11.
they would not give any obedience thereunto, nor to any Order of the
Exchequer, or Parliament, and said, they could make as good a Parliament
themselves. Some said, It is You may see before who taught them this, and where
they learnt to revile the Parl. Lilb. being now King in the Level. that is
fulfilled, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
a Parliament of clouts, and that if they sent Forces, they would raise Forces
to resist them. Moreover, from words they proceeded to Action, so that within
tenn days time, They are not punishable for all this by the principles of
Levellers. They say, No man is to he put to death for murder or any unrighteous
Crime whatsoever, nor to be imprisoned or punished any way; only such are to
work and eat their own bread: And he or they that shall inflict any other
punishment upon fellow Creatures, is an unrighteous Actor in the Creation: For
it is a mighty dishonor to our Maker, that one part of the Creation should
destroy another. New light of Righteousness, p. 60, 61. 69. Again, he that will
rule over, imprison, oppress, and kill his fellow Creatures under whatsoever
pretense, is a destroyer of the Creation, and an actor of the curse, and walks
contrary to the rule of Righteousness. The true Levellers Standard, page 9.
they totally debolished the whole Town of Santoft, and other houses
thereabout, to the number of 82 Habitations, defaced the Church, burnt Stables
and outhouses, broke in pieces a Windmill, destroyed all the Corn and Rapes
on the ground, not less then 3400 acres; so as the damage done at this time
appears by good testimony to be 80000 l. or more.

It is said of Sylla and Richard 3. that they commanded others, under great
penalties to be just and virtuous, whereas themselves walked clean contrary.
What a deal of talk, had Lilb. made of Honesty, Law, and Justice, and yet none
more injurious, arbitrary, tyrannical, then he, where ever he could thrust in,
and have opportunity to exercise the same: As by what follows will more appear.

The Land being thus laid wast, the meeting place defaced, the This also is
agreeable to the Levellers Doctrine, for they will not have any buying or
selling, any Markets or Faires to be kept, no civil trading at all; for to do
so, is to take the mark of the Beast. Light shining in Bucking. 1 part, page 3.
Now to destroy whole Towns at o^ce, is to put down buying, selling, and all
Commerce.
whole Town, with all the houses, mill, and outhouses depopulated, and the
precious Corn destroyed, and all this through Lilburns means and his
Confederates.

In the next place (the former being a preparative as the needle goes before
the thread) There is There was a peace concluded between Allyattes and
Astiages, by drinking each others blood, this was no other agreement but bloody
and cruel.
an agreement between Mr. Lilburn Cum socijs, and several men of the Manor of
Epworth: That in consideration of Dives qui fieri vult, and cito vult fieri:
sed quae reverentia legum, quis meius aut pudor est unquam properantus amari?
unde habeat, quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere. Juvenal.
2000 Acres of land (formerly wast) to be given to Lilburn and Wildman, and 200
Acres to Noddel, they shall There is all the reason in the world that he who
causes men to riot and rebel, should defend them in it.
defend them from all those Riots and Insurrections (a thing easily done) and
maintain them in possession of all the rest of the 7400 Acres before laid
wast, and keep them dry. Here deeds and writings were drawn up, and sealed
accordingly. It seems by this that Mr. Lilburn was of opinion, that (...).
money makes a man, and a poor man is neither excellent nor honorable.

This bargain being made, Mr. Lilburn then with Noddel and others, came to
Stantoft Church on the Lords day, where a French Congregation of Protestants
were assembled together, and most Reader thou art to take notice that it is a
Principle of the Levellers, that men must leave off all TEACHING and
instructing each other, there is no use of Sermons, Sacraments, or Prayer:
Preachers are the curse, and the spreaders of the curse, standing ponds of
stinking water; yea the zealous Preachers are no other then Scribes, Pharisees.
Judases, Traitors, Witches, Sorcerers, Deceivers, They and the People joining
together in public worship is an abomination. Gathering Congregations, Church
fellowship, and all outward forms, this ( say the Levellers) is to betray
Christ into the hands of Flesh, a deceit of the Devil, the government of the
Beast, Antichristian captivity, and it is to be under the tyrant flesh, a new
bondage, a wrapping men in confusion, the mystery of iniquity and only to
hinder Christ the great Prophet from rising. New light of Righteousness.
profanely forced them from thence, and told them they should not come thither
any more, unless they were stronger then they.

Having dispatched this Lords days work, he and Noddle go then to another
Manor, called Crowle, and there they agree with some of that Manor, Note how
this man boasting of himself (as it is usually his manner) in capital letters
writes thus. I am one that has the principles of Freedom and Justice ingrafted
in me, and of an Englishman that loves my Country above all the Countries in
the world, and in a great measure has the sense of my duty in acting toward
its freedom and welfare engraven upon my very heart. In his letter to Mr.
Kiffiin, p. 6. compare his actions and words together. In the Olympic Ga^es he
that was Conqueror, did not put the Garlad on his own head, but stayed till
another did it for him, But Mr. Lilburn is always forward to commend himself.
It seems he dwells by bad neighbors.
to assist them, as they had done the people of Epworth, to get the Commons
into their possession: In order whereunto, they advise them, that they should
impound the Tenants Cattle; and if they repleev'd them, to impound them
again, and to break down all their Fences, and to eat up all their Crops,
and so to tire them out, unless they became Tenants to them.

This mutinous counsel of theirs was immediately put in practice; whereupon the
poor Tenants being terrified, and seeing their condition was like to be no
other then their Neighbors, through necessity (and seeing otherwise they were
undone) took leases from Jasper Margrave, and George Storin, who gave bonds to
save them harmless: Thus were the Petitioners Lucrum improbis justitia fit
praestantius.
outed possession of both these Manors.

When Dyonisius (in the story) had robbed an idol Temple, and at his return by
Sea had a fair gale, and pleasant weather to waft him home with his spoils;
See (says he) how the Heavens smile upon us, and how the gods are pleased with
what we have done. It Is likely enough, all things going thus prosperously
forward, Mr. Lilburn might say in his heart, God has forgotten, he hides his
face, he will never see it: but a Heathen could have taught him otherwise,
(...).
cernit deus omnia judex.

But to proceed with our discourse: At the making of those Leases, Nodell
openly declared in the presence of twenty persons, that he would lay twenty
shillings with any man, that AS SOON as Lilburn came to London, there should be
And reason too. For what Truant would not rather have the rod burnt, then to be
whipped with it.
a new Parliament (no doubt but the other had told him so) and Lilburn would
But where then is the people liberty and freedom if M. Lilburn may do all this?
call this Parliament to an account (so said Jacke Stra^ and Wat^yler) ^urther
adding, that seeing they had now Post dulcia a mara, sweet meat will have sour
sauce.
finished this of Lincolnshire (meaning by riots and fraud gotten the lands
from the Petitioners) they Not stay till they are sent for. But note here, how
to go from Town to Town, and cast down I^clo^u^es, this the law mak's levying
war, and so Treason, how will Noddel answer this?
would go over into York shire to the rest of the Levells and do the like
there, and so would g^ve So do Thiev's make work for the Hang man, but they
had been better to have sat still.
work enough to the Attorney General.

One thing more at another time was delivered by the said Nodell; Having now
stated their Case, they would print it, and nail it the Parliament door: and
if they would not do them Justice, they would come up, and make an outcry, and
And why not destroy them too, as so many Weasels and Poulcats? It seems the man
is but a learner yet.
pull them out by the ears.

Neither is it to be forgotten that the aforesaid agreement being made, viz.
the 2200. acres of land to be divided between Lilburn, Wildman, and Noddel,
this they caused immediately to be measured out, and took the same into their
possession according to the proportions mentioned. And agreed with several
persons to let out some considerable part thereof: whereupon Mr. Lilburn he
repairs the house built for the Minister, partly pulled down by the Rioters
before, and puts his servant therein to keep possession; and having driven away
both the Shepherd and the Flock, he employes the place in which they
publicly met, to the use of a Stable, Cow house, Slaughterhouse, and to lay
his hay and straw therein. This being so, nomen mutatum; Instead of Sir Arthur
Haslerig, Lilburns name being read, whether the Petitioners may not truly say
in A just reproof to Haberdashers Hall, p. 37. Again as in another place, Mr.
Lilburn has most maliciously, premeditately, and in a despite and contempt of
the Law of England, and most treacherously in subversion thereof, has
exercised a tyrannical and arbitrary power over and above the Law. A
preparative to a Huc and Cry, page 36.
his own words; Lieut. Coll: John Lilburn (and his associates) have destroyed
and levelled our proprieties, and in our Case subverted the Laws and Liberties
of England, and exercised an arbitrary and tyrannical power over us, without
any shadow or color from Order, Ordinances, or Act of Parliament, to the
unsufferable and unspeakable indignity and dishonor of the Parl.

We shall add no more, but close with this; It is witnessed upon oath that Mr.
Wildman was present when Mr. Lilburn made the bargain, That they two in
consideration of Nec venit in mentem quorum consideris armis.
2000 Acres, and 200 to Noddel of the land so laid waste, should defend the
Inhabitants from all Sueonius writes, that a Physiognomer being demanded what
he thought concerning the natural inclination of Tiberius the Emperor,
Answered, I see in him (...) dirt mingled with blood: Thereby intimating that
he would prove a covetous and cruel Emperor; the dirt in his complexion
representing filthy lucre, and blood, cruelty.
Riots, both past and to come, and at their charge maintain them in the
possession of the 52000 Acres: And likewise was present, when the Deeds were
sealed to Mr. Lilburn and himself, of the 2000 acres according to the
conditions aforesaid: so that the truth of the Accipias nunc O anium insidias,
and crimine ab uno disce omnes: Virg. Aene. lib. 2.
Narrative is not any way questionable.

Because this business is depending in Parliament, (who no doubt are very
sensible of the high Insolences and abuses committed, and will do Justice
therein accordingly) we shall say the less to it, only will give the Reader
some Observations upon the whole.

1. Howsoever Mr. Lilburn seems sometimes to be so tender of the Law, as if
none like himself were so conformable to the practical part thereof. It
remains upon record, to the lasting infamy of the Cardinal of Cremona, that
standing and pleading against Priests marriages, was himself taken the night
following in bed with a whore. No less is it a sin and shame to this man, to
plead so much as sometime he will do, for Law and Justice: and at other times,
when it is to satisfy his own lust and pleasure, not a greater tra^sgressor
of law and justice then he.
Nevertheless, where he has seen profit and advantage, there he has made
it but as a Spiders webb, blown it easily away, and broken thtough it. Coke
sometimes is his great Master, but in this business of Hatfield Chase, he will
allow of no such Cook, to dress his meat.

In the third part of his Institutes concerning high Treason, he has these
words: Ch 1 p. 9, 10
There is a diversity (says he) between levying of War, and committing of a
great riot, a Rout or an unlawful Assembly. See Rot. Parl. in Cro. Epipham.
20. Edw. 1. Rot. 23 Humfrey de Bobuns Case 4 Eliz. 210. b. Dier. See the Stat.
of 2 Mar. Cap. 2. By which grand Riots in some Cases are made Felony. Pasch.
39 Eliz. by all the Judges of England, he being Attorney Gen: and present.
For exampl, as if three, or four, or more, do rise to burn, or put down any
Enclosure in Dale, which the Lord of the Manor of Dale has made there in that
particular place, this or the like is a Riot, a Rout, or an unlawful Assembly,
and no Treason. But if they had risen of purpose to alter Religion established
within the Realm, or Laws, or to The very Case which Lilburn undertakes to
defend the^ in, both in respect of what they had done, or should do.
GO FROM TOWN TO TOWN GENERALLY, AND TO CAST DOWN INCLOSVRES, this is a
levying of War (though there be no great number of the Conspirators) within
the purvene of this Statute, because the pretense is public and general, and
not private in particular: And so it was resolved in Case of Richard Bradshaw,
Miller, Robert Burton, Mason, and others of Oxfordshire, whose Case was, That
they Observe how the like was practiced by the persons formerly mentioned, and
a resolution taken up to go forward, and to cast down Enclosures and Towns one
after another.
conspired and agreed to assemble themselves with so many as they could procure
at Enslow-Hill in the said County, and there to rise, and from thence to go
from Gentleman's house to Gentleman's house, to cast down Enclosures, as well
for enlargement of Here we may see what fair pretenses can be made for foul
offenses. It was for Enlargement that Mr. Lilb. had a chief stand in those
Riots, but not to enlarge high ways but to e^large himself with 1000 acres:
Space and way enough for one time.
high ways, as of arrable lands: And they agreed to get Armor and Artillery
at the Lord Norris his house, and to wear them in going from Gentleman's house
to Gentleman's house for the purpose aforesaid, and to that purpose persuaded
diverse others, and all this was confessed by the offenders. And it was
resolved, That this was a compassing and intention to levy War against the
Queen, because the pretense was public within the Statute of 13 Eliz. Cap. and
the Offenders were attainted and executed at Enslow-hill.

How Mr. Lilburn here can Here we suppose Mr. Lilb will need some Logic with
his Law, either in Actu signato, and quo ad speciem, or in actu exercito, and
quo ad invidium, how speciated by its object, and individuated by is
circumstances.
quit himself from Treason or Fellonie according to Coke, unless by a Jurie
of his own choosing (who will not find him guilty for any Insurrection, or
Conspiracy against the State, be the thing never so clearly proved) we leave it
as a Querie to men, better skilled in the Law then our selves.

But 2. by this it does appear, that he remembered not the proverb, A burnt
child dreads the fire: For who but Hanniball used to say of Marcellus, that he
was such an Enemy as would not be quiet whether Conqueror, or conquered. Mr.
Lilb. (thanking his honorable Jurie) came off Conqueror, yet he could not for
his life sit still, but there being a Co^motion and Insurrection in the
Country, yea though but one, yet whosoever is out, he will be sure to have his
hand in it.
himself, having a little before so narrowly escaped punishment for sedition,
would have thrown himself again head long into the danger? Theseus is said to
cut off his golden locks, least his enemies should take advantage by taking
hold of them. It is possible he may think, that to make tumults and commotions
in the Nation, is an As Ishmael might have gloried when it was said of him, He
will be a wild man; his hand will be against every man, and every man's hand
against him.
ornament and credit to him: Notwithstanding, seeing he gives his Enemies
hereby so much advantage, as to take hold of him, it were better he did cut
off those golden locks, in giving over such contentious courses, which will
prove his ruin and fall at last.

3. Should such a president as this be left without due execution of Justice,
in what The Law says, paena unius est multorum metus. Praes I^u: In Cod. lib.
3. c. 27. ad leg. Jul. Again, Qui punit injustos, in caeteris prohibet fieri
injuriam.
danger were the whole Commonwealth? For if men shall be secured and protected
from the Law for all their riots past, and what after they shall commit, what
should hinder the multitude from raising continual Insurrections every where?
and to make Lilburns plea, Propriety, Liberty, Free-Commoners, etc. In the
days of Ptolomeus Philopater, when the huge and great Anchor of the ship
Thalmegos was laid out upon the shore, the children of Alexandria did ride upon
the stalk, and crept through the ring of the Anchor, as if it had been made
for pastime of Children: But wise ship-men knew it was appointed for better
use; namely to stable and make sure the great Vessel, in great and tempestuous
storms. Just so do some men serve the Law, if the Foolish birds frighted a
little at first with the Husbandmans scar-crow, and after a while observing
that it stirs not, are bold to sit upon it, and desire it: So Rioters and
Mutiners, when they see the law is not put in execution against them, become
the more bold, and proceed from evil to evil.
execution thereof be neglected, they are ready to ride on it, and runn through
it, as if it were made only for sport: But wise Statesmen know it was
appointed for better use, namely when Turbulent spirits cause Riots and
Commotions in the Land, to preserve then (in such a storm) the great Vessel of
the Commonwealth, by a due and careful proceeding against them, especially to
make the Pectora magnis obsessa malis non sunt ict^ ferienda levi.
Authors and Ringleaders Exemplary.

Thus we have showed what Mr. Lilburns carriage and deportment was, before his
Banishment, and have fully proved the Assertion or Charge, to wit, That no man
more deservedly has been banished out of the Commonwealth of England for
grand misdemeanors against the Reipublick then he. And therefore it is not true
(as we said before) that the reason and cause of his banishment should be of
some difference or particular Quarrel between Sir Arthur Haslerig, and him.
Neither is it true which he writes to the General: In a printed letter, p. 2.
That Primats business and nothing else, was the cause of his Banishment. For
howsoever that business occasioned his banishment, yet originally and chiefly
it was not the cause; but the Our State here followed that saying, Cuncta prius
tentanda; sed immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Ovid.
whole series of his former Treasons practiced against the State, he having
made it his For not only before his banishment, but whilst he was beyond Sea,
and since his return, he has sought the ruin of this Nation: And therefore we
may well say, a continual and constant work.
continual and constant study and work, to destroy the welfare and peace of
the Nation.

Now to the end that neither he himself, nor any other, may think we have
taken this work in hand, either without cause, or not called thereunto, we
desire it may be noted, how we are in a manner dared and challenged to it. If
the Should he not be well employed to reply to his slanders and falsehood,
Regium est, male audire and been facere.
General (says he) or He has bin answered before: And being not able to
clear himself from the several treacherous plots laid to his charge, and
proved, see how he comes off: As the Beast Doron, casting his Excrements at
them. Arraignment, page 3.
any other for him, have any thing in imagination or supposition against me, to
lay to my CHARGE, let him or them STAND UP AND SAY TO THE UTTERMOST, I crave no
favor at their hand.

To set forth things by supposition or imagination, we abhor it (though it has
been his constant practice against other men so to do) but whatsoever we have
declared, as to his seditious and factious designs, are real and certain, as
being either published by himself, or under oath asserted by sufficient
witnesses.

From England we are now to follow Mr. Lilburn in his actions and procceedings
beyond Sea: And here we find it true, Non gens sed men's; though the man have
changed the Air, and be under another Climate, yet no way altered, (but rather
worse) in his malicious practices against this Commonwealth, so that the
saying is true (and fufilled here) Magna vis est consuetudinis, quae non modo
lex ipsa, sed altera est natura: neque enim solum lege^ imitatur sed and vincit
legem adeoque plus valet quam lex ipsa. Arist.
great is the force of Custom, which is not only Law it self, but another
nature, yea which breaks Law, and prevails above it: so that Consuetum quidquid
est, tandem praesumitur justum.
what a man is It is Like a man that moves a stone on the top of a hill, which
never cease running and tu^bling till it come to the bottom: so is he in his
desperate designs against this Commo^-wealth, unwearied and restless. Facile
vocaveris cacodaemona, sed vocatum non facile repuleris.
accustomed to do, he thinks it at length to be lawful.

We have proved before, that no man has been banished out of this Nation for
greater Crimes then he had done against the Government established. Our next
Assertion is this; No English Exile in the time of his banishment, showed more
malice, or contrived greater Treason against England, then Mr. Lilburn did
against this State, in the time of his Residence in the Netherlands.

We know what it is to bear false witness, and therefore are Veritas res
omnium justicima. Multo suavius est, vera dicere quam audire.
careful not to set things down otherwise or further, then we h^e most evident
and clear proof for the same.

1. Never was a State by the mouth or pen of any Exile (we exempt not Parsons,
nor any other Jesuit) made more execrable, odious, and detestable, then he
has rendered Ours, to Foreign Nations. But that we have it under his own hand,
otherwise had it come by report or hearsay, we should not have believed it,
being so unparalled, scandalous, and malicious. Thus he writes: Lilburn
Revived, p. 6.
O renowned and worthy Heathens, far surpassing in honesty, and far surmounting
in Justice and Righteousness, our great pretended Christians, the Governors
in England, that How could he in his coming over have any hope to be safe
under such Governors: It is probable he expected no such thing from them: but
having made them odious before hand, he made full account that others would
have joined with him in cutting them off.
judge no means nor ways, though never so abominable in themselves, too vile
for them to undertake for the accomplishing of their own ends. Whether it be
treachery, murder, perjurie, breach of faith, or what ever it be: And who have
cheated all manner of Interests, that ever yet in their lives they dealt with;
and hold it an undoubted Article of their Faith for the support of their state
and policy, that it is not fit nor convenient for them to keep Faith with
Note how in his Book Entitled, A defensive Declaration of Lieut: Colonel John
Lilburn, he speaks not a word of this, nor any way repenting for it, but of a
Pass, that he might come speedily home, as if our State would have been glad
to have received him, with all his treachery against it.
ANY INTEREST OR GENERATION OF MEN IN THE WORLD longer then it serves their
own end: Being absolutely in their own thoughts (as their constant practices
sufficiently declare as clear as the Sun at noon day) tied by no Engagement,
Declarations, Protestations, Oaths, Covenants, or Contracts whatsoever, that
even amongst Pagans and infidells themselves are most sacred, longer then they
please.

Our Enemies being Judge^ was there ever more reproach and contempt cast upon
any Government? Is it imaginable that any people under heaven are such
monsters, monstrous monsters, as he is pleased to report of us? was not this
(if believed) enough to have raised up all foreign States against us? Who
would desire our Amity or Friendship were these things so? What Cavallier or
Malignant could have done more to have advanced Charles Stewards Interest?
Where the building is green and not dry, things are the sooner put out of
order: Mr. Lilburn knew our Commonwealth was new and tender, and therefore as
taking advantage before it was fast and well settled, he makes account the
easier to overthrow it.

There is a kind of Serpent, the nature of whose venom is such, that if it
enters into the body, it provokes to vomit, and causes the person to bring up
whatsoever is in the stomach, in thick and filthy fleagm. The Serpents sting
being entered into this man's It is worth the noting; after he had thus basely
reproached the State, he ads, If any of their mercinarie pen men dare be so
impudent as to deny this that I now say of the^, and endeavor in their behalf
to prove the contrary: I dare hereby engage my life and reputation by abundance
of evident, declared, and known instances, to prove these my present assertions
as clear as the sun in its most glorious shining. But this is a vapor, for his
manner is not to stand to the justification of his writings: As for example, at
his Trial in the Guild Hall, I do not own a jot, a line, a word, a syllable,
or any of them: and so it is likely he will do here, not own any thing, which
denotes a man of a cowardly spirit, having put his hand and name to a thing,
afterward to say, I will not own it.
tongue, see how he vomiteth; Only it is a marvail that the stink thereof had
not poisoned himself.

Neither is this all, but he has more and worse in another place. You have
rendered your selves (says he) the scorn and contempt of all Europe, having
given too just occasions to the Nations round about you, to judge you less
faithful, and your Oaths and Promises less to be regarded, then Turks,
Pagans, and Infidels. Your most reproachful and perjured Actions, have rendered
your selves and your Religion in the eyes of the sons of men, He faith
himself, that he has a quick and sharp pen; he might have added, and a
tongue sharper then an arrow.
more contemptible, then ever the foolish and ridiculous actions fathered upon,
and said to be committed at Munster in Germany by John of Leyden and
Knipperdoling, whom in folly, murder, madness, and ridiculousnesse you have
visibly in the face of the world out-stripped: And already made good the truth
of the worst of the Kings sayings against you, or the sharpest and bitterest of
his pens against you: And who in history must leave behind you, to future
ages, the blackest name that ever the sons of men had, and for you no defense
or excuse, or shadow of a bare figleaf-covering can be made for you. Here we
may see how falsely he speaks, when he says: In all my actions and carriages
beyond Sea, I have been to the utmost of my power, understanding, and ability,
as studious and industrious a real wel-wisher to the prosperity of the people
of ENGLAND in general, as ever I was in my life. A defensive Declaration of
Lieut: Coll: John Lilburn, page 16. He knows, qui nescit dissimulare nescit
impe^rare.


It was the policy of Ziba to devise a lie against his Master, and then to
speak of it himself unto David, whereby to alienate the Kings affection from
that honest man: So did Nero, when he had set Rome on fire, he falsely charged
the Christians with it.
The very same here, is Lilburns design; he raises falsehoods and slanders
against us, and then spreads them abroad in other Nations, as thinking by this
means to divide all people from us.

But 2. As we have observed before, how Mr. Lilburn (like the Pope) makes our
Governors State-Hereticks, and then proceeds to cutting off: So it was his
design beyond Sea. And because this business is of great concernment, we shall
therefore first set down the particulars whereof he is accused, and by whom,
and then give the Reader some rational Considerations, as to the truth of the
thing.

1. Isaac Berkenhead affirms, that he heard Colonel Charles Lloid, Engineer
Gen: and Quartermaster Gen: to the late King, Captain Luke Whittington, Agent
to Charles Stuart, Captain John Titus, and Captain Bartlet say; That Lieut. Col:
John Lilburn had In the Laws of D^co there is nothing memorable, but that it
was appointed death, for the least crimes; there is hardly any thing remarkable
in Lilburns writings, but the fury and madness of the man, as if he would
kill and destroy every body that is in his way.
proposed several times to Sir Ralph Hopton, and sometimes to Coll: Charles
Lloid aforesaid, and several others, that if the aforenamed persons would
procure him Well may the love of money be said to be the root of all evil.
For what wickedness is there, but a covetous man will commit, if he may gain
by it.
10000 l. he would destroy the Lord General Cromwell, the Parliament and
Council of State that now sits at Westminster, and settle Charles Stuart
King of England (as he called him) in his Throne in England, or else he would
have a piece of him nailed upon every post in Bruges.

I further observed (says he) from Lieutenant Coll: John Lilburn and others,
who told me of his actions, that the Lieut: Colonel did not only move with
much violence and earnestness, showing which way he would bring this his
proposed design about; but This is the more likely to be true, because when he
was in England it was his constant practice to go from place to place to stir
up as many as he could to seditious courses.
went from person to person, whose reputation he thought could O cives, cives,
quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos.
procure so much as he proposed (for the advancement of this his declared
design) and whose affections and opinions were most suitable to further him in
such employment. Thus he.

2. Captain John Titus says, that the said Lieuten: Col: John Lilburn proposed
to the Lord Hopton, that if he would procure him ten thousand pounds, he would
One of Mr. Lilburns friends writes thus, It is a firm law, and radical
principle in nature, engraven in the heart by the finger of God in the
Creation; for every living moving thing wherein is the breath of life, to
preserve, award, and deliver it self from all hurtful things, destructive and
obnoxious thereto, to the uttermost of his power. Overtons Appeal, page 3. If
this be true, then has the Commonwealth of ENGLAND great reason to look
about, and beware of this man's design.
destroy the Commonwealth of England in six months, or he would have a piece
of him nailed upon every post in Bruges. The Lord Hopton told the said Lilburn,
that it could not be so facile a thing, though he believed it might be done,
but not in so short time; To which the said Lilburn replied; My Lord, I Will show
you how it shall be done, give me but the moneys I propose for, and I Will have
my Agents (for I have enough of them) that shall give me an account of all the
Commonwealth of Englands proceedings: And by those But who are they? Vain and
light fellows, like such as followed Abimilech.
Agents I will spread my papers abroad, that shall instigate the people against
the Parliament, and so by that We hope when this Case and Craft which is here
discovered, shall be understood by the people of this Nation, he will have
little cause to boast any more of Power here.
power I have already, and that power my Agents shall make by working upon the
people, I will destroy the Parl. the Council of State, and the Lord Gen:
Cromwell in half an hour. So he.

3. Captain John Bartlet says, About the 20 of July, 1652. in an Arbor in
Plaringdoll, three miles from Ostend in Flanders, Lieut. Coll. John Lilb. did
propose to Coll. Charles Lloid, Quartermaster Gen: and Engineer Gen: to the
late King, in the late Wars in England, and to Capt. John Bartlet the
Examinant, and Captain Luke Whittington, Agent for the King of Scots, that if
the said Charles Lloid, or any of the aforesaid persons would procure him It is
reported of one, who for the like sum of money was hired to kill a man: And
having done it, hung the money about his neck, and went up and down offering it
to any man that would cut his throat: post duca amara. Gravior. Inimicus, qui
latet sub pectore.
10000 l. he the said Lilburn would settle the King in his Throne (to wit,
Charles Stuart) in England: And that the King (to wit, Charles Stuart) should
never come into his Throne, but by the said Lilburns means.

4. Richard Foot affirms that he heard Mr. Lilburn speak these words: If my
Pass come not up, and I find that its Cromwell that hinders it, as it must be,
for it lies in his power, I will either kill him my self, or This shows what
for Agents he had.
send one to do it: Then one of the Merchants asked him how he could do such a
thing with conscience? he answered, tell not me of Note that the Levellers hold
that there is no heaven nor hell: No resurrection of the flesh, for to take it
so in the letter (they say) is a dream of our Preacher. New Law, p 78.
Conscience in this case: For if I am banished without law, conscience, or
equity, and deprived of my natural Air to breath in, which is every man's
birthright, I may How justly? whether is there any such Law in Magna Charta?
We mention not the Scriptures: For all that we call the hostorie of the
Scripture, Levellers say is an idol. New Law, page 97.
justly right my self if I can. If I would take a Hare or a Deer, I ought to
give them fair play because they are Beasts of Game: but if a Fox or Wolf, I
may use what device I can to kill him. So if Cromwell keep himself above the
law, that I cannot have my right by the law, I may kill him how I can.

The Sepiae, a certain kind of Fish, perceiving themselves in danger of
taking, by an instinct which they have, do darken the water, and so many times
escape the net which is laid for them. Mr. Lilburn finding himself here almost
taken, seeks to get off by such a device, as blacking the water, partly by
denial, and partly by aspersing the There is one Cap^. Wendy Oxford, whom he
often in his writings cries out against, as to be a Spy, and sought to murder
him: But we do not remember that he has any where laid any thing to the
charge of these men, as to tax the^ with any particular miscariages: So that
every rational man will give the more credit to what they have test^fied upon
oath.
Witnesses, as to be Spies; suborned, Rogues, Knaves, etc. Here now our
business is, to lay down some Rational Considerations, as to the proof of
the Charge; that is, whether the impartial and understanding Reader (walking
by the rules of Judgment and Reason) is to believe his bare and single denial,
though backed with Vows May not he lie in his protestations here, as he did at
his last Trial, when he took Jehovah to witness, and protested before God, men
and Angels, that he was not the person intended to be banished by that Act.
, Protestations, Asseverations, etc. rather then what these I upon oath have
attested. The whole Charge may be cast into three heads, or branches.

1 His resolution to kill the Lord General Cromwell. 2 To destroy the
Parliament and Council of State. 3 To settle King Charles (as he called him)
in his Throne in England.
Of these we shall speak in order.

Concerning the killing of the General, that he said it, and intended as much,
we have these Reasons to believe it.

For 1. this is no more then what his own It is likely so he will again, if he
can set it out in print, with his name to it; but here he knows how to help
himself if called to an account: Who can prove it is mine?
mouth has publicly spoken, that formerly he intended to do it; wherein
therefore is it improbable that he might not privately to a few say as much, as
before he had openly declared to the world. When a messenger came from Jezebel
to tell Elias that she had a purpose to kill him; if some other afterward
should have told the Prophet, that he heard her likewise say the same, had he
not reason to have believed this later report also?

Decipies alios verbis vultuque benigno:
Nam mihi jam notus dissimulator eris.
Others thou may beguile with words, and such face make:
But unto me art so well known, dissembler I Will thee take.
But 2. We cannot observe in Mr. Lilburns practice and carriage beyond the
Seas, any change of his mind concerning the murdering of the General Yet at
his first arrival, it was, my Lord and his Excellency, and yours to serve you
But the Gen: knows, non facile est eodem and A dulaore and ami^uti.
; but (if we may give credit to what is published under his own hand) an
increase and growth of desperate wrath, selfe-revenge, and blood-thirstinesse.
And so much is evident by such expressions. That grand Tyrant Cromwell, Cromwels
beastly and abominable tyranny: The cheats of that hypocritical and Alchymie
Saint Oliver, and his graceless Tribe. Their false, treacherous, Nec tibi dua
parnis, generis nec Dardanus author perfide, sed duris genui^ te cautibus
horrens Caucasis, Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera ^gres. Virg. Aeneid. l. 4.
hellish, diabolical and cowardly means. I judge him to be as false as the
Devil, and whom What man ever showed more hypocrisy, then after all this, by
insinuation and flatteterie to seek the General's favor.
I will never trust again whilst I breath, let him swear and protest never so
much: For For shame once in your life show your self like a man, and be not
still a beast.
shame my Lord once in your life learn to be just, ought not you your self (my
Lord) to be hanged? etc.

The Omnia membra in seen deficiunt, excepta lingua, quae nunquam quiescit.
Wolfang Franzius, hist. Animal. Tract. 4. Cap. 2. page 726. 272.
Aspe in her old age has all her members decayed, only her tongue is as bad
as ever. This Book wherein he thus reproacheth the General, is called Lieut:
Coll: John Lilburn If you wake a drunkard out of his sleep before the drink be
out of his head, he will rage and take on as if he were mad: It seems Lilburn
was ^a^ asleep, being drunk with malice and self-revenge, and being awaked
sooner the^ he should, carries himself like a Bedlam.
revived. Now this must be understood only of his venomous tongue: For the Law
holds every banished man to be dead. A dead man we know, smells not the stinck
which comes from him: It was an Argument that Lilburn was not revived, saving
his tongue, that such Trash and This is the Dung-trap with we mentioned before,
pa. 30. wherewith he has caught many maligna^t Gnats.
dung should proceed from him, and he no way sensible of the stink thereof.
But seeing this His tongue has bin like a mill loose hung, which makes a noise
and crackling, but grinds no corn. So with his reproaches and raylings, he has
filled all places with a noise, but nothing have we from him that is profitable
and good for the Nation.
unruly member of his is revived (with the Readers patience) we shall set down
a little more, that it may appear, the intended murder which he acknowledges
himself, and by others since is witnessed, was fixed and settled in his
malicious heart. In a letter to his Excellency thus he writes:

You know I have a quick and See how the vain man glories in his shame: As some
beasts when they have voyded their dung, turn about to smell to it
sharp pen, and therefore give me not cause to challenge you, or any of your
Champions Here is so much drawn out to discover the blackness and filthiness
of his actions, as all the soap he has made, had he it by him, would never
make him white and clean again.
to draw out a short Epitomy, or into a larger Charge, all that evil that in
your own thoughts you can colourably imagine unto the Bishops, Star Chamber,
Councell-Table, High Commission, or any person therein were guilty of, nay or
any person since their downfall, by you executed, for the highest of Treasons,
Tyrannies, and Oppressions were guilty of: and yet comparatis comparandis, for
me to aver you outstrip them all, and in particulars to undertake upon But
when his life is questioned for such things as he here speaks of, then he will
not own a jot, a tittle, a line, a word.
my life to make good: And that those sayings of God by the Prophet Ezekiel,
Chap. 16.48.51, 52. (mentioned in the Title page) may as truly and as justly be
v^rified of you, as they were of Judah or Jerusalem. And that you have
out-stript (comparatis comparandis) all those whom you your self count the
most wicked men, that you have pulled down, and therefore have done in Actions
as much as in you lies to justify all their wickedness, that in It seems he
forgot here, how he had condemned the Lawyers for their large Fees, and
pleading bad Causes, afterward did the like, or worse himself.
words you have condemned.

And besides (my Lord) what faith, what truth, what honesty can be in that
man, or in that generation of men? that by a constant series of his, or their
Actions, visibly and apparently declare: He or they hold it lawful to commit
When Domitian the Father of Nero heard the people, upon the birth day of his
son to make a great acclamation: he told them there needed no such rejoicing;
for nothing could be born from him and Agripina, but what would be pernicious
to the Empire. We may say the same of this man's brain-conception, it is so
pernicious to the Common wealth, as no man hitherto has had cause to rejoice
at the birth of it.
ANY MANNER OF WICKEDNESS OR BASENESS WHATSOEVER THAT CAN BE NAMED UNDER THE
SUN, for the accomplishment of his or their proposed end, whether in it self
it be wicked or righteous, yea to cheat, break faith with, and murder the
nigh^st Relations a man can converse with, when they We had heard none of all
this, if his ends had not been crossed, and so much confesses himself, and in
this has discovered himself, what he is.
cross his end. Yea, and for that end only to raise wars upon wars, to the
devastations of Kingdoms and Nations; the gulled, cheated, and abused peoples
lives, and truly being of no more value with him or them, then so many dead
dogs, serving him or them for no other end but to be his footsteps, to climb
up to the top of absolute and arbitrary power and pretended Authority, or
unlimited and unbounded King-ship. And that you my Lord ( Observe how tender
this man is of his good name, as not to be taken away behind his back: Thus he
writes, I entreat your Lordships and Honors (the same men whom he had before
called Tyrants and Murderers) as you are men of honor and conscience, suffer
not my good name behind my back to be rent and torn in pieces with notorious
lies and falsehoods A defe^sive Declar. of L. Col. J. Lilb. p. 20. Was there not
reason, that he who had raised against them, and behind their backs so many
notorious lies and falsehoods should be heard and satisfied.
particularly) are the man that is guilty of all this in my judgment and
apprehension.

When we see sparkles and flames to come forth from the mouth of an Oven, we
know that fire is still within: Those flashes of his tongue, what do they
signify? but fire continued still in the furnace. That is, the execrable
murder intended against his Excellency before his banishment, was kept up, and
continued in his heart, all the time of his abode in other Countries.

But 3. That the Reader may believe the forementioned Charge to be true, rather
then what he speaks to the contrary; we shall here set down his own words in
print, which do amount to as much, as by the witnesses is asserted in this
particular. Having declared his willingness to surrender his Estate into his
Wives hand, he adds this as the reason: That I might be left (says he) to my
self, to manage my own private business, as a master workman, or a poor
instrument in the hand of the Almighty, to the purpose to The tongue is a
scourge, and many by it have been wounded in their good name.
chastise that hypocritical and Alchymie, Oliver Cromwell.

Now because this might seem to be somewhat dark, the word Chastise being
ambiguous, he explains his meaning a little after, I am totally and positively
resolved It is by most believed, that his coming over was to make good what
here ^e says. It was well we knew so much before hand.
never to see England so long as Cromwels hateful, detestable, and beastly
tyranny lasts, UNLES IT BE IN A WAY TO PURSUE HIM AS THE GRANDEST TYRANT AND
TRAITOR THAT EVER ENGLAND BRED, OR THE PEOPLE THEREOF EVER READ OR HEARD OF:
And therefore once again in good earnest, Here is open war proclaimed, but he
forgets Nulla salus bello: pacem te possimus omnes, pax optima rerum quas
homini novisse datu^ est: pax una triumphis innumeru potio^ pax custodire
salutem, and cives aequare potens.
sound Trumpets and Drums, and have at thee Oliver with all my might.

Can any man imagine, that he would set this this to the world, and not say as
much (if occasion served) in the hearing of his Friends, especially to those
persons, for whose sake this chastising and pursuing of the General was to be
undertaken.

It is said of Ladas, Alexanders footman, that he ran so lightly and swiftly
upon dust or sand, as the print of his feet could not be seen: But this man
steps harder and deeper, as leaving still behind him such remarkable prints of
murder and Treason, that a man may easily trace him every way, as he runs along
before him.

There are several other passages in his writings, wherein he declares an
intent to do the Gen: some mischief. Let them give Oliver (he means the Dutch)
a box on the ear, on the one side in their own way, and give me but leave in
my own What his way is, you have seen it before, as likewise in the
examination of Capt. Titus; Give me (says he) but the moneys that I propose
for, and I le have my Age^ts, (for I have enough of them) that shall give me a
continual account of all the Commonwealth of Englands proceedings: And by
those Agents I will spread my papers abroad, that shall instigate the people
against the Parliament, and so by that power I have already, and that power my
Agents shall make, by working upon the people, I shall destroy this Parliament,
the Council of State, and the Lord General Cromwell in half an hour.
way to give him a box on the other ear: And if I do not do it heartily, and
to the purpose, I will freely give them leave to account me a knave for my
pains: And if I do it heartily and effectually, although it be not in every
punctillio in their mode, yet I am sure Note how he openly declares to be an
Enemy to this Common wealth, and would engage in the behalf of the Dutch to
the prejudice of our Nation: Quidquid hostis facit jure belli agit ac suspitit,
and licet turpiter saepe facit quod sit hostis, tamen cum hostis sit, turpiter
non bellum gerit. Arg. l. 4. Si sed quod D. Con. Obrump. Cause.
they can be no loosers by it.

We do not gather these things up, as thereby in any way to move the General
against him, or that he should be otherwise toward him then formerly he has
been: Suffer evil doers patiently. For Nobile vincendi genus est patientia:
vincit
Qui patitur: si vis vincere disce pati.


But we do it to this end, namely, to show that there is And the rather to be
believed, because we know not of any thing that he has to lay to their charge,
whereby the truth of what they do affirm should be questioned.
reason to believe his Accusers, and not he; seeing what they have witnessed
concerning his intent to murder the Lord General Cromwell, is no more then what
he did resolve to do by his own The Law says, Confessio superat omne
probationis genus. Confession is beyond all other kind of proof. Bern. in l. Si
confess: de Cust: reorum.
Confession. Again, since that time, is grown more malicious, and in his later
writings, has publicly declared a purpose to do the very same thing.

We proceed to the second particular, to wit, of his intent to destroy the
Parliament and Council of State. That this may be true, and the less doubt to
be made of it, consider,

1. During the time of his Banishment in the Netherlands, he counted the
Parliament no other then he had done before, John Lilburn revived, second
letter, page 7.
viz. Tyrants, Traitors, Murderers, Knipperdolings; Men that exercised a
tyrannical and arbitrary power, a kingdom of brambles, highly commending the
history of Independency, as the penman to be an understanding Author: and
among other passages cites these as It is no marvail that he calls this
remarkable and notable, for it is no more then what he uses to write himself;
so that in commending of it, he highly applauds himself.
most remarkable, and notable, where he declares and protests that the
Parliament as a combined treacherous Faction, have forced an Inter-regnum, and
Justicium upon us, an utter suspension of all lawful Government, Magistracy,
Laws, and Judicatories, so that we have not (jure) any Laws in force to be
executed, any Magistrates or Judges lawfully constituted, any such Instruments
of the Law, as a lawful Great Seal, or any Authority in England, that can
lawfully condemn, and execute a Thief, Murderer, or any other offender,
without being themselves called Murderers by the Law. Milo Crotoniates whilst
he was tearing asunder the stock of an Oak, his strength failing him, the
Clift suddenly closing, was held so fast by the hands, that he became a prey to
the Beasts of the field. The like thing is happened to this Historian; whilst he
was cutting down with the Ax of Treason the Commonwealth, he was caught and
laid fast by the heels.
All legal proceedings being now Coram non judice: Nor can this remaining
Faction in the House of Commons, show any one president, There have been
Presidents, Law and Reason enough, were not he and Lilburn like him who said,
Non persuadebis etiam, si persuaseris. We say, nulla tam sancta lex est quam
non oporteat, si salus populi postulet urgeatque necessitas, mutare. Bod. de
Reip. l. 4. Again, Quod non est licitum in lege, necessitas facit licitum.
Again, nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum.
law, reason, or authority whatsoever, for their aforesaid doings, but only
their irrational, tyrannical votes, and the swords of their Army.

Here we have Mr. Lilburn, and the Anti-Independent Historian, like Herod and
Pilate, made friends. And that Mr. Lilburn may have the more respect among
Malignants, he brings this understanding Author with him, who is (as he says)
a Cavallier sufficient, even in the highest, and yet speaks not reproachfully
or contemptuously, but honorably of him. But could he do less? seeing they
are here, not two, but Like Sampsons Foxes, though their heads be asunder, yet
their tayls tied together, with firebrands between, both seeking to destroy the
peace of the Nation.
all one in Trason against the State, even combined and knit together. But to
the point in hand.

It being his opinion that the Supreme Authority of this Nation is unlawful
and tyrannical, what rational man will not think, that without the least
scruple of conscience, he can as willingly and effectually destroy those men in
power, as so many Weasels and Poulcats, as to have formerly murdered the
Juncto, or Gentlemen sitting at Westminster; the later being (in his
understanding) as very Tyrants, Murderers, Thieves, as the former were: And
seeing his conscience was free thus to act, Querie, If he can get as many to
follow him as will enable him with his sword in his hand, whether he will not
do Justice and Execution upon those si^ting at Westminster, as he said he would
do Execution upon the former.
why might not his tongue be as forward to declare the same?

Then 2. That Mr. Lilburn did speak the words whereof he is accused, we have
reason to believe; because we find among his writings, that could such a thing
be done, it would content him very much, and the Authors of such Treason and
Murder, should be reputed the true lovers of the Liberties and Freedoms of
England: Lilburn revived, first letter, p. 12.
That it may appear our purpose is to deal heartily and fairly always with
him, we shall here insert his own words: So the Jesuits, when they would
persuade a man to execute any bloody design of theirs, for encouragement, tell
him that in doing so and so, he will show himself a true lover of the
liberties of the holy Church. The great Case, etc.
Only here is (says he) their alone fear that now troubles them, viz. that in
the absence of their Land Army, the true lovers of the Liberties and Freedoms
of England, should have had an opportunity thereby, to imbodie together, and so
force the establishing of their long promised, and long contended for Rights
and Freedoms: And then We know he looks for such a night, in which England may
have cause to say, venit summa dies and meluctabile tempus Britaniae, etc.
goodnight Oliver, and all his hypocritical Cheats.

It is an opinion among the Turks, that until men come to be of their
Religion, they are Meshumadim, sinners, and lost; but turning Turks,
Musulmamim, servati, as if then they were saved, and not before. Whosoever will
look over this man's Books, shall find, that so long as people are sober,
peaceable, well-affected to the Government established, they are (with him) no
lovers of the Liberties and Freedoms of England: But if they turn Rebels and
Traitors against the State (which he calls imbodying together) As Saul held
them all for his enemies that would not join with him to destroy David: Only
Doeg is his true friend.
then servati, gallant blades, true Burford friends, worthy Soldiers, etc.

3. Neither is it without ground to believe that such words were spoken by him,
considering what is here said, as to the means and way how he would destroy
the Parl. and Council of State, it is the same which elsewhere he declares
publicly to the world, viz. by There have been so many of these Agents whipped,
and sent to Bridewell (being the rascality of the Nation) as few desire to
follow the Trade any longer.
Agents which should spread his papers abroad to instigate the people against
the Parl. What these Papers are, and the issue and effect which he expects by
them, he tells us thus.

I have a long time in my imagination laid down a Cause si non Cast.
method to myself (which I would not That which is bred in the flesh will
hardly come out of the bones.
willingly go from) by me to be used in appearing in print again to the world,
rationally and Of this we have spoken, viz. the several wiles and ways which he
has used to destroy the Parl. and Army.
methodically, to prepare and make way for my former Appeal to the Here we
must understand his Agents, for to others his writings have bin a trouble and a
burden, but qualis herus talis servus.
body of the People of England. Now to know his meaning here; This writing is
intended against his cruel Judges, who merely for the accomplishing their
own ends, took away the Kings life, that so when they had slain him, they
might take possession of his Power and Estate, and at their pleasure Who took
away 2000 acres of land, and divided it?
divide it among themselves, and their slaves, and by the strentgh and power of
it, The fruit of a tree in the West Indies called Yogma, will fatten swine, but
it is naught for men. We see how this man fills his belly with reproaches and
railing, which to others is most hateful.
domineer arbitrarily and ^yrannically over the lives, liberties, and Estates
of the anciently free people of England, etc.

Therefore to destroy these Tyrants, I will (says he) do the best I can in my
Appeal, to discover the cheats of Alchymie Saint Oliver, and his graceless
Tribe in that Vote: Also I will Here some things are left out, viz. with
Machiavels principles, and Jesuiticall doctrine.
instruct the people of England, in the best way, method, or form that I can,
to set themselves in, to obtain the real exercise of their declared rightful
supreme power. And also produce them several Namely from John of Leyden, Wat
Tyler, Cades, Kets, and such like, having gotten the quintesence of them all.
Presidents from the practice of the people in the Ancient and most famous
Commonwealths of Rome, and the Ancient Grecian Commonwealths of Athens,
Corinth, Thebes, etc. If he have read such Stories, he can tell us something,
how the Supreme Authority of these Commonwealths dealt with Incendiaries, and
can tell us of hundreds, some that have been banished, others put to death for
less Treason, then he has committed against our State.
How they practiced their Supreme power upon many occasions, even upon the
greatest Generals, Noblemen, If he had not told us this himself, we should not
have thought he had read much more then Magna Charta, and our own English
Law Books.
Senators, or Parliament Men they had. And there is abundantly more Reason and
Ground for the people of England, NOW TO CONTEST EVEN TO THE DEATH for the
Election from among themselves of Tribunes, or Keepers, or Defenders against
the annihilating encroachments, that their present tyrannical Riders have
already made upon them, then ever in the days of old, etc.

Whilst there was a contest among the birds about a Rose found in the way, a
mischievous Owl came in the night and carried the flower away: It is probable
enough, could he but occasion the This contest which he speaks of is like the
Herb Cohobba, which. being snuffed up into a man's nostrils, makes him mad; such a
powder he gives to his Agents.
contest he speaks of, viz. make a dissension and breach between Parliament and
people, he would cunningly deceive all parties, and get the Rose to himself.
But let us hear what he says further.

And also I will His shows are like those fires which by night appear burning
on hills, which if a man follow, they will insensibly lead him into terrible
downfalls; the truth of which he has experienced himself, and many more by his
occasion.
show them Grounds and Reasons to demonstrate clearly to them, that there is in
manner a great necessity for them to contest for the establishing by a law (as
to contest for the fafety of their lives) those two essential Maxims, without
which England in a Commonwealth can never be free. viz.

First, that the Chief Commander of their Militia, or the General of their
Forces, by Sea or Land, be often removed, at least once every two years, upon
pain of The Romans in great perils created a Dictator, by whose command all
things were done It is much, seeing Mr. Lilburn is so skilled in history
(specially the Roman) that he acquaints not the people with this office; it is
likely he thinks they would not choose him, and therefore it is concealed.
immediate death upon the least refusal to surrender his Command.

2. That they make strict and sure provision for the keeping out at one and the
same time diverse of one family or kindred in their chief places.

Seeing Mr. Lilburn pretends to have some knowledge in the history of
Commonwealths, we shall tell him what was practiced in the Commonwealth of
the Lycians. There it was ordained that all those that propounded any Novelty
in matter of State, should deliver it in public with That which he has
published since his coming over concerning Parliaments, not having power to
alter fundamental Laws, is such a noveltie as he had been hanged for it, had
he published it among the Lysians.
a halter about his neck, to the end if their Propositions, were not found to
be good and profitable, the Authors should be strangled in the place: That
these things are Novelties, he knew well enough; and we know as well, that in
propounding them, he meant neither good, nor profit to the Nation: But like an
Enemy without the walls, casts Granado's and Wildfire in, not regarding
where it falls, so it may do some mischief and hurt amongst us.

But one thing here, is remarkable, to wit, how evidently his own gross
hypocrisy is discovered by himself. Mark all Readers that have sense; he
pretends as if the Liberties and Freedoms of the people were dear to him, and
hence it is, that he writes so much against Tyranny and Oppression. Whereas it
is The Jesuits protest to live by begging, yet so uti, vel non uti prout
commodum vi deretur, to do it, or not, as they see occasion. Hist. Trent, l.
10. so is he for the peoples Liberty, to speak or not to speak of it, as he
sees it is best for his own advantage.
otherwise, his mouth witnesses against him: For thus it follows.

If by the help and benefit of this intended Appeal, the people of England
come to assume unto themselves the true exercise of their public declared
power, that their present Tyrants in words have already instated them in, and
deal with my grand Adversaries thereby according to their demerits. Let my
bloody and malicious Adversaries THANK THEMSELVES IN NOT LETTING ME ALONE TO
SIT UNDER MY OWN VINE IN PEACE AND QUIETNESS. And so much has apeared in all
Incendiaries and disturburs of States: Only their own Interest, because they
have been unsatisfied in some things concerning themselves: Thereupon have made
Insurrections and Tumults, and to draw the people in with them, have cried up
Liberty and Freedom, whereas the public good was not at all minded.
So then if Mr. Lilb. had been let alone, and not crossed in his will and way,
there had been no Appeal made, No Hue and Cry after? Tyrants, Murderers,
Thieves, etc. nor any need or cause so to do. It was not the peoples Liberty
and Freedom that moved him thus against the State, but (as he says himself)
his own private Interest: namely because he could not have such things (as But
that we think he understands not Latin, otherwise one would have thought he
had read Seneca, where it is said, Pecunia ingens generis humani bonum: cui non
voluptas matris, aut blandae potest paresse pralis, non sacer meritis pare^s.
money, lands, preferment) as he expected: All which we know to be true, had
not his own mouth spoken it.

We come now to the third and last particular, viz. To settle Charles Stuart,
King of England (as he called him) in his Throne in England. That he should
thus speak, and promised so to do, we have these reasons to believe that the
same is true.

Neither has any man showed himself a greater dissembler then he has done in
this particular, viz. in doing as much as any man to have the K. put to death,
and afterward to pretend he was against it.
Lilburn revived, 2 letter, p. 6, 7. we only relate what he says himself as
speaking now to the Caval.
No man (says he) was more against the putting of the last King to death then
myself, and spoke more to the Grandees teeth about it, then all the Cavalliers
put together in one, avoidably durst have done. Yea so highly displeased was he
with that action, that had there been two sons of his own Judges in the high
Court of Justice, he would have This is the man, who a little before told us,
that if he had been let alone, he would never have meddled with matters of
public oncernment.
chopped off both their heads for conspiring to overthrow and destroy the
liberties of the Commonwealth: following herein that famous and renowned
Consul Lucius Brutus in Rome. See here how like another Jehu he calls out to
the Cavalliers, See my zeal to your Lord and Master.

Again, An Out cry of the young men, p. 2.
the King most illegally was put to death, by a strange, monstrous, illegal,
arbitrary Court, such as England never knew. This speech of his is much like
the Answer which Cicic. de divin.
Pythius the Priest gave to Pyrrhus the King of Epire.

Aio te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse. An Answer so dubious and discrepant, as
it cannot be gathered from it, whether He or the Romans should overcome: his
speech here is of the like ambiguity and darkness. For ye cannot directly say,
whether he thought the King guilty and worthy of death, yet so, as not to have
suffered in the manner he did: or whether innocent, and so not to have
suffered, (as to his life) in any judicatory way at all. Now in this, there was
some reason why he should not be The Turks Painter being to set forth
several Nations according to their dress and habit, leaves one people naked:
and being demanded a reason thereof, Answered, he knew not what apparel to put
on them. So we must here leave this man naked, as being ashamed and afraid to
speak out his mind as to the taking off the Kings head (as waving the manner of
the proceeding) whether as a King the people could have put him to death or no.
Machiavels maxim is, that in designs men must be close, and in Conspiracy
against the State, the complotters thereof must not pass the number of 3 or 4.
too open, for thereby he might have lost the Interest of some parties, in not
joining with him in the GRAND DESIGN.

2. Not only has he apparently declared, Prince Charles Apparent Heir to his
Fathers Crown and Throne, but likewise in his former papers has most
treacherously persuaded the people to receive him, as being a thing justifiable
before God and man, and very much to the prosperity and welfare of the Nation;
his own words are these.

I do not see but you may more justifiably before God or man join with the
Prince himself (yea I am sure Judge Reader, whether this man would not sooner
join with Charles Stuart, then with the Interest of the present Government, if
there should be any engagement in War between them; who affirms that it is
better a thousand times to join with him, then to the present Government.
a thousand times more justly) then the present ruling MEN: and if we must have
a King, Not for any love to him we dare say, but as a Thief, cares not how, nor
which way be take away the true man's purse so he has it. Just so it is here;
If he might but once see this Commonwealth destroyed; As for the persons, who
they were that did it, it would be all one to him, either Stuart or Turk.
I for my part had rather have the Prince then any man in the world, because of
his large pretense of Right, he being at Peace with all Foreign Nations, and
having no Regal pretended Competitor.

He that thinks Charles Stuart has more lawful right to the government of
this Nation, then the present Supreme Authority, and that the people should do
better, if he were here settled King: why may not we think that his coming
lately over, was of purpose to effect some such thing?

The Athenians having conspired against Darius the Persian, he commanded one of
his servants, that always as he sat at meat, he should thrice cry, here
memento Atheniensium, Sir remember the Athenians. As we find all along so much
treason and conspiracy plotted by him against the Commonwealth, so we know it
is our duty to speak of it unto such as are most concerned to look after it.
Praevisa minus Laedunt, fore-warned, fore-arm'd: It is easier to shun the
snare, then being in, to escape.

But 3. The great familiarity which was between him and the Cavalliers, whilst
he was resident in the Low Countries, It has ever yet been held a maxim of
all Statesmen, to look on those no other then Traitors, who keep close
corresponde^cy and familiarity with such as are known Conspirators a-against
the State.
is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of the Charge in this particular. And
for the pretenses which he makes, whereby to excuse him self, we find them to
be rather matter of proof, He would make us believe that the occasion of the
great familiarity between the D. of Buckingha^ and him, was, that he should be
an instrument for the others liberty here in England. And is not this a likely
thing, that Buckingham should be so simple, as to make use of him, or to
propound any such thing really to him? knowing him not only to be banished, but
one who^ the State of England did account as treacherous and dangerous to them,
as the Duke himself, or rather more.
then any way to weaken the Testimony. Those that were the Parliaments
Friends, with them he neither took, nor desired acquaintance: but such as
were known to be their greatest Enemies, were evermore his familiar and
special Associates: Insomuch as by letters from thence we were often
advertised, to take heed of Lilburn, who had such close and secret conversing
with our Enemy, as did plainly signify there was some treacherous design
amongst them against the peace of this Nation.

When the Carthagenians understood of Alexanders intent and great preparation
for Africa, Am^car sent one out, who feigning himself to be an Exile, and
banished, might be accepted with Alexander, learn his secrets, and as occasion
served, give him an account thereof. Mr. Lilburn would have made the world
believe that he was sent over into Holland as a Spy, to discover unto the
State here the counsels of the Cavalliers. But (hoccine credibile est aut
memorabile) how could he think that any Unless he thought us to be like the
Blemmye, a people who have neither heads nor eyes, and so could neither see nor
understand things though as clear as the light.
man should imagine such a thing.

1. Having protested against the putting of the Father to death.

2. Showed such large affection to the Son.

And 3. for this Government, none had more opposed it, nor done half so much
for to destroy it, as he had done.

So that the Cavalliers had no Reason to mistrust him, but might freely and
safely take him into their Counsels, there being nothing intended by them as to
the overthrow of the present Government, but wherein he was one with them, and
And as this is truth, so poena gravior gravius peccanteb: debetur paenae autem
leves non possunt refraenare Juventatis insaniam, and inge^ij ferociam: Neque
possunt ita facile rerum been starum contemptores ad temperantiam reducere.
more forward and active then any of them to put it in execution.

4. When Saul sought to excuse himself, he was demanded of Samuel, quid ergo
sibi vult vox pecudum istarum? what means then the bleating of the sheep in
my ears? So we may say to Mr. Lilburn, denying the Charge, what means the
tumult and noise of the Malignants for him? why are his Juries so corrupt, as
contrary to Law and Justice, do acquit him? wherefore do all seditious people
seek his As the Jews, though they were of several Factions, yet agreed all
together to have Barabbas released, who had made an Insurrection in the City,
and to have Christ put to death: so the Enemies to this present Government
(howbeit differing among themselves) yet in this do all accord, viz. to have
Lilb. set free, one that has sought to make many Tumults and Revolts in the
Nation, and would rather have honest men to suffer then he.
enlargement? It is not for any love they have to him, or desire of his
advancement: But knowing how artificially be can plead their Cause as to the
re-establishing of Monarchy, Tyranny, Episcopacy, under the fair pretense of
Liberty and Freedom, all this stir and trouble is made about him.

So the Rower in the Boat wastes the passengers over the River, they are
contented, though all the way he looks on the other side. What cares the
Cavalliers, which way Lilburn looks, whether he speaks for them or against
them, all is one; they know what his work is, and what he is come about, namely
to waft over if he can, Charles Stuart, and to set him upon the English Throne.

5. And lastly, this particular Charge is the more likely to be true, not only
because he hates the present Government, and desires the ruin of it, but
because there is no way more probable to accomplish what he would have done,
then to join with the Cavalliers in Charles Stuarts Interest. It is said of
Tiberius, he would have Caligula to reign, that he might destroy the people:
Upon such an account would Lilb. settle HIS KING among us, Hence is that
saying, Homo non homo; iratus. Again, magna ira multos peridit mortalium.
merely to destroy godly and honest men, in their Religion, Liberties, Laws,
Lives. Not of any good will to him, but that he might be It is reported of
Bajazet, that showing one day the pleasure of hawking to the Count Nevers,
caused almost 2000 Faulkners to be killed for one Hawk that had not flown well.
In such a way for all the world would he be revenged upon the Nation, because
some have not flown or acted to his mind, through discontent, multitudes must
perish for it.
revenged on those which would not have him to domineer and play the Tyrant.

Having showed his actions both at home and abroad, we now come to speak of his
return; And here are many things, very remarkable, as to the time, manner, and
other circumstances,

1. We are altogether unsatisfied, as to the occasion of his coming over. He
had before declared to the world; That England was too little for him and
Cromwell: And was totally and positively resolved (if he could choose) never to
see England, so long as Cromwels most hateful, detestable, and bloody tyranny
lasted, unless it were in a way to pursue him as the Tacitus mentions one
Vibulenus, much like this man, who caused a mutiny among the Soldiers, by
accusing falsely the Lieut. Now the things which he charged him with, were most
horrible, but all untrue; yet he thought it would take the more with the
soldiers, because he did accuse him of such foul and gross things.
grandest Tyrant and Traitor that ever Engl. bred: and had rather live in a
voluntary widowhood all his days, then to live under Cromwels bloody Tyranny.

Again, when he was here, he was scarce able to resist the dangerous and
hazardous temptations concerning the killing of him: Yea, and had resolved at
the Parliament door to have murdered him, but for the Reasons formerly
mentioned: These are his own words.

Now taking it for granted (as we suppose he would have it so to be taken)
that LIEUTENANT COLONEL JOHN LILBURN is not aliud stants, aliud sedens, one
while for the thing, another while against it; but as he says himself There is
a passage of his worth the observing: I was told (says he) that the Gen: upon
the Tuesday that I was called to the Bar, etc. appeared openly in the House as
the grand and principal man that caused me to be banished; in all which
regards and considerations, I was then of opinion, and yet am not fully
altered, that I had just cause to write and speak as evil of the General, as
my tongue or pen could invent: A defensive Declaration of Lieutenant Colonel
John Lilburn, p. 15. Note 1. That this was since his coming over. 2. How he
still raises his reproaching of others, from his own particular Cause and
Interest. 3. For such as do him wrong, he has just cause to write and speak
as evil of them as he can. This later is his own doctrine, not Christ's.
settled, fixed, constant, semper idem. We must necessarily conclude (and all
rational men with us) That the Reason of his Return was for the prosecution
and execution of his malicious and bloody intent: And because it is possible he
is as well skilled in Logic as Law, we shall frame an Argument, Thus.

Mr. Lilburn resolved and purposed, if ever he came into England, it should be
to destroy the Lord Gen: Cromwell:

But M. Lilburn in his resolutions and purposes is fast, settle, constant.

Ergo, Mr. Lilburns coming over into England, was to destroy the Lord Gen:
Cromwell.

Neither the Proposition nor Assumption can be excepted against, or denied; For
we have his own hand to prove both.

Gregoras his Fox (in the fable) being black'd over with Ink, told the Poultry,
he much repented him, to have used them so ill; but that hereafter they might
converse with him, since his habit and condition permitted him not to live
otherwise then innocent. We could not perceive that Mr. Lilburn before he came
amongst us, had done any thing, as to a visible change in outward appearance:
we never saw He speaks sometime of living peaceably and quietly under the
present Government, and at the same time dispersed several printed papers full
of sedition.
any Black that he had, no sorrow or repentance for his former Insolences
and miscarriages: But as if he should have said, Ille ego qui quondam; Behold I
am the man, who whilst I was here, and since my abode beyond the Seas, have
several ways sought the destruction of this Common wealth, and without any
change of my resolution, mind, or puurpose, am returned again unto you.

2. Concerning the Pass which he speaks of, in a letter to his wife. Here we
cannot but admire the man's presumption: That be should not seek for a Pardon,
but a Pass: as if the State would have been so careless and improvident of
the peace and safety of the Nation, as presently to have As the Trojans did
when they took in the wooden horse, in whose belly lay hid the Grecian
soldiers, Dividimus muros and maenia pandibus urbis, accingunt omnes operis:
But what follows? Inclusos utero Danaos and Pinea furtim laxat claustra Sinon,
illos Patefactus aut auras reddit equus laetique cavo se robere promunt. No
less could be expected to come out of his head and heart, but dangerous plots
closely hid against the State.
opened their gates, and let him in, whom they had cause to suspect, purposely
came over to betray them.

But 2. how is it that he seeks now to the General for a Pass, seeing not long
before, he professed it could not stand with the safety of h^ life, nor could he
be secure, so long as Cromwels absolute tyranny lasted, upon any promises that
he could make before God or man: For by too large experiences, h^ judged him as
false as the Devil himself, and one whom he would We find in his writings,
that he confesses the General had been very real and helpful to him, and
had done him many great kindnesses; but setting aside his reproachful
language, there is not only reason or cause, which he shows, why he should not
trust him.
never trust again whilst he breathed, let him swear and protest never so
much.

Here is a great secret, that Mr. Lilburn should desire a Pass, and afterward
petition the General for his Enlargement, and yet neither trust him, nor
believe him.

Now we may not charge him, as to be fickle, wavering or unconstant, but
resolute; the seeming contradiction is to be resolved thus:

He desires leave to return, and liberty to go where he list: not that he
would believe, or trust the General, or thought his life any way safe, or
secure to live under him: but having such an The fish feels the hook before
shee^es it: Quod pa^am hoc clam.
advantage, he made account to bring to pass his designed Treason the sooner,
easier, and more effectually.

Mariners when they tack about, alter not their course, it is only to take more
wind into their sails, that so the Vessel may run the speedier, and come the
sooner to their Port. This was only And the rule is good: Satius recurrere quam
male currere. Quod male caeptum est, ne pigeat mutasse.
a Tacking about for the wind sake, no change of mind or resolution: And we
must needs say, as to the thing intended, he showed himself a master worke-man,
for there was now a necessity of such a Leevere, or turning To have turned
much, it would have given occasion of some suspicion to ^he other party, as if
he had left them, and declined heir cause. In medio tutissimus ibis.
a little to reach the haven of his expectation.

3. We find that it has been the ordinary practice of all Incendiaries, both
in this Nation and elsewhere, whenever they have intended to put their
premeditated Treason in execution, to do it upon Nosce tempus, or tempori pari
is the old saying.
a change of the Government of the State: partly because things are A stake or
a pole that is loose in the earth, is easily taken up and carried away, so here.
then unsettled and loose, and partly because at such Turnings and Changes many
men are Such persons are usually like weather-cocks, to move and turn about, if
any seditious wind blow upon them.
unsatisfied, and discontented, and so the readier to make tumults, and
insurrections. And this was not unknown to him, whose knowledge in sedition has
exceeded most: And therefore takes the advantage of Our Change, there being no
fitter opportunity then now, to manage his own present business, as a
master-workman to the purpose.

4. In the Letter to his wife, a little before his coming over, he presses her
very much Here is another mystery, why so speedily? unless to strike whilst
the iron was hot. Indeed time must be taken, front capillata est, post occasio
Calva.
speedily to get him a pass: And one reason moving him (as he says) to make
the more have, is, because if I come over, and find things in a handsome way
to my liking, I have something of very great consequence to say speedily to
such a great faithful man, as I shall trust. The Law says, Dubium in meliorem
partem accipiendu^. l^ cum Creditor, de furtis.
A doubtful action is to be taken in the better part, and the In re dubia
benigniorem semper fieri interpretationem. L: proxime C: de his quae in Testdel.
fairer interpretation must be made.

Again, Nobiliores praesumptiones semper in dubijs eligendas. L. merito pro
socio.
in doubts the nobler presumptions are always to be chosen. Now howsoever our
desire is to walk ( Ratio sit linguae and orationis Mode^a^ix.
where we can) by such charitable and Christian rules. Nevertheless
considering here, the condition of the man; As

1 That he counts few to be honest and faithful, but Rioters, and seditious
persons.

2 What he calls matters of great consequence, are Whosoever shall read over all
his printed papers, shall find that they contain little else, but either
reproaches and aspersions cast out against particular men, or sowing seditious
seed in the Nation.
ordinarily Conspiracies and Treasons against the State.

3. To have things Querie, whether that were not a handsome way when his true
Burford friends revolted? And so when the Rioters laid wast the Enclosures, and
destroyed men's corn, and habitations? No doubt this was to his liking.
in a handsome way, and to his liking, is to have the Nation in blood and war.
We say, the case standing thus, we cannot but conclude, that this passage
contains a laying of a ground or foundation in order to the promise which he
made to Hopton and others, viz. to murder the General, destroy the Parliament
and Council of State, and to settle Charles Stuart ( King of England, as he
called him) in his Throne in England.

Before the creature brings forth her conception, we certainly know what it
will be, as to the kind and nature, whether mankind, bird, beast, etc. by the
male in whose womb it is. It is easy to guess what Mr. Lilburns conceptions
are, and so suitable what he will bring forth, by knowing his nature, and what
Hitherto omnia fuit, and nihil fuit, as one said of Severus.
hitherto he has brought forth, as so many bastards of his own begetting.

5 In the same Letter he writes thus. But if our new Council of State or
Governors will not cast a favorable eye upon me, but either deny Toll
mores: semper nocuit differ paratis. Again, Tu propera, nec te venturas
differ in Horas: Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
or delay me a Pass, so that the next Post I hear not of it, I shall then
take it up for granted, that Major Gen: Harrison (being as I hear one of your
New Council of State) is my Principallest and Grandest Adversary: and
accordingly, I shall only take a rise, from what I was informed, he said in the
House at Note how at his last Trial h^ used these words; I call Jehovah to
witness, and do protest before God, Angels and men, I a^ not the person
intended to be banished in that Act. Speaking of the Act whereupon he was
indicted, and yet (forgetting the proverb, that a liar has need of a good
memory) here he confesses that he was the same John Lilburn.
my banishment: and what he said publicly at Alhallows ( when from Dover I
sent my Letter to the people that met there) To write him such a letter, which
already in my This in likelihood will be a piece more solid then the rest when
it comes abroad: because by his former writings he has showed to have more
sand then brain in his head.
brain I have conceived, as will no way please him.

What, so high already? and the thing already contrived in his head? This is
much. No doubt it was some Arraignment, or Hue and Cry. It is is likely it
will come forth; for his head is like a sieve, keeps nothing in it. But We find
the cause of his brain-design against Major Gen: Harrison, to be thus: The
Major Gen: had said (as he says) that there was no credit to be given to him,
because he had found him so false: Now see how tender the man is of his own
good name: But for others they must sit still and bear all his reproaches.
why, if the Pass be not granted, must Major Gen: Harrison be his
principallest and grandest Adversary? It seems the Gentleman being judicious,
and of singular discerning, observed more then other men, the deceitfulness of
his ways, and so became an instrument to preserve many honest hearts (as
ignorant of his wiles) from being taken by his snares; now this he cannot
forget: But sound Drums and Trumpets, and have at thee Harrison with all my
might.

We question not, but the Reader will here observe with what spirit this man
came over: And the good hand of God toward us, that such restlesness,
self-revenge, and malice, should thus still be discovered by his own he scorns
to do like those beasts, which wipe out with their rail the print of their
feet, lest the pursuers should follow them by their track.
mouth.

This is the man that makes account to be the Instrument and Actor, for the
Restoration of our Freedom and Liberty.

Now herein we know not whereunto better to like him, then to that Bird, which
was brought to a certain City, to devour the Offals and Carrion, about the
place: but her own dung was so much, and so intolerable, as they were soon
weary of her, being Nero in the beginning of his Reign complained much against
the ill government of his Predecessors, but afterward was worse then they.
worse a great deal then they were before.

6 Not to speak of the frequent meetings, and great familiarity, which a little
before his return, he had with Jamot, Layton, Whittington, and other Cavalliers
in several places: Being at Callais, immediately before his last coming over,
he spent a day or two with the Note, that one in the next chamber heard them
discourse of the Lord Gen: Cromwell, of whom Lilburn spoke very slightly,
saying, Cromwell, what can Cromwell do? The information of John Staplehill.
Duke of Buckingham, and some Colonels of the late Kings Army, where he and
they, with other Arch Cavalliers It is a Spanish proverb, dime con quiem and is
y dezirte be quiem eres. Tell me with whom thou go, and I will tell thee
what thou art. Had we not other marks to know Mr. Lilburn by, his familiarity
with these men, were enough to show that he is a traiterous Enemy to this
Common wealth.
dined and supped continually together, who at his departure, brought him at
midnight to the waters side, where he with two Cavalliers (embarked all in one
boat) went away together.

The Virgins in Cyprians time, granted they walkd with young men, talked with
them, went led with them; but when they came to the Action, they abstained.
Some such Apology (perhaps) he will make for himself: Familiar they were, but
not cum stullis stultiscere, and cum vulpe vulpinari: No action. But as vain
and unsatisfactorie, as ever was devised, to excuse an Enemy by. Here we may
say in his own words, We are too old with such gins to be caught. We have
learnt so much Law, and Reason too, as not to believe an accused person upon
his bare denial of the fact, where we have clear demonstration and proof to
the contrary.

7 No sooner is he Two Assertions we have already proved. 1. That no man has
been banished out of this Nation for greater Crimes then he has done against
the Government established. 2. No Englishman in the time of his banishment,
showed more malice, or contrived greater Treason against England, then he did
in the time of his being beyond Sea. Our third Assertion is this: No man
banished out of England, being returned again, ever offered such insolences,
and high contempt against Authority, as he has used since his coming over,
specially for the time. And here we begin at his arrival to prove the same.
arrived in England, but at Canterbuire, in his way to London, he presently
begins to boast of his own interest here; saying, he had no need of a Pass,
being as good a man as Cromwell, and that he did not fear what he could do unto
him.

Geese (they say) when they fly over Taurus, keep stones in their mouths, lest
by gagling they should discover themselves to the Eagles, which are amongst the
Mountains, waiting to take them. But Mr. Lilburn in his flight, feared no
apprehension, he scorns Authority, and thinks himself as potent as any man,
and therefore will Neither follow this counsel, virtutem primam esse puta
compessere linguam.
not have his mouth stopped, but speaks great swelling words, as if he meant to
have put the whole Nation into a dreadful fear of him.

8 And lastly, what could any rational man understand, by his appearing so
publicly, and sending by his Agents papers abroad, to acquaint people in all
places, of his being in the City, and where he was, and how to come to him,
but a treacherous design to If the sparkles which a man strikes out of a flint
do not take and kindle, it is otherwise then he would have it; he uses the
steel and the stone to have fire.

That these sparkles of sedition took no effect, no thanks to him.


gather a party to him, whereby to make new Tumults and Commotions in the
Nation. And thus much for his coming over.

For his carriage since, it may be considered two ways: 1. What he has said.
2. What he has done.


Of these we shall speak distinctly, and in order. Upon his Trial at the
Sessions in the Old Baily, he spoke, and asserted the particulars following.

1. Concerning the Act whereupon he was indicted, this he said; It was a lie
and a falsehood; an Act that has no Reason in it, Smith in his Book entitled
The Common wealth of England, says, that which is done by the Parliament, is
called Fist, sable, and sa^ctum, and is taken for Law, l. 2. chapter 2. This man
knew better the power of a Parliament then Mr. Lilb.
no Law for it: It was done as Pharaoh did. Resolved upon the Question, that
all the One thing here he forgets to tell the Jurie, that as Moses, one of the
male children being preserved, was afterward the instrument and means of their
freedom and liberty. So he had foretold of himself (as one of the reasons why
he killed not the Gen:) that he did believe he should be an Actor or Instrument
to procure the full restoration of our English Liberties and Freedoms. Lilburn
revived, 2 Epist. p. 2.
male children should be murdered: That if he dyed upon this Act, he dyed upon
the same score that Abel did, being murdered by Cain. That the Act was a void
Act, a printed thing, there being no one Punctillio or Clause in it grounded on
the Law of England, and that it was an unjust, unrighteous, and treacherous
Act, and that he doubtted not to shatter that Act in pieces.

We read of one Theodosius, who having denied Christ, made it afterward his
study to cast reproach upon the works and ways of Christ. This is Mr. Lilburns
practice here, having been a continued Enemy to the State, and for his
intolerable insolences and miscarriages, necessarily banished, he seeks to
help himself by villifying and undervaluing Parliamentary Acts: not that there
was any truth in it, nor so much as good sense in his words, neither any thing
as proper to the Jury to hear, much less to be Judges of: But as children and
fools, will part with silver and gold, if a counter or toy for it be put into
their hands: so he knew, by such A man that has experienced a thing and found
it right, will make use of it again upon the like occasion. By Impertinences
and by-talke, he escaped the time before, and therefore would take the same way
again.
by-talke, and impertinencies (specially railing against the proceeding of the
Parliament) how to take away from his twelve men, their reason, judgment, and
conscience.

2 Concerning the late Parliament, he said, that The Moabites called their God
Baal^ognez, the God of Thunder. But the Lord in scorn called him Baal-peor, the
god of opening, or of a crack. Unless it be such as do adore him: For other
men, they value his words but as cracks and wind.
they could not make an Act of Parliament since the Kings head was cut off.
Here the man takes off the vizard from before his face, and will no more
trouble the Attorney Gen: about producing sufficient and legal witnesses; but
for the Treason which he speaks, he resolves now to abide by it. Nevertheless,
we cannot tell, but he may have here some Jesuiticall Equivocation: As it was
a common practice among young Students in the time of the Dunces, that in
disputation, when they were brought to an inconvenience, were it never so
absurd, they would have a distinction, though without brain or sense: So
possible he will So the like concerning the protestaon which he made, that he
was not the John Lilb. intended in the Act of his banishment; here no doubt he
has a distinction: now tell what it is, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
have a distinction between a lawful Parliament, and making an Act of
Parliament: that is, it may be virtually and formally a Parl. and yet want
power, or not be in a capacity to make an Act of Parliament: And we are the
more persuaded to think that he will make some such Dunce-like distinction,
because he knows; Whosoever shall say, that the last Parliament Assembled was
unlawful, or not the Supreme Authority of this Nation, shall be taken, deemed,
and judged to be high Treason. But we shall leave this to himself, and proceed.

3. He said, If a Child might have its choice, whether to burn the rod, or
spare it: we know in this case what he would do: The Jury being Judges of the
Act, and law, that is either to repeal it, or let it stand, had reason to make
it null for their own safety. A dead Lion cannot bite.
By the same Law they voted him to death, they might vote his They must needs
be so; for they are of his own choosing, and wish as much good to the State as
he does.
honest twelve Jurie men. Was not this a very winning Argument? and enough to
work effectually and feelingly upon the affection of the Jury? It being for all
the world, as if some Arch Thief or Murderer should say; Ye Gentlemen of the
Jurie, take heed what you do in my Case: For if you hereafter shall be found
As who knows but what your heart thinks may come out at your mouth one time or
other.
guilty of such Robberies and Murders as I have committed, there will be as
much reason and Law that ye suffer as my self.

Cleonides being asked, why he spared the Argives, who had sought to destroy
their Country, answered, lest (says he) we might want such men to exercise
our youth. If we consider the weakness and vanity of Lilburns words, and how
corrupt and unjust his 12 men were, in their verdict. In stead of that answer
(or rather no Answer) which they gave at the time of their Examination before
the Council of State; they might well and truly have said, We have spared
him, In the days of Hadria^ the Emperor, there was one Bencosby, gathering a
multitude of Jews together, called himself Ben-Cocuba, the son of a star,
applying that prophecy to himself, Number. 23 17. but he proved Barchosaba, the
son of a lie No otherwise may they expect in following this man, whom they did
choose as the star of the Law to be led by in their proceedings, but an ill
business in the later end.
lest we should want such a man as he to oppose the present Government, and to
carry on the Cavalliers Design and Interest for us.

4. He said, The Parliament before the Kings head was cut off, and the Members
taken out, were in their purity, This is the first time (to our remembrance)
that ever in public he spoke well of any Government; who knows, in regard of
the great familiarity between him and the Cavalliers, but he might learn some
such thing of them.
a gallant Parliament, who were tender of the liberties, and of the welfare of
the Nation: And walked in the steps of their Ancestors, and Forefathers; Then
were the days of their virginity, they made good and righteous Laws, and then
they had no force upon them: But since 1640. and 1641. there have been no good
Laws made.

All this (as the rest) is only a flash and wind; nothing at all to the
purpose or thing in hand. Two things nevertheless are worth the observing.

1. His notable dissimulation, as being like the Crocadile (of whom it is said)
when he has killed a man, afterward weeps over him, as if he were sorry, and
did repent for what he had done. It is well known, what an Enemy he was to the
We are here in the dark, as to find out the bottom of the man, why the
Parliament before the Kings death was so gallant? He brings this in by head
and ears, as having no occasion to speak of such a thing. But if we may give
our guess, he speaks this to justify the last King, and to condemn the War
which was made against him: For beings Virgin Parliament, and making good and
righteous Laws, what could they have more of the King? So that the King was in
no fault of the blood and treasure of the Nation which was wasted.
Parliament before the Kings death: his own Libels and Pamphlets are yet
extant, wherein he does as much scandalize and reproach the Parliament then,
as since. But see here his Crocadile tears, as weeping over their dead bodies
by a feyned and base flattery, seemingly to repent for the murder of his
tongue.

2 Note his gross absurdities and contradiction: The Parliament before the
Kings death (which was not till about the year 1649.) was a gallant
Parliament, etc. and yet since the year 1640. or 41. there has been no good
Laws made. We shall not press him here, but spare him, and endeavor to help
him out. Thus therefore we understand him: In the year 1640. or 41. the
Parliament It might have been said of that time, hodie venemum Reipubl: est
immissum. For ever since that time has he been restless, and continually
quarrelling with one or other.
bestowed something upon him, he being formerly very poor: since which time
they have not done the like, and so consequently made no good Laws. And thus
stands the case: for otherwise (putting aside his own Interest) we all know,
that more useful and wholesome Laws have been made since Anno 1640. or 41.
then before.

5. He affirms, that it was no lawful Parliament, that made that Act. Again,
The Parliament that made this Act of Banishment was no Parliament I will prove
it: And the Parliament were rather Transgressors then I. Again, Admit the
Parliament legal, They had NO POWER TO SEND FOR ME. If there were In the
great contest which was between the house of Lords and him, he then denied
their power, and cried up the house of Commons, as to have more power: But now
they being removed, and so not likely any more to send for him. He seems to be
of opinion that some such power was with them, yet this he speaks somewhat
darkly and closely, lest too much of his hypocrisy should appear at once.
any Judicatory in Parliament, it was the Lords House, not the Commons.

It is well, we have it at last, and in plain English without any Equivocation.
He will prove it (he says) that it was no lawful Parliament: The which saying
is proof enough (by Cokes Institutes) to prove him a Traitor. The Wolf,
though he often dissemble, and closely hides his nature, yet he cannot do so
still, but will show himself what he is, one time or other. So it is with
devouring spirits, they may sometimes walk in the dark, and use such
artificial sleights, as their designs are not discerned: yet this they cannot
always do; but now and then (casting off the sheeps-skins) will appear (what
they are) even Wolves indeed.

But does he not in the mean time, very much satisfy the consciences of the
Jurie? as to move them not to find him guilty? considering (being arraigned for
Treason) he should thus openly before them, declare himself to be guilty? Who
can but think, Querie, whether it did not argue (if not impude^ce yet) great
indiscretion in the 12 men, being known to be disaffected to the present
Government, that such as they should durst give check to Authority.
knowing what the men were, but by this speech of his, they were much induced
the sooner to acquit him.

6. As for all Parliaments in general, he said Parliaments were a deligated
power, and And because it is so, Nodell told his friends that Lilburn, when he
came up to London, would call the Parliament to account.
ought to give a reason of all they do, and that it was not in their power, as
he had proved in his Plea at large before the Lord chief Justice Rolls, and Mr.
Justice Bacon, May 18. 1647.) nor had they the least Jurisdiction to sentence
him, or any of the least Free born English men: unless it be their own
Members. That We see children will look in a man's face when he is speaking, but
not mind, or remember any thing that he says. The like Simplitians were these
twelve Jurie men; for had they observed the ignorance and folly of his words,
they would have better considered what they had to do in the business before
them, as knowing what he said was false: And all Parliaments before had
constantly practiced the contrary.
all Crimes whatsoever, were to be heard, determined, and judged at the Common
Law, and no where else. Acts of Attainder were not Lawful.

There is an Ointment, which if the heads of men be anointed therewith, they
will seem to be most dreadful and terrible: Surely this man made account to
fright them all away. What has a Parliament no power to send for him? Really
then, either their power is very little, or his power is above a Parliament.
What, no Jurisdiction? no not the least? Alas what a poor and low thing is
this Parliament? No marvel he has taken the boldness to abuse it, and
called it a Juncto, a Tyranny, a Foolery. Note he has stripped it stark naked,
not left so much as a reed or rush in their hands whereby to defend themselves.
Soldiers when they have unarmed the Enemy, forbear afterward to abuse and
beat the naked Prisoners: But he will not show a Parliament so much civility,
for he is not contented to take away their weapons, whereby to keep off the
strokes of his Treason: but when he has not left with them any power or the We
read of Julius Caesar, when he had overco^e Pompeys Army, he spared the
Citizens: And those whom he had vanquished by Arms he preferred, and gave much
wealth to. But he has no such Roman spirit; for though he has laid the
Parliament at his feet, yet he cannot forbear to trample upon it.
least Jurisdiction, he most inhumanely scourges them with his railing tongue.
Domitian is condemned for killing of Flies: not but they might be killed, but
it was no fit work for an Emperor. For some men to have heard him deliver such
absurdities and nonsense, it might have been tolerable; but for a Jury, who
are to maintain the power and privileges of Parliaments, to hearken to such
roving and wild discourse, was no way justifiable.

If a Parliament be the Supreme Authority of the Nation, then there is no
Judicatory power or jurisdiction in any Court, but what primarily and
originally (as to order and Government) is in the Parliament, and whatsoever
may be done any where, as to Government and Jurisdiction, the same may be done
by a Parliament, viz. to send for Delinquents, to Imprison, Banish, etc. And
this stands with pure reason, if the man had The reason wherefore this man
shows so much folly, is his ignorance, as not capable to understand what
power, jurisdiction, government, order, and such things are. If a people be
free, Power essentially is in them; yet so, as to action there must be first
order, which is to establish a Government. Now it has been the ancient
practice of this Nation to have a Parliament, which is the alone National
Government: Neither is there any Judiciary or Government in the Nation, as
properly arising and derived from the people, but what is in a Parliament,
because other Courts and Jurisdictions may be said to have their rise rather
from the Parl. then the people.
sense to understand it: for to grant a Parliament, and to deny Government and
Jurisdiction which he speaks of, is such nonsense, as none but an Ignoramus
in pure reason, would speak it. It is one thing, what is not convenient or fit
for Parliaments ordinarily to do, and another thing what lawfully they may
do, as in point of Power and Jurisdiction.

Neither thought he it enough to speak thus reproachfully of Parliaments, but
at the same time most unworthily abused the Court: As for instance.

1 Speaking to the Lord Mayor: This is the strangest thing (says he) that ever
I saw, that a man must be cheated of his life: Good my Lord Mayor you have made
your self a party in my case, and taken a wrong John Lilburn, and if you do
not make me hang, you are afraid your self: You make the Land groan under your
burdens and oppressions. I desire you will not deny me my right, that I may
not loose my life in the resolve of a Question: That John Lilburn shall be
hanged, which in time may come to murder your posterity, and the posterity of
those that hear me this day.

To speak nothing how he A man tells a lie so often as he thinks it, at least
to be a truth, and who knows how far he was gone in a lie this way.
lies against knowledge and conscience, in saying they had taken the wrong John
Lilburn: nor how grossly he contradicts himself; for being the Note how the
honest honorable Jury men, as they made no conscience of lying in their
Examination: so by Lilburns lying, their Consciences were satisfied, that he
was the wrong John Lilburn. But herein neither of the^ follow that frying,
magna est proesentia very.
wrong John Lilburn, how could the Mayor make himself a party in his case?
There is something of note, where he says, He had before given our, that one
land was too little to hold the General and himself, aut Caesar aut nullus.
if he dye not, others may fear to suffer. There was much truth and reason in
this: For as the Plague not removed, kills the body: so Incendiaries (who are
no other then Pests in the Commonwealth) must either be suppressed, or ruin
will follow.

For the rest, it is nothing else but as before, impertinencies, and base
talk: Though possibly he work up himself hereby, more and more into the
affection of the Jury: For they hearing him to speak so high against the Lord
Mayor, and telling him of making the Land to groan with burdens and
oppressions, they must needs think (he speaking thus as a Prisoner) had he
liberty what a stout Champion would he be for them in the Rich: Tomlins, one of
the Jurie, says in his Examination, What he can tell is one thing, but to
accuse himself is another thing.

Now who can tell? if he would have declared the truth; but seeing Lilburn at
this time so bold, he thought it was fit to save his life, in hope he would be
a notable Instrument for them hereafter. This is that honest man, who boasted
beforehand, right or wrong, they would save him.


Great Business, whenever opportunity should serve.

3. He told the Lord Keeble, that he had nothing to do to judge him, being a
party, and had a Sallary of a thousand pound per annum from the State.

Here he speaks home for Liberty: Malefactors are not only to choose their
Jury, but their Judges too: So that Magna Charta is to be understood of liberty
granted unto Murderers, Thieves, Traitors: But for true men, honest and
faithful to the State, there is no help for them there, as to their liberty
and security: So that we may apply to our selves, what is applied to Rome.

In Roma vale piu la putana,
Chela moglie Romana.
In Rome the Harlot has a better life,
Then she that is a Romans honest Wife.
For the 1000. l. Sallary, we know no reason We would gladly have an Answer to
this Question, following that rule, Non multis verbis pauca comprehendit, fed
paucis multa.
why he may not better (or at least as well) deserve to have so much of the
State for suppressing (as occasion is) such Riots and Insurrections as are made
in the Nation: as Mr. Lilburn to have 1000 Acres not per annum, but ad seculum
seculorum, for undertaking to defend men in making Ryots and Insurrections
against the peace and safety of the Commonwealth, both past and to come.

3. To Mr. Priduax Attorney-Generall he said, You are a blood-thirsty man, and
you come here to justify your unrighteous Act: And I hope Was there not reason
(...) they should? Besides, seeing they will not give any ^eason wherefore they
did acquit him; why may not this be one, viz. his railing at the Attorney
General, and hoping his Jury would take notice of him. How could men, seeking
to satisfy their conscience, but be satisfied to the purpose to hear all this?
the Jury will take notice of all your violence. It is the admiration of my
soul, that he should be a Judge in This is his common practice, whosoever
prosecuteth any thing against him in behalf of the Commonwealth, he rayls at
them as if it were only their Cause that they manage against him.
his own case, to have a man sit as my Judge, that thirsts after my blood.

The Beast Duron, being pursued, and seeing no way to escape: by a natural
Craft, casts forth her dung against the Hunters following her, whereby to
stop them from coming near, by reason of the corrupt smell and stink thereof.
Whereunto tended all his railing and vile reproaches, but as a subtle devise to
keep his pursuers off, as well knowing the stink was so intolerable, as they
could not possibly endure it: Howsoever sweet and pleasent to his 12 men: For
who knows not, but Swine delight in mire and dirt: so that by such slanders he
has a double advantage: The one to hinder those who prosecuted the cause of the
Commonwealth against him: The other to win still a better opinion and liking
with the Jurymen.

4. He said, that the Army (many of them) have been very good instruments, for
the good of the Nation, to deliver us from Tyranny. I wish there is not a
greater then they delivered us from.

And why Temporis observatio in cunctis negotiis plurimum prodest.
so modest now? Indeed insinuations sometimes are more effectual and taking
then plain affirmations, especially when the Speaker is known (as here it was)
not to doubt or question the thing, but does it (by a figure) for aggravation
sake.

But here the man is very It was said of some books which Aristotle made, They
were set out, and not set out. So we may say of a great deal of his speech, It
was talk, and it was not talk. Many words were spoken; but let them be duly
weighed, either non-se^ce, impertinences, or contradictions.
mysterious, we know not what Tyranny he means; besides, if we have had no good
Laws since 1640. and 41. and before the Kings head was taken off, the
Parliament was tender of the Liberties and welfare of the Nation, etc. Wherein
then has the Army been such good instruments, etc? As the way of a Serpent
upon a rock, such is the way of an adulterous woman. Neither is it possible but
that this man should be thus crossing and contradicting himself, seeing (to
serve his own turn) he carries It is observed how Julian the Apostate, against
the Christians sought to keep up a double Interest, one of the Jews, the other
of the Gentiles; But the Lord destroyed both. And so we trust he will
frustrate whatsoever, either this man, or any other designs against us
on several interests.

5. For the Jury, he called them, his honorable Jury, and said, they were the
Keepers of the Liberties of England: And will make it appear that the Jury when
Philip came to the Oracle of Apollo, the Priest caused the Orac^e to answer to
his humor, and therefore it was said (...): He knew well enough for what the
Jurie came, and how to send them away with satisfaction: To tell them they were
above Law, and Acts, and Parliaments. What A^e being thus tic^led under the
belly, would not stand still, and suffer him to get up and ride him.
are Judges of the Law, as well as of the Fact.

Here we have the man in another temper; and we see, he can as well flatter men
as reproach them. Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostendit altera. This
honorable Jury he handles like Brass-pots, which be they never so huge yet a
man may carry them by the ears where he will. It is by the ears that he takes
them, and here he holds them off by base flattery: as attributing unto them
more then was ever given to any Jury before, and what belonged not unto them
neither by Law nor Reason. Nevertheless having them (like Pots by the ears)
away he carries them, from the rules of Justice, and from what was their work,
(as proper to them) to do that whereunto they were not called, nor in the
least therein concerned.

Moreover, he charged them to consider Judge Reader, whether this was not a
rational question, and to be by the Jury seriously considered of. For seeing
the safety of all the Cavalliers depended on his life, had they not reason to
quit him?
whether if I dye on the Monday, the Parliament on Tuesday may not pass such a
sentence against every one of you twelve? and upon your Wives and Children, and
all your relations; and then upon the rest of this City, and then upon the
whole County of Middlesex, and then upon Hartford- shire, and so by degrees
there be It has bin the saying, dulce and decorum est pro patria mori: But he
is now on the other hand, and would gain reputation and honor to himself, not
by dying for his Country (for that he has no mind to) but to have his life
spared. Pro patria vivere pulchrum.
no people to inhabit England, but themselves.

Had he not understood the condition of the men, he would not durst have
uttered words, so much tending to the disgrace of Authority, and indeed to the
dishonor and infamy of the whole Nation: For had they been persons (we say)
really affected to the present Government, they would by this very speech, have
judged him a person most unworthy to live under that State, Some write of a
certain Devil, whom they call Hudgin, who they say will not hurt any body,
except he be wronged. This Parliament whom he speaks thus reproachfully of, was
not concerned in his Case, but as in point of Justice: the application we leave.
against which such false, malicious, and scandalous words should be spoken.

Yet are not these words without weight, in reference to the Jury, for if the
State, like Demosthenes innocent fool, would stand still and leave all things
to twelve men, as to be Keepers of the Liberty of England, Judges of the Law as
well of the Fact: that is, make void what Laws of Parliament they please, and
leave Lilburns Case to stand for a President: We should see in a little time,
such Conspiracies and Treasons committed in the Nation, and no redres, thereof:
as not only all honest men, their Wives, Children, and relations, in
Middlesex, Hertsordshire, but the whole Land over, would utterly be destroyed,
and no people left to inhabit England, but he and his Faction.

Being to close the first particular as to the Speeches which he used at his
Trial, we shall only add this. I call Jehovah to witness (says he) and do
here protest before God, Angels and men, I am This is wors and wickeder then
what the Heathens allow; for thus they say, Hand equident honestum est,
proloqui mendacium, sed cui tamen damnum magnum affert veritas, par est dari
huic loquenti in congrua. Stob. But this man takes leave and liberty to speak a
lie, yea to swear it our right.
not the person intended to be banished by that Act: speaking of the Act
whereupon he was Indicted.

Such Asseverations and Oaths, we find frequently in his writings: A common
practice of profane and corrupt men, whereby to beguile ignorant and simple
people. It is said of Dionysius the Tyrant, though he loved not the
Philosophers, yet would he wrap himself in their Cloaks, as thinking thereby
men would have the better opinion of him. It is possible this swearing and for
swearing of himself, is not a thing he cares for, only as occasion is, uses
it, for advantage sake, to get credit and belief with the people, specially now
to satisfy the conscience of the Jury: And who knows, seeing they would not
give any other answer when they were There is some great mystery here between
the Jurie and him, as none know or may know, but themselves. For Griff. Owen of
Bishops gate ward (pray take notice of him) he is a Brewer by Trade, being one
of Lilburns Jurie, told the Council of State, That they found not L. Coll.
John Lilburn guilty, because he was not satisfied, that the Prisoner was the
John Lilburn mentioned in the Act.
examined by the Council of State, but that they did satisfy their conscience
in what they d^d; but it was this that did satisfy them, namely his protesting
before God, Angels and men, that he was not the person intended to be banished.

It is true, in this thing he did no more then what he was taught; for it is one
of Machiavel discourses, l. 3. c. 9.
Machiavels Grand Maxims, Those that mean to effect great matters must not
make reckoning what they say or swear, and know by their craft how to turn and
wind about at all times. And the Jesuits do hold equivocation, lying, and
perjury, if it be (as it was this man's case) for safety, profit, and advantage.
They do set open Querie, whether Mr. Lilb. when he was in the Papists
Country, was never at such a school
a School, for deceit, in which they teach an Art of lying, Cujus benefitio qui
ad Nor mam mentiatur aut perjeret: haud ille perjurij aut mendacij reus
consendus sit. Abbot Antilog: And: Eudaem: Joan: c. 2. in p^in. fol. 11. fac. 1.
by the help whereof he that can lie and for swear by the rule (observe that)
shall be free from lying or perjury. And thus much of his sayings: now for his
doings.

Here we find him at his And no (...) marvel he has kept on the trade so
long, considering how he has been left alone, to write and say what he would,
without any contradiction or answer to it Whereas, had his books been laid
open, and the vanity of the^ discovered, he would have been broken in his
trade before now.
old Trade, publishing and dispersing false and scandalous printed papers, and
Libels, to occasion new troubles by slandering the Government of the Nation:
delivering them nudo capite bare faced, and boldly with his own hands, to
several persons, both Citizens and Contrymen. Now because we have already
showed largely his practice in this particular, and seeing what he has done
here again, is the same which he did be ore, we shall therefore (forbearing
repition) speak the less of it.

Not to mention how he dispersed the Petition delivered to the Parliament by
six persons, who called themselves Apprentices. He delivered another printed
paper, entitled, More light to Mr. John Lilburn's Jury, wherein is asserted,
That a Parliament (having its foundation only in the Common Laws) is but one
of them; and neither has, nor have We may here speak to this man in the words
of the message which was sent to the Rebels of Cornwall and Devonshire; We let
you wit, the same has been as nulled by the Parliament, and not now to be
called in question; and dares any of you with the name of a Subject, stand
against an Act of Parliament? Holling. Edw. 6. p. 100 s.
power over the right of its fellow-standing Laws, to contradict, alter, or
repeal any of them, more then it has power to destroy its own being. That is,
the Parliament have not power over this precious way of Trial by Juries; no
more have they power to make that Felony, which by the Common Law of England
is but matter of Trespass.

As Solomon answered his Mother when she desired that Abishag might be given to
Adonijah to wife: Ask for him the Kingdom also. The like may we say to such
men as desire Mr. Lilburns liberty amongst us As Mahash the Ammonite would not
make any agreement with the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, unless he might
thrust out all their right eyes: so nothing will content this man, but we must
give up to him our understanding, light, reason. The saying is, a man may buy
gold too dear.
; why do they not ask, our reason, freedom, privileges, safety, etc. seeing
the case is one? Never was there a thing tending more to perfect slavery: what
a Parliament no power Querie, whether Monarchy was not established by Law, and
whether it were a standing and fundamental Law of the Land, by which Kingly
Government was established here.
to contradict, alter, or repeal any former standing Law? Must those Laws
made by Popish Parliaments, in the midnight of blindness, proper to Monarchy
and Tyranny, and no way suitable or necessary to our present condition, be
continued?

But marvel not Reader at the impudence and boldness of these men. Aliquid
latet quod non patet. This is no new thing, but what formerly Incendiaries have
constantly practiced: namely, Our Irish histories give us many examples in this
particular. As often as the State of England wen^ about to civilize the Irish,
and to take them off from their former barbarous and uncivil^ customs, the
Popish Priests and other Incendiaries, would be disquieting the minds of the
people, and to instigate them, rather to rebel, then not to do as their
forefathers did.
when a State has been about to reform abuses, by removing what is
inconsistent to the present time, and to establish better things in the place
thereof, here to take an advantage for the prosecuting of their Treason: as to
disquiet the minds of the people by false suggestions, and by causing public
Tumults, to hinder the going forth of the work of Reformation, if they can. So
that we have here in stead of crying up Liberty and freedom, the Trap formerly
laid. Bondage and Slavery stood for, and this as a snare likewise. Such a
master-workman is he in the Black Art of Treason.

Such Birds as follow the Eagle in expectation to have a share with him in the
prey, are sure to perish if nothing be taken. Our confidence is, that Lilburn
shall win nothing, by seeking to destroy the power and privileges of
Parliament: And therefore for his Juries and others who have accompanied him in
his seditious design, are likely to come short of their Quere, whether it was
not the expectation of the Jurie, that their quitting of him (being at liberty)
he should immediately have taken the great design in hand, for which he came
over: hic labor hoc opus.
expectation; that is, instead of a Booty, to be loosers by it.

In the same Book it is further said. Such Laws as these being void Laws, who
are to know them to be such but Juries, Who knows but the man had read the
story, how the Ass took upon him to judge betwee^e the Cuckooe and the
Nightingale: Now of all other the Ass might worse do it, having no skill in
singing. The Jury men confess they took upon them to judge between the Parl.
and Lilb. And who might worse do it?
who are the only legal Tryers of all men in all Causes, and they are bound
in conscience to try all Laws made by Parliament, by the fundamental Laws;
and where they find them contrary, and that men stand before them to be Tried
as Fellons upon these laws, they are bound in conscience to pronounce them not
guilty, that are no Fellons, nor in the least deserving death, as in Mr.
Lilburns case, and not to expect Of his writings it may be truly said, Virus
pestis and venenum Reip:
the direction of Judges and Recorders, in the case, who many of them lie under
sore temptations of loosing their honor and place of profit, in case they
wrest not judgment to the wills of those that are in power.

Have not we fought well all this while, and laid out the blood and treasure of
the Nation to a good end? that in conclusion we must have twelve men, ( Whether
any of these 12. were fools, we shall not say: But whosoever shall read their
Examination, will conclude they were not honest men.
suppose two knaves and ten fools, as often it is) and these must be the
Keepers of the Liberty of England, be above Judges, Recorders, yea the
Parliament it self, to determine what is Law: and as they tell us, so we must
acquiesce, right or wrong: There being no power or Authority above them, to
Pray note, how Richard Tomlins, one of the Jury, in his answer to the Council
of State, told them, that he was not bound to give any account in that
business to any but God himself, which is as much as ever any Tyra^t did
challenge.
appeal unto, be their Verdicts and sentence never so illegal, and unjust. The
matter here is so irrational and absurd, as no answer is fit to be given to
it, then to wish those who are in Authority to take speedy care and course to
suppress such insolent and base assertions, given out for no other end, but to
keep up distempers among the people.

Some do well Pareus in Romans 14. ver. 13. p. 469.
observe, that a more greevous punishment is reserved for them which cause
others to offend, then for them which sin by their occasion. Thus the Serpent
was punished more then Eve, she more then Adam: So I^zabel felt a greater and
sorer judgment then Ahab. To sin (says one) Peccare non tantum in se
perditionis habet, quantum quod reliqui ad peccandum inducuntur. Chrysostom hom.
25. in Epist. ad Rom in Mar. ad Locum.
has not so much perdition in it, as to make others to sin. We find no man Ex
pessimo genere ne cautulum quidem relinquendus.
before this man, that has been so unreasonable as to affirm such a thing. And
therefore if we will be followers of God: inventers of evil things, and
inducers to sin, must principally be punished by us.

Another printed paper which he dispersed in the manner aforesaid, was called,
A Word to the Army, wherein he If the Jury be the only Judges of a Law, and to
tell us what Acts are good and what not, what reason has he to appeal to the
Army; for by his own confession it did not belong to them. It seems he can
dispense with legality.
appealed to the Army in his Trial upon the Act of Parliament: Here we might
mention several seditious expressions which he uses, but so much already being
spoken, we shall not trouble the Reader with it; only the man's discretion at
this time, is observable, how he speaks not a word of the false and scandalous
reports which he had formerly published to the world against them. Nor of the
divisions which he had often made in the Army, and several conspiracies,
whereby to have destroyed the same.

There was also a printed paper given forth by him, Entitled, Fundamental
Laws and Liberties of ENGLAND, wherein is reckoned up But why is not Monarchy
in the number of one of these 28? here is a foul oversight; for leave this out,
the rest are Adjectives, not one of the 28 can stand of himself.
twenty eight in number. The second of them is, That the Supreme Authority
cannot be devolved upon any person, or persons, but by Election of the free
people. The third, That yearly Parliaments (to be chosen of course by the
people) is the only Supreme, lawful Government in England. The fourth, That
all Officers and Magistrates of the Common wealth, are to be Ordained and
Commissioned by the Election of the people. The sixth, That the Parliament has
not How much men are pleased and delighted with their fancies and dreams in
their sleep. This dreamer no doubt took a kind of delight in his fancies, and
thinks he talks sense, whereas were he not asleep he would not speak so
irrationally.
power to continue their sitting above a year.

We cannot but admire, that Mr. Lilburn should thus trouble himself and others,
about the Election of Parliaments, and how long they should sit: seeing as he
states the case, Parliaments signify Is not a Parliament a very little thing?
having not power to send for any one man in the Nation (though an open Traitor
or Rebel) except one of their Members. Besides, is not their Power little,
seeing what Statutes and Laws they make, may by a Jury of 12 men be
contradicted and repealed.
little. One would think he should have spoken more concerning the Supreme
Authority of his precious Jury, and have proved by Magna Charta, or some other
fundamental Laws, that their power is arbitrary, absolute, unlimited.

But the truth is, malice and pride has so blinded the light of his reason, as
he knows not what fundamental and standing Laws are, being like Accius the
Poet, who though he were a Dwarf, yet would be pictured tall of stature: so
this ignorant man would willingly be reputed to have skill and knowledge in
Laws, as to a distinction, what is standing, what changable: notwithstanding
in this very thing he is Are not his Agents and others likely to be well led,
who follow such a blind guide I^ is true he talks much of Fundamental laws, but
knows not what a standing law is according to the definition: we will not use
his phrases of pawning our lives, and venturing our necks; yet this we dare
say, and will make it good, that he never was able to define a standing
fundamental Law, nor knows not what it is.
blind, as knows nothing.

All Laws which may be said to be standing and fundamental, are grounded upon
pure reason, not upon Magna Charta, or any former Parliament whatsoever. For in
reference to the Laws which men have formerly made (whether these twenty eight
which he reckons up, or any other) they are not unto us standing or
fundamental, otherwise then we see they are rational, proper and necessary to
us, and for us. This is a standing and fundamental Law, Nihil quod est con^ra
rationem est licitum. Nothing which is against reason is lawful. Again, Bod
in de Reipub. l. 4.
Nulla tam sancta l^x est, quam non oporteat, si silus populi postulet
urgeatque necessitas mutare. There is no law so firmly made, but when the
peoples safety and necessity require, may be changed. So again, Quod non est
licitum in lege, necessitas facit licitum: And And that is a sure standing law,
Nihil quod est contra rationem est licitum. Nothing which is against Reason is
lawful. So then when we come to see that some former Laws are against reason:
or it is against Reason that either the Election of Parliaments or their
continuance, should be as it formerly has been: the same as unlawful things
must be removed.
that rational Maxim in reason, Salus populi suprema lex est.

But now for Parliaments, viz. by whom they shall be chosen, and what time they
shall sit: For this we have no fundamental Law (which he understands Laws
that cannot be altered) because such things are not grounded upon reason: For
here every Age and Generation of men are left free, and to themselves, both for
the manner of election, and the time, yea It came to the Question, when this
Parl. began to si^, whether it should be called a Parliament or no.
and to lay aside all Parliamentary ways, and constitute some Though men
cannot dry up the River, but the waters must and will runn toward the Sea, yet
we often change their course, and turn them from one place to another. Thus it
is in point of Government: There must be government running down among the
people like water, but the course of it may be changed, yea and must be when
there is occasion for it. As of late there was necessity for it.
other form of Government, if they see it more conducing to the safety and good
of the Commonwealth.

But here (Reader) thou see not yet, what lies at the bottom, as the Serpent
under the bush. In the Reign of Edward 6. the Popish Priests of this Nation,
possessed the minds of the people, that the State was about to put down the
Mass; and to stir them up the sooner to Rebellion, persuaded them that the
same by their The Popish Priests, and so Mr. Lilburn deals with ignorant
people, as the Spaniards did with the Jucalion Islanders, when pretending to
carry them to a rich Country, where their Ancestors were in plenty, brought
them to work like slaves in Mines: So they seek to lead us to slavery by
pretending to bring us to our Forefathers.
Ancestors was so established, as no Parliament could contradict, alter, or
repeal it; whereupon great Tumults and commotions were made in several
places, and much treasure and blood lost thereby. As the Priests to have the
Mass to stand, occasioned the rude multitude then to revolt: so seeks Mr.
Lilburn now by making a noise of standing and fundamental Laws, to instigate
the people to insurrection. Whereas all rational men well know, there is no
Law or Statute formerly made, but the Supreme Authority of the Nation may
contradict, alter, and repeal it (we speak here as to their power) as lawfully
and groundedly, as ever Mass and Mattens were suppressed: As fools therefore
will be meddling, so he being Homine imperito nil quicquam est in justius, qui
nil, nisi quod ipse facit, rectum putat Comic.
ignorant what true freedom is, and in what sense Laws may be said to be
standing and fundamental, seeks to As the hand of a Clock or Watch will be
turning about whether the finger stands right to its hour or no. So many people
are carried too and fro, always tuning and in action, not considering the
ground of their motion at all.
disquiet the minds of the people by publishing such things as are most foolish
and absurd. Only this we do observe, that extracting something (though but a
little) from former Incendiaries of every sort and size, he hopes at last (as
he calls himself) to be a Master-workman in his Trade.

About the same time he dispersed another printed Paper, called, Lievt. Col.
John Lilburn's Plea in Law, wherein he undertakes to prove, That the Parliament
can alter none of the fundamental Laws: And in p. 14. I might urge (says he)
many Arguments lawfully to prove, That the Parliament was no Parliament when
they past the said Act of Banishment, but were long before dissolved, and that
by their own consents, when the Parliament took upon them the exercise of
Regality, He that shall read this man's Books, specially the Titles of them,
shall find him to be like Psaphon a certain Lybian, he would be a god: and
having caught some birds, and taught them to speak and prattle, the great god
Psaphon. Hence he foolishly thinks himself a God, and so must have sacrifice:
So this man, setting out one Book after another, and every one prattling, Law,
Law, Law, he at length begins to swell in hearing his birds to prattle so
prettily of him, not considering how he has merely cozened himself.
and the dissolution of Kingship and House of Lords.

Because we would willingly satisfy all such as may otherwise stumble at the
seditious block which he lays in their way, we shall therefore show what it is
to be a free people. And here two things are to be considered.

1 Power. 2 Government, or the execution of that Power, which God, reason, and
nature has given them.
Power, we say is in the people, (yet so as not in all, but with them who by
their delinquency have not forfeited the same) The Government or exercise of
this power is in the persons entrusted therewith, whether in a Parliamentary
way or otherwise, either formally or Neither to say the truth, is there any
other form or kind of civil Government in the world, but what is implicit, as
to order. That is, if the Suprea^ Authority be executed, and the people submit
to it; This makes it a lawful Government; Though there may be something
wanting as to formality.
implicitly; who may as their deligates or persons entrusted, lawfully act (as
to power) whatsoever the people can do, either about Laws, or what else is of
public and general concernment.

So that to suppose As the soldiers mocked Christ, when they put a reed in his
hand, and a Crown on his head: And what otherwise does he, then befoole the
people, as to put on their heads the Crown of Liberty, and into their hand all
power: And afterward to tell them they cannot contradict or alter former laws,
but must continue slaves and vassals to their dying day.
a free people, and to say, that such a people, by a Parliament who have the
power of this free people invested and put into their hands (as to the
execution of it) cannot alter none of the fundamental Laws. It is as perfect
nonsense and contradiction as ever was expressed: for how can they be free,
and yet bound to the observation of former Laws? We grant the Supreme
Authority of the Nation, may continue former Laws, and let them stand in
force, Note well the distinction; It is one thing to continue some former
Laws, and another thing to be bound to continue the practice of them: This
later we deny.
but we deny that either Magna Charta, or any other Statutes or Laws of the
Land, left to us by our Ancestors, are to continue, or that we are bound to
keep them, as in reference to their Acts; and because former Parliaments have
made them: But here (if we are a free people) it is in our liberty to take or
leave, that is, to contradict, alter, or repeal, whether some, or all, or none,
as we see cause and reason for it.

Besides, to plead thus for unalterable Laws, what is it else but to How has
this man published one Pamphlet after another, crying out against other men for
taking away the freedom and liberty of the people: Whereas not any Tyrant ever
broached a more wicked principle to support his Tyranny then he does here, and
has not been ashamed to send it abroad into the Nation.
enslave the Nation? For by such a principle, people not only loose their
liberty, but are brought under such a kind of Tyranny, out of which (as being
worse then the Egyptian Bondage) there is no hope of deliverance.

We see sometimes that men will go backward a while, that so coming foreward
to jump, they may leap the further and better. Mr. Lilburn in going backward
that is, from talking of freedom and liberty, When Taxaris saw his Country man
Anacharsis in Athens, he said unto him, I will at once show thee all the
wonders of Greece, viso solone vidisti omnia. Surely this man shall be the
wonder of our age, seeing he can tell us how to be a free people, and yet
remain all our days in slavery and bondage.
to plead for bondage and slavery, does it (as it seems) to fit himself for THE
LEAP, viz. that he may out-jump his fellow Leapers, in Treason against the
State.

For his saying the Parliament was no Parliament, etc. we have heard him often
to say it, and shall speak no more to it, then to tell him, that by such
sayings he may hazard and hasten his own ruin: As the Poet says of the
foolish Fish, swimming to the hidden hook.

Occultum visus decurrere piscis ad hamum. There was yet another printed paper,
Entitled, A Word to the Jury in the behalf of John Lilburn. The scope whereof
is, to stir up the people by force to No doubt the Jurie would have been glad
if such a thing had been effected, and can you blame them? For had he been
rescued, and so not come to his Trial, their lying, hypocrisy and other
gross evils had not come to light, which now it does to their shame whilst
they live.
rescue the said Lilburn. It is said there, John Lilburn has not offended
against any Laws, but against those The Fox in the fable being arraigned for
killing the Poultry, pleaded not guilty, as not having broken any justifiable
Law: And to prove this, denies the Act which they brought against him to be
lawful, because he, the Kite, and the Raven did not consent to it. Judge
Reader, whether this be not his Case.
by-Lawes which are no Laws: But such as Tyrants made, to succor themselves
in their Tyranny, and were not a legal power to make Laws.

Demetrius for the love which he bore to a certain Picture or Idol in
Protogenies shop, willingly forbore to set the City of Rhodes on fire. That Mr.
Lilburn by the Jury may be quitted, there must be no Act of Parliament against
Treason, put in execution, but a door left open (for this Idol sake) to all
Incendiaries to escape without punishment. The Counsel which is As Homer speaks
of Ulysses, Consilio bonus, and bonus, Armis; such a Councellor was he to the
Jury.
given unto the Jury, is to this effect. As if he should say. You are So the 12
men understood themselves, above Law, and accountable to none but God. Lilburn
tells us that a Parliament are countable to the people for what they do. We
should never have known how far beyond and above all Parliaments Iuries are, if
it had not been for this Trial; for how could we, seeing there is nothing
extant that makes mention of any such thing.
above both Law and Parliament, as Judges of the one, and other; so that it is
wholly in your breasts to determine what is Law, and when a Parliament may be
said to be lawful.

And according to this word, did the Jury proceed, most insolently presuming
(by the Verdict which they gave) not only to be Judges, but condemners both of
Parliament and Laws: A thing so unjust, as before was never heard of, and
whereof they are since ashamed or afraid to give any Reason for it.

Jupiter is brought in, as taking little notice of the evil speeches which the
Giants used against the Gods: But when he saw that they attempted (by raising
Mountains) to pluck them from their Throne: here now he stirs, and with
thundering and lightning destroys them, and breaks their design. It is true,
nothing better becomes men in Authority, then Sic pius enis, nam cum vincamur
in omni munere, sola deos aequat clementia nobis.
meekness, and to pass by a multitude of offenses: but when they shall see
men, Giant-like, to rise against Authority it self, and not only to trample
their persons, but their Acts too, as mire under their feet; Here the proverb
is true, foolish pity spoils a City.
in such a case whether they ought not to be active and severe, let wise men
judge. A Heathen could say, Interdum optimum miseri cordiae genus sit, nocentes
occidere saeva crudelitas si non etc. Senec.
It is sometimes the best kind of mercy, that offenders be punished, and to
spare them, the greatest cruelty.

Again, speaking afterward to the Army; You were first raised to succor the
people from being subject to the Tyrannical will of Seeing his manner is, to
speak always honorably of the last K. and condemned those that judged him to
death. It is a question who he means by Tyrants, and when such tyrannical wills
of men were exercised.
Tyrants. If those therefore that Command you, do Command you to defend any
member of this Commonwealth (whose Servants you are, of whom you receive pay)
you are to obey them therein. But on the contrary, if they command you to kill
or guard the illegal execution of any one Member of the Commonwealth, you are
not to obey them therein: but in stead thereof, employ your Armies against
those that impose such But who must judge when it is illegal? not the
Soldiers nor their Comma^ders, nor Parl. nor any else, but Lilb. cum socijs.
illegal, cruel, and bloody Commands upon you.

What his former practices were, as to divide the Army, by causing divisions
among the Soldiery, we have already showed: the continuance of which most
dangerous design, we see here, he has brought over with him. By guarding
illegal executions, we know what he means by his writings elsewhere: namely
when any one is brought forth to be punished for his misdemeanors (specially
if it be for making Insurrections in the Commonwealth) to countenance and
encourage such a person in his evil and sin, and casting off all just
Commands, to employ their Arms (as Here he tells us what it is to stand for
Liberty, viz. to rise for Malefactors, and not to suffer the Law or Justice to
pass against them, be their crimes and offenses never so many or great. If he
and his party say it is illegal, ipse dixit, that must stand.
he says here) against their Superiors.

When there was a debate between Caesar's and Pompey's Soldiers, of some
agreement: Libienus cries out, Why talk ye (says he) of such a thing? Nisi
Caesaris capite delato, Unless Caesar's head be off there will be no peace. By
this passage we may see, how improbable it is that the Army will be free from
distempers, so long as this man can have any influence among them: It being his
continual endeavor, to leave no way untried, whereby to occasion some
disturbance or other: As if he had vowed or taken an Oath (as His Father made
him swear at 12 years old never to be reconciled to Rome.
Haniball did when he was but twelve years old) not to be reconciled to the
State, nor cease to seek the ruin of it, whilst he lives.

Besides the former, he has also dispersed another printed Paper, called A
horse that is often spurred in one place, is thereby made dull and lazy: his
Pleas are still one and the same, viz. a kicking his Jury in the side with
their absolute power, as to be Judges of the Fact, the Keepers of the Liberty,
that neither Parliament nor Act are lawful: And thus spurring the^ still in
one place, he knows how to make jades of them.
A Plea at large, for John Lilburn, Gent. now in Newgate. In p. 16. it is
asserted as follows, That by the Tax of 120000 l. per month, Arbitrarily laid
by the General and Officers (June 19. 1653.) upon the free people of England,
all their proprieties are confounded and destroyed: For by the same rule that
he lays a hundred and twenty thousand pounds a Month, he may lay six Millions
a Month, when he pleases, and so ad infinitum.

Here we have him prosecuting the method which he propounded to the Duke of
Buckingham, Sir Ralph Hopton, and others: as to That which he publishes there,
may serve as another Reason, to prove the former charge against him: Namely his
Resolution to kill the General, destroy the Parliament, set up Charles Steward,
etc. For had he not intended such a thing, such seditions words would not have
been uttered, specially at this time, being a prisoner.
destroy the Lord General Cromwell, the Parliament and Council of State, and
to make Charles Stuart King of England, by working a mutiny in the Army, and
raising up the people against the present Government, and so put the Nation
into blood and confusion. Now howsoever we shall not speak any thing as to his
method: notwithstanding for the season, we conceive he was not right; for being
lately come over, and known to be seditious: a man would have thought, that for
a while he would not have been tampering with the public affairs of the
State, until he had gotten his liberty, and so been in a better capacity to
have followed the business he came about. But we see the Gall of sedition is
so predominant and overflowing in him, as he cannot for his life forbear the
acting of it, whenever he Take a wo^ and beat him black and blew, cut off
his legs, and then pluck his skin off, yet unless you can change his nature,
he will be a wolf still: so it is with men accustomed to sedition, it is not
banishment, imprisonment, or any other punishment will reclaim them, unless
God change their heart.
finds an occasion to go to work, be it in season, or out of season.

The Controversy was soon decided, as to what Country those Islands did
belong, when they brought Snakes and Adders thither. So we may know of what
side and party this man is, by the venomous Vermins which naturally do live in
him. The Snakes of Treason which he carried away with him, he kept in his bosom
all the time of his abode beyond Sea, and we see here they are brought back
again, so that dye they cannot, the soil being so natural to them.

We shall go no further with his Books, only besides those here mentioned, he
has dispersed with his own hands among several persons many other Some of the
Heathen Emperors ceased from persecuting the Christians, because they saw how
unsuccessfull they were in their actions. One would think he should be quite
weary of publishing Books against the State, to observe how the hand of the
Lord has been still against him, as to blast and curse his doings.
Printed Papers of the same nature and tendency, since his coming over.

Having made so large a discourse of his Case and Craft, we shall now in the
winding up of all, take occasion from the premises, to speak a word in season
to the whole Nation. What course the Parliament should take with him, Only
this, Sed sapiens in f^nte oculos habet, omnia spectans, omnia prudenti cum
ratione videns. And venienti occurite morbo.
we shall not at all meddle with it: it being only our purpose, to satisfy
all people in all places, with this particular: namely, That he is one whose
liberty is not to be desired, dangerous to the Commonwealth, and therefore to
be wished rather further off, then to live amongst us. And that it may appear we
speak not here lightly, or unadvisedly, but what is rational and well
bottomed, we desire that these following Considerations may be weighed.

1. How he has sought by several seditious ways, the overthrow of the
Commonwealth, ever since it was established: And nothing will satisfy him (by
his own confession) but As if he were another Alecto, whom Juno is said to
send forth to raise tumults and seditions in the world. Cui tristia Bella,
Iraeque insidiaeque, and crimina noxia cordi.
murder and blood, where he takes himself to be wronged: Be it true or false,
He that can murder with the least scruple of conscience, such as are in
Authority, in what safety are other people whom he takes for his Enemies.
Surely he will fear less either by his Agents to destroy such low and weak
things.
for here none must be judge but himself. Plynie says, that the Earth never
receives within her entrails, that Serpent which has stung any man to death.
We have showed before, how his tongue has not spared any, but the poison
thereof has been poured out, upon Parliament, Army, Generals, Council of
State, etc. Insomuch that, if after all his poisoning and killing, there should
be an opening to him, as to receive him into our bowels, it might truly be said
(like that voice which was heard from Heaven) Hodie venemum Reipubl. est
immissum, This day is poison poured into the Commonwealth.

2. In all the stirs that he makes, and the several Pamphlets which are forth
under his name, we find nothing in them of Christ, nothing of his Kingdom,
power, and glory, and of the great Work which the Lord is now carrying forth in
the world. It is true we find him often scoffing and jeering at the things of
God, but for the present Here we cannot say of this man, as it was said of the
Ass, the master has need of him. For neither Christ nor his people have any
need of him, as to the cause and work of God going on in the world.
Generation-worke, he is altogether ignorant of it, it is foolishness to him.

When one asked Duke d'Alva whether he had seen the blazing Star, or no: he
answered, that his work was so much below, on earth, as he had neither leisure
nor time to look up, to see what was doing in the Heavens. The like may be said
of this (much to be pitied miserable) man, who has made it so his work to be
contentious, and always quarrelling with one or other, as he has had no spare
hours to look up, or to look on any thing saving self-revenge; and therefore
as he knows nothing of Generation-worke, so he is better out then in; for
should he be taken in, he would but stand in the way It is reported of a tree,
that if the boughs thereof be thrown into a vessel, it will occasion a mutiny
among the Mariners and passengers, and so endanger the loss both of men and
vesse^l. Should this man be shipped with the Saints, there would be no peace
among them: Besides such divisions and contentions would he make, as they would
be the less useful and serviceable in their generation.
to hinder the prosecuting and furthering of it.

3. Take him without his Wiles, and at the best: what are the things which he
talks so much of? But in respect of our condition, so unnecessarily, as the
removal of them generally by honest men is expected and desired. For Magna
Charta and other Statutes, we know them as well as he, and know they were made
in favor A man that leaves a birds nest standing on a tree, shows he is
willing to have the old birds thither again to breed more young ones. It may
easily be perceived, why he pleads so much for old Laws, and to have the nest
of Monarchy to stand, he has a mind to have the old bird of Kingship here
again. Now judge whether he be not a master-workman.
to Monarchy, and therefore as in the bulk, most improper and unsuitable to a
Commonwealth. When Children make a noise, and thereby disturb the Family, our
manner is to put them forth the door. It is but a Childish noise, of purpose to
disturb the State, which he makes, of fundamental standing Laws, of precious
Juries, how Parliaments shall be chosen, and how long they shall sit, etc. The
folly and vanity whereof we have showed before. So that it is of necessity he
should be quieted one way or other, to the end that those who are the
Governors of the Family (being freed from such In this we shall follow the
Lords counsel, Isa. 5.14. Take up the stumbling block out of the way out of my
people. Now though he talk of Reformation, freedom, liberty, yet none a greater
let and block in the way then he.
disturbance) may the sooner perfect what is expedient for the Nation, as to
the present time.

4. For such as fear God, and love the Commonwealth, they may very well be
willing to part with him, considering it is the other side, It would make a man
smile, to read what he vapouringly talks of the inward and intimate
familiarity betwee^ Buckingham and him, and how many thousand miles he would
run upon his bare feet in his errand, and he would be bound body for body so
that the Duke might live in England, etc. It is a trick among Thieves, to put
in little Thieves first at some hole or window, to make way, by opening a
passage for the greater Thieves to follow. Could Lilburn but once creep in, no
doubt he would soon make a hole broad enough for his companions, though greater
then he, to come in after him.
Buckingham and that party, with whom in heart, head, and hand he joins, and
whose interest and cause he carries on, and stands for.

The Philistims were desirous to have David sent away, because they feared when
both Armies should engage, he would join with their Enemy against them. We have
more reason and ground then they had, to believe if ever Charles Stuart by his
Agents here, or friends abroad, should be in a capacity to invade us, he would
join with him against us. And therefore let all wise men judge whether it be
not better and safer to dismiss him before hand, then to put it to a Trial.

5. Neither is it of small consequence that he has so many Agents in the Land,
who (as he says himself) are ready to manage all the designs which he puts
into their hands; he being like the Weathercock which stands over the
Wind-diall in White Hall, sets their hands upon the points of Treason,
according as he turns about. We blame not men for keeping fire and Gunpowder
apart, and far asunder: much less is a State to be disliked, if they keep such
at a distance, whose being near would hazard the blowing up of a whole
Commonwealth.

6. We shall propound this as another Consideration, viz. The dangerous
consequence of We would willingly have those men who desire this man's liberty
among us, to show us some president either divine or humane, that any person
has acted as seditiously as Lilb. has done, and yet the State left him in a
capacity afterward to do as bad again if he would.
an ill president in a Commonwealth. In all well governed Republics, great
care has been taken thereof, insomuch that it has been received for
State-Maximes, Spes impunitatis magna est peccandi illecebra. Et paena unius
est multorum metus. Again, Bonis nocet, qui malis parcit. Qui punit injustos
in alijs fieri injuriam prohibet. Bonorum salutem custodit, qui malos punit.
How When Sheba blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, etc every
man to his tents O Israel. If the people thereupon had not followed him, yet
was the action in it self Crimen Laesae Magist. We have spoken enough of his
frequent blowing the Trumpet of Rebellion, and shall leave it to the judicious
Reader to consider.
suitable these things are to the present subject, we shall leave it to the
understanding Reader to judge of.

We shall conclude all, as to Mr. Lilburn, in that grave Conclusion of the
Senators of Troy, when it was objected that she was the wonder of the world for
beauty. (...), Though she be such a one (say they) yet for all that rid her
hence, rather then to us and our posterity (...) she should abide here for a
When the brazen Serpent became a snare, and an occasion of hurt to the people,
Hezekias was careful suddenly to take it away: And the like have all other
States done, seasonably removed all snares and dangers out of the way of the
people, whether persons or things.
snare and destruction.

We have a little time left us to spend about the Jury, who for their carriage
both then and since, may leave the remembrance of their names to posterity, as
rightly called Those who set on fire the Temple of Diana at Eph^sus, did it (as
some write) to the end they might have their names and memory continue in ages
after. Who knows but these 12 Jurie men, in doing that which was never done
before, nor none but themselves durst have done. Intended to perpetuate their
names by such a notorious actio^: now until some Cavallier cronicle them for
it, this may serve to keep up the memory both of their names and action.
THE UNREASONABLE UNRIGHTEOUS JURY: unrighteous in their verdict, and illegal
sentence; unreasonable, being called before Authority, not to give a reason of
their action. Now, much we shall not speak concerning these men, because there
is enough in their Examination to discover the hypocrisy and falsehood of them.
They say, if a Horse put his foot where a Wolf has stepped before, he becomes
lame by it. It was ill for the Jury that they followed Lilburn, how they went
before we know not, but here they took such an halting as it is to be feared
they will never go upright again: And whether this be not so, will appear by
their Examination, which is as follows.

THE EXAMINATION OF THE JURY Who Tried Liev. Coll. John Lilburn, At the
Sessions House in the Old Baily: Upon Saturday the 20 of August, 1653. Taken
before the Council of State the 23d of the same Month, in pursuance of an
Order of Parliament of the 21.
THomas Green Lilb. could not choose but like this man, knowing that he was as
ill affected to the present Government as himself. Simile amicum simile, and
simile simile gaudet.
, of Snow-hill, Tallow-Chandler, Querie, why this man was made foreman of the
Jurie; we cannot understand of any reason for it, unless it were for being
before others in malignity to the State.
Foreman of the Jury; being asked what the grounds and reasons were that moved
him to find the said Lievt: Col: John Lilburn not guilty upon the Indictment
preferred against him at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, says, That he
did discharge Where a good conscience in discharging truly a man's duty, there
will be boldness, and the person is not ashamed nor afraid to give a reason of
what he has done, being called thereunto.
his conscience in what he then did, and that he will give It seems neither he
nor Mr. Lilb. had any Law to produce, that he was not bound to give the Counsel
a reason of their proceedings.
no other Answer to any Questions which shall be asked him upon that matter.

And being in particular demanded of him, whether he conceived it not
sufficiently proved, that the Act whereupon he was Indicted was an Act of
Parliament, whether he was not satisfied that the Copy of the Act produced, was
a true Copy of the Act it self, It is reported of an old woman, that she would
always keep her hand shut; Imagining that she had within, the whole world,
which would fly out upon the opening of her fist.

But this man would not open his hand, or rather his head, as if there were any
matter in it; but lest the emptiness and nothingnesse within should appear.


or that the John Lilburn at the Bar, was the John Lilburn mentioned in the
Act: And what other thing it was which moved the Jury to find as aforesaid; the
Examinant answered, that he will give no other answer as abovesaid, and desired
that he might be no further pressed therein.

And being further asked, why he would not give an account of the grounds and
reasons of their Verdict, he said, He would not do it for reasons best known
to himself.

MIchael Rayner, of Friday-street, Leather-Seller, he says, that he was one of
the Jury that Tried Lievt: Col: John Lilburn, upon Saturday the 20 instant, and
that he was summoned to serve of the Jury upon Wednesday was seven-night, and
did constantly attend in Court, and upon the service, until the Trial was
over, and that he was If it be a thing which a man likes, and has a desire to
do, he needs not be solicited: he will be forward enough of himself in such a
case.
not solicited by John Lilburn, nor any other on his behalf. And the Questions
mentioned in the foregoing Examination being asked him, he answered, That he was
satisfied in the Verdict he gave in that Case, and that he should give no other
Answer thereto.

And being further pressed therein, he desired that a days time might be given
unto him, to Here that saying is true, Conseientia mordet, quae pluris est quam
mill testis: Quae si mala est etiam insolitudine and solicita est.
consider of it, and he should give satisfaction to the aforesaid Questions.

He was further asked who advised him to make this answer to the Council,
whereto he answered, That the Jury were all of that mind, and that they Thus
one sin draws on another: And when men's consciences begin to smite them for the
evil of their doings, they are evermore studious and solicitous, as how to
excuse the^selv's, and to keep shame and punishment off: whereas men doing
things justly and honestly are not troubled about devising shifts and put-offs.
agreed to give this answer at a meeting they had all together at the Windmill
Tavern in Coleman-street this morning; which meeting they had upon occasion of
the Order of Parliament for examining this business: And that he had notice to
come to this meeting by one or two of his partners, whose names (he says) he
does not well know.

And being further demanded of him, whether Mr. Scobell Clerk of the
Parliament, did not give evidence that Lievt: Col: John Lilburn at the Bar
was the very Lilburn against whom the Act was made, he said, He did give that
evidence, and that he did believe he said true, and that the Copy of the Act of
Parliament produced, was a true Copy, but says, That Here is something of
special consideration, seeing the Jury were told by the Bench, that they were
Judges only of the fact, wherefore they should be so insolent, as to presume to
be Judges of matter of law This particular needs to be looked after, for
otherwise it may be exemplary, and so dangerous in a little time.
he and the rest of the Jury took themselves to be Judges of matter of Law, as
well as matter of Fact. Although he confessed that the Bench did say, that they
were only Judges of the Fact.

He further said, he was very unwilling to be of the Jury.

THomas Tunman, of Cowe-lane This man, though he sels salt, yet his words were
not seasoned with salt, witness his lying here against knowledge and conscience.
Salter, another of Lieutenant Col: John Lilburn's Jury, who says, that the
Verdict was, not guilty: And being asked the Questions in the first Examination,
he says, That he was sworn to find according to the issue and evidence, and
that he did find according to his How durst he speak of conscience, who at the
very same time most grossly lies against his conscience.
conscience, and and positively refused to give any other Answer: And did deny
that the Jury aforesaid had agreed together to give one and the same-Answer to
the Counsel, or that they had met together this morning, or at any other time
since Saturday-night last, until they came to the Council. And being asked in
particular, whether the said Jury did not meet together this morning at the
Windmill Tavern in Coleman-street, When Anthony was fishing, there lay one
under the water, who u^known to him, did put fish on his hook, the which he
threw up, and thought he had caught them. This man little imagined how the
Devil baited his tongue, and put one lie after another into his mouth, which
he threw out before the Counsel. But here we see how God punishes sin with
sin.
he positively answered they did not.

IMmanuel Hunt of St. Sepulchers, who says he was one of John Lilburns Jury,
upon his Trial on Saturday last, and that the Jury found him not guilty; but
his memory being short, does not well remember the issue.

He being asked, whether it was not proved that the Prisoner was the John
Lilburn mentioned in the Act, says, How could he be u^satisfied, seeing
Lilburn had sworn he was not the man.
He was not satisfied that it was so proved, and that there are many John
Lilburns, and that John Lilburn was Indicted of Felony, which he did believe
he was not guilty of; and that what was found was done by the consent of all,
and did satisfy their A man of as much conscience as the former; we see they
were not unequally matched? for in what do they agree together?
consciences therein, and refused to give any other Answer, then as aforesaid.

And it being demanded of him, whether the Jury had not met together, to agree
of the Answer they were to give to the Council; he answered, They met together
the night of the Trial, to drink a pint of Wine, and that they met It seems he
brought away in his head the sign of the Tavern; for his tongue turns about
like a Windmill, says and unsaith; but we must here take notice of the just
hand of God upon them, who will have their hypocrisy and deceit discovered by
their own mouths.
not since until this day; and being asked what time of the day, he answered,
five of them met here. But being asked particularly whether they met not at the
Windmill Tavern in Coleman-street this morning, he did acknowledge they did,
and that Mr. Tunman in particular was there, but refused to declare who gave
him notice of this meeting.

JAmes Stephens of the Old Bailey Haberdasher, who says that he was one of
Lievt: Col: John Lilburns Jury, and that having considered of the matter
whereof he was Indicted, they found him not guilty. And being asked the
Questions in the first Examination, How this man should find the Prisoner not
guilty, acknowledging so much as he does, is beyond our understanding: Possibly
he did here, like some Travelers, who will now and then go purposely out of
their way, rather then part company.
He acknowledged that he was satisfied that the Prisoner was the John Lilburn
mentioned in the Act: Nor did he yet question the validity of the Act, but the
Jury having weighed all which was said, and conceiving themselves ( It will be
much to the satisfaction of the Nation, that these me^ be required to give
their Reasons, wherefore contrary to the Counsel and Bench they peremptorily
took it upon them to be Judges of the Law.
notwithstanding what was said by the Council and Bench to the contrary) to be
Judges of Law as well as of the Fact, they found him not guilty.

He acknowledges that all the Jury met this morning at the Windmill Tavern in
Coleman-street, to consider what Answer to give to the Council, and that the
Galaton paints Homer vomiting, and the other Poets licking up what he had
vomited. He that would put these twelve in a Picture, might do well to paint
them so.
Foreman of the Jury spoke to him to be there, telling him he had heard there
was an Order of Parliament for summoning them before the Council; and further
says, That ^unman was at that meeting.

RIchard Tomlins of St. Sepulchers In what Book does he find it, that a man
being warned to be of a Jury, before he hears the Case, may say, Right or
wrong, he will acquit the Prisoner: But so impudent was he to say so much
before the Trial of Lilburn.
Book-binder, who says he was one of Lievt: Coll: John Lilburns Jury, and that
the Jury found him not guilty. And being asked what was the point in issue, he
desired to be excused in that, saying, What he can tell is one thing, but Here
is a p^ain confession of guilt, yet so, as he will not he his own Accuser: This
is for the Commonwealth to prove: A thing easy to be done.
to accuse himself is another thing. It being further demanded of him, whether
he was satisfied that the Prisoner was the John Lilburn mentioned in the Act,
he said, he was not: And being asked what made him think so, He answered, he was
This is a Maxim laid down by Tyrants: Only we never heard so much from the
mouth of a subject before But see, what it is to be a Juryman, viz. to be above
a Parliament, above Law. More then a subject, arbitrary, absolute, not bound to
give an account of his actions to any man The Roman freedom was nothing to this
for privileges.
not bound to give any account of what he did in that business, but to God
himself.

WIlliam Hitchcock of Watlyn-street, Woollen Draper, who says he was of Lievt:
Col: John Lilburns Jury, and that the Jury found him not guilty: he being asked
the Questions expressed in the Foremans Examination, he answered, he had
discharged his Lex dei est regula conscientiae, says P. Mart. loc. com clas.
2. c 1. Not Lilburnes whymsies and falsehoods, nor a man's own will and lust.
conscience in what he had done, and desires the Council not to ask him any
questions. For he can give no other Answer, and is In reading this man's
resolution, it puts us in mind of a company of good fellows, who meeting at a
Tavern (as these did) agreed among themselves that they would pay only so much
for their reckoning, and resolved to give no more: but they were made to pay a
great deal more before they departed: now who knows but it may be so with
these resolute men.
resolved to give no other Answer.

And being asked concerning the meeting of the Jury to agree of an Answer to be
given to the Council: He first It would be worth the knowing what character
was given to Lilburn concerning these men, as to encourage him to to make
choice of them for his Jury: seeing it appears they are such as make no
conscience of lying: It is probable he had a hint of some such thing before
hand, and thought them the fitter to serve his turn.
denied that they had any other meeting, then what they had the same night his
Trial was. But being asked particularly, if they met not at the Windmill
Tavern in Coleman-street this morning, he acknowledges they did, but denied
he heard of any Order of Parliament for sending for the Jury, nor did they meet
upon the business of John Lilburn, or that they did at the Meeting speak of
it, but only met to drink a pint of Wine, as they had agreed to do, the same
night they gave up their Verdict.

THomas Evershot of Watlin-street Woollen Draper, who says he was one of John
Lilburns Jury, and that they found him not guilty, but denied to give any
Answer to any further Questions, saying he was Quere, whether this ma^s
conscience when he lied against it, was not as well satisfied, as when he found
Lilburn not guilty.
satisfied in his own Conscience in what he did. And being asked, whether the
Jury did not meet this morning to agree of an Answer to be given to the
Council, When there were brought before King Demetrius 8 persons who had
conspird, his death, he made it matter of admiration, that so many could agree
together in a design so cruel and bloody. It is in truth a wonderful shing
that there should be found in this City 12 Jurymen so void of conscience and
the fear of God, as to agree together in a thing so evil and naught, as
Heathens would scorn to have done.
denies that they did, or that they met at all since the night of the Trial,
until they met at the Council.

The persons following were Examined the 29 of August, 1653. in the morning.
THomas Smith of Cornhill, Haberdasher of Small Wares, he says he was of John
Lilburns Jury, and found him not guilty, but But whether the State may not
refuse to rest satisfied in such an Answer that is the Question: we shall leave
this to Time.
refuses to Answer to any other Questions, saying, he was called to serve his
Country in this particular; and that he had done it He might have said rather,
according to his Ignorance; for had he done the thing with understanding, he
would not have been either afraid or ashamed to have given the Council a
reason of his action.
according to the best of his understanding; acknowledges the meeting of the
Jury at the VVindmill Tavern yesterday morning.

GIlbert Gain of Dunstans in the west, Grocer, he says he was one of John
Lilburns Jury, and found him not guilty. And he being asked what the issue was,
he acknowledges that he was Indicted for Felony, for coming into England; but
says the Jury did find as they did, because they So did Lambert Simenel take
upon him to be Edward Earl of Warwick, Son and Heir to the Duke of Clarence,
but he was a counterfeit, and for taking upon him that which he was not, had his
just punishment in the end.
took themselves to be Judges of the Law, as well as of the Fact; and that
although the Court did declare, they were Judges of the Fact only, yet the
Jury were otherwise persuaded from what they heard out of the These Law Books
will appear to be only the wind which came from Lilburn, which blew their
heads too and fro, like weather-cocks.
Law Books. He confesses he himself did at first differ from the rest of the
Jury, but was convinced by their Reasons; he confesses the meeting of the Jury.

GRiffeth Owen of Bishopsgate ward, Brewer, he acknowledges he was of Liev:
Col: John Lilburns Jury, and that they found him not guilty, because he was
Howsoever they agreed to give no reason of their action to the Council: yet on
the contrary so much is spoken by them, as does make it evident they were of
Tomlins mind, that is, right or wrong, resolved to quit the Prisoner.
not satisfied that the Prisoner was the John Lilburn mentioned in the Act; and
that he had never seen John Lilburn before that day, nor was he solicited in
his behalf by any person: He acknowledges the Jury met yesterday morning at
the VVindmill Tavern, but made no agreement what Answer to make the Council.

The Unrighteousness of this Unreasonable Jury, is so fully discovered by
themselves, as there is no need of adding any thing thereunto. It is reported
of the waters of Nilus, that having run many hundred miles a pure and clear
water, when it comes near the Mediterranean Sea it begins to grow brackish and
salt, and at last it falls into the Sea, and loses its name. We read of many
just and honest Juries in the days of our forefathers: Some hundred years
ago, Jurymen made Conscience of what they did, and feared an Oath. Now that
the same is changed, and the water become bitter and corrupt, what may this
presage. If we may freely here deliver our opinion, thus we think. The way of
proceeding by twelve men in the Trial of Malefactors, is near an end, and
shortly to be swallowed up by the Supreme Authority of the Nation: So as
neither the name nor thing shall be any more in the Commonwealth of England.

FINIS.

