A JOYFUL MESSAGE For all Loyal SUBJECTS: SENT From the Kings Majesty's
Royal Court at Causam, touching diverse great and Remarkable Passages herein
contained.

TOGETHER, With the Armies Propositions, concerning the raising of Forces, and
continuing of Bodies, to the apparent hazard of a new War.

AS ALSO, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax's Proclamation concerning the
raising of new Forces.

London, Printed for John Terrie, Anno Dom. 1647.

The last NEWS From the Kings Majesty's Royal Court at Cawsam; Sent in a
Letter from a Gentleman residing at the Court, to his friend in London.
SIR,
YOur last I have received, dated July 10 wherein I find many earnest
expressions, touching the proceedings of this present Treaty. And whereas you
desire to be a partaker of our intelligence in these parts, I shall here
faithfully impart unto you, that which is of greatest concernmene, and most
desired by the whole Kingdom, viz.

The Kings Majesty does not seem (as yet) to alter His Resolution, or to
remove His Court from Causam, but is resolved to stay there some certain days
longer, in expectation and hopes of having the Duke of York, and the rest of
His Children sent down to Him, for the obtaining of which, the General has
sent a Letter to the Honorable Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster,
intimating the earnest desires of his Majesty therein; but (as yet) I do not
hear what answer has been returned, concerning the said Desires, expressed in
his Excellencies Letter.

But this much I can assure you, that the whole Court in general are prompt up
with much confidence, and do absolute believe, that his Majesty's Desires will
be satisfied, and that his Children (whom he so earnestly desire to see) will
be speedily sent to him. Yet it is rumoured here, that the Parliament desires a
convenient place may be appointed nearer London, to the intent, His Majesty may
advance thither, for the visiting of his Children.

But his Majesty resides here as yet, being gallantly accomadated, in all
respects whatsoever, which gives great satisfaction and contentment to his
Majesty, occasioned by the civil behavior, and gallant expressions of diverse
loyal and faithful Subjects now attending his Royal Person; for seldom has
it ^in seen, (of late days) that his Majesty was ever more merry or lightsome
then now, being joyful to see his Subjects flock about Him, and does not deny
any one to salute his Hand.

Here is much resorting to the Court, both from City, Town, and Country, and
many desires to kiss His Majesty's Hand: Diverse are admitted into His
Majesty's Chamber, and presenting themselves before him, he puts forth his hand
for them to kiss.

His Majesty is very courteous and respective to all that comes near him, which
causes great triumph and joy throughout the whole Counties adjacent. He has
within few days, touched abundance for the Kings Evil, and cured many.

His Majesty betakes himself much to Reading and Study, and oftentimes confers
with his two Chaplains Doctor Hammond, and Doctor Shelden, who gives him great
satisfaction in many quaeries and Proposals, propounded by his Majesty.

As also, concerning diverse scruples and objections, touching the present
Government of the Church of England.

The Duke of Richmond behaves himself very gallantly here, and the King takes
great delight in his company. And therefore for his Excellencies assenting and
permition to have the said Peer and two Chaplains come to the Court (according
to his Majesty's desire) was a a very honorable and prudent way: And according
to his Excellencies own words; That a moderate dealing toward His Majesty, His
Royal Family, and His late Party, so far as may stand with security of
common Rights, is the most hopeful course to take away the Seeds of War
amongst Us for Posterity, and to procure a firm and lasting Peace; for the
effecting whereof, and for the propagation of the Gospel of Truth and Peace,
it is hoped that neither the hearts of Sovereign and Subjects will be wanting
therein.

Thus having given you a just Account (as near as I can) of the proceedings
here at Court, touching the Kings Majesty, I shall in the next place present to
you the Copy of a Proclamation, set forth by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
as follows.

A Proclamation of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to prevent tumultuous and
unlawful Assemblies of Persons disaffected to the Public Peace.
WHereas I am informed, that diverse ill-affected to the Parliament and peace of
this Kingdom, have taken and do take upon them to raise Forces, and with high
threats and menaces terrify the peaceable people, and such as are
well-affected to the Parliament, who have in all these wars stood firm to
the common interest of this Kingdom and do further in a violent manner offer
to displace diverse honest and godly Ministers settled by the Parliament with
very much other unwarr^ntable practices and all under the name and pretense of
doing service to this Army.

Now forasmuch as it is manifest these things are done by such men who are
ready to take all advantages (notwithstanding any pretense whatsoever) of the
present unsettlement of affairs to cast the Kingdom into new troubles. I do
hereby declare my utter dislike of all such attempts and practices; and that if
hence-forward any such persons shall presume to attempt the disturbance of the
peace of this Kingdom, I shall endeavor by all good means to prevent and
suppress the same.

And furthermore, that I will assist and stand by those who are really affected
to the peace and weal of the Kingdom, to protect and defend them from the
violence and wrong that may be offered to them by any persons as aforesaid.
Given under my Hand at Reading the 7. of July, 1647.

FAIRFAX.

A Declaration or Representation sent to His Excellency Sir T. Fairfax by the
Agitators for the Northern Army.
THat whereas your Excellencies Petitioners having for some few years past
served the Parliament and Kingdom in the late unnatural wars, and having
undergone the same with all cheerfulness and read^nesse: notwithstanding the
sad coffeehouse and sad sufferings which we have undergone being not at all
so thereby discouraged as to manifest any visible distemper, or unwillingnesse
unto the aforesaid Service, our conditions being at present so uncertain, that
we know not to whom to repair as our chief Conductor and by reason of the
same, we are exposed to an incapacity of being made partakers of the fruits of
our wearied travels and dangerous services, out of the experience that we had
of your Excellencies care for the satisfaction and preservation both of
Soldiers and Subjects, we are emboldned to present these as follows.

That your Excellency would be pleased to make our satisfaction and
preservation, the object of your Excellencies care together with the Army at
present under your Excellencies command and resident with you.

That to the end we may be exempted from further obedience to any other command
then what may conduce for the obtaining of our just dues and privileges the
establishing of the peace of the Kingdom, and with which your Excellencies
advice and approbation shall concur.

That your Excellency would be pleased to recommend this annexed Representation
of our Desires to the Parliament, to prevent misunderstanding betwixt the
Parliament and the Soldiers of this Kingdom, for the obtaining of their just
desires, and putting an end to these present distractions.

Assented to by each several and respective Regiment throughout the whole Army.
The Armies new Propositions.
FIrst, that there is nothing done with effect, notwithstanding the Votes of
the House to the dispiersing of the Reformado-Officers, who still continue in
and about London, ready to head Forces to the apparent hazard of a new War.

2. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House for the speedy sending into
Ireland, or disbanding those Forces which left the Army, and their special
order to the Committee at Derby house to take speedy care therein, yet they are
still in continued Bodies in and about the City of London, and as it is said,
more Forces are daily listing, pretending the service of Ireland.

3. That notwithstanding the Votes of the House of the tenth of June, and those
since of the 5. of July, for the present purging the House, diverse persons
comprised, in those Votes, continue still to sit there. Thus having given you a
satisfactory answer, according to your Request, I remain.

Yours to command, N. Godfrey
Causam July 13.
FINIS,

