

The Knowledge of things Unknown.

Showing the effects of the PLANETS, and Ot^^^ ASTRONOMICAL Constellations.

With the strange Events that befall Men, Women and Children borne under them

Compiled by GODFRIDUS super palladium de Agricultara. Anglicarum.

Together with the Husband-mans Practice, or Prognostication for e^^^ as
teaches Albert, Alkind, and Ptolomey

With the Shepherds Prognostication of the Weather, and Pytha^^ his Wheel of
Fortune

Ptholomeas.


This is unknown to many men, Though it be known to (...)

Printed for John Stafford and are to be sold by Francis Coals, at the (...) of
the Lamb in the Old Bailey, 166^.

The Table to the first Part.
THe Book of Knowledge for the benefit of all People; and of the Nativity of
our Lord, falling on any of the seven days in the Week, thereby showing the
Disposition of the year. Fol. 1 2 Of the birth of Children in the days of the
week. Fol. 4 3 The nature and Disposition of the Moon in birth of Children.
Fol. 5 4 Of Saturn, and his disposition. Fol. 7 5 What the Thunder signifies
in every month of the year. Fol. 18 6 Of the good days for Bleeding, and ill
days for any work. Fol. 19 7 To know how a man shall keep himself in health.
Fol. 21 8 The perilous days of every month. Fol. 22 9 Ptolomies rule for the
Zodiac. Fol. 24 10 How the Twelve Signs do rule the parts of Man's body. Fol.
25 11 The disposition of the Planets. Fol. 26 12 The condition of Man
discovered by creatures. Fol. 31 13 The descriptions of the four Elements, and
of the four Complexions. Fol. 32 14 Of the four prime Qualities. Fol. 32 15
The year divided, with the Knowledge of the state of man's body by Urine. Fol.
35 16 An A. B. G. Wherein you may know of what Planet every man is borne, his
fortune and time of his death. Fol. 42 17 Another Alphabet for the same
purpose. Fol. 44 18 To know the Weather that shall be all the year after the
change of the Moon, by the Prime days. Fol. 46 19 A rule to know upon what
letter, what hour, and what minute, as follows. Fol. 46 20 Of the most best
and profitable days that be in the year to be let blood. Fol. 48 21 Here
follows the nature of the twelve Signs. Fol. 5^ 22 The Anatomy of Man's body,
with the number of the bones. Which is in all, 248. Fol. 55 23 The use and
order of Phlebotomy, with the names of the veins and where they rest. Fol. 58
24 Of the year with the growth of things. Fol. 63 25 The change of man twelve
times according to the months. Fol. 65 26 The Rutter of the distances of the
harbors and havens in most parts of the World, from one to another. Fol. 69 27
Of the Axtree and the Poles. Fol. 72 28 Of the Circles of the Sphere. Fol. 73
29 The Reason why that five parallel Circles are only in the Sphere. Fol. 75
30 Of the five grater Circles, of the appearance and non appearance of them:
Fol. 76 31 Of the bigness of the five parallel Circles. Fol. 79 32 Of the
number of the Parallels. Fol. 80 33 O the order of the five parallel circles.
Fol. 81 34 Of the power of the five Parallels. Fol. 81 35 Of the space between
the Parallels Fol. 82 36 Of the Colors. Fol. 83 37 Of the Zodiac. Fol. 83 38
Of the Horizon. Fol. 84 39 Of the Meridian circles. Fol. 86 40 Of the Circle
Galaxias. Fol. 89 41 Of the five Zones Fol. 87 42 Of the Celestial Sgnes with
their Seats Fol. 88 43 Of the twelve winds, with their names and properties.
Fol. 92 34 Strange wonders most worthy of note. Fol. 91
The table to the Second part.
1 THe Husbandmans Prognostication for ever, together with his Rules and
Practice. Also a ^hriefe Chronology of diverse memorable Accidents. 2 Of
Christmas day. Fol. 100 3 The Husbandmans practice. Fol. 102 4 The disposition
of the twelve Days known by the shining of the Sun. Fol. 103 5 From the time
of Christmas to twelf day. Fol. 103 6 How thou may rule well thy beasts that
year. Fol. 109 7 An old rule of the Husbandman. Fol. 110 8 How the Winter
shall be after two twelve months. Fol. 110 9 The saying of Soly^us and Petrus.
Fol. 110 10 The circles about the Sun, Moon, and other Stars. Fol. 111 11 The
color and lights of the other Stars. Fol. 112 12 How to know the weather by
the rising and going down of the Sun. Fol. 113 13 Albertus of the Lightning.
Fol. 114 14 Of the Rainbow, from whence he is, and what it signifies. Fol.
115 15 Of Thunder and Lightning Fol. 116 16 To know the weather by the four
Quarters of the year as shows, L^icht^nb^^ger, Fol. 117 17 How to know the
weather out of the New and Full Moon. Fol. 118 18 Of the Eclips of the Moon,
the cause thereof how and when they happen. Fol. 121 19 To find when the Moon
shall be Eclipsed and when not. Fol. 121 20 To find when the Sun shall be
Eclipsed and when not. Fol. 122 21 How to behold an Eclipse of the Sun without
hurt to the eyes. Fol. 122 22 The mind of the Fathers of the nature of the
Fire. Fol. 123 23 A brief discourse of the Natural causes of watery Meteors.
Fol. 124 24 Of the Rainbow. Fol. 124 25 Of Rain. Fol. 124 26 Of Hail, Fol.
125 27 Of Snow. Fol. 125 28 Of Frost and Dew. Fol. 125 29 Of Wind. Fol. 126 30
Of sudden Blasts. Fol. 126 31 Of Earthquakes. Fol. 127 32 Signs of
Earthquakes, Fol. 127 33 Of Thunder and Lightnings. Fol. 128 34 What things be
not hurt with Lightning. Fol. 129 35 Sundry rules of excellent use, and right
necessary to be known of the Husbandman and all other persons of what quality
soever, as of Physic and Husbandry through the 12 months of the year. Fol.
130 The use of an Instrument to find the hour of the day. Fol. 142 A Table
showing the Interest of any sum of money from 1 pound to 1000 pound. Fol. 147
Tables showing the value of any Lease or pure hase either at 5, 6, 8, or 10
pounds in the hundred. Fol. 150 Of the Distances, Magnitudes, Motions, and
Situations of the Planets fixed Stars. Fol. 155 1 Of the Heaven of the fixed
Stars. Fol. 155 2 Of the Heaven of Saturn. Fol. 157 3 Of the Heaven of I^piter,
Fol. 158 4 Of the Heaven of Mars. Fol. 158 5 Of the Heaven Sun. Fol. 159 6 Of
the Heaven of V^^us, Fol. 159 7 Of the Heaven of Mercury. Fol. 160 8 Of the
Heaven of the Moon. Fol. 160
A Table of the Kings Reigns, their beginning, ending and continuance. Fol. 162
How to make all manner of Bills, Bonds, Leases Indentures, Receipts, Wills, etc.
Fol. 166
The table to the Third part.
1 THe Shepherds perpetual Prognostication for the Weather: and first, The
signs of Rain, Fol. 183 2 Signs of Storms and Wind, Fol. 184 3 Signs and
tokens of fair Weather. Fol. 185 4 Signs of Heat and hot Weather, Fol. 196 5
Signs of cold and frosty Weather, Fol. 196 6 Signs of Snow, Fol. 187 7 Signs
of Plenty and Abundance, Fol. 189 8 Signs of Dearth, and want of Corn and
Food, Fol. 190 A brief Chronology of Memorable Accidents. Fol. 191 A brief
Description of all the Members of the body with their signification. Fol. 197
Of the signification of Moles. Fol. 215 A description of the Wheel of Fortune.
How the Moon appears when she is Eclipsed, and in this manner did she
appear in the year 1661. upon Saturday being the 28. of September.
North.



THE BOOK of Knowledge.
Both necessary and useful for the benefit of all People.
Sunday.
IF the Nativity of our Lord come on Sunday Winter shall be good, the Spring
windy, sweet and hot, Vintage flourishing: Oxen and Sheep multiplied, Honey
and Milk plentiful: Peace and accord in the Land, ^ea all the Sundaies in the
year profitable. They that be borne shall be strong great and shining: and he
that flies shall be found.

Monday.
IF it ^all on the Monday, Winter shall be indifferent, Summer dry, or clean
contrary; so that if it be rainy and tempestuous, Vintage shall be doubtful:
in each Monday of the said year, to enterprise any thing, it shall be
prosperous and strong. Who that flies shall soon be found: Theft done shall
be proved, and he that falls into his bed shall soon recover.

Tuesday.
IF it come on Tuesday, Winter shall be good, the Spring windy: Summer
fruitful Vintage laboursome, Women dye and Ships perish on the Sea. In each
Tuesday of the same year, to begin a work it will prosper: he that is born
shall be strong and covetous, dreams pertain to age. He that flies shall
soon be found; theft done shall be proved.

Wednesday.
IF it come on the Wednesday, Winter shall be sharp and hard, the Spring windy
and evil, Summer good, Vintage plentiful, good wit easily found, young men
dye, honey sparing, men desire to Travel, and Shipmen sail with great hazard
that year. In each Wednesday to begin a work is good.

Thursday.
IF it come on the Thursday, Winter shall he good, the Spring windy, Summer
fruitful Vintage plentiful, Kings and Princes in hazard. And in each Thursday
to begin a new work prosperous; He that is borne shall be of fair speech, and
worshipful; he that flies shall soon be found: theft done by women shall
soon be proved. He that falls in his bed shall soon recover.

Friday.
IF it come on the Friday, Winter shall be mavelous, the Spring windy and
good. Summer dry, Vintage plentious: There shall be trouble of the air, Sheep
and Bees perish, Oats dear. In each Friday to begin a work it shall prosper, he
that is born shall be profitable and lecherous. He that flies shall soon be
found, theft done by a child shall be proved.

Saturday.
IF it come on the Saturday, Winter shall be dark, snow great, fruit
plentious, the Spring windy, Summer evil, Vintage sparing in many places:
Oats shall be dear, Men wax sick and Bees dye In no Saturday to begin a work
shall be good, except the course of the Moon alter it: Theft done shall be
found he that flies shall turn again to his own: Those that are sick,
shall long wail and uneath they shall escape death.

2. Of the Birth of Children in the Days of the Week.
ON the Sunday who that is be the shall be great and shining. Who that is born
on the Monday shall prosper, if he begin a work a^ that day. Who is borne on
the Tue^sday, shall be Covetous, and perish with Iron, and hardly come to the
last age; and to begin all things is good. He that is borne on the Wednesday,
shall lightly leanue words. He that is borne on the Thursday, shall be stable
and wo^hipfull, and to begin all things is good. He that is borne on the
Friday, shall be of long life and Lecherous, and to begin all things is good.
He that is borne on the Saturday, shall ^^ldome be profitable, but if the
course of the Moon bring it thereto.

3. The nature and disposition of the Moon in the birth of Children.
The first day Adam created.
IN the first day of the Moon Adam was made: to do^ all things is profitable,
and that thou see in thy fleepe shall be well, and turn into joy; if thou
seem to be overcome, nevertheless thou shall overcome. A Child that is
borne shall soon increas^ and ^e of long life, a^^^rich; he that falls sick
shall long wall; a ^^suffer a long sickness. It is good to let a litt^^ Blood.

The second day Eve made.
IN the second day of the Moon (...) made: to do an errand is good (...)
prize any thing is profitable: as to (...) sell, and fly into a ship to make a
^a^; and to so^^ seeds: theft done shall soon be found: Whatsoever thou shall
see in sleep^ sudd^^ effect it shall have whether it he good or evil to let
blood is good. A Child that is born, soon shall wax, and he shall be a
Lecherer; and if a waman prove a strumpet.

The third day Cain was borne.
IN the third day of the Moon Cain was borne; abstain from doing of any thing,
except thou would not have it prosper: draw up roots in the yard and in the
field: theft done shall soon be found. Whatsoever thou see in sleep is
naught: the Man child shall grow for the time, but dye young. A sick man that
falls in his bed shall travel, and not escape; To let blood is good.

The fourth day Abel was borne.
IN the fourth day of the Moon Abel was borne. Whatsoever thou do is good
in each travel: the dream thou see, has effect; hope in God, and counsel
good. A child that is born, shall be a good creature and much praised. A man
that falls sick either soon shall be healed, or soon shall dye. It is good
to let blood.

The fifth day no Sacrament.
IN the fifth day of the Moon, do nothing of errand, nor work; to receive
the Sacrament is dangerous: He that flies shall be taken or killed; the dream
that thou shall see shall be well. Beware that thou reject no counsel. A child
that is borne shall dye young: He that falls in his bed, soon shall dye: to
let blood is good.

The sixth day send Children to School.
IN the sixth day of the Moon, to send Children to School is good, and to use
hunting. The dreams that thou shall see, shall not come to pass: but beware
thou say naught to any man, nor discover thy counsel. A child borne shall be of
long life, and sickly. A sick man uneath shall escape; to let blood is good.

The seventh day Abel was slain.
IN the seventh day of the Moon, Abel was slain. He that falls ssek shall
dye: he that is borne shall be of long life: it is good to let blood, and to
take drink. A dream that thou see, long after shall be. Who that flies,
shall soon be found, and theft also. To buy Swine, to tame beasts, to clip
hairs, and to take all manner of nourishing is good. A s^^ke man if he be
medicined he shall be healed.

The eighth day good to do any thing.
ANd in the eighth day of the Moon; whatsoever thou will do is good: All
things that thou will treet of to go in counsel, to buy Manciples and Beasts
to change folds of Sheep, to lay foundations to so^^ seeds to go in a way. A
child that is born shall be sick and dye young; but if he live, he shall be a
Purchaser. A dream shall be certain, and soon shall be. If thou see sor^y
things turn them to the East. Though an old man wax sick he shall live: their
shall be found; to let blood it behooves in the midst of the day.

The ninth day, Lamech borne.
ANd in the ninth day of the Moon Lamech was born: to do all things is
profitable, what thing thou will enterprise shall come to good offect. A dream
that thou see shall come in the day following, or in the second day; and thou
shall see a sign in the East, and that shall appear in sleep only, within
eleven days shall come to pa^e. A Child borne, in all things shall be a
Purchaser and good, and long of life. A sick man shall wail much, and arise.
Who shall be chased, shall not be found: and who that is oppresse^ shall be
comforted. Presume thou not to be let blood.

The tenth day Noah borne.
ANd in the tenth day of the Moon was b^^ne the Patriark Noah. Whatsoever thou will do, shall prtain to light: Dreams ^e in vain and within four days shall
come without peril. A child that is born shall see many countries, and die old.
Whatsoever is lost shall be hid: who that is bound shall be unbound: who that
flies after shall be found: who that falls in travel without peril, shall be
delivered: who that falls sick in his bed he shall long abide. To let blood
is good.

The eleventh day, Sem born.
ANd in the 11th day of the Moon, Sem was born: It is good to begin works; a
Journey; to make a Wedding; A dream within four days shall be fulfilled
without peril; A child that is born shall be of long Life, and Religious, and
he shall have a sign lovely in the forehead, or in the mouth, or in the ^ye,
and in the latter age he shall be made better. A wench shall have a sign that
she shall be learned with wisdom. To travel is good, and to change folds of
Sheep from place to place. He that is sick, if long sick, shall be healed: each
day to be let blood is good.

The twelfth day, Canaan born.
ANd in the twelfth day of the Moon was born Canaan, the son of Cham: nothing
thou shall begin, for it is a grievous day. A dream shall be certain, and joy
to thee after: that thou see, within nine days shall be fulfilled. To wed,
and to do errands is profitable: that is lost shall be found. A child that is
born shall be of long life, angry and honest: a Sick-man shall be grieved, and
arise: who that is taken shall be let go: theft done shall be found. To let
blood at even, it is good.

The 13th. day, Noah planted Vines.
ANd in the thirteenth day of the Moon. Noah planted Vines, so that to plant
Vines is good: After that thou wakest, thy dream shall be, and within four
days come to gladness: but take heed to Psalms and Orisons. A child born shall
come to adversity, he shall be angry, and not long of life. Who that is bound
shall be loosed, that is lost shall be found. Who that waxes Sick long time
shall travel, and seldom shall recover, but die. To wed a wife is good, and
each day let blood.

The 14th. day, Noah blessed all things.
THe fourteenth day of the Moon, is a good day, and a glad. Noah blessed all
things, whatsoever thou will do, shall come to thee to good purpose. A dream
within six days shall be. To make wedding is good, and to go in the way. Ask
of thy friend, or thine enemy, and it shall be done to thee. A child that is
born shall be a traitor, the sick-man shall be changed and rise, and healed by
Medicine: to let blood is good.

The 15th. day, confusion of Languages.
ANd in the 15th. day of the Moon, tongues were divided: do no work, begin no
work for it is a grievous day. A Sick-man shall long travel, but he shall
escape. A dream that thou see nothing shall annoy, but come to good event. A
child born shall die young: that is lost shall be found; to let blood is good.

The 16th. day, Pythagoras born.
ANd in the sixteenth day of the Moon, Pythagoras was born, and the Author of
Philosophy: to buy and sell is good, and to tame Oxen and other beasts. A dream
is not good, after long time it shall come, and it shall be harmful; to take a
wife, and make wedding is good: Folos of Sheep from place to place to change is
good. A child that is born shall be of long Life, but he shall be poor,
sorsworn and accused. A Sick-man if he change his place, he shall live: to let
blood is good.

The 17th. day, ill to be an Ambassador.
IN the seventeenth day of the Moon it is evil to do an errand: a dream that
thou see after long time shall be, or within thirty days. A child that is
born shall be silly; he that is sick shall be much grieved, and arise: that is
lost shall be found: to send children to school, to be wedded, to make
Medicine, and to take it, is good, but not to let blood.

The 18 day, good to enterprise any thing.
ANd in the eighteenth day of the Moon, it is good for all things to be done,
namely, to begin houses, and to set children to school; dreams are good, and
shall be done within twenty days; who that sickness has, shall soon rise, or
long be sick, and then recover; theft done shall be found; a man-child now born
shall be valiant and eloquent, proud, unpeaceable, and not long of life: A
maid-child then born, shall be chaste, laborious, serviceable, and better in
her latter age: they shall both be marked above the knees. Not too hardy be
thou to let blood this day.

The 19 day, a day indifferent.
IN the nineteenth day of the Moon, it is indifferent to begin any thing,
dreams shall come within twenty days; who that has sickness, shall soon
rise, if he take medicine: theft then dene shall not be found: A man-child then
born, shall be true, begin, fight, wise, ever wax better and better in great
worship, and have a mark in the brow. A maid-child then born, shall be right
sick; yet wedded to one man; that day is good to bleed.

The 20 day, Isaac blessed his Son.
ANd in the 20 day of the Moon, Isaac blessed his Son; whatsoever thou will do
is good. A dream that thou see shall appear, but tell it to no man. To make a
wedding is good; to buy a servant; to build houses; to change folds of sheep
from place to place; to tame beasts, and to sow seeds is good; a child that is
born shall be a fighter, and he shall have many arriving; that is lost shall be
found; to change bees is good; A sick man shall long wail, or soon arise; to
let blood at even is good.

The 21 day, Saul was born.
IN the 21 day of the Moon Saul was born, first King of the Jews. A dream is
true and come to pass within four days. A child that is born shall find ^^uch
evil, he shall be a thief, and witty, or a traitor, and travellous. Esau took
the last blessing of his Father; it is good to heal Swine and other Beasts; it
behooves to abstain from gaming: to go in the way is good; a sick man shall
arise; theft shall be found; let no blood neither day nor night.

The 22 day, Joseph was born.
IN the 22 day of the Moon, Joseph was born: it is a day of holiness; if thou
do any errand, thou shall find it grievous: dreams shall be certain, and
shall come to joy. A child born, in all days shall be a Purchaser, merry,
fair, and religious. A sick man both late is confirmed and healed. Bees to
change from place to place, is good: and to let blood all day is good.

The 23 day, Benjamin was born.
IN the 23 day of the Moon, Benjamin was born, Son of the right side, the East
of the Patriack Jacob. Whatever thou will do is good: a dream that thou see,
shall turn to joy, and nothing shall trouble thee; and other while it was wont
to fall within eight days; To take a wife is good, to make wedding, to lay
foundations, to open new earth, and to tame beasts is good. A child born shall
be an outcast, and many adventures he shall have, and in sins he shall die; a
sick man shall arise: it is good to (...) blood.

The 24 day, Goliath was born.
IN the 24 day of the Moon, Goliath was born: a dream that thou see,
signifies thy health, and nothing shall annoy: A child born shall be suddenly
in his Actions, and do wonderful things; a Sick-man shall languish and be
healed: to let blood before their hour is good.

The 25 day, the Plagues of Egypt.
IN the 25 day of the Moon, our Lord sent Signs into Egypt by Moses, and in
each day he passed the red Sea; he that takes the Sacrament, shall die a
perilous death; fear is threatened. The dream signifies hard things, and
within ten days it was wont to come early, then bow thy head into the East; A
child born shall be an evil man, many perils he shall suffer; a Sick-man shall
sustain injury, and unneath escape; it is good to let blood.

The 26 day, Moses dried the red Sea.
IN the 26 day of the Moon, Moses dried the red Sea: In that day Jonathan the
son of Saul was born, and Saul died with his Sons. Thou shall begin nothing;
the dream shall be certain, and turned into joy. Pilgrims must beware of Spies,
and Enemies. A child born shall be full lovely, but neither rich nor poor. A
Sick-man shall travel and arise; if he have the Dropfie, he shall die: to let
blood a little is needful.

The 27 day, Manna sent.
IN the 27 day of the Moon, our Lord rained Manna to the Children of Israel;
what ever thou will do is good; use diligence; a dream that thou see shall
come either to good or evil. A child born shall be of long life, and most
loved, and if a man, neither rich nor poor: a sick man shall rise to life, he
shall be holden in much languor, but shall be healed: folds of Sheep from place
to place to change is good. To let blood in the evening is good.

The 28 day, good to pitch Tents.
IN the 28 day of the Moon, War may begin, and Tabernacles fixed in the desert;
whatever thou will do is good; a dream that thou see shall turn into joy. A
Child born shall be much loved, he shall be holden in sickness; a sick man that
fasteth in infirmity, soon shall be saved; to let blood in the even, is good.

The 29 day, the Jews go into Canaan.
IN the 29 day of the Moon, the Jews went into the Land of Canaan: Herod the
King cut off the Childrens heads. Begin nothing: the dream shall be certain and
good, gladness and joy it signifies; an errand begun is good to fulfill; to
take a wife is good, but yet make no Dowers, nor write Testaments. A child born
shall be of long Life, Wise, Holy, and Meek. To fish and hunt is good, a sick
man shall not be grievously sick, but escape. It is good to be let blood.

The 30 day, Samuel was born.
ANd in the 30 day of the Moon, Samuel the Prophet was born, whatsoever thou will do, is good. A dream that appears to thee certain, and within two days
thou shall see, and thou shall find a red figne in the East within nine days.
A Child born shall be of long life, and profitable and well measured in each
thing. A sick man shall nigh come to death: In no manner let blood. These and
many other pertain to men, as the course of the Moon follows.

4. Of Saturn and his Disposition.
SAturn is the first Planet, and the wickedest, and he begins the Zodiac
but once in thirty years, reigns in each Sign, two years and a half, which
is in six Signs, fifteen years. And in all the twelve Signs thirty years: And
aright as there are twelve Signs in the Zodiac, so are there twelve months in
the year, each Sign to his month. Wherefore beware before, and look where
Saturn reigns in three winter signs, that is to say, Capricorn, Aquary, and
Pisces, and all these seven years and half, shall be scarceness and hard of
Corn, Fruit, Beasts, and all other things; for in three years signs he has
might and most power to fulfill his malice, if he be not let by
neighbour-ho^d of any good Planet.

5. What the Thunder signifies every Month of the Year.
THunder in January, signifies the same year great winds, plentiful of Corn
and Cattle peradventure. Thunder in February, signifies that same year many
rich men shall die in great sickness. Thunder in March, signifies that same
year great winds, plenty of Corn, and debate amongst People. Thunder in April
signifies that same year to be fruitful and merry, with the Death of wicked
Men. Thunder in May, signifies that year need, scarceness, and dearth of
Corn, and great hunger. Thunder in June, signifies that same year, that woods
shall be overthrown with winds, and great raging shall be of Lions and Wolves,
and so like of other harmful Beasts. Thunder in July, signifies that same year
shall be good Corn, and loss of Beasts; that is to say, their strength shall
perish. Thunder in August, signifies the same year sorrow, wailing of many,
for many shall be sick. Thunder in September, signifies the same year great
wind, plentiful of Corn, and much falling out between man and man: Thunder in
October, signifies the same year great wind, and scantnesse of Corn, Fruits
and Trees. Thunder in November, signifies that same year to be fruitful and
merry, and cheapnesse of Corn. Thunder in December, signifies that same year
cheapnesse of Corn, and Wheat, with peace and accord among the People.

9. Of the good days for bleeding, and ill days for any work.
IN every month be two evil days, one in waxing of the Moon, and another in
the waning. The Calendar shows them and their hours openly enough: in the
which days, if any folk take sickness, or begin any new thing, it is great
grace if ever it fare well, or come to good end. And there are fifty Canicular,
or Dog-dayes, that is to say, from the fifteenth Calendar of August, to the
Nones of September, in which days it is forbidden by Astronomy to all manner
of folks to let blood, or take Physic: yea, it is good to abstain from Women:
For why, all that time reigns a Star, that is called Canicula Canis, in
Latin, a Hound in English: Now of the foresaid Star Canicula, the foresaid
fifty days are called Canicular days, and biting as a Bitch, for the kind of
the star Caniculas, is boiling and brenning as fire, and biting as a
Bitch-whelp: that time the heat of the Sun, and of the Star, is so fervent and
violent, that men's bodies at midnight sweat as at midday, and sweleth lightly,
blows and brenneth; and if they then be hurt, they be more sick than at any
other time, very near dead. In these days all venomous Serpents creep, fly,
and gender, and so they overset hugely the air, in feeding of their kind, so
that many men are dead thereby. In these days a Fire is good night and day,
and wholesome: sees your meats, and take heed of feeding violently.

And from the eighteenth Calendar of October, to the seventeenth Kalend of
November, look thou take no cold; for then the powers of man, of earth, and of
all things else settle, and they may not open again till the seventeenth Kalend
of April: wherefore it is less harm for thee to take cold at Christmas, than
at this time.

7. To know how a man shall keep himself in Health.
IF thou will keep thee long in health, fly anger, wrath, and envy, and give
thee to mirth in measure, travel sadly, so that thou sweat not too much in the
Summer, and namely, the Canicular days; fly all manner of strong Drinks and
hot Spices, brenning Meats, especiaily their excess; Fast not too long at
morn; Sup not too late at night; eat not too hastily, nor overmuch at once, and
that that thou eatest chew it well: every time that thou ^atest, rest a little
after; sleep not after dinner except in May, June, July, and August; and yet
the less that thou sleep then, the better it is. To sleep well in the
waxing of the Night, and to be early up in the Morning, is the better: and
every day beware of Mysts, that none enter into thee fasting; for thereof
comes great pestilences and heat. And in great cold and pestilences, eat much
Garlike every day with nine Saffron Chieves, and i^ will do thee much good. Eat
enough in Winter, and the Spring, but little in Summer: look thy meat be well
seasoned: in Harvest beware of fruits, for they are not good, except they be
given thee for medicine: of all manner of meats, sodden is the best; eat not
too many hot Spices, nor eat but little at once, for better it were to eat
seven times in the day, than once thy fill: Flesh is more nourishing than Fish:
Eat not too much sower meats, nor salt, for they will make thy bones sore; look
thy drink be not too new, nor too old: sweet powdered Meats be most wholesome. Of
all things take measure and no more: for in measure rests virtue.

8. The perilous Days of every Month.
IN the change of every Moon, be two days, in the which what thing soever is
begun, late, or ever, it shall come to no good end, and the days be full
perilous for many things.

In January when the Moon is three or four days old, In February, 5, or 7. In
March, 6, or 7. In April, 5, or 8. In May, 8, or 9. In June, 5, or 15. In July,
3, or 13. In August, 8, or 13, In September, 8, or 13. In October, 5, or 12. In
November, 5, or 9. In December, 3, or 13.


Astronomers say, that six days in the year are perilous of death: And
therefore they forbid men to be let blood on them, or take any drink. That is
to say, The third day of the Month of January. The first day of the Month of
July. The second day of the Month of October. The last of the Month of April.
The first day of August. The last day going out of December.


These six days with great diligence ought so to be kept, but namely the
latter three, for all the Veins are then full. For then whether man or brast be
knit in them, wihin seven days, or certainly within fourteen days he shall
die. And if they take any drinks within fifteen days, they shall die; and if
they eat any Goose in these three days, within forty days they shall die; and
if any child be born in these three latter days, they shall die a wicked death.

Astronomers and Astrologers say, that in the beginning of March the seventh
night, or the fourteenth day, let thee blood of the right arm: And in the
beginning of April, the eleventh day, of the left arm: and in the end of May,
third or fifth day, on whether arm thou will; and thus of all that year, thou
shall orderly be kept from the Fever, the falling Gout, the sister Gout, and
loss of thy Sight.

9. Ptolomies Rule for the Zodiac.
EAch man's body is ruled by a certain Sign of the Zodiac.

Wherefore (as says Ptolomeus, If thou be sick in any limb, do not medicine
unto that limb, for it shall rather hinder than further. And nainely, fly
blood-letting at that time. Thus shall thou know how the Signs reign in our
limbs.

10. Of the twelve Signs.
figure with twelve signs

ARies, or the Ram governs the Head. The Bull reigns in the neck, and in
the Throat.

Geminy, or the Twins rule the shoulders, arms and hands, and these three are
the signs of the Spring.

Cancer or the Crab, commands the Stomach, Limbs, Arteries, Milt, Liver and
Gall.

The Lion reigns in the Back, Sides, Bones, Sinews and Gristles.

Virgo, or the Maid, guides the Womb, Midriffe and Guts. And also she reigns
other-while in the Stomach, Liver, Gall, and Milt, and other nutriffe Limbs
beneath the Midriffe; and these three are the Signs of Summer.

Libra or the Balance holds in the Navel, the Reins, and the lower parts of
the womb.

The Scorpion keeps the Bladder, the Buttocks, and other Privities of Man or
Woman. The Sagitary dwells in the Thighs and Buttocks, and these three are
signs of Harvest.

The Capricorn reigns in the Knees.

The Aquary governs the Legs and Anckles.

The Fish detecteth the fee^: and these three be the Signs of Winter.

The Disposition of the Planets.
SAturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.

Saturnius is the cause of death, dearth and peace.

Jupiter is the cause of long peace, rest and virtuous living.

Mars is the cause of dryness, debate, and war.

Sol is the cause of life, health and waxing.

Venus is the cause of lusty love and lechery.

Mercury is the cause of much speech, merchandise and flights.

Luna is the cause of moistness, great waters and violent fl^^ds.

Saturn's hour is good and strong to do all things that as^eth ^^ength only,
and to naught else, save to battle; for it is wondrous evil. That man or woman
that has the Star Saturn to his Planet, he is melancholy, black, and goes
swiftly, he has a void heart, wicked and bitter as worm (...) he will lightly
be wreth, he is quarelsome, witty, covetous and ireful; he eats hastily, and
is false and inclining to lie, with shining eyes as a Cat; he has in the
forehead a mark or wound of fire, he is poor, and his clothes are rent unto a
time. And thus he has open signs, and all his coverous is by other men's
possessions, and not by his own.

Jupiter's hour is good in all things, namely peace, love, accord; who that
has this Star to his Planet, he is sanguine ruddy, and goes a large pace,
neither too swift nor too soft; his stature is seemly and shining, he has a
fair visage, lovely semblance, red lips, fair hairs, broad face, good brows;
his clothes are good and strong; he is sweet, peaceable, and soft.

Mars's hour is evil, and better by night than by day; for it is Masculine on
the night, and Feminine on the day: It is good to do any thing, but with great
strength: by night it is good to enter battle and also by day, but not so much
good as by night. Who that has this Star to his Planet, his making is of good
defense, and oftentimes his face is red with blood, his face is small and
su^^^ll, and laughing, and he has eyes as a Cat: and all the days of his
life, he will acc^^se many men of evil; he has a wound of a Sword in his face,
he is most choleric. And thus he has open signs.

Sol's hour is the worst of all other hours, no man in his hour may do his
will, save Rings and Lords, and that with great strength: who so in this hour
enters battle he shall be dead there. Who that has this star to his planet,
he has sharp eyes, great speech, and wicked thoughts in his heart, he is
wicked and avaritious, neither white nor black, but betwixt both; he has a
mark in his face, or a wound, and has a wound in his body of fire, and he is
right wicked and grudging in his deeds.

Venus hour is good in all things, and it is better on night, then on day, ever
til midday, at midday it is not good, for the Sun covers it. On Sunday the
ninth hour is Venus hour; sus not then to any Lord nor Potentate; for if thou
do, thou shall find him wroth. Who that has this star to his planet, namely,
if he be born by night in Venus hour, he is while, and has a round face,
little forehead, round beard, he has middle nose, and hairy eyes; he is
laughing and litigious, and he has a mark in his face; his making is fair and
plain, and of^time his nether lip^ is greater than the upper. And who that is
born under Venus, when she is not in full power, he has a sharp nose, and
somewhat crooked, fair hairs, soft eyes of running water; he is a singer, he
longs much after games, and loves them well, and his tales be sweet.

Mercurie's hour from the beginning to the middle, is good in all things, and
from the middle to the end it is hard, and it is not much better on night than
on day, and each time of the night and day, he stands before the Sun, or
behind; therefore he has his power much more by night than by day; from morn,
to the fifth hour of the day he has his power, and from thence to the ninth he
has no power. Who that has this star to his Planet, he has a sharp stature,
and a sharp long face, long eyes, long nose, great hairs on his eyes, and thick
narrow forehead, long beard, thin hair, long arms, long singers, long feet,
long head; he is meek and lovely, he will do each thing to certain space, he is
more white than black, and oft-times right white, and he has great shoulders:
And who so is born under Mercurius, when he is not in his full power; that is
to say, from the first hour of the day to the ninth, he is black and dry, he
has crowded teeth and sharp; he has a wound in his body with fire, he is
scourged with wands, or smitten with a sword, and men speak evil of him, for
lying and manslaughter.

The Moons hour is right good and right evil; from the fourth day to the
seventeenth it is good, namely, to all those that are born in it; and from the
seventeenth day to the twentieth it is somewhat good, but not so good, and from
the twentieth day, to the seven and twentieth day, it is evil, namely, to all
those that are born in it. Who so has that Star to his Planet, and is born
there under, when it is in his full power, he has a plain face, and pale,
sometime quarrelling, and does his wills to men, he has a seemly semblance,
and he is rich, and he has mean stature, neither too long, nor too short; he
has straight lips and hollow eyes. Who that is born under this Star, when it
is not in full power, he has a straight face and dry, and is malicious, he
has little teeth, abulgine, that is to say, a white streak in the ear.

12. The Condition of Man discovered by Creatures.
1 NAturally a man is hairy as the Lion. 2 Strong and Worthy as the Ox. 3
Large and liberal as the Cock. 4 Avaritious as the Dog. 5 Hardy and swift as
the Heart. 6 Debonarie and true, as the Turtle-dove. 7 Malicious as the Leopard.
8 Gentle and tame as the Dove. 9 Crafty and guileful as the Fox. 10 Simple and
mild as a Lamb. 11 Shrewd as the Apt. 12 Light as the ^drse. 13 Soft and
pitiful as the Bear. 14 Deat and precious as the Elephant. 15 Good and
wholesome as the Unicorn. 16 Vile and floathful as the Ass. 17 Fair and proud
as the Peacock. 18 Gluttonous as the Wolf. 19 Envious as the Bitch. 20 Rebel
and inobedient as the Nightingale. 21 Humble as the Pigeon. 22 Fell and foalish
as the Ostrich. 23 Profitable as the Pismire. 24 Diss^late and vagabond as the
Goat. 25 Spiteful as the Pheasant. 26 Soft and mee^ as the Chicken. 27 Moveable
and varying as the Fish. 28 Lecherous as the Boat. 29 Strong and puissant as a
Camel. 30 Traitorous as the Mule. 31 Advised as the Mouse. 32 Reasonable as an
Angel.
And therefore he is called the little world, or else he is called all
Creatures, for he does take part of all.

13. The Description of the four Elements and of the four Complexions, with the
four Seasons of the Year, and the twelve Signs for each Month.
elements, seasons, signs

IN each man and woman reigns the Planets, and every Sign of the Zodiac, and
every prime Qaulity, and every Element, and every Complexion; but not in every
one alibe, for in some men reigns one more, and in some reigns another: and
therefore men be of diverse manners, as shall be made apparent.

14. Of the four prime Qualities.
FOur prime Qualities there be; that is to say, Coloness, Heat, Dryness and
Moisture, which be contraries: and therefore they may not come nigh together
without a mean; for the hotness on the one side binds them together, and
coidness on the other side. Also hotnesse and coldness are two contraties; and
therefore they may not come nigh together without a mean, for the moistness on
the one side binds them together, and dryness on the other. Moistness is
cause of every thick substance, and of every sweet taste: And there again,
dryness is cause of every thin substance, and of every sower stinking saste:
and also hotness is cause of every red color, and large quantify: there again,
coloness is cause of every white color, and little quantity. These four prime
Qualities in their combination, make the four Elements. Air, minst and hot,
the Fire hot and dry, the Earth dry and cold, the Water cold and moist. The
Air and Earth are two contraries, and therefore they may not come nigh
together; but as fire binds them on the one side, and the water on the other
side. Also Fire and water are two contraries, and therefore they may not come
nigh together; but as the air between them binds on the one side, and the earth
on the other side. The fire is sharp, subtle and moveable. The Air is sabtil,
moveable, corpulent, and dull. The Earth is corpulent and thick. The water is
moveable, corpulent and dull. The Earth is corpulent, dull and unmodable: In
the heart of the earth is the Center of the world; that is to say, the midst
point, and in every Center is Hell. And there again about the Fire are the
stars, and about them in Heaven Chrysta-line; that is to say, waters of all
bless, departed in nine orders of Angels; then is Heaven in the hightest
rooms, and largest. And there again is Hell in the lowest, narrowest and
straitest place.

Right as there be four Elements, so there he four Complexions, according in
all manner of qualities to these four Elements.

The first is Sanguine; that is to say, blood gendred in the liver, limb, and
like to the air. The see^nd is Choler, gendred in the Gal, and like thereto,
and it is according to the fire. The third is M^^^^^cholp, gendred in the Milt,
and like to the dregs of blood, and it ^ccordeth to the earth. The fourth is
Phlegm, gendred in the lungs, like to Gall, and it accords to the Water.
A Sanguine man much may, and much coveteth, for he is most hot.

A Choleric man much coveteth, and little may, for he is hot and dry.

A Melancholi^ue man little may, and little coveteth, for he is dry and cold.

A Phlegmatic man little coveteth, and little may, for he is cold and moist.

A Sanguine man is large, lovely, glad of cheer, laughing, and ruddy of color,
steadfast fleshy, right harry, mannerly, gentle, and well nourished.

A Choleric man is guileful, safe and wrathful, traitorous, and right hardy,
small, dry and black of color.

A Melancholious man is evious, sorry, covetous, hard, false, guileful,
dreadful, slothful, and clear of color.

A Fleg^^atick man is slumbry, sleepy, slow, sleightful, ^humatick, dull and
hard of wit, fat visage, and white of color.

15. The year divided with the knowledge of the state of man's Body by Urine.
IN the year be four quarters, ruled by these four Completions; that is to say,
the Spring, Summer, Harvest and Winter: Spring has three Months, that is to
say, March, April, May, and it is Sanguine complexion. Summer has also three
Months, that is to say, June, July, and August, and this Quarter is Choleric
Complexion. Harvest has also three Months, that is to say, September, October,
and November, and this Quarter is melancholious Complexion. Winter has also
three Months, that is to fay, December, January, and February, and this Quarter
is phlegmatic Complexion.

Each day also these four complexions reigns; that is to say, from three
after midnight, to nine, reigns Sanguine, and from nine after midnight, to
three after midday, reigns Choler, and from three after midday, to nine
after midday, reigns Melancholy, and from nine after midday, to three after
midnight reigns Phlegm.

Also in the four Quarters of the World, reigns these four Complexions; that
is to say, Sanguins in the East, Choler in the South, Melancholy in the West,
and Phlegm in ^he North.

Also the four Complexions reign in the four Ages of Man; that is to say,
Choler in childhood, Sanguine in manhood, Phlegm in Age, and Melancholy in
old age. Childhood is from the birth to fourteen years full done; Manhood is
from thence to Thirty years of age, and from thence to fifty years. And old age
from thence to fourscore years, and so forth to death.

All these four Complexions reign in the four parts of man's body.

Choler reigns in all the soulet Limbs, from the breast upward.

Sanguine reigns in all small Limbs, from the Midriff to the Wesand.

And Phlegm reigns in all nourishing Limbs, from the Reins to the Midriffe.

And Melancholy reigns in all Limbs, from the Reins downward.

Wherefore every man's Urine is cast in four; that is to say, Corkil Superfice,
midst of the ground, every part of the Urine to his part of Man's body: and
therefore to four things in every Urine we must take heed; that is to say,
Substance, Quantity, Color, and the Content. Three Substances there are; that
is to say, Thick, Thiu and Middle.

three substances

Thick substance betokens very much moistnesss.

Thin substance betokens much dryness.

A middle substance betokens temperance.

Also three quantities be in Urine, that is to say, much, little, mean.

Much quantity betokens great cold.

Little quantity betokens great heat.

Mean quantity betokens temperance.

Also take ^he^d to the taste, whether it be sweet or not.

Sweet taste betokens health.

And other taste betokens st^knesse.

Also in Vrines be twenty colors, of the which the first ten betokens cold,
and the other ten betokens heat.

The ten colors that betoken cold are these.

The first is black, as dark coal, and comes of livid going before:

The second is like to lead, and those two betoken mortification.

Che third is white as clear water.

The fourth is lactick, like to whey.

The fifth is carauose like gray russet, or to Camels-hair.

The sixth is yellow, like to fallow leaves falling off trees; and those four
colors betoken indigestion.

The seventh is subpale, that is to say, not full pale.

The eighth pale, like to some sodden flesh.

The ninth is subsitrine, that is to say, not full sitrine.

The tenth is sitrine, like to pomfi^er, or to right yellow flowers.

And these four colors betoken digestion.

Now we have seen the colors which betoken cold; so we will see the other ten
which betoken heat.

The first is subruss, that is to say, not full ruse.

Che second ruse, like to fine gold.

And those two colors betoken perfect digestion: so the urine he middle of
substance, middle of quantity, sweet of taste, and without contents.

The third is subruse, that is to say, full red.

The fourth is red like Saffron dirt.

The fifth is subrugund, that is to say, not full rubigund.

The sixth is rubicund, like a strong flame of Fire. And these four colors
betoken passing of digestion.

The seventh Ynopose, like to white wine.

The eighth is Kinanos, like to rotten blood.

And these two betoken adustion.

The ninth is green as the Cole-steek.

The tenth is as black as clear black horn, and this black comes of a green
going before. And these two betoken adiistion and death.

In Urine be eighteen contents, that is to say, circle, amyul, grains, clouds,
scum, atter farness, humor, blood, gravel, hairs, scalos, bran, crinodose,
sperm, dust, esks, sedimen, or ypost as.

The Circle shewe^h all the qualities of the head.

Ampul, that is to say, Creme shows also the brain disturbe^.

Grains betoken of rhume and glut.

Clouds shows vice in the small limbs.

Scu^n, that is to say, foam, shows ventosie, and often the Iaundies.

After, that is to say, quitture shows vice of the reins of the Bladder, or
the Liver.

Fatness, as oil drops, shows the wasting and dissolution of the body,
namely of the loyas.

Humonr like glet, or like drests of blood, or rotten gall, it shows vice of
the mid-riffe or above, or beneath.

Blood, shows vice of the Liver, or of the reins, or of the bladder.

Gravel, shows the stone.

Hairs, shows the dissolution of the fatness of all the body, especially the
reins.

Scalos and bran, shows the third spice of Feverick incurable.

Sperm, that is to say, mankind, shows too much leachery.

Dust, shows the Gout or a woman conceived.

Eskes, the privy harneis to be grieved.

Sedimen, that is to say, clods in the ground of the urine, or breaking upward.

The circle called Ipostas, that is to say, the ground, and it has most
signification of all, and namely, of the lower parts.

Of every man's body be four principal limbs, that is to say, Soulet Limbs,
small Limbs, nourishing Limbs, and gendring Limbs.

Soulet Limbs, be the brains, and all that are thereabout down to the wesand.

Small limbs, be the heart and the lungs and all that be about them, betwixt
the mesand and the mid-riffe.

Nourishing limbs, be the liver, milt, gall, and guts, and all that be about
them, between the wesand and the midriffe, and the reins.

Gendring limbs, be the reins, bladder, privy harneis, and the limbs about from
the reins downward.

16. An A. B. C. whereby thou may know what Planet every man is born, his
fortune, and time of his death
A E. 1. I. S. 1. B. K. 2. Q. R. 2. G. L. 3. D. M. 4. C. D. 6. V. 2. T. 7. F.
8. P. 1. X. 9.

Divide this by 9. unto a hundred; and if 1. or 8. be over, then the Sun is his
Planet if 2, or 9. be over, then Venus is his Planet if 3. be over, then he is
of Mercury; if 4. be over, then he is of the Moon; if 5. be over, then he is of
Saturn; if 6. be over, then he is of Jupiter; if 7. be over, then he is of Mars.

Adam 31. Andren 1. Aldon 25. Nufos 12. Benafter is in 9. Becus 9. David 9.

Also here follows another A. B. C. (...) know by, of what Sign in the
Zodiac every man is; that is to say, under which Sign he is born, and to which
Sign he is most like. Also hereby thou may know his fortune, and the moment
in the which he shall die. Also hereby thou may know thy fortune, and
infortune of many things, Towns, Ciries and Castles.

A. 2. B. 2. C. 20. D. 41. E. 5. F. 24. G. 3. H. 20. I. 10. K. 13. L. 42. M.
12. N. 22. O. 21. P. 21. Q. 24. R. 27. S. 22. T. 91. V. 13. X. 20. Y. 20. Z. 7.

If thou will know by this A. B. C. any man, as is said before, take his name,
and his Mothers name. And also, if thou will know of any Town by this A. B. C.
as it is said before, then take that Town's Name, and the Name of the City
Jerusalem, for that is the Mother of all Towns, and then account the Letters of
the Names by the number of this A. B. C. and when thou have all done, divide
this by 28. and if 1. or 2. be over, then that thou see longs to the
Wether, and if three, 4. or 5. be over, then that that thou seek longs to
the Bull, and if 6 or 7. be over, then longs it to the Twins, and if 8, or 9.
be over, then longs it to the Crab, and if 10, 11, or 12. then longs it to
the Lion, and if 13, or 14. then longs it to the Virgin, and if 15, or 16 be
over, then longs it to the Balance. and if 17, 18, or 19, then longs it to
the Scorpion, and if 20, or 21. then longs it to the Sagitary, and if 22, or
23, then longs it to the Capricorn, and if 24, or 25. then longs it to the
Aquary, and if 26, 27, or 28. then longs it to the Fish.

Another Alphabet.
DIvide any thing in seven by the proper name of those letters: I will tell
which of the seven it is, by the other number divided by nine.

A 3 B 4 C 2 D 2 E 2 F 4 G 2 H 5 I 3 K 5 L 6 M 25 N 25 O 12 P 13 Q 15 R 8 S 13
T 2 V 23 X 98 Y 56 Z 56

18. To know the Weather that shall be all the Year, after the change of every
Moon, by the Prime Days.
Sunday, Prime, dry Weather,

Monday Prime, Moist Weather.

Tuesday Prime, cold and windy.

Wednesday Prime, me^vailous,

Thursoay Prime, fair and clear.

Friday Prime, fair and foul.

Saturday Prime, rain.

19. A Rule to know upon what Letter, what Hour, what Minute, as follows.
Prime upon Hours, Minutes. A 29 9 B 4 5 C 13 1 D 20 18 E 28 12 F 21 4 G 13 40

EVermore thus reigns these seven Planets. First reigns Saturn, then
Jupiter, then Mars, then Sol, then Venus, then Mercury, and then Luna. Saturn
is Lord on Saturday, Jupiter is Lord on Thursday, Mars is Lord on Tuesday, Sol
on Sunday, Venus on Friday, and Mercury on Wednesday, and Luna on Monday:
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, and Mercury is masculine; that is to say, Mankind;
Venus and Luna are teminine; that is to say, Womenkind: Saturn, Mars and Luna
are evil Planers, Jupiter, Sol and Venus be good Planets, Mercury is changeable.

On Saturday the first hour after midnight reigns Saturn, the second hour
Jupiter, the third hour Mars, the fourth hour Sol, the fifth hour Venus, the
sixth hour Mercury, the seventh hour Luna.

And then again, Saturn the eight hour, and Jupiter the ninth hour, Mars the
tenth hour, Sol the eleventh hour, Venus the twelfth hour, Mercury the
thirteenth hour, and Luna the fourteenth hour. Then again, the third of day
time, Saturn the fifteenth hour, Jupiter the sixteenth hour, Mars the
seventeenth hour, Sol the eighteenth hour, Venus the nineteenth hour, Mercury
the twentieth hour, and Luna the one and twentieth hour. And again, the fourth
time, Saturn the 22 hour, Jupiter the 23 hour, Mars the 24 hour; and then
begins Sol, in the hour after midnight on the Sunday, Venus the second hour,
Mercury the third hour, Luna the fourth hour, Saturn the fifth hour, and so
forth, hour by hour, and Planet by Planet in order as they stand, each Planet
to his own day, reigns evermore certainly, the first hour, the eighth hour,
the fifteenth hour, and the 22 hour, and so forth, every one after another, and
next after that reigns the Planet that is next in order, as thus, Saturn,
Juiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and Luna.

20. Of the most best and profitable Days that be in the Year to let Blood.
IN the beginning of March; that is to say, the sixth and the tenth day, thou
shall draw out blood of thy right arm.

In the beginning of April, of the left arm, and that in the 11 day for thy
sight. In the end of May, of which arm thou will, and that against the Fever;
and if thou so do, neither thou shall lose thy sight, nor thou shall have no
Fevers how long thou live.

Quot retinente vita and non sit mortis Imago

Si semper fuerint vivens morietur and infra.

Goodhap. Mishap. Mishap. Best. Best. 1 13 Sorrow. Dearth. 2 14 24 3 16 26 4 17
23 6 18 27 11 8 10 20

Est vesper Esplaton Deam pulle Philosophy.

Vita Vita. 7 19 Heaviness. Joy. 5 21 28 9 22 29 12 25 30 15 Vita. Joy. Joy.

Collige per numeros aliquid cupus esse Phandre junge simulatum feriaque diem.

A 3 B 6 C 12 D 20 E 26 F 25 G 3 K 15 L 21 M 19 N 22 O 20 P 14 Q 16 R 4 S 29 T
28 V 4 X 6 Y 6 Z 3 Sunday 13 Monday 18 Tuesday 15 Wednesday 25 Thursday 11
Friday 15 Saturday 26

Thus ends the Sphere of Platon.

Whosoever in the seventh day of March is let blood in the right arm, and in
the eleventh day of April in the left arm, he shall not lose the sight of his
eyes.

In the four or five last days of May, if both arms be let blood, he shall
have no Fevers.

Whosoever in the first day of each Month, falls in any infirmity, the third
day ensuing is to be feared, which if he pass, he shall escape till thirty
days.

Who so falls in the second day, though he be long sick he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the third day, at next Change shall be delivered.

He that falls sick in the fourth day, he shall be grieved to the 28 day,
which if he pass he shall escape.

He that falls sick the fifth day, though he suffer grievously, he shall
escape.

He that falls the sixth day, though he seem to be healed, nevertheless in
the fifth day of the other month he shall be dead.

He that falls the seventh day with grief, he shall be delivered.

He that fails the eighth day, if he be not whole at the twelfth day, he
shall be dead.

He that falls on the ninth day, though it be with great grief, he shall
escape.

He that falls the tenth day, without doubt he shall be dead.

He that falls the eleventh day, he shall be delivered the next day.

He that falls the twelfth day, except he be delivered within two days,
within fifteen he shall be dead.

He that falls the thirteenth day, till the eighteenth day he shall be sick,
which if he pass, he shall escape.

He that falls sick the fourteenth day, shall abide sick till the fifteenth
day, and so he shall escape.

He that falls sick the fifteenth day, except he recover within eighteen
days, he shall be dead.

He that waxes sick the sixteenth day, though he be grieved 24 Days, the 28
day shall escape.

He that waxes sick the 17 day, he shall die the tenth day.

He that waxes sick the 18 day, soon shall be healed.

He that waxes sick the 19 day, also shall escape.

He that waxes sick in the 20 day, in the fifth day he shall escape; but
nevertheless in the month following he shall be dead.

He that waxes sick the 21 day, except he run into peril of death, within ten
days of that other month, he shall be delivered.

He that waxes sick the 22 day, except he run into a peril of death, within
ten days of that other month, he shall be delivered.

He that waxes sick the 23 day, though it be with grievousnesse of pain, in
the other month he shall be delivered.

He that waxes sick the 24 day, in the 27 day he shall be delivered; but
nevertheless, in the month following he shall be dead.

He that waxes sick the 25 day, though he suffer a little, nevertheless he
shall escape.

He that waxes sick the 26 day, though he suffer to the out passing,
nevertheless in that other month he shall be delivered.

He that falls sick in the 27 day, it menaceth death.

He that falls sich in the 28 day, it menaceth death.

He that falls sick in the 29 day, by little and little in that other Month
he shall be delivered.

He that falls sick on the 30 day, it is a doubt whether he shall pass any of
these.

Also he that waxes sick in the 31 day, whether he shall escape it is unknown.

51. Here follows the nature of the twelve Signs.
ARies is hot and dry of the nature of the fire, and governs the head and
face of Man, and it is good for bleeding, when the Moon is in it, save in the
part it governs and rules.

Taurus is evil for bleeding-

Taurus is dry and cold, of the nature of Carth, and governs the neck, and
the knot under the throat, and is evil for bleeding.

Geminy is evil for bleeding.

Geminy is hot and moist, of the nature of the air, and governs the
showlders, the arms and hands, and is evil for bleeding,

Cancer is indifferent for bleeding.

Cancer is cold and moist, of the nature of water, and governth the breast, the
stomach, and milt, and is indifferent, neither too good, nor too bad for
letting blood.

Leo is evil for bleeding.

Leo is hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and governs the back and the
sides, and is evil for blood-letting.

Virgo is indifferent for bleeding.

Virgo is cold and dry, of the nature of the earth, and governth the womb, and
the inward parts, and is neither good nor evil for bleeding, but between both.

Libra is right good for bleeding.

Libra is hot and moist, of the nature of the air, and governs the navel, the
reins, and the lower parts of the womb, and is very good for bleeding.

Scorpio is indifferent for bleeding.

Scorpio is cold and moist, of the nature of the water, and governs the
members of man, and is neither good nor had for bleeding, but indifferent
between both.

Sagitarius is good for bleeding.

Sagitarius is hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and governs the thighs,
and is good for bleeding.

Capricornus is evil for bleeding.

Capricornus is cold and dry, of the nature of the earth, and governs the
knees, and is evil for bleeding.

Aquarius is indifferernt for bleeding.

Aquarius is hot and moist, of the nature of air, and governs the L^gs, and
is neither good nor evil for bleeding.

Pisces is indifferent for bleeding.

Pisces is cold and moist, of the nature of water, and governs the Feet, and
is neither good nor evil for bleeding, but indifferent.

No man ought to make incision, nor touch with iron the members governed of any
sign, the day that the Moon is in it, for fear of the great effusion of blood
that might happen.

Nor in likewise when the Sun is in i^, for the great danger and peril that
might follow thereof.

22. The Anatomy of Man's Body, with the number of the Bones, which is in all
two hundred forty eight.
IN the top of the head is a bone that covers the brain, the which Ptolomeus
called the capital bone. In the scull be two bones, which be called Parietals,
that holds the brain close and steadfast. And more lower in the brain is a
bone called the crown of the head; and on the one side, and on the other, be
two holes, within the which is the Palats, or roof bone. In the part he^ind the
head be four like bones, to which the chain of the Neck holds. In the Nose be
two bones. The Bones of the Chapts above be eleven, and of the nether Iaw be
two above the opposite of the Brain, there is one behind named Collateral. The
Bones of the Teeth be thirty eight before, four above, and four underneath,
sharp edged for to cut the Morsels, and there is four sharp, two above, and two
underneath, and are called Conines, for they he like Conies teeth: After that
are sixteen that be as they were Hammers, or grinding teeth, for they chew and
grind the Meat the which is eaten, and there are four above on every side, and
four underneath ^^: And then the four Teeth of Sapience on every side of the
Chaps, one above, and one underneath. In the Chin from the head downward are
thirty Bones called knots or joints: In the Breast before be seven bones, and
on every side twelve Ribs: By the Neck, between the Head and Shoulders, are two
Bones named the Sheers, and the two Shoulder-blades: From the Shoulders to the
Elbows in each arm, is a bone called Ajutor: From the elbow to the hand bone,
in every arm be two bones that are called Cannes: in each hand be eight bones,
above the palm be four bones, which are called the comb of the hand. The bones
in the finger in each hand be fifteen, in every finger three. At the end of the
ridge are the huckle bones, whereto are fastened the two bones of the thighs: in
each knee is a bone called the knee plate. From the knee to the foot in each
leg be two bones called Cannes, or marrybones. In each foot is a bone called
the anckle or pin of the foot, behind the anckle is the heele-bone in each
foot, the which is the lowest part of a man, and above each foot is a bone
called the hallow bone. In the plant of each foot be four bones, then are the
tombs of the foot, in each of which are five bones; the bones of the toes in
each foot are fourteen: Two bones are before the belly for to hold it steadfast
with the two branches. Two bones in the head behind the ears, called Oculares:
we reckon not the tender bones of the end of the shoulders, nor of the sides,
nor diverse little gristles and spelders of bones, for they are comprehended in
the number aforesaid.

23. The use and order of Phlebotomy, with the names of the Veins, and where
they rest.
THE Vein in the midst of the Forehead would be letten blood for the ache and
pain of the head, and for Fevers, Lethargy, and for the Megrim in the head.

About the ears behind be two Veins, the which be let blood to give clear
understanding, and virtue of light hearing, and for thick breath, and for doubt
of Measelly or Lepry.

depiction of male human anatomy (ventral view) depiction of male human anatomy
(dorsal view)

In the Temple be two veins, called the Arteries, for that they heat, which are
let blood, for to diminish and take away the great repletion, and abundance of
blood that is in the brain, that might annoy the head and the eyes, and it is
good against the Gout, the Megrim, and diverse other accidents that may come to
the head. Under the tongue are two veins that are let blood for a sickness
called the Sequary, and against the Swelling and Apostumes of the throat, and
against the Squinancy, by the which a man may die suddenly for default of such
bleeding.

In the neek are two veins called Originals, for that they have the course, and
abundance of all the blood that governs the body of man, and principally the
head; but they ought not to be let blood without the counsel of the Physician:
and this bleeding avails much to the sickness of the Lepry, when it comes
principally of the blood. The vein o^ the heart taken in the arm, profits to
take away humors, or evil blood that might hurt the chamber of the heart, and
is good for them that spet blood, and that are short-winded, by the which a man
may die suddenly for default of such bleeding. The vein of the Liver taken in
the arm, swageth the great heat of the body of man, and holds the body in
health; and this bleeding is profitable also against the yellow-axes, and
apostumes of the Liver, and against the Palsy, whereof a man may die for
default of such bleeding.

Between the master finger and the leech, Anger to let blood helps the
dolours that come in the stomach and side, as Botches and Apostumes, and diverse
other accidents that may come to these places by great abundance of blood and
humors.

In the sides between the womb and the branch are two veins, of the which that
of the right side is let blood for the dropsy, and shat of the left side for
every sickness that comes about the Milt; and they should bleed according to
the fatness or leanness of the party: take good heed at four fingers nigh the
incision; and they ought not to make such bleeding without the counsel of the
Physician.

In every foot be three veins, of the which three, one is under the anckle of
the foot, named Sophon, the which is let blood for to swage, and put out diverse
humors, as botches and Impostumes that comes about the groins, and profitteth
much to women, for to cause the menstruosity to descend, and delay the Emroids
that comes in the secret places, and other like.

Between the wrests of the feet and the great toe is a vein, the which is let
blood for diverse sicknesses and inconveniences, as the pestilence that takes a
person suddenly by the great super-abundance of humor, and this bleeding must
be made within a natural day, that is to say, within 24 hours after that the
sickness is taken of the Patient, and before that the Fever came on him; and
this bleeding ought to be done according to the corpulence of the Patient.

In the angles of the eyes be two veins, the which be let blood for the redness
of the eyes, or watery, or that runs continually, and for diverse other
sicknesses that may happen and come by over great abundance of humors and
blood.

In the vein of the end of the nose is made bleeding, the which is good for a
re^ pimple^ face, as red drops, pustules, small scabs, and other infections of
the heart, that may come therein by too great repletion, and abundance of blood
and humors, and it avails much against pempled noses, and other like
sicknesses.

In the month in the gams be four veins that is to say, two above, and two
beneath, the which be let blood for chausing and canker in the month, and for
toothache.

Between the lip and the chin is a vein, that is to let blood to give amendment
unto them that have an evil breath.

In each arm be four veins, of the which the vein of the head is the highest,
the second next is from the Heart, the third is of the Liver and the fourth is
from the Milt, otherwise called the low Liver-vein.

The vein of the head taken in the arm, ought to bleed for to take away the
great repletion and abundance of blood that may annoy the head, the eyes, and
the brain, and avails greatly for changeable heats, and swelling faces, and
red, and for diverse other sicknesses, that may fall and come by great abundance
of blood.

The vein of the Milt, otherwise called the low vein, should bleed against
Fever Tertians and Quartains, and it ought to be made a wide, and a less deep
wound than in any other vein, for fear of wind that it may gather; and for a
more inconveniency, for fear of a sinew that is under it, that is called the
Lezard.

In each hand be three veins, whereof that above the thumb ought to bleed, to
take away the great heat of the visage, and for much thick blood and humors
that be in the head, and this vein delayeth more than that of the arm.

Between the little finger and the leech finger is letting of blood, that
greatly avails against all Fevers, tertians and quartians, and against the
flames and diverse other lettings, that come to the paps and milt.

In the thigh is a vein, of the which bleeding avails against pain of the
Genitals, for to put out of man's body humors that are in the groins.

The vein that is under the ancle of the foot without, is named Sciot, of the
which bleeding is much wroth against the pain of the flanks, and for to make,
avoid and issue diverse humors which would gather in the said place; and it
avails greatly to women to restrain their menstruosity, when they have too
great abundance.

24. Of the Year, with the growth of things.
THere be in the year four quarters, the which are named thus, Ver, Hyems,
Aestas and Autumnus; These are the four seasous in the year. Prime time is the
Spring of the year, containing February, March, and April. In these three
Months every green thing growing begins to bud and flourish.

Then comes Summer, as May, June, and July, and in these three months every
herb, grain, and tree is in his most strength and beauty, and then the Sun is
at the highest. Next comes Autumn, as August, September, and October, wherein
all Fruits wax ripe, and are gathered and housed.

Then comes November, December, and January, and these three Months be in the
Winter; that time the Sun is at the lowest, and is of little profit. We
Astronomers say, That the Age of man is threescore and twelve years, and that
we liken but one whole year; for evermore we take six years for every month,
as January or February, and so forth: for as the year changes by the twelve
months, into twelve diverse manners, so does man change himself twelve times in
his life, by twelve ages, and every six times six makes thirty six, and then
man is at the best, also the highest; and twelve times six makes threescore
and twelve, and that is the age of man. Thus you may count and reckon for every
Month six years, or else it may be understood by the four quarters and seasons
of the year, so man is divided into four parts, as to youth, strength, wisoom,
and age. He is to be eighteen years young, eighteen years strong, eighteen
years in wisdom, and the fourth eighteen years to go to the full age of
threescore and twelve.

25. The change of Man twelve times according to the Months.
HE must take the first sir years for January, the which is of no virtue nor
strength, in the season nothing on the earth grows. So man after that he is
born, till he be six years of age, is of little or no wit, strength or cunning,
and may do little or nothing that comes to any profit.

Then comes February, and then the days lengthen, and the Sun is more hotter;
then the fields begin to wax green. So the other six years till he come to
twelve, the Child begins to grow bigger, and is apt to learn such things as
is taught him.

Then comes the month of March, in which the Labourer sows the Earth, and
planteth trees, and edificeth houses. The child in these sir years waxes big,
to learn doctrine and science, and to be fair and pleasant, and loving; for
then he is eigteen years of age.

Then comes April, that the earth and the trees are covered with green
flowers; and in every part goods increase abundantly.

Then comes the young man to gather the sweet flowers of hardiness; but then
beware that cold winds and storms of Vices beat not down the flowers of good
manners, that should bring a man to honor, for then he is twenty four years of
age.

Then comes May, that is both fair and pleasant; for then Birds sing in Woods
and Forests night and day, the Sun shines hot; then man is most lusty,
mighty, and of proper strength, and seeks plays, sport, and manly-pastimes,
for then he is full thirty years of age.

Then comes June, and then the Sun at the highest in his Meridional; he may
ascend no higher in his Station. His gleamering golden beams ripeneth the
Corn: and then man is thirty six years, he may ascend no more, for then nature
has given them courage and strength at the full, and ripeneth the seeds of
perfect understanding.

Then comes July, that fruits be set on suning, and our Corn a bardning; but
then the Sun begins a little to descend downward. So the man goes from
youth toward age, and begins for to acquaint him with sadness, for then he
is come to forty two years of age.

After that comes August, then we gather in our Corn, and also the fruits of
the earth, and then man does his diligence to gather for to find himself, to
maintain his wife, children and household when age comes on him, and then
after that six years he is forty eight years of age.

Then comes September, that winds be made, and the fruits of the trees be
gathered: and there withal he does freshly begin to garnish his house, and make
provision of needful things, for to live with in winter, which draws very
near: and then man is in his most steadfast and covetous estate, prosperous in
wisoome, purposing to gather and keep as much as shall be sufficient for him in
his age, when he may gather no more: and then he is fifty four years of age.

Then comes October, when all is gathered, both Corn and other manner of
fruits, also the Laborers Plow, and sow new seeds in the Earth for the year to
come. And then he that naught sows, naught gathers: and then in these six
years a man shall take himself unto God for to do penance and good works, and
then the benefits the year after his death, he may gather and have spiritual
profit; and then man is fully the term of three. seere years.

Then comes November that the days be very short, and the Sun in a manner
gives but little heat, and the trees lose their leaves, the fields that were
green look hoar and gray; then all manner of herbs are hid in the ground, and
then appears no flower, and winter is come, that the man has understanding
of age, and has lost his kindly heat and strength; his teeth begin to rot and
fail him, and then has he little hope of long life, but desires to come to
the life everlasting: and these six years makes him threescore and six years
of age.

Last of all comes December, full of cold, with frost and snow, with great
winds, and stormy weather, that a man cannot labor, the Sun is then at the
lowest, the trees and the earth are hid in snow, then it is good to hold them
nigh the fire, and to spend the goods that they got in the summer. For then men
begin to wax crooked and feeble, coughing and spitting, and loathsome, and then
he loses his perfect understanding, and his heirs desire death: and these six
years makes him full threescore and twelve years, and if he live any longer,
it is by his good guiding and dieting in his youth; howbeit, it is possible
that a man may live till he be a hundred years of age; but there be few that
live so long,

26. The Rutter of the Distances of Harbors and Havens in most parts of the
World.


THe compass of England round about is 4309 miles. Venice does stand from
Flanders East and by South 80 miles. And the next course by Sea from Flanders
to Iaffe is this. From Sluse to Calais is 70 m. From Calais to Bucheffe 80
miles. From Bucheffe to Lezard 260 miles. From Lezard to Capfenester 650 miles.
From Capfenester to Lisbone 283 m. From Lisbone to Cape St. Vincent to the
Straits 240 miles From the Straits of Gibralter unto the Isse of Sardine 110
miles. From Malsitana in Sardine to Inalta is 460. miles. From Inalta the
course of Saragora and Sicil, to sail to Iaffe in Surry 1800 m. From Iaffe to
Baffe, to Cypre, to the Castle Roge 200 m. From Castle Roge to Rhodes 100 m.
From Rhodes in Candy 250 m. From Candy to Modon 300 m. From Modon to Corfue 300
m. From Corsue to Venice 800 m.
Tshe length of the Coasts of Surry, of the Sea coasts is from the Gulf of
Ermony, to the Gulf Dalarze, next the South and by West from Luzaria to Rise 65
m. That is to understand, from Lazaria in Eremony to Soldin, that comes from
the River coming to Antioch 70 m.
ANd from Soldin to the Port of Lycha, next unto the Souch. From Lycha to the
Port of the South 50 m. From Torosa unto the Port of Tripo^, South 50 m. From
Bernet to Acres, South and by West, 70 m. From Acres to Port Iaffe, South and
by West, 70 m. From Port Iaffe to Port Delazara, South, South-west. 130 m. From
Damiat to Sariza in Surry, to Damiat in Egypt, 180 m. From Damiat to Babylon,
Alchare, 80 m. From Damiat to Alexandria, 110 m.
THe length of Mare Major, is from the Gulf St. George, in the midst of the
Gulf that is betwixt Tarpesond, Senostopoly, to the Port Messembre, West from
St. George, 1060 m. The breadth of the West end, is from the Bras St. George of
Constantinople upon the River Danubius, next the North from St. George Bras,
560 m.
FRom Pero to Caffa in Tartary, Northeast, 600 m. From Caffa to the straits of
Tae, Northeast, 100 m. The Gulf of Taken is about 600 m. The Cape of Caffa is
about 600 m. From the head of Taken to Sanastopoly 4 m. From Sanastopoly to
Trapesond by West, 250 m. From Trapesond to Synopia, next to the South, 430 m.
From Synopia to Pero, next to the West, Southwest, 230 m. From Pero to
Messember, next the Northwest, 230 m. From Messember to Manchro, North,
Northeast, 160 m. From Manchro Castro to Danobia, Northeast, 130 m. From
Danobia to the straits of Caffa, next the East 200 m.
The Compass of the Islands.
THe Isse Cypre is about 500 m. The Isse of Rhodes is about 180 miles. The Isse
of Lange is about 80 m. The Isse of Negre Pont is about 300 m. The Isse of
Cicilia is about 737 m. The Isse of Sardine is about 700 m. The Isse of great
Brittan is about two thousand miles The Isse of Ireland is about a thousand and
seven hundred miles. The Principality of Mar is about 700 m.
Thus ends the Rutter of the Distance from one Port or Country to another.
27. Of the Axtree and Poles.
depiction of axle and poles

THe Diamenter of the world is called his Axtree, whereabout he moves, and the
ends of the Axtree are called the Poles of the World. Of wham one is called the
North Pole, and the other the South Pole. The Northern is he that is always
seen in our Habitations; And the Southern is that which is never seen above our
Horizon. And there are certain places on earth, whereas the Pole that is eder
in our sight, cannot be seen with them that dwell there: and the other Pole,
which is ever out of our sight, is in sight to them. Again, there is a place on
earth, where both the Poles have even like situation in the Horizon.

28. Of the Circle of the Sphere.
SOme of the Circles of the Sphere be parallels, some be oblique, some others
go cross over the Poles. The parallels are they that has the same Poles as
the World has; and there be five parallel circles, the Artick, the Estival,
Tropic, the Equinoctial. The Artick circle is even the greatest of all those
circles that we have continually in sight, and he scarcely touches the Horizon
in the point, and is altogether presented above the earch,

And all the Stars that are inclu^ed in this circle neither rise nor set, but a
man shall epsy them all the night long, keep their course round about the
Pole. And that circle in our Habitation is drawn of the further foot of
Ursamajor. The Estival circle, most Northward of all the circles that be made
of the Sun, whom when the Sun removes into, he turns back from his Summer
circuit, then is the longest day of all the year, and the shortest night; and
after the Summer return, the Sun shall not be perceived to progress any
further toward the North, but rather to recoil to the contrary parts of the
world: wherefore in Greece this Circle is called Tropocos, the Equinoctial
Circle is the most greatest of all the five paralled circles, and is so parted
by the Horizon, that the one half circle is above the earth, the other half
circle lies under the Horizon. The Sun being in his circle, causes two
Equinectials, the one in the Spring, and the other in the Harvest. The Brumal
Tropic is a circle most South of all the Circles, that by the moving of the
world, be described of the Sun; which, when the Sun is once on red into, he
returns back from his Winters progress; then is the longest night and the
shortest day in all the year. And beyond this Winter mark, the Sun progresseth
never a whi^ further, but goes into the other coasts of the World: Wherefore
this Circle is also named Trevicos, as who so say, returnable. The Antartick
Circle is equal in quantity and distance with the Artick Circle, and touches
the Horizon in one point, and his course is altogether underneath the Earth,
and the Stars that be placed in this, are always invifible unto us. The
greatest of all the said Circles is the Equinoctial, and then the Tropicks, and
the least (I mean in our Habitation) are the Artichs: And these circles must be
understood without breadth, and be reasoned of by according to the situation
of the Stars, and by the beholding of the Dioptra, and but supposed only in
our Imagination, for there is no circle seen in all the Heaven, but only
Galaxias. As for all the rest, they be conceived by imagination.

29. The Reason why that five parallel Circles are only in the Sphere.
FIve parallel Circles alone are wont to be described in the Sphere; not
because there be no more paralels than those in all the world. For the Sun
makes every day one parallel Circle, equally distant to the Equinoctial,
(which may be well perceived) with the turnning of the World: Insomuch that 128
parallel Circles are twice described of the Sun between the Tropicks, for so
many days are within the two returns, and all the Stars are daily carrted
withal round about in the parallel Circles: Howbeit every one of them cannot
be set out in the Sphere. And though they be profitable in diverse things in
Astrology, yet it is impossible that the Stars may be described in the Sphere,
without all the parallel circles, or that the magnitude on days and nights may
be pr^cisely found out without the same parallels. But in as much as they be
not deemed so be so necessary for the first introduction of Astrology, they are
left out of the sphere. But the five parallel circles for certain special
instructions are exhibited. The Artick circle severeth the Stars, which we ever
see; the Estival Tropic contains the going back of the Sun, and it is the
further, most part of the progress into the North: and the Equinoctial circle
contains the Equinoctials, and the Brumal Tropic is the furthermost point of
the way of the Sun toward the South, and it is even the mark of the Winter
return: the Antartick circle determines the Stars, whom we cannot see. And so
seeing that they are very expedient for the introduction into Astrology, they
be right worthy to take room in the Sph^ar.

30. Of the five greater Circles; of the Appearance and Nonappearance of them.
ALso the said five parallel circles, the Artick circle appears altogether
above the earth; and the Estival Tropic circle is divided into two parts of
the Horizon, whereof of the greater part is above the earth, and the lesser
lights underneath it. Neither is this Tropic circle equally divided of the
Horizon in every Town and Country, but according to the variety of the Regions;
it has diversities of uprising: and this Estival circle is more unequally
divided in the Horizon to them that dwell nearer the North than we do; and
further there is a place where the Estival Tropic is wholly above the earth:
and unto them that draw nearer unto the South than we the Estival Tropic is
more unevenly parted in our Horizon. Furtheremore, there is a coast (but south
from us) wherein the Tropic circle is equally divided of the Horizon. But in
our Habitation the Estival Tropic is so divided of the Horizon, that the whole
circle being divided into eight parts, five parts shall be above the earth, and
three under the earth. And indeed it seems that Aratus meant this Climate,
when as he wrote his book of Phaelomenon; whereas he speaking of his Estival
Tropic Circle, says on this wise.

When this Circle divided is into eight parts even just,
Five parts above the earth, and three underneath remain needs must.
The restless Sun in Summer hot from this returns back.
And so of this division it follows, the day to be of fifteen Equiuoctial
hours, and the night of nine Equinoctial hours long: and in the Horizon of
Rodes, the Estival Tropic is so divided of the Horizon, that the whole circle
being divided into eighteen parts, there shall appear 29 divisions above the
Horizon, and nineteen under the earth, by which division it appears that the
longest day in the Rodes, has but fourteen Equinoctial hours in it, and the
night nine Equinoctial hours, with two half hours more beside. The Equinoctial
circle in every Habication, is so justly divided in the midst by the Horizon,
that the one half circle is above the earth, and the other half circle
underneath the earth. And this is the cause that the Equinoctials happen
always in this circle. The Brumal Tropic circle is so divided of the Horizon,
that the lesser part shall be above the earth, and the greater part under the
earth, and the unequality of divisions has even like diversity in all Climats,
as it is supposed to be in the Estival Tropic circle; and by this means the
divisions of both the Tropical circles be precisely correspondent each to
other: By reason whereof the longest day is of one length with the longest
night, and the shortest day equal with the shortest night. The Antartick circle
lyech every whit hid under the Horizon.

31. Of the bigness of the five parallel circles.
But of the said five parallel Circles, some keep still the same bigness
throughout all the world, and of some the bigness is altered by reason of the
Climates, so that some circles be bigger than other, and some lesser than
other. The Tropic circles and the Equinoctial do no where alter their
quantities, but the Articks vary in bigness, for somewhere they appear bigger,
and somewhere lesser. For unto the Northward dwellers, the Artick circles seem
bigger, the Pole being raised or high, the Artick circle touching the Horizon,
must needs also appear bigger and bigger continually, and unto them that dwell
further North, sometime the Estival Tropic shall increase the Artick Circle,
so that the Estival Circle, and the Artick also meet together, and be taken but
instead of one. And in places that be yet further North, the Artick Circles
shall appear greater than the Estival Tropic Circle: but there is a place so
far North, where that the Pole appears over head, and the Artick circle
serves for the Horizon, and remains with it in the moving of the world, and
is as wide as the Equinoctial, insomuch that the three circles (to say) the
Artick, the Equinoctial, and the Horizon, be placed in our order and
situation. Again, to them that dwell more south, the Poles appear more lower
and, the Artick circles lesser. Yet again, there is a place being south in
respect of us, which lies under the Equinoctial when the Poles be under the
Horizon, and the Artick circles are altogether gone: so that of the five
parallel circles, there remain but three Circles, that is the two Tropicks and
the Equinoctial.

32. Of the Number of the Parallels.
For all these speeches, it is not to be thought that there continue five
paralels always, but so many to be imagined for our habitations sake: for in
some Horizons there be but three Paralels only, and there be Habitations on
earth, where the Estival Tropic circle touches the Horizon, and even for the
Tropic circle is the second taken which is called the Habitation under the
Pole. The third Habitation of whom we spoke a little before, which is named the
habitation under the Equinoctial.

33. Of the Order of the five parallel Circles.
THe order of the five parallel circles is not every where the same, but in our
Habitation; the first shall be called the Artick, the second the Estival
Tropic, the third the Equinoctial, the fourth the brumal, the fifth the
antartick; but to them that dwell more north then we, sometime the first is
accounted as the Estival Tropic, the second as the Artick, the third as the
Equinoctial, the fourth as the Antartick, the fifth as the Brumal Tropic; and
because the Artick circle is wider than the Equinoctial, the said order must
needs be observed.

34, Of the Power of the five Parallels.
LIkewise, neither are the Powers of the same five parallel Circles alike. For
the Circle that is our Estival Tropic, is to them that dwell in a contrary
Habitation, the Brumal Tropic. Contrariwise, that which unto them is the
Estival Tropic circle, is the Brumal Tropic unto us. But such as dwell under
the Equinoctial, even the three Circles be in power Estival Tropicks unto them;
I mean them that dwell just under the course of the Sun; for in conferring one
to another, that which is the Equinoctial with us, shall be their Estival
Tropic Circle. And both the Tropicks shall be Brumals. So then the Estival
Tropic circle may be said by nature umversally all the world over, which is
next to the Habitation: Therefore unto them that dwell under the Equinoctial,
the Equinoctial it self ferveth for the Estival Tropic, as wherein the Sun
has his course dir^ctly over their head, and all the parall^l Circles shall
take the room of the Equinoctials, being divided by equal divisions in the
Horizon.

35. Of the Space between the Parallels.
NEither the spaces of the circle one from the other, do remain the Wine
hrdughout all Habitations, but after the description of the Spears they are
discussed on this sort. Let any Meridian be divided into sixty parts, he Artick
shall be divided from the Pole sixty six parts off; and the same on the other
side shall be sixty five parts distant from the Estival, and the Equinoctial
shall be from either of the Poles sixty four divisions off. The Brumal Tropic
circle stands from the Antartick sixty five parts off. Neither have these
circles the same distance between them in every Town and Country: but the
Tropicks in every declination shall have even like space from the Equinoctial,
yet have not the Tropicks equal space from the Articks at every Horizon, but in
some place less, and in some place more distance.

Likewise, the Articks have not in every declination one certain space from the
Poles, but some where less and some where more. All the Spears be made for
the Horizon, of Greece.

36. Of the Colors.
There are circles that go cross overthwart the Poles, which of some men are
called Colors, and they be so framed that they contain within their circuit
the Poles of the world, and be called Colors, by reason of those portions of
them that be not seen. And for other Circles, they be seen whole the world
moving round about. And there are certain parts of the coloursin visible; even
these parts that from the Antarick lie hid under the Horizon; and these circles
be signed by the Tropical points, and they divided into two equal parts of the
circles that passes through the midst of the Zodiac.

37. Of the Zodiac.
THe circle of the twelve Signs is oblique and is compounded of three parallel
circles, of whom two are said to show the breadth of the Zodiac, and one is
called passing through the midst Signs: thus touches he the two equal circles
and parallels, the Cstival Tropic in the first degree of Cancer, and the
Brumal Tropic in the first degree of Capricorn. The breadth of the Zodiac is
twelve degrees. This circle is called oblique, because he passes over the
parallels awry.

38. Of the Horizon.
THe Horizon is a circle that divides part of the World, seen from the part
that cannot be seen: so he divides the whole sphere of the world into two
parts, even that heleaveth the one half sphere above the Earth, and the other
half sphere underneath the earth. And there be two Horizons; one sensible, the
other imagined by understanding. The sensible Horizon is that, which of our
sight is limited at the uttermost of our knowing: So that his Diamerer is not
passing a thousand furlongs even throughout. The Horizon that is imagined by
understanding, is for the speculation of the Sphere of the fixed Stars, and he
divides the whole world into two parts. Wherefore there is not the same
Horizon throughout every Habitation and Town, but to a man's witting, he
remains the same for the spare of four hundred furlongs almost. So that the
length of the days, the Climats, and all the apparances remain the same still;
but with the more number of furlongs; for the diversity of the Habitation, the
Horizon, the Climate, yea and all the apparances shall vary, so then change,
and habitation must needs happen in geing Southward or Northward beyond four
hundred furlongs. And they that dwell in one parallel, for every exceeding
great number have a new Horizon, but they keep the same Climate, and all the
apparances; likewise the beginnings and endings of days, change not at the
self same time to all that dwell in the same Parallel. But after very exact
curiosity, the least moving in the world hither or thither, even for every
point the Horizon is changed, the Climate and the Apparances do vary. The
Horizon in the Spears not after the manner described, for all the other circles
are carried together from east to west with the moving of the world; and the
Horizon is immov^able by his own nature, as long as he keeps the same
situation. And so if the Horizon were set out in spears when they should be
turned about, he might so happen to move, and sometime to be over head, and
that were a thing most inconvenient, and farthest out of reason in Sphere
matter; yet for all that there may be a place assigned for the circle Galaxias
is left out in many spears, and it is one of the greatest circles; and they be
called the greatest circles, which have the same center as the Sphere has.
And there be seven of the greatest Circles, the Equinoctial, the Zodiac, that
which goes through the midst of the Signs, and that which goes by the Poles,
the Horizon of every Habitation, the Meridian, and the Circle of Galaxias.

41. Of the five Zones.
THe outward fashion of the Earth is spherical, and divided into five Zones, of
whom, two which be about the Poles are called the cold Zones, because they be
very far from under the course of the Sun, and be little inhabited, by reason
of the great cold: and their compass is from the Artick to the Poles ward; and
the Zones that be next unto them, because they be measurably situate toward
the course of the Sun, be called temperate, and above in the Firmament upon the
Tropic and Artick Circles between whom they lie. Now the fifth, which among
the said four Circles is middlemost, for that it lights under the way of the
Sun, is named the hot, and it is divided of the Equinoctial of the earth into
two, which lies all about under the Horizon in the frame of the Sphere.

39. Of the Meridian Circles.
THe Meridian is a Circle that goes through the Poles of the World, and through
the point that is just over our head. In whom when the Sun is come to, he
causes midday and midnight: and this Circle is also immovable in the World,
as long as the self-same situation is kept in all moving of the world. Neither
is this circle drawn in a Sphere that be painted with Stars, because he is
immovable and receives no mutation, but is man's conjecture by wit, for three
hundred Furlongs almost, the Meridian abides the same, but after a more better
exact imagination, for every step either East or West, makes another Meridian:
but go North or South even ten thousand furlongs, and the same Meridian shall
serve.

40. Of the Circle Galaxias.
THe Circle of Galaxias, oblique also and goes over the tropicks awry, and it
is of the substance of five elouds, and the only visible Circle in the
Heavens, neither is it certain what breadth it is of, for it is narrower in one
place than in another, and for that cause der the Equinoctial of the world. But
on the two temperate Zones, one is inhabited of them that be in our habitation,
being in length nigh an hundred thousand furlongs, and in breadth about half
the same.

42. Of the Celestial Signs with their Stars.
THe Signs that be blazed with Stars, are divided into three parts; some of
them be placed in the circle of the Zodiac, some be called Northern, and some
be called Southern. and they that be situate in the circle of the Zodiac, be
twelve Beasts, whose names we have declared in another place, in which twelve
Beasts there are diverse Stars, which for certain notable marks espied in them,
have taken their proper Names; for the fixed Stars that be in the back of
Taurus be called Pleiades; and the Stars that be placed in the head of Taurus
be fix in number, and are called Hyades: And the Stars that stand before the
feet of Geminy, are called Propus; and the cloud like substance, that is in
Cancer, is called Presepe; and the two Stars that stand nigh Presepe, are
called Afini; and the bright Star that is in the Heart of Leo (according to the
name of his place) is the Lions Heart, and it is called of some men the royal
Aar, for that they that are born under it, are thought to have a royal
nativity. The fair Star that sticks at the fingers ends of the left hand of
Virgo, is called the Spike. But the little Star that is fastened by the right
wing of Virgo, is named Protrigettes. And the four Stars that be at the right
hands end of Aquarius, called Urna. The Stars that be spread one after another
behind Pisces tail, are called the Lines. And in the South Line there are aine
Stars, and in the North line five. The bright Star that is seen in the Lines
end is called Nodus. So many are counted for the Forthern, as be set betwixt
the Zodiac, and the North. And they be these, Ursarmajor, Ursarminor. And
Draco that lies betwixt both Ursa, Arctophylax, Corona, Engonasin, the
Serpentine, the Serpent, the Harp, the Bird, the Arrow, the Eagle, the Dolphin
Protomo Hippy, the Horse that stands by Hippachos, Chepheus, Cassiopeia,
Andromeda, Perseus, Auriga, Deltoton. And he that was stellifted of Callimacus,
Bernicks heir. Again, there be other Stars, who for certain plain Apparances
that they have in them, have had their name given them. For the notable Stars
that lies about the midshanks of the Arctophilar is called Arcturnus. And the
shining Star that is set by the Harp, even by the name of the whole Sign, is
called the harp; and the Stars that be at the top of Perseus left hand, are
named the Gorgones, and the thick small Stars that are espied at the right
hands poin^ of Perseus, make as it were a Sithe. And the clear Star that is set
in the left shoulder of the Driver, is called the Goat. But the two little
Stars that be at the outermost of his hand, be called the Kids. And all those
be Southern Signs that lie on the South side of the Zodiac. And their names be
be these; Orion, the Centaurus, the beast that Centaurus h^ldeth in his hand;
Thirsylocus, whom Centaurus sets before the Sensar; the Southern Fish, the
Whale, the water poure^h off Aquarios, the Flood of Orion, the South Crown,
which of some is named Uraniscats; the Road that lies by Hipparchos. And
again, in these there be certain Stars that have taken them proper names. For
the bright Star that is in Prokyon, is called Prokyon; and the gli^^ring Star
that is in the Dogs mouth, for that she is thought to cause mo^^fe^vent heat,
is called the Dog, even by the name of the whole Sign. The Star that (...) in
the top of the Star of Argo, is named Canopus; and this is so seldom seen in
the Roades, except it be from high places: But in Alexandria she is not seen at
all, where the fourth part of the Sign does scanty appear above the Horizon.

43. Of the twelve Winds, with their Names and Properties.
depiction of the twelve winds

THe Wind is an exaltation hot and dry engendered in the inner parts and
hollowness of the Garth; which when it has issue, and comes forth, it moves
sidelong about the Earth, and is called the Wind. And there be twelve of them,
which old Mariners had in use, of whom four be called Cardinals.

The first principal Wind.
Auster the Meridional or South wind, hot and moist air, or likened to the air,
Sanguine, full of Lightning, and makes, or causes great rain, he nourishes
large clouds and ingendreth pestilence and much sickness; Auster Aphricus his
first collateral or side wind, airery, he causes sickness and rain: his
second collateral is called Auro Austor, airery, he provokes clouds and
sickness.

The second principal Wind.
The fourth wind, and the second Cardinal is Septentreonarius, contrary, or
positive to the first, cold and dry, melancholic, compared to the earth: he
puts away rain, he causes cold, and dries, and conserveth health, and
hurts the flowers and fruits of the earth: his collaterals, the first is
Aquilo, frosty and dry, earthy, without rain, and hurts the flowers. Circius
his second collateral, earthy, cold and dry, causes round, or hurle-windes,
thick snow and winds.

The third cardinal Wind.
From the rising of the Equinoctial that is in the Gast, blows Subsolanus the
third cardinal wind, harp, hot, and dry, choleric, temperate, sweet, pure,
subtle, or thin, he nourishes Clouds, he conserveth Bodies in health, and
brings forth flowers, Hellefrontus collateral, Solstitial, and Estive, or
summery, dries all things.

The fourth cardinal Wind.
Last of all in the going down the Equafor, that is the West, blows
Favonious, cold and moist, watery, phlegmatic, which resolves and loses cold,
favors and brings forth flowers; he causes rain, thunder, and sickness,
his collaterals Affricus and Corus have the same nature and properties.

44. Strange Wonders most worthy of note.
IN the Country of Cilicia, as the worthy Cosmographer Pomponius Mela
reports, in the innermost places, there is a Province of great renown. For
the discomfiture of the Persians by Alexander, and the flight of Darius, at
that time having in it a famous City called Issos, whereof the Bay is named the
Bay of Isses, but now having not so much as a little Town. Far from thence
lies the Foreland Amanoides, between the Rivers Pyramus and Cydnus, Pyramus
being the nearer to Issos, returns by Mailon, and Cydnus runs our beyond
through Tarsus. Then is there a City possessed in old time by the Rhodians, and
Argives, and afterward at the appointment of Pompey, called Soloe, by Pirates
now Pompeyopole.

Hard by, on a little hill is the Tomb of the Poet Aratus, worthy to be spoken
of, because it is unknown why stones that are cast into it do leap about. Not
far from hence is the Town of Cyrocus, environed with a narrow talk to the firm
Land.

Above it is a Cave named Coricus, of singular nature, and far more excellent
than may with ease be discribed. For gaping with a wide mouth, even immediately
from the top it opens, the Mountain butting upon the Sea, which is of great
height, as it were of ten Furlongs; then going deep down, and the farther the
larger; it is green round about with budding Trees, and casts it self into a
round Vault, on both sides full of Woods, so mavelous and beautiful, that at
the first it amazeth the minds of them that come into it, and it makes them
think they have never seeen enough of it. There is but one going down into it,
narrow and rough, of a mile and a half long, by pleasant shadows and coverts
of wood, yielding a certain rude noise, with Rivers trickling on either hand.
When ye come to the bottom, there again opens another Cave, worthy to be
spoken of for other things: It makes the enterers into it afraid with the
dinne of Timbrels, which raise a ghastly and great rattling within; afterward
being a while lightsome: and anon, the further ye go, waring darker; it leads
(such as dare adventure) quite out of sight, and carries them deep as it were
in amine, where a mighty River rising with a great breast, does but only show
it self, and when it has gushed violently a while in a short Channel, sinking
down again, and it is no more seen. Within is a waste space, more horrible than
any man dare pierce into, and therefore it is unknown. It is altogether
stately, and undoubtedly holy, and both worthy, and also believed to be
inhabited of Gods. Every thing presents a stateliness, and sets out it
self with a certain Majesty,

There is another beyond, which they call Typhos Cave, which is a narrow mouth,
and (as they that have tried it does report) very law, and therefore dimmed
with continual darkness, and not easy to be sought out: howbeit because it
was sometime the chamber of the Giant Typho, and because it now out of hand,
stifleth such things as are let down into it, it is worthy to be mentioned for
the nature thereof, and for the tale that is reported of it. Beyond that are
two Forelands, that is to say, Sarpedon, sometime the bonds of King Sarpedons
Realm, and Anemutium, which parts Cilica from Pamphilia, and between them
Celendris and Natidos, Towns builded, and people by the Samians, whereof
Celendris is nearer is Sarpedon.

FINIS,
THE HUSBAND-MANS Practice; Or, Prognostication for Ever.

As teaches Albert, Alkind, Haly, and Ptolomy.

With the Shepherds perpetual Prognostication for the Weather.



London, Printed by S. D. for John Stafford, and are to be sold at the sign of
the George at Fleet-bridge, 1663.

What the Husbandman should Practice, and what Rule he should follow; after
the Teaching of Albert, Alkind, Haly, Ptolomy.
THe wise and cunning Masters in Astronomy have found, that man may see and
mark the weather of the holy Christmas night, how the whole year after shall be
in his working and doing, and they shall speak on this wise.

When on the Christmas night and evening it is very fair and clear weather, and
is without wind and without rain, then it is a token that this year will be
plenty of wine and fruit.

But if it be contrariwise, foul weather and windy, so shall it be very scant
of wine and fruit.

But if the wind arise at the rising of the Sun, then it betokens great death
among Beasts and Cattle this year.

But if the wind arise at the going down of the same, then it signifies death
to be among Kings and other great Lords: But if the wind arise at north Aquilon
at midnight, the betokens the year following a fruitful year, and a
plentiful. But if the wind do arise and blow at South Austro in the midst of
the day, that wind signifies to us daily Sickness to reign and be amongst us.

2. Of Christmas day.
If Christmas day be on the Sunday, that year shall be a warm Winter, and
beginning fast with sorrow, there shall come great winds and tempests.

The Lent shall be mild, warm and moist.

The Summer hot, dry, and fair, the (...) arvest moist and cold, much unto
Winter.

Wine and Corn shall be plenty and good, and there shall be much honey, and the
sheep shall prosper well. The small seeds and fruits of gardens shall flourish
also. The old men shall die sore, and especially Women that go with child:
peace and quietness shall be plenteous among married folks.

If Christmas day fall on the Monday, there shall be a misty winter, neither
too cold nor too warm, the Lent shall be very good, the Summer windy, with
great stormy weather in many Lands; the harvest good, and much wine, but very
little honey; for the swarms of Bees shall die, and many women complain, and
sit mourning this year for their Husbands.

If Christmas day be on the Tuesday, it shall be a cold winter and moist, with
much snow: the Lent shall be good and windy, the summer wet, and harvest dry
and evil; there shall be reasonable plenty of Wine, Corn, Oil, and tallow; the
swine shall die, and sheep be diseased, and the beasts perish, the ships of the
sea shall have great misfortune; Much amity and good Peace shall be among Kings
and Princes, and the Clergy shall die sore that year.

If it fall on Wednesday, then shall the winter be very sharp, hard, and after
warm; the Lent strong with naughty weather, the Summer and Harvest very good
weather; and this year shall be plenty of hay, wine and corn, which shall be
very good, the honey dear, fruits scant and very bad: Builders and Merchant men
suffer great Labors, and young people, children and also cattle die in great
store.

If it fall on Thursday, the winter shall be very good with rain; The Lent
windy, a very good summer, and a misty harvest, with rain and cold; and there
shall be much corn, fruit and all things shall abound on earth, and wine with
oil and tallow shall be plenty, but yet very little honey. Many great men shall
die, with other people, and there shall be good peace and great honor to all
Kings and Governors.

If it fall on Friday, the Winter shall be steadfast, and continue his course:
The Lent very good, but the summer steadfast, and the harvest indifferent, and
there shall be plenty of wines and corn, hay shall be very good, but the sheep
and swarms of Bees shall die sore, the people shall suffer great pains in
their eyes; oil shall be very dear that year, and of fruits there shall be
plenty, but children shall have much sickness.

If it be on Saturday, then shall the winter be misty, with great cold and much
snow, and also troublesome, unstedfast, with great winds, the Lent shall be evil
and windy, the Summer good, and dry harvest, there shall be little corn, and
dear, and scarcity of fruit; pastures for Beasts shall be very good, but the
ships on the sea and other waters shall have great misfortune, great hurt
shall be done to many houses, and there shall be war in many Countries, with
sickness, and many old people die; many trees shall wither; and the Bees die
also that year.

3. Of the Practice of the Husbandman.
THe Husband-mans Practice stands after this manner.

They begin to mark first on Christmas day, and so forth; they mark also the
other twelve days; even from the first day, and what weather there is on every
one of the twelve days. And also the weather that shall be upon, and in the
Month that belongs to the same day, and therefore it is to be marked, that
Christmas day betokens January, and St. Stephens day betokens February, and
St. John's day betokens March, and so forth; proceeding unto the last.

4. The Disposition of the twelve Days, known by the shining of the Sun.
ON the Christmas day, if the Sun do shine the whole day, it betokens a
peaceable year. If the Sun shine the second day, Gold shall be hard to come by,
and the Corn much set by.

If the Sun shine the third day, Bishops and Prelates will be diligent to make
war, and great errors shall be among Churchmen.

If the Sun do shine on the fourth day, then must the weak children suffer much
pain.

And if the Sun do shine on the fifth day, then does the Winter Fruits and
Herbs, and Fruits of Gardens prosper well.

If the Sun do shine on the sixth day, there shall be great plenty of the
Fruits of the Gardens, with all other Fruits also.

But if the Sun does shine on the seventh day then betokens hunger and
scarceness, both of Man's food, and also of Beasts, for victuals shall be dear,
with Winter (...) Corn.

If the Sun do shine on the eighth day, it shall be good for Fishers that year,
and fortunate.

If the Sun do shine on the ninth day, it shall be prosperous and happy for
sheep that year.

If it shine the tenth day, then shall there be much evil weather that year.

If it shine the eleventh day, there shall be much misty weather that year, and
also commonly death.

If it shines the twelfth day, then follows that year much war, debate and
strife.

If the wind blow the Christmas day at night, that betokens death to a great
man in that Land.

The second night, if the wind be still and laid; then the third night dies
the greatest Lord in that Land.

If the wind blow the fourth night, there shall be dearth in the Land.

If it blow the fifth night, there shall be death among them that are learned.

The sixth night, wind brings plenty of Wine, Corn, and Oil.

The seventh night, wind brings neither hurt nor good.

The eight night, wind causes much death among old and young people.

The ninth night, wind betokens much sickness and death ^^ong the people.

The tenth night, the Cattle fall to the ground and die.

If it blow the eleventh night, much Fish shall die.

If it blow the twelfth night, it betokens much war and debate in the Land.

5 From the time of Christmas unto the Twelfth day.
THe Husbandman understanding all this, when on Christmas even at midnight the
wind waxes still, it betokens a fruitful year: when on the Twelfth day
before day, it is somewhat windy, that betokens great plenty of Oil.

When the Sun on the Twelfth day in the morning does shine, that betokens
foul weather. In the beginning it is never steadfast weather, for the months
go all one through another the same day. If it be fair weather that day, it
is happy and fortunate. The sixth day after the first day is the last day; so
that the first is last, and that in the six days every day leaves behind him
two months.

Also, that the second day leaves February before noone, and January at the
after noone, and so forth does all other days.

January.
If it be on New-yeers day that the clouds in the morning be red, it shall be
an angry year with much War and great tempests. If the Sun do shine on the
22. day of January there shall be much wind. If the Sun ^et^ shine on St. Paul's
day, the twenty five day of January, it shall be a fruitful year, and if it
do rain or snow, it shall be between both: If it be very misty it betokens
great death. If thou hear it thunder that day, it betokens great winds and
great death, and most especially among rich men that year.

February.
On Shrode-tuesday whosoever does plant or sow, it shall remain always green.

Item, how much the Sun did shine that day, so much he shall shine every day in
Lent, And always the next new Moon that falls after Candlemas day, and after
that the next te^sday shall be always Shrove-tuesday.

And when the Sun rises and shines early, then prospers well all manner of
fruit: if you hear it thunder, that it betokens great wind and much fruit.

Saint Beda says there be three days, and three nights, that if a child be be
born there in the body abides whole and shall not consume away until the day
of Judgment: that is in the last days of January, and the secrets thereof are
full wondrous. And if a tree be hewed at, on the same day, it shall never fail.

March.
The more mists that there be in March, the more good does it, and as many
days as be in March, so many hoar frosts shall you have after Easter, and so
many mysts in August. All manner of trees that shall be cut down unto the two
last holy capes in March, shall never fail. Item, If on Palm Sunday be no fair
weather, that betokens too goodness. If it do thunder that day, then it
signifies a merry year, and death of great men.

April.
If it rain never so little on the Ascension day, it betokens dearth of all
manner of food for Cattle. But when it is fair weather it is prosperous, and
there shall be plenty of Tallow and much Wool.

May.
If the Sun do shine on the 25 day of May, Wine shall prosper well; but if it
does rain, it does much hurt Item, if it rain on Whitsunday, it is not good.
Item, in the last of May ^^e Oak trees begin to hear blossoms, if they
blossom then, you shall have a good year of Tallow and plenty of Fruit.

June.
If it rain near so little on Midsummer day, that is the 24 day of June, then
do not the Hasell nuts prosper. If the holy Sacraments day of our Lord be
fair, then it is good, and cause fruit plenty, and the Lambs to dye.

July
If it rain the second day of July, such weather shall be forty days after,
day by day, yet some imputed it to Swithin the 15.

August.
If the the Sun do shine on the 15 day of August that is a good token, and
specially for Wine.

September.
If thou will see and know how it shall go that year, then take heed to the Oak
apples about S. Michaels day, for by them you shall know how that year shall
be: If the apples of the Oak tre^es, when they be cut, be within full of
Spiders, then follows a naughty year: if the apples have within them flies,
that betokens a meetly good year. If they have maggots in them, then follows
a good year. If there be nothing in them, then follows great dearth: if the
apples be many and early ripe, so shall it be an early Winter, and very much
snow shall be before Christmas, and after that it shall be cold.

If the inner part or kernel be fair, and clear, then shall the Summer be
fair, and the corn good also; but if they be very moist then shall the summer
also be moist. If they be lean then shall there be a hot and dry Summer. If
thunder in this month it presageth plenty of wine and corn that year.

October.
When the leaves will not fall from the trees, then follows after a cold
winter, or else a great number of caterpillars on the trees

November.
Whether the Winter be cold or warm, go on Alballows day to a beech tree and
cut a chip thereof, and if it be dry then shall the winter be warm: if thou will try on S. Andrews even, whether it shall be moist or dry year that
follows you shall know by a glass full of water: if the year shall be moist and
much rain shall fall, then shall the water in the glass run over: and if there
shall follow a dry year, then shall not the water arise to the brink thereof.

When there follows a foggy night, a good year after ensues, that is when it
comes on the thursday night, or on a flesh day at night, and not on the Friday
or Saturday, wherein some men will eat no other meat but flesh: i^ there be
thundering, that betokens plenty of fruit.

December.
When Christmasse day comes while the Moon waxes, it shall be a very good
year, and the nearer it comes to the New Moon, the better shall that year be.

If it come when the Moon decreaseth, it shall be a hard year and the nearer the
latter end thereof it comes the worse and harder shall the year be. And if any
wood be cut off on the two last days of December, and on the first day of
January, it shall not rot nor wither away, nor be full of worms, but always wa^
harder, and in his age as hard as a stone.

6. How thou may rule thy beasts that year.
Item, put out of thy stable all thy beasts or what other cattle that thou have
the 3 nights following hereafter, and make the stals and stables very clean,
with ye mangers also, and give a beast no meat those nights in those places but
bestow them in some other room, and there give them meat, for that is good; and
these be she three nights, Christmas even at night, New-yeers even, and Twelfe
even at night.

7 An old rule of the Husbandman.
Item, When it is fair weather three Sundaies after S. Iamses his day, it
betokens that corn shall be very good, but if it rain, then the corn
withers. S. James day before noon betokneth the winter time before Christmas,
and after noon, it betokens the time after Christmas. If it be so that the
Sun do shine on S, James day, it is a token of cold weather: but if vain
thereon it is a token of warm and moist weather. But if it be between both,
that is a token of neither too warm, nor yet too cold.

8 How the Winter should be the twelve Months.
If a man desire to know what fair weather shall be in every month or what
rain, then must he mark in what hour the new Moon is in, and under what sign,
and what planet rules the same hour, so sual the same month be hot and dry,
cold and moist after the judgment and manner of the four times of the year,

Item, when the Moon is new change^, what weather shall be that month, sh^lbe
found out after this manner: If the Moon shine this and clear, and so
follows wind: (...) the Moon pale so shall it rain. If it (...) in the next
month after a new Moon, (...) shall it rain forth the whole month.

9 The saying of Sylinus, and Petrus.
If the Sun have in the morning under him trouble some clouds, then shall ye
have ^aine, and much tempest of weather; if the Clouds be troubled in the
morning early, and black, then shall there blow a strong North wind.

If the Sun and Element be red in the morning, it betokens rainy weather, If
it be ^^d in the Evening, it is a token the next day shall be fair weather.

10 The Circles about the Sun, Moon, and other Stars.
GUido Bonarus speaks on this wise, we shall mark the circles which be
sometime about the Sun, and about the Moon, whether they be one or more, and if
there be but one, they being clear and not long enduring, and quickly vanished,
it betokens a fair and clear weather following, and a good and clear air:
and when there be many circles it betokens wind: if they be of color red and
clear in many parts, then it betokens trouble in the air.

And if they be gray, dark, and of earthy color, then it betokens trouble in
the air through cold and wind; and it brings in the winter time snow, and in
summer time rain.

When they be black, it betokens in the winter wind and snow, and in summer
rain, and when they be many, then do the same the more increase.

11 The colors and lights of the other Stars.
When the Stars give great light, it betokens wind from the same parts where
those lights be seen.

When the stars be misty and dark, as though they shined through a mist, and
that all the same time there be no Clouds in the element it is a token of
trouble in the Air, and much rain or snow, after the time of the year.

And when they be clear and red, they judge it to be windy.

Likewise, if thou see the common Stars thick, dark, and of course sight,
it betokens always change of weather.

If thou in clear weather see the Stars shoot, and fall down to the
earth, that is a token, that there shall be shortly after, wind from those
parts where the stars do shoot, and the more they shoot the stronger shall
be the wind. For when you see such things present, it betokens inordinate
wind, and when you see such like in every part of the element, that is a token
of great trouble in the Air in all parts, with thunder and lightning.

12 How to know the Weather by the rising and going down of the Sun.
When the Sun arises clear and fair it is a token of a fair day.

When the Sun arises, and has about him red Clouds, it is a token that it
will rain that day:

When there be Clouds in the Orient, so that the Sun cannot shine through them
at his arising, it is then a token of rain.

When the kuglin is in the rising of the Sun, it betokens a sharp wind, and
in the going down of the sun fair weather.

When there be Clouds about the sun when he rises, the less that the Sun does
shine, the more redder be the Clouds.

When at the rising of the sun there proceeds a long shining, it betokens
rain.

When before the rising of the Sunshine does appear, it betokens water and
wind.

When the sun in the rising is dark, either hid under a Cloud, it betokens
rain.

When the sun is clear, and that it gives light from the middle part against
the rising about midnight, that betokens rain and wind.

When long shining beams go before the sun, it betokens a dead and strong
wind from those parts that the beams do shine.

When by the accident at Night there is a shining circle, it betokens that
night a boistrous and unruly weather; and if there be a mist the stronger shall
the wind be, if the mist fall from the sun, it betokens wind in the Region
beyond where it falls.

When the sun arises black, or with clouds under it, or that he has on both
parts clouds, the which some men call the Sun, or sunbeames which proceed from
the sun, whether they be black of color or no, it betokens a winter air
or rain.

When the circle that is round about the Sun, in the rising or going down
thereof, is in many sundry colors, or else as red as fire, or else that the
light of the Sun does fall, or that the color be settled, or that the Clouds
stand thereby, or that the Sunbeams be very long, it signifies a strong wind
to come from those parts.

When in the rising or going down of the Sun, the light or shining thereof
goes before and evening the Element is red, it betokens the next day fair
weather.

And when the shining thereof in the rising or going down be not right, it
betokens rain.

13 Albertus of the Lightning.
If the color of lightning be red and clear, the flames white and red, or the
color of snow, that betokens all things fruitful, the other helps to the
beinging forth, and does neither hurt nor hinder, except it be too far
withered. The third goes through and sets forth.

14 Of the Rainbow, from whence he is, and what it signifies.
When the Rainbow is clear, and appears bright in clear weather, then shall
it not be long clear after, which betokens a winter air or rain.

Item, When thou see in the morning a Rainbow, it betokens rain the same
day, and there shall be a great boystrous storm.

Item, when the Rainbow does appear about three or four of the clock in the
afternoon, it betokens fair weather, and there shall be against in a strong
dew,

Item, When there does a Rainbow appear about noon it betokens much water.

Item, When the Rainbow does appear about the going down of the Sun, then does
it for the most part thunder and rain.

Item, When it appears in the Orient, then follows fair weather.

Item, when the Rainbow appears in boisterous weather in the North, it
betokens fair weather and clear, And contrariwise when he appears and is
seen with a clear Summer, whether in the West or at noon it follows rain.
Haily says when the Rainbow appears in fair and clear weather, it
betokens increase of raw weather, and in the Winter it betokens less.

15. Of Thunder and Lightening.
When in the time of winter, the Sun is in Capricornus and Aquarius, especially
from Lucy, until the tenth of January, if the thunder be heard then shall it
be from the begin-of the Lightning throughout the whole year, more windy than
any other year is.

When in Summer it thundreth more then it lightneth, it is a sing of wind that
shall come from the same place whence the thunder comes: but if there be seen
more Lightning then is heard of thunder, then shall the wind come from the
place where the Lightning is seen.

If it thunder less then Lighten, that is a token of rain, with fair and clear
weather, and shall both thunder and lighten, or else thunder and lighten out of
all four quarters, but mark if it come only from the East part, there shall be
next day rain from the North, and wind.

When it thundreth early, it betokens both ^ind and rain to come from the day.

16. To know the weather by the four quarters of the year, as shows
Leichtenberger.
What weather there shall be on the day that the Sun enters into Aries, and in
the text day after their operation shall be for the most part in the Harvest,
in September, October and November.

Item, Aries works the one day when the Sun goes in Leo, and the next day
before and after, and so shall be the winter, especially December, January, and
February, for the winter gives him wholly, and leaves on the North, that is
to say, from the midnight which is the Orient East and that time shall be dry,
and then shall be great frost and cold. But if it come in South Austro, which
is of the midday, either west Occident, then that time shall be moist and but
little Ice. If the weather be dry after the moistnes, so shall the winter be
unstable.

On that day that the Sun goes into Lib^^ mark the weather the next day before
it, and the next day after it.

And when the weather is given to lightning more in March, April, and May,
theu mark that also. For as the weather is in those days that come next after,
and before, when the Sun enters into Aquarius, so shall it be in the most part
of the summer, June, July and August.

In them many wise men do conclude how the weather shall be all the time that
the Sun is from Libra to Scorpio, even to the 20, degree, that is, that from
the 14 day of September unto Alballowes day, and commonly it shall be likewise
in the year following. And this time is reckoned among the twelve months, so
that four days are reckoned for a moves and every day betokens a quarter
of a Moon, which is seven days, and November is reckoned for the first month.

27 How to know the weather out of the new and full Moons.
On the third day before the new and full Moon, mark well the Moon, when there
goes or proceeds from her a clear light shining, it betokens fair
weather, and also windy, and if the Moon be black or dark, it is a token of
fold air and rainy.

When there is a fair and clear circle by the Moon, and that being sharp and
bright it betokens a fair and clear air, and if there be two or three rings
about the Moon, it betokens a cold winter air.

When there is a darkness about it, it is a token of winterly air which comes
through strong winds, And if there be black about it, then ^is a token of sueh
like weather also.

When the Moon arises and shines fair, it betokens fair weather: red, wind;
black, rain.

Likewise as the weather is on the third day after the new and full Moon, so
shall the weather be ten days after most commonly.

A sudden and hasty rain, comes always from the wind that went before.

The greatest winds be commonly in harvest, the sudden coming of cold and heat,
comes of the wind, and of the rain.

There goes commonly before Thunder, great winds.

When the wind goes from the ^ccident, then it is commonly rainy weather.

From the East is fa^re weather.

From midnight, it is cold and hard weather.

From noone, hurtful and unhealthfull weather.

If it do hail in the midst of Summer, it is a token of great cold in the
higher Region of the air.

When the lower part is hot, that causes Hail to come from above.

18 Of the Eclipse of the Moon, the cause thereof, how and when they happen.
YOu are to note, that an Eclipse of the Moon is nothing else but the
interposition of the earth between the bodies of the Sun and Moon, they being
Diametrically opposite: as if a line drawn from the center of the Sun, to the
center of the Moon, should pass directly through the center of the earth:
which only happens at the time of the Opposition, or full Moon, and not at
every full Moon neither, but only when they meet in the head or tail of the
Dragon; which is only the intersection of two Circles, viz. the Celiptique, and
the Different, which is the Circle that carries the Moon about; and you are
likewise to note, that an Eclipse of ^he Moon appears to all those above,
whose Horison the Moon is at the time of the Opposition, though it be otherwise
with the Eclipse of the Sun, for a Solar Eclipse is to some total, to others
partial, and to others not at all visible, though the Sun be at the time of the
Conjunction above all their Horizons, etc.

To find when the Moon shall be eclipsed and when not, by her distance from
either of the two fections, called the head and tail of the Dragon.
IF the Moon at the time of her true opposition to the Sun, shall be distant
from either of these two points less than 10 degrees, 21 minutes, and 20
seconds, then must the Moon suffer an eclipse.

But if her distance (as before) be more then 13 degrees, 5 minutes, and 23
seconds, then the Moon (at that full) cannot be eclipsed.

Therefore if her distance be more than 10 degrees, 21 minutes, 20 seconds, and
less than 13 degrees, 5 minutes, 23 seconds, than she may happen to be
eclipsed, but not necessarily.

20. To find when the Sun shall be eclipsed, and when not.
IF the apparent latitude of the Moon at the time of the visible conjunction be
less than 30 minutes, 40 seconds, there must be an eclipse.

But if the apparent latitude of the Moon be more than 34 minutes, 51 seconds,
there cannot be an eclipse.

Therefore if the apparent latitude be more than 30 minutes, 40 seconds, and
less than 34 minutes, 51 seconds, there may be an eclipse.

21. How to behold an Eclipse of the Sun without hurt to the eyes.
TAke a burning glass, such as men use to light tobacco within the Sun; or a
spectacle glass that is thick in the middle, such as for the eldest sight; and
hold this glass in the Sun, as if you would burn through it a past-board, or
white paper book, or such like; and draw the glass from the board or book,
twice so far as you do to burn which it; so by direct holding it nearer or
further as you shall see best, you may behold upon your board, paper or book,
the round body of the Sun, and how the Moon passes between the Glass and the
Sun during the whole time of the eclipse.

Thus thou may practice before the time of an eclipse, wherein thou shall
discern any Cloud passing under the Sun; or by another putting or holding a
bullet on his fingers end betwixt the Sun and the Glass, at such time (the sun
shining) as thou hold the glass, as before thou art taught.

22. The mind of the Fathers, of the Nature of the Fire.
When the fire sparkleth it betokens rain.

When the Fire gives much flame, or else when a man takes an Hasten, and
lifts it up by the coals, and if the coals do hang thereon, that betokens
wind and rain.

When that cold in the Winter cease,

And when a man snow finds.

If there be dark clouds thereby,

Then look for rain verily.

If the Frog in the morning do cry,

Betokens rain great plenty.

23. A brief discourse of the natural causes of watery Meteors, as Snow, Hail,
Rain, etc.
You must first understand, that all watery Meteors, as Rain, Snow, or such
like, is but a moist vapor drawn up by the virtue of the Sun, and the rest of
the Planets into the middle region of the air, where being congealed or
dissolved, falls upon the earth, as Hail or Rain.

24. Of the Rainbow.
Pliny says, The Rainbow is made by the Sunbeams striking upon a hollow
cloud, when their edge is repelled and beaten back against the Sun; and thus
arises variety of colors by the mixture of Clouds, Air, and fiery Light
together. But (as he says) it pretends neither far nor fowl weather.

25. Of Rain.
Of these kind of Meteors you may read Arist. libro primo Meteoro logicorum,
cap. 1. and 2. But briefly, Rain is a cold vapor, and earthly humor, raised
from the earth and waters, into the middle region of the air, where by the
extremity of cold, it is thickened into the body of a cloud, and after being
dissolved, falls upon the earth.

26. Of Hail.
Hail is engendered of Rain, congealed into Ice, freezing the drops presently
after the dissolving of the cloud, whereby we have great irregular Stones fall
on the Earth; I have seen them in that fashion, 1610, contain 4 inches about,
for the higher it comes, and the longer it tarrieth in the air, the rounder it
is and the lesser.

27. Of Snow.
Snow is of the same humor that Hail is, but not grown together so hard. Pliny
says, Hail sooner melts than Snow, and the Hail comes oftener in the day than
in the night.

28. Of Frost and Dew.
When in the day time through the faint heat of the Sun, there is a cold and
moist vapor drawn up a little from the earth, presently at night it descends
again upon the earth, and is called Dew, and in the Spring or Harvest, it is a
sign of fair weather; but if by means of cold it be congealed, it is called
Frost, and therefore Dewes come not so often in hot seasons, neither when winds
be up, but after a calm and clear night, Frosts dry up wet and moisture: For
when (as Pliny says) the Ice is melted, the like quantity of water in
proportion is not found.

29. Of Wind.
Wind is nothing but many exhalations drawn from the Earth, and enforced
laterally above the Sun.

30. Of Sudden Blasts.
A windy exhalation being shrown down, and encompassed (as Pliny says) in a
thin course of clouds newly over cast, coming at some time with such a
violence, as it bursts and cleaves a dry cloud in sunder, and makes a storm, of
the Greeks called Ecnephias; but when this cleft is not great, but that the
winds he forced to turn round, and roll in this descent without lighting,
there is made a whirle puff, or gust, called Typhon, which is to say, The
storm Ecnephias, sent forth a winding violence, and this wind does bear many
things away with it, changing from place to place; but if the hole in the cloud
were great, it is called Turbo, casting down and overthrowing all that is next
it. Pliny says, no Ecnephias comes with Snow, nor no Typhon from the South:
some say, Vinegar thrown into this Wind, breaks the gust.

31. Of Earthquakes.
Plenty of winds gotten into the bowels, holes and corners of the earth,
bursting out of the earth, and the earth closing again, causes the shaking, or
Earthquake, and is a token of ensuing war.

32. Signs of Earthquakes.
When waters in wells or pits be troubled, and have a bad savor, the long
absence of the winds, strange noises, the obscurity or darkness of the Sun
with clouds, and strangely colored, etc.

33. Of Thunder and Lightning,
When an exhalation, hot and dry mixed with moisture, is carried up into the
middle region, and there in the body of a cloud: Now these two contraries being
thus shut, or pent in one room together, they fall at variance, whereby the
water and fire agree, not until they have broken the prison wherein they were
pent, so that fire and water fly out of the Cloud, the breaking whereof makes
a noise like the renting af cloth, which we call thunder, and the fire
lightning, the thunder being made first, but the lightning first seen, in
respect the sight is before the hearing; and of lightnings there be many sorts.

That which is dry burns not at all, dissipating and dispersing: That which
is moist burns not likewise, but blasts, and al^ereth the color: but that
which is clear, is of a strange operation, it draws vessels dry without hurt
to the vessel; it melts metal in bages or purses, and hurts not the bag or
purse, nor Wax that sealed the bag hurt; it breaks the bones, and hurts not
the flesh; and kills the child in the womb, not hurting the mother. Pliny
says, Scythia by reason of cold, and Egypt by reason of heat, have seldom
lightning.

34. What things be not hurt with Lightning,
It hurts not the Lawrel-tree, it enters not past 5 foot into the earth,
such that are shadowed with the skins of Seals, or Seacalves, are freed, the
Eagle is free, etc. Many other wondrous and strange kind of Meteors be there in
the heavens often times seen, as Comets, burning Dragons, etc. but this volume
will not contain an ample discourse thereof.

35. Here follows diverse and sundry Rules, of excellent use, and right
necessary to be known of the Husbandman, and not only of him, but of all
other Persons of what quality soever.
ANd First, I will begin to show what Rules of Husbandry are to be observed in
each month, and also Observations for Taking of Physic, and keeping of a good
and wholesome Diet, and modest Recreation.

36.
Rules of Husbandry in January.
This is the season for good husbands to lop and purge superfluous branches
from fruit Trees, uncover their roots, set all kinds of quick-sets and fruit
trees in the new of the Moon, be sure the wind be not North nor East, and set
the same sides to the South and West, which grew at the first, set Beans,
Pease, and Parsnips, the weather mild, and Moon decreasing, dig Gardens,
dreauch weak and sick earth, Rine with Verdijuce, Horses with Water and ground
Malt sodden with a little Brand.

Observations for Physic and Diet in January.
The best Physic is warm Clothes, good Fires, warm diet, and a Merry honest
Wife.

Rules of Husbandry in February.
This month set, cut, and lay Quicksets, and Roses, as all other Plants, set
and plant Vines, Hops, and all Fruit that grows on bushes; Sow Pease, Beans
and Onions, furnish your Gardens with Sallats and Pothearbs for Summer, prune
and trim all sorts of fruit Trees, from Moss, Canker, and superfluous Branches,
remove Grafts or young Trees in the last quarter, the Moon being in Aries,
Libra or Scorpio.

Observations for Physic and Diet in February.
If necessity urge, you may let Blood, but be sparing in Physic, and be sure
when a warm day comes, to prevent taking of cold through carelessnesse, for the
warm Air in this month is not lasting, but often deludes us to our prejudice.

Rules of Husbandry in March.
Now regarding the wind and weather, graft, cut quicksets, cover the roofs of
fruit trees (opened in December and January) with fat earth, sow Oars, Barley,
Parsnips, Onions, Carrets, Melons, Cowcumbers, and all kind of Pothearbs, slip
Hartichokes and Sage, and sow all manner of garden Seeds.

Observations for Physic and diet in March.
Now advise with the honest and able Astrological Physician, it is good to purge
and let blood.

Rules of Husbandry in April.
This month sow Hemp and Flax; pull Hops; set and sow all kinds of Garden
herbs, restore the Liberty of the laborious, Be, by opening her Hive;
Bar-trees for Tanners, and let good-huswives mind their Gardens, and begin to
think of their Daries.

In gard'ning never this ruie forget.
To sow dry, and set wet.
Observations of Physic and diet in April.
The use of Physic becomes now seasonable, as also Purging and Blood-letting,
it is good to abstain from Wine, for many diseases will be taken thereby to the
ruin of many.

Rules of Husbandry in May.
This month commands the provident house-wife, and the prudent Artist, to set
their Stils on work; in the beginning of the month sow and set those tender
summer Herbs, that would not endure the former cold, weed your Hopgardens, cut
off superfluous branches, moss Trees and Gardens, and weed Corn.

Observations for Physic and Diet in May.
Now every Garden and Hedge affords thee Food and Physic, Rise early, Walk the
Fields by running. streams the North and West sides; Sage and Sweet-butter an
excellent Breakfast, clarified Whay with Sage, Scurvy-grasse-Ale, and
Wormwood-beer, are wholesome Drinks.

Rules of Husbandry in June.
At the full of the Moon this month and next, gather your Herbs to keep dry for
the whole year; Set Rosemary and Gilliflowers, sow Lettice and Radish three or
four days after the full, and they will not run to seed; shear your Sheep the
moon increasing.

Observations for Physic and Diet in June.
Let honest moderate Labor and Exercise procure your Sweat, thin and light
Diet, and chaste Thoughts tend to Health: Lie not unadvisedly on the ground, or
over hastily drink.

Rules of Husbandry in July.
Get Rue, Wormwood, and Gall, to strowe on your floores to destroy Fleas, at
the full Moon gather flowers and seeds, dry your flowers rather in the shade
than in the Sun, which too much exhalteth their virtue, but to avoid
corruption let the Suns heat a little visit them.

Observations for Physic and Diet in July.
Beware of violent heat and sudden cold, which are the great distempers of this
month, and produce pestilential Diseases, forbear superfluous Drinking, but Eat
heartily.

Rules of Husbandry in August.
Now with thankfulness reap your desired harvest. Sow winter Herbs in the new
of the moon. Esteem fair weather as precious, and mis-spend it not. Gather
garden Seeds near the full, use moderate Diet, forbear to sleep presently after
meat: take heed of sudden cold after heat.

Observations in Physic and Diet in August.
Beware of Physic and Blood-letting in the Dog-dayes, if the Air be hot,
otherwise, if occasion require, you may safely make use thereof.

Rules of Husbandry in September.
The beginning of this month and end of the former, gather Hops, their
Complexion being brown and the weather fair, and no dew on the ground, kill
Bees, make Verjuice, remove and set all slips of Flowers between the two Lady
days, remove Trees from Sept. fill Febru. especially in the new of the Moon,
the weather warm, and the wind South or West, cut Quick-sets, gather ripe
fruit, sow Wheat and Rye, winter Parsuips and Carrets, and set Roses,
Strawberries and Barberries.

Observations for Physic and Diet in September.
Now as the year declines, provide your winter garments, hang them on loosely
to pervent that you might after repent of; good for Physic, and Phlebotomy.

Rules of Husbandry in September.
Sow Wheat and Rye, remove young plants and trees about the new moon, observing
this as a seasonable secret, that in setting, you carefully place that side to
the South and West, which were so before you took up the Plant, otherwise the
cold kills it: gather your remaining Winter fruit, set all kinds of Nuts and
Acorns, and cut Rosetrees but once in two years, if you intend to have store of
Roses.

Observations for Physic and Diet in October.
The Garments you last month hung on your backs in jest, now button them close
in good earnest; cloth you now for prevention, for the cold comes insensibly,
and fogs oft-times beget a whole winters cold. Consult with your Tailors as
well as Physicians.

Rules of Husbandry in November.
Set Crabtree stocks to graf on, in the old of the moon, set pease and beans,
and sow parsusps and carrets, Trench gardens with dung, untober the ro^^s of
your apple frees, and so let them remain till March, kill swins in or near the
full of the moon, and the flesh will the vetter prove in voyling.

Observations for Physic and Diet in November.
The best Physic this month, is good Exercise, Warmth, and wholesome Meat and
Drink.

Rules of Husbandry in December.
In the last Quarter of the Moon, this Month and the next, are the vest times
to fell Timber: Let Fowlers mind their Game, cover all your best Flowers and
Herbs from cold and sterms with rotten hors-dung, look well to thy Cartle,
blood Horses. Let a warms Fire and a cup of Nectar be thy Bath, the Ritchin thy
Apotheearies shop, hot meats and broths thy Physic, and a well spread Table,
the proof of thy Charity to thy poor neighbors, to whom this advise is
seasonable.

Being poor thy self, and can not feast at all,
Thank God for such as thee to feasting call.
Observations for Physic and Diet in December.
The best Physic is as before, a merry honest Heart, and the exercise of
Charity among thy poor Neighbors.

37. Here follow other brief Rules of Physic and Husbandry.
Physical Observations.
Good to let the Sanguine blood, when the Moon is in Pisces.

To let the Choleric blood when the Moon has her course in Cancer, or Pisces.

To let the Melancholy blood, when the Moon is in Libra, Aquarius, or Pisces.

To let the Phlegmatic blood, when the Moon is in Sagitarius or Aquarius.

To prepare humous, the Moon being in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius.

Good to purge.
With Electuaries, the Moon in Cancer.

With Pills, the Moon in Pisces.

With Potions, the Moon in Virgo.

Good to take Vomits, the Moon being in Taurus, Virgo, or the latter part of
Sagitarius.

To purge the head by sneesing, the Moon being in Cancer, Leo, or Virgo.

To take Glisters, the Moon being in Aries, Cancer, or Virgo.

To stop Fluxes and Rheumes, the Moon being in Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn.

To bathe, when the Moon is in Cancer, Libra, Aquarius, or Pisces.

To cut the hair off the Head or Beard, when the Moon is in Libra, Sagitarius,
Aquarius, or Pisces.

Brief Observations of Husbandry.
Set, Sow Seeds, Graft and plant, the Moon being in Taurus, Virgo, or in
Capricorn.

And all kind of Corn in Cancer.

Graft in March at the Moons increase, she being in Taurus or Capricorn.

Shear Sheep at the Moons increase.

Fell hard Timber from the Full to the Change.

Fell Frith, Copice, and Fuel at the first quarter.

Lib or Geld Cattle, the Moon in Aries, Sagitarius, or in Capricorn.

Rill fat Swine for Bacon (the better to keep their fat in boiling) about the
Full Moon.

The use of a small portable Instrument, to find the Hour of the Day upon the
least appearance of the Sun.
THis Instrument may be made either of Wood, Brass, or Silver, or, for a
shift, this Paper ^t felf being pasted upon a fine piece of Board that will not
wary, may supply the want of a better: In the Tenter of this Instrument (which
is noted with the Letter A) there is fined a piece of fine silk, having a small
Plummet of Lead at the end thereof, noted with the Letter P; and upon this
string, let there be a Bead, or small Pinshead, which may be slipped up and
down the string, as occasion shall require; this small Bead, or Pins head is
noted with the Letter O; Likewise upon the edge of the Instrument, noted with A
B, you must have a small piece of wier (or a piece of a small pin) about a
quarter of an inch in length, which must such up right upon the ^dge of the
Iustrument; this small more of wier is noted with the letter 6 (as if you will,
you way have a depiction of sundialsmall hole made in the line A B, into which
you may stick a pin when you would know the hour of the day, which will be
sufficient. Lastly, between the Lines B C, and D D, are certain small
divisions, which are the days of the twelve months of the year, noted with the
first Letter of every month, as I for January, F for February, M for March, A
for April, M for May, I for June, I for July, A for August, S for September, O
for October, N for November, and D for December. Now the Hour Lines offer
themselves to every ones eye, having the numbers 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, set at each end of them.

Having thus described the several parts of the Instrument, I will now show the
use thereof which is very easy. For first (the thread being fired fast in the
Center at A) you must lay the string upon the cay of the mouth (as in the
figure the string lies upon the 10th. day of April) then staying it there,
move the bead up or down the string till it lie just upon the line of 12, as
you see in the figure at O, then is your Instrument fitted to find the haur
any time that day, which you must do after this manner. Take the Instrument in
your hand, laying the thumb of your right hand about E, and the thumb of your
left hand about R, turning the left side of your body to the Sun, and hold up
the Instrument till the Sun cast the shadow of the short piece of wier in S,
straight along the line S C, neither above nor below it, the string playing at
free liberty by the side of the Instrument, then shall the bead faling upon the
houre-line, give you the true hour of the day either before or after noon.

Example.
If you would find the hour on the 5th. of April, you must then lay the thread
upon that day, and keeping it there, move the bead till it lie upon the line of
12, then holding the Instrument in your hand, and turning the left side of your
body to the Sun, hold it up till the shadow of the small wier fall just upon
the line S M, and then, (the thread and plummet, having free liberty to move
along the side of the Instrument) observe where the bead rests, and there is
the hour of the day, as if it fall upon the line noted with 9, 3, then it is
either 9 in the morning, or 3 in the afternoon: in like manner, if it fall upon
the lines 10, 2, it is either 10 in the morning, or 2 in the afternoon; again,
if it fall just between the lines of 8 and 3, then it is either half an hour
past 8 in the morning, or half an hour past 3 in the afternoon, and which of
these hours it is, may he easily disstinguished,

Note, that from the tenth day of March, to the twelfth of Sea tember, you must
make use of those Houre-lines which are drawn with a full line thus -- But from
the twelfth of September, to the tenth of March, you must make use of those
Houre-lines which are pricked thus...... Let thus much suffice concerning the
use of this Instrument.

Usus optimus magister.
A Table showing the Interest of any sum of money, from 1 pound to 1000 pound,
at 6, percent.
1 month. 2 month. 3 month. 4 month. lib. lib. s. d. lib. s. d. lib. s. d.
lib. s. d. 1000 5 00 00 10 00 0 15 00 0 20 00 0 500 2 10 00 5 00 0 7 10 0 10 00
0 400 2 00 00 4 00 0 6 00 0 8 00 0 300 1 10 00 3 00 0 4 10 0 6 00 0 200 1 00 00
2 00 0 3 00 0 4 00 0 100 0 10 00 1 00 0 1 10 0 2 00 0 90 0 09 00 0 18 0 1 07 0
1 16 0 80 0 08 00 0 16 0 1 04 0 1 12 0 70 0 07 00 0 14 0 1 01 0 1 08 0 60 0 06
00 0 12 0 0 18 0 1 04 0 50 0 05 00 0 10 0 0 15 0 1 00 0 40 0 04 00 0 08 0 0 12
0 0 16 0 30 0 03 00 0 06 0 0 09 0 0 12 0 20 0 02 00 0 04 0 0 06 0 0 08 0 10 0
01 00 0 02 0 0 03 0 0 04 0 9 0 00 10 0 01 9 0 02 8 0 03 7 8 0 00 09 0 01 7 0 02
4 0 03 2 7 0 00 08 0 01 4 0 02 1 0 02 9 6 0 00 07 0 01 2 0 01 9 0 02 4 5 0 00
06 0 01 0 0 01 6 0 02 0 4 0 00 05 0 00 9 0 01 2 0 01 7 3 0 00 03 0 00 7 0 00 1
0 01 8 2 0 00 02 0 00 5 0 00 7 0 00 9 1 0 0 01 0 00 2 0 00 3 0 00 4

The use of the Table of Interest.
THe first column contains any number of pounds from one to 1000, against any
of which sums, there is set down the Interest thereof for one, two, three, or
four months, according to the titles.

Example, Let it be required to find the interest of 70 pound for four months.
Find 70 l. in the first column, and right against it, in the column of four
months, (which is the last) you shall find 1 l. 8 sh. 0 d. and so much is the
interest of 70 pound in four months.

Now, if you would know what the interest of the same sum would be in 6 months,
Look in the Table for the interest thereof, in two months, which is 0 l. 14 sh.
0 d. which added to the interest for four months, namely, to 1 l. 8 sh. 0 d.
the sum is 2 l. 2 sh. 0 d. and so much is the interest of 70 l. in 6 months.

Also, if it be required to find the interest of any sum which is not in the
first column, as of 75 li.

Let it be required to find the interest of 75 li. for three months. First,
look the interest of 70 li. for three months as before, you shall find it to be
1 l. 1 sh. 0 d. Likewise find the interest of 5 l. for three months, which is 0
l. 1 sh. 6 d. this being added to the former, viz. to 1 l. 1 sh. 0 d. makes 1
li. 2 sh. 6 d. which is the interest of 75 l. for three months.

Here follows four plain and necessary Tables showing the true value of the
purchase of any House or Land, by Lease, or otherwise: calculated according to
the Rates of 5 l. 6 l. 8 l. 10 l. in the hundred.
This Table is to be used in the Purchase of Land. 5. per Cent. Time of the
purch. Value of the Purchase. Years Mon. 1 0 11 2 1 10 3 2 9 4 3 7 5 4 4 6 5 1
7 5 9 8 6 6 9 7 1 10 7 9 11 8 4 13 9 5 15 10 5 17 11 3 19 12 1 21 12 10 23 3 6
25 14 1 27 14 8 29 15 2 31 15 7 41 17 1 51 18 3 61 18 11 71 19 4 ^1 19 7 91 19
9 20 0 Fee sim.

This Table shows the Purehase of Leases of Land. 5. per Cent. Time of the
purch. Value of the Purchase. Years Mon. 1 0 11 2 1 10 3 2 8 4 3 6 5 4 3 6 4 11
7 5 7 8 6 2 9 6 10 10 7 4 11 7 11 13 8 10 15 9 9 17 10 6 19 11 2 21 11 9 23 12
4 25 12 9 27 13 3 29 13 7 31 13 11 41 15 1 51 15 9 61 16 2 71 16 5 81 16 6 91
16 7 16 8 Fee sim.

This table shows the Purchase of leases of houses or lands. 8. per Cent. Time
of the purch. Value of the Purchase. Years Mon. 1 0 11 2 1 9 3 2 7 4 3 4 5 4 0
6 4 7 7 5 2 8 5 9 9 6 3 10 6 9 11 7 12 13 7 1 15 8 7 17 9 1 19 9 7 21 10 0 23
10 4 25 10 8 27 10 11 29 11 2 31 11 4 41 11 11 51 12 3 61 12 4 71 12 5 81 12 6
91 12 6 12 6 Fee sim.

This Table shows the purchase of Leases of Houses. 10. per Cent. Time of the
purch. Value of the Purchase. Years Mon. 1 0 11 2 1 9 3 2 6 4 3 2 5 3 9 6 4 4 7
4 11 8 5 4 9 5 9 10 6 2 11 6 6 13 7 1 15 7 7 17 8 0 19 8 4 21 8 8 23 8 11 25 9
1 27 9 3 29 9 4 31 9 6 41 9 9 51 9 11 61 9 11 71 10 0 81 10 0 91 10 0 10 0 Fee
sim.

The use of the four preceding Tables.
THese four Tables are all to be used the same way, their difference being only
in the Rate of the profit; which it is fit should be more in houses than in
lands; because houses are subject to be void of Tenants, and many other
casualties of fire and ruin, which lands are no^. And therefore I have (as
briefly as I can) hinted in the Tables, which Table is fittest for any kind of
purchase: not that any one is bound to make his bargain just according to these
Rates; but hereby any one may judge of his Purchase, and know what profit he
makes of his money.

The Tables of themselves are so plain, that they need no explaining; I having
therein altogether applied my self to the usual way of reckoning these bargains
to he worth so many years purchase. Only the year for the more exactness is
divided into twelve months, and not into four quarters.

This example will make all plain.
It is desired to know what the Lease of an House for one and twenty years, is
worth in ready money? To find out this, look in the last Table which is
calculated after the rate of ten per Cent. and is fittest for such kind of
bargains; and in this Table at 21 years, you shall find the value of the Lease
to be worth 8 years and 8 months purchase. So that let the yearly rent or value
of the house be what it will, the said Lease of 21 years, is worth eight whole
years rent, and almost three quarters of the said yearly rent; which you may
easily reckon up, and so know the true value of the purchase. And at this price
you shall have 10 per Cent. profit for your money.

I kave made these Tables to show the worth of long Leases also, because most
men value a long Lease too much, in respect of the value they set upon a short
lease. Reekoning a lease of 21 years to be worth but 7 years, and yet thinking
a Lease of 60 years to be worth 12 or 13 years purchase; Whereas you may see by
this Table, that though the lease of 21 years be worth 8 years and 8 months
purchase; yet the lease of 60 years is not worth full 10 years purchase: may
the lease of an hundred years, or the Fee-simple cannot be worth above 10 years
purchase, allowing the said rate of 10 per cent for the money.

Many other questions of Purchases and Reversions might be added; as you may
see at large in my Purchasers pattern, printed for Mr. Pierrepont, at the Sun
in Paul's Church yard.

A brief Discourse of the Celestial part of the World, of the Distances,
Magnitudes, Motions, and Scituations of the Planets and fixed Stars.
1. Of the Heaven of the fixed Stars.
ALthough (by the Diurnal motion of the Primum mobile) this Heaven (as all the
other Orbs of the Planets are) be violently turned about once in 24 hours, yet
they retain a proper motion to themselves, which is contrary to the former;
this motion is called natural, because it is effected by the proper motion of
the Star or Planet in its own Orb, and the other motion is called Violent,
because it forces a motion contrary to what the thing it self in nature would
perform.

This Heaven of the fixed Stars, is very slow in motion, moving but one degree
in 71 years, and so is 25412 years moving through the whole Zodiac: It is
adorned and beautified with diverse glorious bodies of several magnitudes, of
which the Ancients have noted 6 in number; and that the multiplicity of these
glorious bodies, might not confound the beholders by their irregular
situation; the Ancients have contracted their number by the uniting a certain
number of them together into the form or fashion of some living Creature, or
other object, as the SWAN, the BEAR, the SHIP, the CROSS, etc. and these are
called' Constellations, of these Consteliations; the Ancients observed only 48,
though there be others found out of later times, of which 21 were on the North
side of the Equinoctial, 15 on the South side, and 12 in the Zodiac it self:
each of these Constellations contain a certain number of these Stars, whose
magnitudes are very vast, in respect of this little ball whereon we live; for,

A Star of the first Magnitude is greater than the Globe of the whole Earth 68
times, of which magnitude there are 15 Stars.

A Star of the second Magnitude is greater than the Globe of the whole Earth 28
times, of which magnitude there are 45 Stars.

A Star of the third magnitude is greater than the Globe of the whole Earth 11
times, of which magnitude there are 208 Stars.

A Star of the fourth magnitude is greater than the Globe of the whole Earth 11
times, of which magnitude there are 244 Stars.

A Star of the fifth Magnitude, is greater than the Globe of the whole Earth 21
times, of which magnitude there are 217 Stars.

But a Star of the sixth Magnitude is less than the Earth, and of his
Magnitude are 49 Stars.

An Appendix to the precedent Almanac.
2. Of the Heaven of Saturn.
THis Heaven is situated within the Concavity of the Heaven of the fixed
Stars, and contains only the body of his own Planet, which appears as a
Star of the second magnitude; he is of a swarthy and obscure color like unto
lead; his distance from the Earth in his mean distance is, 9091960 Miles, and
the circumference of his Sphere is 57030266 miles, according to which by the
violent motion of the primum mobile he is moved 2376261 Miles in an hour, but
his own proper motion is slower than any of the other Planets, yet much swifter
than that of the fixed Stars, for he ends his course in 30 years.

3. Of the Heaven of Jupiter.
Within the Concavity of the Sphere of Saturn, is sciutated the heaven of
Jupiter, in which moves the body of 4, which appears like a Star of the
first magnitude very bright, and of nature warm. In his mean distance he is
distant from the Earth 3431400 Miles, his body exceeding the earth in magnitude
14 times, the periemter of his sphere being 21568800 miles, so that his hourly
motion is 898700 Miles, he finisheth his Zodiacal period in 11 years, and 316
days.

4. Of the Heaven of Mars.
UNder the Heaven of Jupiter, is the Orb of Mars, appearing of a red fiery
color, being distant from the earth in his mean distance 1500700 Miles, the
Circumference of his Sphere being 9432971 Miles, so that by the violent motion
of the primum mobile, he is moved 393040 Miles in the space of an hour, he
compleateth his revolution in one year and 322 days.

5. Of the Heaven of the Sun.
THe Sun is seated in the midst of the Planetary Orb, by which he enlightens
the superior as well as the inferior. In his mean distance he is distant from
the earth 989000 Miles, the magnitude of his body being (according to Tycho)
140 times greater than the earth, the compass of his Orb being 6216571 Miles,
and he moves in a hour 259023 Miles, he makes his Zodiacal revolution in 365
days, 5 hours, 49 min. 16 second.

6. Of the Heaven of Venus.
VENUS the most bright and splendent star in all the Firmament, is moved about
the Sun as about a Center, her distance from the earth being 989000 Miles, she
moves equally about the Sun, though her motion seem to be very irregular, she
is sometimes higher and sometimes lower than the Sun, she is six times less
than the Earth, and is distant from the Sun, 735300 Miles.

7. Of the Heaven of Mercury.
Within the concavity of the Sphere of VENUS is placed MERCURY, he is
seituate very near the Sun, and is never above 29 degrees distant from the Sun;
so that he is rarely seen: he moves about the Sun as Venus does, and is
distant from the Earth 989000 Miles, he is less than the earth 19 times.

8. Of the Heaven of the Moon.
THe Moon is the lowest of all the Planets, being distant from the earth in her
mean distance, 48760 Miles, the Circumference of her Sphere being 306491
Miles, she runs in the space of an hour 12770 miles, she is less than the
Earth 39 times; but according to Copernicus, 43 times, and finisheth her course
in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 min. and 6 seconds.

Having thus taken a brief view of the heavenly Orbs, we cannot but admire
their vast magnitudes and swift motions, and if from hence we can learn
nothing, yet let us learn this, that there is a God, and that he is far above
all the works of his hands; and the Wiseman contemplating thereupon, says, We
may understand by the heavens how much mightier he is that made them, for by
the greatness and glory of the Creatures proportionally, the Maker of them is
seen.

A most plain and easy Table, showing the true time of the beginning, and
continuance of the Reign of each King and Queen in England, from the Conquest,
until this year, 1662. Gathered forth of Chronicles, and set forth for the
profitable use of Lawyers, Scriveners, etc.
William Conqueror began his Reign 1066. October 15. and Reigned 20 years, 11
months, and 22 days.

William Rufus began his Reign 1087. September 9. and Reigned 12 years, 11
months, and 19 days.

Henry the First began his Reign 1100. August the first, and Reigned 35 years,
4 months, and 11 days.

Stephen began his Reign 1135. December the 2. and Reigned 18 years, 11 months,
and 18 days.

Henry the Second began his Reign 1154. October 23. and Reigned 34 years, 9
months, and 1 day.

Richard the First began his Reign 1189. July 6. and Reigned 9 years, and 9
months.

King John began his Reign 1199. April 6. and Reigned 17 years, and 7 months.

Henry the Third began his Reign 1216. October 19. and Reigned 56 years, and 1
month.

Edward the First began his Reign 1272. November 16. and Reigned 34 years, and
8 months, and 6 days.

Edward the Second began his Reign 1307. July the seventh, and Reigned 19
years, 7 months, and 5 days.

Edward the Third began his Reign 1326. January 25. and Reigned 50 years, 5
months, and 7 days.

Richard the Second began his Reign 1377. June 21. and Reigned 22 years, and 3
months, and 14 days.

Henry the Fourth began his Reign 1399. September 29. and Reigned 13 years, 6
months, and 3 days.

Henry the Fifth began his Reign 1412. March 20. and Reigned 9 years, 5 months,
and 14 days.

Henry the Sixth began his Reign 1422. August 31. and reigned 38 years, 6
months, and 8 days.

Edward the Fourth began his Reign 1460. March the 4. and Reigned 22 years, one
month, and 8 days.

Edward the Fifth began his Reign 1483. April the 9. and Reigned two months,
and 18 days.

Richard the Third began his Reign 1483. June 22. and reigned two years, two
months, 5 days.

Henry the Seventh began his Reign 1485. August 22. and Reigned 23 years, ten
months, and two days.

Henry the Eighth began his Reign 1509. April 22. and Reigned 37 years, 10
months, and 2 days.

Edward the Sixth began his Reign 1547. January 28. and Reigned six years, five
months, 19 days.

Queen Mary began her Reign 1553. July 26. and Reigned 5 years, and 4 months,
and 22 days.

Queen Elizabeth began her Reign 1558. November 17. and Reigned 44 years, four
months, and 16 days.

King James began his Reign 1602. March 24. and Reigned 22 years and three
days.

King Charles the First began his Reign 162^. March 27. and Reigned 24 years-
10 months, and 3 days.

King Charles the Second began his Reign the 30. of January 1648. Whom God
grant long to Reign over us.

Here now follows the manner of making all manner of Bonds, Bills, Leases,
Indentures, Wills, etc. Very necessary for those who live in the Country where
a Clerk or Scrivener is not near at all times to be had.
A Bill or Obligation from one man to another.
KNow all men by these presents, that I T. R. of G. in the County of S. Yeoman,
do owe, and am indebted unto J. A. of G. in the County abovesaid, Gentleman,
the sum of One and twenty pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be
paid to the abovesaid J. A. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns;
in and upon the first day of May next ensuing the date hereof, at or in the now
dwelling house of the abovesaid J. A. for the which Payment well and truly to
be made, I bind my Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, in the sum of forty
two pounds of like moneys of England, firmly by these presents;

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and Seal,
the first day of June, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of

An Obligation with a Condition, Two bound to One.
KNow all men by these presents, that we W. S. of R. in the County of N.
Ioyner, and H. M. of F. in the Isse, are holden and firmly bound unto V. G. of
B. in the County of S. Gentleman, the sum of Two hundred pounds of good and
lawful money of England, to be paid to the abovesaid W. G. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns; for the which payment, well and truly to
be made, we bind us, and either of us, the Heirs, Executors, Administrators of
us, and either of us, in the whole, and for the Whole firmly by these presents;
sealed with our Seals, dated the fifth day of M. 1660.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the above bound W. S. and H.
M. they or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
pay, or cause to be well and truly paid, the full and entire sum of one hundred
pounds of good and lawful money of England, at one entire payment, in and upon
the first day of November next ensuing the date hereof, at or in the now
dwelling House of the said W. G. of B. that then this present Obligation shall
be void and of none effect, or else shall remain in full power, force, and
virtue.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

A short Bill.
THis Bill witnesses, that I. G. of R. in the County of S. Tailor, do owe unto
I. L. of R. in the same County, Yeoman, the sum of Thirty pound of lawful
English Money; for the payment whereof, I bind me and my Heirs.

In witness whereof I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal,
the first day of May, in the Year, 1660.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of

A Bill without a Penalty.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That R. S. of K. L. in the County
of N. Gentleman, do owe unto R. B. of R. in the same County Yeoman, the sum of
one hundred pounds of lawful Money of England, to be paid to the said R. B. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, upon the first day of May next
ensuing the date hereof, at, or in the now dwelling house of the aforesaid R.
B. in Risin; for the which Payment well and truly to be made, I bind me, my
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these presents.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal
the first day of August, One thousand six hundred and sixty.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of

An Acquittance.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I R. B. have received of W.
B. the sum of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, in full discharge
of all Debts, Reckonings, Accounts, and demands whatsoever, from the beginning
of the World to this day, being

July the first. One thousand six hundred and sixty; In witness whereof, I
have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, the day and year above written.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

A General Release.
BE it known unto all Men by these presents, That I R. R. of H. in the County
of N. Gentleman, have remised, released, and quite claimed, and by these
presents do, for me, my Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, remise,
release, and for ever quit claim, unto E. B. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, all, and all manner of Actions, Suits, Cause, and
Causes of Actions and Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings, and Accounts, Debts,
Duties, Reckonings, Sum and Sums of Money, Controversies, Judgments,
Executions, and Demands whatsoever, which I the said R. R. ever had, or which
my Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of us in time to come,
can, or may have, to, for or against the said E B. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, for, or by reason of any matter, cause, or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the World to the day of the date hereof.

In witness whereof I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal,
the second day of May, 1660.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of

A Letter of Attorney general to receive Debts and Rents.
KNow all men by these presents, That I I. R. of W. in the County of R. Yeoman,
have Assigned, Ordained, and Made, and in my stead and place, put and
constituted my trusty and well beloved Friend, F. R. of S. I. in York, Yeoman,
to be my true and lawful Attorney for me, and in my name, and to my use, to
ask, sue for, levy, require, recover, and receive of all and every Person and
Persons whatsoever, all and every such Debts, Rents, and Sums of Money as are
now due unto me, or which at any day or days, time or times hereafter shall be
due, oweing, belonging, appertaining unto me by any manner of ways whatsoever:
Giving and granting unto my said Attorney by the Tenor of the presents, my
full and whole Power, Strength, and Authority, in and about the Premises; and
upon the receipt of any such Debts, Rents, and Sums of Money aforesaid, to give
Acquittances, or other Discharge for me, and in my name, to make, seal, and
deliver; and all and every other Act and Acts, Thing, or Things, device and
devices in the Law whatsoever, needful and necessary to be done in, or about
the Premises, for the recovery of all, or any such Debts, Rents, or sums of
Money as aforesaid, for me, and in my name, to do, execute and perform, as
fully, largely, and amply in every respect, to all intents, constructions and
purposes, as I my self might, or could do if I were personally present;
ratifying, allowing, and holding firm and stable, whatsoever my said Attorney
shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in or about the Execution of the same,
by virtue of these presents.

In witness whereof I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal,
July 20. 1660.
An Indenture for an Apprentice bound out by a Parish.
THis Indenture, made the second day of June, One thousand six hundred and
Sixty, according to the Computation of the Church of England, etc. witnesses,
That the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of St. M. in K.
L. in the County of Nort. with the consent of I. P. Major, and F. P. Recorder,
Esquire two Justices of the Peace for the Parish, according to the Statute in that
case made and provided: Have placed and put forth I. R. an Apprentice with I.
R. of King Lyn, aforesaid, Waterman, for and until she be of the full age of
one and twenty years, from the day of the date hereof; during all which term
the said I. R. does Covenant to find unto the abovesaid I. R. his Apprentice,
sufficient Meat, Drink and Apparel, Washing and Lodging, sufficient for such
Apprentice; and at the end of the said term, to give her two Suits of Apparel,
the one for Holy Days, and the other for Working-Dayes:

In witness whereof they have interchangeably set to their Hands and Seals,
the day and year first above-written.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of

A Letter of Attorney to receive a Debt.
KNow all men by these presents, That I I. R. of H. in the County of Nor. Gent.
have assigned, ordained, and made, and in my stead, and place, by these
presents put and constituted my trusty and well beloved friend S. R. of H. in
the County of S. Gent. to be my true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my
Name, and to my use, to take, ask, sue for, levy, require, recover, and receive
of G. B. of Hal. in the County of S. Gent. all and every such Debts and sums of
Money, which are now due unto me by any manner of ways or means whatsoever.
Giving and granting unto my said Attorney my whole power and strength, and
authority in and about the Premises, and upon the receipt of any such Debts, or
Sums of money aforesaid, Acquittances, or other discharge, for me and in my
name to make, Seal, and deliver, and all and every such act and acts, thing or
things, device and devices whatsoever in Law, for the recovery of all, or any
such Debts, or sums of money as aforesaid, for and in my name, to do, execute,
and perform as fully, and largely, in respect to all intents, constructions,
and purposes, as I my self might, or could do if I were there in my own person
present; ratifying, allowing, and holding firm and stable, all and whatsoever
my said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause to be done, in, or about the
Execution of the Premises, by virtue of these presents.

In witness, etc.

A Copy of a Will.
IN the name of God, Amen, the first day of July, 1660. according to the
Computation of the Church of England, I E. N. of K. L. in the County of N.
Gent. being of perfect memory and remembrance, praised be God, do make and
ordain this my last Will and Testament, in manner and form following, viz.

FIrst, I bequeath my Soul into the hands of Almighty God my Maker, heping that
through the Meritorious death and passion of Jesus Christ my only Savior and
Redeemer, to receive free pardon and forgiveness of all my Sins; and as for my
body, to be Buried in Christian burial at the discretion of my Executrix,
hereafter nominated.

Item, I give unto my Son P. T. the sum of Five hundred pounds.

Item, I give unto my Daughter F. -- the sum of Five hundred pounds.

Item, I give unto my Daughter E. the sum of Five hundred pounds.

Item, all the rest of my Houses, Leases, Lands, Tenements and Goods
whatsoever, I give unto S. my Wife for term of her Life, and then to my Son P.
and his Heirs for ever, upon Condition that she shall pay all my Debts and
Legacies, and make her sole Executrix of this my last Will and Testament,
revoking all other Wills and Testaments.

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal,
the day of the Year first above written.
Pleasant Questions in Arithmetic.
Quest. 1. To tell the number that another man shall think, be it never so
great.
LEt the Party that thinks double the number which he thought, which done,
bid him multiply the sum of them both by 5. and give you the product (which
they will never refuse to do, it being so far above the number thought) from
the which if you abate the last figure of the product (which will always be a
Cipher or 5) the number thought will remain.

Example.
Let the number thought be 53. which doubled make 106, and multiplied by 5 make
530, then if you take away the cipher which is in the last place, and there
will remain 53, the number thought.

Quest. 2. A pretty question.
A Thief breaking into an Orchard, stole from thence a certain number of Pears,
and at his coming forth he met with three men one after another, who threatened
to accuse him of theft, and for to appease them, he gave unto the first man
half the pears that he stole, who returned him back 12 of them. Then he gave
unto the second half of them he had remaining, who returned him back 7. And
unto the third man he gave half the residue, who returned him back 4. and in
the end he had still remaining 20 Pears. Now do I demand how many Pears he
stole in all? To answer this Question you must work backward, for if you take 4
from 20. there will remain 16. which being doubled make 32. from which abate 7.
and there will remain 25, which being doubled make 50. from which Substract 12,
and there will remain 38. which again doubled makes 76. the true number of
Pears that he gathered.

Quest. 3. Another of three Sisters.
A Certain man having three Daughters, to the eldest he gave 22 Apples, to the
second he gave 16 Apples, and to the third he gave 10 Apples, and sent them to
the market to sell them, and gave them command to sell one as many for a penny
as the other; (namely, 7 a penny) and every one to bring him home so much money
as the other, and neither change either Apples or moneys one with another; how
could that be done?

This to some may seem inpossible, but to the Arithmetitian very easy; for
whereas the eldest had 3 penyworths and one apple over, the second 2 penyworths
and 2 apples over, and the youngest had ten penyworths and 3 Apples over; so
that the youngest had so many single Apples and one penyworth as the eldest had
penyworths and one apple over, and consequently the second proportional to them
both.

They made their Markets thus, A Steward coming to buy Fruit for his Lady,
bought all the Apples they had at seven a penny, leaving the odd ones behind,
then had the eldest sister 3 d. and one apple, the middle sister 2 d. and two
apples, and the youngest 1 d. and three apples. The Sreward bringing the Fruit
to his Lady, she liked it so well, that she sent him for the rest, who replied,
that there were but a few remaining, she notwithstanding sent him for them, and
bid him bring them at any rate.

The Steward coming to the market again, could not buy the odd Apples under a
penny a piece (who to content his Lady, was fain to give it) then had the
youngest sister three peniworth, the middle sister two peniworth, and the
eldest one penyworth, and so had they all 4 d. a piece, and yet sold as many
for a penny one as another, and neither changed Apples nor Money one with
another, as they were commanded.

THE Shepherds Prognostication for the Weather: With a brief Chronology of
diverse Memorable things since these hundred Years, showing in what year they
happened, and how long it is since to this Year, 1660.

WITH A brief Collection of all the Members of Man Physiognomized.

AND A Judgment upon the signification of Moles on Man or Woman, from the head
to the foot.

By Melampus a Greek Author.

ALSO The Wheel of Fortune, Approved and confirmed by Science and Reason of
Pythagoras the most excellent Philosopher: By the which you may know all things
that you will demand.

London, Printed for John Stafford, and are sold at the Sign of the George at
Fleet-bridge.

The Shepherds Prognostication for the Weather: with a brief Chronology of
diverse Memorial Accidents since, these last Hundred Years.
IF Rainwater be drunk or sucked up by the earth sooner than ordinary, i^
signifteth Rain to be at hand.

If standing water be at any time warmer than it was commonly wont to be, and
no Sunshine help, it fore-telleth rain.

If any Springs do newly rise or buble forth, or old Springs flow faster than
ordinary, it is a token of much rain.

If Ducks and Drakes do shake and flutter their wings when they rise, it is a
sign of ensuing water.

If young Horses rub their backs against the ground, it is a sign of great
drops of rain to follow.

If in a clear and starry night it lighten in the South or South east, it
fore-telleth great store of wind and rain to come from those parts.

If Sheep do bleat, play or skip wantonly, it is a sign of wet weather.

If Swine be seen to carry bottles of hay or straw to any place, and hide them;
it betokens rain,

When Oxen do lick themselves against the hair, it is a token of Rain to follow
shortly after.

If Oxen or Kine feed apace when it rains, it fore-telleth that therein shall
continue many days after.

If Cattle when they do puff or bellow, and do look up to the sky, it
signifies ensuing Rain.

If the heat in summer be more hot and violent than is wont to be, it is a
token of rain.

If Dogs Guts or Entrails stir or rumble in his belly, it is a sign of Rain.

If Salt or powdered Meat be more moist than it is ordinary wont to be, it
signifies Rain.

The Sky or Element being red or fiery in the morning, fore-sheweth Rain to
follow.

Doves or Pigeons coming later home to their Dove-house in the evening than
ordinary, it is a token of Rain.

If Crow^s or Daws bathe themselves in winter, or if they cry, yealk along
any shore more then they are commonly wont to do, then will rain presently
follow.

The sparkling of a lamp or candle, is a manifest sign of ensuing rain.

The falling of Soot down a chimney more then ordinary, there will follow rain
presently

When Ants or Pismires do often run to nests or homes, it is a manifest token
of wetweather.

When Hens flutter their wings in the dust or they flock together, seeking to
shelter themselves, rain follows.

When gouty Men, or such as are troubled with any old aches, do feel their
joints to ache, there rain shortly follows after.

And if the Moon seen dark, graenish foggy, low^ing or duskish, or if it appear
the third day before or the third day after the new Moon it is a token of
ensuing rain.

When Flies, Gnats, or Fleas do bire or sting sorer then they were wont to do
or hover about men's eyes or mouths, or of brasts it is an evident token of rain.

And if Frogs dor croak more then ordinary, it is an apparent token of rain.

When tooads go from their holes in the evening, it is a token of of stormy
weather and rein.

Wen Swallows are seen to flutter and fly about low, or over waters or marish
grounds, and with their wings to touch the water, it is a manifest token of
great rain.

And if any black spots appear in the Sun or Moon, it is a token of water.

And if the sound or noise of Bells be further heard then wont, without the help
of wind, it will rain shortly after.

If Meles or Wants do turn up the ground more then they are wont, and that the
earth they turn up be small and dry, it is a manifest token of rain.

And if Birds, of what kind soever, make more noise with their wings then
commonly, it is a sure token of rain at hand.

And if the dew fall not early in the morning (unless it be hindered by the
wind) it is a sign of rain.

And if the worms called Wodlice or Hoglice be seen in great quantities
together it is a token that it will rain shortly after.

If the Rainbow appear in calme' weather it is a manifest token of winds to
follow.

When the fire does send forth his flames waving or that it sparkles more then
ordinaly, it is a windy weather.

The Sea casting forth great store or pieces of foam, it is a manifest token of
stormy Skides.

If any great Clouds be seen to pass alost and very high in the sky, look
from whence it comes, thence shall you shortly after have store of winds.

When the beams of the Sun be red and broad, and pierce the Clouds like
darts they foretell winds.

The Hedghog commonly has fins holes or vents in his den or cave, the one
toward the South, the other toward the North, and look which of them he stops,
thence will great storms and winds follow.

If the Sun continue hot and scorthing many days together, it is a token of
winds to continue long together.

The winds coming from the Cast are dry, commonly ingendring drought.

The Northern winds is ever more healthfuller then the Southern.

If Bees fly not far from their hives, it is a sign of foul weather.

When Oxen bite their foreteeth, it is a manifest token of foul weather to
follow.

If the flame of the Fire do wave up and down, or that sparkles fly and crack
from it, there will stormy weather follow.

If small Clouds dispiersed and seattered abroad appear in clear weather, it
is a manifest token that foul weather following shall last long.

The chirping of Sparrows in the morning foretells foul weatger.

The bluscering and noise of leaves and trees in Woods or other places, is a
token of foul weather.

Great store of Sriow and Water in Winter does foretell that ths Springtime
and Summer following shall be fair and warm. If the Rainbow appears in the
East-toward the evening, it is a token of fair weather.

If it lighten in the Herizon without thunder, it is a token of faw and clear
weather.

When night Batts show themselves in greater number, or more timely in the
evening then they were wont, it is a manifest token that the next day after
will be clear and fair.

If kites be seen to walk and slye together it is a token of fair weather.

If little Flies or Gnats be seen to hover together about the beams of the Sun
before it set, and flys together making as if were the forms of a pillar, it is
a sure token of fair weather.

When the clouds in the air are seen to de cline downwards, it then death
foretell falt weather.

When Sheep and Goats be seen to join or couple together late, or in an
Evening, it Prognostieateth fair Weather.

If Oxen be seen to lie along upon the left side, it is a token of fair
weather.

If any Mist fall either in the Spring or Autumn, it fore-tels that day to be
fair and clear.

When the Owl skritcheth in foul weather, it is a token of fair weather at
hand.

If Ants or Pismires dwelling in any hollow place do remove their Eggs, it is
a sign of fair weather.

When Cranes are seen to fly for h-right without turning aside or back, it is
a manifest token of fair weather.

The Moon appearing with a white circle called Halo, in the form of a Crown,
foretells fair weather to ensue.

If it lighten the air and weather being clear, it is a sign of hot weather.

If Ravens or Crows be seen to stand gaping to wards the Sun, it is a
manifest sign of extreme heat to follow.

When Kites are seen to play and fly leysurely in the air, it is a sign of
heat.

When the air is sultering and very hot it is a stgne of cold weather to enuse.

It is sign of manifest cold weather, if the dew fall not in the morning,
especially not being hindered by the wind.

If in the winter the Sun sets more clear red and bright then it was wont,
and that a Northern wind blow, it is a sign the night will be very cold.

If that the Air in our Region be faint and warm, it is a token of Snow to
follow.

The apyearing of a Comet or Blasingstar, is a token of a dear year.

When Birds fly and flock together in companies, with crying and chirping
forsake the Istand, the Woods or Fields, and withdraw themselves near to
Cities, Towns and Houses; it foresheweth great barrenness, dearth and want of
victuals in ensue.

Thus said my Author long ago,
Which now too true we find:
None knows his Friend now from his Foe,
Nor which way blows the Wind.
A brief Chronologicall Table. Memorable Accidents.
Yea. of Christ Years ^xpit. A Great Earthquake and a Blazing-starre seen
nightly in October and November, 1580 0080 Another Blazing-starre in May. 1582
0078 Foureteen Traitors executed. The Camp at Tilbury. 1586 0074 Portugal
Voyage. 2588 0072 Will: Hacket executed in Cheapside for Blasphemy and Treason,
July 28. 1589 0071 Doctor Lopez executed the 7. of June. 1591 0067 Cadiz
Voyage, and the Lady Elizabeth borne. 1594 0066 The late King Charles was born
the 19. of November. 1596 0064 A great Plague, where of dyed in one year in
London and the Suburbs, 30578. besides these of other diseases. 1600 0057 The
Powder Treason discoverer November. 5. 1600 0055 A great Frost from the 8. of
December, till the 2. of February. 1607 0043 Prince Henry dyed. 1611 0049 The
New River brought from Amwell, finished. 1613 0047 A great Snow. 1616 0044
Queen Anne dyed. 1618 0042 The late King Charles having been in Spain, came
home the 6 of October. 1623 0037 Queen Mary arrived at Dover, June 12. 1625
0035 The Drawbridge repaired in June. 1628 0032 Prince Charles borne, May 29.
1630 0030 The Lady Mary born, Novem. 4. And a lamentable Fire on London bridge,
the eleventh of February. 1632 0028 The late King Charles his Progress into
Scotland, and the Duke of York borne, the 15 of October. 1632 0028 The
Reparation about St. Paul's Church begun, and the River of Thames twice frozen,
that people did daily go over on the Ice as on plain ground. 1634 0026 Thomas
Parr, a man reported to be 252 years old, dyed the 15 of December. Lady
Elizabeth, Daughter to our Sovereign, borne the 29 of December. A Ship brake
through Bridge, that was come home with wine 1635 0025 The Lady Anne borne the
seventeenth of March. 1636 0024 Prince Charles installed at Winfor, 21 May.
1638 0022 A cruel Sea Fight between the Spaniards and Hollanders, near the
English-coast, in the month of September. 1639 0021 The Parliament began the
third of November, which continued twelve years. 1640 0020 William of Nassau
the Prince of Orange was wedded unto the Lady Mary, Daughter unto the late King
Charles, the 2. of May. 1641 0019 The Rebellion in Jreland began 23 October.
1641 0019 The Lord Strafford beheaded, 12. of May. 1642 0018 The Lord of Essex
made General. 1642 0018 The Battle of Edghill, Octo. 23. 1642 0018 At
Brainford, Novem. 12. 1642 0018 The Scots enter into Eng. Ian. 16. 1643 0017
Cheapside Cross taken down, May, 2. 1643 0017 Tomkins and Chaloner executed,
July 5. 1643 0017 Newbury first Battle, Sept. 23. 1643 0017 B. of Canterb.
beheaded, Ian. 10. 1644 0016 Marston-moore Fight, July 2. 1644 0016 Newbury
second Battle, Octobber, 28. 1644 0016 Book of Common Prayer Voted down. Nov.
16. 1644 0016 Lord Fairfax made General, December 13. Naseby Fight. June 14.
1645 0016 Scots routed in Lancashire, August, 7. 1648 0012 Ormond beaten from
before Dublin, Aug. 2. 1649 0011 Lilburn's Trial at Guild Hall. 1649 0011
Scots routed in Scotland by his Highness, Septem. 3. 1650 0010 The late King
Charles beheaded, January 30. 1648 0012 House of Lords and Kingly Offied, Voted
down. 1648 0011 Hamelton, Capel, and Holland beheaded. 1648 2012 A new stamp
for Money. 1648 0012 Colchester taken, and Lucas and Lisle shot to death, Aug.
28. 1648 0012 Duke of York fled from St. Jameses, April 20. 1649 0011 Act for
abolishing Kingly Government, May 29. 1649 0011 The King of Scots routed at
Worcester by his Highness, Septem. 3. 1651 0009 The long Parliament that had
sat twelve years six months and seventeene days dissolved by his Highuess,
April 20. 1653 0007 A great Victory against the Hollanders, June 23. 1653 0007
The L. Protector began his Government, December. 16. 1653 0007 Gerard and the
Portugals brother beheaded on Tower Hill. 1654 0006 The Parliament called by
the Protector. 1654 0006 The River of Thames Ebbed and flowed twice in 3.
hours, October 3. 1656 0004 Sir Henry Slingsby and Dector Huet beheaded on the
Tower hill, June 8. 1658 000^ Col. Edward Ashton executed as a Traitor in
Tower-street, John Betteely, the like in Cheap Side; but Henry Tryer reprieved,
July 7. 1658 000^ Edmund Stacy Executed in Corn hill, John Summer and Oliver
Allen reprieved, June 9. 1658 000^ Oliver Cromwell the Usurping Protector dyed,
September, 3. 1658 000^ Richard Cromwell took upon him the Government,
September. 1658 0002 Our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second,
returned from his Exile and entered London, upon the 29. thos^ May. 1660 0001

Whom GOD grant long to Reign.
A brief Description of all the Members of the body, with their Significations.
Of the Head.
FIrst, the head short and round denotes only to be forgetful and foolish,
the head long in fashion to the hammer, to be prudent and wary; and in the
forepart of the head a hollownesse, to be wily and isefull; the head big, does
denote a dull person, and applied to the Ass. The head little to be foolish,
and applied to the Dog, the head mean of bigness, does argue a good wit
naturally; the head pinable sharp, to be unshamefast and a boaster.

Of the Forehead.
The forehead smooth, to be a flatterer applied to the fawning Dog; the
forehead big wrinkled, to be bold applied unto the Bull and Lion: a low
forehead to be sad applied to the passion, a low forehead to be a flatterer,
applied to the Dog; a high forehead to be liberal applied to the Lion; an
over-wrinkied forehead to be unshamefast, and puffed up in the temples, to be
high minded, irefull and of arude wit; the forehead small to be unapt to
learn, unconstant, and applied to the Sow; the forehead very big to be flow,
and applied to the Ox; the forehead round to be of a dull perseverance,
irefull, and applied to the Ass; and being somewhat a plain forehead to be
circumspect, and applied to the Dog; a square formed Forehead to be bold,
applied to the Lion.

Of the Eyes.
The eyes small and quivering to be shamefast, and yet a lover; how much the
bigger eyes so much the lesser malice, yet the more foolishness, the eyes
thwart writhing to be deceitful, a niggard and icefull; the eyes big out, to
be foolish, fearful faint-hearted and unshamefast, the eyes disorderly
moving, as one whiles running, another whiles staying, to be rash, disquiet and
troubled in mind, wicked, and a briber; the eyelids quivering, to be
fearful, applied to the passion; the eye swist moving with a sharp look, to
be fraudulent, unfaithful and a thief: the eyes steadfastly looking to be
troubled in mind, and a deceiver, the eyes situated as into a length to be a
deceiver and envious; little bags or bladders swelling out from the eyes, to be
great wine^rinkers, applied to the passion; little bladders swelling out before
the eyes, to be great ^eepers, and applied to the passion; the eyes small to be
faint-hearted, applied to the Ape; the eyes big to be flow and tranable,
applied to the Ox, the eyes hollow standing to be envious and wiched, applied
to the Ape; the eyes standing out to be foolish; applied to the Ass; the eyes
somewhat hollow to be stout of courage, applied to the Lion, the eyes somewhat
big, and a little entinent to be gentle, and applied to the Ox, the eyes very
wide-open to be impudent; the corner of their eyes ^^eshie unto the nose
joining to be malicious; the eyes of length to be crafty and a deceiver the
eyes his and frembling, to be desirons of women, applied to the passion.

Of the Nose.
The nose round with a sharpries at the e^e to be wavering of mind, applied to
the Bird. The nose holy crooked from the for head downward, to be unshamefast
and unstable, applied to the Raven: the nose crooked like Eagles bill, to be
bole, applied to the Eagle; the nose flat, to be lecherous and hasty in wrath
the nostrils large to be irefull, applied to the passion: the nose stretched
long to the mouth, to be honest and bold; the end of the nose big, to be
descrous of that he sees, applied to the Ox: the end of the nose big and
turning up: applied to the Sow: the end of the nose sharp, to be of a fierce
we; applied to the Dog; the nose round being blunt at the end, to be stout,
applied to the Lion.

Of the Ears.
The Ears long and narrow, to be envious: the ears standing very near to be
head to be a dullard and sluggish: the ears hairy, to be long lived, and quick
of hearing: the ears small, to be a scoster, applied to the Ape, the ears
big, to be a dullard, applied to the Ass: the ears hanging, to be a fool,
applied to the Ass; the ears of a mean bigness, to be faith^ull and honest
conditioned: the ears over round to be unapt to learn.

Of the Face.
The Face long, to be unshamefast, the face of small cause sweating, to be
crasty, lecherous. and a great feeder; the face very little and round to be
foolish; the face long ondlean to be bold; very crooked, long and lean, to be
malicious; longer from the forehead to she james, to be a liar; narrower from
the jaws unto the chin, to be envious and contentious: the face fleshy, to be
flow applied to the Ox, the face lean, to be careful, and eircumspect: the
face very fleshy to be careful, applied to the Ass, and Heart the face big, to
be slow, applied to the Ox and Ass: a narrow face, to be a niggard: a
countenance looking downward, to be an hypocrite and wicked: the face to be
hollow without any bearing out, to be contentions: like to a drunken
countenance, to be lightly drunk: like to an frefull countenance, to be
irefull, and applied to the apparances, like to the shamefast countenance, to
be shamefac't; the face deformed and awry, to be evil conditioned.

Of the Lips.
The Lips big that the upper hangs down over the nether, to be foolish,
applied to the Ass: the upper lip bearing out that the gumbe seen to be a
wrangler and spiteful, applied to the Dog; the Lips thin hanging the one over
the other, be bold and ha^dy applied to the Lion; the Lips thin and hard to be
irefull, and unapt to learn, applied to the Sow: the Lips thin and soft, to be
stout, applied to the Lion.

Of the Chin.
The Chin round to be effeminate, applied to the woman, the under thin hanging
low down to be lecherous; the Chin having a Pit at the end, to be a wily
person and libidinous; the Chin sharp to be faithful, applied to the Dog: the
Chin small and sharp to be envious and cruel, applied to the Serpent: the Chin
in a manuer square to be honest conditioned, the Chin long and downward sharp,
to be a crafty fellow.

Of the Beard.
The Beard unseemly formed to be of a good nature, of a natural cause: the
Beard unseemly fashioned, to be of an evil nature, of the contrary. The woman's
Beard, to be lecherous: the woman having no Beard at all to be honest
conditioned. The man's Beard over hairy to be melanchalicke, of a natural cause.

The Color of the Eyes.
A dark yellow to be honest conditioned, applied to the Lion; and fiery to be
unshamefast yet full of mirth; variable of color to be cheerful, applied to
the Passion: and shining bright to be luxurious, applied to the Cock, and
Raven; the color red about to be irefull, applied to the Passion; very black
to be fearful; which the property of the color gives. Black and yellow of
color to be honest conditioned, applied to the comeliness thereof: gray or
white to be cheerful, which the property of the color gives.

The Color of the Face.
The ckeeks and nose of the Livers redness to be most digested; the color red
above to be shamefast, applied to the Passion. the theeks red above to be
lovers of Wine, applied to the Passion.

The Color of the Breast.
Of a fierce color, to be irefull, applied to the Passion.

The Color of the whole Body.
A very Pale color (except it be of sickness) to be fearful, applied to the
Passion; of an honey color to he fluggish, of a natural cause; of a fiery
color to be long angry, hard to be pleased, very furious and Pale, not
proceeded of overmuch study, to be vicious and wicked; very black of color
to be fearful of courage, applied to the Black-more; very white, to be
fearful applied to the Woman; swarfish of color, to be meanly strong;
Yellow of color, to be honest conditioned, applied to the Lion: very red or
ruddy, to be wily and ingenious, applied to the Wolf.

Of the Teeth.
The Teeth big and broad, to be sharp witted; one of a dull capacity and
lascivious, applied both to the Ox and Ass: the sharp Teeth if they be long
and fast bearing outward to be a great feeder, ireful and wicked, applied to
the Dog and Bear.

Of the Voice.
The Voice small, soft and broken, to be fearful, applied to the woman: big
and high to be very irefull, applied to the masty Dog^ a soft voice without
reaching, to be gentle, applied to the Sheep: the voice small and loud, to be
irefull, applied to the Goat: the voice loud and big to be injurious, applied
to the Ass, the beginning big and ending small, to be irefull, applied to such
which cry out anb to the crying of the Ox.

Of the Neck.
The Neck short to be witty applied to the Wolf and Cat; such sufficient
strong about the knot or joint of the neck, are witty, and of a good capacity;
such there weak, to be dullards, the Neck big to be strong, applied to the
Man, the Neck slender, applied to the Woman, big and fleshey, to be irefull,
applied to the Bull; the Neck mean, to be stout applied to the Lion: long and
small to be fearful, applied to the Heart.

Of the Breast.
The Breast with out hair, to be unshamefast, or fearful applied to the
Woman: very fleshy, to be unapt to learn: the space from the throat boale, to
the bottom of the breast longer then from the bottom of the brest^unto the
navil of the belly, to be of a witty and good capacity, the-Paps fat and
hanging down to men, to be weak and effeminate. A big piece of flesh bearing
out of the lest side of the breast in the form of a Leekes head, or smew sprung
up, and that there be one or many ^ayres growing on it it is then an argument
if honor and riches, as Ptolomy writes: the Breast big and well fashioned to be
strong, applied to the man: the Breast large and well compact to be strong,
applied to the Lion: hairy on the Breast to be unconstant and bold, applied to
the Birds.

Of the Shoulders.
The Shoulders sharp to be deceitful: the Shoulders broad to be sirong, of
good capacity, but narrow to be a dullard the Shoulders fashioned big to be
strong; the Shoulders eviil, fashioned to be weak well compounded to be
liberal: weak compounded and bearing up thin to be a niggard.

Of the Stammack.
The Belly small to be of good capacity: such hairy from the Navil downward to
befull of words, applied to the Birds: such fat about the Stomach, to be
strong, otherwise weak: the Belly bearing out big; to be a great feeder.

Of the Back.
The Back crooked to be a niggard, ill conditioned, and equally formed to be of
a good nature; the Back narrow weak, the Back big to be strong? the Back
large, to be strong and high minded.

Of the Arms.
The Arms hairy to be unconstant, and lecherous applied to the Birds; the
Arms very long to be strong, bold, horest, and gentle; the Arms short to be a
procurer of discord and lecherous.

Of the Hands.
The Hands small to be unconstant, and wily; the Palms of the hands unto the
wrists broad and narrow upward, to be a ^^otour in his first age; the Hands
short and very big, to be rude and a dullard the Hands fatt with the fingers,
like to be a thief.

Of the Nails of the Fingers.
The Nails very short to be wicked, applied to the property; the Nails small
and crooked to be a greedy catcher, applied to the Hawke; the Nails very
little to be a craft beguiler; the white pricks of the Nails to be wealthy,
and to have many friends, the black pricks in the Nails, to be hated, applied
to the natural cause: the Nails long, smooth thin, white, ^ed^ish, clear
withal, to be witty and of a good capacity: the Nails narrow and long to be
cruel and fierce: the Nails rough and round, prone to the veneriall act,
applied to the property.

Of the Nails of the Toes.
The Nails thin and well colored, to be honest conditioned and wity; the Toes
joining close together, to be fearful, applied to the Quail: the Toes and
Nails crooked, to be unshamefast, applied to the Birds.

Of the Navel.
The stomach from the Navell to the Breast fleshey to be wicked, after Ptolemey
the same spruce, soft and well compact to be stout and high-minded. The shape
large from the bottom of the Breast to the Navell, to be dull of capacity, and a
great feeder, applied to the natural cause, the space equal, to be witty and
honest conditioned, applied to the natural cause.

Of the Ribbs,
The Ribs styled about, as they were blown up to be full of words and foolish,
applied to the Ox and Frog: the person well ribbed to be strong, applied to
the male-kind: the ribs narrow and weak compounded, to be weak, applied to the
female-kind.

Of the Loins and Hypocondria.
The Hypocondria thin and fat, to be fearful applied to the Frog: the
Hypocondria fleshey, unapt to be taught: the person well loyned, to be a lover
of the hunting of the wild Beasts, applied to the Lion and the Dog.

Of the Hanches and Hips.
The Hips well sinewed to be strong, aplpyed to the male-kind; the Hips fleshy
to be weak, applied to the woman: the bones of the Hanches bearing out-ward, to
be strong, applied to the male-kind; the bones of the hanches flender to be
fearful and weak applied to the Woman.

Of the Pecten.
The Pecten very thin of hair to be chaste, applied to the natural cause; the
Pecten very hairy to be libidinous, yet prosperous applied to the natural
cause.

Of the Buttocks.
The Buttocks dried in flesh to be evil, applied to the Ox; the Buttocks
sharp and bony to be strong, applied to the Malekind; the Buttocks fat and
fleshie, to be weak applied to the Woman.

Of the Legs.
The Legs slender to be dull of capacity yet this fails often in the learned
Student, the calves very big bearing out, to be slugish, and rude mannered; the
calves meanly big formed to be witty, and honest conditioned, the Legs big
sinewed and brawned to be strong, applied to the Male-kind; small sinewed to be
libidinous, applied to Birds, the Legs big and ill fashioned to be
unshamefast: the calves of the Legs big to be an ill-mannered person; the
calves soft to be effeminate.

Of the Knces.
The Knees bending forward to be effeminate, applied to the Woman: the Knees
fat to be fearful, yet liberal: the Knees lean to be strong and hardy: the
Knees big to be an effeminate person, applied to the excessive appearance of
them. the Knees slender to be fearful, applied to the excessive appearance of
them.

Of the Ancles.
The Ancles broad to be strong, applied to the natural cause: the parts about
the Ancles over-fleshy to be foolish, applied to the property: the heels
slender or thin to be fearful, applied to the property and condition of them:
the Ancles strong sinewed and brawned to be strong, applied to the Male-kind;
the Ancles to be much fleshy, to be weak, applied to the Woman.

Of the Feet.
The Feet thick and short to be weak, of the natural cause; the Feet slender,
short, to be wicked of the naturail cause; the Feet over long to be wily, of
the natural cause: the feet fleshey and hard, to be a dullard the feet small and
fair-formed, to be a fornicator, applied to the property of the note; the feet
much hayry to be leacherous and bold, applied to the natural cause; the feet
naked of hair to be weak of strength and courage of the natural cause; the
feet weak sinewed and brawned, to be strong, applied to the male-kind: the feet
weak sinewed and small to be effeminate, applied to the woman: the inner parts
of the soles of the feet not hollow but so filled with flesh that they make no^
hollownesse at all in the step on the ground, is noted to be crafty, applied
to the natural cause: the feet big and fleshey, to be foolish, applied to the
natural cause.

Of the Hairiness of the parts.
The back very hairy to be cruel applied to the Beasts; the neck behind hairy
to be liverall and stout applied to the Lion; the hair of the eyebrows growing
down-wards toward the nose, and spreading upward unto the temples, to be
foolish, applied to the Sow: the hayrs of the eyebrows joined together, to be
a sad person, applied to the passion; the hair of the head standing straight
up, to be fearful, applied to the passion; the hair of the head very crisped,
applied to the Moors: the hayres to be crisped at the end to be strong and
bold, applied to the Lion; the hayrs of the head plain to be simple, much hayr
of the head and thick to be evil conditioned: the Legs hayry to be venerous,
applied to the Geat; the breast and belly very hairy to be unconstant, applied
to the Birds; the shoulders hairy to be the like unconstant.

Of the Going and Moving.
The person going with the feet and knees turning in to be weak, applied to the
Woman; the sculking writhing or shringing the body hither or thither to be a
flatterer, like to the fawning Dog: leaning on the right side in the going to
be a Cynick, applied to ye excessive appearance; the eyes quick moving to be
greedy and quick catchers, applied to the Hawke; the eyes quick and often
moving with a stedinesse of the body to be witty, and of a ready understanding,
applied to the condition of the passion. The pace flow and long to be witty and
strong; the pace flow and short to be witty, yet weak: the pace long, and quick
to be long, yet foolish, the pace short, and quick to be foolish, and weak of
strength: the shoulders bending forward in going to be high minded.

Of the Personage, and Stature,
Such as are high of personage of a hot and dry quality to be witty, and ready
to conceive. Big of personage and of a cold and moist quality to be dull of
capacity, of the contrary cause. The personage evil fashioned and tall of
stature to be dull of capacity, and evil conditioned, applied to the Form.
The person of a comely Personage and mean of stature, to be witty and honest
conditioned, applied to the natural cause. Such as are of a very small
personage to be quick witted and prompt in attaining any matter, of the
natural cause. Such very big of personage of dull capacity, and thereof hardly
conceiving of the contrary cause, after Aristotle, Small of Personage, and of a
hot and dry quality choleric, to be apt, readily to conceive and to judge or
discern any matter rightly. Small of Personage and of a cold and moist
quality, to be apt to conceive and readily to discern of the contrary cause.

THE SIGNIFICATION of the Moles.
IF the Man shall have a Mole on the place right against the heart, it does
denote him undoubtedly to be wicked.

If the Woman shall have a Mole on the left Breast, then pronounce the same
Judgment as of the Man.

If a Mole shall be seen on the man's or woman's belly, does demonstrate that
he, or she, to be a great feeder or glutton.

If a Mele in either the man, or woman, shall appear on the place right
against the spleen, does signify that he or she, shall be much passionated
and oftentimes sick.

If either the man or woman, shall have a Mole on the bottom of the belly,
does argue much debility, and to be often sick.

If a Mole in either the man or the woman, shall be seen near the privy
place, denotes unspeakable desirousnesse, and unsatiate in coasting.

If a man or woman have a Mole on the 23. u 2. rpr. 2. be in 2. m it self
argues the begetting of male children, and the woman semale children.

If a Mole shall appear on that party, about the 23. u 3. rpr. be in 2. m in
the man or woman, denotes great increase of riches.

If a man shall possess a Mole on the knee, he shall then obtain a comely and
wealthy wife.

And if the woman shall have a Mole on the right knee signifies her to be
honest and virtuous: if on the lest, then she shall enjoy many children.

If a man shall have a Mole on the anckle of the ^^^t, it denotes that he
shall take upon him the woman's ^art.

If a woman have a Mole on the anckle ^^e shall take upon her the man's part.

If the man or woman shall have a Mole on the soot deroteth good luck, and
enjoyment of many children.

Likewise (this is to be learned) that the Notes or Moles seen on the right
side, either of man or woman, evermore denotes honesty and riches, but on the
left side, to be harmed with calamities and continually poor.

If a man shall have a Mole on the forehead, does vindicate, that he shall
possess much wealth and riches.

The woman having a Mole on the forehead does demonstrate, that she shall
either govern, or else come to an high dignity.

If a man shall have a Mole about the overbrow, does argue that he shall
couple, and jayne in marriage, both with an honest, wealthy and virtuous woman.

The woman having a Mole in the same place, does denote that she shall join in
marriage both with a rich, fair and comely person.

If the man shall have a Mole on the overbrow, then let such a person refrain
from marriage altogether, or all his life time: for that such a Person (if he
marry) shall have five wives in his life time.

The woman having a Mole in the like place to have so many husbands (as the man
has wives) in her life time; as Melampus writes.

If a man have a Mole on the nose somewhat ruddy, and another the like in the
privy place, does vindicate that such a person to be overmuch given to the
venerial act.

The like Mole seen either on the nose, or eye of the woman, and that she has
the like on the privy place, does signify the same that is before spoken of
the man.

If a man shall have a Mole over-thwart the nose, does denote, that he shall
wander hither, and thither, through Countries, and Cities.

A Mole the like standing on the woman's nose, does pretend that she shall
travel on foot through sundry Countries; and that she has the like Mole
besides on the privy place.

If a man have a Mole on the gullet or throat, does demonstrate, that he shall
become very rich.

If the woman have a Mole on the nether ^aw, does vindicate that she shall lead
her life in sorrow and pain of the body; because she has that within her body
which shall hinder her from the attaining and bearing of children.

If a man shall have the form of a Mole on his tongue, does demonstrate that he
shall marry with a rich and beautiful woman.

If either man or woman shall have a Mole on any of the lips, does portend that
he or she to be a great feeder, and a glutton.

If a man shall have a Mole on the chin, does argue that he shall be rich both
in the substance of money, and possessions.

The woman having a Mole in the same place, does vindicate that she shall come
to the like wealth as the man, and that she has besides the same like Mole
right alsft, or against the milt.

If a man shall have a Mole in any of the ears, does argue that he shall be
rich, and much reverenced and spoken of.

If the woman shall have the same, and that in the like place, does denote the
same good hap and fortune to her; and that besides she has the like Mole
placed on the thigh or hams.

If the man shall have a Mole on the neck, does promise that he shall become
very rich.

If the woman have a Mole in the same place, does vindicate that the like
fortune and wealth shall ensue unto her.

If the man shall have a Mole in a manner behind the neck, does demonstrate
that he shall be beheaded, except God (through earnest prayer) prevent the same.

If as well the man as the woman shall have a Mole on the loins, does
demonstrate a weak and poor kindred, and to be always needy.

If on the shoulders of the man shall be seen a Mole, does signify
Imprisonment, and sorrows of the mind.

If the man shall have (as is above said) a Mole on the throat, it does promise
that he shall marry both with a beautiful and rich woman.

If the woman shall have a Mole on the same place, does signify, that she
shall also marry both with a wealthy, and very fair, or comely man.

If either in the man's or woman's hand shall a Mole appear, does denote the
prosperous good luck, and enjoy of children.

If either the man or woman shall have a Mole on the breast, does threaten that
he or she shall be much harmed by poverty.

Hereafter follows the Wheel of Fortune, approved and confirmed by Science
and Reason of Pythagoras, the most excellent Philosopher; by which ye may know
most things that you can demand.

The Description of the Wheel of Fortune.
And to the end you may the better understand the wheel of Pythagoras, and the
resolution of the questions which you would propound, you must first choose a
number as you best fancy, so that it exceeds not 30. This done, take the number
of the day as you shall find set down, and take the number of the circle of the
wheel which is over the letters, which letters must be the beginning of your
name, then gather the numbers into one sum, which ye must divide by 30. And
what remains look in the body of the Wheel for, and if you find it in the upper
part of the wheel it will come to pass, if in the nether, the contrary.

Likewise to know if one shall enjoy their Love or no, take the number of the
first letter of your name, the number of the Planet, and of the day of the
week, all these put together, and divide them by 30. And if it be above, it
will come to your mind, and if below, to the contrary; and mind that number in
the which exceeds not 30.

Pithagoras Wheel


Gentle Reader, this is to let thee understand, that this is the true and
ancient Book of Knowledge, though now enlarged to be sixteen sheets, the
counterfeit is but ten sheets; and that you may know it the better, look in the
Title page and you shall find the date thereof, 1655.

The Chances or Demands which may be made or propounded in the Wheel of Fortune.
1. Whether you shall obtain the favor of the person you desire. 2. Whether
your Master shall attain to the preferment he desires. 3. If you shall have
the favor of a Prince as you desire. 4. If the Prince shall take the town
besieged. 5. Which of the two Princes which make war the one against the other,
shall have the victory. 6. Whether there shall be any great feat of arms done
in the camp or not. 7. If there shall be peace between two Princes. 8. If a
Captain shall be in great favor with the Lord he serves. 9. If a Captain be
valiant or not. 10. If a Horse shall win the race. 11. If a Prisoner shall come
out of prison. 12. If a sick person shall amend. 13. If the sickness shall be
long or short. 14. If the suit in Law shall be judged to your profit. 15. If
you shall have your hearts desire or not. 16. If you shall have a Child by your
wife or Lemmon. 17. If a woman with child shall have a son or daughter. 18. If
a Child shall be fortunate or unfortunate in the World. 19. If a thing stolen
will be recovered again. 20. If it shall be a plentiful year. 21. If it be good
to take a voyage in hand. 22. If it be good to occupy merchandise. 23. If it be
good to take a wife. 24. If a friends Ship shall take good effect. 25. If a man
shall be fortunate in his house. 26. If a person shall be always rich or poor.
And thus you may do of all other demands whereof you would be resolved.

And to the end you may the better understand this Wheel of Pythagoras, and
the resolucion of the demands which ye would propound, you must first of all
choose you a number what you list at your discretion, as 10.15, or 12. or any
other number more or less; this being done, take the number of the day, as you
shall hereafter find; all set in order, and then take the number which ye shall
find in the Wheel upon the first letter of your name: As for example, if your
name be Anthony, you must take A. and the number which is over it: all which
things you shall find put in order in the Wheel, and gather all those numbers
into one sum; which ye shall divide by 30. reserving the rest: As for example,
if your total number do amount unto 134. divide that by 30. and there will 14
remain, which number ye must search in the wheel, and if you find it in the
upper half, your matter shall speed well, and if it be in the nether half, it
shall be evil: and thus may you know all that you desire to know.

And if ye would know whether ye shall enjoy your love or not, take the number
of the first letter of your name, the number of the Planet, and of the day of
the week, and all these numbers ye shall put together, and then divide them by
30. as you did before, and take your remainder, and seek in the wheel, and you
shall find it; and then if it be in the upper half, you shall have your
request, and if it be in the nether part, it is contrary: And thus may you do
of all other things which you would know: you must consider that the numbers in
the Wheel pass not 30. as ye shall find them beginning with 1, 2, 3, and 4.
consequently to 30. as in the Wheel you may see.

An Alphabet to know which of the two that fight, or go to Law one against
another, shall have the Victory.
A B C D E F G H 1 3 22 24 22 3 7 6 I K L M N O P Q 20 1 10 33 13 8 13 7 R S T
V X Y Z. 13 9 8 2 6 6 4.

For to understand and practice this Alphabet rightly, you must first know the
proper names of the Parties which is to fight or go to law one against the
other, then with the same names in Latin in the nominative case singular,
observing the true Orthographie, and according to the Alphabet, join unto each
Letter of the same names the number unto him appertaining, following the
purtraicture here before written, and sum the said numbers together; that is
to say, each man by himself, and when ye bave put them all together, divide
them by 9. and that which remains on the one part and on the other, the
division being made, you shall no doubt readily find it. After this, behold the
Rules which follow, whereby you may know what shall happen to the one and the
other: And if it fortune that in the dividing the whole by 9, there remain
nothing, you must take the least number of 9. for that must then serve in this
purpose, as you shall hereafter know more at large by experience.

It does not chance once in a thousand times, that two Persons which do go to
fight, or do go to law one against the other, should be of one very name,
therefore look to know their true names: And to the end that you may the better
understand this Rule: Put the case that Peter and Paul should fight one against
the other; if you do then examine that which is said before, you shall know the
thing that shall happen; yet must you know that God is Governor and Disposer
of all things, and can change and alter them at his pleasure; but we speak
according to the influence and course of the Stars; and here

P 13 makes seven times nine. P 13 makes 4. times 9. E 22 67 A 1 37 T 8 V 2 R
13 L 10 V 2 rests 4. V 2 rests 1. S 9 S 9 Sum 67. Sum 37.

And so by this example is showed unto you the names, the numbers, and the
sums of them, with their divisions by 9. So that they being divided and
summed, there rests 4 to Peter, and 1 to Paul. The Table following shows
which of the Persons shall be Conqueror, according to the Rule going before.

1 The Conqueror is of 3 5 7 9 2 1 4 0 8 3 2 5 7 9 4 1 3 6 8 5 2 4 7 9 6 1 3 5
8 7 2 4 6 8 8 1 3 5 7 9 2 4 6 8

To know whether a Person do tell the truth, or not.
You must write his or her name in Latin, that you would prove this practice
by, and likewise the name of that day that they told you the tale, and add unto
each of those letters the number thereunto belonging, as you shall see by this
Alphabet following, and put all those numbers into one total sum, and add
thereunto 26. and then divide the whole total sum by 7. and then if the
remainder be even, the person has not told you the truth; but if it be uneven,
they have told you the truth.

A 8 C D E F G H 10 2 22 4 14 6 16 7 I K L M N O P Q 18 11 11 12 4 14 6 16 R S
T V X Y Z 8 18 10 2 2 4 14

To know whether the Husband or Wife shall die first.
To know and understand the resolution of this question, you must write the
proper names both of the Man and of the Woman in latin, and put to each letter
in them the number of it belonging, as ye found it in the Alphabet before, and
putting all these numbers into the total sum, divide them by ^. and then if the
remainder be even, the Woman shall die first, and if it be uneven the Man shall
die first.

To know if a Woman be with child, whether she shall have a Boy or a Girl.
Write the proper names of the Father and Mother, and of the Month that she
conceived with child, and adding likewise all the numbers of those letters
together, divide them by 7. and then if the remainder be even it will be a
Girl, if uneven it will be a Boy.

To know if a Child newborn, shall live or die.
Write the proper names of the Father and of the Mother, and of the day that
the Child was born, and put to each letter his number, as ye did before, and
unto the total sum being collected together put 25. and then divide the whole
total by 7. and then if the remainder be even, the Child shall die by and by:
and if it be uneven it shall live.

To know whether a Wife be honest, or dishonest.
Write the name of Wife, and of her Mother, and put the number unto each
letter, as is aforesaid, and unto the total sum put 15, and divide it by, and
then if the remainder be uneven, she is an honest Woman; but if it be even she
is dishonest.

You must always write the proper names in Latin, according to the true
Orthography.

To know what Planet has dominion in the Nativity of any Person.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 A B C D E F G H 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 I K L M N O P Q 80 90
100 200 300 400 500 R S T V X Y Z

Take the numbers of every letter of the proper names in latin of the party
you desire to know, and of his or her Father or Mother, by the Alphabet
abovesaid, then add all the said numbers into one total sum; then divide the
same by 9. and then if 1. or 4. remain, it shows the Planet to have dominion.
If 2. or 7. the. If 3. If 5.. If 6.. If 8.. If 9.. In like manner is known
under which of the twelve celestial Signs any person is born: To try the same,
sum together the Persons name, his Father and Mothers names, as aforesaid,
and divide the same total by 12. then if 1. remains, it signifies. if 2.. 3..
4.. 5.. 6.. 7.. 8. subli. 9.. 10.. 11.. and 12..

The number of the Planets, and their Characters.
55. 78. 39. 34. 45. 114. 45. Saturnus. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus Mercurius.
Luna...

The number of the days of the week.
106. 52. 52. 103. 31. 68. 45. Sunday, Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday.
Friday. Saturday........

FAIRS. The Names of the principal Fairs in England and Wales, together set
forth; with the Month, Day, and Place where they be kept, more largely then
heretofore.
Fairs in January.
THe 3 at Llanibithew, the 5 at Hicketford in Lancashire. The 6 being Twelfth
day at Salisbury, at Bristow, the 7 at Llanginnie, the 25 at Bristol, at
Churchingford, Gravesend, the 31 at Llandissel.

Fairs in February.
The 1 day at Bromley in Lancashire, the 2 at Bath, at Bicklesworth, at
Bugworth, at Faringdon, at Codlemew, Linn, Maidston, Reading, Beckles field,
the Vizes in Wiltshire, Whiteland. The 3 at Boxgrove, at Brimly, the 6 at
Stafford for six days, for all kind of Merchandise without Artests; the 8 at
Tragaron, the 9 at Landaff, the 14 at Owndle in Northamptonshire Feversham, the
24 at Baldock, Bourn, Froom, Henly upon Thames, Higham feiries, Tewksbury,
Uppingbam, Walden, the 26 at Stanford, an Horse fair.

Fairs in March.
The 1 at Langadog, Langevellah, Madrin, the 3 at Bremwelbraks in Norfolk, the
4 at Bedford, Oakham, the 8 at Tragarron, the 12 at Spaford, Stamford, Sudbury,
Wooburn, Wrexam, Bodnam, and Alsome in Norfolk, the 13 at Wye, Bodwin in
Cornwall, and Mountbowin, the 17 at Parrington, the 18 at Sturbridge, the 20 at
Alesbury, Durham, the 24 at Llanerchemith, the 25 at St. Albons, at Ashwel in
Hartfordwire, Burton, Cardigan, Cartwalden in Essex, Huntington, St. Jones in
VVorc. Malden, Malpas, Newcastle, at Northampton, at Onay in Buckinghamshire,
at Woodstock, at Witeland, at great Charte. The 30 at Malmesbury.

Fairs in April.
The 2 day at Hitchin, Northfleet, Rochford. the 3 at Leak in Staffordshire,
the 5 Walingford, 7 Darby, 9 Billingsworth, 22 at Stabford, the 23 Ampul,
Bewdley, Browton, Bristock, Bilson, Bury in Lancashire, Castlecombs, Charing,
Chichester, Engfield in Sussex, Gilford, Bishops Hatfield, Hinningham, Ipswich,
Kilborough, Lonquer, Northampton, Nutley in Sussex, St. Pombes, Sabridgeworth,
Tamworth, Wilton, Wortham, Rilborough, Harbin in Norfolk, Sapsar in
Hartfordshire. The 25 at Bourn in Lincolnshire, Buckingham, Caln in Wiltshire,
Cliffe in Sussex, Colbrook, Dunmow in Essex, Darby, Innings in Buckinghamsh.
Oakham, Uttoxiter, Winchcomb. The 26 at Tenderden in Kent, at Clete.

Fairs in May.
The 1 at Andover, Brickhil, Blackburn in Lancash. Chelmsford, Congerton in
Cheshire, Fockingham, Grighowel, Kimar, Leighton, Leicester, Litchfield if not
on Sunday, at Lexfield in Suffolk, Linfield, Latrissent, Louth, Maidston,
Ocestry in Shropsh. Perin, Philipsnorton, Ponbridge, Reading, Rippon, Stansted,
Stow the Old, Stocknailand, Tuxford in the Clay, Usk Haveril, Warwick,
Wendover, VVorseworth. The 2 at Powltheley in Carmarthenshire, the 3 at
Abergavenny, Ashborn peak, Arundel, Bramyard, Bala, Chersey near Oatlands,
Chipnam, Churchstreton in Shropsh cowbridge in Glamorganshire, Darby, Denbigh,
Elstow by Bedford, Hinningham, Me^thir, Mounton, Noncaton, Huderafield,
Ratsdale in Lancash Tidnel, Waltham Abbey, Thetford in Norfolk. The 5 at
Merchenleth in Moutgomerysh. The 6 at Almsbury, Hoy, Knighton. The 7 at Bath,
Beverley, Hanslop, Newton in Lancash. Hatesbury, Oxford, Stratford upon Avon.
The 8 at Maidston. The 10 at Ashborn in the Peak, the 11 at Dunstable, the 12
at Greys-Thorrock in Essex, the 13 at Bala in Meriton, the 15 at VVelchpool in
Mountgomery. the 16 at Llangartanagge in Cardiganshire, the 19 at Mayfield,
Odehill, Rochester, Wellow, the 20 Malmsbury, the 25 at Blackburn, the 29 at
Crambroke, the 31 at Pershore.

Fairs in June.
The 3 at Alesbury, the 9 at Maidston, the 11 at Holt, Kinwilgate in
Carmarthensh Lanibither, Lanwist, Landinalador, Maxfield, Newborough, Newcast.
in Elim, Oakham, Wellington, Newportpannel, Skipton upon Stow, Bremwel in
Norfolk. The 13 at Newton in Kedwen, Mountg. the 14 at Bangor, the 15 at Vizes,
Pershore, the ^6 at Bealth, Newport, the 17 at Hadstock, Higham ferries,
Lanigrolling, Towgreon the 19 at Bridgenorth, the 21 at Ystradmerick, the 22 at
St. Albons, Shrewsbury, Durham, Darby, the 23 at Barnet, Castle-Ebidien,
Dolgelly, 24 at Ashborn, St. Anns. Awkingborough, Bedford, Bedle, Beverley,
Bishopscastle, Boughton green, Bosworth, Brecknock, Bromsgrove, Cambridge,
Colchester, Crambrock, Croydon, Farnham, Gloucester, Halifax, Hartford, Harston,
Horsham, Hurst, Kingston, War, Kirkham Aund, Lanc Leicester, Lincoln, Ludlow,
Pemsey Preston, Reading, Rumford, Shaftsbury, Stratstock, Tunbridge,
Wakefield, VVenlock, VVestchester, Windsor, Wormster, York. The 26 at Northop,
the 27 at Burton upon Trent, Folstone, Landegain, the 28 at Hescorn,
Machenleth, St. Pombes, Royston, the 29 at Ashwel, Barkhamsted, Bennington,
Bala, B^balance, Bolton, B^omly, Buckingham, Buntingford, Cardiff, Gorgange,
Odesdon, Holdsworth, Horndon, Hudderfield, Lewer, Knotsford, Lempster, Lamorgan
Lendeber, Mansfield, Marleborough, Peterfield, Pontstephen, Sarstrange,
Sennock, Mountsorril, Mounstril, Onay, Peterborough, Southam, Stafford,
Stockworth, Sudbury, Thorrock Grayes, Upton, Tring, at Wem, Westminster,
Witney, Woolverhampton, Woodhurst, York. The 30 at Maxfield.

Fairs in July.
The 2 day at Ashton Underline, at Congerton 3 days at Huntington, at
Rickmansworth, at Smeath, at Swernsey, VVoinborn. The 3 at Haverson, the 5 at
Burton upon Trent, the 6 at Haverhull, Lambither, Llanidlas. The 7 at Albridge,
Burntwood, Chipping-norton, Castlemain, Chappelfresh, Canterbury, Denbigh,
Emlin, Haverford, Richford, Shelford, Sweacon, Tenbury, Teshavemick, Vizes,
Uppingham, 11 at Lidde, Parthey. 13 at Fodringhay. 15 Greenstead Pinchback, 17
Stevenage, Bealth, Kelmes, Leek, Llanvilling. 20 at VVinchcomb, Anferton,
Barkway, Barley, Boulton, Bowlen, Catesly, Chimmock, Coolidge, Llanibithener,
Neath, St. Margarets, Odiham, Tenbie, Usbridge, Woodstock. 21 at Bainards
castle, Battlefield, Bicklesworth, Billoricay, Redburn, Bridgenorth, Broughton,
Calne, Clitheral, Colchester. 22 at Irkleton, Keswick, Kimolton, Kingston,
Maudlen-hill, Hey, Marlborough, Newark upon Trent, Norwich, Church Ponterley,
Ridwalley, Roking, Stonistratford, Stokesbury, Turbury, VVitheral, VVithgrige,
Yadeland, Yern. 23 at Carnarvan, Cheston. 25 at Abington, Ashwel, Aldergam,
Baldock, Barkhamstead, Bilson, Bostone, Bristowre, Bristol, Bromsgrove,
Bromley, Broadeke, Buntingford, Camden, Capel Jago, Chichester, Chihol, Detby,
Doncaster, Dover, Dudley, Erith, Hatfield, St. James London; at St. James by
Northampton, Ipswich, Kingston, Lifle, Reading, Richmond in the North, at Ross,
at Safironwalden, at Shaftnal, at Skipton, at Stamford, at Stackpool, at Stone,
at Themblegreen, at Thickham, at Thrapstone, at Tilbury, Trowbridge, Walden,
VVarrington, VVetherby, VVigmore. The 28 at Ashwel, at Canterbury, at
Chappel-frith, Horsham. The 30 at Stafford.

Fairs in August.
The first day at Bath, at Bedford, at Chepstow, at Dunstable, at St. Eedes, at
Exeeter, at Feversham, at Flint, at Hay, at Horsnay, at Kaermarthen, at
Kaergwilly, at Llantrissent, at Llawiwin, at Ludford, at Loughborough, at
Malling, at Newton in Lancashire, at Newcastle upon Trent, at Northamchurch, at
Rumney, at Shrewsbury, at Selborn, at Selby, at Thraxsted, at Wisbech, at
Yellane, and also at the city of York. The fourth day at Radnor, and at Linton.
The tenth day at Abchurch, at Banbury, at Blackamore, at Bodwin, at Bra^^tford,
at Chidley, at Chidley, at Choreley, at Croyley, at Diff^ingdiwich, at
Doncaster, at Farnham, at Fodrisham, at Fulsea, at Harley, at Hawckhurst, at
Horncastle, at Hungerford, at Kellow, at Kenwilgal, at Kilgarron, at Ludlow, at
Martas, at Melton-mowbray, at Mearworth, at Newborough, at Oundle, at Rugby, at
Sedole, at Sherborn, at Toceter, at Waltham Abbey, at Walden, at Weydon, at
VVormster, at VVinstow. The fifteenth day at St. Albons, at Bolton, at
Cambridge, at Carlisle, at Cardigan, at Cisborough, at Goodhurst, at Hinckley,
at Huntington, at Laton, at Marleborough, at Newin, at Northampton, at Newport
in Monmouthshire, at Preston, at Raiardargwy, at Ross, at Stow in Lincolnsh, at
Stroud, at Swanley, at Turbury, at Wakefield, at Whitland, at Yminith. The 25
at Aberconwey, at Aborough, at Ashby-de-la-zouch, at Beggars-bush, at Bromley
Slag, at Bridgestock, at Chorley, at Croyley, at Crowland, at Dover, at
Daringdon, at Grimby, at Harewood, at Kidderminster, at London, at Mountgomery,
at Monmouth, at Nantwich, at Northallerton, at Norwich, at Orford, at Sudbury,
at Tewksbury, at Tuddington, at Watford. The 28 at Ashford, at Daintry, at
Sturbridge, at Wan, at Talisarngreen, at Welchpool. The 29 at Brecknock, at
Colby, at Carmarthen, at Kaerwis, at Okeham, at Watford.

Fairs in September.
The first day at Chappelsilvie, St. Giles, at Neath. The 7 at Ware, at
Woodburyhill. The 8 at Atherston, at Bewmaris, at Blackborn, at Brewood, at
Bury in Lancashire, at Cardigan, at Cardiffe, at Charton, at Chaulton, at
Drayton, at Drifield, at Gisborough, and at Gliborn, at Hartford, at
Huntingdon, at Llandissel, at Maldon, at Northampton, at Partney, at Reculer,
at Smeath, at Snide, at Southwark, at Sturbridge, at Temby, at Ulcester, at
Wakefield, at Waltham on the Woulds, West N^^^. at Whiteland. The 12 at
Tuxford, at Worseworth, at Woolpit. The 13 at Newtown, Redwin, Powltheley, at
Varsley. The 14. at Abergavenny, at Barsley, at Churchstretton, at
Chesterfield, at Denbigh, at Hidome, at Hesbury, at Munckton, at Newborough, at
Newport, at Penbad, at Rippon, at Richmond, at Ross, at Rockingham, at
Smalding, at Stratford upon Avon, at Waltham Abbey, at Wotten under hedge. The
15 at Raiardagwy. The 17 at Cliffe, Llanidlas. The 20 at Llanvelly, at Ruchin.
The 21 at Abergwilly, at Baldock, at Bedford, at Braintry, at Brackley, at
Maiden-pulwick, at Canterbury, at Dover, at Clapon, at Croydon, at Daintry, at
Eastred, at St. Edmondsbury: at Helmsly. at Holden; at Katherine hill, at
Knighton, at Kingston, at Ware, at Marleborough, at Malden, at Mildnal, at
Nottingham, at Peterborough, at Shrewsbury, at Stratford, at Vizes, at
Wendover, at Witheral, at Woodstock. The 23 at Pancridge in Staffordshire. The
24 at Llanvilling, at Malton a week. The 26 at Darby. The 28 at Dolgeth, at
Kaermarthen. The 29 at Aberconwey, at St. Albons, at Ashborn Peak, at
Balmstock, at Basingstock, at Bishopstratford, at Blackburne, Besterrunningham,
at Bukland, at Burwel, Canterbury, Cehich, at Cockermouth, at Market Deeping,
at Michael Dan, at Headley, at Heay, at Higham-ferries, at Hull, at St. Ives,
at Kingston, at Killingworth, at Kingsland, at Lawenham, at Lancaster, at
Leicester, at Llanidlas, at Llanvihangel, at Llochir, at Ludlow, at Malden, at
Marchenleth, at Methir, at Newbury, at Selby, at Shelford in Bedfordshire, at
Sittingborn, at Stow Linc. at Tuddington, at Uxbridge, at Weyhill, at Weymer
seven days, at Westchester, at Witham, at Woodham-ferry.

Fairs in October.
The 1 at Banbury, at Caster. The 2 at Salisbury, The 3 at Boulton in the
Moors. The 4 at St. Michael the 6 at Havent in Hampsh Maidstone in Kent. The 7
at Bishopsstratford, at Chichester, at Hereford, at Llanibither, at
Pontstephen, at Swansey. The 9 at Ashborn Peak, at Blithe, at Devizes, at
Gainsborough, at Harborough, at Sabridgeworth at Thorrock greys. The 12 at
Bolton furnace, Llangoveth. The 13. at Aberfrow, at Charing, at Craston, at
Colchester, at Drayton, at Edmonstow, at Gravesend, at Hitchin Newp. at Hodnet,
at Leighton bussard, at Marshfield, at Newport in Munmouthshire, at Royston, at
Stopforth, at Staunton, at Tamworth, at Windsor. The 18. at Ashwell, Banbury,
Barnet. Brickhill, Bridgenorth, Bishops-hatfield, Burton upon Trent, Charleton,
Regis, Cliffe, Ely, Faringdon, Henly in Arden, Holt, Kidwelly, Isk, Low hadden,
at Marloe upon Thames, Middlewich, Newcastle, Radnor, Thirst, Tildale
Tunbridge, Uphaven, VVelling borough, VVighan, VVrigley, York. 19 at Frideswid
by Oxford. 21 at Saffronwalden, Cicetter, Coventry, Hereford, Llanibither,
Lentham, Stocksley. 23 at Bidesworth, Knotsford, Dow, Ratsdale, Preston,
VVhitchurch. 25 at Beverley. 27 at Darnton. 28 at Aberconwey, Ashby de la
zouch, Biderden. Hallaton, Hartford, Lemster, Llanedy. Newmarket, Oxford,
Preston Aund. Stanford, Talisarn green, Warwick, VVillon, Wormster. 30. at
Abermales, Chelmsford, Ruthin, Powltheley, Stocksley, Wakefield. On Martinmas
day at Darnton.

Fairs in November.
The 1 day at Bicklesworth, Castlemain, Kellome, Mountgom. Ludlow. 2 at
Belchinglic, Bishopscastle, Elsemere, Kingston upon Thames, Leek, Loughborough,
Layfield, Marfield, York. 3 at Kaermarthen. 5 at Welchpool. 6 at Andover,
Bedford, Brecknock, Hartford, Lesford, Mailing, Marton in Holderness, Newport
pond, Pembridge, Salford, Stanley, Trigney, VVellington, VVetshod. 10 at
Aberwingteen, Lenton in Nottinghamshire, 7 days at Llanibither, Rugbv,
Shifnal, Wem. 11 at Aberkennem, Boetlingham, Dover, Folkingham, Marlborough,
Monmouth, Newcastle, Emlin, Shaftsbury, Skipton in Craven, Tream, Withgrig,
York. 13 at St. Edmondsbury, Gilford in Surrey. 15 at Llanithimety,
Marchenlete, VVellington. 17 at Harlow, Hide, Lincoln, Northampton, Spalding.
19 at Horsham in Kent. 20 at St. Edmondsbury, Health, Ingarstone. 22. at
Penibont, Sawthey, 23 at Bangor, Bwelth, Carlin, Froome. K^^^scross, Ludlow,
Sandwich, Tuddington. 25 at Higham-ferries. 28 at Ashborn peak. 29 at Lawrest.
30 at Ampthill, Baldock, Bedford, York, Bewdly, Boston Mart, Bradford,
Collingborough, Cobham, Gubley, Endfield, Gargreen, Greenstead, Harley,
Kimolton, Maidenhead, Maidenbrack, Narbert, Ocestry, Peterfield, Pecores,
Preston, Rochester, Wakefield, Warington.

Fairs in December.
The ^ at Turbury 5 at Dolgeth, Newton, Puckley. 6 at Arundle, Eased, St.
Needs, Exeter, Grantham. Hendingham, Hethin, Hornsay, Norwich, Sennock,
Spalding, Woodstock. 7 at Sandhurst. 8 at Bewmaris, Clitheral, Helxome,
Kaerdigan, Kimar, Leicester, Malpas, Northampton, Whitland. 21 at Hornby 22 at
Llandilavawt. 29 at Canterbury, Royston, Salisbury.

A Note of the moveable Fairs in England and Wales.
FRom Christmas till June every Wednesday at Northallerton. The 3 Mondays after
Twelfth day, at Hinckley in Leicestersh. The Tuesday after Twelfth day, at
Melton-Mowbray, and an Horse Fair at Salisbury. The Thursday after Twelfth day,
at Banbury, Littleworth; and every Thursday for 3 weeks. Friday after Twelth
day, at Litchfield. On Shrove Monday at Newcastle under Line. On Ash Wednesday
at Abington, Cardain in Glocestershire, Cicester, Dunstable, Eaton by Windsor,
Exeter, Folkingham, Leichfield, Royston, Tamworth, Tunbridge. On the first
Thursday in Lent, at Banbury. On the first Monday in Lent, at Chesay,
Chichester, Winchester. On the first Tuesday in Lent at Bedford. On the fourth
Monday in Lent at Odiham, Saffron-Walden, Stanford. On Friday and Saturday
before the fifth Sunday in Lent, at Hartford. On the Monday before the
Annunciation, at Denbigh, Kendal, Wisbich. On the fifth Monday in Lent, at
Grantham, Helxome in Sussex, Salisbury, Sudbury. On Wednesday before
Palm Sunday, at Drayton. On Thurs. before Palm Sunday, at Llandissel. On
Palm Sunday Eve, at Alesbury, Leicester, Newport, Pomfract, Skipton, Wisbich.
On Palm-Monday, at Billingsworth, Kendal, Llandanren, Worcester, On Wednesday
before Easter, at Kacrling, Llanguilling. On Maundy-Thursday, at Kettering,
Sudminster. On Good Friday at Acton-Burnel, Amphil, Bishops-castle, Brenton,
Bury, Charing, Engfield, Gilford, Hinningham, Ipswich, Lonquer, Meliain,
Nutley, St. Pombes, Risborough, Rothecum. On Tuesday in Easter week, at Brails,
Daintry, Hitchin, Northfleet, Rochford, Sanbich, Ashby-de-lazouch. On Monday in
Easter week, at Gainsborough a Mart, Onay, Dryfield. On Wednesday in Easter
week, at Wellingborough, Beverley, Redburn. On Friday in Easter week, at Darby.
On Saturday, at Skipton. On Monday after Low-Sunday, at Bicklesworth, Evesham,
Newcastle. On the third Monday after Easter, at Lowth. In Rogation week, at
Beverley, Enfield, Rech. On Ascension Eve, at Abargely, Darking. On Ascension
day, at Bewmorris, Bishop-Stratford, Bradstead, Brunningham, Bridge-North,
Burton, Chapel Frith, Chapel Kinon, Eccleshal, Eggestrew, Hallaton,
Kidderminster, Lutterworth, Middlewich, Newcastle, Rippon, Ross, Stapport,
Sudminster, Vizes, Wigam. Yaun. On the Monday after Ascension day, at
Thraxstead, Bursington. Wednesday after Ascension, at Shrewsbury. Friday after
Ascension, at Ruthin. On Whitson Eve, at New-Inne, Skipton in Craven, Wisbitch.
On Whitson Monday, at Grib, Kirby-Steven, Lenhim, Ratsdale, Rie-hill,
Salisbury, Agmondsham, Amerson, Appleby, Bicklesworth, Bradford, Bromyard,
Burton, Chichester, Cocker mouth, Darrington, Evesham, Exceter, Harts-green,
St. Ives, Linton, Owndle, Rigate, Shelford, Sitting-born, Sleeford, Mitliome,
Whit-Church, Darrington in the North, Dryfield, Stockheer. On Whitson Tuesday,
at Ashby, Canterbury, Daintry, Elsemere, Epping, Farringdon, High-Knotsford,
Laiton-Buzzard, Jews, Longuer, Long-Milford, Llanimthevery, Melton-Mowbray,
Midhurst, Monmouth, Perith, Rochiford, Oringstock. On Wednesday, at Llanbedder,
Llandeby, Leek, Newark upon Trent, Pontsteven, Royston, Lanbar. On Thursday at
Cukefield, Kingston. On Friday at Cockshal, Darby, Stew in Guellin. On Trinity
Eve at Pomfret, Rowel, Skipton. On Trinity Monday, at St. Mary-Awk, Kendal,
Heunslow, Southcave, Stokelly, Briswel, Raily, Spisby, Watford, Tunbridge,
Vizes. On Tuesday at Abergavenny, Radnor. On Wednesday at Aberfrow. On Corpus
Christiday at St. Anns, Banbury. Bishop-stratford, Brimmingham, Carewid,
Egglesrew, Hallaton, Halig, Kidderminster, Llanwist, Lannimerchemeth, Neath,
Newport, Prescor, St. Eedes, Stamford, Stopport, Newbury, Hempsted, Ross. On
Friday after at Coventry, Chepstow. On Monday after at Belton, Stamford. Monday
after the 3 d. of July at Haveril. On Sunday fortnight after Midsummer, at
Fodringhay. On Monday before S. Bartholomew at Sanbitch. On Monday after St.
Michael, at Falsely, St. Faiths by Norwich, St. Michaels. On Tuesday at
Salisbury. On Thursday at Banbury, Monday fortnight after Whits. at Darnton;
and so every Mond. fortnight until Christmas. A fair at Burnham-westgate in
Norfolk, Lamas Eve, and five days after.

An Advertisement of Books.
THe works of W. Fenner, B. of Divinity. A heavenly Treatise of the Divine Love
of Christ, by J. Preston, D. D.

Plenitudo Fontis; or, Christ's fullness and Man's emptiness, by the same Author.

Two Treatises, viz. the Christian Freedom, and the Deformed form of a formal
Profession.

The Christian freedom; or, the Character of the Gospel; showing the privilege
and prerogative of the Saints by virtue of the Covenant.

The Life and Death of Dr. Martin Luther, the passages whereof have been taken
out of his own and other Godly and most Learned men's writings, who lived in his
time.

Justice justified; or the Judges Commission opened: in two Assize Sermons,
Preached before the Judges of Assize.

The best Name on earth: together with several other Sermons lately preached at
St. Brides, and in other places, by Tho. Fuller, D. D.

Notes upon Jonah, by Thomas Fuller.

Triana: or a threefold Romanza of Mariana, Paduana, Sabina.

Ornitho-logie; or the speech of Birds. Also the speech of Flowers; partly
Moral, partly Mystical.

The most glorious Star; or Celestial constellation of the Pleiades, or
Charles Wane.

Divine Meditations.

A continuation of the History of Argalus and Parthenia.

Regale Lectum miseriae; or, A Kingly Bed of Misery.

Choice forms of Prayer, by several Reverend and Godly Divines.

A brief instruction concerning the Holy Sacraments.

Dives and Lazarus, or rather Devilish Dives.

The Highway to Happiness.

The Christian Sword and Buckler.

A Dream of the Devil and Dives.

A Censure of that Reverend and Learned man of God, Mr. John Cotton, lately of
New England, upon the way of Mr. Henden of Bennenden in Kent.

The wonderful and most deplorable History of the later times of the Jews, and
of the City of Jerusalem.

The pleasant history of the Gentle Craft, showing what famous men have been
Shoo-makers.

Directions for Writing: set forth for the benefit of poor Scholars, where the
Master has not time to set Copies.

A Manual of most experienced, excellent, and profitable secrets belonging to
Physic and Chyrurgery; for all those Diseases that are most predominant and
dangerous (curable by Art) in the Body of Man.

Markhams Method; or Epitome.

The Art of Courtship, by which Young Ladies, Gentlemen, and Forreiners, may be
fitted with all variety of elegant Epistles, witty Dialogues, eloquent
Expressions, complemental Ceremonies, amorous Answers, (...) guage, suitable to
every occasion.

The Rape of Lucrece, committed by Tarqu^^ the sixth, and the remarkable
judgments that befell him for it.

The History of the Golden Eagle; being both delightful and profitable.

The Miller and King; or the merry Progress and Hunting of King Henry the 2 d.
in the Forest of Sherwood in Nottinghamshire; with the pleasant pastime and
merry conferences with the Miller of Mansfield and his Son.

The Book of merry Riddles.

The Parliament of Pismires; or a most dilightful History of the famous
Clothier of England, called Jack of Newbury: in the days of King Henry the
8th. how he was beloved of his Mistress above all her wealthy Suitors; what
great and valiant things he did for England, and the great number of Poor he
daily cherished.

The second part of Argalus and Parthenia, by John Quarles Gent.

The judgment of the Urine and Poulse, with the Physicians help attending the
Chyrurgeons Sanctuary for such accidents as endanger life.

Reader, be pleased to take notice, That this Book of Knowledge, having been
several times Printed with much approbation; It is now Reprinted with very
much Addition (...) nothing of the old omitted: It is (...) (...) for^^^
surther Addition or alteration is and he expected.

Likewise there is another Book lately Print^^ed, entitled, The pleasant
History of Thomas of Reading; or, The six worthy Yeoman of the West, corrected
and enlarged.

The Government of Cattle.

Gentle Reader, I desire thee to take notice, that there is a piece of Poetry
lately published, called Dimagoras, written by Mr. Quarles, which I need not
stand to commend, in respect that the Author is sufficiently well known to the
World.

There is another excellent Book lately extant, called, The Art of Courtship,
which before was never Printed; it has passed the perusal of many iugenious
Gentlemen, who are pleased to afford it that commendations, which indeed it
justly deserves.

There is a Picture of King CHARLES the Second on Horseback, with Armor, Drums,
Trophies, etc. the likest Picture yet extant.

All to be sold by John Stafford, in George-Yard, near Fleet-Bridge, London.

with a^. lognes, el^

FINIS.

