JULY 18. 1642.

A perfect Diurnall OF All the proceedings of the English and Scotch Armies IN
IRELAND, From the 14 of June to this present.

Sent over from Master Godwin, Master of the Ordnance in the English Army, TO A
Merchant now dwelling in LONDON.

London, Printed for Jo. Raworth. 1642.

A perfect Diurnall of all the proceedings of the English and Scotch Armies in
IRELAND, From the Fourteenth of June, to this present.
TUesday the Army marched forth, being about 5500 horse and foot, and 8 Field
Pieces, under the conduct of the Lord Lieutenant General, with a design of
supply to relieve the Lord President of Connaught, the first night we quartered
at Pierstowne, where we had notice that Sir Richard Greenfield had besett
certain Rebels in a strong Castle, having lost many men before it, but for
want of Ordnance could not take it, whereupon was sent him 3 of our best
Field-peices for his assistance.

On Wedensday the 15, we came within 2 miles of Trym, in these two days march
we passed through an even Champion and rich soil, by many pleasant seats, too
good for so barbarons and wretched a people as inhabited it. June the 16. our
men having made a breach in the Castle, assaulted it, but found the Enemy
desperately resolute, reviling and calling them English dogs, Parliament
Rebels, Puritan rogues, and holding up some of their best apparel and linen
at their sword points, and topps of Pikes, and setting fire unto them burnt
them in our sight, saying, look you here you pillaging Rascals there is pillage
for you, and when our Gunners shot, they cried shoot home you rogues, Captain ^
grenades, part of the house took fire, which some of them seeing, resolutely
burnt their arms goods, and and fastly themselves therein, others cried for
quarter, but none being granted but to the women and children, they resolutely
defended themselves, and kept our men almost two hours at the breach at push
of pike, throwing stones, slates, and hot liquor, in great abundance on them,
spoiling many, yet our men encouraged by the example of Captain Statu^,
seconded him and ^stantly forced an entrance, killing many in the (...), and
found many that had bin killed by our shot, drawn into several corners, the
rest crying out, and begging for quarter, were brought out and stripped by our
men and immediately slain, being guessed in the total at 140 persons, besides
the women and children who had their liberty, we lost about 30 men, and many
wounded, among whom Lieutenant Colonel Kirk is chief, of whose recovery there
is great doubt; lastly, having burnt the Castle, we lest it, and on Thursday
marched through Trym a walled Town, standing preasantly on the Boyn, now
fortified by Sir Richard Greenfield the Governor; thence we marched five miles
to a strong and pleasant Town called Athboy, burnt, and forsaken by the enemy,
that might we lay about Del^in Castle, likewise forsaken by the enemy: about
this part of the country we recovered good store of cattle, and other booties.
On Saturday the 18 day, we marched to Rathconnell twelve miles; on Sunday the
19 day we marched through Mollingar, burnt and forsaken by the enemy, in it we
found beer, corn, and wool, hid under ground; this day a footman met us with a
Letter from the Lord President, that night we came to Ballimere 12 miles, 9
miles from Athlone, we found the Town and Church newly burnt, and a very strong
Fort which the enemy had made, forsaken, to our no small wonder at their
cowardice; the next day our General went to Athlone, accompanied with diverse
Commanders, taking with him a Convoy and the succors for the Lord President,
being 18 companies of foot, and one troop of horse, with two Fieldpieces, and
store of Ammunition: there met him young Sir Church Coot, whose wisdom and
courage, by Gods merciful blessing, had been the preservation of the English
in that part of the country, as his deceased Fathers industry and valor had
bin in this; great was the joy the Townsmen were in upon the arrival of our
succor. In our return another way, we found two dangerous passages fortified
and forsaken, the enemy supposing that we would have come that way from Dublin;
for though they seemed to have Intelligence of our design and forces, as they
often have had, yet they knew not but we would march the usual and direct rode
way, which if we had done, it had cost us the lives of many of our best men,
they having placed their forts and redoubts accordingly, sometimes they came
out of the Bogs, and slew the straglers in the Rear, and many of our men were
in this journey lost by marching disorderly, and straggling to pillage, the
enemy still watching his advantages. The 24. being Friday, we came to Kilcock;
12 miles from Dublin, from which place a troop being sent with some carriage to
quarter at Menooth, a mile from the army, passing through the narrow pace in
the wood, certain companies of the enemy set upon them, slew one or two men,
wounded diverse horse, put the rest to flight and took the carriage, which they
conveyed to Welshes Castle their place of retreat, where we hope shortly to
find them to their cost. The 25. we passed through Menooth, in which stood a
most stately house of the Earl of Kildares lately burnt, the Garrison placed
therein, having their Sentinel stabbed, the house betrayed by the Earls
Bailiff an Irish man, who suddenly set fire on it and let in the Enemy, but
Lieutenant Boughton with the Garrison of 34. Musketeers beat them out, and
seeing the roof falling over his head, made a desperate sally, and valiantly
retreated, maugre their continual assaults and skirmishes; to the next
Garrison 4 miles off at Leslipp, on Saturday night we arrived safely (blessed
be God) at Dublin, though the Papists there had raised reports backed with
particulars, that we were all cut off and defeated, we are preparing for
another Journey for the performance of some great design, (if want of money
here and Union in England hinder not) on which I doubt not you will pray with
us, that God will please to continue his gracious blessings, and prosper it.
Amen.

For other Intelligence there is little at present, only that Sir Francis
Hambleton and the Lady Craig having kept their castles as long as they were
able, through want of victuals and Ammunition were compelled to take quarter
of Phel. O Relly, all that were with them being about 800. Persons, being
according to the agreement safely conveyed to the next English Garrison, some
of them being arrived here.

We are sending some Culverin and other necessaries for war as is said for
Munster, but I suppose to meet our Army at Wexford; we have a report that the
Irish in the North have had a great defeat by our forces, and also in Munster,
and that the Lord of Ikerins is slain, the first is confirmed that S. Robert
Steward fought with 600 two hours and defeated them, slaying 5000. at the
least: this is now written for certain.

A Party of 1500. went hence, took in 3 Castles, slew 400. men, brought 70.
prisoners, this done chiefly by means of the Ordnance, not without the loss
of some 30. of our men. This we esteem very good service.

FINIS.

