A Treatise of the RICKETS: Being a Diseas common to CHILDREN. Wherein (among
many other things) is showed, 1. The Essence 2. The Causes 3. The Signs 4. The
Remedies
of the Diseas.

Published in Latin by Francis Glisson, George Bate, And, Ahasuerus Regemorter;
Doctors in Physic, and Fellows of the College of Physicians at London.

Translated into English by Phil. Armin.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1651.

The Preface to the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
BEfore the space of five years, we have mutually communicated by written
Papers something concerning this Affect in private meetings (which some of us
Physicians use sometimes to have for Exercise-sake in the works of Art) When
these things had opened a way in some sort to the deeper enquiry and search
after the condition and cure of this Diseas; We thought it might prove a very
succesful undertaking to recall those Papers once again to a Review; and (those
things being called out which might be best accommodated to this use) to
prepare a perfect Tractate of this Diseas. That Care by common suffrage was
entrusted to Dr Glisson, Dr Bate, and Dr Regemorter, who purposed at first to
divide this business among themselves according to the parts of the future
Tractate, and to assign to each one his proper task. But when Dr Glisson in the
judgment of the rest had accuratly interweaved his part (which comprehended the
finding out of the Essence of this Diseas) and in that had propounded many
things different from the common Opinion of Physicians (though perhaps the less
different from the truth) we altered our Resolution, and committed the first
Stuff of the whole Work to be woven by him alone, lest at length the parts
should arise deformed, misshapen and heterogeneous to themselves. He accepted the
offer, but with this condition, that whilst he was employed in beautifying and
adorning this part, the other two should often hold consultation with him, and
confer unto the Wouf their Covenanants of free commerce by their own
observations concerning this Affect, and that those things which should be
delineated and shaped by his labor and study, should presently undergo the
examination and judgment of the rest, as if they had been fashioned by their
hands. And so at the length we have brought this Work (such as it is) to
perfection, and have offered it to the public view, being by no means moved
thereunto by an itch of writing (which is the Epidemical ill custom of this age)
but by this Consideration only, That because we are not born for our selves, we
might make these (such as they are) common, which in some measure may advance
the health of Infancy and tender age (in which for the present a great part of
Mankind, but for the future all Mankind is comprehended) and likewise propagate
an Encreas unto Learning: with this hope also, That by this Example we may
invite the Wits of other most learned men to make inquisition into the Essences
of Diseases and their Causes, and to examine these our Labors that posterity may
enjoy them yet more perfect. But the obscure Essence of this Diseas, and this
our daring to tread in unbeaten paths (were we silent) might obtain a pardon,
and modestly challenge a candid interpretation for all defects, lapses, and
errors in these our Endeavors. Finally, expect no flashes of Rhetoric and
Courtly-Language; Nobis non licet esse tam dicertis,
Musas qui colimus severiores.


And indeed the condition of the matter forbids all such Painting; in such a
manner, Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri.


Farewell (kind Reader) and peruse them as we dedicate them, that is, with an
ingenious and candid mind.

F. G. G. B. A. R.


The Names of those Doctors who by written Papers contributed their
Observations to our first Exercise upon this Affect.

Dr Francis Glisson. Dr T. Sheafe. Dr G. Bate. Dr A. Regemorter. Dr R. Wright,
dead. Dr N. Paget. Dr J. Goddard. Dr E. Trench.
Fellows of the College of Physicians at London.

The Names of several Books printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the
Printing-Press in Cornhil, by the Exchange, LONDON.
Three several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 A PHYSICAL DIRECTORY: Or a Translation of the Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen 's Method
of Physic. 2 A DIRECTORY for Midwives; or a Guide for Women. 3 An EPHEMERIS
for the year 1651. Amplified with Rational Predictions from the Book of the
Creatures. 1 Of the State of the Year. 2 What may probably be the effects of
the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, July 9. 1650. in Scotland, Holland,
Zealand, York, Amsterdam, etc. and about what time they may probably happen. To
which is joined, An Astrologo-Physical Discourse of the Humane Virtues in the
Body of Man.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex. An Exposition on the
Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward. Seven Books of Mr. Jeremiah
Buroughs lately published; As also the Texts of Scripture upon which they are
grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed,
1. What Contentment is, 2. It is an holy Art and Mystery, 3. The Excellencies
of it, 4. The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of
it. 2 Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1. The right manner of
the Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving
the Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is
showed, 1. That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3. And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those Men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 3. 20. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is, 2 The great
Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is joined,
A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on
Phil. 3. 20. An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters
of the Prophecy of Hosea. An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth
Chapters of Hosea. An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
Chapters of Hosea.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The great Gospel-Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly-Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of his People undar Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, The Overflowings of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith, through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual-Life, and In-Being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9. A Vindication of
Ordinances. 10 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 11 The Saints Hiding Place in time
of Gods Anger. 12 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight.
Six Sermons, Preached by Dr. Hill, collected into on^ Volumn. Dr Sibbs on the
Philippians. The Best and Worst Magistrate, by Obadiah Sedgwick^ The Craft and
Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries, b^ Matthew Newcomin. A sacred Panygrick,
by Stephen Marshal. Barriffs Military Discipline. Dr Ponnet's Treatise of
Politic Power. The Immortality of Man's Soul. The Anatomist Anamized.
Cum multis aliis --

A Treatise of the RICKETS.
CHAP. I. The Antiquity and first Origin of this Disease, the Name of it, and
the Derivation of the Name.
THAT some new Diseases altogether unknown to the Ancients, have, for some Ages
lately past invaded diverse parts of Europe, is a known and undoubted truth
(whether we attribute it to the vicissitude of things, or impute it to the Sins
and Impieties of men, and their corrupt manners) as the French Pox, the Scurvy,
the A most loathsome and horrible Disease in the Hair, unbeard of in former
times, bred by modern luxury and excess: It seizes specially upon Women; and
by reason of a viscous venomous humor, glues together (as it were) the hair of
the head with a prodigious ugly folding and entanglement: sometimes taking the
form of a great Snake, sometimes of many little serpents: full of nastiness,
vermin, and noisome smell: And that which is most to be admired, and never eye
saw before, pricked with a needle, they yield bloody drops. And at the first
spreading of this dreadful Disease in Poland, all that cut off this horrible
and snakie hair, lost their eyes, or the humor falling down upon other part of
the body, tortured them extremely It began first, not many years ago, in
Poland: It is now entered into many parts of Germany H Saxo* Professor of
Physic in Padua.
Plica, and the like; in which number this very affect we are now about to
handle may be justly Registered. For if we examine all the diseases of Infants and
children described either by the Ancients or Modern Writers in their Books of
the Diseases of Infants, we shall meet with none which with a sufficient
exactness does delineate the condition and Idea of this evil. For although it
may seem to hold a correspondence, or to have some affinity with a chronical
Fever, a Consumption, the extenuation or leanness of Infants, and the A
Disease in the head, coming from Rhewm.
Hydrocephalos; yet to speak truth it is an affect evidently different from them
in the Species. For you may observe many to be vehemently afflicted with this
Malady without any Feaverishdistemper, or any cause of such suspicion: in like
manner although a Consumption does freque^tly supervene upon this Disease before
the dissolution of the Patient, yet is it seldom seen to accompany the first
invasion thereof, as for the meagerness or leanness, although some parts are
perpetually observed in this affect to be made lean, yet this does not happen
in all alike, as in a right and true leanness, but you may perceave the parts
about the head and face to be in a thriving condition as to outward appearance,
and well complexioned, even to the last day of life. Finally, The Hydrocephalus
is very frequently complicated with this affect, yet we have dissected some
whose Brain has been sufficiently firm, and not over-moistned with this
superfluous humor. Some have conjectured that this Disease is an imp or fruit
of the French Pox or Scurvy, descending from the viciated Bodies of the Parents
upon the Children: For we deny not but the Parents, being infected with the
Scurvy or the venerous Pox, may propagate and bring forth an Issue, not only
affected with that Pox and Scurvy, but likewise infected with this evil, and
this even has also fallen under Observation: yet for the most part this Disease
in the propriety of its Essence, has neither affinity nor familiarity with
those affects, and besides it requires a different progress of cure; we have
sometimes likewise observed a strumatical and swelling Malady to be complicated
with this; but we have also many times beheld this to be well distinguished
from that, and that from this.

But why do we dwell so long upon this inquisition? seeing that he, who will
accurately contemplate the signs of this affect, as in their due places they
shall be propounded, may most easily persuade himself, That this is absolutely a
new Disease, and never described by any of the Ancient or Modern Writers in
their practical Books which are extant at this day, of the Diseases of Infants.

But this Disease became first known (as near as we could gather from the
Relation of others after a sedulous enquiry) about thirty years since in the
Counties of Dorset and Somerset, lying in the western part of England; since
which time the observation of it has been derived unto other places, as
London, Oxford, Cambridge, and almost all the Southern and Western parts of the
Kingdom: in the Nothern Counties this affect is very rarely seen, and scarcely
yet made known among the Vulgar sort of people.

The most received and ordinary Name of this Disease is, The RICKETS: But who
baptized it, and upon what occasion, or for what reason, or whether by chance
or advice it was so named, is very uncertain*

However it obtained that Name, yet in so great a variety of places through
which it has ranged, it has not to this day been known by any other
Denomination.

But it is an accident well worth our admiration, That this Disease being new,
and not long ago nameless, at least not known by this Name, neither spreading
so much in remote as in adjacent places, yet no man hitherto could be found
out, who knew, or could show, either the first Author of the Name, or the
Patient to whom the appellation of the Disease was first accommodated, or the
peculier place where it was don, or the manner how it came to be dispersed among
the common people: for the inhabitants having gotten a Name for the Disease,
receave it with acquiescence as a thing done with diligence and deliberation,
and are not at all further solicitous either about the Name, or the Author of
the Name.

But because they which are expert in the Greek and Latin tongues, may
peradventure expect a Name from us, whereof some kind of Reason maybe given, we
have made fit together diverse Names to this Disease, yet we conceave it
somewhat unnecessary to make a particular rehearsal of them in this place:
Nevertheless it may perhaps be proper and profitable to commemorate the Rules
which we propounded to our selves in the designation of the Name: The First
therefore was, That the Name should comprehend some notable condition of the
Disease. The Second was, That it should be sufficiently distinct from the Names
of other Diseases and Symptoms. The Third was, That it should be sufficiently
familiar, easy of pronounciation, acco^modated to the Memory, of no undecent
length, and not studiously, and laboriously compounded.

Whilst we bend our employments to the satisfaction of these Rules, One of us
by chance fell upon a Name which was complacenceous to himself, and afterward
pleasing to the rest; now this was (...). or indeed (...) (for that termination
is not altogether abhorrent from the common Gender) the Spinal Disease, also
(...), the disease of the Spine of the Back: For the Spine of the Back, is the
first and principal among the parts affected in this evil. Then no other Malady
or Symptom did by the prerogative of time vindicate this appellation from it;
besides the Name is familiar and easy. And finally, The English Name Rickets,
received with so great a consent of the people, does by this Name seem to be
excused, yea, justified from Barbarism. For without any wracking or convulsion
of the word, the name Rickets* may be readily deduced from the Greek word
Rachitis, or Rachites; provided, That we will but allow that consideration of
change, which in vulgar pronounciation usually happens to words transplanted
from one Language to another.

Object. You will say, That they which imposed first the English name Rickets,
were peradventure altogether unskilful in, and ignorant of the Greek tongue, or
that they never thought of the Greek word Rachites, at least understood not
that the Spine of the Back was the principal among those parts which were first
affected in this Disease?

Answer. We Answer, It concerns not us whether they were ignorant of, or
thought not upon the Greek word, or whether they did not understand the
principal part that was first affected; yet are these things freely asserted.
For we knew many at that time when the Disease did first spring up, and the
Name was imposed, indeed learned men and skilful in the Greek tongue, to have
their Residence in those places, to whom it was not perhaps any difficulty to
observe that conspicuous debility of the Spine in this affect, and thereupon
they might assign this Name unto it; although it is very possible, yea probable,
That the common people by the error of pronounciation might somewhat pervert
the Name so given, and express it, as to this day they retain it by the word
Rickets. But whether it were, or were not so, we are not at al solicitous. If
the matter were so, the imposed Name will (as is manifest) be altogether
congruous, and perhaps also at the last will most fitly correspond with it. For
suppose you should fall upon some Name, received not so much by choice as
chance, yet so fit, that a more comodious Name could scarce be devised by
council and deliberation, nor one more consonant to Reason; in such a Case,
What would you do? Would you extirpate and banish the received word, to
introduce one that was new and nothing better? This practice would usurp upon
the privilege of Conversation, and be injurous to the custom of Speaking:
Words contract a value by their use, and ought not to be denizen'd with
rashness, or innovated by timerity: Or would you not rather confirm the Name
received, yet as a new one, and from that time to be deduced from a new
Origin: for this would be at the least like a chosen Science inoculated upon a
new stock, which by reason of the affinity with the Root, would without any
difficulty receave strength and nourishment: Or if this please you not, suppose
if you please, That we now newly devised the English name of this Disease, and
deduce it from the Greek word Rachites: the English word resulting from hence
would be the Rachites: and how little is the difference between that and the
ordinary word Rickets? Certainly so little, That the vulgar pronounciation is
not wont to be greatly solicitous about so small a difference: But we trifle too
much in staying so long upon these trifles. Let the Greek Name therefore of the
Disease be nosos Rachitis, or Rachites (if the word may be allowed to be of the
common Gender) or tes Racheos; in Latin Morbus Spinali^, vel Spine Dorsi: and
by coining a Latin Substantive out of the greek Adjective Rachitis -- idis let
the ordinary English name Rickets be retained, or in stead of it, to gratify
more curious ears, you may substitute the Rachites. And thus much, if not too
much, of the Name.

CHAP. II. Anotomical Observations collected from the Dissection and Inspection
of Bodies subdued and killed by this Disease.
BEfore we attempt an enquiry into the Nature and Causes of this Disease, we
hold it convenient to premise some few certain and undoubted things, as being
obvious to the Senses, which both demonstrate the real existence of this
Disease, and may also be cast for a foundation, whereon to build the
Superstructure of our judgment and opinion concerning this new Disease. For we
would not have any man to imagine that we here treat of some Fictitious and
Imaginary Evil, much less to expect that our Opinion should be credulously
embraced without examination. But this we rather aim at, That the matter of our
Discourse to all possibility may be known and preconceived in the very
entrance, that we may confirm those things which we shall propose, by those
things that are obvious to the Senses, as occasion shall require; and that the
Reader being instructed in these, may become a competent judge of our Reasons,
and with the more facility be able to interpose his judgment concerning each of
them. We attest therefore that many of us have been present at several
Dissections of Bodies which have been separated by this Disease, and that we
will in this Chapter briefly and faithfully declare those things which we have
hitherto Observed by long experience and frequent Dissections, namely, Those
things which we have seen with our eyes, and have handled with our hands.

In the mean time Two things are here to be premonished: The former is, That
the Reader carry in his memory, That the dead Bodies which we opened were most
vehemently afflicted with this disease whilst they were animated, for they are
supposed for the most part to have yielded to the very magnitude of the
Disease, and therefore he must not expect that magnitude of the Affect or
Symptoms which we here describe, in other Bodies yet living or newly besieged.
For every Disease is moved to a Consistence, and then also Nature being
oppressed and unable to maintain the conflict grows worse and worse. The
latter is that the Reader take notice, That almost all Diseases in process of
time, do unite unto themselves other affects of a different kind, and therefore
that chronical Diseases are for the most part complicated before death: Let him
not therefore imagine that every preternatural thing that is found in dead
Bodies, though destroyed by this affect, must of necessity belong to this evil;
for perhaps it may rather have reference to some other Disea^e supervenient
upon this before death, then to this very Malady: And the truth is, Anatomists
through inadvertency, and want of due regard to this Caution, have foully ered
in their Observations, whilst they ascribe those things which concern another
Disease, to another wherewith it was complicated before the dissolution. The
best prevention therefore or rectification of this error is, Not to make a rash
judgment from the inspection of one or two bodies, but first by a reiterated
and sedulous experiment, to be able to distinguish what things perpetually
occur, what for the most part, what frequently, and what but seldom, in the
dissected bodies that have perished of the same Disease: for you must know,
That whatsoever is not perpetually conspicuous in the opened Bodies dissolved
by the same Disease, cannot appertain to the intimate and chief Essence of it:
for neither the Disease it self can have an existence being separated from its
Essence, nor the Essence being separated from the Disease. But enough of these
things; let us now proceed to the Observations themselves.

These our Anatomical Observations are distinguished into those which do
extrinsecally occur, the Body being not yet opened, and those which present
themselves only upon the Dissection of the Body.

I. These of the former kind are they which are outwardly visible upon the
first appearance of the naked dead Body. 1 An irregularity, or disproportion of
the parts; namely, The Head bigger then ordinary, and the Face fat and in good
constitution in respect of the other parts. And this indeed has appeared in all
those whom hitherto we have beheld to perish by this affect, one only excepted,
who together with this Disease had suppurated Lungs, and was pined and
disfugured with the Physic. Yet he also throughout the whole progress of the
Disease, was full faced, and had his head somewhat big; but for about fourteen
days before he Deceased, on a sudden all the fleshy parts about his head
consumed away, and his face was like the picture of Hippocrates, not without
the just wonder of all those who beheld so sudden a change. 2 The external
members, and the muscles of the whole Body were slender and extenuated, as if
they had been wasted with an Atrophy, or a Consumption. This (for so much as we
know) is perpetually observed in those that die of this Disease. 3 The whole
Skin, both the true, and also the fleshy and fattish Membrane, appears lank
and hanging, and loose like a Glove, so that you would think it would contain a
far greater quantity of flesh. 4 About the joints, especially in the wrests and
ankles certain swellings are conspicuous, which if they be opened, not in the
fleshy or membranous parts, but in the very ends of the bones, you may perceave
them to be rooted in their appendances; and if you will file away those
prominencies of the bones, you will easily perceive them to be of the same
similary substance with the other parts of the bones. 5 The articles or joints,
and the habits of all the external parts are less firm and rigid, and more
flexible then at another time they are observed to be in dead bodies; and in
particular the Neck after death is scarce stiff with cold, at least much less
then in other Carcasses. 6 The Breast is outwardly lean, and very narrow,
especially under the arms, and seems on the sides to be as it were
compressed, the That part of the breast where the ribs meet.
Stern also is somewhat pointed, like the Keel of a Ship, or the breast of a Hen.
7 The top of the ribs to which the stern is conjoined with gristles, are
knotty, like unto the joints of the Wrest and Ankles, as we have already said.
8 The Abdomen indeed outwardly in respect of the parts continent is lean, but
inwardly in respect of the parts contained it is somewhat sticking out, and
seems to be sweld, and extended. And these have been our Observations before
the opening of the bellies.
II. The Abdomen being opened, we have Noted these things: 1 The Liver, in all
that we have dissected, has exceeded in bigness, but was well colored, and
not much hardened, nor contaminated by any other remarkable vice. We desire some
bodies should here be excepted, in which other Diseases before death were
complicated with this, as in a Dropsy and an extreme Consumption we remember
to have happened. 2 The Spleen (namely so far as hitherto it has been lawful for
us to observe) for the most part is not to be contemned, whether you consider
the magnitude, the color, or the substance of it; notwithstanding we do not
deny but it may otherwise happen in regard of a complication with other
Diseases. 3 We have sometimes espied a wheyish water to have glided into the
cavity of the Abdomen, but indeed not often, nor in any great plenty. 4 The
Stomach and Guts are somewhat more infected with flatulent humors, then sound
bodies usually are, which partly may be the cause of that extension of the
hypochondriacal parts above mentioned. 5 The Mesentery is sometimes faultlesse,
and sometimes affected with glandulous excrescences bigger then ordinary, if
not with swelling bunches: But concerning the sweet-breadwe declare nothing for
a certainty; only we suspect that obstructions, if not a schirrhus, may
sometimes invade that part. But thus we delegate, to the enquiry of others. 6
The Kidneys, Ureters, and Bladder, unless there be a concomitancy of some
other Disease, are laudably sound. We observe in general of all the Bowels
contained in this Belly, that although the parts containing them, as we have
noted above, are very much extenuated and emaciated, yet are they as large and
as full, if not larger and fuller, then those seen in sound bodies, as has
been said of the Liver.
III. The Stern being withdrawn, these things have presented themselves in
the breast. 1 A certain adherence or growing to of the Lungs with the A thin
and smooth skin which cloatheth the ribs in the inner side.
Pleura which has been more or less discernable in all the Bodies which
hitherto we have cut up. Yet we suppose that this affect may happen without any
such nourishment, although in the advancement of the Disease for the most part
it comes before the Patient die. 2 The stopings or stuffings of the lungs are
no less frequent, especially in those coadhering parts. Hard humors also
engendered by a thick, viscous, and blackish blood, sometimes in one, sometimes
in many of the strings of the Lungs, yet are not these always conspicuous,
many times also Imposthums and Ulcers. 3 One amongst us does attest, That he
once saw glandulous knobs and bunches, so numerous, That they seemed to
equallize, if not exceed the magnitude of the Lungs themselves* They were
situated on both sides between the Lungs and the Mediastinum (that is the
Membrane that divides the middle belly) and were extended from the Canelbone to
the Diaphragma. 4 In the cavity of the Breast we have sometimes seen a
collection of wheyish waters, and indeed more frequently then in the cavity of
the Abdomen, but not in all. 5 One amongst us has likewise seen this affect
complicated with a great Impostume, and with the Ptysick: the Stern being
removed, all the Lungs on the left side were infected with an Impostume, and on
every side growing to the Pleura, and the humor being lightly crushed, a
copious, thick and stinking Matter of a yellowish color, flowed out through the
sharp artery into the very mouth: The outward Membrane of the Lungs whereby
they firmly adhered to the Pleura, appeared thicker then ordinary, and by the
mediation of it, the strings on that side did so grow together, that you could
scarce distinguish them ^or such: the same Membrane also, involved both the
Lungs and also the Impostume it self* which being opened the magnitude of the
Imposthume was discernable, which by the estimation of those that were present,
contained at the least two pound of water. 6 The kernel in the Canel-bone in
Childhood is always observed to be great, and perhaps greater yet in those who
have died of this Disease.
IV. The Skull being sawed through in a circular Figure, and the little cover
being removed, we have observed these things: 1 The Dura Matter has been more
firm, and adhered to the Skul in more places then is usual in men of ripe
years: perhaps the same may be observed in other Children not affected with
this evil, although, as we suppose, not in so great a manner: for certain it
is, That in new born Infants there are many and straight connexions between the
Pericranian and the Dura Matter which are afterward broken off and are scarce
discernable. 2 In some Bodies that we have dissected, between the Dura and the
Pia matter, and in the very ventricles of the Brain, we have found wheyish and
waterish humors; from whence it is manifest, That this affect is complicated
with the Hydrocephalus. 3 We have found the Brain in others that we have
opened, to be firm and inculpable, and not overflowed with any waterish
congestions. 4 Lastly, We have observed in some Bodies lately opened, That the
Carotides have exceeded their just proportion, and so also have the jugulary
Veins; but the Arteries and the Veins which are delated to the outward parts,
were of an unusual slenderness.

But whether or no this be perpetual in this affect we cannot yet witness by
an occular testimony; yet we conjecture, That it happens so perpetually, but
it came not sooner into our minds to examine it, since the beginning of our
Anatomical enquiries into this subject.





These things being premised, our next Disquisition shall be to find out the
Essence of the Disease.

CHAP. III. Certain Suppositions are proposed for the easier finding out of the
Essence of the Disease. First of the Essence of Health. Secondly of the Essence
of a Disease. Thirdly of a threefold Division of Health and Diseases. The
Explication of the third Division, and the Use of the same. The Description of
a natural Constitution, and the exaltation of it. The Fourth Supposition of the
Combination of three Constitutions in the same parts.
THat we may proceed the more distinctly and clearly in the finding out of the
Essense of this Disease, we judged it very advantageous to premise these
subsequent Suppositions:

I That the Essence of Health does consist in some Constitution of the Body
according to Nature. But seeing this is twofold in the kind, one Essential and
necessary, respecting the to esse simply, which during life continues
immovable and immutable under various affections, and is indivisible: The
other Accidental, having reference to the to been esse, which in respect of the
whole Animal, is both moveable and mutable* and has a great latitude, and can
be present or absent without the dissolution of the whole. Health consists not
in the former, but in the latter Constitution.

II. That the Essence of a Disease in like manner consists not in the
Essential Constitution: For so the dissolution of the whole would by and by
follow: But in the Accidental Constitution, namely such an one, as in respect
of the whole can be present or absent without its dissolution. We have said
(and not without reason) that this Constitution wherein Health and Sickness
are founded, is moveable and accidental in respect of the whole; for even this
also in respect of some part may be essential: as for example, a finger being
cut off, a Disease arises in the defective number of the parts, which in
respect of the whole, is founded upon an accidental Constitution; for that
finger may be present or absent without the dissolution of the whole; but in
respect of the lost member it is founded upon an Essential Constitution, for
this Disease being supposed, the Essence of that finger perishes.

III. That the Constitution wherein the Essence both of Health and Sickness
consists, admits a threefold manner of division or distinction in the method
of Discipline. The first is somewhat thick, and is resolved into parts
altogether Concrete, namely, It proceeds Kata topous, according to the
division of the parts from head to heel. The second is purely abstracted, and
searches out all the Elements of the moveable Constitution, from whence comes
the division of Diseases into similar, organical, and common; and then again
those various subdivisions into distempers, faults of figure, superficies,
cavities and passages, of magnitude, number, site and continuity. The third is
as it were a middle manner, and although it has been hitherto neglected, yet
we dare avouch, That it may have its use, and that no contemptible one, in the
handling of Diseases, and the finding out of the causes of the Disease; and it
is divided into a Constitution Natural, Vital, and Animal.

The first is proper to, and inherent in every part, absolutely competible to
it, and without any dependence upon the other parts according to the Essence of
it simply: This remains a while after death, till it be resolved by
Putrefaction, Ambustion, simple Exiccation, Mummification, Petrification, and
the like violent Causes. This Constitution in respect of its simple Essence,
does not depend upon those Members which minister an Influx, but it depends
upon them both in respect of its Conservation, and likewise of its Operation.
For the vital influx ceasing after death (which is as it were the salt and
condiment of it) quickly perishes, and as long as the creature lives, this is
variously affected by the influxes, and thereupon the actions are either
promoved or interupted.

The Second is the Vital Constitution, which is produced by that continual
influx from the heart through the arteries into the parts of the whole Body.
This also it admits degrees, and is often subject to variations more or
less, and sometimes also seems to suffer a kind of eclips, as in a swouning,
a syncope, etc. yet it persevereth from the beginning to the last period of
life (at least in its fountain, and in some other parts.

The Third is the Animal Constitution, which is derived from the Brain through
the Nerves into the Organs of Sense and Motion. This is many times totally
wanting in many parts, the life notwithstanding remaining; yea it might for a
long time together be defective in several parts, or all the parts, did not
respiration, which is absolute necessary unto life, depend upon it. These
Constitutions therefore keep such a connection between themselves, that the
second does eternally and continually presuppose the existence of the former,
and the third of the second; but there is not back again so absolute a
dependence between them, because (as we have even now said) the former can for
some time subsist without the second, and the second commonly altogether
without the third: And these three Constitutions may in most bodies be
manifestly perceived, yet we affirm not that they may be found in all. The
Natural indeed and the Vital are wanting to no part: but the Animal is
defective in the Bones (though the teeth will admit some doubt) gristles,
perhaps ligaments, and some substances as of the Liver, Spleen, etc. we assert
therefore this threefold Constitution to be in all those parts, to whom the
Natural, Vital, and Animal Faculty is communicated. For although these
Faculties as to the first act may be said to depend upon the Soul (which
relation has indeed no relation to the Medicinal art) yet in respect of the
second act they are necessarily rooted in some material Constitution of the
parts to which they belong. For whereas some say that the Vital Faculty is
derived from the Heart, and the Animal from the Brain unto the other parts,
that must not so be understood, as if the Faculties themselves in a wandering
manner were transient from part to part (for the passing of an accident from
subject to subject cannot be conceived by any understanding) but that the Vital
Faculty is derived with, and in the vital Spirit from the Heart unto the parts,
or at least is excited by some motion of the Heart and Arteries in the parts
themselves, and in like manner the Animal Faculty does descend in and with the
Animal Spirit by the Nerves, or is produced in the parts by some motion of the
Nerves in the Brain. Which way soever it comes to pass, we must needs confess
that some alteration is imprinted in the part it self receiving it either from
the said Spirits, or from their motions. Which alteration as it is here granted
to be the root of the Faculty, either Vital, or Animal in the respective parts,
so is it a moveable Constitution, because it can be variously changed,
remitted, and intended without the dissolution of the whole; and it is the
Constitution wherein either Health or Sickness may consist, seeing that
whenever alteration is deficient unto the parts wherein it ought to be, or
any other ways administered then is requisite, the action will thereupon be
unavoidably depraved; but if it be rightly performed, then sound and perfect
health is said to be present from the part of that Constitution. Considering
therefore that there are two kind of Alterations besides the natural and
inherent Constitution, one from the influx of the Heart, another from the
influx of the Brain in most parts; and seeing the said alterations, as they
themselves are more perfect or more imperfect, do render the Faculties in the
respective parts (at least as to the second act) more perfect or imperfect, and
that the actions are thereupon depraved or sound, it is necessary that this
threefold Constitution reside in most of the parts, and that the said kind of
alterations be medical constitutions whereon Health and Sickness may be
grounded.

That this Division or Distinction is not frivolous or altogether unprofitable,
appears from hence, because the practical Physicians in their Methods do
rightly admonish, that in obscure Diseases the Faculties must be accurately
observed, when their actions are seen to be depraved, which diligence may serve
as it were for a Manuduction to guide us to the Origin of the affect; now if
it be a consideration of so just importance to note the interupted Faculties in
Diseases, certainly it will be an exercise of no less moment to take
cognizance of the Constitutions themselves, upon which those Faculties have an
immediate and strict dependence.

Now least any man should conceive that there is almost a coincidence between
this third Division and the second, he may observe, if he will diligently weigh
the matter, That every member of this division does in some manner include all the members of the next precedent, namely that the natural Constitution does
comprehend primarily indeed the similar Constitution, but that secondarily and
in order to the whole creature, it contains in a sort the conformation and
continuity; in like manner that the Vital and Animal Constitution do in their
way so clearly participate of all the Members of the said Division, that to
offer proofs of it were an unnecessary undertaking: Only we desire the Reader
to take notice (which also we even now intimated) That the natural Constitution
primarily and principally has respect unto the temperament, the common
qualities, the plenty of the Spirits, and the peculiar disposition of them
(which by some are refered to the form and the whole substance) but that it
has respect unto the manner of the Organe and the continuity as it were
secondarily, and in order to the whole creature, and that it can scarce be
otherwise hurt or vitiated by them. Yet we must not deny but that the natural
Constitution is sometimes vitiated as it is merely Organical, for thus it
falls out in the obstructions of the natural passages; as for example, when a
stone is impacted or grown to hardness in the passage of the Meter or the
yard, and in the like cases: but this happens unto it especially in as much
as the passage is ordained for the use and conservation of the whole; but for
the most part the Organical vices in the natural Constitution are of less note
and consideration then the similar.

These things may suffice to be spoken in a general way of this triple
Constitution. We will now in particular speak a few things of them in few words.

The Natural Constitution which is proper unto and inherent in every part, may
be known by this description, That it is the manner of the natural Being,
settled in the parts, competible to them, in as much as they are aptly
constituted by their temperament, and common quallities, by their sufficient
portion and convenient disposition of ingenerated Spirits, and by their just
conformation and continuity, to a perfect performance of natural actions,
together with the concurrence of the Vital (and perhaps the Animal) influx.
Therefore when there is in any part a just temperament, convenient common
qualities, an exquisite proportion, and harmonious disposition of inherent
Spirits. Finally, when there is a laudable conformation and unity, and yet
notwithstanding all this, the natural action is depraved, we may well conclude
that it is not vitiated by the natural Constitution, but by reason of the
concurrent cause, namely the vital or natural influx, or of both together; for
the natural actions in creatures in regard of the union and wedlock of life,
are exalted to a more eminent condition then otherwis they would attain unto by
the natural Constitution alone. And from hence it comes to pass, That although
the natural Constitution in slain Creatures remains after death undepraved
for a while, yet the attractive and retentive Faculty, the concoction of the
aliment, and the expulsion of the exctement do altogether cease: And in
Diseases also many times the natural Constitution is at first untoucht, yet the
natural action is vitiated merely by the defect of the due concurrence of the
vital influx: after the same manner somttimes the natural and vital
Constitution being sound and healthful, yet some natural action is depraved by
reason of the defect of some animal influx and concurence: but this for the
most part happens only in the Nervous, Fibrous, and Membranous parts,
especially where they make a hollownesse, but seldom or not at all in the
substance of the parts: As in the Palsy the excrements are many times unduly
retained, by reason only of the astonishment and insensiblnesse of the guts,
the other constitutions being sound. Therefore in these cases, when some
natural action is hurt, we must not presently conclude that the natural
Constitution is first vitiated, but we must with diligence enquire out that
Constitution which is first vitiated, for that is to be looked upon as the root
and first essence of the evil; in like manner if some vital action be depraved,
we must not presently infer that the vital Constitution is primarily vitiated;
because sometimes the first Origin is more rightly deduced from the natural, or
perhaps the animal Constitution: as for example, Through the intensivenesse of
cold, a finger is mortified by inflammation: in this case it is true that the
influx of the vital blood is plainly intercepted; yet the beginning of that
interception must be sought out in the natural Constitution of that very part
so benumned: So also in a Convulsion the circulation of the blood is perhaps
something disturbed and interupted; but the first depravation must be ascribed
to the animal, not to the vital Constitution. On the contrary, in a Fever the
Head is invaded, but the source of the evil will peradventure be found out in
the vital Constitution: so perhaps the Flesh is wasted, and all the natural
Spirits are decayed; yet the root of the evil will be found out in the vital,
not in the natural Constitution: So that any Constitution of the three before
named may be in several Diseases, sometimes the first, sometimes the second,
and sometimes the third cause of vitiated actions.

Not only many other parts of the body (yea simply all the sensible) which
exhibit not an influx, neither are subservient as delatory parts, do naturally
admit this threefold Constitution, but besides also even the Heart it self, and
all the arteries, and the Brain and all the nerves, so that the Brain (excepting
the fault in its natural Constitution) may be cherished and helped by the vital
Spirit which is transmitted through the veins and the arteries, being well
affected, or vitiated and hurt if that be ill affected: And after the same
manner also may the Heart by the animal Spirit which has an influx through the
recurent nerve of the sixth pair, the arteries also by the animal influx through
the nerves by a way perhaps not yet found out: And Finally, The Nerves also by
the vital Spirit deduced through the Arteries.

CHAP. IV. That the Essence of this Disease consists not in the Animal or
Vital, but in the Natural Constitution; not as Organical, but as Similar: Three
Limitations are Propounded.
THese things being Presupposed, We shall proceed to enquir in what Constitution
of the parts the first Root or Essence of this affect is lodged. Be the first
Conclusion therefore this,

The First Root of this Affect is not in the Animal Constitution, or in that
which depends upon the Influx of the Brain into the parts. Indeed we confess
that all the nerves which without the Skul proceed from the spinal marrow, are
found to be loose and weak in this affect; yet this does not here seem to arise
from a defect of the influx of the Brain, which we thus prove, First the
loosnesse and weakness of the nerves, which comes primarily from the Brain,
is almost always consociated with somnolency and drowsinesse; but this Symptom
happens but rarely, and by accident only in this affect. Secondly, As we
remember, we never knew the Palsy, or the Apoplexy to supervene or follow upon
this Disease; but it ought necessarily so to do, and that very often (at least
in the confirmation of the Disease) if this loosnesse and weakness of the
nerves should take beginning from a defect of the influx of the Brain. Thirdly,
We have observed the Brain to be sufficiently firm and inculpable in many
dissected after death. Fourthly, For the most part those that are afflicted
with this evil are ingenious in respect of their age, which does evidently
attest the vigor and vivacity of the Brain.

The Second Conclusion. The first root of this affect is not in the Vital
Constitution, or in that which depends upon the Influx of the Heart into the
parts. An unequal distribution of blood indeed almost (if not altogether)
perpetual may be observed in this affect: nevertheless the chief reason of
this inequality must be ascribed, not to the inequasity of the influx of the
Heart or Arteries, but to the unequal reception and unaptnesse in the parts
themselves to receive it; for the Heart and the Arteries do for their part
indiscriminately or equally distribute the blood with the Spirits every way
into the parts. But if it so fall out that an Artery of some part be interupted
in his function by reason of the benumnednesse and stupefaction of that part,
or the parts adjacent, there is a necessity that the blood must be minutely
transmitted thither, and so unequally in respect of the other parts which
expeditely and aptly receave the blood. Therefore in this case this inequality
of distribution does properly and primarily depend upon a preexistent fault
without the artery pertaining to the natural Constitution of the parts.

Object. But some may Object, Although perhaps the aforesaid inequality has no
dependence upon the Heart, yet it may so happen that a weak Pulse may suffice
to distribute the blood through the lesser Circulations in the inner parts,
which nevertheless may not be altogether so sufficient to undergo that duty
through the greater Circulations in the outward parts which are more remote from
the Heart, the fountain of blood.

Answ. We Answer, That this Objection was formerly of so great importance with
one of us, that he supposed such an inequality of the vital influx did belong
to the prime Essence of this Disease, and did therefore endeavor to deduce the
reason of the first Symptoms from it. But after second thoughts, the matter
being more nearly and deeply examined, he was of Opinion, That this inequality
of the vital influx had no relation to the primary, but to the secondary
Essence of the Disease. But we return to the solution of the Argument. And
First we grant indeed that in this affect there is an unequal distribution of
the blood; and that in the internal parts and in the head it is more liberal,
in the external more sparing. Secondly we grant that the Circulation of the
blood may be kept in the inward parts, even although no Pulse apear in the
outward parts; but this happens only in a vehement either weakness or
oppression of the vital Spirits, as in a swouning, and a strong hysterical
paroxism, or fit of the Mother, in which affect some that have been accounted
for dead have been seen to revive again. Thirdly we grant that a more liberal
Circulation of the blood may be in the internal then the external parts, yea
and in some one external part more then in another, as it happens in the
inflammation of some external member.

These things being granted, we affirm, that in the first Case the inequality
of the distribution of the blood does not principally depend upon the weakness
of the Pulsifical virtue for as much as concerns the heart; and the reason
hereof is plain. For the heart, as we have already said, does emit the blood
indiscriminatly or equally, and with one continuation from it self into the
Aorta or chief artery, even at such time when as the Pulse is most weak. This
artery does exonerate or disburthen it self again with all possible expedition,
and from hence proceeds the inequality of the diffusion of the blood, as the
blood is more easily impelled from on rivelet then from another. This
inequality notwithstanding must not properly and primarily be attributed to the
heart, but to the recipient parts, and to the particular transmitting arteries.
For any primary affect of the heart is necessarily universal, and communicated
to all the parts of the body: wherefore although we grant this enequality of the
Circulation of the blood to be in the secondary Essence of this Disease, yet we
exclude it from the primary.

Moreover in the Second Case propounded, we say that there is a great disparity
between the cases of extreme necessity, and ordinary cases. Neither indeed do
we know whether in the said cases the circulation in the inward parts,
howsoever it be granted, be of any moment. And for so much as concerns the
present business, we deny any such debility of the heart in this affect, that
the Pulse should be defective in the outward parts; yea we have not observed
that any one afflicted with this Disease has been prone to fall into an extacy,
or a swouning; which would readily happen if the origin of the Disease were
rooted in the debility of the heart it self. Besides when we have seen such as
were sick in their tender age, to endure without any loss of strength sometimes
a liberal eduction or flowing forth of the blood from the opened veins of their
ears, yea and seen it sometimes reiterated with good success. Finally, When
also they have very well endured purgations, with respect had to their age, it
does not appear to us how the first root of the evil can be ascribed to the
weakness of the vital constitution.

In the Third Case it is evidently manifest that the first cause of this
unequal circulation of the blood is some disposition of an outward part, as in
an inflamed member, laboring under some private Disease, there happens a more
full and impetuous Pulse by reason of the accidental heat of the artery, infused
by the immoderation of heat which is in that outward part.

Therefore seeing that the Essence of this affect cannot be primarily rooted in
the animal nor the vital Constitution of the parts (as we have now showed) it
follows (which shall be the Third Conclusion) That the primary Essence, or
first root of this affect, consists in the proper or inherent constitution of
the parts. But because the natural Constitution (as we have said above)
consists partly in the common qualities and the temperament, and partly in a
just plenty and disposition of the inherent Spirits, and again partly in the
organical construction and continuity; our next enquiry must be to find out in
which of the prementioned constitutions it lodges, and whether it be rooted in
one alone, or in many, or in altogether. Be the Fourth Conclusion therefore
this:

This affect is not radicated in the Organical Constitution of the parts. For
although in progress of time the Organs themselves are diverse ways affected
in respect of their conformation, quantity, and site, as it is sufficiently
manifest from the increased bulk of the head, liver, etc. from the tumors of
the bones unto the wrests, the ankls and the extremities of the ribs; from
various obstructions and the extenuation of the outward parts; seeing
nevertheless that al these things depend upon a higher origin* and howsoever
also we may necessarily admit these things in a Disease confirmed, and now
variously compounded; yet in the original Essence, we presume, for the
subsequent reasons they are to be rejected.

First, Because the depravations aforesaid in the Organical parts do not appear
presently in the beginning of the Disease, but increase afterward by little
and little: And although perhaps some of these may be said from the beginning
to have taken root in the body, notwithstanding they cannot as yet be
immediately discerned by the sense, neither do they manifestly hurt any actions,
and for that reason they cannot appertain to the first Essence of the Disease.

Secondly, Because the Organical vices aforesaid are not the Causes but the
Effects rather of the chief Symptoms which from the beginning exhibit
themselves in this affect. For the augmented figure of the head, liver, etc.
the standing out of the bones, and the leanness of the external parts, are
more rightly refered to the inequality of the nourishment, then on the contrary
the inequality of the nourishment should be ascribed to them: For when one part
does excessively increase, and another is defrauded of a due and decent
augmentation, there is a necessity that a disproportionate and an unequal
nourishment must not only be present in the parts, but also have had a
preexistence in the body, whereby one part is nourished, and another neglected
beneath a mediocrity. But seeing this unequal nourishment is a depraved action,
and so a Symptom presupposing some preexistent Disease, and yet withal (as we
have said) does precede, as a cause, the organical vices aforesaid, it is
manifest that those organical vices are not the first root of this Disease. As
for the obstructions which indeed are for the most part conjoined with this
affect, yet nevertheless there is a great deal of reason to exclude them from
the first Essence of this Disease, because they neither specificate the
Disease, neither can any reason of the Symptoms be rendered from them, neither
do they perpetually besiege some certain and determinate noble part. Some man
perhaps, who has respect to the excessive magnitude of the liver, may object
that in this affect that is perpetually obstructed, and thereupon the
sanguification being vitiated the other things are preposteriously derived; but
if this swelling of the Liver did always proceed from the obstruction of it,
then a palenesse of complexion, a cachexia or indigestion, and by the advantage
of time, the Dropsy it self should necessarily and perpetually accompany this
affect: Moreover, The Liver should always be seen to be vitiated in the
color, and at the dissection hard tumors and knots should be observed in the
substance of it, especially in an inveterate affect, and that which killed the
Patient; but seeing these things do not frequently (much less perpetually)
occur in dead bodies, the augmented bulk of it must rather be refered to the
irregular nutrition: Moreover, we deny it not but that we have observed by
Anatomy in those who have perished of this Disease, obstructions, various
tumors, and knotty excrescencies in the Lungs, but we attest withal, That we
have seen some Infants, yea Boys lightly affected with this evil, in whom there
was no suspicion of vitiated Lungs, for there was no cough, no impediment of
respiration, which necessarily is an individual companion of the obstruction of
the Lungs.

Thirdly, Because a sufficient reason of all the Symptoms proper to this
Disease, may more clearly and easily be derived from other fountains, as we
shall see anon.

And thus we have sufficiently proved, That this affect in respect of the first
Essence of it, consists not in the Organical Constitution of the natural parts.
The same arguments will more effectually convince (more might be produced, but
we judge accumulations unnecessary) That this evil is not radicated in the
continuity of the natural parts, so that there needs no more words to prove it.

The Fifth Conclusion. This Disease is primarily rooted in the similary
Constitution of the natural parts: And therefore in respect of the radical
Essence thereof, it is a similary Disease. And because a similary Disease, as
such, is not perpetually Simple, but sometimes variously compounded (namely a
Distemper is either Simple, or Compound, and this becomes such, not only by the
first qualities among themselves, but perhaps by hidden qualities conjoined
together; or, which is more agreeable to our Conceptions, especially in the
present business, by a kind of sure proportion and medification of the inherent
Spirits) We judge this to be a Compound Disease, and we assert the prime and
radical Essence thereof to consist in a cold and moist Distemper, with a Defect
and stupefaction of the inherent Spirits, concurring in the inherent
constitution of the parts primarily affected. But before we proceed to an
higher Explication of this Opinion, we will premise some Limitations of it.

The First shall be this: That in this Disease, some parts of the Body are
Primarily, and others Secondarily affected: And truly, to us the External parts
seem sooner to be affected than the Brain and Bowels, as we shall declare more
at large when we come to speak of the parts affected.

The Second is this: That in those parts alone which are Primarily affected, do
labor under a notable cold Distemper with penury and stupefaction of spirits:
For the Brain perhaps and the Bowels may be moderatly hot, and sufficiently
abound with Spirits, by reason of the copious vital influx; and moisture may
exceed in them by reason of the affusion of our overplentiful aliment: but the
other External parts are always affected with a cold and moist Distemper, and
a benumedness of the natural Spirit, etc. Whereupon we assert, that in this
Disease they are primarily affected, and that they alone are the seat of the
first Essence of this Disease.

Be this the Third: All the External parts, and those first affected, do not
equally labor under a cold and moist Distemper, and with benumedness of
Spirits, etc. For the Ligaments, Tendons, and Nerves, are in their own nature
more cold, and less moist; the Muscles, or fleshy parts are rather more moist,
and less cold: the skinny parts usually retain a mediocrity, yet all the said
parts recede more or less from the natural toward a cold and moist temper. And
in like manner, although some of the said parts do require a greater plenty and
activity of Spirits than others, yet al of them a just proportion, being
observed to the plenty and activity respectively due to each of them, are
defective and destitute of that just proportion.

CHAP. V. The preposed Opinion is examined by Parts. First, That this Disease
is a cold Distemper. An Objection, and the Answer thereunto; That it is moist:
That it consists in the penury or paucity of the Spirits. An Objection, with
the Answer. Finally, That this Disease consists in the stupefaction of the
Spirits.
NOw let us more nearly examine the Opinion proposed, and assert it by parts.

First, That the parts first affected do labor under a cold distemper may be
proved. First, from the unequal and diminished nutrition of the said parts; for
as the inborn heat when it is augmented to a just proportion does very much
conduce to further the concoction of the Aliment; so if it be too remiss, it
easily retardeth and lesseneth the same.

Secondly, The same distemper is proved from the slowness and unaptness to
motion; and also from the aversation to exercise, and desire to rest. For as
the activity and agility of the Body is attributed to the Heat, so the tardity
and slothfulness of it is in great part ascribed to Cold, Namely, supposing (as
before) that this slothfulness has no dependence upon the fault of the animal
influx.

Thirdly, It is further confirmed, because this Disease many times follows
other accute Diseases, whereby they end not seldom (after the Wast or
Consumption of the Natural heat) in a cold distemper.

Besides, It also receives Chronical Diseases which extenuate the Body, and
such as in any manner are prone to leave a cold distemper behind them as
Pertinacious Obstructions, the Scurvy, Cachexy etc.

Moreover, Because it succeeds the importune suppression of Scabbedness, and
Impetiginous effects, as we have often observed, when the Scabs have newly
broken out again, and the Itch is revived, such Boys have been easily restored
to health, because by that means the Natural heat is reaugmented in the outward
Members.

Lastly, Because many times it happens after a continual use of cold, thick,
and viscous aliment, after surfeting and idleness, and the like evident causes,
either diminishing or overwhelming the Natural heat.

Fourthly, It is yet more plainly evinced, because those helps which excite,
augment, and cherish the heat in the outward parts, as various agitations,
rubbings, and anointing of the Body, do contribute a large share to the
advancement of this Cure. These things being all cast together into a heap, it
is sufficiently conspicuous that a cold distemper of the Natural constitution
of the parts first affected is contained in the primary essence of this Disease.

Object. But here we meet with a specious Objection, That a little Fever,
especially a slow one, or such as is erratical and wandering, is frequently
conjoined with this affect, which at the same time seems absolutely
inconsistent with a cool distemper. For all Fevers by all men are accounted to
be a hot distemper which is diametrically opposite to the said essence.

We Answer (that we may not here interpose any thing concerning the essence of
a Fever) we freely grant, for so much as concerns the present Question, that a
Fever is a hot distemper; but this does not chiefly consist in the Natural
constitution of the parts, but in the vital constitution, namely in the
influent heat preternaturally affected. For a Fever is not some private
Disease, but universal, and is diffused from the Heart through the Arteries in
and with the vital Spirit, be it either overheated, or otherwise viciated. For
this preternatural heat has only a respect to that inherent as a cause potent
and able variously to alter it, yet indeed by degrees and little and little.
For first the influent heat is manifestly an actual heat, but the heat of the
natural constitution is only potential: wherefore we affirm that a cold
distemper in respect of a natural and potential heat may consist with a hot
distemper in respect of an actual and influent heat. For indeed an actual heat
is not so directly averse to a cold distemper* which is so called by reason of
a defect of the potential heat, but it may (the cause persevering) consist for
a good while with it. As for example, there is an actual heat in Simple Water,
Barley Water, diverse Juleps and the like being made hot, although at the same
time they are potentially cold. So that to be actually hot, and potentially hot
differ not in the Degree, but in the Species, neither are they so directly
contrary to one another, that one must presently expel the other out of a
subject.

Moreover, Secondly, The influent hot distemper does not so much correct the
inherent cold distemper, as by accident it augmenteth it, namely by a wast and
dissipation of the Natural Spirits, wherein chiefly the natural and potential
heat resides: Just after the same manner as the actual heat introduced by the
fire diminishes the potential heat of the Wine. Whereupon any kind of Fever
supervening upon this Disease, usually brings more damage than advantage to the
sick.

Secondly, We affirm, a moist distemper to be lodged together in the parts
first affected; this is manifest from the laxity and softness of the said
parts: and this sign likewise does more strongly confirm the same thing,
because the said parts are extenuated, so that unless there were a redundancy
of moisture in them, a certain rigidity and roughness would assault the touch;
again, a cold distemper does very rarely continue long without a moist: and
lastly, things helpful and hurtful attest this truth, for drying things are
helpful, and moistning things are hurtful.

Thirdly, we affirm, That in the parts first affected there is a penury of
natural spirits. This is proved by the very same arguments which we produced to
evince it to be a cold distemper.

For first the unequal and imminute nutrition of the parts first affected does
not only argue a coldness of temper, but withal, a want of natural spirits, for
otherwise this defect of nutrition might be easily corrected. For the cause of
that coldness wherewith the defect of the spirit is conjoined, or some peccaut
humor is not impacted, is easily cashired, and sooner then is wont in this
disease, as may b^ seen in the parts grown extreme cold in the winte season;
for example sake, in the handling of snow; the parts so extremely cooled
provided that they be rightly handled, will return to their pristine temperame^t
in few hours: but where there is a distemper with the matter of it, as a case
conjoynd, or where there is a defect of the inherent spirits, such a distemper
indeed is not so soon nor so easily removed. But in the present affect we
cannot affirm that a conjoined or impacted matter of any note is (at the least
alwise) caused in the parts first affected, because they are observed to be
more withered, feeble, and extremely extenuated, and seeing this affect is very
different from Cachexia and the Virgins disease; in the which for the most
part, it is not the want of Spirits, but the conjoined matter that cherishes
the cold distemper: wherefore we may rightly infer that the pertinacity of this
evil does chiefly depend upon the defect of the natural Spirits. Secondly, The
same is proved after the same manner by the second argument before alleged
for the cold distemper, namly from sloth and aversness to exercise. For
activity has not only a dependence upon the temper, but chiefly upon the
fullness of the Spirits: as may be seen in strong and heathful men, who in
winter time, and hardest frost, are more prompt and inclinable to violent
exercises, then in summer, when the inherent Spirits are wont to be somewhat
dissolved. Thirdly, Fevers, and long extenuating diseases, as they often
introduce a cold distemper, so they evidently diminish and dissipate the
inherent Spirits. To these we ad that argument which is deduced from the
constitution of the Parents* the Parents that are more strong and lusty
(experience witnesses it) and accustomed to labor, seldom bring forth
children obnoxious to this disease: on the contrary, such as are weak, sickly,
idle, tender, delicate, very prone to immoderate, premature, or decriped
Venery, such as are troubled with a Gonorrhea, etc. for the most part beget
children subject to this affect: Namely, because the Seminary principles are
furnished only with a deficiency of Spirits. We should now proceed to the
fourth assertion, but must first remove a remora that comes in the way.

Object. For some may object. That the natural cold distemper is subordinated
to the want of Spirits, and not contradistinguished to it, as is here supposed.
For the paucity of the Spirits seems to be the very cause of the cold
distemper, and the natural heat be it more intense or more remiss, seems
respectively to follow the proportion of the natural Spirits, as being
radicated in them as their first subject.

We answer. First, That the inherent heat is indeed first grounded and
subjected in the inherent Spirits. Moreover as the inward heat is divided into
two par s, namely, the natural, and the acquired heat; so the inward Spirit
must be also conceived to be twofold, the primigenial or seminal derived from
the Parents in the seed, and the acquired Spirit contracted from a perfect
assimilation of the aliment, the former Spirit is the basis of the engrafted
natural heat, the latter of the inward acquired heat; we mean, not that these
heats and Spirits are in themselves distinct in the species* but only in their
origin and degree of perfection, which is sufficient to invest them with a
various appellation. For in nutrition the assimilation of the aliment
proceeds even to a specifical identity, and not an individual, although
sometimes, also it attaineth not the degree of original perfection. For which
cause it seemed sufficient to us to have named the implanted heat, and the
implanted Spirit, without any higher distinction; and therefore we grant that
the implanted heat is first subjected and rooted in the Spirits, and that it is
nothing else then a certain modification of the said Spirits, whereby they
being irradiated by the vital heat do delight to endeavor to diffuse themselves
and to enlarge their dominions, by attracting, retaining, assimilating the
aliments like unto themselves by severing the excrements, and lastly, by
disposing the things acquired in due places: we say, likewise that this
endeavor (wherein we place the essence of heat) by reason that it is diffusive
does somewhat dissipate and wast the implanted Spirits, which because of this
effect are vulgarly called by the name of radical moisture continually devoured
and consumed by the heat. Thus far we grant the argument: But in the second
place we affirm that the implanted heat does differ from the hot implanted
temperament; for the implanted heat is only a part of the hot implanted
temperament, for not only a Spirit, but sulphur also, and salt, or perhaps
choler, contribute their heat to the constitution of the whole hot implanted
temperament, whereof the implanted heat is only a part. Wherefore it is fasly
suggested in the propounded argument, that a plenty of Spirits is the sole
cause of a hot distemper, and a paucity of a cold distemper: for a pound of the
flesh of an infant contains more implanted Spirits then a pound of a yongmans
flesh: yet it is most evident that the temperament of a young man is far more
hot then that of an infant: a hot temperament cannot therefore depend upon the
sole plenty of the Spirits, nor a cold temperament upon a want of Spirits.
Moreover in many maladies a hot distemper is consistent with a paucity of
Spirits; as in a Hectic of the third degree; in like manner of a cold
distemper with a competent plenty of Spirits, as in the Green sickness.

We say thirdly, That a plenty or paucity of Spirits is not perpetually a
sufficient cause to determine the temperament either hot or cold; as on the
contrary, neither does a hot, nor a cold temperament certainly and necessarily
demonstrate a plenty or paucity of Spirits, as is manifest from the instance
given. So that the temperament is no sure sign of the quantity of the Spirits,
nor the quantity of the Spirits a sure sign of the temperament; and therefore
purposes not without just cause, these things come to be considered and
examined as contradistinct, if we will procure a certain and inconfused
knowledge of them.

Fourthly we answer, That although it were granted, that the implanted heat is
subjected in the implanted Spirits, yet notwithstanding that heat is not
intended nor remitted according to the sole plenty, or paucity of Spirits: for
the Spirits howsoever sufficiently copious, yet if they be too much fixed,
torpid, and as it were frozen; they exhibit not any implanted heat worthy of
consideration. As for example, the white of an egg swells with copious
Spirits, yet are they so benumbed, and the inward heat is thereupon so small,
that it obtains not the formation of a chicken, unless it be first excited by
incubation, or some such other heat; therefore we may lawfully conclude, that a
consideration from the want of Spirits is sufficiently distinct from the
consideration of a cold implanted temperament, although the objected argument
does seem to insinuate the contrary. Moreover from this fourth article of our
answer, there resulteth a fourth assertion of the essence propounded, Namely,

That beside the distemper and want of Spirits a certain benumdness of them,
must be added as a distinct part also of the essence of the disease. This
benumdness of the engraffed Spirits appears chiefly by the defective
nutrition, and aversation from exercise, which proceed not primarily (as we
have proved above) from any defect of the influx of the brain. It is also
manifest from hence, because all those things which drive out that stupefaction
of the Spirits, although they do not altogether drive it away, yet they conduce
very much to the cure of this disease; as exercises of any kind augmented by
degrees, frictions, anoyntings, etc. and things inwardly taken, of a heating,
cutting, purging, and gently opening quality. But that this benumdness is
sufficiently distinct from the want of Spirits (besides that which we have said
in the 3. article of our Answer is sufficiently manifest from hence, because an
excessive excitation, contrary to a benummednes is often conjoined with a
penury of Spirits: as it commonly falls out in a Hectic fever, in
dissolving fluxes, and the like diseases, in which howsoever there be a want of
Spirits, yet no benummedness is consociated; but on the contrary that vehement
excitation, and propensity to motion, must be restrained.

On the contrary, copious Spirits may consist with a benummedness, as in wheat
or meal. For although it may seem to have but little Spirit, because the
Spirits of it do yet lurk in their fixation, and benummedness; yet indeed the
Spirits do abound in it, and may be summoned out by a simple fermentation, and
excited to a manifestation of their activity: As strong Beer made thereof does
plainly declare. In like manner juice newly pressed out of immature grapes, is
very mild and pleasant, containing in the mean time plenty of Spirits, which
afterward the due fermentation being finished, reveal themselves in generous
wine.

Let us conclude therefore that the benummedness of the Spirits in this affect
deserves a particular and distinct consideration.

CHAP. VI. Of the Part first affected in this Disease.
WE have already propounded the first Essence of this Disease, it remains now
that we enquire after the first Subject in which that Essence is radicated.

The heart and the brain do here seem rightly to be excluded, for the reasons
before alleged, the repetition whereof for brevity sake we shall omit.

The liver and the Lungs are not as yet exempted from all suspicion of this
fault, we will therefore examine these bowels apart, and first we demand,

Whether the Liver be the subject of the first essence of this Disease?

The principal Argument is for the Affirmative, because this Disease may seem
to proceed from a vicious sanguification, the Shop and Workhouse whereof (at
least in probability) the Liver is supposed to be, but that a viciated
sanguification is the first origin of this disease seems to be made manifest
by many signs. First, because this disease for the most part follows after
many other great diseases, either acute or chronical, which in great measure
have beforehand weakened the sanguifical virtue of the Liver. Secondly, Because
this disease does not only depend upon outward, but inward causes, namely the
vicious humors. And seeing the vicious humors are generated in and with the mas
of blood in the liver, the first essence of this affect seems to be referred
hither. Thirdly, The Liver is perpetually observed to be bigger than ordinary
in this affect; which manifestly witnesses the Liver to be affected. Fourthly,
those internal Medicines which have a faculty to putrify the blood are
requisite to the cure of this disease* and being exhibited are found to be very
profitable. 5. The missian of blood from the veins of the ears (which is not
the meanest help to vanquish this affect) does more than sufficiently argue
some fault to be in the blood, which seems to be ascribed to the constitution
of the Liver, in as much as it does sanguificate. These Arguments have so far
prevailed upon some very famous Physicians, that thereupon they have attributed
the first essence of this disease to the Liver alone.

But we conceive that these things may be sufficiently answered, if we shall
first grant what can be further or what has already been rightly said
concerning this matter, and then dissolve those things which are inferred by
bad and invalid consequence.

First, Therefore we grant that the mas of blood is viciated in this affect,
and that from thence is conveied a continual ^^^^editati^^ (...) the disease.
We grant also for the present that the Liver is the Officin of sanguification:
but we deny that every viciosity of the blood does depend upon the viciated
sanguification constitution of the Liver. For first, the blood may be corrupted
by unwholsom aliment, the Liver in the mean time remaining sound, in like
manner if the first concoction in the ventricle by any cause whatsoever be
rendered imperfect; yet it cannot be fully corrected by the second concoction in
the Liver be that bowel never so sound. Besides, although the generation of
vicious blood should be solely ascribed to the Liver, yet the other parts
should necessarily concur to the conservation of that which is generated, as
the Kidneyes, the Spleen, the Pancreas, the Womb etc. yea, and it seems
undeniable, that all the parts which the blood washes in his circulation, do
variously alter it, whilst according to the capacity of the subject they
imprint their qualities in it: for they are natural agents, and act by
necessity and continually without any suspention of their actions or
intervenient pauses, unless they be estrained by some predominant power:
therefore if these be il affected, they give a greater or a less tincture of
pollution, to the blood which passes through them, as may be seen in a
contagion gotten by an external contact communicated to the inward parts.
Moreover, sometimes a great pollution from the other diseased parts is
insinuated into the blood, the liver in the interim being safe, as has been
sometimes observed in opened bodies, that have perished by a Dropsy, in whom
the Liver was found to be sufficiently sound and whole. Moreover, We grant that
the faults of the Blood do frequently derive their beginning from the
depravedness of their sanguifical constitution of the Liver, and that that
depraved* constitution is an affect of the Liver. But we deny this to be the
same Disease whereof we now treat, because it differs from it in the whole
Species. For that same depraved constitution of the Liver is alike common to
men of full age, to Boys, and Children; but this disease is solely apropriated
to boys and infants. Again, We grant that a vicious constitution of the Liver
may by generating a corrupt blood be a common cause, and foment the
augmentation of this affect: but we deny that to be the disease it self,
whereof we now speak, or any part of the first essence thereof. For it is one
thing to produce a common cause of a disease, and another thing to be of the
first essence of a disease. We deny also that to be the continent cause of this
disease, or to be a sufficient cause of it self alone, or to be always a
cause. For the vicious constitution of the Liver, of what kind soever you will
suppose it, does not produce this affect in those that are come to ripenes of
years, nor perhaps always in young boys: and this our answer in general to the
argument: we proceed now in a like method to the confirmation of it.

First, Therefore we grant that this affect does often follow other diseases be
they either acute or chronical, but not so much because they had hurt the
sanguiffical constitution of the Liver, as because they had left the outward
parts cold and benumbed the ingrafted Spirits exhausted. Although we may easily
admit the viciated liver to be able to foment the evil by reason of the
depraved sanguification.

Secondly, We grant that this affect does not only depend upon outward causes,
but also upon inward, namely the faults of the blood it self; but that all
these faults have their beginning from the Liver, that we flatly deny for the
Reasons before alleged.

Thirdly, We grant that the mole or substance of the Liver is augmented in this
affect, but we deny that to be the first essence of the Disease, for the
reasons above rehearsed, where we reject the organical vices from the primary
essence of this evil. Yet we admit this and the like diseases in a secondary
essence of this affect, as we shall see hereafter.

Fourthly, We grant that internal Medicines can both alter and purify the
blood, but in the present Affect they conduce to the cure, in this regard,
principally, because they facilitate the distribution of the blood to the
outward members, attenuating the thicker and cutting the viscous parts thereof,
and because they also do impregnate the blood, with a copious and benign
Spirit, whereupon it happens, that the implanted Spirits of the parts before
languishing, are cherished, augmented, and excited. In the mean time we
acknowledge that general benefit which accrue to the whole body, by the purging
of the blood, by siedge, vomit, urine, or any other ways of evacuation. Only
this is it which we affirm, that the more specifical part of the cure is
wrought by way of alteration with the medicines aforesaid, as we have intimated
already.

Fifthly, and lastly, We grant that the opening the veins in the ears does
somewhat attenuate the blood, and conduce to the renovation of it, as also to
the distribution of it to the external parts, and the withdrawing of it from
the internal parts oppressed with too much plenty, and in that respect very
much to advance the cure* yet we deny that it can from thence be rightly
inferred that the first Essence of the disease is radicated in the Liver. And
thus we suppose we have satisfied the reasons brought for the confirmation of
this opinion. We will now produce some arguments that seem to persuade the
contrary.

The first is this, The first Essence of a disease does Specificate the
Disease. But the vitiated sanguifical constitution (however it be conceived)
does not specificate this Disease. For seeing that this Disease does appertain
to infants only and children; it behooves them who adhere to the contrary
opinion to design some certain way of the depraved sanguifical Constitution of
the Liver, which may be proper to the tender age alone, but no depravation of
the sanguifical Constitution of the Liver can be imagined, which is not also
common to those of ripe years. If therefore the first Essence of this Disease
should consist in that, this Disease would at least sometimes be observed in
those of ripe years, which notwithstanding has never been hitherto observed.

Secondly, The subject of the first essence of a Disease is so long affected
with that Essence, as the Diseas continues. For neither can the Diseas Exist
without its Essence, neither can that Essence wander from one part to another:
If therefore the Liver be the subject of the first Essence of this Diseas, then
should it be affected thorowout the whole progress of the Diseas; which
nevertheless does not seem credible, seeing that the Livers of those who have
died of this Diseas, and have been dissected, have excepting the augmented bulk
thereof, been seen inculpable in respect of the other conditions.

Thirdly, If the Liver be the subject of the first Essence of this Diseas,
necessarily it is, that upon the daily increase of the Disease that should be
more grievously and evidently afflicted, and before death certainly it should
be marked by some manifest signs. For seeing that every Disease is contrary to
the nature of that part it besieges, and does daily more and more damnify and
empair it: And although the beginnings of Diseases are many times obscure, yet
in process of time (especially if they continue till the last day of life) they
imprint most evident marks in the parts primarily affected; so that it can
scarce be avoided, but that upon the opening of the body they will be apparent
to the first sight: although also when an enquiry is appointed into some
Chronical Diseas, by dissection of the body that perished by it, the finding of
it out be grown difficult by reason of some other intervenient Diseases, or
otherwise complicated: Yet the part first affected is ever observed to be
grievously and manifestly hurt. Seeing therefore in those whom this Diseas has
destroyed, the Liver is oftentimes sound, excepting the augmented bulk, or at
least not considerably hurt, it will be to infer, that that bowel is not the
subject of the first Essence of this Diseas.

Fourthly, If the liver were the subject of the first essence of this disease,
it should labor under a cold and moist distemper, and also under a penury and
benummedness of spirits, as is sufficiently manifest from what has already
been spoken. But in this present affect the liver does not always labor under a
cold distemper, nor with a penury and stupefaction of spirits. For in this
affect the vital blood being sparingly distributed to the outward members, it
must needs be superabundantly poured upon the bowels, especially the brain and
the liver; and seeing this blood, which is circulated through the bowels so near
the heart, is made very hot and full of spirit: as even now issuing out of the
fountain of the vital spirits, it is impossible that it should permit a cold
distemper, or any defect of spirits to be in those parts, which it waters
with so copious an afflux.

Fifthly, In this affect we often behold the face to be well colored, and the
cheeks ruddy, which can scarce happen in a cold distemper of the liver if it be
of any continuance.

Sixthly, From a bad habit of breeding blood in the liver; a sufficient reason
cannot be rendered of the symptoms proper to this affect, a Cacotrophy indeed,
or a vicious nourishment, and an Atrophy, or a defective nourishment: nay many
times and peradventure not unjustly be ascribed to the fault of the liver: but
an Alogotrophy, or a disproportional nourishment cannot immediately be referred
to that bowel, For the liver makes the blood equally and without difference,
for all the parts; neither is it liberal to our part in the dispensation of it,
and reserved to another. Moreover the debility of all the muscles, the dislike
of exercise, the affectation of rest, seems to have no correspondence with
the Liver, wherefore neither do we acknowledge the Liver to be the first seat
of this disease.

Seventhly, This disease in strong children is cured sometimes, only by
exercise, play, stirring, and rubbing of the body; by which means the heat is
summoned to the outward parts, new spirits are raised up, the stupefaction of
them is chased away, and the aliment is with a more plentiful benignity drawn
to the outward members, which benefits without doubt are more properly
accommodated to the outward parts then to the Liver.

And this question being thus solved, we proceed to the other; namely,

Whether the Lungs be the subject of the first Essence of this disease?

The symptoms which seem to persuade the affirmative, are the frequent
narrowness of the breast, the difficulty of breathing, an astma, a cough, the
inflammation of the Lungs, the hard swellings of the Lungs, the impostume in the
Lungs and the Ptisick. First, The narrowness of the breast does not presently
arise from the very beginning of the diseas, and therefore cannot be attested to
be of the first Essence of this Diseas, in like manner the difficulty of
breathing and the astma do not perpetually accompany this affect, and therefore
an indication of the part first affected cannot be borrowed from them. Thirdly,
the cough is sometimes present, sometimes absent, and is often times variously
intended and remitted, til the essence of the disease persisteth in the same
state; which also happens from very many of the aforesaid symptoms. Fourthly,
An inflammation of the Lungs does not frequently molest the patient, and when
it invadeth him, it is an acute and not a chronicle disease; as this, whereof
we now speak, so that we cannot lawfully conclude any certainty of the first
affected part from a symptom so unusual and so Fugitive. Fifthly, Hard
swellings of the Lungs, little swellings, impostumes; yea, and bunches may
precede, associate, and follow after this affect, but these diseases are
altogether of a different kind from that we now speak of; yea, and are common
as well to men of ripe years as to children, and infants: moreover the Ptysick
does not usually superveen unless after a long continuance of this affect, as
being far from the first Essence of this Diseas; and that it may manifestly
appear to be very remote from the first esteem of it, so that can confer little
or nothing to the finding out of the part affected. Moreover, those inseparable
and vulgar symptoms of this Diseas, as the impotency of the external parts to
motion, and the inequality of nutrition, can by no reason be deduced from the
affected Lungs: and therefore we cannot admit this Bowel for the first seat of
this Diseas. And thus at length we descend to point out the parts first
affected.

The special marrow issuing out of the skull does seem to deserve the first
place: The second, all the Nerves produced by it; the third all the membranous
and fibrous parts unto which those Nerves are carried along. And in these parts
we affirm the first essence of of this diseas to be rooted, neither do we think
it needful to join other parts with these. For the softness, looseness, and
Atony of the whole Spine without the Skul, of all the Nerves arising from
thence, of all the Fibers of the Universal Body, and by that means an inability
to motion, a slothfulness and affectation of rest, which bewray themselves from
the very beginning of this affect, do abundantly evince these parts to be
affected with coldness, defect and benummedness of Spirits, and from hence it
comes to pass that they are extenuated and afflicted with an incompetency of
nourishment. For they do somewhat communicate their benummedness to the tops of
the Arteries, whereupon the Flux of blood that is distributed unto them,
suffers diminution; and because they are cold and labor under a defect of
Spirits, they imperfectly concoct the affused blood, so that there is a
necessity that they must be unduly nourished and less than the other parts, and
by consequence be extenuated. Therefore we justly and deservedly ascribe the
first essence of this Diseas to those parts alone.

Yet it may be here doubted whether the bones may not also be numbered among the
parts first affected, seeing that certain tumors of the bones may be observed
presently after the first invasion of the Diseas in diverse places, but
especially in the appendancies of the Bones to the Wrests and tops of the Ribs,
where they are conjoined with the grizles of the Stern?

We answer, That indeed it cannot be denied, but that the said tumors of the
bones, both in respect of the increased greatness, and also by reason of the
viciated figure are really and truly Diseases, and therefore we grant that the
bones must be referred to the primary or secondary essence of the Diseas: but
that they do not pertain to the primary essence of the Disease is manifest from
hence, Because the said tumors of the bones depend upon the first essence of
this Diseas, and suppose the preexistence of it. For they spring from the
unequal nourishment of the parts which is a Symptom of the first essence of
this Diseas. But here the inequality of the nourishment can depend upon the
first essence of this Diseas, shall more fully be declared in its due place;
namely, where the reason of the secondary essence is to be rendered. We will
only here show that those swellings of the bones are rightly deduced from the
improportionate nourishment, to wit when in respect of the rest it is too much
augmented in the swelling parts. That is proved by this argument, Because the
protuberant part of the bones are altogether of the same Species with the other
parts of the bones; whereupon it is necessary, that they come out by the same
way of generation, by which the rest are augmented and encreas. Therefore
seeing that the other bones are augmented by nutrition, that is, by the
introsumed aliment, and the assimilation of it, certainly we must judge that
these bones also acquire their augmentation by the like reason (although
without reason, measure and proportion) You will say, That tumors are usually
generated not of an alimentory or good, but a corrupt and vicious juice. True
it is indeed that this is for the most part true, but as true it is that it is
only for the most part true. For some tumors swell from a legitimate and
alimentary juice, as caruncles or little pieces of flesh, knobbed swellings,
and perhaps some hard bunches, but even these swellings do also differ much
from the present standing out of the bones. For those tumors which we use to
call excrescences, have somewhat in them without the habit of the part and in
the whole kind beside nature: but these tumors do not grow without the habit of
the part, neither do they include or contain any other preternatural thing
beside the sole magnitude disproportionately increased, and by that means the
viciated figure of the parts. For otherwise these swellings should not be of
the same Species with the rest of the Bone, to which they are continued, but
that is repugnant to the experience of the senses.

If therefore it be granted that some tumors (even among those which are
altogether preternatural and consist without the habit of their body) are
generated of alimentary juyces, certainly much less hard is it to be understood
that these swellings of the bones are generated and formed of the legitimate
matter of the bones, by the inherent nutritive faculty. And this is clearly
confirmed by this, because the bones according to their similary nature are by
no means legitimately produced by an illegitimate matter, that is, an
indisposed and disagreable matter to the other similary bones. Ex quolibet
ligno non fit Mercurius, Every natural agent disposes the matter before it can
introduce the form. It is necessary also that the matter so disposed be
legitimate. Now the matter of the swelling bones is manifestly disposed; for
otherwise it could not actually receive the specifical form of a bone. Moreover
that these tumors of the bones are generated by the nutritive faculty is
likewise evident, because in all our body there is not any other ossifical
virtue besides that nutritive Faculty inherent in the bones themselves, because
also these tumors are generated and augmented by the introsumed aliment, and
assimilated by the bones themselves: although perhaps in respect of the whole
Bone this reception of the aliment may be unequal, and a sufficient cause of
error in the nutritive faculty, whereby one part of those Bones may be too
sparingly nourished, and another part too plentifully even to a tumor.

CHAP. VII. Of the Secondary Essence of this Diseas.
THe first and Radical Essence of this Diseas, and also the parts first
affected being explained, now in the next place the Secondary Essence; namely
that which immediately follows this Diseas, offers it self to our
examination. And here we must refresh the memory by an intimation of that
threefold Constitution already asserted, the Natural, the Vital, the Animal,
and through these particular Constitutions, shall our examination proceed. And
first we will consider the Natural Constitution. This as we have taught above
consists in the Temperament, common qualites, the plenty and disposition of
the Natural Spirits, in the Organization, and continuity: now we have already
proved, that the first Essence of this affect is radicated in the Temperament,
and in the plenty and disposition of the Natural Spirits: but the other parts
of this Constitution, to wit, the common qualities, the Organization, and the
continuity do yet remain to be examined.

By Common Qualities we understand in a manner the same which some others have
called the Modos Materiae, and others, Qualitates Secundas. Now we call them
Common, because they are not restrained to any one Element or Form; but in some
sort may expiate and range through all the Bodies, and for the most part affect
them more or less. Of this sort are density, rarity, consistence, fluidness,
tenacity, friability, laxity, tension, (or rather tensity, that the habit may
be distinguished from the action) witheredness, swelling, and stifness,
softness, hardness, smoothness, roughness. But it is not our meaning, exactly
to reckon up all and each of the Common Qualities, nor to prosecute those
already rehearsed, further then the present occasion shall require.

The Tone or Harmony of the Parts does seem to result from some Common
Qualities mutually embraced among themselves. For the Tone of the Parts
properly consists in a du tenor and mediocrity between certain opposite
Common Qualities, as between thickness and thinness, etc. But if there be a
recess or departure from the just mediocrity to either of the extremes, then
there is a necessity that the Tone must be vitiated. Two things therefore do
here seem to be enquired after concerning the Tone of the Parts; the first,
whether in this Diseas the Tone of the Parts be in any degree vitiated. The
next, Whether those faults of the Tone do belong to the secondary Essence of
the Diseas.

As concerning the first, It will be unnecessary to run through the particular
Parts of the Tone severally, it will be sufficient to examine those that seem
guilty of the suspected crime.

First, Therefore we meet with an evident looseness of the Tone in this affect:
But this looseness differs both from the infirm coherence, and likewise from
the Paralytical resolution of the Parts: for the infirm coherence or weakened
stifness of the part is easily made an occasion of the looseness, because in
such cases the Part can scarce be stretched forth; but a part may at the same
time be both loose, and likewise sufficiently stiff, as may be seen in the
strings of Instruments, which if you wind down the pins, they become loose,
although in the mean time they forgo not the tenacity of their substance. And
in dissected bodies we have frequently observed the loose parts themselves to
be sufficiently stiff; yea, and that sometimes in this affect. Wherefore this
looseness is a distinct quality from the vitiated stifness of a Part. Neither
does it less differ from that resolution of the Parts which happens in the
Paralytical Members. For the dead Palsy first consists in the depraved Animal
Constitution: But this looseness is rooted in the Natural Constitution. For here
is no Palsy present either in respect of motion, or in respect of the sense of
the Parts: Neither is the Brayn in this Diseas primarily affected, as we have
already demonstrated. Moreover that there is such an exceeding looseness of the
Parts first affected, in this Diseas is a thing so conspicuous, that we judge it
a superfluous employment to offer proof thereof. For it is obvious to the very
senses, and therefore we have listed it among the signs of the Diseas. For
whether it be a Part of the Essence or not a Part, if it be manifestly
subjected to the Senses, it acquireth the propriety of a sign in respect of the
other Parts of the Essence, which are removed from the Senses.

Secondly, In this Diseas there is not only a looseness but likewise a
witheredness, and feebleness. Now this quality comprehends somewhat more then
the mere and simple looseness; for it denotes withal a certain emptiness of the
parts, whereby they sink down of themselves. Now such an emptiness, and such a
falling down of the Parts first affected in this Diseas are so obvious to the
Senses, that there is no need of further proof.

Thirdly, A a softness also may be named in the Tone of the Parts first
affected in this Diseas. For sometimes it so falls out that there is no
coincidence between the softness and the aforesaid qualities; but that it
includes or excludes some other thing, as in a suppurated Tumor there is
softness, but without any laxity of the Tone, any emptiness or subsidence. For
in this present supposed case the softness chiefly depends upon the manner of
Termination, and the tenacity of the Part being vitiated. But in this affect
there is for the most part a coincidence with the laxity and flaccidity before
mentioned: So that it is needless to distinguish it more accurately then by the
name only.

Fourthly, There happens also another fault in the Tone of the Parts first
affected in this Diseas, and this is an extreme inward slipperiness. Some
perhaps may wonder what the meaning of these words may be, Internal lubricity.
We confess indeed that for want of words we have been constrained to join this
appellation. For when in nature such a quality as has a true existence has by
the oversight of Philosophers, and also the neglect of Grammarians wanted a
name, we have taken so much liberty to our selves, as in respect of the great
vicinity which it has with the superficial lubricity of the body to give it
the same Name, with the distinctive Epethite of Internal. In natural bodies
therefore we acknowledge a twofold lubricity; one External and Superficial which
indeed consists in the smoothness and equality of the Parts of the
Superficies, by reason whereof the Subject of it does easily slide by other
bodies which it lights upon without much attrition and resistance, Now
contrary to this lubricity, is the Superficial roughness: but these two
qualities have no reference to this place, because they are Organical, neither
do they any way belong to the Tone of the Parts. That other lubricity whereof
we began to make mention, consists in that internal, profound and similary
smoothness, and equality of the body. By reason whereof, the whole substance of
its Subject does easily slide by the other introsubient bodies without much
attrition and resistance. And to this lubricity also there is an Internal
roughness. Now that there is such an internal similary slipperiness, and such a
roughness also opposite unto it may be showed almost by innumerable instances.
For almost all mucilaginous substances are slippery, and that not only in
respect of the outward Superficies, but also inwardly, and in respect of the
universal Substance, and every particle thereof; so that, according to the
definition of a similary body, every particle, by reason of this quality is
made like unto the whole, and therefore this quality is internal, and similary,
and diffused through the whole internal substance of the Subject. In like manner
such an internal roughness may be observed in unripe fruits, extentended through
their whole substance and Internal flesh. But when they have attained to a just
ripeness then usually, in the room of that roughness there succeeds such a
slipperiness as we have now described. And here it must be observed, that if
these bodies internally slippery be besmeared or daubed upon the Superficies of
bodies otherwise rough, they bequeath a certain degree of lubricity to them,
for the time they adhere* in like manner being inwardly taken as the slippery
juyces, and mucilages of Althea, etc. They do communicate a certain lubricity
to the Internal passages of the Body; yea, and not only to the passages that
relate to the inward cavities, but also more or less to the very Similary
substance of the parts of the Body, which also the blood washes being
impregnated with that slippery juice.

But this internal lubricity is manifold: oily or fat, watrish, spiritous,
saltish, and perhaps earthy. The oily is chiefly conspicuous in the fat of
Creatures, especially such as are young, and in many expressed Oils, especially
the moister and colder, and also the temperate; as may be observed in the Oils
of Poppy Seeds, Pippin Seeds, the four greater Cold Seeds, Time Seed, and the
Oil of sweet Almonds, and the like. A watrish lubricity is in some measure
found in simple water it self, although by reason of the fluidness it is less
sensible; also this lubricity may most evidently be taken notice of in the
mucilages, etc. The Spiritous perhaps does never happen alone, but it is most
frequently mixed with the waterish, as in the sperm of almost all Creatures, and
ripe fruits. The Saltish likewise is rarely simple, although there is a man
that contendeth it is to be found in salt of Tartar. But the compound saltish
lubricity is frequently obvious, as in Soap and Salt of Tartar dissolved with
waterish and oily substances. The Earthy (even mixed) is scarce worthy of
observation, unless it be in respect that it concurreth to the thickning of
fluid bodies, as in white clayish Mud, and Fullers Earth dissolved. But in this
place we have regard chiefly to that lubricity which is waterish, as being that
alone which can be guilty of the crime in this affect we now handle,

And these things may suffice in general of the internal or similary lubricity.
The next enquiring must be whether the first affected parts of this Diseas be
affected beyond a due proportion with an internel or similary lubricity. And at
first indeed it seems very probable that there is such an extreme lubricity
in the said parts, because moisture does superabound in them, which ever
favoreth the said lubricity, be it conjoined either with heat or cold. Every
one knows that the Sperm of Creatures by how much it is moister than the
creatures produced by it, by so much also it is the more slippery: in like
manner that the young flesh of Creatures is more slippery than that of old.
Seeing therefore that humidity and lubricity of this kind are so inwardly
converted: Seeing also that in the parts first affected there is manifestly an
extreme humidity, certainly it may easily be granted that a lubricity likewise
does too much abound in the said parts. And to the production of this the
benummedness of those parts have no small share. For the Spirits when they are
in their exaltation contract a kind of acrimony and sharpness, as may be seen
by comparing Must with old Wine, or with Spirit of Wine or with Aqua vitae. For
the Spirits of Must may truly be said to be benumbed or stupefied, if they be
compared with the Spirits of old Wine; and by how much more they are stupefied,
so much more lubricity they likewise contain, and also so much the less of
sharpness and acrimony. From whence it is manifest that that benummedness and
dullness in the Spirits lodging in the first affected parts does favor that
extrem lubricity; for that dullness of the Spirits in the said parts is almost
of the same degree with the dullness of the Spirits in Must. And because the
Spirits are defective in the parts first affected, it is evident that this
lubricity is an over-watrish lubricity. Moreover, laxity, flaccidity, and
softness do also seem to conspire. For unripe fruit as they are hard, so till
they wax ripe they grow softer and softer, and withal acquire an internal
lubricity; in like manner the parts are loosned by relaxant baths, and together
they become more slippery; also slippery things taken inwardly, as the mucilage
of Althea, etc. Do not only loosen the Parts, but they also make the passages
slippery, for which case in the pains of the stone they are drank with good
juyces. Again, this lubricity of the first affected parts, seems to be much
confirmed by this, because in the dissected Bodies a manifest lubricity is
observable by the touch; and if they be squeezed a mucilaginous kind of blood,
inwardly besmearing them, is crushed out with the fingers. We say nothing of
the skin, which for the most part is slippery in this affect, and is seldom
felt to be rough to the touch: but it is worthy to be noted, that extreme
slippery Medicines either outwardly applied, or inwardly taken, do usually more
hurt then good in this Diseas. And thus we absolve the former question, of the
manner whereby the Tone of the Parts is vitiated in this Affect. The other now
presents it self to our consideration.

Whether the Tone vitiated after that manner as has been said, be a Part of
the Essence of this Diseas?

We suppose here that whatsoever is found to be vitiated in the Body, is either
a morbifical cause, or a Symptom, or the Diseas it self; and therefore this
Diseas either simple or compound, or any part of a compound, and that either
primary or secondary.

We say first, That the vitiated Tone above propounded is not properly a cause
of the Diseas. And this scarce need any proof. For the said Tone is a
preternatural Constitution, rooted in the Parts themselves, and by that reason
it is most evidently distinguished from a morbifical cause properly so called.
For although, one Diseas may be the cause of another, nevertheless even then it
is not properly called a morbifical cause, but a primary Diseas, and that other
which it produces, a a secondary affect. But every where there is a growing
together of them both into one total Diseas, the former will be the primary Part
of the Essence, and the latter the secondary part of the Essence.

Secondly, We affirm, that the described Tone of the Parts is not a mere
Symptom, for it is not under the things secured and retained, neither can it be
comprehended under any depraved action, or any changed quality, not vitiating
the action. But that the vitiated Tone is not comprehended under the things
secured and retained, nor under any depraved action, may by the same labor be
proved by this Reason, because those kind of Symptoms are not indeed
Constitutions of the body; but the said vitiated Tone without controversy is a
preternatural changed constitution, as we have already most plainly
demonstrated. Secondly, That the said Tone vitiated after that manner, is not
contained under any changed quality, not depraving the action, is so clear and
evident, that it needs no proof. For laxity and flaccidity hurts the motion
of the Parts, and an extreme lubricity is an impediment to the du quickening of
the vital Spirits, as shall hereafter be made manifest.

It may be Objected, That some bare changed qualities which are comprehended
under the Genus of Symptoms, may also vitiate an action: as the color changed
in the skin yields an unpleasant prospect to the beholder, so that it
begets deformity and defect of du comeliness?

We answer, That the changed color of the Skin in as much as it vitiateth the
beauty thereof (which is the proper action of the Skin) does in rigor (in a
large acception) fall under the Notion of a Diseas. But seeing this action of
the Skin is only Objecture and Ad extra, and seeing that altered color does hurt
no Internal action of that individual: Physicians, who in the definition of a
Diseas, have respect only to the Internal actions of that individual, do
usually exclude it from the Classis of Diseases. Or if the vitiated color of a
part do chance in some place to deprave an internal action (which is known only
to happen in the Tunicle of the Eye, called Corura) the best Physicians do ever
reckon it for a Diseas, although perhaps secondarily. But that we may return
into the way from whence we have a little erred: seeing that the vitiated Tone
may hurt, as we have said, the internal actions, it does not properly belong to
that kind of Symptom, which is wont to be called by the name of a changed
quality.

Thirdly we say, That this vitiated Tone, seeing it is neither a Morbifical
cause, nor a Symptom, and yet is something preternatural, must needs be the
Diseas it self. Moreover, the same is clearly proved by the very definition of
a Diseas. For this vitiated Tone is a preternatural Constitution, primarily or
immediately hurting the internal action; therefore it is a Diseas. For to what
the definition is competible, to that also the thing defined is competible.
That it is a preternatural Constitution is manifest by this, because it is
inherent in the solid parts of the body: that it likewise depraveth the
Internal actions, is manifest from hence, because an extreme laxity, lubricity,
and flaccidity of the parts being granted, presently the agility is weakened, no
other cause approaching, and a certain sluggishness deadeth the irritation of
the vital Spirits. In agility, the matter is plain, seeing that firm and
stretched bodies, other things being answerable are more active, and so on the
contrary: that the same thing also happens in the dullness of the irritation
shall be showed in its place, for the present we labor to prove no other thing
then that the vitiated Tone in this affect is a Diseas.

We say fourthly, That this vitiated Tone in this Diseas is not any simple
affect, having an existence apart by it self, but that it is so conjoined and
compounded in those same parts with the primary Essence, that the whole Essence
of the Diseas (whereof we dispute) may be said to consist of many Diseases
united together (in themselves indeed simple, if they be considered asunder) and
therefore that the vitiated Tone is only a part of the whole Diseas. And this
needs no other proof, then because the first Essence proposed above, and the
said vitiated Tone* are both found in those same parts. For that is properly
called a compound Diseas, which is produced by many simple Diseases conjoined
in the same Part.

Fifthly, We affirm that the vitiated Tone is not only a part of the whole
Essence, but such a part as has some dependence upon the primary Essence, and
therefore that it is a secondary part of the Essence.

Before we proceed to the proof of this Proposition two grants or concessions
are to be premised.

We grant first, That the said Tone may be even immediately vitiated in other
causes perhaps, and likewise by other causes, although that happen not in this
present Diseas. For the inherent Tone of the Parts may be primarily loosned in
the Animal Constitution, and that suddenly, as may be observed in the dead
Palsy. For the natural tensity (and not the Animal only) of the Paralytical
member is loosned, and indeed suddenly without any conspicuous intervention of
any part of the aforesaid primary Essence. After the same manner in a Lipothymy
or defection of the mind, looseness and languishing suddenly attatcheth all the
parts. Now we cannot in either of these two causes refer the cause of the
looseness to the cold and moist distemper of the natural Constitution, seeing
that cannot be so suddenly and so sensibly changed. Which let them consider
(that we may give warning of it by the way) who will have these common qualities
to be always second and dependent upon the first alone: yea, on the other side
let them in that cause observe how a cold and moist distemper does afterward
by degree, follow that looseness suddenly introduced. Again, as for the
flaccidity of the parts that may be immediately produced by large evacuations,
as a flux of the belly, sweatings, and the like immoderate vents, the
temperament being not yet considerably changed, although we deny not but this
may easily and does usually follow. Moreover an internal lubricity may be
manifestly separated from coldness, though very difficultly from moisture.

Secondly, We grant that in the present Diseas, the vitiated Tone does not in
any manner depend upon the first admitted Essence, nor that in every respect is
subordinate unto it. For first the qualities of the Tone here vitiated, do also
ow somewhat to common causes, namely to themselves, and also to those that are
common, to the first granted Essence. For extreme moistening things by one and
the same operation are apt to produce both too much moisture, and also
looseness. In like manner from violent evacuations, a want of Spirits, and
withal a witheredness does arise. Also from things too too slippery, either
outwardly administered, or inwardly tataken, or both, an internal lubricity is
augmented, together with a moist distemper. For there is so great a connection
of the whole Essence, hitherto propounded with the common causes, that there is
scarce any thing which does augment the first essence of the Diseas, but at the
same time more or less it has an influence upon the vitiated Tone.

These things bring granted, We say notwithstanding that in the present affect
there is a very great dependence of the vitiated Tone upon the first Essence of
this Diseas; for which respect alone we have here referred the vitiated Tone to
the secondary Essence. If any list to contend, That the said Tone in another
respect may relate more clearly to the Secondary Essence, because he may
imagine that the primary Essence of every Diseas is necessarily similary and
perpetually grounded upon the first qualities alone; or because he may conceive
that the qualities wherein the Tone consists are perpetually secondary, and
that they follow the first only (as the shadow does the Sun) that man may take
notice that we purposely decline such questions, least we should straggle into
an unwarrantable digression.

It remains therefore only that we prove the Dependence of the vitiated Tone
upon the first Essence of this Diseas to be very great, and that we shall do by
parts. We will begin at the laxity. We grant indeed that a laxity may be
sometimes suddenly produced, and in that cause a moist distemper may often
follow upon it, Namely, when the laxity primarily depends upon the fault
either of the Animal or Vital Constitution; but in this Diseas, seeing that
neither the Animal nor the Vital Constitution are primarily affected, there is
a necessity that it must flow from other causes. Moreover, such is the
condition of laxity and tensity, that they are obnoxious to sudden alterations.
For the strings of a Lute may almost in a moment be stretched and loosned
again; the same thing likewise from some causes befalls the Fibers of the
Parts, But in this affect the laxity steals on by degrees and slowly;
therefore necessary it is that it must begin, be ruled and moderated by some
cause leisurely and slowly augmented. Although therefore we granted even now,
that the laxity does own somewhat to the common causes of the Diseas; yet the
augmentation thereof is chiefly restrained and moderated by the primary Essence
of this Diseas. For moistning Medicines although they loosen withal, yet they
scarce loosen more than they moisten, because for the most part they loosen by
moistning. Seeing therefore that the common causes of this Diseas do flow into
the Tone, chiefly by the Mediation of the first Essence of this Diseas: And
seeing that neither the Animal nor the Vital Constitution can here supply the
virtue of a cause, we may Lawfully infer that the laxity of the Tone does
chiefly depend upon the first Essence of the Diseas. This is further confirmed,
there is of it self a certain proness and tendency of the Body to be through
wet, so that the fibers of the parts must needs be loosned by it: Moreover, the
defect of the Spirits and the stupefaction of them does cause a remission of the
Tone by diminishing the vigor of the part. Therefore we may conclude that the
Diseas, laxity principally depends upon the primary Essence of the Diseas. As
for the flaccidity because it comprehends the laxity, it springs from the
same causes as that does; but in as much as it includes also a subsidence and
a certain emptiness, it evidently depends upon the defect and benummedness of
the inherent Spirits; the plenty and vigor whereof being augmented the lank and
flagging member is easily rendered turgid and swelled. In the interim we deny
not but that that subsidence does withal depend upon the extenuation and
atrophy of the parts.

Lastly, How the slipperiness does proceed from these causes is sufficiently
manifested by what has been said above.

That we may at the length put a period to this matter, it may be observed for
the higher confirmation of those things already spoken that there is such a
strict dependence between the Tone and the first granted Essence, that
throughout the whole cure of the Diseas they are intended and remitted together
almost in equal pace. For at firstthe Children that are afflictedwith this
affect; do only go slowly and leisurely whilst the Tone of the parts is yet but
a little loosned; but in the progress they scarce and with much ado trust to
their feet, then they play only sitting or as they are carried about.
Afterward they can scarce sit upright; and at the last when the Diseas has
attained the highest exaltation, the feeble neck cannot without much difficulty
support the burden of the head; all which things as they attest the primary
Essence of the Diseas to be gradually augmented, so also they make it manifest
that the vices of the Tone are intended by an equal pace. And so all these
things being rightly weighed, we refer the viciated Tone to the secondary, not
the primary Essence of this affect, and by consequence we conclude, indeed the
thing that was in question, that that depraved Tone is a secondary part of the
Essence of this Diseas.

CHAP. VIII. The Secondary Essence of this Disease in the Vital constitution.
WE have already propounded that part of the Secondary Essence of this Diseas
which is radicated in the natural constitution, in as much as it comprehends
the common qualities; it remains now that we examine the organical vices, and
the faults of continuity, if any such be found out. But seeing that no proper
faults of continuity do accur in this affect, and seeing that the organical
vices do depend partly upon the Essence above given, and partly upon the vital
constitution being viciated, it seems necessary in the next place to search
into these faults of the vital constitution.

The vital constitution is aptly distinguished into the original, or that which
makes an influx, and the participative or that which is produced by that
influx.

The subject of the original vital constitution are the Spirits themselves
excited in the blood of the Arteries. You will say, The heart rather seems to
be the subject of this constitution. But it is not so, for the heart it self
through the coronary Arteries receives the vital Spirits brought down with the
Arterious blood from its left Ventricle. But it is absurd to suppose the walls
of the Heart to be the first subject of the vital heat, and in the mean time
for those to receiv that heat from the Arteries. We must say therefore that the
solid substance of the heart is indeed the first and principal subject of his
natural and inherent constitution; but seeing that receives the Vital Spirits
(as has been said) it cannot be accounted the first subject of the Vital
Constitution, which is imprinted in it by those Spirits, and continues no
longer than the substance of the Heart is shedded and besprinkled with the
Vital Spirits. For neither can life subsist in any place without the Vital
Spirit. Wherefore the substance of the Heart does so far participat of the Vital
constitution, as it is washed and bedewed with the Vital Spirits, and by
Consequence tha^ Constitution in the substance of the heart is not original or
influent, but participative or produced by that influx. This is also confirmed
in that, because the vital heat of the blood in the hollow Parts, or Ventricls
of the Heart (which heat is at least a part of the Vital Constitution) is for
greater and more intensiv than that which is within the walls of the Heart, as
any man may observe by the opening of the Bodies of living Creatures, the
Ventricle of the heart being wounded, and the Finger presently thrust in. For
he shall feel a far more augmented heat in the blood, than in the very
substance of the Ventricle, however it be handled. Moreover the vital
Constitution is a thing transient and consists (as the Philosophers Phras is)
in motu and fieri; therefore it is rooted. In the movable and decaying Spirits
(such as the Vitals which are contained in the Arterious Blood) for some Member
being cut off, the Life vanishes almost in a moment, and by Consequence the
vital constitution: but the natural (as we have already insinuated) continues
(though not in such an exaltation as when the Vital remains) for a while
after death. And indeed the Life and the Vital constitution is suddenly taken
away in the case aforesaid not by any positive contrary Cause, But by a mere
privation of the Conservant and Continent CAUSE. This is most evidently
confirmed, because the Vital constitution is suddenly intended, remitted and
altered in all the parts in respect of the model or measure of the Vital
Constitution, excited in the Ventricles of the Heart, so in a Lipothymy, the
heart fainting, the life of the parts presently vanishes, at last languisheth;
but as soon as the Ventricles of the heart are refreshed with Spirits by some
proper cordial applications, straight way we behold the vital Constitution to
be suddenly in some measure repaired in all the Parts. In the suppression of
the breath sudden death follows the torrent of the vital Blood from the right
to the left Ventricle being intercepted. In the opening of a Vein or in any
other immoderate profusion of Blood there happens a swouning by the sole
defect of the Vital Spirits. Therefore seeing the Vital constitution is
transient and fugitive in any of the solid parts, and seeing it depends upon
the proportion of the vital spirits flowing into them from the Ventricle of the
heart, we may rightly infer that in the solid parts, it is not original but
participative. But in the Vital Spirits themselves, by whose function the Vital
constitution is diffused and transmitted into all the Parts, it must
necessarily be original: For there is no other original subject of it to be
found in the Body.

Yet we grant that the solid substance of the heart by his Natural Constitution
(especially being watered by the Vital) is the assistant cause of the excitation
of the Vital Spirits in the blood included their Ventricles, although it cannot
be the first subject of that same Vital Constitution, as we have even now
abundantly proved. And these things for the present may suffice in general
concerning each vital constitution, the original and the participative, and to
prove that that must properly be ascribed to the Vital Spirits, this to the
solid Parts as the immediate Subjects of the inherence. Three kind of vices
belonging to this Constitution do still await our examination: The two former
whereof relate to the Original: And the third pertains to the participative
Constitution. The first vice concerns the Generation of the Vital Spirits.
The second has reference to the distribution of them: And the third
appertains to the participation of the Vital Constitution. Of these we shall
make enquiry in their order.

CHAP. IX. The vitiated Generation of the Vital Spirits in this Affect, and
whether that fault be a Part of that Secondary Essence?
THe Vital Spirits are first excited or generated within the Ventricles of the
Heart; namely, in the very mass of the Blood, and properly they discriminate
the Blood in the Arteries, from that in the veyns, after that they are
generated they are cherished and conserved within the cavities of the Arteries,
until they are distributed into the habit of the Parts. Yea, they are not only
cherished in the Arteries, but in them also rightly disposed, perhaps some new
ones are excited, though with less efficacy then in the heart.

This being Preadmonished.

We say first, That in the very Substance of the heart there does not occur any
fault repugnant to the Generation of the Vital Spirits, which properly can be a
part, even of the secondary Essence of this Diseas. For the heart it self, for
his does rightly perform his function in this Diseas: and if any imperfection
happen in the Generation of the Vital Spirits, it cannot be properly ascribed
to the heart, but to the ineptitude of the matter, to receive the form of the
Vital Spirits. As the ingested aliment if it be extremely crude, it may
frustrate the perfection of a laudable concoction, the Stomach being otherwise
sound and faultless: So the unapt and unprofitable blood exported to the
ventricles of the Heart, may render the action thereof imperfect, in respect of
the operation and effect, how sound soever it may be in it self: In which case
the ascription of the fault is usually and truly attributed to the indisposed
matter, and not to the Heart. You will reply, a Fever is sometimes complicated
with this affect, and at such time the heart does unaptly Generate the Vital
Spirits, But that Fever is a Diseas of a different kind, and by no means
either the whole or any Part of the Essence of this affect.

Secondly, We affirm that the lesser Arteries inserted into the first affected
Parts, are in some degree really cooled and benumbed by them, through their
adjacency and contact, and for that cause they do unaptly conserv the Vital
Spirits contained in them, whereupon the Vital Constitution of them is rendered
somewhat imperfect, before they can be effused into the Parts themselves. And
this fault of the little Arteries seems by very good right to be ascribed to
the Generation of the vital Spirits. For although it be not the function of the
Arteries to propogate the Vital Spirits according to the first signification of
the word; yet for this very reason, that they are obliged to conserv them when
they are propagated, namly by such a conservation as in a manner includes a
certain continuate Generation of them, their faults are rightly to be referred
to the Generation of the Vital Spirits. For the Vital Constitution is a certain
transient action (as we have showed before) which, while it lasts, is in a
continual flux and motion, and which like a flame, when the continual
fomentation and reparation of it is suspended and suppressed, suddenly
extinguished. Therefore are the Arteries as a continuate Heart to all the parts
of the body, unto which they transmit and power out their contained Spirits; and
what faults soever of the Spirits happen before the effusion of them into the
habit of the Parts, seeing that they necessarily belong to the Original Vital
Constitution, and cannot otherwise be ascribed to the distribution of the
Spirits, they must be referred to the very Generation of them; namely, a
continuate Generation in the Arteries, whereby they are continually preserved
from a sudden extinction.

Moreover, This fault of the Vital Spirits is the depravation of the Vital and
Original Constitution, and seeing that it is somewhat preternatural, first
hurting the action, from whence the participative constitution, flows in like
manner depraved, and seeing that it merely depends upon the primary Essence
aforesaid and is complicated in the same parts, it will be a part of the
secondary Essence of this Diseas.

Thirdly, We say that the matter of the Vital Spirits, to wit the Blood of the
Veins impregnated with his Natural spirits returning in his circulation from
the first affected parts toward the Heart, is somewhat disabled by them to
admit the form of the Vital Spirit. For it is necessary that the Blood, whilst
it passes through the parts affected with a cold distemper, want and
benummedness of inherent Spirits, must also thereupon affected with some kind
of frigidity, benummedness, and perhaps with a thickness and viscous quality
beyond the usual degree of Nature. For as the blood does give a tincture of his
qualities to the parts through which it glideth; So on the contrary, the parts
themselves bequeath also as much as they can of their qualities to the flowing
blood. But here likewise we must grant withal that this indisposition in the
parts first affected (especially when it is light and small) in the return to
the inward parts, is very much corrected by their heat, before it arises at
the Ventricles of the heart, nay that it is sometimes subdued or if any such
contracted fault remain, it is commonly totally abolished by the length of the
journey before the return of the Blood to the left Ventricle of the heart,
whilst it flows down by the right, and the substance of the Lungs, the same
thing also may be thus confirmed, because if that indisposition should continue
till the return of the blood to the left Ventricle of the Heart, the whole mass
of blood in the Arteries would become crude and imperfect; and seeing that this
blood thus abounding with imperfect Vital Spirits should be transmitted from
the Aorta to all the Parts, it would more or less affect them al; which very
rarely is observed in this Diseas. For the head, and many bowels, however some
of them are found to be greater then ordinary yet they seem to be watered with
a perfect Vital Spirit. But although, as we have said, the slight indisposition
of the Blood may be corrected, before its return to the right ventricle, yet
when the contracted fault is great and more considerable, it cannot be
altogether overcome, whereupon the Lungs in this Diseas are commonly afflicted
with the most grievous Evil. For, when the less Spiritous, and therefore the
less passable Blood, is continually transmitted through the Lungs, cold and
thick, or viscous, in process of time it must needs more or less infect and
obstruct the weaker parts of the Lungs; from whence proceed difficulty of
drawing breath, a stubborn cough, hard tumors, inflammations, impostumes, and
the Ptysick. Fevers also both Erratick and Hectic, may from hence dirive
their Origin. But seeing that fault may be suddenly introduced from the first
affected parts, it is credible (although we have said the Lungs are often
infected by it) that it is for the most part overcome, before the Blood can com
to the left Ventricle. And this may be the reason why the Head and the adjacent
parts do look so well and flourishing, namely, because neither the Natural nor
the Vital Constitution is hurt in them, seeing that the perfect Vital Spirits
generated in the left Ventricle, and distributed from thence, do excite that
fresh color in the face; when on the contrary the Lungs do oftentimes labor
under the faults aforesaid, the viciousness of the Blood not being corrected
before it enter the right Ventricle and the Arterious vein.

Moreover, This imperfect production of Vital Spirits in the right Ventricle of
the Heart, by reason of the crudeness of the affluent Blood, flowing in the
Veins, totally appertains to the secondary Essence of this Diseas, and must
be accounted a part of it: for the Vital Constitution is vitiated, whereupon the
actions in the Lungs are depraved, and it depends wholly and in every respect
upon the primary granted Essence, neither in the mean time, does it reside in
the solid Substance of the Heart, that it should therefore deserv the name of a
a new diseas.

Here we note by the way, That Physicians in the cure of this affect do ever
intermingle such things with their remedies as have respect to the benefit of
the Lungs; and not without reason, seeing that it is apparent by what has been
said, to how much danger that Bowel is continually subject. And this may
suffice concerning the faults in the Generation of the Vital Spirits: Now
follow the faults of the distribution of those Spirits.

CHAP. X. The vitiated Distribution of the Vital Spirits in this Affect, and
whether it be a Part of the Secondary Essence thereof?
THis vitiated distribution seems to consist in three things: Namly, in the
Dimunition, Slowness, and the Inequality of it. The defective, and also the
slow distribution of the Blood and Spirits, may be seen in some one Part, and
perhaps in all those that are first affected: But the inequality cannot be
observed in any one, seeing that it resulteth from a collation of a various
swiftness and slowness, greatness and smalness of the torrent of the Blood in
respect of the other parts. The defect and slowness of the distribution: seeing
that they depend almost upon the same causes in the present affect, they may be
handled together, and seeing those differences are more simple then the
inequality, the handling of them seems deservedly and justly to be premised.

But first we must grant that the passages and circulation of the Blood, through
the first affected parts is not very difficult in this affect. For although a
cold distemper, a want and benummedness of Spirits, do seem very difficultly to
admit a transition of the Blood through the parts affected, with these
qualities; yet indeed other conjoined qualities; as moisture, looseness, laxity,
flaccidity, softness, and internal lubricity, can at the least contribute as
much power to facilitate the passage of it, as the qualities aforesaid can
oppose to the interruption of it. Yea, if you valu them by a just estimation,
perhaps they can do more, but we will not in this place assert it, only we
flatly deny the difficulty of the circulation to be greater. For, if we may
compare hard bodies with soft, low bodies with straight, moist with dry,
slippery with rough, we shall easily perceiv that the circulation of the blood
is much more quick and expedite in those, then in these. And this is manifest
in young Creatures in whom those qualities abound, in such as are new born,
although the Heart be very tender, the Arteries less firm, the pulsificative
virtue, yet feeble and weak, yet the passing too and fro of the blood are
readily and easily exercised; which in those that are older is not accomplished
without a stronger pulse, and an endeavor or a kind of labor of the Heart and
Arteries. Again, according to the opinion of Galen and Hippocrates, the Bodies
of children are most passible; namly, by reason of their humidity, laxity, and
softness. Besides, if we observe the formation of the chicken in the eg, the
matter will be yet more plain. Within few days after the incubation the Heart of
the chicken is sensibly and evidently seen to beat, and to begin the
circulation of the Blood: but if at the same time we consider the frailty of
the Heart it self, and how weak a coherence there is between the parts of it,
til in the interim it finisheth the circulation of the blood according to the
manner of it, such as it is* we must necessarily grant that in that shapeless
lump, moisture, and internal lubricity do expediate and facilitate that motion.
Some perhaps may object that in these cited cases the liberty and readiness of
the circulation of the blood, depends not so much upon the moisture, softness
and slipperiness, as upon the plenty of the inherent Natural Spirits. For in
the Cachexia, Green sickness, and the dropsy, the flesh is very soft, moist;
and perhaps slippery, when in the mean time the transition of the Blood is very
difficult. We answer, those Bodies that wax tender and soft by a paucity of
inherent Spirits, are less indisposed, and more apt to admit the circulation of
the Blood then the other parts. But it is not simply true that such bodies which
most abound with Spirits do perpetually obtain the most expedite and
unrestrained circulation of the Blood: for the Blood is more easily circulated
in Fish, then in Creatures of the Land, as is manifest by the tender and frail
Constitution of their Heart, and Arteries; yet they enjoy a less quantity of
Inherent Spirits. But because they live perpetually in the waters, therefore is
their flesh more moist and slippery. Whence it most evidently appears how
effectual the inward lubricity and moisture are to facilitate the passage of
the Blood. As for those that are invaded with the Green sickness or afflicted
with a Cachexia, we grant indeed that the circulation of the Blood is difficult
in them, yet not only through a defect of inherent Spirits, but by reason of
stubborn obstructions lodging in the whole body. Wherefore it must be granted,
notwithstanding the cold distemper, the penury, and stupefaction of the
Spirits, which procure a difficulty to the circulation, that such a Mediocrity
is imposed upon it, by the moisture, softness, and internal slipperiness, that
the passage of the Blood may be reduced to a just, if not an extreme facility.
But if the moisture, softness, and inward slipperiness be so considerable to
effectuate an easy circulation of the Blood, Truly, the distribution of it
through the parts first affected seems to be expected more swift and not more
slow. We answer that the facility of the transition of the Blood is opposed to
the slowness of the motion, or to the smalness of the passage. For a swift
motion may be slow, and in a small Channel. But the facility is here opposed to
difficulty, striving, and labor, which in this case, if the circulation were
difficult, should happen to the Artery in the passage of the Blood. But that
the Arteries do undergo some labor in expediting the circulation of the Blood
into the first affected parts, shall anon be demonstrated; we only affirm in
this place that the facility, of the passage of the Blood does not sufficiently
argue either the swiftness of the motion, nor the widness of the passage. For,
two causes do chiefly conspire to hasten the course of the Blood through the
habit of the parts. One is the aptitude of the part recipient, or that through
which the blood ought to flow; and this cause is merely passive and slothful:
the other is the impulsion of the Heart and Artery, and also of the Arterious
Blood contending to stretch and dilate it self. This cause is active and full
of vivacity. For upon the cessation of this impulsion, the distribution of the
Blood will presently after totally cease, however the passage may be otherwise
supposed to be most easy, manifest therefore it is that this impulsion is the
principal and active cause of the swiftnes and slownes, and also of the
quantity of the distribution of the Blood. Wherefore those causes which do any
way advance or hinder this impulsion, do now come to undergo a more accurate
examination. For by these we shall know whether the destribution of the Blood
in the parts first affected, be really more sparing or slow than is meet.

These causes do chiefly concur to excite that impulsion. First, the plenty and
activity of the Vital spirits contained in the Blood. Secondly, the perfect
soundness of the Heart. Thirdly, The firmitude, heat, and just magnitude of the
Arteries. Fourthly, An irritation both of the Heart and Arteries, whether
extrinsecally or intrinsecally caused. These we will run over in their order,
that it may appear in what condition they are in this present Diseas. First, As
for the plenty and activity of the Vital Spirits, we have already showed that
in this affect the imperfect Vital Spirits are frequently excited in the right
Ventricle of the Heart. Seeing therefore that the Blood tainted with these
imperfect Spirits, must be driven into the Lungs, there is a necessity the
destribution must there become more sparing and slow by reason of the defect of
the Spirits. Again, seeing that the vital blood, as we have also showed above,
is somewhat cooled in the Arteries, which are terminated in the first affected
parts, it is necessary likewise that the passage of it through the said parts
must be diminished and more dull.

Secondly, The virtue of the Heart, unless peradventure by accident through the
complication of some other Diseas, is seldom seen to be viciated in this affect.

Thirdly, For so much as concerns the Arteries, we cannot accuse their
condition of any notable defect in reference to their strength. But there is a
manifest fault both in their heat and magnitude. First, in their heat, the
Arteries inserted into the first affected parts, must necessarily by their cold
distemper be somewhat affected with the like distemper. For seeing that a
distemper of the parts first affected is active and permanent, it is
unavoidable but they must more or less introduce a like quality into the parts
so nearly bordering to one another, For natural agents are busily industrious
to assimilate all Bodies placcd within the Sphere of their activity, but
especially such as are circumambient and nearly adjacent. But if any man doubt
whether that coldness of the Arteries can retard and lessen the current of the
Blood through the first affected parts, let him consider that frigidity is of
it self an enemy to any kind of motion. For it is the quality of cold by its
own Nature to arrest Violences, and impetuous oppositions, to condensate, to
induce sloth, to superinduce Somnolency, stupefaction, and immobility, and when
it attaineth a more intensive degree, to congeal and mortify the parts.
Therefore it must needs cast a Remora to the torrent or the Blood waving through
the parts affected with that quality. Besides, In the opening of a Vein we have
often observed upon the cooling of the member that the Blood has flowed more
slowly and sparingly, and if the member be warmed again, or the pulse be
excited by rubbing or any other motion or means, that then the Blood flows
again with a more plentiful and liberal current. Moreover, the application of
cold things is sensibly effectual to stop Blood preternaturally bursting out of
any part, as on the contrary, hot things do provoke the ebullition of it.

It may be objected, That the Pulse is many times actuated and intended by the
cold outwardly opposed; as by the handling and playing with snow, we see that
not only the Pulse but the heat also is augmented in the hands of those that
sport themselves with it.

We answer, Cold things of themselves do always move the passage of the Blood
through the habit of the parts; but that by accident they may intend the
circulation of the Blood, if at length they provoke the pulses of the Arteries
(as in the said case of the snow it happneth) to beat stronger marches. But
this never comes to pass in this present affect. For (as we have already
showed) the circulation of the Blood in this Diseas, however it may suffer
Immunitior or Retardation, yet it continues sufficiently easy and expedite,
neither does any irritation of the pulls arise from thence, as anon we shall
perceiv more plainly. For seeing it is manifest by what has been said, that the
Arteries reaching to the first affected parts, become more cold then ordinary,
or is meet, we may easily beleev that they become likewise more slender; so in
any cooled member we see the Veins and the Arteries become more slender then
they were wont to be; and it cannot be denied, but that actual cold does
straighten the Vessels. But it is more then probable that a Potential coldness
(such as perhaps that may be said to be which is of an inward distemper) does
likewise make the Veins and Arteries more slender. So we see cold Complexions,
and also cold and moist, to have less Veins and Arteries then the hot.
Corpulent bodies, women, children, have narrower Vessels, then lean, men, or
youths. Besides, the very heat it self is an expansive quality, that it may
enlarge the Vessels, and cold a contractive quality, that it may restrain and
straiten the Vessels. Finally, one of us observed that upon the dissection of
the Bodies perishing by this affect: He has sometimes found the Veins, and the
Arteries, tending toward the first affected parts to be of an undue
slenderness: but that those Arteries called Carotides, and the Iugulary Veins
were disproportinatly amplified; and in is credible that this might have been
perpetually observed, had they that opened the bodies minded it with a
attentive contemplation. But this we peremptorily affirm not, but leave it to
future inquiry: in the interim seeing that it sufficiently appears by what
has been said that the circulation of the Blood, in the first affected parts
is diminished, it is likewise agreeable to reason, that the Vessels also of
those parts are straightened. And seeing that the left Ventricle of the Heart, does
pour so great a quantity into the Aorta as may suffice all the parts, and seeing
that so many parts primarily affected do sparingly sip, that blood it is very
probable that it is distributed with an unusual liberality through the other
parts, and namly through the Head and Liver, and therefore the Vessels of these
parts are somewhat dilated and amplified. Concerning the lesned circulation of
the Blood in this affect: We ad this experiment only, a ligature being wound
about the arm or thighs of a young boy grievously tormented with this Diseas,
the Veins did not so easily swel beyond the ligature, neither did the habit of
the part full of Blood appear in that place so swelled and colored as it usually
does in those that are sound. From whence apparent it is, that the transition
of the Blood through those parts is more dull and less plentiful, then it ought
to be as a river stopped by a dam or wall does sooner or later overflow the
Banks, according to the various swiftness and magnitude of the Torrent: So
likewise it happneth here, the retiring of the Blood through the Vein, to the
inward parts, is intercepted by the force of the ligature, which if it were
violent, would in a short time fill the Veins, and the habit of the parts beyond
the ligature; as we see it to happen otherwise in sound Persons; but because in
this Diseas it fills them slowly, and very dully, we must conclude that the
circulation of the Blood in those parts is extremely lessened and slow, and
that the Arteries inserted into those parts are more cold and slender then they
ought to be, as we have most abundantly proved, that the Arteries of the first
affected parts are vitiated by a defect of just magnitude.

Fourthly, As for the irritation of the Heart and Arteries (which perhaps is
the principle cause of many differences in the pulses) it is manifestly found to
be weak and ineffectual in the Arteries of the first affected parts. We purpose
not at this time to discourse of the nature, causes, differences and effects of
irritation in the pulses; only we observe in general that it may be either
natural or violent; and that each of them may be universal or particular, and
withal may arise either from within or from without. And lastly, that it may be
excessive or defective: In the handling of the present Diseas it will suffice to
touch upon the particular Irritation of the Arteries, and afterward to
accommodate our Diseases to the present business. 1. Therefore, we affirm that
the Arteries impel the Blood into the substance or habit of the parts, by a
certain labor and contention; and that the parts which receiv that Blood do
make some resistance and opposition: that by reason of this conflict the
Arteries are Irritated to make stronger resistances or pulses; and that that
Skirmishing is of so great moment to fortify the pulse and render it more
vigorous, that when it is weak, the Pulls can scarce be strong: but where the
contention is somewhat more increased, yet so, that it does not overcome the
opposition of the Arteries, the pulse becomes more strong and lively, provided
that no impediment from some other cause does intervene. This we might illustrate
by diverse instances, but we will exemplify it only in a few: in the winter the
pulses are more full, hard, strong and constant, then in the summer; but it is
certain that at that time the outward parts of the body being bound up with
cold, are more firm and less passable, and therefore that they do more strongly
then at other times resist the Blood, contending to pass through the substance
of them in his circulation; whereupon the Arteries, when no other intervening
matter hinders, must needs move more vigorously, and drive the Blood more
forcibly, if they perform their office in perfecting the circulation of the
Blood. Hereupon those Arteries are irritated, unless they be totally suppressed,
or by some other means charmed, and by degrees yield stronger strokes; and
withal the Spiritous Blood being pent in and striving for more room they do wax
a little more hot, and are somewhat enlarged, and sometimes having a little
triumphed over the subdued opposition, they drive forward the blood into the
parts, with a more swift and copious torrent then before. This is further
confirmed by the heat augmented by handling snow, for although at the first the
Hands wax presently cold, yet in a short time after they grow hot, and withal
they are died and colored with Blood, as the intensiveness of the heat does
justify. For upon the first contrectation or touch of the snow the parts are
bound up, and strongly resist the circulation of the Blood, the Arteries also
in those parts are at the same time contracted But, unless the cold prevail to
a total suppression of the Spirits contained in those Arteries, and to a
stupifying of the Arteries themselves, or at least a benummedness, those
Arteries are by degrees irritated, and the interrupted Blood more forcibly
contends for wider room, and so at length by this counteropposition, the
Arteries wax hot and are dilated, and the pulls being increased, they extrude
the Blood more plentifully into the part before overcooled. On the contrary, in
the summer, when less resistance is opposed against the passage of the Blood,
the pulse becomes more feeble, more languid, and more soft. From whence it
appears that the defect of a du irritation, proceeding from the weak resistance
of the parts which receav the Blood from the Arteries* does diminish the vigor
of the pulses.

Secondly, The same is yet more evidently seen when the Pulse is augmented by
the motion of the Body; for in any violent motion almost all the Muscles are
stretched, by reason whereof they somewhat more resist the passage of the Blood;
hereupon the Arteries are provoked to contention, their heat is increased, and
therefore more nimble, strong and full Pulses are emitted.

Thirdly, As the inflammation of a part does sensibly irritate the Arteries
thereof, so it exciteth a more vehement Pulse and bauseth a more liberal Flux
of the Blood. The same may be said of pain.

Fourthly, Hither also must be referred the bruising of any part. For a bruised
part does difficultly receive the Blood flowing to it: hereupon the Arteries
provoked, they beat more strongly, and swell the bruised part resisting them
into a tumor. This might be demonstred by many more examples, but we conceive
these to be very sufficient and satisfactory.

Moreover, It must be noted that the parts caused by the reception of the Blood
in the Arteries, may be very great, and yet not sufficient effectually to
irritate the Arteries; in which case it rather remitteth and disturbeth them,
increases, or facilitateth the force of the torrent of the Blood. For that
opposition of it self interrupteth the channel of the Blood through the
substance of the parts; but because it does withal irritate the Arteries to emit
more lively strokes, it quickneth the torrent of it by accident. Wherefore we
are here compelled into another involuntary digression, by distinguishing
between the resistance of the part that irritate, and that which does not, or
does very little irritate the instances already alleged will suffice for the
former, and to explain the latter we will ad a few.

First, Therefore there is a resistance that totally suppresseth the torrent of
the Blood. Such a one is caused by a strong ligature, which does altogether
intercept the pulse in those parts beyond it, neither yet does it irritate the
Arteries on this side of it, because it overcomes all the force of the Artery
beyond the Ligature and does wholly break off the action thereof. The same is
seen in the parts mortified with cold, or by other causes corrupted with an
inflammation; and perhaps in some hard swellings, contractures and some
confirmed wounds.

Secondly, There is a resistance pressing down the Arteries even by the
compression of the Arteries, and this happens in a ligature indifferently
bound. Also in the compression of an Artery by some tumor in the adjacent parts
as in a raw swelling; also in a compression from any outward cause, many things
which belong to the lying down on the right side especially, and the left are
referred hither; so in tumors on the right side, the lying on the left side is
many times endured with the least patience by the compression of the sound
parts by those that are swelled etc. and this compression however it resists
the circulation of the Blood, yet it does not seem much to irritate the
Arteries, because it does no less intercept the very pulsificative force, then
it diminishes the action thereof. Although perhaps it may sometimes irritate in
the Lungs by reason of their vehement heat, just as it uses to do in aching
and inflamed parts.

Thirdly, There is a resistance in part repressing the circulation of the
Blood, but without compression of the Arteries, nor yet totally suppressing
them, nor very much irritating the Artery. Such an one occurreth in
obstructions caused by cold, slow, thick, and moist humors, which although they
may somewhat retard the free passage of the Blood, yet they provoke the Artery
very little, because at the same time they superinduce a certain benummedness
in them, at least a cold distemper, as also in the Blood which they contain.
The same almost may be said of paralytical members, but that in these a
benummedness is more evidently introduced in their Arteries, and the channel of
the Blood is less retarded in them,

Moreover, We affirm secondly that the parts first affected in this Diseas do
not sufficiently irritate the Arteries, by which the Blood is distributed
through them. For although in these parts, both by reason of their solidity,
and also in respect of their coldness, we grant some kind of resistance, yet it
is extreme feeble and slow, and very little provoking. First, because in those
paris a moist is conjoined with the cold distemper, which of it self tempereth
and qualifieth all manner of provocations. Secondly, Because there is a penury
of inherent Spirits, which otherwise, where they abound, are wont to cherish
the vigor of the Arteries, and the blood contained in them. Thirdly, Because
those parts are loos, weak, and soft, and therefore more prone to receive with
facility that which the Arteries send in, than to exasperate them by
resistance. And that the Arteries do not conveigh the Blood by any vigorous and
considerable force into these parts, is manifest by this sign, because after the
influx of the Spirits, and the Blood they still continue loos, soft and feeble,
when on the contrary strong Pulses are wont to render the parts otherwise weak,
full, swollen, and stiff, on a sudden. Fifthly, because the first affected parts
have in them a similary lubricity. For as the superficiary or external
lubricity suffers any thing to pass by, without attritition: so also the
Internal or similary lubricity facilitates the circulation of the Blood, so
that the passage is accomplished with very small opposition. We conclude
therefore that the proirritation of the Arteries is in this Diseas deficient;
and therefore that the Arteries are very dully and ineffectually excited to
strengthen the pulls.

Having at the length weighed al things which we propounded concerning the
causes which actuate and advance the Blood in his circulation, it sufficiently
appears, that the circulation of the Blood in this affect is easy and expedit
enough, but that it is lessened and passes dully through the parts first
affected, both by reason of the sluggishness of the Arterious Blood contained
in the Artery of the said parts, and also because of the defective heat, and
slenderness of those Arteries; and finally, in regard of their ineffectual
irritation. And let these things suffice concerning the two former faults
belonging to the distribution of the Blood in this affect, namly, the
diminution and slowness thereof. It remains in the next place to examine the
inequality of that distribution.

CHAP. XI. The Inequality of the Distribution of the Blood in this Affect.
THis inequality is to be estimated by a comparison of the greatness and
swiftness of the current of the Blood, made in diverse parts. For if the
circulation of the Blood according to a Geometrical proportion be either
equally small and slow, or equally great and swift, that must be judged equal by
the scope of the present enquiries: on the contrary, if in some parts it be
little and slow, and in others great and swift, that must be reputed unequal
and disproportionate. And this is the State of the present disquisition.

It is manifest by what has been said, That the stribution of the Blood through
the parts first affected, is extremely sparing and slow: It remains therefore
only that we consider whether it be transmitted through the other parts with a
quicker and more plentiful motion.

We have already affirmed that the root of this evil is not fixed in the Heart
it self, and that this Bowel of it self is not primarily il affected in respect
of the left Ventricle thereof. It is credible therefore, that the Heart (unless
perhaps some other Diseas be conjoined or supervene) does rightly execute his
function, and expel a sufficient quantity of Blood, for our turn by every
stroke into the Aorta. Seeing therefore (as has been already proved) that the
Blood is niggardly dispensed from the Aorta into the first affected parts, a
superfluous portion of it must needs be distributed into other parts not so
affected: for otherwise the Aorta should not sufficiently discharge it self,
nor disburthen the Blood received from the Heart, but it would be obstructed
and oppressed with the plenty thereof; and this repletion upon every slight
occasion would fly back, even to the left Ventricle of the Heart, and there
kindle a Fever. And we grant indeed, for this very cause, among others, that in
this Diseas a Fever is easily and frequently produced. But seeing that the
Fever is another Diseas conjoined, and separable and different from this, and
seeing that this Diseas very often happneth without a Fever; it must needs be
granted, that by how much more sparingly the Blood is distributed to the first
affected parts, by so much the more plentifully conv^^ed to the other parts, at
least in the absence of the Fever. For seeing that quantity of Blood, as we
said even now, is extruded into the Aorta, as may suffice the whole Body, and
seeing al of it must be distributed into several parts, it most plainly follows,
that the less is transmitted into one part, the more is dispensed into another.
And thus it may be perceived that the inequality of the distribution of the
Blood is inferred from the sole diminution thereof, in the first affected parts
above asserted, (at least probably) namly, from the small and slow current of
the Blood through the parts first affected, there may be rightly collected a
more quick and plentiful stream of it, into the inward parts not so affected.
Now let us see whether the other appearances relating hither are correspondent
to this Discourse.

First, It seems manifest by what has been alleged, that the Head, the
Brain, the Liver, and the other Bowels, are not afflicted with that cold
distemper, nor that stupefaction and penury of inherent Spirits, wherewith the
parts primarily affected are oppressed. For the bowels and the said parts do not
receive their Nerves from the Spinal Marrow, without the Skul, but they are
involved in the same condition with the other parts. Moreover, those parts, as
far as we can judge by the touch are (at least outwardly) moderatly hot, and as
far as we can guess by the sight they retain their native and flourishing color,
besides they are more full and fleshly, then the first affected parts.

Moreover, Children afflicted with this Diseas have an indifferently good
appetite, they do not il concoct the introsumed aliment, and about the Head
they retain their senses very acute: they see, they hear, they taste, they smell
as subtily as others, and as for their wit, they many times surpass those of
equal years with them; unless an impediment from some other cause. All which
things put together do abundantly witness, that a cold distemper, nor a
benummedness or penury of Inherent Spirits, has none, or at least a very small
predominancy in those parts. These things being granted, we must likewise needs
grant that a more liberal distribution of the Blood is dispensed to the said
parts. For as for the heat, we have already showed that that does both amplify
and stir up the Arteries to send forth a stronger pulsation; and we have also
noted above that the plenty of the Spirits, does not only cherish the
pulsificative force of the Arteries, and conserv the vigor of the Blood
contained in them, but that it does somewhat enliven and excitate both of them,
and that by so much the more effectually, by how much the less the inherent
Spirits are affected with a stupefaction.

Secondly, unless those parts were watered with a more liberal circulation of
the Blood, they would become more soft, loos, and feeble, then they are, even as
the parts first affected are observed to be. For upon the defect or languishing
of the Pulls in any part, the part presently becoms loos and weak, as it
happneth to all the Parts in a Lipothymy. On the contrary, when the Pulls beats
strongly, the Part whereunto it belongs, is seen to be somewhat rigid and
swelled. For a full Pulls does presently fill up those parts, which were before
sunk down by emptiness; as the Lypothymy being driven away, and the Pulls being
restored, the Parts of the Body, which were before loos and languid, are not
only well colored, but full of vivacity and turgid: seeing therefore that those
Parts are not affected with that softness, looseness, and weakness, we must
conclude that they are actuated with a full Pulls.

Thirdly, The very augmented magnitude of these parts, in comparison of the
parts primarily affected in this Diseas does witness, that they are more
liberally fed with their aliment, namly, the Blood, (which is reputed the
common and last aliment of the Parts) for otherwise scarce any sufficient
reason can be imagined, why, when the first affected Parts are so extenuated,
these should be (especially the Brain and Liver) in so good a condition, so full
and so plump. The same thing is confirmed by the lively color of the same
parts. For if the Pulls languish in any part, somewhat of the fresh and amiable
color presently retireth from that Part.

Fourthly, The Arteries called Carotides, and the Jugulary Veyn, which belong
to the Brayn, and the parts about the Head, are observed to be very broad in
this affect; but the Vessels tending to the first affected parts to be unduly
slender; from whence we may clearly infer, That the dispensation of the Blood
to those Parts is unequal. And here we entreat and beseech those who have an
opportunity to open such Bodies as this affect has destroyed, that they would
accurately contemplate whether the swelling Arteries inserted into the swelling
parts of the Bones do more liberally, and more commodiously transmit the Blood
into those, than into the other less nourished parts of the Bones, and whether
the Arteries of those parts are more broad than of these. Although indeed we
confess that this enquiry is most difficult, both because of the slenderness of
those Arteries, and in regard of the obscurity of their insertion, and also in
respect of the hardness of the Bones.

Fifthly, Hither also belong things hurtful and helpful for children afflicted
with this Diseas are manifestly benefitted by rubbings, motion, and various
agitation of the Body, by exercises, strengthening Ointments, and the like means
which raise the heat in the Members on the right-side, and the other parts
primarily affected, and irritate the Pulses and augment them after any sort,
whereby the distribution of the Blood may be more nearly reduced to some
equality; with the contrary things they are damnified. In like manner such
Medicines which promove the dispensation of the Blood to the first affected
parts (as those which are moderately hot, benign and familiar to Nature, and so
attenuant, incident, and deobstruent that at the same time they do not in the
least degree wast but cherish and augment the Spirits) help very much toward
the cure of this Diseas; the contraries do either produce or foment it being
produced. All these things being considered we must conclude that the
destribution of the Blood in this affect is irregular and unequal. And thus at
length we have finished the disquification of the faults in the destribution of
the Vital Blood; we now proceed to the examination of the faults, if any such
there be, of the Vital participative Constitution in this Disease.

CHAP. XII. The faults of the Vital participative Constitution in this Affect.
WE have already said that the Origin of the Vital Constitution is grounded in
the Arterious Blood, and especially in the spiritous part thereof: but because
the solid parts also do somewhat truly participate the nature of Life we justly
ascribe unto them the Vital participative Constitution.

Now this Constitution consists in Three Things.

First, In a certain union of the Arterious Blood with the substance of the
solid parts through which it passes.

Secondly, In the Vital heat excited in those parts.

Thirdly, In the enlivening and exaltation of the Natural Constitution, and of
all the Natural faculties of those parts.

First, As for that union of the Arterious Blood, it must be justly reputed,
the first part of the participative Life. For the solid parts are therefore said
to participate of the Nature of Life, or the Vital Constitution, because the
Vital Spirits are contained in them. For Life cannot consist without a Vital
Spirit. Therefore when the Vital Spirit is distributed in and with the Arterious
Blood to the solid parts through the Arteries, and these parts do suck in that
Blood into their substance, it comes to pass, that the said parts are counited
with the Vital Spirits, and so they participate of the Nature of Life.

Moreover, Seeing this union is not permanent but transient and consists in
motion, it seems to consist in the confluence and mutual embracement of the
inherent natural and influent Vital Spirit: but the conditions which are
requisite to make this a natural concourse, are,

First, That it be in all respects, moderate, and not impetuous.

Secondly, That it be in all respects strong, and not feeble and stupefied.

Thirdly, That it be friendly and peaceable, not hostile and Turbulent, that it
be gentle not tumultuous; that it be neither too slippery and smooth, nor too
rough.

Fourthly, That it end not in any kind of dissipation of the Spirits, but
rather in the appeasing and apt disposition of them for their return into the
Veins. More such conditions might perhaps be added; but because they very
little belong to this Diseas, we shall here superceed any further examination
of them. We only note that the mutual concourse and union of the Vital and
natural Constitution by their Spirits, does not occur in this affect, with that
activity, vigor and complacency, as it usually does in sound Bodies. And this
scarce needs any proof, seeing that it is manifest by what has been said
above, that not only the natural constitution of the first affected Parts does
labor under a cold and a moist distemper, a defect and benummedness of Spirits,
but that the Vital Blood it self is also somewhat damped and stupefied in the
tops or ends of the Arteries, before it can be conveyed into the first
affected parts, so that that union must needs be performed without either a
sufficient vivacity, or pleasure. For when the vigorous Vital Spirits do meet
together with the Natural Spirits no less vigorous, they are united with a kind
of courteous strife and delightful contention. Whether, that we may illustrate
this matter by an example, the natural Spirits as a Bride do here allure and in
a manner repel the Vital Spirits who as it were act the part of a Bridegroom:
But the Vital Spirits provoked with their heat, and driven on by the vigor of
the Pulses do more confidently invade the Natural Spirits and penetrate into
their confines and regions, whilst the Natural Spirits in the mean time
(however as it were with modest resistances repulsing the assault) receive them
at length not without a certain pleasure. For the very corporal pleasure is
established upon, and increased by a kind of amorous strife, and the principal
part of Life it self consists in such a contention about the Reciprocal union
of the Spirits; for to that end the Vital Spirits are both* generated and
distributed, that at length they may pass through the solid Natural
Constitution of the Parts, and may profoundly imbue them with their vital power
and virtue; but seeing this peneration cannot be effected without endeavor and
resistance, it must needs be, that the vigor of that contention and resistance,
be either more or less according to their copiousness, vivacity, and heat of
those Spirits that maintain the conflict. Therefore because in this affect,
both the Natural and the Vital Spirits are more cold, fewer, and less active;
their concours and union must needs be dull and undelightful. Moreover it must
be noted in this affect (which also we have showed above) that the permeation
of the Blood through the first affected parts is to easy and slippery, whereupon
even for this reason, that concours and union of the Spirits in those parts is
rendered more slothful, and less pleasant. Besides, hot exhalations although for
the most part they are sparingly raised in this affect, yet being raised, by
reason of the softness, looseness, and internal lubricity of the first affected
parts, parts, they evaporate sooner then is meet, whereupon they leave those
parts cold and feeble.

Secondly, As for the Vital heat communicated to the solid parts (which is the
second part of the Vital participative Constitution) that partly depends upon
the aforesaid union, or the Incorporation of the Arterious Blood, with the
solid parts; but partly it consists in a certain expansive motion or endeavor
(like to that expansive endeavor of the Arterious Blood) excited in the very
solid parts. The first is very perspicuous, for the Arterious Blood through the
impregnation of the Vital heat, when it is received into the solid parts, must
needs with their substance communicate their heat also unto them. The second is
likewise proved without difficulty, For if the Vital heat radicated in the
Arterious Blood consists in a certain motion or endeavor of that Blood
uniformly diffused and withal at the same time somewhat restrained, it must
unavoydably excite the same motion in the solid parts through which it passes,
seeing that natural causes do always act to the extremity of their power, and as
much as is possible by way of assimilation. If any man doubt whether the
Essence of the Vital heat consist in such an uniform diffusive motion,
moderately restrained and intrinsically advancing: let him know that the
Essence of heat does in general consist in motion or a rerefactive endeavor
somewhat interrupted, as Sr. Thomas Bacon does most clearly demonstrate in his
Novum Organum. But this I say, the Vital heat, seeing that it contains in it
self the true nature of heat, it will be also necessarily such a rarefactive
endeavor somewhat restrained. But that this heat may be restrained to the Vital;
more conditions must be added, which nevertheless we cannot in this place
either reckon up, or accuratly search into, least we should run into an
unreasonable digression: In the interim that we may have the matter, and the
manner of enquiring, whether or no in this affect the Vital heat be moderated
according to nature, it seemed good unto us, to propound these subsequent
conditions.

First, That the Vital heat may be called Natural, or according to Nature, it
is requisite that the Origin thereof be Internal; Namly, in the Arterious Blood,
and that it be derived to the solid parts, as has been said, by the
implantation and union thereof; for that any thing may be called, Natural, it
must needs flow from an Internal Principle, although it be likewise true that
what things soever do moderatly cherish, augment, and excite that Internal
Principle, may in that respect deserve this appellation.

Secondly, It is required, that that heat be moderate, not unequally, remiss,
or intensive, but communicated to the parts, in an even degree.

Thirdly, It is required, that it be in some measure uniform, and like it self
in those parts, that rejoice in the same similary constitution, provided, that
they be equidistant from the fountain of heat, and after the same manner
affected by some other concurrent and adjacent causes. But in the parts further
distant from the fountain of heat; yet otherwise, as has been said, after the
same manner affected, that it may be uniformly diminished: And in like manner
in the colder parts in respect of the inherent constitution, that it may be
also proportionably more remiss. Lastly, In the parts diversely affected by
other causes, so that one may be much more intensively hot then another: it is
requisite, that between the hotter and the colder part there be found a heat
gradually, and as it were uniformly more remiss (if you proceed gently from the
hotter toward the colder part.) And even a certain uniformity may be observed
in this deformity or disparity of heat, so long as it continues within the
bounds of Nature. For the parts immediately and intermutually touching one
another, are in a preternatural capacity, or condition: If one of them be
extremely hot in comparison of the other. For seeing that this Vital heat
consists in a rarefactive endeavor somewhat restrained, if it be very unequal
and disproportionate in the Parts bordering upon one another, it will happen,
that that part which endeavoreth with vehemence, does withal endeavor to
separate it self, from that which uses no such vehemence, and so that it will
become a preternatural endeavor, causing pain: for pain consists in the
solution of continuity, not yet made, but to be made.

Fourthly, That this heat may not actuate or assist the action of any other
hurtful conjoined quality whatsoever. For although in this case the conjoined
hurtful quality is chiefly peccant, and meriteth the greater part of blame, yet
cannot the heat be altogether excused. For an acrimonious and malignant heat,
denotes other qualities to be conjoined besides the bare heat, yet the Vital
heat it self, in as much as it exasperateth and provokes the activity of those
conjoined qualities to a more potent depravation and annoyance, it must be
judged partly culpable of their vicious actions.

Fifthly, On the part of the resistance moderation is also required, both in
respect of the appeasing of the irritated Vital Spirit, and also in regard of
the passage of the Arterious Blood, and finally in respect of the transpiration
of the unappeased exhalations.

Sixthly, A certain proportion must be observed between the expansive endeavor
of the Vital heat, and the resistance that restrains it, an excess therefore in
either of them in it self is not a fault, but if one be disproportionate to
another, in that regard it must be reputed faulty.

Seventhly, A certain harmony and order is observable both in the endeavor, and
in the resistance. For they do not always proceed in one form and continuation,
but as it were fighting, they are sometimes intended, sometimes remitted. And
indeed they are chiefly increased in the Diastole of the Arteries, where the
blood not being contained in his Marrow Vessels, strugleth for more room, and
so stretches the Arteries, til a competent portion of it falls down, into
the habit of the parts, and is there digested; for then the place does not
compel the Blood into such straights, but after a short time it desisteth from
that impetuosity, and among the causes of the pulsation this motion of the
Blood is not the least considerable. Now that we may apply these things to the
present business, amongst all the conditions now proposed, the second alone
seems manifestly to be desired in this affect. For the Vital heat is not here
moderate, but defective and more remiss than the just and Natural Degree. For
seeing that the first affected parts are besieged with a cold and moist
distemper, and with a penury and benummedness of Spirits, they must necessarily
(as we have already demonstrated) somewhat rebate the heat of the Arterious
Blood before it is transmitted into the substance of them; whereupon those parts
participate a more remiss degree of Vital heat, than is due unto them. And this
shall suffice concerning the communication of the Vital hear to the Parts.

Thirdly, As for the last part of the participative Life, which indeed
depends upon the two former, and which is the first in the intention, though
the last in the execution of Nature; we say, that it is in some sort the end
both of the Original Vital Constitution, and also of the distribution thereof,
and finally of the aforesaid union and heat communicated to the parts. For the
Vital Spirits are not excited in the Arterious Blood for their own sakes alone,
neither are they distributed into the parts, and united to them, only for their
own advantage; but chiefly, that they may enliven and dignifie the inherent
constitution of the solid Parts, and so actuate and promote their faculties.
For as the heat of it self is only potentially visible, unless it be irradiated
with light, so those inherent faculties of attracting, retaining, concocting,
secreving, and forming, are dead as it were and merely potential, when they are
deprived of the vivification and erogation of the Vital afflux, This is most
clearly conspicuous in a lipothymy; for upon the defect of the Vital influx,
all those faculties suddenly fail, decay, languish. But seeing all the faculties
are established upon some constitution, which is both the cause and subject of
them, it might be demanded in which Constitution of the parts it is grounded?
We answer, in respect of the potential Nature they are radicated in the Natural
Constitution which we have before described; but that in reference to the
Actuated and Elivened Essence that they depend likewise upon the Vital influx.
And we declare in general that the participative Vital Constitution, which we
have already asserted to consist in Three things, conjoined with the Natural
Constitution, is the total and adequate, both cause and subject of all those
faculties. But it would be a tedious degression, and inconsistent with our
purpose, to make enquiry how those Constitutions can produce this or that
faculty determinate in its Species. For the present we will only run over those
faults of the faculties aforesaid which occur in this affect.

First, The fashioning virtue here erreth by an unequal purging out of the
Vital Blood in diverse parts, as we have discoursed above. Hereupon the Head and
the Liver grow to an unmeasurable bigness; the first affected parts are
extenuated, the ends of the Bones stick out, and sometimes the Bones themselves,
which are otherwise straight, wax crooked.

Secondly, The Concoctive faculty is weak in this Diseas and in the first
affected part by reason of the inherent cold distemper, the penury and
benummedness of the Spirits, the brittle and slippery union of the Vital
spirits with the Natural Constitution, and by reason of the feeble imprinted
Vital heat.

Thirdly, The Attractive, Retentive, and Expulsive Faculties, seem not to
recede much from their Natural Condition; yet the Attractive is somewhat more
slow than ought to be; the Retentive, by reason of the internal lubricity is
somewhat weaker, and the Expulsive is more vehement for the same Cause.

And thus at length we have dispatched the faithful examination of the faults
of the Vital Constitution in this affect. The Animal Constitution should now
undergo the next disquisition, but that some faults of the Natural Constitution;
namly the Organical faults thereof, which have some dependence upon some of the
recited faults of the Vital Constitution, do challenge this place, as most
proper to themselves.

CHAP. XIII. The Organical Faults of the Natural Constitution in this Affect.
Seeing that the Organical faults in this Diseas belong to the Inherent
Constitution of the parts, those indeed by the Law of just Method should be
immediately after the similary vices of the same Constitution; but as we have
noted above, the Reason and Cause of them must be derived from the faults of the
Vital Constitution lately mentioned, and therefore we are constrained to premise
the examination of these, and to reserv the consideration of the other for
another place.

The Organical faults in this affect are fitly reduced to these Heads.

First, To the extenuation and leanness of certain parts namly, the parts first
affected.

Secondly, To the unreasonably augmented magnitude of some parts, as the Brain,
the whole Head, and the Liver.

Thirdly, To the tumors or lanching out of certain Bones, as of the Bones to
the Wrests, to the Ankles, and the ends of the ribs.

Fourthly, To the bowing of certain Bones, as it frequently happneth to the
Bones of the Cubit, and the Shin Bone, sometimes to the Bone of the Thigh and
Sholder.

Fifthly, To the poynted figure and narrowness of the breast.

And these faults are reckoned beneath among the Symptoms and signs of the
Diseas, not because they are indeed mere Symptoms, but because they are obvious
to the Senses, and so do fitly supply the place of signs, both in respect of
the parts of the Essence of the Diseas more deeply retired, and also in respect
of the hidden causes thereof. For whatsoever is perceived by the sens, and
besides it self represents somewhat else to the understanding that is obscure,
has the formality of a sign. For indeed these faults are parts of the
secondary Essence of the Diseas, seeing that they are the vicious Constitutions
of the Organs depraving the action, and have a dependence upon the other parts
of the Essence of the Diseas.

The common cause almost of al these recited affects seems to be an uneven or
disproportionate nourishment or Alogotrophy of the parts. Now this depends
chiefly upon two causes in this affect. The first is, the unequal inherent
Constitution of the parts irregularly nourished. The disparity between the
inherent Constitutions of the first affected parts, and the Head and Bowels,
cannot be so well collected by what has been already said, but that it may
deserve a further inculcation. The last ca us, which is indeed of equal moment,
is the very unequal distribution of the Arterious Blood into the parts unevenly
nourished. That the Blood is unequally distributed in this affect we have
already showed, here we only infer that that must needs produce an unequal
nutrition of the parts. Al Creatures the more liberally they feed the more fat
and fleshly they are unless some oother impediment does intervene; but if the du
quantity of aliment be subtracted, they grow lean, and are daily more and more
extenuated. Why should we not suppose that the same thing happens in the
Parts of Creatures? the Blood, or at least somewhat contained in the Blood, is
acknowledged for the last aliment of all the parts, where therefore that is
liberally dispensed to one part, and sparingly to another, certainly, it is no
wonder if one part be excessively augmented, and another extremely extenuated.
But these things may suffice in general. In particular,

First, We assert, that the first affected parts in this Diseas do daily wax
lean and fall away. Proof of this assertion cannot be reasonably expected, seeing
that daily experience yields an occular demonstration of it. But why those
parts are so extenuated, that may require some reasons, and we offer these.

The first is deduced from the primary essence of the Diseas; namly, from a
cold distemper, a penury, and inactivity of the inherent Spirits in the parts
aforesaid, For by this means the attractive, retentive, and concoctive faculty,
do execute their functions in those parts, unduly and ineffectually.

The second is brought from the looseness, softness, and internal slipperiness
of the same parts; for hereupon the expulsive faculty is too much irritated,
the breathing is too easy and dissipative, the circulation of the Blood is to
slippery, the retentive faculty through the weakness of it, parts with the
aliment too soon, and with too much facility: and this very thing almost
happneth here in these parts, which befalls the Guts in a Lyentery. Howsoever
it be, the expenses exceed the incoms, and by consequent those parts are
extenuated.

The third Reason arises from the unequal distribution, and indeed defective
in the first affected parts, of which we have already superabundantly
discoursed.

Secondly, We affirm, that in this affect the greatness of the Head, and
especially of the Liver, as also of the Brain is unreasonably increased.
Sometimes the Palsy in the Head is conjoined, which nevertheless we suppose to
be of a different Species, and no part of this Diseas: although we grant, that
this affect may sometimes give occasion to the supervening Hydrocephalus.
Moreover, we have sometimes seen, the Consumption being superinduced upon this
affect, and long continuing also, the Face, and the parts about the Head to be
somewhat extenuate before death. But this was produced by the Consumption, not
by this Diseas we now treat of. But that we may give a reason of that greatness
unmeasurably increased in the Parts aforesaid. We note,

First, That the parts belonging to the Head and almost all the Bowels, do
receive the Nerves from that part of the Spinal Marrow, which is included
within the Skul, and therefore that these parts are not necessarily subject to
that unhappy condition of the first affected parts. Wherefore no reason does
compel us to affirm, that these augmented parts are either affected with a cold
distemper, or a penury and dullness of Spirtts, or that the attractive,
retentive, or concoctive faculties are thereupon vitiated, and by consequence
that those parts are totally exempted from the first cause of that extenuation
which befalseth the parts first affected.

Secondly, we observe that neither looseness, nor flaccidity, nor softness, nor
internal slipperiness are predominant in those immeasurably augmented parts,
and that these qualities (as it happneth to the first affected parts) do not
yield a more irritated expulsion then is requisite, so that the exportation
should be feared to exceed the importation, which we have showed to befall the
extenuated parts.

Thirdly, We observe that the Blood in his circulation, by how much the more
sparingly it is distributed to the first affected parts, the more liberally it
does water and nourish these parts. This we have already proved, and it is
needless to insert more arguments to that purpose. These things therefore being
observed, the Reason is plain, why the parts aforesaid are unmeasurably and
irregularly augmented. For if the attractive retentitive and concoctive
faculties be not weakened in them, according to our first annotation, and the
expulsive be not immoderately irritated according to the second, and in the
interim if sufficient aliment be dispensed to them according to the third, the
bulk of them must needs increas beyond proportion.

Thirdly, We affirm that the protuberancies or swellings of the Bones in the
Wrests, Ankles, and the ends of the Ribs do vitiate the Organ in a twofold
respect* namly, in respect of the greatness, and also of the figure. The parts
vitiated in both respects are obvious to the Eyes, and therefore we shall
supersede al further proof.

But why are the Bones stretched out after that manner in those places?

Truly it is very hard to render a Reason thereof, neither perhaps dare we
engage our selves by promise to give satisfaction in all respects herein to the
curious. Therefore instead of an answer we dedicate to the Reader these
subsequent observations as not altogether unprofitable.

First, The Bones in many do agree with the substance of the Bowels. For first
they consist of a certain similary matter severed from the preterfluent Blood,
not needing any laborious assimilation, and seem to admit a most easy
nutrition till they arrive at the exaltation and highest pitch of their
increase; Moreover, they seem to be nourished until by age they are brought to
an extreme dryness, and they seem not to be obnoxious to any considerable
extenuation; so the substances of the Bowels are similary being joined together
by the separation almost of the Blood alone, and they likewise easily encreas,
and are difficultly and rarely extenuated. Secondly, The Bones are nourished
almost after the same manner, as the Parenchymata or substances of the Bowels:
Through the Arteries they receive the blood, through the Veins they amandate
and conveigh away the superfluous portion of it, and instead of Vessels of the
third kind whereby the excrements are expelled, they are furnished with Cells
and Cavities. Some perhaps may doubt of the Arteries of the Bones, because so
hard and rigid a part may seem unapt to admit any pulsation of the Arteries
within it, we grant indeed that the Bones in regard of their hardness and
stifness are less apt for the pulsation of the Arteries, and therefore we
acknowledge that they admit not within them any notable ramification or
branching of Arteries; but if any man will from thence infer that no Arteries
are admitted into them, truly herein he must expect our absolute denial, for
they are living Parts, they are nourished, they grow, and they exercise the
Attractive, Retentive, Concoctive, and Expulsive faculties. Again, they receive
the Blood, which they cannot do but by the conduit Pipes of the Arteries, and
this is manifest by the bloodiness of them, when the Bones of Living Creatures
are either broken or any other way divided. In young Creatures the spongy
substance of the Bones, and the very Marrow is sensibly perfused with Blood,
and the greatest part of their Cavities is filled more with Blood than Marrow.
In elder and greater Creatures you may observe both Veins and Arteries through
the Membranes enwrapping the Marrow; all which things do sufficiently prove
that the Blood is distributed into the very Bones. But wise Nature (who in the
conformation of all the parts does most equisitely and aptly proportion all
things) foreseeing here that the Veins and Arteries could not conveniently be
extended by a longer carnification through the substance of the Bones by reason
of their hardness, she casts that vast number of them, some being as small as
hairs, into almost inconspicuous little holes in the Bones. But if you soundly
boil the Bones of greater Creatures these Orifices of the insertion of the
Vessels may very easily be perceived in the outward superficies if you remove
the Skin enwrapping the Bones. But let this suffice concerning the Veins and
Arteries of the Bones, seeing that this matter is somewhat incoherent with our
scope. As for the Vessels of the third kind, seeing that the excrements of the
Bones were not about to prove altogether improfitable, nor could commodiously
be expelled out of the Body, Nature, instead of a Vessel of the third kind has
made certain Recepticles (namely Cavities and Cells) into which she would
exno^rate and cast aside the excrements, namely that fat part which is
altogether improfitable to furnish the Bones with nourishment. There are some
who suppose the Marrow to be the principal nourishment of the Bones, but very
inconsiderately, seeing that the Marrow, as we have said, is altogether unapt
for the generation and nourishment of the Bones, for the bones are not only
most hard and solid and naturally of a white color, but they consist of a
certain earthy and clammy substance, which conditions differ very much from
Marrow. Again, Marrow cannot by any art be sublimated to the firmness of a
Bone. Moreover, Marrow melts, and is dissolved with a moderate heat of the
fire; but the Bones endure the most ardent flames of fire without any melting.
Besides, Boil the Bones as long as you please, they resolve into a gelly, not
into the substance of, or like Marrow. Again, Bones may be worn to powder, so
cannot Marrow. Certain therefore it is, that the marrow is not the Aliment of
the Bones but a kind of excrement, or rather secrement of them, profitable
indeed, and therefore to be preserved in those receptacles. For the Bones being
otherwise dry, cold, and rough, would be unapt for motion, were they not
moistened and made slippery by the exundations and exhalations of the Marrow,
and cherished by their gentle heat. All these things are confirmed by this
single experiment. In young Creatures the greatness of the Bones being
considered, there is less Marrow in the Bones, and more Blood, than in greater
Creatures. In the Embrion, there are scarce observed any signs or appearances
of Marrow destinct from the Blood. But after the birth the medullary substance
is daily augmented, and it is visibly perceived to be less and less
intermingled with the Blood; again in the maturity of years the Bones are
filled almost with pure and sincere Marrow, without any considerable commixture
of Blood; but in the approaches of old age it is credible that the Bones are
less and less watered with the circulation of the Blood; and perhaps the Marrow
it self upon the suspension and cessation of the nourishment is rather
augmented than diminished; in which respect the propounded experiment must be
peradventure limited. Thirdly, the Bones (the Teeth perhaps excepted) cannot
want their nervs, at least very little, neither are they supposed to be
otherwise sensible, then by reason of the Periostium, or the Fibers thereof
fastened into the Orifices of the Bones. In like manner the substances of the
Bowels seem to obtain that dull sense, which they possess, rather by the
Membranes and vessels, then from their own substance.

From hence we collect, that the Bones in this affect are not much otherwise
affected, than the substance of the Bowels in respect of nourishment. We have
already showed that the Bones are not to be reckoned among the first affected
parts, as likewise neither the Parenchymata: only we here further affirm that
all the Bones universally considered, are not perhaps less sparingly nourished
in this Diseas, than they usually are in sound Bodies, for if they be nourished
by way of coaugmentation, or joining together, as the Parenchymata are, and
with such facility also, if they possess Arteries and Veins delated unto them,
and Cells, and Cavities to receive the Blood, if they be not in the number and
condition of the first affected parts, and if they receive not Nerves from the
spinal Marrow; it is very credible that they do duly receive, laudably retain,
and perfectly concoct their Aliment. Moreover, If you will consult experience,
Children afflicted with this Diseas, a regard being had to their age, and the
magnitude of their parts, weigh heavier than others for the most part, as we
have sometimes observed, which very thing seems partly to be ascribed to the
greatness of the Bones. Although in this case we wish more frequent, certain,
and accurate observations, which others who are befriended with opportunity may
oblige the world withal: in the mean time we suppose in general that the Bones
are not illiberally nourished in this Diseas.

Some may reply, That what has hitherto been spoken does concern the
nourishment of the Bones in general, but that they yield not a reason of the
protuberances in them.

We deny it not, but seeing that these faults of the Bones depend upon their
unequal nourishment, as we have already proved, we supposed it would not be
unprofitable to purpose some reason of their nourishment in general: now we
draw nearer to the aforesaid swellings of the Bones. And we observe, Secondly,
That those tumors of the Bones are not of a different kind in respect of the
other parts of the same Bone, but that they are parts altogether similary and
of the like kind with the rest, and that they are not faulty in respect of the
similary Constitution, but in respect only of their greatness and figure.

From hence it follows thirdly, that these swellings are not produced by any
illegetimate matter of the Bones, or by any other virtue than the same by which
and from which the other are generated.

Fourthly, That the said swellings are produced by an unequal nourishment of
the Bones, as by a more liberal nourishment of the swelling parts, and a
sparing nourishment of the other parts of the same Bone. And these Three last
observations we have already abundantly proved where we treated of the affected
parts.

Fifthly, We observe the Epiphyses of the Bones in the Wrests and Ankles, and
perhaps in some other places, to be more soft and spongy than in the other
parts of the same Bones. And peradventure they receive into themselves greater
Arteries and Veins, although indeed we are not yet fully assured of this. The
tops of the Ribs are also much more soft and spongy than the other parts of
them. From whence we infer that those more soft and spongy parts of the Bones
may more easily and freely admit the circulation of the Blood, and therefore be
more plentifully nourished than the rest of the parts of them. You will say,
That softness and sponginess of those parts is observed to be as well in
healthful Children as in those affected with this Diseas. We grant it, but yet
it must needs be, that those parts which are of a more compacted substance, and
with difficulty admit the circulation of the Blood, must be affected and
obstructed upon lighter causes, then those parts that are more open, and more
easily receive it. But the Blood in this affect is transmitted to the external
parts somewhat more cold, viscous, and thick, then it ought to be; therefore
those parts which are unapt to admit the circulation of it, those are more apt
to be somewhat obstructed, and less liberally nourished.

But, Why also are not those soft and spongy parts more liberally nourished in
sound Bodies, seeing that they (as has been said) do more plentifully receive
the Blood?

We answer, Because, as in health those parts do in a larger measure receive
the Blood through the Arteries, so they remit the same more plentifully through
the veins which certainly does preserve them from that excessive augmentation
unto which otherwise they would grow. But in this affect the same parts by
reason of the coldness thickness, and viscosity of the Blood, do perhaps more
sparingly and more slowly remit it, then it is poured in to them; and therefore
from that abundance and excess of the Blood, those parts do somewhat increase;
whilst the other parts of the Bones by reason of the narrowness of the cavity
of the Artery, are not perhaps sufficiently nourished with Blood, whereby to
obtain an equal nutrition and increas. And from hence (at least probably) we
deduce the inequallity of the nutrition of the Bones in this affect. But the
condition of the Blood whereby in this Diseas it is apt to obstruct an* parts
through which it flows, seems to have a peculiar respect to the quality of the
Bones. For in the Bowels, the Lungs excepted, the Blood does seldom Generate
obstructions, as also ne ither in the first affected Parts: However it be the
Bony substance, either because it is incapable of the internal slipperiness, or
because the nutritive juice in the mas of Blood is peculiarly apt to congeal in
the parts so vehemently fixed: or lastly, because it has in its own nature
some affinity with the Bones: we say, the Bony substance is easily infested
with obstructions in this Diseas, and thereupon it happneth to be unequally
nourished.

The Faults of breeding Teeth are likewise to be referred hither, seeing that
they also seem to depend upon this unequal nutrition of the Bones. For if the
Teeth should be equally nourished, they would be of a uniform substance, and
would not fall out by pieces, as it here frequently happneth. For the similary
parts, when they are equally nourished, acquire not such an interrupted and
unequal consistence, as to be easily broken in pieces. Wherefore seeing the Teeth
are parts naturally delighting in a similary substance, were they equally
nourished, they should enjoy an equal and uniform consistance, and would either
continue firm in their gums, or would fall out whole: And there can scarce any
other reason be given, why they should be broken and fall out more on one side,
or in one part then another. We grant indeed that their aptness to break, may
hitherto conduce very much: but we conceive that even that aptness to break,
does in great part depend upon the unequal nutrition aforesaid. For otherwise
the Teeth do usually obtain a very firm, solid, and coherent substance; and the
truth is, they seem to consist especially in this viscous affect of a very
matter. For the Blood for the most part is observed to be more viscous and
thick then ordinary, so that this aptness to break off the Teeth, cannot be so
easily ascribed to a defect of viscosity in the matter, as it may much more
probably to the inequallity of the nutrition. We conclude therefore that the
standing out of the Bones, and likewise the faults of the Teeth, do proceed
from the unequal nutrition of these parts, arising from a peculiar obstructive
disposition of the Blood, having reference especially to the Bones. Now we
proceed to the crookedness of the Bones in this affect.

Fourthly, In this affect the Bones are frequently somewhat crooked, especially
the Shin Bones, and the lesser Bones of the Legs; also the Bones of the Cubit,
the lesser of the two long Bones of the Cubits, and the bigger Shank-Bone,
sometimes the Bones of the Sholder and Thigh: some Joints also become crooked,
sometimes inward, sometimes outward: the whole Spine is likewise many times
bended, sometimes it is wreathed like the letter S; namly, partly forwards,
partly backwards, and sometimes partly to the right Hand, partly to the left.

Some ascribe this crookedness of the Bones, to the bending faculty of them;
for say they, in the tender age of Children, the Bones themselves are not so
stiff stubborn, and inflexible, as in their riper years; and therefore upon the
invasion of this Diseas, they are rendered in some degree easily flexible.
Therefore they rebuke the Nurses, which too soon commit the children to their
Feet, supposing, that the Bones are made crooked by the sustained burden of
their Bodies. Others also tax the Nurses of imprudence in swaddling them.

But we cannot yield our full assent in all respects to these Reasons. And first
we flatly deny, that the Bones of Children afflicted with this Diseas are more
flexible, or less stiff and friable then the Bones of others. For we have
already proved, that the Bones in this affect do not differ in respect of their
similary substance from the Bones of sound persons. Besides, no man hitherto
worthy of credit has attested that he has seen the Bones flexible in this
Diseas. Moreover, if we should grant that in this tenderness of years the Bones
might perhaps be somewhat bended, yet they would not continu so bent like lead
or wax, but being left to their liberty they would return again to the proper
position and figure of the parts. For they consist not of any ductile matter,
and therefore by being thus bent, they would either be broken or else doubtless
they would endeavor to reobtain their former situation. As for the ignorance or
negligence of Nurses, although we do not altogether excuse it, yet cannot we
justly impute this crookedness of the Bones to their carelessness. We see the
Children of Poor People are ordered and handled with less care, and sooner
committed to their feet then the Children of the rich, yet the Children of Poor
People are more rarely afflicted with this infirmity, then the Children of the
rich. Besides, we have known Nurses use all manner of diligence as swaddling
them, and every other way laboring to prevent this incurvation, yet al their
pains, otherwise praisworthy, has in this respect been succesless. Therefore we
must endeavor to find out some other cause of this crookedness.

We compare the Bones therefore, in which this crookedness uses to happen, to a
Pillar, and not unaptly, seeing, that when they are erected, they resemble a
Pillar; and from thence we deduce a demonstration that illustrates and makes
the matter very plain. Let the Pillar therefore consist of three stones A B C
placed over one another. We suppose it such an one as is perpendicularly
erected on every side, and of the same height: If therefore you shall fasten in a
wedge on the right side between A

B

C

D

E

F

G

the stones A B through the line F D, the Head of the Pillar; Namely, the stone
A will of necessity be bended toward D and will make an Angle in D, and the
height of the Pillar on the right side, will be higher than on the left. In like
manner if you drive in another wedg through G E into the stones BC the pillar
will be yet more bowed, and the angle will be made in E. Now therefore the Pillar
stands bent to the left hand after this manner.

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

ABCFGDE. but if you build the Pillar of more stones, and betwixt every two, as
has been said, a wedg be interposed on one side, it will not resemble the
figure of a Pillar, but the proportion of a Bow, as by this following may be
perceived.

A

B



Now that we may accommodate these things to the present business, if the Bones
aforesaid be more plentifully nourished on one side, and therefore do grow out
more on that then the opposite side, there is a necessity, that that must grow
crooked: For here the overplentiful nutrition of that side, has the same power
after the same manner to bow the Bones, as the interposed wedg has to bow the
Pillar, save that the wedg is fastened only in some places of the side of the
Pillar, and the overplentiful nutrition of the side of the Bone, is commonly
equally made, according to the whole length thereof. For the aliment received
into the Bone, in what part it more liberally admits it, that part it
obstructeth: and like the wedg thrust into the Pillar it extends it into an
augmented length, whereupon the Bones must needs be bowed toward that side
which is not lengthened in an equal degree with the other. Moreover, if the
production of one side of the Pillar happen only in one or two places thereof
and not in many, as in the third figure, then so much the nearer the inflexion
of it approaches to the figure of a part of a Circle, or a Bow. But if the
said side according to the total longitude thereof should be equally lengthened
beyond the opposite side, doubtless it would be bended toward the opposite
side, and would exactly resemble a piece of a Circle or Bow without any Angles,
just after the same manner, arises the bending of the Bones in this affect:
namly, from the greater lengthning of the side most nourished; for seeing that
that lengthning happneth by the received aliment, according to all the parts of
that side, an Angular figure cannot be expected, or one compounded of many
straight ones angularly connexed, but a crooked one like a Bow, wherein the
unequal part is constituted by the side, plentifully nourished, and the concave
or hollow part by the side, which is sparingly nourished. But when it happneth
that some part of the unequal side of a crooked Bone is disproportionatly
nourished, in respect of the opposite side, without all doubt the unequal Bone
will stick out more on that part then in the rest: and so from the inequallity
of the nutrition, we have given a reason of the crookedness of the Bones in
this affect. We will ad for a higher confirmation of this matter. An observation
raised from the cure of this crookedness of the Bones. The Quacks of our
Country are wont to rub daily the hollow, not the unequal sides of the Bones,
and that rubbing, say they, does very much conduce to the cure, but this does
rather hinder it. But it is certain that rubbing does powerfully summon the
nutritive juice out of the Bloody mass into the part so rubbed, therefore if at
any time you rub that hollow part which is insufficiently nourished, it is no
wonder if it do good, seeing that thereby the aliment is more plentifully
allured, and the heat of the part is also excited and augmented; neither on the
other side is the Gibbous part of the Bone, being hurt by rubbing to be wondered
at, because by that means the aliment is attracted to that part which was
before superabundantly nourished: besides, the Ointments, which may cherish the
inherent heat, and strengthen the nutritive faculties, after the rubbing, do
most good, when they are applied to the hollow part of the Bone; but the unequal
part a strait ligature which may restrayn the rising up of the Bones is usually
fitted with desired success: chiefly indeed for this reason, because the
capillary Arteries which convey the Blood, or nutritive juice, to that side of
the Bone, are bound up by such a ligature, and thereupon the nutriment is
lessened. And these things shall suffice concerning the crookedness of the Bones
in this affect.

Moreover, To this Article we opportunely ad the inflexion of some of the
Joints, as of the Knees, and Ankles, which happneth very frequently in this
Diseas. sometimes being made inwardly, sometimes outwardly, And this bending also
seems to be not unfitly referred to the inequallity of nutrition. For if it
happen by unequal nutrition, that one side of the Shank-Bone be so lengthned
more then the other: suppose outwardly, that it does somewhat lift up the
outward part of the Epiphysis of the Shank-Bone above the inward part, the
joint in the Knee must needs stand outwardly bent; and on the contrary, if the
inward part be lifted up, and the outward depressed, the same Joint must needs
stand inwardly bent: as may be easily perceived by the following Figures.

C

B

A

D

C

A

D

B

C

B

A

D

A

D

C

B



In the Joint of the Knee, A B, that part of the appendance of the Shank-bone
B, in the two first Figures, is higher than the other part of the same
appendance; whereupon the Bone of the Thigh (is inwardly bowed, and so likewise
is the Shin-bone D; but the Joint A B is thrust somewhat outwardly. But in the
two last Figures all the contrary things may be observed. The Joint A B is
inwardly, because that part of the Shinbone A, is higher than the other part of
it B. Whereupon it must needs lift up the inner and lower top of the
Thigh Bone, so that the Thigh Bone will be bent outwardly, and the Joint
inwardly.

The same thing likewise may happen in the Anklebones, and the turning Joints
of the Back, if the Bones fastened to the Joint be higher on one side than on
the other. But in the Ankles, because there, besides the Shin-bone, the lesser
Bone of the Leg is also fastened through the Joint, it may so fall out, that the
lesser Bone below may stand out further than the Shin-bone, and so bend
outwardly the Joint of the Ankle; and on the contraty, if it happen that the
Shin-bone be longer than the lesser bone, the Joint must needs be inwardly
bent. Although we confess that such an inequality of length between the
Shin-bone and the lesser Bone in the Leg does not so often happen.

Moreover, We suppose that the preternatural bending of the Spine does rarely
happen from the unequal altitude of the sides of the turning Joints of the
Bones, but more often from another cause which we will now prosecute. We have
already said that the Spine is somewhat weak in this affect, and that Children
afflicted with this Diseas are unapt not only to motion, but also to stand upon
their feet, yea, and to raise their backs by reason of the weakness of the
Spine. Therefore whenever their Bodies are raised, they seek somewhat to rest
upon, and they suffer their Spine to be bowed sometimes forwards, sometimes
backwards, sometimes to the right hand, and sometimes to the left; whereby the
burden of their Body may be rested upon something that stands near them.
Hereupon it many times happens, that the Ligaments of the turning Joints of the
Spine in that part which is most commonly bending out are loosned and
lengthned, and on the opposite side they are contracted; so that intract of
time the Spine cannot be erected according to the straight and natural Figure.
And truly in this case we cannot excuse the Nurses indiligence or negligence,
because they do not observe with a sufficient attentiveness, to which part the
Children which they suckle are most prone to bend their Bodies, that by that
means they may endeavor to bend them to the opposite part: In like manner also
when Nurses without due regard and care do too soon commit weak Children to the
use of their feet, it may happen, that, when the regular motion of the Muscles
is too weak to bear the Body, Children may suffer either their Knee or Ankle to
be bowed to one side; whereupon the Ligaments of the Joint are extended either
on the inner or the outward side, and by consequence the Ligaments on the
contrary side are contracted, whereupon the joint must needs be bended either
inwardly or outwardly, therefore although we have denied above that the
crookedness of the Bones depends hereupon, yet we grant that the bending of
the Joints may happen in weak Children by the negligence of the Nurses. We
grant moreover that the Bones which would otherwise have been straight, may be
crooked by an unskilful swaddling; yet that this cause does happen exceeding
rarely in this affect we are somewhat confident, as we have showed already more
at large. Now we proceed to the pointedness and narrowness of the breast in
this affect.

We observe that this pointedness and narrowness of the Breast does not appear
presently at the beginning of this affect, but that it succeeds upon the
confirmation of the Diseas, and is by degrees intended, till by the
perseverence of the Diseas it becomes evident and conspicuous, when the Breast
forwards resembles the Breast of a Hen, or the Keel of a Ship. This viciated
Figure of the Breast which otherwise should be broad according to Nature, and
not straightned on the sides, and even not pointed forwards, we reduce to four
causes. The three former whereof we confess do contribute little efficacy to
this matter, but the fourth alone does almost all the work. Yet because the
three former do contribute something, we will likewise recite them here in
order. Be this the first, In this affect the Bone of the Stern by reason of the
augmented Bulk of the Liver is somewhat elevated or thrust forward, whereupon
there happens some part of the said viciated Figure; and moreover from the
same elevation of the Bone of the Stern there happens a certain contraction
of the Ribs toward the Spine, and this causes the other part of the viciated
Figure. This contraction of the Ribs we thus demonstrate. Let the circle be A B
A

B

C

D

C D, this must be supposed to be made of a flexible matter, but not equally
extensible, as for example, of the Bone of a Whale. Therefore when the sides A C
are both stretched from one another, so that line of distance is produced into
length between A C, then the sides of that circle D B are necessarily
contracted almost in equal degree, and by the same means the line of lateral
distance from D to B is abreviated; for the Circle becomes an Oval Figure, as
any man shall find who will take the pains to reduce it to experiment. For the
Figure will be changed into this form which the Figure following does express; A

B

C

D

In which the line of distance between A and C is represented longwise, and
withal the line D B appears to be abreviated, and the Circle becomes Oval;
neither is there need of more words to prove this matter.

Now it must be known that the opposite couples of the Ribs do express a
certain rude kind of circular Figure, especially the uppermost which chiefly
fashion the Breast, by the mediation of the Spine on the hinder part, and the
Stern on the fore part. Nor should it trouble any man, because they will not
make an exact and perfect Circle, seeing that our demonstration is as effectual
in a circular Figure how imperfect soever, as in the most exquisite and
perfect; provided that there be a coherence among all the parts, that they be
not distorted, that they be flexible, but not easily extensible; which
conditions are sufficiently conspicuous in the Figure of the Ribs even now
proposed to view. Therefore if in this affect the Bone of the Stern be somewhat
elevated forwards, that it may yield room to the augmented Bulk of the Liver,
the Ribs toward the Spine must needs be drawn in nearer to one another,
whereupon the Breast must unavoidably be laterally straightned, the latitude of
it, being lessened.

Some may say, If the rising of the Bone of the Stern did conduce any thing to
the pointed Figure of the Breast, it would chiefly effect that about the
inferior Ribs, seeing that this elevation of the Stern does begin at the lower
part; but it is manifestly known to fall out otherwise; for the narrowness of
the Breast happens chiefly about the Armpits, and afterward beneath the
Channel Bones; but the lower Ribs seem to be enlarged about the sides rather
than straightned.

We answer, That the Five lower Ribs are not articulated with the Stern,
neither do they make a perfect Circle; and therefore in no wise do they relate
to the propounded demonstration; but the stretching of them depends upon
another cause, namely, the fullness of the Hypocondriacal parts. Let it likewise
be noted that we assign not this for the chief cause of the viciated Figure,
yea, we suppose that it conferreth very little toward it. And so we proceed to
the second cause of this viciated Figure, which we also conceive to be a very
slight one.

In this affect the Hypochondriacal parts is almost perpetually observed to be
full and stretched, namely both in respect of the greatness of the Liver, and
also because all the other Bowels almost which are contained in the bottom of
the Belly are sufficiently large; seeing that as has been said, the first
essence of this Diseas is not rooted in them. And lastly, Because the Guts and
the Ventricle are usually more or less distended with wind. But now from that
fullness and extension of the Hypochondriacal parts we may justly collect that
in this affect the Ribs are drawn downwards a little more than is expedient.
For the greatest extension is here observed in the oblick Muscles that are
extended beneath the Hypochondriacal parts; Now the Muscle obliquely discending
has toothed heads fastened to the sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth Ribs, and
the part of the broad tend on also oblickly ascending is adjoined to the
grizles of the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Ribs. Wherefore seeing that the said
Muscles are almost pertually too much extended in this affect, they must needs
in some manner draw the said Ribs downwards, and seeing all the Ribs are firmly
fastened together by the intercostal Muscles, it happened that in this affect all the Ribs are somewhat drawn downwards. But now that these Ribs so drawn down do
somewhat straighten the Breast may be perceived by this following Figure.

Fig. 1.
A

F

C

D

E

B

Fig. 2
A

F

C

D

E

B

Fig. 3
A

F

C

D

E

B



Let A B be the Backbone. CD E the Rib. F the Bone of the Stern. We suppose
that every one may see here in the Skeleton, that the Ribs are not conjoined
with the Spine, according to the straight Angle, but that the Angle beneath the
Rib is somewhat less then the straight Angle: So that if the Rib be drawn a
little upwards, the Articulation of it approaches nearer to a straight line.
We suppose also, that the circulation of the Rib, whether with the Spine or
with the Stern abides firm, and does not draw upwards (least any man should
er) save only the middle parts of the Rib between the said Articulations. We
say, therefore on the contrary by how much the more downwards the Rib is drawn,
so much the more acute is the Angle with the Spine, which it then makes:
Wherefore that part of the Rib furthest distant from the Backbone A BC; (namly,
D in each of the Figures) as being thrown downwards, it constitutes a more
acute Angle with the Spine, so is it also less distant from the Spine then it
was before, and renders the broadness of the Breast more narrow. For the sides
of the Breast were then indeed most broad, when the Ribs are most erected upon
the Spine, according to a straight line. For that part of the Rib D will be then
furthest distant from the Backbone A B, as you may soon perceive if you
compare the first and second figure with the third. For in the third Figure,
the Rib is expressed erect in a straight line, with the Backbone, and then that
part of the Rib D is sensibly further distant from the Backbone A B, then it
is in the first or second figure, as he that will examine them, shall quickly
apprehend: but in the second Figure, the Rib with the Spine is supposed to make
a more acute Angle, and in proportion that part of it D (as you may perceive)
is less distant from the Spine than the same part D in the same Figure, whose
Angle is supposed to be less acute; and yet that is much less distant from the
Spine, then in the* third Figure, whose Articulation is erected to a straight
Angle. We infer therefore, that the Ribs, when they are drawn upwards, do
amplify the Breast sidewise, but when they are drawn downwards, then they
straighten the Breast on the sides.

This is further confirmed in that, because at such time when the Breast is
dilated; namly, when the breathing is rightly performed, the Ribs are drawn a
little upwards by the strength and force of the Intercostal Muscles; and when
the expiration is performed; namly, when the Breast is contracted, the same
Ribs are drawn back again downwards by the help of the oblique Muscles of the
Abdomen. Any man may observe this in himself or in any other man especially in
great inspirations and expirations. For in a vehement inspiration he shall
plainly perceive at the same time to be lifted upwards, and withal to enlarge
the breadth of the Breast; but in a vehement expiration he shall feel the Ribs
as it were bowed downwards, and at the same time contracted inwards. Neither of
these things could happen, unless the position of the Ribs were such, as that
those beneath in respect of the Spine, should make an acute Angle, and being
more depressed, should make it so much the more acute, and by consequence the
Breast, should be then most straightned; and on the contrary being lifted
upwards, they should appracch near to a straight Angle, with the Spine, and so
extend the sides of the Breast. We conclude therefore that the Ribs in this
affect ar drawn somewhat downwaads, and that the Breast is contracted on the
sides, by reason of the plenitude and tensity of Hypochondrical parts; although
we grant as we have intimated above, that this cause is not so considerable,
that we should attribute any great part of this Diseas unto it.

Be this therefore the third, The Cause of this vitiated Figure of the Breast, Is
a lateral growing of the Lungs in the Pleura, in this Diseas especially, being
confirmed it is most frequently observed to happen. Doubtless such an
adnascency does restrain and interrupt the motion of the Ribs outwardly, whereby
the Breast is laterally dilated. For if the Rib, under which this adnascency
lies, should endeavor forcibly to remove it self, from the center of the
Breast, there would be danger of pulling the Lungs that grow to it, or the
Pleura it self from the ribs with intolerable pain. For although the Lungs
upon the ingress of the air admit an easy extension, according to all the parts
thereof, yet when they fall down, or are stuffed with thick humors (which most
frequently happneth in this case) they scarce admit any notable distention,
without dissolving the unity either of some Vessel, Membrane, or the substance
of the Bowels themselves. Moreover, whilst we consider that in sound bodies the
Lungs are very rarely laterally divided from the Pleura; and but in those parts
only of the chest, which were to be exposed to motion at a considerable
distance; namely, the Back, the Stern, the Mediastinum (that is the Membranes
that divide the middle of the Belly) and perhaps the middle parts of the
Diaphragma, etc. We conceive that wise nature did this deliberatly and with
design; namly, least their connexions should either offend the dilitations of
the Breast, or render the Lungs themselves obnoxious to those kind of
calamities. However it be, it is scarce conceivable, but that preternatural
growing together of the Lungs, with the Pleura more or less must hinder and
retard the free spreading of the Ribs toward the sides, and therefore it
conduces a little at least to occasion the narrowness of the Breast.

Be this the fourth, The cause of the vitiated Figure aforesaid, is an unequal
nutrition of certain parts of the Ribs in respect of others. And this cause we
affirm to be much more effectual then the rest, to procure this Symptom. Which
that we may demonstrate, we assert first, that the seven uppermost Ribs do
chiefly, if not solely, constitute this Figure of the Breast for the five
lowermost, as they are not immediately conjoined with the Stern; So neither can
they in any manner point, or elevate the Stern. Ad also, that seeing (as we have
already showed) they do not close in perfect Circles, their Figure is easily
movable, that it may more or less yield to the fullness of the Hypochondriacal
parts. But the seven upper Ribs are Articulated by their Grizles, with the
Bones of the Stern: from whence it may perhaps com to pass, that they do
somewhat lift up foreright those bones of the Stern, which they do touch, when
the five lower Ribs being deprived of the contact of the Stern, cannot effect
it. Secondly, We assert, that all the Ribs, and not only the five lowermost,
but also the seven uppermost do admit an equal nutrition in this affect, and
that they are more nourished in one part then in another, and therefore that
they are more extended in length by that, then by the other, which is more
sparingly nourished: and indeed that they grow more on that side in which they
are conjoined with the Gristles of the Stern, and that they are less and more
slowly lengthened on the other part, namly, the Head or top, whereby they are
fastened to the Regions of the Back. The Reason is, because the forepart of any
Rib is more soft and spongy, then the hinder part of it, as any man may make
trial in any Creature. Seeing therefore (as it is clear by what has been said)
that the softer parts of the Bones do in this affect more easily receive their
aliment and augmentation, then the harder and more solid, it follows that the
foremost parts of the Ribs which are most soft, are more lengthened than the
undermost. Thirdly, We assert, that in a Body of a Circular or Anulary Figure,
if one part of the Ring be more lengthened than another, the other parts must
needs give place to this increas, or else that part so unequally lengthened,
will either outwardly hang out, or be inwardly knotted, either upwards or
downwards, and be bent either one, or many of these ways. This we thus
demonstrate. Let the Circle or Ring be A A

B

E

C

F

D

B. Let the former parts of it be supposed to be lengthened from A to B. But
the other parts of it; namly, C D E to remain in their position, and not at al
to yield to the said lengthning. These things being supposed, the lengthened
portion of the circle, namely, A B must needs be either lifted up outward, or
depressed inwards, either bent upwards or downwards or variously: For otherwise
the distance between the limits of the string F would not suffice to contain
that portion of the Circle now lengthened, the figure of the Bow being changed.
For those limits did only suffice before; therefore the Bow being lengthened,
and not the string, or the tops and limits of the string, it cannot be, that
the Bow should be to the string as before. It must be changed therefore, the
bending being made either outward or inwards, or upwards or downwards, or many
of these ways, as may be perceived by the Figures following. The first Figure
represents a Bow outwardly prominent* The second, Inwardly, and the third
variously bent and intorted. And indeed the first does very fitly set out the
Figure of the Breast vitiated in this affect. For we have noted above, that the
ribs articulated E

B

F

D

A

B

F

C

E

D

A

B

C

F

D

with the Stern and Spine do make a kind of imperfect Ring, and that they are
in this affect sooner nourished, and lengthned in the foremost, then in the
hindermost part, therefore in respect of the cause this Symptom fully and fitly
agrees with that Figure first described. Besides, we have supposed that the
parts of the Circle do remain firm: that also in this affect may be
accommodated to the lateral and hindermost parts of the ribs For seeing these
grow much less then the foremost, certainly, they may well be supposed to be
stable, unless, perhaps some may say, that either the sides and hinder parts of
the Ribs, by dilating themselves, or their Joints, with which they are fastened
with the turning Joints of the Back, by suffering the Ribs to be bended
backwards, do yield somewhat to that exceeding augmentation. But neither of
these can be rightly said. For first, the latter and hinder parts of any Rib as
they are more hard and solid, so are they likewise more stiff and strong then
the foremost; now it is absurd to imagine that the weaker parts of the same Rib
can bend the stronger, or that the less flexible parts will yield to those
parts which are easily flexible. Wherefore the lateral and hinder parts of the
ribs cannot be so bent, as that they should yield to the foremost lengthened
parts thereof. As for the Joints of the Ribs, doubtless that Joint, wherewith
the Rib is conjoined with the turning Joint of the Breast, can by no means
suffer the Rib to be bent so much backward, as that it should yield to the
lengthning thereof; and that not only because it is double; namly, in the
hollowness of the turning Joint, and in the transversal process thereof: and
therefore very unapt to permit a backward motion. But chiefly, because it is
even ten times stronger than the foremost Joint, wherewith the same rib is
fastened to the Bone of the Stern. Now a Joint ten times stronger, and withal
double, and in such a manner formed double that it is altogether unapt to
endure any retrograde motion, cannot by any means be imagined to yield
backwards, least the Joint ten times weaker should be bent somewhat forwards. We
must conclude therefore, that the lateral and hinder parts of the Ribs do not
yield to that unequal production of them, which happneth forwards, and by
consequence, that in this respect they are to be accounted firm; and therefore
that unequal lengthning, must needs change the figure of them, on the forepart;
and that by bending them there either upwards or downwards, or inwards or
outward, or diverse ways.

This bending of the Ribs here cannot be made either upwards or downwards,
because the Ribs in regard of their latitude are unapt to be bowed either way.
Ad also because that they are firmly restrained by the Intercostal Muscles in
their position; so that without offers of violence to these Muscles, they can
scarce be bent, either upwards or downwards.

That that elongation cannot, or indeed very scarcely can bow the Rib inwards
may thus be proved; because, the greatness of the Liver is repugnant to such a
motion. For we have proved before, that the greatness of that Bowel does
somewhat lift up the Bone of the Stern outwardly or forwardly. Then the very
figure of a Circular Rib does evidently contradict the inward making of any
plication, or bending. Lastly, because that elongation does not many ways bend
the Ribs, it may from thence also be inferred, that such a bending would infer
a compound Figure, and should necessarily contain some of the simple figures
before rejected.

Wherefore we conclude, that that unequal length of the Ribs on the forepart,
must needs change their outward Figure, elevating the Bone of the Stern, and
then pointing forwards the Figures of the Breast (otherwise almost even.) The
following Scheams do lively express the manner of it.

A

C

D

B

A

C

D

B



Let A be the Bone of the Stern, B the turning Joints of the Back. C and D the
two opposite Ribs, which as we have said do make a kind of Ring. Therefore if
the forepart of the Ribs; namly, between C and A and between D and A be
lengthned, and yet the parts between C B and D B are no way answerable to this
elongation, the figure of the Ring must needs be outwardly changed. Therefore
seeing that the Rib is, (as we have already showed) unapt to be bent either
upwards or downwards, or inwards, it must needs be outwardly bowed, as it is
expressed in the second Figure, where the stern A by reason of the elongation of
the part of the Rib CA and D A is represented, as if it were outwardly pointed,
which is the very vitiated Figure of the Breast in this Diseas.

Beside the causes of the narrowness of the Breast hitherto commemorated, we
can here ad the small increase of the Ribs between C and B and also between B
and D. For the Just Latitude of the breast does chiefly depend upon a du
augmentation of those parts of the Ribs. For if those parts of the Ribs do grow
to a just length, they must necessarily dilate the Breast unto the Ribs almost
in a just proportion, that little of the narrowness only being taken away,
which the former causes alone were able to introduce. For by how much the more
those parts of the Ribs are lengthened, by so much the more also the Lateral
part of the Rib D and the part C will be distant from the Backbone B, and will
make the Breast so much the broader. On the contrary when upon the increas of
the other parts of the Body, those parts of the Ribs are but little, or not at
al augmented, they must of necessity be laterally less distant from the center
of the Breast then is meet, and therefore the Breast must be straightned toward
the sides. For the sides of the rib C and D are so much the less distant from
the Backbone, and the center of the Breast, as the parts of the Ribs between C
B and D B are less lengthned. And let these things suffice to have been spoken
concerning the narrowness and acumination of the Breast in this affect: With
which we put at last an end to this disquisition of the Organical vices
occurring in this Diseas.

CHAP. XIV. The Secondary Essence of this Diseas in the Animal Constitution.
HAving put an end to the examination of the Natural and Vital Constitution,
vitiated in this affect, it now remains that we make enquiry into the Animal
Constitution. And we have already affirmed, that no primary fault does here
occur, and that it is a part of the primary Essence of this Diseas. But whether
there lurk in it any secondary vice, that we shall now examine.

But seeing that neither the Ancients nor the Modern Writers, who have written
of the Animal Faculty, have made any mention of the Animal Constitution, nor
indeed so much as once attempted a description of it: It may very justly be
expected from us, who acknowledge such a Constitution. And seeing some wise men do
dissent from that description, which may be deduced from the opinion of
Antiquity, and the common opinion concerning the Animal faculty, and otherwise
expounding the matter do substitute a somewhat different description, we thought
good to offer both to the Readers consideration.

According to the former and vulgarly received opinion and description of the
Animal faculty, the animal constitution is that affection of the Body which
consists in the generation and due motion of the Animal Spirits. Now by the
due motion of the Animal Spirits they understand the excursion of them from the
Brain through the Nerves like lightning, and again their recourse back to the
Brain, whereby they declare unto it what is perceived by the Organs of the
outward Senses.

Others (as we have said) do otherwise explicate this matter. They grant indeed
that the Animal constitution does include the generation and destribution of
the Animal Spirits but they say that that swift motion of the Flux and Reflux
of the Animal Spirits like lightning, is inconceivable in the Nerves, and if it
be not unprofitable, yet certainly it is very little necessary to establish the
animal faculty. But instead of this they substitute in time of waking a certain
contractive motion, of a moving endeavor of the very substance of the Brain, of
the Spinal Marrow, of the Nerves arising from thence, and of the parts into
which they are distributed. And this motion or endeavor produces (say they) a
certain Tensity in the aforesaid parts, by whose force all the alterations
imprinted in those parts by any objects, are communicated to the Brain. For as
in a Harp when the strings are stretched to a just pitch, if they be stricken
in the most gentle manner at either end, that motion in a moment, at least a
Physical one, runs to the other end; so they likewise affirm that any Nerve
being moved which is duly stretched without the Skull, that motion is extended
to the Brain it self by reason of the continuity and Tensity of the said parts,
and there fixes a certain impression conformable to the cause thereof. But in
time of sleep they suppose the Brain, the Spinal marrow, and some of the Nerves
to be somewhat loosned. And indeed they say perpetually and simply that the
foremost connexions of the Spinal Marrow with the Brain remain loos continually
during sleep; but they grant that the hindermost connexions with the Cerebethi
are somewhat extended, as in Night-walkers, and so by that means they do in some
sort discern outward objects, but they judge not of them by common sense, but as
it were reflected from the memory to the Fantasy. Neither do they suppose it
necessary that all the inferior parts of the Spinal Marrow, and therefore the
Nerves from thence proceeding should be perpetually loosned during sleep:
seeing that most Birds sleep standing upon their feet; seeing that respiration
in time of sleep does presuppose the Tensity of some Nerves; and lastly, seeing
where sleep first steals in, the uppermost Nerves are wholly loosned before the
neathermost. As for Dreams they conceive that they proceed from a various and
chanceable agitation and commixture of diverse impressions treasured up in the
memory, which are now again freshly perceived by reason of a retained Tensity
in some parts of the Brain. But when in deep and profound sleeps no dreams are
represented, then they say that the whole Brain is loosned.

Now whether the former opinion or this latter be most agreeable to truth, for
the present we do not much care; Neither do we here undertake to determine this
Controversy, seeing that the Animal faculty does exercise his function both
ways, from the same causes, and that the secondary vice does happen by this
affect in the Animal Constitution almost after the same manner. For first, as
for the generation of the Animal Spirits, whether the former or the latter
opinion be true, it will be all one; because we find no fault in the Brain
(unless perhaps some other Diseas be conjoined) wherein each opinion supposes
the Animal Spirits to be generated. For we have showed above that the Head
ought not to be numbered among the first affected Parts, and that the internal
and proper actions thereof are not viciated in this Diseas. Then secondly, As
for the destribution of the Animal Spirits, whether it be perfected backwards
and forwards by that rapid and sudden motion like lightning, or by a motion
only made forwards and that too gentle and slow, commonly the same fault
occurreth in this Diseas.

For first, Seeing that that supposed rapid motion of the Animal Spirits is
caused by their passage into the first affected Parts, namely, through the
Spinal Martow without the Skul, through the Nerves from thence proceeding, and
through the parts into which those Nervs are distributed; and seeing that all
these parts in this affect do labor with a cold distemper, with a paucity and
dullness of inherent Spirits, the due swiftness of that motion must needs be
somewhat retarded. For a cold distemper, as also a benummedness and penury of
Spirits are repugnant to any motion, excepting a constrictive; some may say
that the opinion propounded in the first place does suppose a wonderful
activity and subtilty of the Animal Spirits, whereby they can easily overcome
this repugnance. But, however it may be, seeing that the parts react through
which the Spirits have their passage, and labor to communicate their coldness
and dullness to them, they must needs in some degree retard that activity of the
Spirits, lessen their subtilty, and somewhat intercept that expedite transition.
Wherefore this opinion being supposed as true, the Animal Constitution will be
viciated in this affect, in regard of the retundation of that motion of the
Spirits. And that secondarily, seeing that this motion is not interrupted by the
primary fault of the Animal Spirits, but by the fault of the first affected
Parts, as has been said in like manner in the Opinion last proposed, wherein
the motion of the Spirits is supposed to be peaceable and gentle, they must
needs whilst they are somewhat slowly transmitted through the first affected
parts, contract some viciosity from the depraved inherent Constitution of those
parts, for the same Reasons which we alleged in the Question immediately
preceding. It will be therefore according to this Opinion also, a Secondary vice
in the destribution of the Animal Spirits,

Again, As for the Tensity of the very substance of the Brain, of the Spinal
Marrow of the Nerves and the Nervous parts in time of waking, which is supposed
in the latter Opinion before propounded, there must needs be some defect of a
due Tensity in the Spinal Marrow without the Skull, in the Nerves arising from
thence, and in the parts unto which they are distributed. For first, A cold and
moist distemper is repugnant and advers to that due Tensitiy, so also is that
dullness and penury of inherent Spirits; wherewith the Parts are without
controversy rendered slothful, and less apt to perform the Animal Actions; the
contrary whereof happens, when the aforesaid parts obtain their due Tensity.
Secondly, It is manifest by what has been said, that the Tone of these parts
is somewhat viciated in this affect, by reason of their exceeding looseness,
slipperiness, softness, weakness and internal lubricity, which qualities do
most evidently enfeeble the just Tensity of the said Parts. Although therefore
that the Brain in this affect do for his part yield a due and just influx, yet
it is scarce possible, nay it is altogether impossible, that it should
communicate that Tensity in a sufficient degree to to the Spinal Marrow without
the Skull, to the Nerves from thence proceeding etc. because of the distemper,
benummedness and penury of the inherent Spirirs. Thirdly, The Symptoms in this
Diseas that relate to the Animal faculty do most clearly confirm the same
thing. For Children afflicted with this Diseas do from the very beginning
thereof (if they be compared with others of the same age) move and exercise
themselves very weakly, and are less delighted in manly sports: but upon the
progress of the affect, they are avers from any vehement motion, as they stand
upon their feet, they reel, wave, and stagger, seeking after somewhat to support
them, and can scarce go upright; neither take they pleasure in any play unless
sitting or lying along, or when they are carried in their Nurses Arms: Finally
the weak Spine is scarce strong enough to bear the burden of the Head, the Body
being so extremely extenuated and pined away. All which things do abundantly
demonstrate that the Tensity of the parts subservient to motion is less rigid
in this affect than is justly requisite in time of waking. If therefore that due
Tensity in time of waking be a part of the Animal Constitution, which we here
suppose, that being viciated must without all doubt necessarily constitute a
Diseas in the Animal Constitution; and seeing that this fault has no primary
dependence upon the Brain it self, but upon the inherent Constitution of the
first affected parts, it ought in all Reason to be reputed a Secondary fault in
respect of the Animal Constitution.

Yet here we meet with a scruple. Some may demand, Why the sens as well as the
faculty of motion is not vitiated in this affect? The reason is plain, a far
greater tensity, strength and vigor of the Nervs is required to exercise the
motive then the sensitive faculty. For almost the gentlest motion of the Nervs
is sufficient for sense; but not for motion. So you may observe in the motion
of any Joint, that the Muscles which move it are very hard and stiff, but that
hardness being remitted, yet the sensation is easily performed. Nor does that
any way hinder, because that sometimes in the Palsy the sense is somewhat
stupefied, and the motion remains: for the Palsy is an affect very different
from this; for in that the primary fault resides in the very Animal
Constitution, therefore it may so fall out, that both the sense and the motion
may be equally affected. Besides, when perhaps one Nerve does want the du
influx of the Brain, and another which is extended to the muscles of that part
does enjoy it, it may be, that for this cause also the sense may be abolished,
and yet the motion may continu; although this case is not so frequent, and that
the motion is more usually taken away, the sense remaining. But we have said
enough concerning this matter. And thus at length we have produced those things
which we have meditated of the integral Essence, both primary and secondary of
this Diseas; and that with as much perspicuity as a matter so difficult and
unsearcht into, would bear: In the next place we shall address our selves to the
examination of the causes of this Diseas.

CHAP. XV. The Causes of the Rachites. And first those things which concern the
Parents.
WE have largely explained above both the Primary and Secondary Essence of this
Disease. And indeed we have sufficiently demonstrated in the same place, the
dependence of the secondary upon the Primary Essence. It may not therefore be
here expected, that we should again purposely and in particular discuss the
causes of the secondary Essence, which we have handled before. It may suffice
that we have found out the causes of the secondary Essence. Yet if any cause do
occur which at once* has an influx as well into the primary or secondary
Essence of the Diseas, we shall not refuse to take notice of it, by the way as
we proceed.

But omitting al diligent search into the several kinds of causes, we purpose
to contract this our discourse chiefly to two heads. The former contains the
Infirmities and the diseased dispositions of the Parents, which perhaps have so
great an influence upon the Children, that they suppeditate, at least a proness
to this affect, and infer an aptitude to fall into it, if they have not actually
fallen into it from their very birth. The latter comprehends the accessory
causes of this Diseas; namly, those which happen to children after their birth.

Concerning the causes of the first kind we meet with a Question at the first
entrance: How and whether this Diseas may be said to be hereditary? That we may
the more succesfully proceed in the determination of this question, an
hereditary Diseas must be distinguished into that properly, and that improperly
so called. And indeed an hereditary Diseas properly so called, is ever supposed
to be preexistent in both or one of the Parents, and from thence to be derived
to the Progeny. But an hereditary Diseas improperly so called, is not supposed
to be preexistent in the same kind, either in both or one of the Parents; yet
the same fault must always necessarily precede (perhaps altogether of a
different kind) at least in one of them, by virtue whereof a certain disposedness
is imprinted in the children, whereby they are made obnoxious to fall into this
improperly hereditary Diseas.

Moreover, An hereditary Diseas properly so called, is twofold; either in the
conformation, as when a lame Person begets a lame; a deaf Father, a deaf Son,
or a blind a blind; or in the similary Constitution: as when a Gowty Father
begets a Gowty Child. It is to be noted, that in the first kind, there is an
hereditary fault inherent in the first affected parts of the Conformation. But
in the latter, there is no necessity that a Diseas of the same kind with the
Diseas of the Parents, should be actually inherent in the Embryon, from the
first formation. But such a disposition imprinted by one or both of the Parents
is sufficient, which as the life is lengthened may be actuated into the same,
by the concours of other intervening causes. Again, an hereditary Diseas
improperly so called, may be likewise twofold; namely, either in the
Conformation, or in the similary Constitution. In the formation, as when
neither of the Parents is blind, pore-blind, lame, etc. yet have begotten a Son
blind, pore-blind, or lame, by the very fault of the formation. For in these
cases, that very fault which is sensible and conspicuous in the Issu, flowed
from some fault in the Parents, although perhaps of a different kind, and so it
may be called, though improperly an hereditary Diseas. In like manner in the
similary Constitution of the Issu, there may reside an hereditary Diseas
improperly so called, as when a Melancholy, sedentary, or an intemperate
Parent, begets a Child subject to the gowt, or the Cachexia, although
perhaps the Parent was never troubled either with the one or the other.

These things being thus premised, we approach nearer to the resolving of the
Question. And first, we affirm that this Diseas is not comprehended under the
former species of an hereditary Diseas, properly so called. For that consists
in the formation: but this Diseas according to its primary Essence, is a
similary Diseas, as we have before demonstrated, and very rarely bewrays it
self from the very Birth, much less from the very conception and formation. And
for the same Reasons, we also affirm this Diseas belongs not to the former
kind of herditary Diseases improperly so called. Which after a like manner
consist in the formation of the parts, and are begun presently after the first
formation.

Secondly, We say, that so it may com to pass, that this Diseas may fall under
the second species ptopounded, of an hereditary Disease properly so called;
namely, that which consists in the similary Constitution. Yet we cannot
affirm this as certain and undubitable, because the Children which we have
hitherto known to be afflicted with this Diseas, have not lived to such
maturity of years as to beget Children: and therefore we cannot otherwise
suppose, then by probable conjecture, whether or no their progeny should be
infected with this affect, as it were by right of inheritance.

Thirdly, We say, that in many Children this Diseas does directly fall under the
second species of an hereditary Diseas improperly so called. For according to
the primary Essence of it is a similary Diseas, and although it has not yet
been so long and sufficiently discovered unto us, that we can determine the
effects of it, how they will operate in the Progeny, yet frequently in the
present progeny we have observed certain Rudiments of this affect to have been
derived to many from one or both of the Parents. So that although neither of
the Parents were in their infancy or childhood afflicted with this Diseas, yet
some proness and disposedness to this Diseas has presently appeared in their
little Infants, especially in those whose Parents before coition were
predisposed by some vitiosity of body, or error of life, to transmit this
pollution to their Issu; but those defilements of the Parents which dispose
them to propagate Children obnoxious to this affect, we shall by and by reckon
up, in their order; from whence also a higher confirmation of this assertion
may be deduced.

Fourthly, We say, although the affects of the Parents do frequently imprint a
certain propension in the Issue, to fall into this Diseas, so that this Diseas
may be therefore reputed in the second acception of an hereditary diseas,
improperly so called; yet it very rarely happneth that this Diseas does
actually break out before the birth of the child. One amongst us attesteth,
that once, and only but once, he saw a Child new born invaded with this Diseas.
And in this Child the Backbone, and the neck were so weak, that they could not
sustain the weight and greatness of the Head, within three months after it was
born, the Child dyed. Whereby it is apparent that he was grievously affected. It
seems conspicuous by what has been said, that Infants, however they may
frequently borrow from their Parents a disposedness to this affect, are most
rarely and seldom troubled with it before they are born, but if at any time
they are so prematurely afflicted, that then the affect is most vehement and
grievous. Now a reason of the event of both these may be demanded. To the
former therefore we say, that this Diseas does partly consist in a cold
distemper of the first affected parts, and indeed an unequal one, as namly,
being very cold in the said parts, respect being had to the temper of the Head,
and the Bowels: and that hereupon that unequal coldness of those parts, is of
great moment in this Diseas, and that also in respect of the very inequallity.
For this contributeth much to that unequal and deficient distribution of the
Vital Blood to the parts first affected. Seeing therefore at such time when the
Embryon is carried in the womb, this inequallity of the temperament of the
first affected parts may be much corrected and averted by an equal heat, whereby
the womb may on every side embrace, and cherish the body of the Embryon, it
follows that the gestation does very much drive away this Diseas, at least
retard the invasion of it. For the body of the Womb being all about equally
warmed with an even heat, and equally embracing and cherishing all the parts of
the Embryon, does not easily permit one part to wax colder then the rest, and
by that means to be cherished with a defective and sparing afflux of the Vital
Blood. Wherefore seeing that that very inequallity of heat and comfort, are
Essential parts of this Diseas, and without which this Diseas cannot consist,
it is no wonder that the womb strongly resisting these parts of the Diseas, and
the invasion thereof, does for the most part protract it, at least during the
impregnation.

As for the latter part of the question propounded, namly, Why Infants, who
before their birth were infested with this Diseas, are more grievously and
dangerously afflicted? We say, according to that Aphorism of Hippocrates, that
a Diseas which holds the least congruity with the condition of the Diseased,
is more dangerous then the contrary; as a Fever threatens more danger to an
old man, than to a young, and in the winter, then the summer. For a Diseas that
has some correspondence and conformity with the condition of the Diseased,
requires a slighter cause for its introduction: but that which is contrary
thereunto argues the magnitude of the cause, which notwithstanding resistance,
and opposition, will produce his effects. In the present Diseas therefore if the
equal and impartial heat of the womb cannot restrain the propensity of the
Embryon to this affect, but it will fall into it, some vehement cause must needs
be imprinted by the Parents, and the seminal Principals extremely weakened.
Therefore there is little hope when the Embryon laboring with this Diseas is
born, neither will a prudent Physician attempt the cure without some Prognostic
of imminent danger. Moreover, instead of a Corallary, we substitute another
Rule, having some affinity with the former, although perhaps it be not yet
certain and approved; namly, that Children by how much the sooner after their
birth they are invaded with this Diseas, so much the more difficulty (caeteris
paribus) are they delivered from it. And let these things suffice concerning
the Question propounded.

We will now apply our selves to the division and reckoning up of those causes
which on the Parents parts may produce this Diseas. Some of these faults in the
Parents relate to the Generation of the seed, whereof the Embryon consists,
others have reference to the Embryon now conceived, and yet born about in the
Womb. The faults of the Generation of the seed proceed either from the man or
the woman, or from the whole Body, or from those parts only which are
dedicated by nature to Generation. The faults of the Parents depending upon the
whole Body have the strongest influence into the Child, because it transmitteth
such matter to the Generation of the Seed, as is unapt for those parts
dedicated to that office. We purpose not here to particularize the several
faults of the matter of the Seed, but to instance in those alone, which
conspire to entitle the Progeny to this Diseas. These we reduce to four Classes.

The first Classis contains a cold and moist distemper of the matter, whereof
the Seed is Generated. This chiefly resulteth from a cold and moist distemper
of the Parents, unto which we also refer a predominancy of il juice, especially
that which is Phlegmatic and waterish also a Cachexia, and Dropsy, and perhaps
the Green Sickness, which some call the white Fever, not sufficiently subdued
before conception; al which affects manifestly help to constitute a waterish
matter, both cold and moist in the Genital Parts, which is not only in general
less apt for the Generation of the Seed, but it particularly inclines to a
condition of this Diseas; a part of whose primary Essence consists in that
very cold and moist distemper, as we have already proved. Moreover, we may
perhaps hither reduce the Scurvy, the French Pox, and the Jaundice, in which
affects the Blood also is polluted with filthy excrementitious humors, and
corrupt exulcerations, which cannot easily be changed into laudable and
fruitful Seed.

The second Classis contains contains the penury of Natural Spirits, whereby
the good Seed should be Generated. For a Spirituous Seed cannot flow from such
a kind of matter. The causes which suppeditate that impure matter to the Parts
of Generation are the dried and extenuated Bodies of the Parents, wasted either
by long abstinence, or by some vehement evacuation, as by vomits, lasks,
Lienteries, Dysenteries, Hepatical Flures of long continuance; by an excessive
Hemorrhage from any part, by violent sweatings, or any Chronical Diseases,
which wastes the strength and is not repaired before Coition especially, a
Consumption, a Hectic Fever, an indigestion from any kind of Cause. Lastly,
from a defective and imperfect Concoction of the last aliment, or the fault of
any part. For in such cases the matter which is separated to the parts
subservient to Generation, is destitute of a competent plenty of Natural
Spirits, whereupon the Parts preparing and concocting the Seed cannot perfectly
correct this defect, and ejaculate such Seed as is sufficiently abounding with
Spirits. Seeing therefore that a considerable part of this Diseas consists in
the paucity of Natural Spirits, it cannot otherwise be, but that the issue
propagated by such a crude and almost Spiritless Seed, should be tainted with a
certain Natural Propension to this affect, even in their first rudiments, which
afterward upon the concurrence or other causes, is easily deduced into Act.

The third Classis contains the benummedness or stupour of the matter
transmitted to the Generative Parts, whereof the Seed is produced. For not only
the solid parts, but also the whole Mass of Blood, and the humors therein
contained are obnoxious to that same stupour. And from hence it is that
Physicians being to render the causes of Diseases, do use to say, that the
humors and also the Blood are too fluid and moveable and unduly vehement;
sometimes on the contrary that they are unapt for motion, less fluxible, and
unactive beneath a Mediocrity, and in respect of this thing also a certain Mean
is most wholesome: but more things relating hither may be seen above. We will
here only prosecute those faults of the Parents from whence this defect of
vigor and activity in the matter of the Seed does arise. These therefore are
first the fost, loos, and effeminate Constitution of either or both the
Parents, indisposed to strong and Masculine exercises. Secondly, an overmoist
and full diet and epicurison, obnoxious to frequent crudities. Thirdly, A
delicate kind of life abandoned to eas and voluptuousness, slothful, and rarely
accustomed to labor, danger, and care. Hither you may also refer a total defect
of manly Exercise immoderate sleep, especially soon after mate, and any kind of
sleepings whatsoever, a sedentary, speculative life, intent upon soft and
queint Arts and Sciences, as Poetry, Music, and the like, to these may be
further added a daily frequenting of Comedies and other Plays, an assiduous
reading of Fables, and Romances, and instead of manly and laudable Recreations,
a loos expense of time in Carding and Dicing. Hither also belong the
neverfailing fruits of a lasting peace and plenty, such as security,
indiligence and the like. All these enumerated faults do manifestly contribute
a share to introduce a laziness and Effeminateness in the parts. Seeing therefore
that the Blood, together with the humors contained in it, does in its
circulation wash all those stupefied parts, it cannot otherwise be, but that as
it glideth along it must participate some such alteration; and seeing that some
portion of the transient Blood affected with this stupefaction, is transmitted
to the Generative Parts, with the very matter whereof the Seed is Generated, it
is easy to infer that that Child which springs from such principals must
inwardly contract at least some propension conformable to the sluggishness, and
stupour of its Native matter, and that that propension, Afterbirth when the
preservation is taken away by the equal cherishings of the Womb, is by diverse
causes without difficulty deduced into act, wherefore seeing that such a dullness
is a part of the Primary Essence of this Diseas, it follows that in such
vitiated principals there lurketh a propensity to this affect, derived from one
or both of the Parents.

The Fourth Classis contains the vicious Dispositions (if any such occur) of
the Parents, who in their Childhood were infected with this Diseas. For these
would transmit into the Children a continuation of an hereditary Diseas
properly so called. But because, as we have said, it is not yet manifest
whether the Parent afflicted with this Diseas in their infancy shall beget
children therewith affected; besides, because the faults of the Parents may be
conveniently referred to any one of these Classes aforesaid, or to many, or
indeed to all of them, it will be fruitless to insist longer upon them.
Therefore having reckoned up the faults of the Parents which depend upon the
whole Body, in the next place we proceed to their faults which peculiarly reside
in the Genital Parts.

These faults are sometimes a cold distemper, sometimes a moist, when by reason
of too much humidity they are loosned or weakened, whereupon they ejaculate
either an unfruitful deed or such as is propense to this Diseas, sometimes those
parts are infested with a virulent, vicious or waterish Gonorrhea, and they
excern a Seed not sufficiently elaborated; the same must be said of the white
and red Fluxes of Women. Again, some things outwardly applied to those parts
have reference hither; as Ointments of Hemlock and other Narcotical things,
especially if they be often anointed with them, in like manner Ointments that
are incorporated with white or red Lead, Chalk of Lead, Litharge, Sugar of
Saturn and the like, daily and for a long time adhibited to those parts. For
such as these blunt the activity of the inherent Spirits in those Parts, and
introduce a certain dullness in them, which being communicated to the Seed
prepared in them disposes the progeny to this affect.

At length we have finished our intended enumeration, if not of all, yet at
least of all the most principal causes which happen before Conception about the
Generation of the prolificative Seed, and have any concurrence to produce this
Diseas, or to dispose to the production thereof. Now follow the faults and
errors of the Mother in the time she bears the Embryon in her Womb, which
also must be reputed among the causes of this Diseas before the Birth.

First, There happens a cold and moist distemper of the Womb it self, which (as
were we silent is easily manifest to every one) may most readily be
communicated to the Embryon by the perpetual contact of the Womb.

In the Second place, All those things offer themselves which suppeditate to
the Embryon crude and impure Juyces converted by excrementions and corrupt
humors instead of laudable aliment. Hitherto principally belongs the
unwholsom and preposterous diet of Women with Child, especially inclining to
moisture, coldness and the heaping together of crudities. The same things also
happen by the imperfection and defect of the first or second Concoction,
especially when they are not excerned by vomit or some other evacuation of the
Crudities from thence proceeding, but are at length transmitted with the
Mothers Blood for the aliment of the Embryon. Besides, if a moist and cold
Diseas, as a cold and moist distemper with the matter, an ill digestion, a
Cachexia or Dropsy, etc. do invade a woman with Child after Conception, it may
thereupon easily happen, that the impure aliment also, which nourishes and
cherishes the Seeds of this Diseas, be dispensed to the Embryon.

In the third place are to be reckoned al those things that defraud the Embryon
of du aliment, as any excessive evacuation, especially a lashing flux of Blood
in any part; also a rash opening of a Vein, or Phlebotomy that exceeds in
quantity. The suckling of another child may also divert the afflux of
sufficient aliment from the Womb toward the Breasts. Hitherto likewise
belongs inordinate fasting, or any indigestion in the Mother, any inappetency
after meat, or defect of concoction. Moreover, an acute Fever happening to a
woman with Child, besides other inconveniences, may also defraud the Child of
du aliment; so also an Hectic Fever. All these things do not only infer to
the Embryon, a dejection of Vital Spirits, and a defective nourishment, but
also they cause a want of natural Spirits. For the Natural Spirits are wasted
and dissipated without due nourishment, and are also destitute and disappointed
of necessary reparation. Seeing therefore that a part of the Essence of this
Diseas consists in the defect of Natural Spirits, some disposition to this
affect must need be bequeathed to the offspring from the causes aforesaid.

4ly. and lastly, excessive sleepines of women with child, slothfulness, eas,
any vehement labor and exercise after Conception, do also contribute their
share. For although violent motions and actions of any kind are forbidden to
women in such causes; yet moderate labors, watchings and exercises which offer
no violence to the womb, or provoke to abortiveness, do not only conduce to the
health of the Mother, but in some degree they drive away that dullness from the
Embryon, and augment the heat, vigor and activity of it. And thus we put an end
to the first Chapter of the causes of this Diseas before the Birth. Those which
happen after the birth shall be the subject of our next examination.

CHAP. XVI. The Causes of this Diseas incident to Children after their birth.
WE have noted in the precedent Chapter, that Infants from their first Origin
are seldom afflicted with this Diseas, but by reason of the Causes there
rehearsed, that they are frequently affected with a natural disposedness, and
propension to the same. We shall now prosecute those causes which are apt to
actuate that Natural disposition after the birth, or newly and fully to produce
this Diseas. For it must be known that the same causes which may actuat that
predisposedness to this Diseas, may produce this Diseas a new, if they be
sufficiently intensive in their degree. And therefore we confess that those
children which are prone to this Diseas from their Nativity are easily
affected; but that other which are free from al Natural corruption fall not
into the same but upon more potent causes; and yet those causes are the same
for their kind and differ only in the degree. We therefore thought it needless
to speak of these things distinctly and apart: it may suffice that we have
spoken of them indescriminately and together.

At the very entrance a Question there is which importunes a Resolution;
namely, Whether Contagion may be numbered among the causes of this Diseas, and
therefore whether this Diseas in a proper and right understanding be a
contagious Diseas, indeed he that considers this Diseas unknown to the
Ancients, how it first invaded the Western Parts of England, and in few years
has been since dispersed all England over, will at the first thought easily
judge it to be contagious, and to have been spread so far and wide by the
infection of it. But the matter will seem to be otherwise to him that will
consider it more intentively, For although this Diseas may in some manner
endeavor to imprint an affection like unto it self in other Bodies, yet it
scarce advances so far that it can totally produce a Diseas of the same kind.
For perhaps it may in one some slight inclination in another Body, yea,
sometimes perhaps it may accelerate or hasten the invasion of an affect in a
Body highly predisposed unto it, yet it cannot therefore deserve the Name of a
Diseas properly contagious. For all Diseases conspire to change and assimilate
those Bodies which are nearest to themselves, yet that is not sufficient to
denominate Diseases contagious. For to constitute a contagious Diseas properly
so called it is further required that out of it self it propagate a certain
Seminal fermentation of it self, which secretly insinuating it self into other
Bodies, may by degrees introduce into those Bodies a Diseas of the same
Species. But this Diseas contains no such fermentation in its essence,
neither is it secretly propagated by a precedent emission of Seed from it self
which may imprint a Diseas of the same Species in the adjacent Bodies. For we
have already often said, That the first essence of this Diseas consists in a
cold and moist distemper, and in a dullness and paucity of inherent Spirits,
which affections if they endeavor to assimilate any Bodies that are near them,
they attempt and undertake it by open violence, and not by snares and
fraudulence or a preimmission of secret little fires. In like manner if you
reflect upon the Secondary Essence thereof, neither the viciated Tone, nor the
depraved Vital nor Animal Function, nor the Organical faults are found apt and
fit in this affect to insinuate themselves into other Bodies, and to propagate
their own Species. Finally, if we will consult experience, the matter will
quickly be vindicated from all doubt. For we frequently observe Children either
of the same age, or very near to the same age, be brought up in the same House,
whereof one or other of them is perhaps afflicted with this Diseas, whilst a
third or many amongst them do escape it. Yea, We have known Children not only
educated under one common Roof, and delighting in the continual and mutual
society of one another, but daily meeting at one Board and lying together in
one Bed; whereof one who has been ill affected with this Diseas has not
infected any of his companions either by feeding or lying together. Which could
scarce possibly happen in a Diseas properly contagious. Wherefore Contagion
being excluded from the Catalogue of this Diseas, we will address our selves to
the finding out of such as are more true and unquestionable. We divide the
causes which produce this Diseas after Birth into two Classes. The first
contains the errors which procure it in the use of the six nonnatural things.
The latter comprehends the precedent Diseases of diverse kinds, which are wont
very often to leave behind them some Inclination to this affect.

As for the former Classis concerning the abuse of the six non-Natural things,
so far as they relate to this Diseas, seeing that children are seldom
discomposed with any vehement passions of the mind, and can thereupon very
difficultly fall into this Diseas. Again, in regard that the use of Venery
appertains not unto them; we will reduce and limit these cases to the five
subsequent heads. To the Air, also to what things soever extrinsecally occur,
or are applied to the body, to meat and drink, and such things as are inwardly
received, to motion and rest, to the kind and manner of life, to actions and
exercise, to sleep and watching; lastly, those things which are preternaturally
retained in, or severed from the body. These several things we shall examine in
the propounded order with all convenient brevity.

Of the Air and such things, as happen outwardly.
A cold and moist Air does powerfully contribute to this Diseas. For seeing that
it does more easily steal into the external and first affected parts in this
Diseas, then into the hidden and fenced bowels, it directly helps to imprint
in those parts that unequal; namely, that cold and moist distemper. The
constitution of this kind of Air, is chiefly predominant about the beginning of
the Spring, at which time the Nurses ought to be cautious and circumspect. How
they too confidently expose their children, which are subject to this affect,
to the injuries of the Air; as also when the Air is cloudy, thick, rainy, and
full of vaporous exhalations. Hereupon places near the Sea, great Marshes that
are obnoxious to much rain and showers, and fed with a great number of Springs,
are wont to be (caeteris paribus) very fruitful of this affect. In like manner
houses near the banks of great Rivers and Ponds or Meers are for this purpose
condemned. Moreover, frequent bathing and washings with sweet water, although
they be applied actually hot, yet in regard that they are potentially cold and
moist, they are also justly culpable; for they do in some sort communicate their
distemper unto the parts whereunto they are adhibited, and more or less cause a
softness and looseness in those parts, and make the circulation of the Blood too
slippery.

Hither we may also refer cold and moist liniments, as also such as are loose
and slippery, being too often continued in that tender age, especially about
the Spine or the Origin of the Nervs: lastly, soft linen clothes, if they be
not well dried, they cherish the roots of this Diseas. For this cause amongst
others, it happens that the Children of poor people are the less obnoxious to
this Diseas, because namely, for the most part they are enwrapped in course
clothes, and woolly integuments, each of which does rub and tickle the parts
thereby exciting and augmenting the inward heat, and irritating a more copious
afflux of the Vital Blood unto the habit of the Body, and are therefore very
effectual to banish this Diseas. But the softened fine linen does neither
irritate the heat into the external parts, nor laudably cherish it. For if they
chance to be for some short space of time removed from the touch of the parts,
they presently loose their warmth, and at the next touch they conveigh a sense
of coldness into the parts. Wherefore such linen clothes being in the number
of those things which are dedicated only to extrinsecal application, and seeing
that they are hurtful by their sole coldness and softness, we have referred them
to this first Classes of causes, and the first part thereof which contains
cold and moist things outwardly occurrent.

In the second place the Air being infected with any particular infection, as
noxious Metalline exhalations, which for the most part sight against the
inherent Spirits of the parts, by a kind of venomous malignity, and do either
extinguish them, or drive away and dissipate them; withal they dissolve the
Bone of the parts, and the pulsificative force, especially in the parts
external, where they first happen, they at least diminish, if they do not
weaken it, and affect it with a languidness. These things are principally
caused by exhalations from Lead, Antimony, Quicksilver, and the like.
Moreover, ointments made of the same, are almost alike perilous, if the first
affected parts be frequently and unseasonably anointed therewith; although
perhaps these things do also belong to the fouth title of this Classis.
Finally, we have observed some Children who have been anointed with Mercurial
Unctions for the Scabs, to have fallen afterward into this Diseas.

In the third place an Air vehemently hot and subtle, extremely attenuant and
dissolvent, may likewise be numbered among the causes of this Diseas, because it
allureth forth, dissipateth and consumes the inherent Spirits. In like manner
hot liniments and especially discussive withal, Chemical oils distilled and not
sufficiently corrected by the commixture of things temperate; for these in such
a tender constitution of the parts do easily melt and resolve the Spirits into
a volatile and Airy thinness, and by consequence infer a penury of Inherent
Spirits. Hither also belong sharp, saltish, hot and discussive Baths,
especially, if they be unseasonably and unmeasurably used, for these no less
then the former do wast and consume the Spirits.

Fourthly and lastly, An Air filled with Narotical vapors or exhalations, and
baths, fomentations and Liniments made of Soporiferous and Narotical
ingredients, as Hemlock, Henbane, Opium, Nightshade, and the like, and
externally applied, are very fitly reducible, also to this Classis. For they
easily introduce a benummedness into the first affected Parts, into which they
first conveigh their force. Which benummedness is not only it self a part of
the first Essence of this Diseas, but it also easily dulleth and diminishes
the Vital influx in those parts, and consequently is also a cause of that part
of the Secondary Essence of this Diseas, which consists in the Vital
Constitution, which thing we have already explained more at large. And thus
much of things outwardly occurring.

Secondly, Of Meat and Drink, and things inwardly taken.
To this Title there belong first aliments of any kind which are too moist and
cold, for these things manifestly cherish the distemper, wherein a part of the
Essence of this consists. Hither therefore we refer most kind of Fish, and
crude Meats which are not well prepared by Coition; also all those things
whatsoever they be which cause a defect of concoction in the Ventricle. Therefore
the feeding upon new Meat, before the former Aliment is concocted, is very
hurtful for Children disposed to this affect; and in this respect, a plentiful
Diet is altogether to be abandoned, and a thin spare Diet ought to be observed,
for too liberal feeding does overwhelm and choke the heat, and therefore must
needs accumulate many crude and raw humors. And perhaps this one may be reputed
among the especial causes, why this Diseas does more frequently invade the
Cradles of the rich; then afflict poor men's Children. In like manner cold and
moist Medicines taken inwardly, and also such as are laxative, and endued with
an internal slipperiness, do manifestly relate hither. For these things do not
only infer a like distemper, but they produce a Relaxation in the Tone of the
parts, and affect them with an internal slipperiness, and in a word they render
the current of the Blood through the first affected parts over slippery and
easy.

Secondly, Nourishments that are too thick, viscous and obstructive belong
hither, especially because they interrupt the equal distribution of the Blood.
Hither we refer flesh hardened with smoke, and seasoned with much Salt; in like
manner Salt Fish, and Cheese almost of any kind plentifully fed on. Bread newly
taken out of the Oven, and not yet cold; also almost all sweet things condited
with Sugar, unless they are withal tempered with Wine, or cutting, or
attenuant. Obstructive Medicines likewise of any kind belong hither, unto which
we may further ad such as are Partotical, and whatsoever being drank induce a
benummedness into the parts.

Thirdly, Nourishments that are of an extreme hot and biting quality, sharp,
and corrosive, as old and strong Wines, especially being drank upon an empty
Stomach, Meats also that are seasoned with much Pepper and aromatical Sawces,
must be connumerated among the reputed causes of this affect, For these things
in such a tender consistence of the Parts, do easily feed upon and devour the
inherent Spirits. The same thing is also affective by Medicines that are
immoderately hot and discussive, yea, these are far more powerful to hurt,
because they more quickly and forcibly spoil the inherent Spirits, than the
prementioned Nourishments.

Thirdly, Of Motion, Rest, Exercises, and Actions.
Motion and Exercises, if they exceed a mean, they dissolve the Body of a
little Child into a profuse Sweat, and withal they somewhat dissipate the
inherent Spirits of the Parts, and therefore for that reason they may conspire
the introducing of this Diseas* although we conceive it falls out exceeding
rarely, that Boys are infested with this Diseas, whereof we discourse. But a
defect of Motion and want of Exercise does most frequently, yea and most
effectually concur to the production of this affect. For the Spinal Marrow, and
the Nerves from thence arising, and the other first affected parts, serve
chiefly for Motion and Exercises. A stupidity therefore and sluggishness of
those parts, is a cause that neither their inherent heat is sufficiently
cherished, nor that heat extenuated, nor the cold distemper stealing in
banished, nor the excrementitious, and superfluous moistures expelled by a due
transpiration, but it permits them to be affected with a certain softness,
looseness, and internal lubricity, whereupon the Arteries also distributed unto
them are faintly irritated, yield a dull and slothful Pulse, neither do they
render the parts somewhat turgid or swelled, but leave them lank and subsiding.
By which means the circulation of the Blood becomes slow and lesned, and more
slippery than is meet, the production also of the vital heat must thereupon be
necessarily be feeble and weak, all which considerations do sufficiently evince
that this is an efficacious cause of this Diseas.

Fourthly, Of Sleeping and Watching.
We grant that Children should sleep oftener and longer then Men; yet if it be
excessive even in Childhood the matter is the same as in defect of exercise
and motion. For sleep is a certain rest and privation of watchings or of the
exercise of the senses. But watchings consist in the very exercise of the
senses, according to Aristotle in his Book de Some. and Vigill. Wherefore the
evils that we have described to arise from the defect of motion and exercises,
the same also must needs happen from immoderate sleep. On the contrary, in that
tender age, inordinate watchings are no less noxious. For they do not only
retard the concoction of the aliment, but they likewise taint the Blood with a
kind of acrimony, and consequently dissipate the Principals of the Natural
Constitution of the first affected parts, and without difficulty introduce a
defect of inherent Spirits.

Fifthly. Of things preternaturally cast out and retained.
All the internal causes of Diseases might be perhaps not incommodiously
reduced to this title. For any thing whatsoever contained in the Body, and
preternaturally altered, as they are preternatural, they indicate their
ablation, and may so far forth be reputed among things to be cast out, which
are nevertheless preternaturally retained. But we more rightly grant, that all
internal causes may be distinguished into two kinds: one whereof contains
those things which are preternaturally retained and cast out: the other, such
things as are contained in the Body being preternaturally altered. For these
latter are not only taken away by casting out, but also by Alteration, they may
be reduced to an agreeable proportion of Nature. However it be, there is a
great affinity between the Humors vitiated by Alteration, and the
excrementitious Humors which are retained. For there are so many and such
various ways of casting out in the Body, that scarce any humor can be
imaginably produced by Alteration, which does not properly relate to the
secretive and excretive faculty of some Bowel, or some other partt and is
destinated to be severed and evacuated from it; and therefore though the errors
of the first concoction are scarce corrected in the second or third, by
Alteration, yet they may be mended by local motion, or excretion, made from
some part of the Body, the unprofitable parts being separated and rejected. In
like manner the mass of blood being any ways preternaturally altered, or
infected with some Humor, the peccant matter which cannot be otherwise subdued
by Alteration, is quickly exterminated perhaps by excression made from some
part or Bowel (unless withal the secretive or expulsive faculty thereof be
hindered) therefore it must needs be of great moment for a Physician to know
what Humors are particularly predominant in any Diseas, and by what determinate
ways they may be most properly spied out according to the intent and purpose of
Nature.

For there are as many subordinate species of things spied out, as there are
distinct substances of the Bowels and other parts destinated to that office in
the Body. For it is credible that the Liver does cast out one thing, the
Kidneys another, the Sweetbread another, the Spleen another, the Stomach and
Guts another, the Lungs another, the Brain another, the Stones, the Matrix, the
Kidneys, the Kernel under the Canel Bone, the glandulous parts of the Larynxes,
the Throat and Jaws another, the scarf Skin and the Skin another. For it
seems scarce admittable, that Nature should build and prepare for her self
Organs of different kinds, and yet should make use of diverse of them for the
performance of one and the same action. Therefore when the excretion of any of
the said parts happens to be restrained, a certain peculiar filth will flow out
from thence into the mass of Blood, and so there will be so many differences of
things preternaturally retained, as there are kinds of parts inservient to
particular casting out: and in like manner there will be as many kinds of
vicious excretion, either by excess, defect or depravation, as there are diverse
wais through which the excretion may be made.

If any man demand, Whether the several kinds of things excerned be
sufficiently discovered and understood by us: We answer, that an exact knowledge
is desired of that particular humor which is to be cast out through the new
Vessel of the Sweetbread, then in the next place, what is cast out by the
Kidneys, the Kernel under the Canel Bone, and the glandulous parts of the
Larynx: yea, perhaps it is yet scare sufficiently known, what is rejected by
the Spleen. For this cause therefore amongst others, it seemed good unto us to
supersede in this place any high and accurate disquisition of things secerned
and retained, either in relation to the parts and ways whereunto they belong,
or in order to the present affect, and rather to insist on that fourfold
division of Humors made by Galen; namely, into Choler, Phlegm, Blood,
Melancholy, adding only undue transpiration and sweating. For although we may
doubt, whether this division can deduce the humors to the subordinate Species,
(as we have noted above) more then four parts distinct in the species are
evidently dedicated to the casting out of the humors; yet seeing that this
division of the Humors is not only approved by all Classical Physicians, but
that it is likewise profitable in it self, and at least reduces the Humors to
certain Heads or Kinds, (however perhaps every kind may comprehend under it
several species) we are resolved for the present to insist upon it, and so much
the rather, because under a general notion it very fitly conjoyneth and
contains both things altered and preternaturally contained within, and also
things to be spied out which are not yet excerned, and in that respect it will
eas our burden and contract our work. For whilst we make our proceedings in
this manner, it will be needless to institute any other peculiar Chapter of the
Causes of this Diseas, namely of this altered which are preternaturally
contained, seeing that they are comprehended, as we have said, under this Title.

We reduce therefore the internal Causes of this Diseas (whether they be
excrementitious humors retained, or viciated by alteration) either to Choler,
or to Melancholy, or to Elegm and a Waterish humor, or an undue Transpiration
and sweating, for the Blood properly so called is in this affect scarce
observed to be faulty.

You may object, That Practical Physicians do in this Diseas commonly prescribe
the opening of a Vein in the hollow of the Ear, observing that Evacuation to be
very profitable, which Reason could hardly admit, unless the Blood were in some
degree peccant?

We answer, That this Remedy is available, not in respect of the universal
plenitude of the Blood, but by reason of a peculiar plenitude of the Head it
self. For we have already showed how that the Blood is uneqally dispensed to
the parts of the Body* and indeed illiberally to the first affected parts, but
to the Head superabundantly. Therefore although there be not an universal
redundancy of the Blood in this Diseas, yet in respect of the particular
Plenitude of the Head it self, such a particular emptiness, is perhaps
profitably instituted those outward and small Veins of the Ears being cut. You
may reply that we by this Answer do indeed decline the universal Plethora, but
that we grant a particular one of the Head, which ought no less to be esteemed
a cause of sickness, We answer, That we have at large explained this fault of
the Blood, when we discoursed of the unequal distribution of it, unto which
place it properly belongs, seeing that it is a cause of the Secondary, not of
the Primary Essence of this Diseas; and therefore a vain and superfluous
repetition thereof ought not in this place to be expected, We will now therefore
proceed to our purposed disquisition of the Humors, and likewise the
Transpiration aforesaid.

First Choler (whether by this word you understand that excrementitious humor
in the little Bladder, and the Chollerick pore, or a hot, dry, sharp, and
bitter part of the Mass of Blood, or that unsavory humor that tastes like
stinking Oil, begotten and flowing in the Stomach by some corrupt aliment,
especially, that which is fat, addust, or salt; or certain sharp and corrosive
Excrescences produced in the Body by corrupt Blood) if it abound and luxuriate
in the Body, very probably be a cause of this affect.

For although it may rather seem to impugn that cold and moist distemper, which
is a part of the first Essence of this Diseas; yet in regard that it is apt in
some sort to hinder the nourishment of the Parts, either by a vehement
irritation of the expulsive faculty, or by attenuation of the aliment, and to
extenuate and wast the very inherent constitution of the Parts, and by
consequence to consume and dissipate the Natural Spirits, it may not unjustly
be numbered among the causes of this Diseas. For every one knows that Persons of
a Chollerick Constitution are lean, and of an extenuated habit because of the
Reasons aforesaid. Secondly, A Melancholy humor (whether you understand the
Earthy Portion of the Blood, or that saltish or tartar like matter excreted in
and with the Urin, and when the Urin grows cold, incorporating into little
Sands; or that sour humor powered into the Ventricle perhaps by the Spleen
(though not through that short Veiny Vessel, as the Ancients believed) or those
terrene Parts of the assumed Aliment, which are evacuated by siege with the
other Excrements) understand either or any of them, if this humor abounds and
be not purged out after a due manner, may be blamed as a cause of this Diseas.
For first, that humor which is the more Earthy part of the Blood, if it exceed
a just proportion in the Mass of Blood, it renders it unapt to nourish the
Parts, especially those that are first affected; for the first affected parts
are of a more noble texture than the substances of the Bowels, or the bony
parts; and therefore we have already noted how the Parenchymata of the Bowels
and the Bones do easily admit nutrition, and by a way like unto digestion; but
those former parts do require a far more exquisite secretion and elaborated
assimilation. And this is the Reason that the fleshy parts of the Bowels are
rightly imputed among the impure and grosser aliments, namely, Because they are
nourished with a course Blood, and not accurately elaborated before the Union.
Secondly, Any great accumulation of Saltish, and Tartar like matter is an Enemy
to Nutrition, and is rather dissipative and devouring than favoring
augmentation. Thirdly, The sour Humor of the Ventricle is totally ravenous, and
as it were hungerstarved, and perhaps where it abounds it easily
communicates to the Blood such another Depredatory quality; Fourthly and
lastly, The Terrene Dregs of the Belly may if they be inordinately retained,
taint and infect the Chylus, and render it unapt for the nourishment of the
part. Finally we grant, that every propounded kind of Melancholy superfluously
coagumented or preternaturally retained, does not primarily, properly, and
directly concur to the production of this evil; but nevertheless we are of
opinion that indirectly, and after the manner propounded it may contribute
something to the generation of it,

Thirdly, Phlegm (whether it be taken for the moister and colder part of the
Mass of Blood, or for the wheyish part thereof, or for the slow humor of the
Stomach and Guts, or for the Spettle, or for the Snot of the Nostrils or Jaws,
or for that peculiar humor, which perhaps the new Vessel of the Sweetbread
does use to evacuate) however you take it, if it be retained or abound in the
Body, it has a direct reference to this Diseas, and properly deserves to be
called the cause thereof. For this humor is cold, most, slow, thick, benumbed,
little spiritous, lost, and affected with an internal slipperiness; all which
things do exactly comply with the primary and secondary Essence of this Diseas
as they have been propounded. Wherefore upon a superfluous accumulation of this
humor, seeing that there succeeds a conspiracy to the production of this
affect, it ought justly to be esteemed a proper cause and a Primary Agent.

Besides these humors undue Transpiration, as also immoderate or defective
sweating may be sometimes numbered among the causes of this affect.

For excessive Sweating, as also immoderate Transpiration, does dissipate the
Spirits, and withal dissolveth the parts, especially the external which in this
Diseas are the first affected, and the inherent Spirits being consumed it
easily leaves a cold distemper behind it. For to a just excitation and
conservation of the heat of the parts there is required a certain due and
regular strife of the exhalations between breathing, which if it prove
deficient, the actual heat also (because it partly consists in this strife)
becomes very feeble and languid, and the parts are easily exposed to a cold
distemper. But we have already spoken of this matter at large. On the contrary,
Sweat preternaturally restrained, as also a very small or lesned Transpiration,
does easily kindle a Feverish heat, and therefore it likewise injureth the
Spirits and dissolveth the parts, and renders them afterward easily obnoxious
to a cold distemper.

Finally, That we may comprehend all in a word, Any humor excerned above Reason
or Measure does easily introduce a colliquation of the parts and a dissipation
of the inherent Spirits, and consequently disposes the Body to this affect.
And let this suffice to have been spoken of non-Natural things, and the causes
of this Diseas thence arising.

CHAP. XVII. Precedent Diseases which may be the Cause of this Disease.
THese Diseases, in respect of their proper Essence, ought only to be called by
the name of Diseases, but in respect of this Diseas they may rightly pass under
the notion of causes of Diseases, because they leave it behind them as one of
their Effects. Yet although many of them (as they relate to the Parents and so
imprint a Natural pollution in the Offspring) are rehearsed above,
nevertheless, by right they here deserve their consideration, yet in a
different respect and order. These Diseases we reduce to three Kinds or general
Heads.

First, To Diseases that have some affinity with this affect.

Secondly, To Diseases that extenuate the Body.

Thirdly, To Diseases inducing a stupor and dullness in the first affected parts.

Of the First Kind.
Diseases having an Affinity or holding Congruity with this we call those who
at least in part consist in the same with the Essence of this Diseas: of this
kind are any cold distemper, or any moist distemper, also any cold and moist
distemper. For a part of the first Essence of this Diseas includes a cold and
moist distemper, and so those distempers do partly agree with this Affect.
Hither also belong a Phlegmatic Cachocymy, a Melancholy and a mixed; an
obstruction proceeding from such like humors, a Cachexia and a Dropsy. Yea, we
may likewise refer hither in regard of their affinity, those Diseases wherein
the inherent Spirits are somewhat consumed; for a part of the Essence of this
Diseas consists in a scarsity* of those Spirits, but otherwise they are more
aptly referred to the second kind. In like manner the Diseases wherein the first
affected parts are benumbed, and stupefied; may likewise in respect of their
affinity, be hitherto referred, although they belong more properly to the third
kind of Diseases. Moreover, those Diseases wherein the Tone of the parts is
infeebled and loosned must here be listed, for they include a part of this
Diseas; namely, that which consists in the loosnesse, litherness, internal
slipperiness and softness of the Tone, as they are above described. The
Philosophers say, that the Elements which agree in like qualities, are easily
changed one into another; by the same reason that these Diseases which partly
agree in the same Essence do easily admit a reciprocal change from one to the
other. So we see a quotidian Ague, which agrees with a putrid Fever in a
preternatural heat, upon every slight Cause degenerate into it. Yet it must
here be noted, That great Diseases are not so easily changed into small, as small
ones into great. Besides, not all Diseases which perhaps participate alike of
the same Essence, are with an equal facility reciprocally changed. For some
Diseases are more subject to change into others, with whom in part they have
some agreement, than others: And that for other Reasons beside the said
agreement, however it be, if a cold and dry distemper should happen to a Child,
that would easily change into a cold and moist; both in respect of the
congruity of each Diseas to cold, and also a peculiar inclination of that
tender age to moisture. For by reason of the coldness, the digestion becomes
imperfect, and hereupon crudities or crude humidities are engendered, which a
cold distemper in so tender an age would easily and immediately follow.
Moreover, a cold and moist distemper in regard of the coldness would make a
slow Pulse, and in regard of the moisture would make it the more slippery, and
the less viscous, whereupon the Vital heat being diminished, a benummedness and
dullness by little and little would steal upon the Vital Spirits. Finally, in
respect of that slipperish retention arising from the internal slipperiness of
the parts, and by reason of the weak concoction, the inherent Spirits of the
first affected parts, would also by degrees be diminished, and so by little and
little after this manner the perfect Essence of this Diseas will be introduced.

Of the second kind.
Most Diseases making lean, or any ways extenuating the Body, although perhaps
they no way participate of of the Essence of this Diseas (like the Diseases of
the first kind) yet they do dispose the Body to the invasion of this affect,
and may also leave it after them. For all great quotidian Diseases, in process
of time do extenuate the Body, wast the inherent Spirits, and dissolve the Tone
of the parts; and this attrition and attenuation of the parts does chiefly
refer to the first affected parts in this Diseas. For as we have already
asserted, the substance of the Bowels are not so easily subjected to
dissolution or dissipation. But in the dissected Carcasses of those who have
dyed of Chronical Affects, the Bowels are observed to be no less; yea, many
times much bigger when the external parts (which in this Diseas are first
affected) are for the most part made lean with the vehemence of the affect. And
therefore seeing that extenuating Diseases, do chiefly communicate their force
into the first affected parts, it easily falls out that in Children they help
to introduce this Diseas. For the inherent Spirits of the first affected parts
being very much wasted, a cold distemper must needs follow, which by reason of
the crudity is (as we have said above) received by a moist one and a
benummedness; because the heat, activity, and vigor of the parts do chiefly
depend upon the plenty of Spirits. And thus we have exhibited the manner whereby
this Diseas does follow and as it were tread in the footsteps of other
foregoing affects of this kind, which we now further subdistinguish into three
Classes.

The first comprehends Diseases extenuating and consuming the habit of the
body, by ways insensible; hither are referred almost al Fevers, especially the
Hectic and Consuming, an Ulcer of Lungs with a putrid Fever. Also any
continual Fever that is violent, as a burning, malignant, pestilential Fever,
a Pleurisy, and an inflammation of the Lungs, also the small Pox, and the
Meazels when they grievously afflict the Patient. In like manner intermitting
Chronical Fevers. Lastly, al Chronical Fevers that torment with vehemence do
the same. The second Classis contains Diseases consuming by manifest
passages, and evacuating the solid substance of the parts. Hither you may refer
immoderate vomiting, a Lyentery, Dysentery, Lask, the Hepatical Flux, the
Diabetes, any profuse Hemorrhage or Bloody Issue, any excessive sweating, any
great Ulcer in any part, eating deep, and daily casting out much matter. For all
these Affects do evidently extenuate the habit of the body, and cause the
introduction of this affect.

The third contains the Diseases which are said to extenuate the substance of
the parts not directly, but by consequence: as al Diseases interrupitng
concoction or the distribution of the Blood. For these prohibit the reparation
of the parts continually fed upon by the Vital heat. Hereupon several Diseases
of the Ventricle, Guts, Mesentery, Sweetbread, Spleen, Liver; Yea, Diseases in
the Mouth, Jaws or Throat, which hinder only the assumption or swallowing of
the Meat, may in this respect be numbered among the causes of this Diseas. As a
distemper, a tumor, a nauseating, a feeble appetite of the ventricle, a
distemper, a tumor an obstruction and Skirrhus of the Mesentery, and
Sweetbread, or the Liver, Spleen, and the like effects of any of the said
parts, which by any means frustrate the due concoction and distribution of the
nourishment, and thereupon extenuate the parts by defect of nutrition.

Of the third kind.
Diseases that induce an astonishment to the first affected parts, do also by a
peculiar propriety conspire the production of this Affect. For the Natural heat
of those parts is somewhat dulled by them, and is rendered less effectual:
whereupon a cold distemper steals in by degrees, which is also (as has been
said) easily waited on with a moist distemper, a softness, and internal
slipperiness. Moreover, the Pulls of the Arteries reaching to those parts is
secretly, and by little and little weakened, the distribution of the Blood, and
the Vital Heat is diminished, the parts themselves are sparingly nourished, and
at length there comes a defect of Natural Spirits. So that from this Root also,
for some time persevering the Essence of this Diseas may at last bud forth. The
Apoplexy, Palsy, Lethargy, and the like effects do chiefly belong hither. Yet
Children do exceeding rarely fall into this affect from these sleepy Causes,
and so rarely, that we have not yet observed this Diseas to own its beginning
to such affects. If any demand a Reason of this rarity; we say, that the Bodies
of Children by reason of their permeability and thinness, are seldom subjected
to those affects; but if at any time they are invaded by them the Diseas does
not first assault the Natural or Vital, but the Animal Constitution, and
consequently procures for the most part a deprivation of the Animal Faculty,
before it interrupteth either the Natural or the Vital. But the benummedness
whereof we now speak, belongs to the Natural Constitution, into which it
cannot be presently transferred. Moreover, they are easily and speedily driven
out, by reason of the facility of transpiration in the Bodies of Children, if
peradventure those affects do gently invade them: but if they rage and
tyrrannize, they easily and speedily dispatch and kill, as being in their own
Nature most terrible and grievous Diseases; and the sooner, because of the
weakness of their Constitutions over whom they prevail. But which way soever
they happen, they scarce continue so long, as with sufficient efficacy to
imprint this benummedness in the Natural Constitution of the parts. Yet we
grant that these affects may, if perhaps, they persist longer with life, affect
the Natural Constitution with that benummedness so that this Diseas may follow
thereupon, although we can neither justify, nor assert it upon the credit of a
single observation.

But the Diseases which do most frequently introduce an astonishment in the
Natural Constitution of the first affected parts, are those very same, which
hinder Children any way from ordinary actions and due exercises, especially
from the use of their feet, as the luxation fracture, or some wound of a foot,
or thigh, or the leg, or the Backbone: also tumors and pains, or the like
affects, whether they afflict the parts aforesaid or others, provided that they
hinder the Children, so that they cannot walk, or play standing upon their
legs, or use any Masculine Exercises. For hereupon by degrees the rigor and
heat of the external parts waxes dull, which in this evil are the parts first
affected, and from thence the other parts of the Essence of this affect, follow
by an uninterrupted and linked succession, as whosoever will may see above.

We have now run over the Causes of this Affect, and should in the next place
proceed to the differences thereof, but that two difficulties do here interpose
themselves, which properly result from a higher consideration of the Causes
propounded. For all those Causes now alleged seem as well common to Boys of big
growth, as to Children, whereupon it may very pertinently be enquired, How it
comes to pass, that they which are grown to man's Estate are not infested with
this evil, as well as Children? Then again, Seeing that the Causes propounded are
al of them almost common, both to England and many other Countries, and some of
them to al Climats of the Earth, It may be demanded in the second place, Why
this diseas is more frequent and rife in England, than in other Countries?
These Questions we shall examine in order, and shall freely deliver our judgment
concerning them.

CHAP. XVIII. The Former Question.
WHy they which are elder in years are not equally obnoxious to this Diseas as
Children? The terms of the Question seem to insinuate, that this Affect may
happen, though very rarely to those of big age. But we reserve the solution of
this doubt til the close of the present determination. Therefore in the mean
time the Constitutions or dispositions both of Children that are chiefly
obnoxious to this Diseas, and also of bigger Boys which are rarely subject
unto it, must be opposed and every way considered and thought on: also of
Youths, Men, and Old Men, and that in order and relation to this Affect. For
the Question is not absolute, but comparative, therefore the first and best way
of determining it, will be by a mutual comparison between the different
dispositions of the said Subjects, how they admit the impressions of the
propounded causes either with case or difficulty. Then certain accidental and
peculiar conditions of Young Children, under such an age must be likewise
considered in respect of which they are under one age rendered more, under
another less obnoxious to this Diseas.

That we may the more succesfully declare the former comparison, we will
distinguish the ages of men. Here we comprehend Children of six months of age,
a year old, two, three, four years old; there we understand those of five years
of age or more, Youths, Men, and old men, and those we call by the general name
of Ju^^ors and these by the name of Seniors, unless p^^^^ps the matter may
require a subdistinction of the g^^^^er sort: these things being premised we ad
(...) our s^lvs to the collation.

First, The younger Children are of a colder temperament than the Elder. For the
heat of the temperament is augmented from the time of the birth to man's estate,
at which time it stands at a stay being far more intensive than that of
Children, but afterward it declineth by degrees unto extreme old age, and a
little before that extreme age, it falls into the same degree as it held in
the time of Childhood; but before the approach of this term of extreme old age
the temperament of aged men is more hot than that of Children, for although
young Children may enjoy a greater plenty of Natural heat, and abound with
Natural Spirits, yet there is no necessity that they therefore must be of a
hutter temperament, for there is required a concurrence of many things to
constitute a hot temperament, beside the inherent Spirits, and the inherent
heat; as for example a large portion of Chollerick humors, and withal or
chiefly a strong endeavor of the Vital faculty, namely in the pulses, and the
Vital Spirits in their circulation. Seeing therefore that the younger Children are
more cold, it is no wonder, if they be more subject to cold Diseases than
others, such as this is. As for old men, especially such as are inclining to
extreme old age, we grant that they also are more cold, and upon every light
occasion obnoxious to cold Diseases. Wherefore from hence, namely, from the
coldness of the temperament, we infer no difference between younger Children and
these old men, in respect of an aptitude to fall into this affect.

Secondly, The younger Children are more moist than the elder; for to wax old,
if it be taken in a sound sense, is to wax dry. For although old men after
their manner may be likewise obnoxious to moist affects, as Cathars,
Obstructions, a Cachexy, a Dropsy, a Palsy, a Lethargy, a looseness and
trembling of the Nervs, and the like evils, yet really there is some difference
between a moist distemper which happens to Boys, and that which befalls
aged Persons. For in Children an adventitious humidity constituting the
distemper does not only penetrate the most retired substance of the solid
parts, but they are totally incorporated with the same: But in old Men the
solid parts, even then when it is endued with a moist distemper, does not seem
to part with its earthiness, but to be in some sort compounded of that Earthy
Nature, and a certain adventitious crude and moist Juice, or else an
excrementitious drunk into the pores, or into the substance of the parts, yet
it is not sufficiently incorporated or united. For as sand, being drenched in
much water, retains al its Earthy substance, however it be somewhat moist; So
also the Bodies of old Men, however they may be moystened with crude and
excrementitious humors, yet do they not deposite that terrene substance, or
that part which by the Chymicks is designed by the name of a dead Head, which
they daily accumilate unto themselves from their first beginning. This
distemper therefore of old Persons is spurious not genuine, crude and not
perfectly digested into the substance of the parts. And therefore although we
grant that old men may in their way, labor with a moist distemper, yet it is
manifest withal by what has been said, how great a difference there is between
this of aged persons, and that of Young children. Morover, that this moist
distemper of old men, is less Homogeneal to the present affect, then that of
children, appears plainly from hence, because it produces not that softness
and tenderness of parts in old men, as we see it does in Children, neither does
it equally dispose them to a dissipation or colliquation of the inherent
Spirits, or any slippery passage either of the Blood or Exhalations, which are
supposed in this Affect: But on the other side, it rather renders them
obnoxious to obstructions, and the other evils recited before a comparison,
therefore being made between the cold and moist distemper incident to Younger
Children, and that which is wont to affect old men, there resulteth a pregnant
reason, why aged people are not so subject to this Diseas as Children.

Thirdly, Young Children, although they Naturally abound with inherent Spirits,
yet by reason of the easy transpiration of their Bodies, and because of the
laxity, tenderness and incoherence of the parts, they are much more prone then
Elder persons to dissipation and colliquation of the Inherent Spirits, and by
consequence upon less and slighter causes they fall into a want of them.

Fourthly, Younger Children by reason of that very same weak consistance of the
parts, are also rendered more obnoxious to an astonishment than the Elder. For
to the vigor and activity of the parts, there is required besides a just plenty
of Spirits, a strength of their coherence and consistence.

Fifthly, it is not needful for us to ad any thing concerning the Tone of the
parts, seeing we have so often insinuated the weakness of it in Younger Children
in respect of the Elder, and any man may observe that upon the increase of
years the Tone is more and more confirmed.

Sixthly, As for the diminute distribution of the blood to the first affected
parts, (which we have already proved to be a considerable part of the secondary
Essence of this Diseas) We say, that the Elder Children do use more strong and
frequent exercises then the Younger, and therefore that the pulses of the
outward parts are more strongly stirred up in them, and that a greater heat is
raised and cherished in them, and by consequence a cold distemper is more
potentially driven out of them.

Seventhly, as for the Organical faults, namely, the augmented magnitude of the
Liver Head, and their Vessels, it is a known thing that the proportion of the
parts is more stable and confirmed in the bigger Children, and on the contrary
that in the Younger they are easily moved and altered, but the augmentation
ceasing they are not any more afterward altered, without some unusual and
weighty causes. So that even in this respect the Younger Children are most
subject to this Diseas.

Let us therefore conclude the parts of the Question, That Young Children, in
respect of their Natural Constitutions and dispositions are more obnoxious to
this evil then those that are Elder, and so much the more, the Younger they are.

But we must not wave an Objection, that here we meet with, which also does
very fitly conveigh an occasion of passing to the other comparison; namly, of
Young Children amongst themselves. For if Young Children (as is manifest by
what has been said) are more prone to this Diseas by their Natural
Constitution and disposition, and the Younger they are, the more subject they
are: How comes it to pass, that Children rarely fall into this affect, before
they are six months old and somewhat more? For according to the Opinion
delivered, Children should seem to be principally subject to this Diseas
immediately after their birth, which yet experience disappointeth; yea, rather
indeed it witnesses the contrary; namely, that Children before they are nine
months old are seldom or scarce ever afflicted with this Diseas. Here therefore
it will be needful for us to declare that other comparison of Young Children
among themselves. For it cannot be, that this Affect should so constantly spare
Children, chiefly disposed unto it, and frequently invade those that are less
disposed, unless some difference did intervene, which did in a diverse manner
relate to those ages, and which notwithstanding the propensity of Nature does
retard the invasion of the Diseas, before the first twelve months were
completely expired, and yet afterward, either does not at all or not so
potently defend Children from this Diseas. Here therefore we must find the very
reason of the difference between these ages: which that we may the sooner do,
it will not perhaps be impertinent to take special notice by the way of those
ages, which upon the authority of experience are observed to be more frequently
affected with this Diseas, and likewise those ages which are least afflicted
with it.

We affirm therefore, that this Diseas does very rarely invade Children
presently after their birth, or before they are six months old; (yea, perhaps
before the ninth month) but after that time it begins by little and little
daily to rage more and more to the period of eighteen months, then it attaineth
its pitch and exaltation, and as it were rests in it, till the Child be two
years and six months old: So that the time of the thickest invasion is that
whole year, which bears date from the eighteenth month, two years and a half
being expired the Diseas falls into its declination, and seldom invadeth the
Child, for the reasons already alleged. But the reasons Why Infants newly
born are rarely affected, and why from the ninth to the eighteenth month they
are frequently affected, and why after the first eighteen months they are most
frequently affected shall now all of them in their order be produced.

The First Reasons why Children newly born are very seldom invaded with this
affect may be these.

The First is, Because the Embryon in the Womb is by the equal heat and
embracement of the Matrix strongly fortified against this Diseas, as we have
declared above, and by consequence the same being brought to light does for a
time retain some of that, muniment and defense which it contracted from that
equal warmth of the Womb, and therefore presently after the Birth it does not so
easily fall into it.

The Second is, Because the Midwives and Nurses do handle them so artificially
when they are new born, that their condition is not considerably different from
that which they possessed in the Womb. For they enwrap the whole Body, excepting
the Head, in one continual Covering; whereupon the exterior and first affected
parts of the Body in this Diseas are fortified against the injuries of the
outward cold, and the hot exhalations breaking out from any part of the Body
are duly and equally retained by reason of that Covering which is two or three
times double, and bound about with swathing Bands, and equally communicated to
all the parts of the Body, so that they are cherished with an even heat as it
were in a common Hypocaust or hot House. Seeing therefore that the first part of
the Essence of this Diseas consists in an unequal cold distemper, it is no
wonder if these Defenses and Fortifications of the Body do avert it at least
for some short time.

The Third Reason may perhaps be the wholsomness of the Diet, for Breast-Milk
is the most solubrious and agreeable nourishment that tender age, especially
when it is sucked from the Breasts: for it is a simple and uniform Meat, full
of nourishment, easy to concoct, and friendly and farmiliar to the
constitution of Infants. Therefore so long as they are conveniently nourished
with it, they incur the fewer errors of diet, and are rendered the less
obnoxious to this Diseas. Yet it must be noted, that if the Nurses milk be not
laudable and good in it self, or otherwise disagreable to the Constitution of
the Infant, then this reason is of no force. Therefore if the Nurse be big with
Child, or immoderatly addicted to Venery, or any ways sickly, or given to
drunkenness and inordinate feeding, it is safer to hasten the weaning of the
Infant, unless you are provided of a better Nurse.

The fourth and last reason is the slowness of the motion of this Diseas in his
first invasions. For it steals on so slowly, that it scarce bewrays any
preparations to an assault til some months are expired, unless the progress of
it be advanced by some extraordinary and most vehement Causes, as by some more
violent Affect preceding or coming upon it. Seeing therefore that this Diseas
does so slowly take Root, and seeing that Children, as we have formerly showed,
are commonly born free from it, it seldom happens to break out evidently into
act til the sixth, yea, indeed til the ninth month. And thus we have given the
reasons, why Infants newly born, notwithstanding the weakness of their
Constitution, are for many months privileged from this Diseas.

Secondly, The causes why Children from the ninth to the eighteenth Month are
every day more frequently infested with this affect, are these,

First, Because the first Cause even now propounded, driving away this Diseas in
those that are new born, does daily remit, and before the ninth Month does
totally vanish. Secondly, In like manner the second propulsive Cause before
alleged till that age does every day grow more effectual. For the hands of
Infants, after some Months, if not before, are usually set at liberty from the
prison of their Blankets, and perhaps their Feet also before they are six
months old, although at night they are swadled up again. In the day time
therefore at the least these outward Members are destitute of that common and
comfortable warmth. The Nurses likewise do many times er, when they cloth the
weak and feeble Infants too soon. For they idly define the time of clothing
them by the number of the Months, seeing that they should rather give an
estimation of it by the strength and activity of the motion of their Hands and
Feet. For when the motion and exercise of those parts does avail more to excite
and cherish their heat, and to irritate their Pulses, than the warmth of their
swaddling clothes, without all controversy that is the time to divest Infants
from their swaddling clothes. Moreover thirdly, After the ninth Month Children
usually are fed with other aliment besides Breast-Milk or other Milk, and from
that variety in feeding there easily resulteth some errors in point of Diet.
Fourthly, The slowness of the Motion of this Diseas does not hinder, but that
it may break forth into act after the ninth Month. For the motion, by reason of
the unperceivable slowness of it, at the end of certain months, does exhibit
some effects and impressions. Lastly the evils of breeding teeth do likewise
contribute very much to the same purpose. For the Teeth begin to breed commonly
about the seventh Month, and come accompanied with diverse Symptoms, which
easily dispose tender Bodies to this affect.

Thirdly, The Causes why this Diseas most frequently rages when the Child is
eighteen Months old, are;

First, Because the Causes before cited hastening this Diseas in the younger
Children, are upon the approach of this age taken away, or at least they
operate with weak and ineffectual powers.

Secondly, The evils of breeding Teeth, although in respect of the immediate
Symptoms which they produce perhaps before this time, they nourish; yet for the
most part they leave behind them in the first affected parts a certain
disposition, which privily hiding it self within them, after the term of some
months produces this Diseas. But the breaking out of the Dog-teeth chiefly
has reference to this place; seeing that these break out a little before the
Child is a year and an half old, and their coming forth likewise is of al other
the most painful.

Thirdly, Hitherto belong also those accidents which happen by reason of
ablactation or weaning of the Child, and at that time a great alteration
befalls Children in matter of Diet, which they endure not without palpable
molestation. For herupon they are angry, they cry, the commotions of their
minds makes them forsake the nourishment of their Bodies, they are hard to be
pleased, neither do they sleep quietly. All which things do easily imprint in
the parts first affected at least a foregoing disposition (although perhaps not
till a long time after) to this affect.

And so at length we have also run through this second Comparison, namely of
young Children among themselves, and we have briefly explained the Causes why
those Children at one age are more, and at another age are less exposed to this
evil.

The Third part of the Question still remains, which as we said we would
reserve to be examined at the close of this Disputation; namely, Whether those
that are of a greater age do sometimes fall (though exceeding rarely into this
Diseas.)

We say first, For so much as concerns that part of the Essence of this
Diseas, which consists in a moist distemper, that some difference must be
expected to be between that distemper in younger Children, and those that are
bigger, in young Men, Men, and especially in old Men, for the same difference
which we put before between the moist distemper of young Children and old Men,
may according to quantity as more or less, be observed between the middle Ages,
and therefore the humidity of the younger Children will be better concocted and
more genuine than that of the elder, as it is obvious to collect, mutatis
mutandis, from the same reasoning.

Secondly, As for the organical faults, we affirm that necessarily there
concurreth a vast difference between Diseases of this kind incident to
Children, and perhaps to those of greater age, for the tumors of the Bones in
the Wrests and Ankles, as also that narrowness of the Breast, likewise that
disproportionatly augmented bigness of the Head and Liver, are either less
conspicuous or altogether undescernable, especially in those that are grown to
full age. For as the years encreas the Figure and proportion of the Parts
becomes more compact, firm, and stable; neither does it easily come to pass
that one part does much grow out more than another by true augmentation.

Thirdly, We say that excepting the two premised conditions, and that in that
manner as they are propounded, this affect according to the other parts of the
Essence thereof (although indeed very rarely and upon the highest causes only)
may happen to Boys, Young Men, Men, and old Men. For first a cold distemper
without al controversy may befall them, though not so easily as Children.
Secondly, A moist distemper may also invade them, but yet only by the
limitation propounded. Thirdly, A want of inherent Spirits, may also befall
them, but then it must proceed from the most potent causes. For Chronical
Diseases and such as consume the habit of the parts, or dissipate it into air,
or wast it by long fasting and an Atrophy, do necessarily leave behind them a
paucity of Natural Spirits. We see the outward parts even in those that are
grown to full age, when they are extenuated and consumed by such like causes, to
wax feeble, to languish, wither, and become destitute of al sufficient
Spirituosity. Yet we grant that in those that are grown to full age, the evil
which causes leanness being overcome, the wasted Spirits may soon be repaired
by the vigor of the Pulses, and that the rudiments and impressions of this
Diseas may be rooted out within one or two weeks, and by consequence, that they
are seldom affected with it. In the interim, if it should so fall out, that upon
that consuming of the Inherent Spirits some impediment should intervene that
might retard their reparation, it is possible that this diseas may grow from
thence in that manner as has been said. But a numbness of the Inherent Spirits
must necessarily follow upon a fewness of them. Fourthly, The parts of the
Secondary Essence, seeing that they have a strong dependence upon the Primary
faults, where these persevere long (the Organical faults being excepted) they
may supervene in their order. So that we do not doubt but this Diseas may
happen to any age after childhood; the restrictions which we have now
propounded being granted, and upon the urgency and perseverance of great and
weighty causes.

One amongst us affirms, that he had a Gentleman in cure about thirty years
of age, who by daily immoderare use of Wine and Tobacco, continued for some
whole years, having neglected the due receiving of his meat, fell into such a
weakness of Stomach, that continually every morning he vomited, and loathed al
kind of Meat, and if at any time he swallowed any with unwillingness, he
presently vomited it up again: to appease this queziness of Stomach, he was at
last compelled to a continual use of ordinary Aqua vitae, but afterward his
custom was to mingle it with stale Beer, and a quantity of Sugar; and with
this drink alone he preserved himself alive for many months. In the mean time
all those parts which in this Diseas we call the first affected, were extremely
lean, and became soft, loose, languid and withered, so that he could neither
turn himself in his bed, nor rise, nor walk, nor stand upright, yet he felt no
pain, neither was there any privation of sens and motion, no cough, no uneasy
respiration, his face was well colored, and all the parts about his Head were in
a good condition, and well habited, so that had you judged of him by his
countenance only, you could scarce have suspected that he was sick. As he lay
in his bed he would chat with his Companions, take Tobacco by turns, and drink
that mixture of Beer and Aqua vitae aforesaid. The event of the Diseas does not
indeed belong to this place, yet we shall set it down to gratify them who are
desirous to know it. The Physician being sent for, he strictly forbad al
intemperance, and amongst other remedies having given him one grain and a half
of Laudanum Londinensis, he appeased the nauseous infirmity, and tumult of his
Stomach, which part he likewise strengthened with internal and external
applications, and prescribed him such a diet as was most easy of concoction.
Instead of exercise he solicited the heat unto the outward parts with rubbing
them every morning: having first given a small quantity of strengthening and
opening Electuary, made up with a little portion of Steel, which he drank in
two ounces of Wine, composed of Wormwood and Mint, a little Saffron being hung
in it, to give it a tincture; three ounces of small Beer, being tempered with
it, and a quantity of Sugar to make the taste of it more pleasant. Moreover, he
purged him by fits with gentle Medicines, and in the evening comforted him with
cordials. Within twenty days he grew to such a degree of amendment, that he
could walk abroad, for the space of an hour, and could without any striving or
much weariness climb ladders without any help. But afterward by a relaps into
the like intemperance, he died in the absence of his Physician. But let us
return from this degression into the way, and direct our speech to our intended
scope. The Affect being now confirmed, as it was upon the first coming of the
Doctor; Besides the faults of the Stomach, it seemed to include a great part of
the Essence of this Diseas, we now treat of. For in the parts subservient to
motion; namely, those that are first affected in this Diseas, there was a cold
distemper, either through defect of motion, or by reason of the immunite afflux
and dispensation of the Vital Blood. Again, the softness, slipperiness, laxity,
and litherness of those parts showed that there was a moist distemper in them.
Also the extreme leanness of those parts did sufficiently demonstrate a fewness
of inherent Spirits, and the unfitness to motion, and affectation of rest and
eas did strongly witness a numbness in those parts. The full and flourishing
habit of the parts about the Head, when the other parts were extenuated, was a
forcible reason to prove the unequal distribution of the Blood. But the
peculiar cause of this inequality in this sick man, might be his frequent
vomiting, whereby a more plentiful afflux of the Blood was driven to the parts
about the Head the other being almost destitute of it.

Any man may perceive by what has been said, that at least the greatest part
of the Essence of this Diseas was comprehended in this mentioned Affect. From
whence at length we may* probably infer, that it is possible for this Diseas to
happen to those of full growth, being considered according to the propounded
limitations; although it very seldom coms to pass, because great causes and
length of time are required to the production of it. And thus at last we have
put an end to the search upon the former Question.

CHAP. XIX. The latter Question. Why this Diseas happens more frequently in
England, then in other Countries? And whether it be Natural to Englishmen?
IT is acknowledged by the common consent of Physicians that there are certain
Country Diseases; namely, which more frequently infest the Inhabitants of some
one Region, than of another, by reason of some Common Cause. But seeing the
relation of the Country to the Diseases usually raging in it, may be observed
to be of a diverse kind; and seeing wise men have improperly denominated some
Diseases from certain Countries: Finally, seeing that they who have hitherto
written of Country Diseases have without difference, called all Diseases which
are most rife in any Region by the name of National or Country Diseases as if
they did equally participate of the Nature of a Country Diseas; we have judged
it to be a profitable enterprise to premise some things in this present
disquisition, concerning the differences of these Diseases among themselves.

First, Therefore those affects which have the denomination of Country
Diseases, from the Region, are properly, or less properly, and abusively so
called.

There are four conditions required to denominate a Country Diseas properly so
called.

The first condition is, That the Diseas be more frequent in that Region, unto
which it is attributed, as Natural and common, then in any other Region, unto
which it is not attributed as such. For a common or Country Diseas, is always
supposed to have an unequal reference to diverse Regions, and to infest one more
(namly, that unto which it is ascribed) and another less.

The Second Condition is, That the Diseas depends upon some kind of inclemency
of the place. For a Diseas properly common imputes a certain crime or
faultiness to the very place; therefore when a place is not guilty of some
peculiar fault, such an imputation is improperly, falsely and unjustly ascribed
unto it.

The Third Condition is, That the inclemency and sharpness of the Region be so
great, as to affect the more wary, and such as observe a du Regiment of health,
and such an one as is apropriated to the place. For in the Regiment of health
some peculiar Caution is due to certain Countries. Therefore when a People
neglecting such a peculiar Observation of the place, shall fall into some
Epidemical Diseas by an erroneous use of the nonnatural things, that it is not
to be reputed a common diseas, but to be imputed to the error, want of wit,
incogitancy and negligence of the Inhabitants. For this diseas, which we
suppose might have been prevented, had the Regiment of health apropriated to
the place been rightly observed.

The Fourth Condition is, That that vicious constitution of the Country do
either continue long, or return often. For the fault of a place that is
fugitive, not permanent nor often returning, must be accounted as somewhat
forregn and merely accidental in respect of the Region, and cannot properly
denominate a common Disease. As for example, If a pernicious and unusual Air
should chance to be blown hither from other countries, and should produce a
common diseas, which should not prevail beyond some months; that diseas ought
not properly to be called common, but rather casual and chanceable. Wherefore
the Fever of Hungary, and the Sweating-sickness of England, although they
obtained their Names chiefly from those Regions, yet are they abusively termed
common, because they want a durable fomentation from those places, and because
they either ceas altogether, or at least are not for the present more
predominent in this or that place than in another.

Diseases improperly common do indeed include the first propounded condition of
such as are properly so called, namely, because they more frequently occur in
that Region whereunto they are attributed, then in another, (for otherwise they
would not deserve the apellation of Diseases improperly common) yet they want
the second third, and fourth. For they either lack that fomentation that is
rooted in the Region, or that fomentation which they have is very weak and in
considerable, which also may be overcom by a Regiment of diet appropriated to
the place; or finally the fomentation is not permanent nor durable, nor
frequently returning. Now by fomentation we understand somewhat that is faulty
in respect of health, founded likewise in the condition of the Country.
Therefore when some common and frequent Diseas arises from the abuse of some
commodity of the Region, as if some Nation by reason of the great plenty of
fruit, and the like fruitfulness of the place, or by reason of a long and
secure peace should abuse themselves to intemperance, sloth or the like vices
and thereby incur some common Diseas, that Diseas is not properly to be called
common. For the occasion of that Diseas, which the Country did supply with, was
laudable in it self, and therefore what event soever succeeded, the abuse thereof
ought to be imputed to the error of the inhabitants, not to any unkindness or
discourtesie of the Region. In like manner if the fomention of a Diseas be
culpable, yet shall not that be founded in the very constitution of the
Country, but in some action of men, as when after the desolations of War the
unburied Carcasses pollute the Air with their putrefaction, and thereupon
introduce an Epidemical Diseas, this ought not to be called a common or Country
Diseas, because it depends upon the liberty of man's will, and was not procured
by any proper fault of the place.

Sometimes also a Diseas is ascribed to a Nation or Place by calumny, and
abusively through the malevolent and corrupt intentions of some People to
traduce the Fame of their neighbor Nations. After this manner the Neopolitans
call the Venereous Evil, the French Pox, as if it were Natural and Common to
the French. And on the contrary, the French to requite the Slander, term it the
Neopolitan Scab. But of this enough.

A Diseas properly called Common, is either Original and Ancient, or
Adventitious and New. The Original is that which from the first Inhabitation of
the place has infested the Inhabitants: of this kind perhaps is the Diseas in
the Throat called Branchocele among those that dwell about the Alps; that
burning Fever which they call a Calenture, under the torrid Zone: the
mortification of the parts under the cold Zones toward the Poles by extremity
of cold.

A Country Diseas that is new and adventitious, is that which is brought into a
Country by some common Cause. This is threefold, for either it proceeds from
some Original fault of the Region, prevailing by the advantage of time against
the health of the inhabitants, or from some alteration or innovation happening to
the Region it self. Or from some incongruity between the Place and the
complexion of the Natives.

First, A new common Diseas invadeth a Country by some Original fault in
process of time prevailing more and more. For it is possible, that the firm and
strong Bodies of the first Inhabitants of any place may powerfully resist the
unwholsom influence of the Region, and for many Ages may repel the invasion of
the evil, although their posterity afterward, in length of time, being by
degrees changed in that peculiar Reason of the complexion whereby they
maintained the former resistance, may fall at last into some common Diseas. For
the Plica of Poland, and the Scurvy, are common Diseases to the Sarmatians,
Polanders, and the Inhabitants of the Baltic Ocean, and they are likewise new
Diseases, and (as all men confess) totally unknown to the Ancients. But to this
day it is not known that any notable or remarkable Change or Innovation has
happened to those Regions before the breaking out of those Diseases, to which you
might probably ascribe the beginning of a new Diseas. Wherefore we ought rather
to say that those new Diseases did proceed from some ancient and original fault
of the places: and yet that they did not bewray themselves at first by reason
of a peculiar resistance made by the Natural strength of the Inhabitants. For
to this very day some Families in those places are free from those Diseases,
and very credible it is that they may so persevere, not yielding to the
injuries or threatenings of the Region.

Secondly, A new common Diseas may result from the altered or innovated
constitution of the place. Such kind of innovations happen in Countries, either
by Earthquakes, or Inundations of Water, or the bursting forth of some new
pernicious Springs, or perhaps of some new Mineral Exhalations from the Caveous
of the Earth, or from some malignant Aspect of the Stars and the like Causes.

Thirdly, A new common Diseas may proceed from the incongruity of the Place
with the complexion of the Natives. Such kind of Diseases chiefly happen to
Nations, when they transplant themselves from one Region to another: especially
when the Constitutions of those Countries which they go to possess, are very
different from those they forsook. So the English who first inhabited Virginia
were frequently afflicted with a swelling of the Abdomen, and the
Hypochondriacal parts; who upon their return to England were cured without any
difficulty, but they who continued in Virginia were not so easily restored to
health.

Moreover, National and common Diseases differ among themselves. Because some of
them totally depend upon the inclemency of the Region, and others in part only.
The mortification of the parts seems to be of the first kind which befalls
men in the Northern Tracts near the Poles. For the whole Essence of the Diseas
may be ascribed to the cold and sharpness of the Place. Of the second kind the
Venereous Pox among the West-Indians seems to be. For there it is conceived
to be partly gotten by impure Copulation, and partly to be contracted from the
Insalubrity of the place. In like manner the Bloody Flux is predominent in
Ireland, depending partly upon the constitution of the place, partly upon an
erroneous and preposterous diet. And thus much in general be spoken of the
differences of common Diseases. In the next place we must enquire why this
Diseas is more rife in England than in other Regions? And by the way it must be
observed, Whether, and how far forth this Diseas may be said to be Natural to
English men?

First, it must be observed, that England is an Island which borrows some
humidity from the adjacency of the Sea, and some frigidity from the distance
from the Equator, then that it abounds with innumerable fountains,
discovering their Springs almost in all places. Lastly, That it is watered with
many and frequent showers of rain more than other Regions. All which things do
sufficiently attest the frigidity and humidity of the place. Seeing therefore
that a cold and moist distemper is a part of the Essence of this Diseas, we may
easily infer that the bodies of the Inhabitants are here more inclined to those
distempers then in other hot and dry Countries.

If therefore you demand, Whether this Diseas, at least considered in this part
of it, may rightly be said to be natural to English men?

We answer, That in some sort it may (although perhaps not properly) namely, so
far forth as the same is attributed as natural to other Regions, alike cold and
moist (although perhaps it may not yet be observed in them.) For those
Countries are as readily disposed to imprint a cold and moist distemper as
England it self. Yet it must be observed, that a cold and moist distemper is a
common part of the Essence of this Diseas, and that it alone does not manifest
the Affect, for every cold and moist distemper does not introduce this evil.
Wherefore although we grant, that an excess of cold and moisture may be imputed
as a fault to England, yet we deny that from thence it can be rightly inferred
that the whole Diseas is common and Natural to English men.

Moreover, Some Countries may perhaps be found out far exceeding England both
in cold and moisture, as Scotland, Holland, Zealand, Ireland, and Denmark, and
the like; wherein notwithstanding this Diseas has not been observed to appear
much. Therefore if this Diseas be not rightly imputed to these Regions, wherein
that common cause is predominant; namely, the excess of cold and moisture.
Certainly neither can it justly be imputed to England, by reason of that common
Cause, which is here less prevalent. Again, The coldness and moistness of this
Kingdom does not so far transcend a a mediocrity, but that by outward and
inwaad applications, exercises and the like; namely, a right use of the six
things not Natural, they may be sufficiently corrected to the cashiering of
that imputation, Wherefore if these things be so, namely, if a cold and moist
distemper be only a common cause of the Diseas, if other Regions wherein this
Affect has not yet been observed to make any impression, are at least equally
obnoxious to cold and moisture: Finally, if those distempers may be prevented
by a Regiment of diet appropriated to the place; certainly the reason drawn
from the coldness and moisture of the Climate, which even now we produced to
show why English men should be more frequently invaded with this Diseas then
others, will be very weak and insufficient, so that we can by no means place
our content in that alone, and therefore we intended nothing more by that
assignation, than that England does more dispose the Bodies of the Inhabitants
to this Affect than hotter and drier Regions do the Bodies of their
Inhabitants. And ^o we proceed to the search of the other causes of the
rifeness and frequency of this Affect.

In the second place we can note that England is very ruitful and
Child-breeding being sufficiently favorable both to Conception and
Childbearing, and not ubject to cause abortions. Now from hence it comes to
pass, that not only strong and able bodied men, and such as are endued with
perfect health, but the weak and sickly persons do also generate; weak and
unsound women likewise, and such as are prone to a consumption, do conceive,
carry their children nine months, and bring them forth in a decent and laudable
manner. But it is no wonder if the Issue begotten by such matter, and which
owes its life almost to the clemency of the place alone, should be feeble and
languid, and very subject to this Diseas. For as much as the very benignity of
the Region may in this respect be the occasion of some infirmity in the Issue.
For as barbarous People in time past by an inhumane experiment upon their new
born infants; namely, by dipping their naked bodies in the coldest water,
destroyed the weak ones with the extremity of the cold, and gave education only
to the strong ones, whose vigorous Constitutions overcame the injury of their
cruel policies, purposing by that inhumanity to have an universal race of
strong and lusty people. So on the contrary the very clemency of the place
promiscously preserving the languishing and weak Children together with the
strong and healthful, does minister an occasion of bringing forth a mixed kind
of people some strong and some weak and sickly. Yet least any should mistake,
we do not mean that all the Children in this Kingdom which are born of weak and
sickly Parents are subject to this Affect. For although if one or both of the
Parents be infirm, the Children will be infirm; yet it is often seen that when
the Parents have been very strong and healthful, yet their Children have been
very subject to this Diseas. Wherefore neither do we rest in this second cause,
but another must yet be enquired out, from whence we may derive a sufficient
reason of the frequency of this evil.

We affirm therefore in the third place, That the rifeness of this Diseas in
England has been much promoted, by that long and secure peace, which we
enjoyed before the first breaking of it. For by this the more wealthy families,
which were first invaded by this evil, and which does still infest them more
than others, had addicted themselves to idleness and a loose and effeminate
life, and thereupon they fell into a moister, softer, and degenerate
Constitution, and such as was less purged and cleansed from excrementitious
humors, and by consequence their Children were even procreated obnoxious to
this Affect. You will say, that Scotland and the Northern parts of England,
although they enjoyed peace and security, yet they are seldom observed to fall
under this Affliction.

We answer, True it is that Scotland and the Northern parts of England are less
affected with this Diseas than the Southern and the Western. In the mean time
peradventure the first impressions and rudiments of it are far more frequent in
those places; yea, and in some foreign Countries, then is commonly believed.
For although this evil be very familiar in the South and West parts of this
Kingdom, and very well known among the Vulgar sort, yet we have many times seen
Children afflicted with it in a slight manner, of whom neither the Parents nor
others of the same family did suspect the least evil: Yea, we have known many,
whom none of their friends thought to be affected, to be healed without any
help of Physic by the sole benefit of the increased heat, or by the increase
of age or exercises. How much easier therefore may the first rudiments of this
Diseas be concealed from them, to whom it is less familiar, and among whom it
seldom ascends to that degree, that they need to implore the Physicians help.
We conjecture therefore that this Diseas is more frequent then is commonly
believed both in Scotland and the Northern parts of England; yea, and in some
Countries wherein the people are ignorant of it to this day: but in those places
they are so gently tormented with it, that they are seldom condemned to the
hands of the Physician. For that is the custom of the Vulgar sort, not to send
for the Doctor (especially to Infants and young Children) unless the vehemence
of the Diseas constrain them. However the matter is, we seem not yet to have
given satisfaction to the objection propounded, Why the South and West Country
men of England are more grievously and frequently conflicted with this Diseas,
then the Northern People and the Scots, although both Kingdoms equally shared
the blessing of the lasting peace and security. Therefore we grant that a higher
reason yet must be given for this difference. Fourthly, therefore and lastly,
we say, That the cause of this difference is the affluence of all good things
in these Southern and Western Countries of England. For this part of the
Kingdom is much the more fruitful, rich and flourishing, and abounding with all
manner of allurements to pleasure. Therefore it is no marvail if the customs of
men do first generate here, their Spirits decay, and the strength of their
Bodies begin to dissolve now, that this degenerate and delicate manner of
living does weaken families, is a truth so solidly and constantly attested by
Historians, that it were an impertinence to offer any proof of it. For you may
observe that the most Noble and Gallant Families have been very much reproached
for these very causes; yea, and sooner or latter sometimes totally extinguished,
and so much the sooner as they have the more refused to undergo labors, and to
innure themselves to masculine exercises. Neither are families ever plunged in a
greater danger of degeneration, then when they abound with all good things, and
lying open to plenty and security they are most powerfully invited to
delicatness, idleness and effeminateness, without any labor, care, and
solicitude. Who was more rich, secure, and effeminate, than Solomon? He left
Rehoboam a degenerate Son behind him. And perhaps the family of Henry the 8th.
is extinct for the like cause. We could heap up almost innumerable examples to
prove this, if it were needful. However it be, we see plainly, that this Diseas
does more frequently and vehemently invade the families of the wealthy, than
the cottages of poor men, and therefore it ought not to seem strange that it
likewise infested the richer and more pleasanter parts of the Kingdom; namly,
the South and West, before the North parts. But these things shall suffice to
have been spoken concerning this matter. It remains only that we enquire,
Whether and how far the three last assigned causes relate to the denomination
of a Common Diseas, and whether in respect of them, this Diseas may be ascribed
to England as common and Natural?

You must know then that these three causes in as much as they depend upon the
Region, are not properly causes, neither by their own nature do they produce
this affect, but that they are only an occasion whereby this Diseas may
accidentally arise. For in themselves they denote the laudable conditions of a
Country, at least they infer not what is culpable in it. For who can accuse his
Country, because it favoreth the procreation of Children, much less make
outcries against it, because it enjoyed long and secure peace. Finally least of
all calumniate the pleasantness, fruitfulness, and affluence of all good
things: For all these things are in themselves blessings, and conditions to be
wished for in a Country. Seeing therefore as we have showed above, that a Disease
properly common does imprint some mark of a vicious Constitution to the place to
which it is ascribed; It is impossible that any Diseas can be attributed unto
it as properly Common, by reason of the commodity of the Region. Wherefore (that
we may comprehend all in a word) although this Diseas in respect of the
coldness and moistness thereof have a fomentation in the very Constitution of
the Country* Although also that it borrow three other occasions of invading
from the Country; Yet seeing that those distempers may be prevented by a due
observation of the Regiment of Health appropriated to the place; and seeing that
the three other occasional causes, are not properly blamable, but desirable, we
must affirm that this Diseas is not properly Common to England. And so we have
put an end to the search of the causes of this Diseas.

CHAP. XX. The differences of the Diseas, called the Rachites.
THere are many differences of the Rachites in regard of the concourse of
several evils, and more than any man would easily imagine; some whereof are of
great importance, and others less considerable we have resolved here briefly to
propound the chiefest. For the knowledge of them is not only profitable to
define the prognostical causes, whereby the various events of a Diseas are
distinctly fortold according to those differences; but it also much conduces
both to the prevention and the cure of a Diseas; namly, that by a consideration
of them apt and fit remedies may be chosen.

Now these differences arise either from the Essence of the Diseas, or from the
causes thereof: or lastly, from Diseases conjoined with it. The Essence of a
Diseas may vary many ways: First, By reason of the parts of the Secondary
Essence either present or absent. Secondly, In regard of the magnitude of it.
Thirdly, In respect of the vehemence. Fourthly, in regard of the Spirits; And
fifthly in respect of the times.

We grant indeed, That there is a certain agreement between some differences
comprehended under these titles; yet seeing that the formal conceptions of them
are distinct, it must be confessed that they deserve distinct considerations.
For although a Diseas, even in that very respect may be called greater, because
it contains many parts of the Secondary Essence in the same Patient yet this
is a different and distinct consideration from that of the magnitude of that
Affect. For the magnitude properly has respect unto the degree of recess from
the Natural State, and not to the Nature of the part of the Essence either
present or absent, for hereupon resulteth more then a gradual difference. In
like manner some of the other differences do perhaps signify the same thing, in
^ concrete and restrained acception, which notwithstanding in an abstracted and
formal consideration denote a diversity. But let us proceed.

The first difference of this Diseas is that which arises from the presence of
few or many of the parts of the Secondary Essence thereof. For although all the
parts of the Primary Essence are perpetually present with the Diseas it self,
yet there is no necessity that all the parts of the Secondary Essence should be
always present. For these are after-comers to the first Essence, and do by
degrees come upon it: Yea, some of them may be so highly intercepted by the
intervention of resisting causes that they may not at all appear. Hither you
may refer that difference, which we propounded at the foot of the precedent
disputation, and which we showed might possibly* though indeed very rarely,
befall those that were grown to full age. But because our purpose here is only to
handle the Diseas as it is incident to Children, we shall be content to pass by
that difference thus noted by the way. But even in Children themselves there
sometimes happen some parts of the Secondary Essence, which have a most strict
conjunction with the Primary Essence, at least they succeed them in the order
of Nature. For the Primary Essence has the efficacy of a cause, which in
Nature does ever go before the effect. But in order of time some parts of the
Secondary Essence do conspire as it were, and concur with the Primary Essence
in the invasion; and others again do come afterward, these we must here
distinguish. For the former sort are absolutely inseparable, the latter sort
separable from this Affect.

The inseparable parts of the Secondary Essence may be reduced to these Heads.
First to the afflicted Tone of the first affected parts. Secondly, to the
unequal and imperfect distribution of the Vital Blood. Thirdly, to the too small
participation of the Vital influx in the first affected parts. Fourthly, to the
Secondary faults of the Animal Constitution. These faults are sufficiently
unfolded above in our discourse of the Secondary Essence of this Diseas; where
likewise because of their strict carriage with the Primary Essence, any man may
perceive with eas (though they have a casual dependence upon the Primary
Essence) that they begin together at the same time.

But all the Organical faults which we have also already recited, are found to
be separable, and sometimes actually separate from this Diseas. For the
magnitude of the Head, and the leanness of the Joints, the crookedness of the
Shank-bone, or the Elbow, the inflexions of the Joints, the sharpness of the
Breast, do not necessarily accompany this Diseas presently from the beginning,
but in process of time they bewray themselves by degrees and supervene upon the
Affect. And although the Consumption of the parts, which in some sort has an
influence into the said faults, may be said to be present in some slight degree
from the beginning of the Diseas, yet is it indeed only a Symptom, and not a
Diseas; neither is it able presently to produce those Diseases of magnitude,
Figure and Place. Moreover it is not necessary, that these Organical faults
should equally and at the same time invade one that has the Rachites, we grant
indeed that the extenuation of the first affected parts, when the Diseas is of
some continuance, does always and necessarily succeed it, neither can it
afterward upon the perseverence of the Diseas be removed, that it is likewise
a principal part of the separable parts of the secondary Essence; yea that the
extenuation whilst it is making does immediately follow the smalness of
nourishment of the first affected parts, almost no otherwise than the smalness
of nourishment immediately follows the primary Essence of the Diseas in the
said parts; but withal we affirm that the extenuation being made which is it
self a secondary part of the Diseas whereof we discourse, does necessarily
presuppose the motion and time of the Diseas, and that it cannot be in the
first moment of the existence of the Diseas. We say moreover that Physicians do
not acknowledge any change made in the parts exposed to the sens, which does not
yet appear to the sense, and by consequence they affirm that extenuation
befalls the first affected parts, til it be made obvious to the senses which
certainly does necessarily prerequire some duration of the Diseas. But the
improportionat magnitude of the Head, does begin almost at the same time with
that extenuation of the first affected parts, but it may so fall out, if a
consuming Phtisick be joined together with this Diseas, that that magnitude of
the Head may vanish before death, as we have already proved by one example in
our Anatomical Observations. The Magnitude of the Head therefore is more
separable from this affect than the extenuation of the first affected parts,
for this cannot be removed without the Diseas be cured. The sticking out of the
Bones appear sometimes sooner, sometimes later, and they sometimes grow out more,
sometimes less, but upon any long continuance of the Diseas they are seldom (if
ever) seen to be absent. The narrowness of the Breast does not appear, but
after a long time when the Diseas is confirmed, and for the most part is the
forerunner of a Ptysick. Again, the crookedness of the Bone in the Arm, and the
Shank-bone, as also the inflexion of the Joints may be absent through the whole
course of the Diseas, and may be more or less present, and indeed is the most
chanceable among those things which follow this affect. We conclude therefore
that these Organical parts of the Secondary Essence are separable after that
manner as we have said, and as a more or fewer of them are present, so the
Difference of the Diseas is constituted, as being more or less compounded.

The Second Difference of this Diseas resulteth from the magnitude thereof. And
the magnitude is estimated from the greater or lesser recess from the natural
condition of it. There is a vast difference in this Diseas in respect of the
magnitude. For some are so gently affected with it that you would scarce
suppose them to be sick. They complain of nothing, they eat, they drink, they
sleep like those that are sound in health; only they play with more
unchearfulness, and show forth some other very slight signs of sickness, By the
only benefit of Nature likewise without any assistances of Art they perfectly
recover, neither their Parents, Nurses, nor the Bystanders so much as once
suspecting that they are affected with this evil. On the contrary, Others are
so vehemently afflicted that they cannot be rescued from death or the danger of
imunient death by the most approved remedies.

The Third Difference is from the vehemence of the affect. Now this is valued
by the violent motion of the Diseas and the resistance of Nature, and also by
the sharpness of the conflict of these things among themselves. This Diseas,
although it be otherwise very great, yet is it slow in motion unless some
fewer, or some other urgent affect be conjoined with it, and stir up the Nature
of it to a fiercer opposition, yet is the motion thereof sometimes more vehement,
and sometimes very dull, and thereupon it happens to be differenced.

The Fourth Difference, is from the strength of the sick Child or Infant. This
is estimated by the greater or lesser presence of those things which are
according to Nature. Hither belongs the condition of the temperament, the
plenty of inherent Spirits, the activity and strength of the Tone, the vigor of
the Vital and Animal Constitution, and the structure of the Organs. For as
these are more or less obedient to the prescriptions of Nature, so their
Spirits ought to be judged more or less strong, and according to them the evil
must be determined the more or less dangerous. For this cause the younger
Children caeteris paribus are more dangerously affected than the elder.

The Fifth Difference, is from the times of the Diseas. And this difference in
a qualified and limited acception includes almost all the precedent; for what
difference soever happens to any Diseas, must necessarily happen at some time
of the Diseas. Physicians reckon up four times of a Diseas: The Beginning, the
Augmentation, the Consistance, and the Declination. But it must be noted that
Physicians are not so exact in distinguishing the seasons of things as the
Philosophers, for they do not restrain the beginning of a Diseas to that point
of time wherein the Diseas begineth; but so far they extend it, till there
appear so great an alteration of the Diseas, that it may be known by certain
and sensible evidences. For the indivisible beginning is not the time, wherein
the Physicians help is perfected, and why should that distinction of a Diseas
be profitable which could not be grounded upon any alteration of it known to us?

Galen therefore has rightly deduced the times of Fevers and Inflammations from
the understandible alteration of them: that is, The beginning from the crudity
of the matter causing the diseas, the augmentation from the manifest coction
thereof; the state from the Excretion, and the Declination he computes from the
Reduction of the Relics to the Natural state; and indeed these times do
sweetly agree in the general, and differ in particular from the crudity and
coction of Fevers and Inflammations. But the truth is, That this distinction of
times has not the like success in many other diseases: For in these Nature
does not so regularly proceed from crudity to coction, so to expulsion, and at
last to reduction; neither by these can we truly and safly know the progress of
the diseas. Other alterations therefore of these Diseases, such as are more
clear and easily known must be weighed. Yet we grant that even these diseases
when they are directed to health, do run through those four seasons, the
beginning, the augmentation, the state or consistence, and the declination. But
when they tend to the destruction of the Patent, they scarce attain to the
consistance, but are daily more and more augmented even to the lest period of
life. Wherefore in these the augmentation admits the greatest latitude,
neither does it deserv a higher difference, or a lower subdivision: but when an
indifferent state of a diseas of the same kind is made the Middle term between
the beginning and the end of such an augmentation, than we can conveniently
distinguish. The encreas into an augmentation on this side, or beyond, or
beneath, or above the consistence. An encreas of the first kind about the
consistance we may call a simple encreas, in regard that it differs not from
the thing it self commonly received by that name, an encreas beyond or above
the state, we call an encreas excrescent, excessive, transcendent and desperate.

Moreover, Two kinds of declination may be observed in a Diseas. The first is
legitamate when the Diseas simply declineth toward health and recovery. The
later is spurious, when a diseas remitting changes into another of a different
kind. And so although there are in those that recover health, only four times of
a diseas, yet in others two more differences may be discerned: Yet it must be
noted, that these six times are never to be found in the same diseas, or the
same patient, but where there is the same diseas in the Species in diverse
subjects. Let us now apply these things to the present affect. We affirm
therefore that six differences of this diseas do occur in respect of the times
thereof. For it has a beginning, and may be called incipient: it has an
encreas, and may be said to be confirmed; it has a state, and then it it may
be termed consistant; it has an increase beyond the state, and may be called
desperate: it has a true declination, and may be said to be an affect remiting
or simply declining; and it has a spurious declination, and may be called a
change, as when it chancheth into some other diseas. Of al which we will speak in
their order.

First, The Rachites is called a Diseas beginning, when the first Rudiments and
impressions thereof are, though very obscurely, first observed, and before
there happens any manifest extenuation of the first affected parts.

Secondly, This diseas is said to be confirmed, when an evident and manifest
extenuation of the first affected parts becoms obvious to the Senses. And here
the Reader perceives we do not distinguish these two times from crudity and
coction, but from another alteration of the Body, namly, The Extenuation made
in the parts first affected; for the beginning of this diseas can no ways be
discerned from the encreas thereof by crudity and coction: But otherwise, so far
as the nature of the thing is capable of it, we shall willingly follow the
example of Galen, and as he distinguishes the encreas from the beginning by the
manifest coction, so we also put a different between these times in this affect
from a manifest alteration, namly, the extenuation made in the said parts.

Thirdly, This diseas advanced to its consistence, is that, which having
attained the highest vigor and exhaltation, is arrested, and for a time is
neither sensibly increased, or lessened, but continues at a stand.

Fourthly, This diseas exceeding the Mediocrity of the consistance is called
desperate, namly, Because in magnitude and vehemence it surpasses the very state
of the same diseas in another Patient indifferently affected, and withal is
continually increased, neither is there any hope but that it will daily encreas
til it has altogether subdued and dissolved the Patient For which cause this
condition of a diseas is termed desperate.

Fifthly, This diseas is said to be truly remitting or declining, when the
Essence thereof is by little and little diminished, and when the Signs and
Symptoms of it are daily mitigated.

Sixthly, This diseas is said to be illegitimatly declining, or passing into
another diseas of a diverse species, when the Essence, Signs and Symptoms thereof
are so lessened, that new ones of a different kind, and perhaps more outrageous
appear in their stead. Thus the Rachites frequently degenerat into a
Consumption, a Hectic, and sometimes perhaps into a slow putrid Fever; yet for
the most part the same diseas does accompany these supervening affects to the
dissolution of the Patient. And let this suffice concerning the differences of
this diseas deduced from the Essence.

This diseas in like manner in respect of the Causes is as it were taken into
pieces, or divided into parts, namly into a natural affect, and into an
after-coming or newly contracted malady. Again, This diseas may be termed
natural in a twofold sens* In the first properly, As when the Sick is born
actually affected with this diseas. In the later improperly, when the Patient
at his birth is not actually affected with it, but strongly disposed by his
native principles to fall into it. If it pleas the Reader to summon those
things to his memory which were said above concerning the causes of this Effect
on the Parents parts, he will easily conceive the reason and foundations of this
difference, and consequently that will excuse us from any further explication:
Only we ad, that this difference is of great use in the judicial part of cure,
which consists in applications antidotal and preventive, but it is not of so
great moment in the Method of Cure. In like manner this Affect is merely coming
after, when being fomented by no Natural disposition, it is newly contracted
after the birth* and here also it is twofold. For it either succeeds some
foregoing Diseas; or it is immediately produced by an erroneous use of the six
non-Natural things: We have sufficiently discoursed of both, where we hammered
out the causes of this Diseas after the birth, and thither we direct the Reader.

Again, this Diseas admits some differences by reason of other Diseases
wherewith it is conjoined in the same subject. It must not be expected that we
should give in a Catalogue of all Diseases, wherewith this Affect may possibly
be conjoined, we shall only reckon up those which ate the usual Companions of
this Malady* Some whereof have a certain dependence upon this Diseas and the
causes of it; others have not any, or at least not any worthy of a distinct
consideration.

Of the former kind are a Hydrocephalus, the faults of breeding Teeth, an
Asthma, the Ptysick, an Hectik fever, a slow, and erratical Fever, and the
Ascites, which is that kind of Dropsy when water has gotten between the flesh
and the Skin.

The Hydrocephalus has a great correspondence with this Affect, seeing that
this Affect also does for the most part suppose an increas of the Head
preternaturally increased, and an overplentiful afflux of the Blood unto the
Brain by reason of the largeness of the Arteries thither extended. And hereupon
it easily coms to pass that the Brain being oppressed with the abundance of the
Blood, must sometimes needs suffer the more serous portion thereof (as being the
most permeable) to evaporate or sweat out into the Ventricles and cavities
within the Menynges, and by consequence to produce the Dropsy of the Brain. But
this, as we have already noted, does always appear.

The faults of breeding of Teeth also are sometimes justly ascribed to this
Diseas going before. For it is well known that they who are affected with this
Diseas do commonly breed Teeth with extreme pain, and many times the Teeth
themselves fall out by pieces. But we have above reduced this fault to the
unequal nourishment of the parts, and there the Reader may find further
satisfaction. In the mean time it must be observed, that a painful breeding of
Teeth may likewise precede this Diseas, and sustain the force of a cause in
reference to this subsequent evil, as we have likewise showed above.

Moreover, An Asthma or difficulty of breathing does familiarly follow upon
this Affect, because the Blood is somewhat cooled in his circulation through the
first affected parts, and is rendered more thick, viscous, and sluggish in
motion, neither is it always perfectly corrected before its return to the right
Ventricle of the Heart. Whereupon being unapt for passage, it is powered back
from the right Ventricle through the Arterious Vein into the substance of the
Lungs, and for that Reason does easily introduce obstructions, hard tumors,
difficulty of breathing, sometimes inflammations, impostumes, Ulcers, the
Ptysick, the Dropsy of the Lungs, a Hectic Fever, or else a slow erratical
Fever.

An Ascites is also sometimes consociated with this Affect. But whether it
proceeds from a copious flowing of the Blood to the Bowels of the Abdomen, we
dare not yet attest for an undoubted truth. Yet certain it is that the flowing
of the Blood to this Belly is very copious and sufficiently active in this
Diseas. For the Liver is great, and the other Bowels are observed to be rather
more full than ordinary, than pined away. Whereupon it may happen, that that
watery moisture from the Bowels which are oppressed with a fullness may be
carried into the hollowness of the Abdomen, but we affirm this with a
distrustful confidence, because we have not yet given our selves full
satisfaction in this matter.

Nevertheless these recited Diseases may happen to Children although the
Rachites have not preceded, and may be the cause to introduce it. Yea, they may
likewise com upon this Diseas from other causes; as for example, by some errors
in the Regiment of health; although in this case also this Affect may be partly
guilty, if it went before: And thus much of complicated Diseases of the former
kind.

But of the latter kind, namely, such as have little or no nependance upon this
Affect, are a malignant Fever, the French Pox, the Scurvy, and the
Strumaticall Affect.

First it is certain, That a Malignant Fever may come upon this Affect,
because for the most part it is produced by infection, from which this present
Affect leaves not Children free, we ad only, that this Fever does seldom or
never ow his Origin to this Diseas.

Secondly, If the French Pox chance to be complicated with this Diseas, it is
either derived from the Nurses infection, or from the Parents by Inheritance.
For it is a Diseas altogether Distinct from this, and has scarce any affinity
with it.

Thirdly, The Scurvy is sometimes conjoined with this Affect. It is either
hereditary, or perhaps in so tender a Constitution contracted by infection, or
lastly, it is produced from the indiscreet and erroneous Regiment of the
Infant, and chiefly from the inclemency of the Air and Climat where the Child
is educated. For it scarce holds any greater commerce with this Diseas, then
with other Diseases of longer continuance, wherein after the same manner the
Blood in time contracteth for the most part this peculiar infection, yet it
must be granted, that this Affect does somewhat the more dispose to the Scurvy
in regard of the want of motion and exercise.

Fourthly, and lastly, The Strumatical Affect does sometimes associate this
evil. But it is credible that it owes more to other causes proper unto it,
then to this precedent Diseas. Although we deny not, but this may minister some
occasion of invading, in as much as it renders the humors more viscous and
gross.

Some other Diseases are peradventure sometimes complicated with this, but
because they happen exceeding rarely, and have yet scarce fallen under our
observation, we pass them by, for the present and proceed to the signs of the
Diseas, and the difference of the signs.

CHAP. XXI. The Signs of the Rachites, and first the Diagnostical Signs.
WE distinguish the Signs of the Diseas into three Chapters. The first
contains those Signs which demonstrate the presence of the Affect, and are
called Diagnostical. The second contains those that distinguish among
themselves the differences of the Diseas, and these are called, Diacritical, or
Discrepant. The third comprehends those Signs which presage the event of the
Diseas, and they are termed Prognostical. In this Chapter we shall not treat of
the first kind.

We divide the Diagnostical Signs into Pathognomonical and Synedreontal. And
here the Physical Authors seem to be more strict in the definition of the word
Pathognomonical, then the necessity of the nature of the matter does require.
For they will have it to be Inseparable and (as Logicians speak) Proprium quarto
modo, that is, to agree, omni, soli, and semper. Indeed it must be granted,
that such an Inseparable Sign, or, Proprium quarto modo, must be according to
the most proper sens a Pathognomonical Sign. For whether it be present, or
whether it be absent, it is ever demonstratively significant: When it is
present it certainly witnesses the species of the present malady, and being
absent it shows that that species of the Diseas is not present.

But when we truly and seriously consider how seldom such Signs as these occur
and of what useless consideration they will prove, the knowledge of them being
thus restrained; we are induced to think of the amplifying of the usual
signification of the word. For although the Ancients to supply this defect, did
substitute (...) in the place of one true Pathognomonicol Sign strictly taken,
and we our selves do most willingly accept of, and approve this very same (...);
yet seeing that this (...) does seldom appear from the beginning of the Diseas,
and by consequence seldom obtains the reputation of an Inseparable Sign, it
necessarily follows, that it also can but seldom perform the office of a
Sign, quarto modo proprie, and therefore also that this notion is reduced to an
extreme narrow use. We are compelled therefore that we may fully prevent, or
avoid this inconvenience to extend somewhat higher the signification of a
Pathognomonical Sign; yet so, as that we will abate nothing of the Nature and
certitude of the signification.

Therefore we define a Pathognomonical Sign to be somewhat appearing about the
Patient, which certainly and infallibly demonstrates the Species of the Diseas,
And in this extended sens it may be divided into a Sign Inseparable, or,
proprium quarto modo, and a Sign Separable; namely, as being proper only, Modo
secundo; to wit, because it is competible only to one kind of Diseases, although
not always. In like manner the Paththognomonical Syndrome, or Concours of
Symptoms may be divided into two kinds, respectively Analogical to those
aforesaid. For sometimes it begins with the Diseas it self, and does
inseparably associate to the very last period. So the pricking pain of the
side, and acute Fever, the difficulty of breathing, and the cough, if they be
taken collectively, they are indeed a Syndrome, but such an one as is always
equivalent to one simple Pathognomonical Sign of the first kind, and does
inseparably accompany a Pleurisy from the first beginning to the very end. But
sometimes the Syndrome or concours of Symptoms is not complete and perfect from
the beginning of the Diseas, yet afterward it is made perfect by the
intervention of the other Signs, and does infallibly denote, the species of the
Diseas. For example, in the small Pox upon the first beginning of the Diseas, the
Syndrome, is so incomplete, that it does not yet certainly determine the
species of the Diseas; but afterward the Pox breaking out of the Skin very
thick, and tending to maturation, then the Syndrome is finished, and the
species of the Diseas is put out of al doubt.

But that a Sign proper to one Diseas alone (although not in the fourth manner)
whether it be simple and solitary, or compounded of a concours of many
together, may suffice, when it is present to make a Sign truly Pathognomonical:
It is manifest from hence, because, when it is present, it does as certainly and
infallibly denote the species of the Affect, as a Sign does, which is proper in
the fourth manner. For that which agrees to one species only, when it is
present, does necessarily infer the presence of that species also. Although
therefore that a Sign proper in the second manner, be not Inseparable, and where
it is absent, does not determine the absence of the Diseas, as a Sign does
proper in the fourth manner; yet when it is present, it is as we have said of
the same valu and certainty. For Physicians do esteem the dignity of the Sign
by the certainty of the signification. For to that purpose they enquire out the
signs of a Diseas, that they may attain to a certain knowledge thereof. Therefore
seeing that Signs proper in the second manner are equivalent in respect of their
certainty, when they present to Signs proper in the fourth manner: we shall
here comprehend them under the extended signification of Pathognomonical Signs.

You may say after this manner many after appearing Signs may be reduced to the
Pathognomonical and are confounded with them. Be it so, provided that they do
infallibly denote the species of the Diseas. For in this respect they are
worthy to be severed from the other after appearing Signs, neither will any
confusion follow hereupon in the method of the semeiotical art, but rather the
valu and dignity of the Signs will by that means be more plainly and easily
observed.

Of the Synedremontal or assident Signs we have nothing of moment to say, but
will directly proceed to the Signs themselves as they are to be reduced into
order. Yet no exact method must be expected from us, because for the most part
the Signs flow from so many several fountains, that they will scarce suffer
themselves to be marshalled into any accurate order. Wherefore, that they may be
constituted which have some affinity among themselves, we have reduced the signs
of this Affect to the subsequent Method.

We shall propound therefore

First, The Signs which relate to the Animal actions.

Secondly, Those which have reference to the irregular Nutrition.

Thirdly, Those that concern the Respiration.

Fourthly, Those that appertain to the Vital Influx.

Fifthly, Certain vagabond and fugitive Signs reducible to no Classis. Under
each of which we shall subjoyn the valu of the Signs.

First the Diagnostical Signs relating to the Animal Actions, are these. The
looseness and softness of the parts. The debility and languidness. And finally,
the slothfulness and stupefaction.

First, A certain laxity and softness, if not a flaccidity of all the first
affected parts is usually observed in this Affect. The Skin also is soft and
smooth to the touch, the musculous flesh is less rigid and firm; the joints are
easily flexible, and many times unable to sustain the body. Whereupon the Body
being erected it is bent forwards or backwards, or to the right side or to the
left.

Secondly, A certain debility, weakness, and enervation befalls all the parts
subservient to motion. This weakness depends much upon the laxity, softness,
and litherness of the parts aforesaid: for which reason we have placed those
Signs before this, as also this before the slothfulness and stupefaction in the
next place to be enumerated, which ow much both to the looseness and softness.
Moreover, this debility begineth from the very first rudiments of the Diseas.
For if Children be infested within the first year of their age or therabouts,
they go upon their feet later by reason of that weakness, and for the most part
they speak before they walk, which amongst us English men, is vulgarly held to
be a bad Omen* But if they be afflicted with this Diseas, after they have begun
to walk, by degrees they stand more and more feebly upon their legs, and they
often stagger as they are going, and stumble upon every slight occasion:
neither are they able to sustain themselves long upon their legs without
sitting, or to move and play up and down with an usual alacrity, til they have
rested. Lastly, upon a vehement increase of the Diseas they totally lose the
use of their feet; yea, they can scarce sit with an erected posture, and the
weak and feeble Neck does scarcely, or not at al sustain the burden of the
Head.

Thirdly, A kind of slothfulness and numbness does invade the Joints presently
after the beginning of the Diseas, and by little and little is increased, so
that daily they are more and more averse from motion. The Younger Children who
are carried about in their Nurses arms, when they are delighted and pleased
with any thing do not laugh so heartily, neither do they stir themselves with so
much vigor, and shake and brandish their little Joints, as if they were
desirous to leap out of of their Nurses hands, also when they are angered they
do not kick so fiercely, neither do they cry with so much fierceness as those
who are in health. Being grown greater, and committed to their feet, they run
up and down with a wayward unchearfulness, they are soon weary, and they love
to play rather sitting then standing, neither when they sit, do they erect
their body with vigor, but they bend it sometimes forwards, sometimes backwards,
and sometimes on either side, seeking some props to lean upon that may gratify
their slothfulness. They are not delighted like other Children with the
agitation of their bodies, or any violent motion; yea, when the Diseas
prevails they are avers from all motion of their limbs: crying as they are at
any play that is never so little vehement; and being pleased again with gentle
usage and quiet rest. In the interim, unless some other Diseas, Symptom, or cause
of sickness does com between, they are moderate in sleeping and waking, they
are ingenious, not stupid, but for the most part of forward wits, unless some
other im pediments arise, their countenances are much more composed and severe
than their age requires, as if they were intent and ruminating upon some
serious matter.

These Signs being taken together, unless they result from some evident
wariness, or proceed from some primary affect of the Brain (which indeed
happens very seldom in this tenderness of age) do constitute a sufficient
Pothognomonical Syndrom of the first kind, and where they are present together,
they certainly witness the presence of the Diseas, and when they are absent
together they infallibly attest the Essence of this Diseas. But if at any time
a wearisomness do bewray any Feverish, or any other like Signs, they may
easily be distinguished from these, both because the reasons of the weariness
have gone before, and also because the Signs from thence arising do suddenly
break out, and as soon vanish. But in this affect the signs do invade by
degrees, and persevere, or else they are daily more increased. Now the primary
Diseases of the Brain are distinguished by their proper Signs. And thus much of
the Signs which relate to the Animal Actions.

The Signs which belong to the disproportioned Nourishment of the Parts.
Of how great moment the Alogotrophy, or unequal Nourishment of the Parts is in
this affect, we have already showed; we shall here therefore prosecute those
signs which in some great measure depend upon it, and we shall present them as
if they were to be beheld at one View.

First, there appears the unusual bigness of the Head, and the fullness and
lively complexion of the Face, compared with the other parts of the Body. But
although this Sign may presuppose some motion of the Diseas before it shine
out, yet is the Diseas so obscure before the appearance of it, that it is
accounted in a manner unperceivable: Therefore commonly this Sign shows it
self more or less from the first beginning, and continues till the departure
of the affect, unless (as we have noted before) the pining of those parts
supervene from some other cause.

Secondly, The Fleshy parts, especially those which are full of Muscles beneath
the Head which we have listed among the first affected, in the progress of the
Diseas are daily more and more worn away, made thin and lean. This Sign does
not presently show it self from the beginning of the Diseas, because it
pre-requireth some notable motion of the Diseas before it evidently appears;
yet in time it most certainly is exposed to the senses, and accompanies the
Diseas to the last step be it either to life or death; excellently
demonstrating the motion and degree of the Diseas by its encreas. Moreover this
Sign being conjoined with the former does at least constitute a Pathognomonical
Sign of the second kind, that is such an one as is proper to this Diseas alone;
and where they are present together they infallibly denote the presence of this
Diseas, although upon their absence they do not equally signify the absence of
the Diseas.

Thirdly, Certain swellings and knotty excrescences, about some of the joints
are observed in this affect; these are chiefly conspicuous in the Wrests, and
somewhat less in the Ankles. The like Tumors also are in the tops of the Ribs
where they are conjoined with grizles in the Breast. We have noted abov in our
Anatomical Observations that these tumors are not situated in the Parts, but
in the very Bones; although this consideration does scarce belong to them as
Signs, seeing that of themselves they are searce conspicuous. This Sign does
also suppose some kind of motion of the Diseas, neither is it emergent a
Principio principiante, as the Philosophers phrase it, yet it offers it self as
an object to the senses sooner than any considerable extenuation of the parts.
But where it is present, it constitutes a Pathognomical Sign of the Second
kind, and without dispute witnesses the Species of the Diseas.

Fourthly, Some Bones wax crooked, especially the Bones called the Shank-bone,
and the Fibula or the small Bone in the Leg, then afterward the greater
Shank-bone, and the undermost and lesser of the two long Bones of the Elbow,
but not so much altogether nor so often; sometimes also the Thigh Bone and the
Shoulder Bone. Again, there is sometimes observed a certain shortning of the
Bones and a defective growth of them in respect of their longitude. This by
chance was omitted above, where we gave the Reason of the Organical faults. Yet
this affect does seem to depend upon the same irregular nourishment; namely so
far forth as the nourishment taken in encrcaseth the Bones according to breadth
and thickness more than length. From hence it comes to pass that some Children
long afflicted with this Diseas become Dwarfs. Hither perhaps may be referred
that folding in the Wrests, the Skin it may be having better nourishment and
more growth than the Bones of those parts, whereupon it must needs be contracted
in the Wrests into a folding or wrinkledness. Finally, to this place also may
belong a certain sticking out of the Bones of the Head, especially of the Bone
of the forehead forwards. For it concerns the common kind of viciated Figure
and the Alogotrophy of the Bones. Yet this in the Bone of the Forehead does
evidently seem to depend upon the free nourishment of that Bone in his
circumference, wherewith it is coupled to the Bones of the fore part of the
Head, and constitutes that seam called S^tura Coronalis, which lies in the
foremost parts thereof. For herupon it must needs be thrust forwards. And indeed
in that place it is plentifully nourished without any difficulty, because this
Bone in Children is cartilagineous toward that Seam. And this also was
pretermitted above where we discoursed of the Organical faultiness, because we
have but lately observed it.

Fifthly, The Teeth come forth both slowly and with trouble, they grow loos
upon every slight occasion, sometimes they wax black, and even fall out by
pieces. In their stead new ones come again though late and with much pain. This
kind of Sign, as also that which we noted in the former Article, may be
referred to the Synedremontal Signs, because neither of these is either
perpetually present, or if it be present, it does not undoubtedly confirm the
presence of Diseas.

Some have imagined that the Bones in this Diseas are transfigurable like wax;
But we have never seen it, neither have we received it from any eye witness who
was not of suspected credit. Wherefore we reject this Sign as altogether
Fabulous.

Sixthly, The Breast in the higher progression of the Diseas, becomes narrow on
the sides, and sticking up foreright, so that it may not be unaptly compared to
the Keel of a Ship inverted, or the the Breast of a Hen or Capon. For on each
side of the middle it rises up into a point, the sides being as it were
pressed down. If any demand whether this Sign be solely apropriated and
peculiar to this affect; We answer, That the Breast may be a little increased
in an Atrophy or Phtisick, and less than the other parts of the Body, and so by
consequence it may be narrower: but it can scarce so fall out according to the
change of the Figure without an Alogotrophy, namely that which is proper to
this Diseas. Wherefore this Sign also when it is present, although the invasion
of it be tardy must be reputed a Pathognomonical Sign of the second kind,
because when it is present, it certainly denotes the Species of the Diseas,
though not on the contrary. And thus much of the Signs which have reference to
the unequal nourishment.

The Signs which belong to Respiration.
First, The narrowness and sticking up of the Breast already mentioned must be
hither referred, whereof we then discoursed at large.

Secondly, A swelling of the Abdomen, and an extension of the Hypochondriacal
parts, which hinders the free motion of the Diaphragma downwards, and by
consequence does somewhat interrupt the breathing. Yet it must be noted that the
Abdomen and the Hypochondries also in respect of their outward parts appear
very lean and extenuated, but inwardly, namly in those parts which are
contained in the Cavity of the Abdomen, they swell, from whence arises this
fullness. This swelling proceeds partly from the windiness of the Stomach and
Guts, and partly from the bigness of the Liver and other Bowels. Sometimes also
a watery moisture into the Cavity of the Abdomen, introducing an Ascites,
joyneth in this conspiracy. This Sign is seldom absent, and yet it must be
numbered among the Pathognomonical Signs, because it is common to many other
Diseases.

Thirdly, A Cough is frequently present in this Affect, as also a difficulty of
breathing, and many other faults of the Lungs, as Stoppings, hard Tumors,
Imposthums, Inflammations, a Coalesence of them, with the Plura, and the like;
Yet these scarce deserve to be reckoned among Signs, because of themselves
(whilst the Patient lives) they are not sufficiently conspicuous.

Fourthly, Children afflicted with this Diseas are ofavers from lying upon
their Sides either the right or the left, or at least it is troublsom to them;
namly, either because of the Coalesence of the Lungs with the Plura, or by
reason of some Tumor on the contrary side, but to lie with their Faces upwards
they are very much delighted. And these signs also being taken together will not
amount to pathognomonical signs of either kind, but syndreciontal only and are
common to other Diseases.

Signs belonging to the Vital Influx.
First, The Veins and the Arteries are more slender than ordinary in the first
affected parts, and less conspicuous than you would expect in a lean Body. But
in the Face (respect being had to the gracility aforesaid in the other part)
they exceed the just proportion. This perhaps is a pathognomonical sign,
although it be difficult to be observed, and indeed not yet sufficiently sifted
by us.

Secondly, The Pulls in the Wrests, and the other affected parts is small and
weak, otherwise perhaps it is moderat, unless when a Fever is present.

Thirdly, A moderate Ligature cast about the Elbow or the Knee, does not so
soon swel and color the part beneath and above the Ligature with Blood, as it
does in other sound Children of the same age.

Centain vagabond and wandering Signs.
First, An appetite to Meat and Deink that is either moderate, or unduly weak,
unless where a Fever is conjoined.

Secondly, The Excrements of the Belly and Bladder do commonly resemble theirs
that are in health, unless some other Diseas do interdict it.

Thirdly, It is observed, that those which are sick of this diseas do abominat
sweet things, as Syrups, and Junkets condited with much Sugar or Honey* Perhaps
also such things as these are hurtful for them, as also for those which are
troubled with the Scurvy, because they thicken the humors.

Fourthly, Some have observed, That they have seen some Children affected with
the Rachites, to weigh heavior than others of the same age and stature. If this
be so, it must be attributed partly to the facility, and partly to the
inequality of the Nutrition of the bony substance in this Affect. For when this
weight can scarce be ascribed to the Flesh, which are here extenuated, it
seems plain that this must be attributed to the bony substance: And seeing
that the Bones in this Diseas are not yet observed to encreas beyond measure in
respect of their longitude, it follows plainly, that it must be imputed to
the thickness of them which is superfluously augmented. These are also common
signs, neither do they merit a more worthy estemation. And thus much for the
Diagnostical Signs, the Diacritical now follow.

CHAP. XXII. The Signs of the differences of the Rachites, or the Diacritical
Signs thereof.
WE shall insist in the same Method we propounded above, where we discoursed of
the differences, whose Signs we now enquire after. We have above deduced five
differences from the very Essence of the Diseas. The first was separable from
the parts of the Secondary Essence, whether they were present or absent. But no
other Signs must be expected besides the very pars present or absent, which of
themselves are subjected to the senses, and therefore they are numbered among the
Diagnostical Signs in the second Classis in in the precedent Chapter.

The second difference was from the magnitude of the Diseas; the signs of this
are many and great, or few and gentle and present signs; namely, to be fetched
from among the Diagnostical Signs above described.

The third difference was taken from the vehemence of the affect. This is
distinguished by the slow or quick encreas of the Diagnostical Signs.

The fourth was from the strength of the Sick; we have showed the way to judge
of the strength above: But the difference of a Diseas arising from hence has
respect unto the danger, and therefore we refer the Signs thereof to the
Prognostics.

The fifth difference was deduced from the times of the Diseas. In which
respect we have above reckoned up six diverse apparitions of this Diseas: to
wit, The beginning, the encreas, the state or consistence, the encreas beyond
the State, the true declination, the superious declination, or the passing into
another affect.

It must be known that the beginning of this Diseas, besides the signs that
difference this time from the increase, does likewise require some peculiar
Signs of the presence of this Diseas: for it is a time of the greatest
obscurity, wherein the Diseas does as it were lurk and hide it self, neither can
an unattentive and in expert Physician easily distinguish it from the
Diagnostical Signs above rehearsed. For by this time most of the Diagnostical
Signs aforesaid do not yet openly break forth; and such as make a discovery of
themselves, present only some obscure impressions to the Physicians
Observation. Therefore the indication of this time requires an accurate and
peculiar collection of the first appearing Signs, and a diligent consideration
of them; but the other times, besides the Diagnostical Signs above granted,
want only a difference among themselves, which is performed by an easy
industry. Wherefore in the first place we will declare the Signs of the presence
of this Diseas, being newly begun or rather beginning, and then the difference
between that and the encreas.

The Signs of the present Diseas of the Rachites newly begun.
First, Diligent Observation must be employed about the three kinds of Signs
ascribed above to the Animal Actions; namely, the looseness and softness of the
parts, the weakness and languidness, the slothfulness and numness. For these do
in a remiss degree, and subobscurely yield advantage to circumspection and
heedfulness presently a principio principiante, as they phrase it.

Secondly, The color must be considered, and the habit of the Head and Face in
relation to the Joints. For if the color or the habit be more fresh and lively
in those than in these, it presents a strong suspicion that this Diseas has
taken root. For although the Bulk of the Head which is evidently increased, and
also the extenuation of the parts affected do pre-require some considerable
motion and duration of the Diseas before they appear, yet from the beginning a
certain difference may be observed by an accurate attention or intuition in
respect of the heat and the habit of these parts compared one with another.

Thirdly, The Wrests and the extremities of the Ribs must be noted. For before
the end of the beginning certain rudiments of knurls or knots begin to appear
in the Wrests, and Excrescencies also in the tops of the Ribs.

Fourthly, A kind of swelled fullness and stretching the Belly is conspicuous
immediately after the beginning especially in the Hypochondriacal parts. For
the magnitude of the Belly compared with the magnitude of the Breast exceeds
the just and due proportion.

Now these Signs collectively taken do assuredly demonstrate the presence of
the Diseas even from the very beginning. But if no sensible and manifest
extenuation of the first affected parts do appear at the same time, in that
very respect it is clearly distinguished from the encreas thereof.

The Signs of the other times are with eas differenced from one another by the
descriptions of those times already laid down; yet because they may point to
this place, and be dispatched in a word, we shall not decline the Annotation of
them.

All those Signs which appeared at the beginning become more intense and
evident in the encreas of the Diseas, and many other and more grievous are
daily accumulated. This time, as has been said, is distinguished by the
manifest extenuation of the first affected parts; but after the consistence by
the continual aggravation of the Symptoms and Signs aforesaid.

In the State of the Diseas the Signs and Symptoms are most outrageous and
conspicuous. But so long as this time lasts it neither manifestly increases
or decreaseth.

In the encreas beyond the State, the Signs and Symptoms exceed that condition
which they retained in the indifferent State, both in respect of their
magnitude and vehemence, and likewise in respect of the dejection of the
Spirits, and from that time forwards they daily grow worse and worse; for which
considerations this time is distinguished, as well from the ordinary encreas,
as from the means of the consistence.

But in a true declination A kind of simple remission of the Symptoms and Signs
tending to a perfect restoration of health begins to discover it self; no
other Signs of the invasion of any other Diseas appearing.

On the contrary, in a spurious and illegitimate declination, Other Signs of a
new and succeeding affect are involved and complicated with the Signs and
Symptoms of this Diseas: and these are distinguished according to the various
condition thereof, and must be fetched from their proper Fountains, and ought
not to be expected here. Moreover, if any particular Signs of any of these
times do occur, which concern the event of the Diseas, they must be reserved
among the Prognostics; and thus much of the Signs of the Differences of this
affect deduced from the Essence thereof.

The Differences of the Causes distinguish the Diseas into Natural and
Accidental, and the Natural again into that which is properly so called, and
that which is so termed improperly. A Natural Diseas properly so called, because
it is supposed to be actually present from the very Birth, requires no other
Signs than the Diagnostical recited in the former Chapter. For upon their
appearance presently after the Birth the Diseas is certainly known to be
Natural.

But if those Signs appear not presently after their Birth, yet a Natural
disposedness to this Diseas may be inherent from the Birth, which afterward
actually breaks out, and the Diseas produced by it, may (though with some
impropriety) be termed Natural, in regard of that dependence upon the Native
faultiness. A Natural Diseas in this sens, requires other Signs than those
which we have recited above, to distinguish it from the same Diseas when it is
altogether and plainly Accidental.

The Signs of a Natural Diseas improperly so called.
First, A weak and sickly Constitution, and the Diseases of both or either of
the Parents: As a cold and moist distemper, a Cacochymy, especially the
Phlegmatical, a Cachexy, a Dropsy, an Atrophy, the Phtisick, the Gonorrhea, the
Whites, the Venereous Pox, the Scurvy, and the like affects.

Secondly, The Slothfulness, Effeminacy, and Sedentary life of the Parents.

Thirdly, The Errors of the Mother during her going with Child, all which
things we have discussed above more at large, when we examined the Causes of
this Diseas in relation to the Parents.

Fourthly, The Debility of the new born Infant when it proceeds not from the
difficulty and labor of the Birth.

Fifthly, The invasion of the Diseas before he is exactly a year old; for this
argues some Natural disposition to the same.

Sixthly, If the elder Brothers or Sisters were before affected with the same
Diseas; for then it may well be suspected that some Infection was contracted
from the Parents.

Seventhly, If no remarkable error was committed in looking to the Child after
the Birth, and before the invasion of the present Diseas. Of which we have
spoken above in the Chapter of the Causes after the Birth.

Eighthly, If this affect has not succeeded some other which was apt to leave
this behind it. Of the Diseases of this kind we have also discoursed above.

The Signs of a Diseas newly and totally contracted after the Birth, are in a
manner contrary to these, and therefore we shall only run them over.

First, If the Diseas cannot be imputed to any weak or diseased Constitution of
the Parents, or their manner of life, or the errors of their customs.

Secondly, If no debility appeared presently after the Birth.

Thirdly, If the Diseas began when the Child was above eighteen months old.

Fourthly, If the Brothers and Sisters were free from the Diseas.

Fifthly, If any notorious errors were committed about the Child after the
Birth.

Sixthly, If any Diseas went before which might occasion a suspicion that this
followed it. If there be a confluence of most or all of these Signs, they do
sufficiently witness that this Disease must not be attributed to any Natural
Infection, but to the future Errors and Irregularities. And thus much of the
differences of this Disease in respect of the Causes.

Lastly, Some differences happen to this Diseas by reason of other Diseases,
wherewith they are peradventure complicated; in which case, besides the
Diagnostical signs already reckoned, some other may be desired as peculiarly
proper to the complicated Diseas. Nevertheless an accurat Description of them
cannot be here expected, because for the most part they are the same which are
every where artributed to those Diseases by practical Writers. But because some
Diseases do more frequently accompany this than others, we will briefly look
into their Signs.

First therefore a Hydrocephalus or Dropsy in the Head being complicated with
this Affect needs sometimes no signs to make it known, but is sufficiently,
yea abundantly manifest of it self: namly, either by the exceeding magnitude of
the Head, or by the water that is outwardly contained under the Pericranium
(which notwithstanding we suppose does very rarely happen) or by some extreme
opening and wideness of the seams in the Head, Water having gotten into them,
and lifting up the Dura Matter, so that a soft and waterish tumor is outwardly
perceivable by the touch in the spaces between the Bones. Many times the
Hydrocephalus is somewhat obscure and requires signs to discover it. First,
Therefore all the inward and outward senses are more dull than otherwise they
use to be in this effect. Secondly, The magnitude of the Head is sometimes
greater than at other times. Thirdly, The Sutures, or seams in the accustomed
places do gape more wide, and are closed again more slowly than they are wont
to be. Fourthly, The Bone in the Forehead is more outwardly sticking out, and
in the other Bones of the Head you may observe certain inequalities and
bunchings out of an unusual bigness.

Secondly, The conjoined evils of breeding Teeth are thus known. 1. If the
accustomed time of breeding Teeth be either approaching, or now at hand; for
from hence arises some suspicion of pain from thence proceeding. This time
ordinarily begineth in the seventh month after the birth, and continues til
the Child be a year and six months old, and longer, if the Teeth come slowly;
which happens very commonly in this affect; and it ends when the number of
the Teeth is complete. 2. Children to mitigat the raging pain do use to put
their Fingers into their Mouths, according to that old saying, ubi dolor ibi
Digitus. 3. The Gums wax white on that side where the Tooth is to break out,
and are somewhat hot in the touch. 4. The Teeth that come forth sometimes wax
black or are loos, or fall out by pieces. 5. To these you may ad watchings, the
looseness of the Belly, Fevers and Convulsions, which notwithstanding are
chanceable Symptoms.

Thirdly, An Asthma is perceived by the very difficulty of breathing, when it
does not proceed from the stretching and fullness of the lowest Belly. But if
withal there be a swelling or Imposthum, and that in either side of the Lungs,
they can scarce endure to lie on the contrary side; but if it be on both sides,
then they desire to lie errect or with their Faces upwards. The same thing for
the most part happens in an Inflammation, with a growing together of the Lungs
with the Pleura, as also in a Pleurisy, but then there are added, an acute
Fever, a Cough and spitting of Blood, moreover in a Plurisie a pricking pain
in the Side. The Phtisick is known by a diuturnal Cough, and a roundish and
sometimes a purulent spittle (although indeed Children do seldom spit out,
because that matter which the Cough fetches up into the Mouth they swallow by
the oesphagus) also by a putrid Fever conjoined, and by a sudden Colliquation
in the parts. An Ascites is discovered by the unreasonable bigness of the
Abdomen.

Fourthly, A Hectic Fever bewrays it self by a continual heat, being
somewhat more vehement than that in a Quotidian Ague, especially about the
Arteries, and still increases after the receiving of meat; also by the swift
and speedy consumption of the parts: a putrid fever is known by the urin being
at the beginning cude, afterward more concocted, then also from the extreme
high color of it. Moreovor, if it be an intermitting Ague, it is discernable by
the inequality of the heat, the external parts being at the beginning extreme
cold, and afterward excessive hot; also from the fits either constant or
erratical; again, by the contraction of the Pulls upon the approach of the fit,
afterward unduly increased. A continual Fever is known by an intensive and
un-intermitting heat, also by thirst, roughness of the Mouth, and the altered
color of the Tongue, and the like.

Fifthly, The Venerious Pox is supposed to meet in complication, if either of
the Parents or the Nurs were before infected; if any ulers appear in the Head,
Mouth and Nostrils; or if any eminent and crusted Wheals break out, especially
such as ordinary Medicines cannot subdue* if hard tumors grow conspicuous, or
knots defiling the Bones in the Fingers with rottenness, or any other parts; if
unquietness and bitter pains in the nightime alarm the sick; or if Buboes
break out in the Groyn.

Sixthly, The Scurvy complicated with this affect has these signs: 1. They
that labor under this affect do impatiently endure Purgations; but they who are
only affected with the Rachites do easily tolerate the same. 2. They are much
offended with violent exercises, neither can they at all endure them. But
although in this affect alone, there be a kind of slothfulness and aversation
from exercise, yet exercise does not so manifestly, at least not altogether so
manifestly hurt them, as when the Scurvy is conjoined with the Rachites. 3.
upon any concitated and vehement motion they draw not breath without much
difficulty, they are vexed with diverse pains running through their Joints, and
these they give warning of by their crying, the motion of the Pulls is frequent
and unequal, and sometimes they are troubled with a Falpitation of the Heart, or
threatened with a Lypothymie, which Affects ar for the most part soon mitigated,
or altogether apeased by laying them down to the rest. 4. Tumors do very
commonly appear in the Gums. 5. The urin upon the absence of the accustomed
Fever is much more intens and increased.

Seventhly, The Strumatical Affect, if extremely complicated with the Rachites,
is sufficiently conspicuous by Swellings obvious to the senses; yea, where many
knotty Excrescences do outwardly occur, it may be justly suspected that the
like Tumors do lurk in the Bowels. But if the knots grow inwardly only, they
are scarce discernable by any certain sign; for that Rule which some have
observed, namly, That those who have short Necks, low and narrow Forheads, with
compressed Temples, and wide Cheek-bones, are subject to these strumatical
Tumors and Excrescencies, is too uncertain and fallible; Others affirm, That
Purging Medicines taken otherwise in a just proportion will scarce work with
those who are thus affected; but we answer from our own Experience That it is
sometimes only, and not always true. Thus much of the signs of the differences.

CHAP. XXIII. The Prognostical Signs in the Diseas of the Rachites.
THis Diseas in its kind is not mortal, yea sometimes it is so light and gentle,
as the Children affected therewith have been restored to health by the sole
benefit of Age, the Vital heat being increased and summoned forth to the
external parts by the force of frequent Exercises. Yet it sometimes so
vehemently prevails, that the iminent danger of life can scarce, yea sometimes
cannot be prevented by the best and most prudent applications. Wherefore it is
very necessary that a Physician should first diligently contemplat the
Prognostical signs of a diseas, that hemay be the better instructed to forsee
the several events of it. But in general those things which abet the Diseas,
that is, all such things as war against Nature, require a contrary
consideration, and as these are the stronger and they the weaker, so much the
more grievous and pernicious is the Diseas. But because it is not obvious to
every one to give an accurate Judgment of Particulars from this General
Admonition, it will not be impertinent or unprofitable to insert some particular
and special Rules and Observations hitherto belonging.

First, This Diseas properly Natural, or that which invadeth before the birth,
is the most dangerous, and seldom, if ever, end in health. For it argues a
deprivation of the Seminary principles, and by consequence that the Spirits are
very infirm; besides it insinuates a vehemence in the causes.

Secondly, The more early the invasion is after the Birth, the more dangerous
(caeteris paribus) the Diseas is: for the Spirits are so much the weaker. In
like manner, The Elder Children, and such as go up and down, are more easily
cured then young Infants that cannot use their legs.

Thirdly, A Diseas improperly so called; namly, that which in part depends
upon the Natural Inclination, is more dangerous than that Which is contracted
by the mere error of the Nurse or Mother.

Fourthly, This Diseas proceeding from some other foregoing Affects, is more
dangerous than that which is introduced by an erroneous Regiment of health; For
it implies a precedent dejection of the Spirits.

Fifthly, Some have observed, That Infants who have had red Haird women to their
Nurses, have been most obnoxious to this Affect. Yet we indeed suspect this
rule of some fallability.

Sixthly, Some affirm, That Girls are more frequently infested with this Diseas
than Boys, and more easily cured. The truth is, we have not yet had any
unsuspected experience of this. Yet we grant that Girls are of a more cold and
moist temperament, which holds the greatest correspondency with this Diseas,
and for that reason probable it is that the Female Sex may be affected with the
lighter causes, and for the same reason also be the sooner restored.

Seventhly, This Diseas does chiefly invade the Cradles of the Gentry,
especially, of those who live at eas, and fare deliciously; then of the poorer
sort, by reason of the manifold and various errors which necessity introduces
as well in the diet of the Parents, as the Regiment of their Children; but it
finds the most difficult access unto those who are privileged from such
assaults by a mediocrity of fortune, and accustomed to undergo some
pains-taking and labor, and are not destitute of necessary means to sustain
life and a healthful competency to prevent indisposition.

Eighthly, By how much the more the first affected parts are extenuated, so
much the more difficult caeteris paribus is the cure of the Diseas.

Ninthly, The greater the Head is, the longer and the harder is the Cure. When
therefore the Bone of the Forehead sticks much out forwards, it portendeth at
least a long continuance of the Diseas; the same also do the other irregular
stickings out of the other Bones of the Head.

Tenthly, The weaker the Backbone, the greater and more dangerous is the
Affect. Wherefore they which are unwilling to sit upright, much more they which
are not able to sit upright, but most of all they whose feeble Necks cannot
underprop the burden of the Head, are in hazard of their lives. Moreover, by
the Diuturnal weakness and bending of the Backbone, Children become
Crook-back'd, or some other ways incuruated, and the trunk of the Body is
afterward scarce reducible to its Native Figure.

Eleventhly, Great Swellings in the Bones of the Wrests and the ends of the
Ribs presage the continuance of the Diseas. Moreover, The crookedness of the
Shank-bone, Shoulder Bone, or the Bone in the Arm, prognosticate no less.
Again, The greater that the inflexion of the Joints is, the more difficult and
retarded will the restoration be.

Twelfthly, They whose Thigh and Shank-bones are much increased, rather
according to latitude and thickness, then according to longitude, for the most
part become dwarfs.

13ly. They who draw their Knees upwards and unwillingly, suffer them to be
extended, recover not without some difficulty.

14ly. When the Teeth wax black or fall out by pieces, there is some danger, and
so much the more, the later they com again, that is, others in their room.

15ly. Al they who attain to the consistence of the Diseas, escape the danger
of it, being carefully looked unto, unless perhaps some other Diseas be conjoined
with it, or do accidentally com after, and disturb the Patient with a higher
encreas. In like manner the declination of the Symptoms does assuredly promise
a restitution of health.

16ly. If an Hydrocephalus be complicated with the Rachites it ever imports
great danger. But if it prevail far, as that the Sutures of the Brain pan do
gape, and that some water gotten into the middle Spaces does swell the Dura
matter into a waterish and soft Tumor, it is mortal.

17ly. A painful and laborious breeding of Teeth coms sometimes accompanied with
most vehement Symptoms, and even threatens death. But commonly it is violent
and cease in a short time; however, so long as it is conjoined, it much
accelerates the motion of the Diseas. But the Dog-Teeth com forth with more
vexation, than the rest and portend more danger.

18ly. An Asthma (especially the Orthopny, when the Patient cannot draw breath,
but with an erected neck, and that difficulty of breathing when he cannot ly on
either side) is very dangerous. For that prompteth to a suspicion of some Tumor,
Imposthum, Pleurisy, or Inflammation of the Lungs, or some growing too of the
Lungs with the Pleura, all which affects want not their danger.

19ly. If the Ptisick be complicated with this Affect, it is for the most part
mortal, especially if one and the same ulcer of the Lungs continu above forty
days.

20. We affirm that if this Diseas be of any long continuance it easily
changes into the Ptysick, or a Consumption, or at least commonly brings a
Consumption to the destruction of the Sick, unless some other affect per
adventure, or grievous symptom do intervene, and prevent the Consumption by
hastening death; as a Convulsion, the loud Cough, the swelling of the Lungs,
(vulgarly called, THE RISING OF THE LIGHTS) a continual Fever, a Pleurisy,
etc.

In the next place, We assert, That if a Dropsy of the Lungs, or an Ascites be
complicated with the Rachites, it portends a desperate and deplorable condition.

Again, An Hectic, slow, putrid, and especially a continual Fever, consuming
the first affected parts does vehemently hasten the motion of this Diseas, and
render it the more dangerous.

Also, If the Venereous Pox be consociated with the Rachites, b e it hereditary
or contracted by infection, it is almost incapable of remedy.

The Scurvy likewise conjoined does very much retard the cure, thoug h less
than the Pox.

In like manner Strumatical tumors either internal or external do not very much
suspend the hopes of cure, though otherwise of themselves they are not easily
subdued in this tender age. For the external parts are exulcerated, or inflamed
with insupportable pain, and do vehemently irritate Nature, and wast the
Spirits, but the internal much more, especially, if they invade the more noble
parts, or bring molestation to the adjacent members with their weight and bulk.

Moreover, Whosoever are not perfectly cured before the first five years of
their age be spun out out, they afterward for the most part live miserable and
sickly, and being either Astematical or Cachectical or P^ysical they die before
they arrive to the consistence of their age, or else they grow deformed,
crooked, and dwarfish.

If Scabs, wheals, pimples, or the itch com after this Affect, it does
hopefully expedite the cure.

Finally, They which easily endure any kind of agitation of the Body, caeteris
paribus, are cured without difficulty.

Thus at length we have finished the History of the three kinds of Signs,
according to the best faith of our observations hitherto. In the next place we
shall proceed to the Method of practice, which comprehends the prevention and
cure of this Diseas.

CHAP. XXV. The Method to practice and Indications in general.
THE Method to practice is divided into the Therapeutical and the
Prophylactical part, or the Curative and the Preservative. We shall discourse of
the former in this Chapter, although perhaps we shall here also propound some
things which are common both to the Prophylactical part, and the Eugieihal. But
the Prophylactical in particular and uncommunicated we reserve for the close of
this Tractate.

The Curative part is usually called the Meth od of Cure, whereof, as of every
other art, there are two general instruments, namly, Reason and Experience, the
uniting whereof comprehends the whole skill of the Artist. Now by experience we
understand not only the History of one or more Diseases, and the success of
Medicines, but also the observation; that is, the application of the Histories
unto those things, which reason dictates in the same affect, and that by way of
comprobation or disallowance. In like manner, by reason we mean every operation
of the mind, so as we do not only comprehend the third; namly, ratiocination
either demonstrative, or probable and Analogal, but also the first and second,
that is, a simple apprehension, comprehension and division. For this part of
Medicine includes or rather presupposes the Physiology, Patholog y and
Semeiotical part, which certainly require a manifold exercise of every
operation of the understanding. Again, no man can understand any proposition,
who does not first apprehend the simple terms thereof, nor any Syllogism, who is
ignorant of the Propositions of which it consists; so that it is manifest
that every operation of the mind does meet with an employment.

Indication, That noble instrument of the Method of Cure (by the use whereof the
Dogmatical Physicians do principally glory to discriminate their Sect from the
Empericks) does likewise vindicate a station among the parts of reason. But
because some things both difficult and obscure do occur concerning this
instrument which have not received an unfolding and full illustration, from the
Neotericks themselves, we judge it expedient here briefly to unvail them by an
examination. We will enquire therefore.

First, What is Indication?

Secondly, Unto which operation of the understanding it relates?

Thirdly, Into what kinds and differences it is distributed?

As for the first, although perhaps many significations of this word may be
found among Authors, yet that is the best and most proper which is delivered by
Galen, in his book de Method. Meden. Indication (says he) is an insinuation or
declaration of the consequence, that is of something to be don. In this sens
Indication may be defined and described to be an objective action of the
Indicant relatively considered, which represents to the understanding the
thing Indicated, that is, what may be helpful what hurtful, and by consequence
what must be elected and applied, what forsaken and avoided, that this
Description or Definition may be the better understood, let us further examine
what is here signified by the Indicant? what by the thing indicated? what the
action of the Indicant is? of what use distinction is of the thing indicated
into helpful or hurtful, into that which must be chosen, and that which must be
refused?

First, Although those terms Indication, Indicant, Indicatum, or the thing
Indicated may peradventure be extended to other Arts and Sciences, yet because
it has hitherto been only apropriated by the Industry of Physicians
(especially of Galen) to the Method of Practice, their definitions which we
shall here declare, shall have respect only to this Method, all other use of
them being pretermitted.

The General Definition therefore of the Indicant must be derived from the most
general Nature which does indicate in our Art. The Indicant therefore may be
defined in general to be a state of the Body as it is fluxible or movable, or
rather, as it is actually influx or motion, relatively considered, namely, as
it intimates what is to be done in that particular.

First, We affirm that the Indicant does perpetually imply some state or
condition of the Body; wherefore because that which is without the Body, and does
not yet affect it, is no state or condition of the Body, it can scarce rightly
be said to indicate. The external cause therefore, which does not yet affect the
Body, is not the Indicant, although the aversion of it may possibly be the
thing indicated. Secondly, the state of the Body as it is frail, or movable, or
rather as it is actually in motion, is required to the Essence of the Indicant.
For as Galen most luculently proves to Thrasyb. If our Body were immutable and
perpetual, there were no need of Medicine, but because the heat does continually
feed upon the moisture, and because health it self in the most perfect state is
frail and fluxible, yea actually fluitant, and in some measure is already
flowed away, manifest it is that the Physicians Art and the Practical Duty of
the Physician are both exceeding requisite. For if the state of the Body and
the alteration thereof be only considered absolutely, a bare and naked
speculation only resulteth from thence: but if it be considered in order to
that which is to be done whereby the Physician may rightly execute his duty
concerning that state, presently it meriteth the denomination of a Practical
Instrument, and is invested with the nature of an Indicant. For such a state
does indicate, as it is frail and in motion that care must be every way had of
the health, and that that care must be exercised and practiced with all
diligence and circumspection. And consequently this very general Indicant does
point out, that which the general scope of the Physicians sought after, but it
must not be expected that the consideration of the most general Indicant can
represent any other thing than a most general action correspondant to the
general scope. For if the Physician desires a higher prosecution of the
particular scope, he ought to descend to more particular Indicants.

Secondly, The thing Indicated is a Medical Action required on the part of the
Indicant. For the Indicant primarily and formally denotes the action, but
secondarily and by consequence the instrument wherewith the action is perfected.
Therefore by way of an appendix let us ad to the proposed Definition, that
secondarily, by consequence, and in a concrete acception, it includes the
Instrument wherewith that action is accomplished.

First, We say, that the thing indicated is an action For the Physician uses
Indication to that end, that from thence he may collect what is to be done: you
will say perhaps, that when the crisis is at hand or legitimatly proceeds,
the thing indicated is an abstinence from, or a suspension of the action, and
not the action it self.

We answer, That this abstinence in that very regard that it is enjoined
advisedly and according to art, is evidently contained under some kind of
notion of a Medical Action; and the same is to be said of any kind of
prohibition of any action in our Art.

Secondly, We say that the thing indicated is a Medical Action, that is
directing the Action to health. For the end of Medicine is health, and therefore
that Action which does aim at health is rightly termed a Medical Action.

Thirdly, We say, That the thing Indicated is an Action requisite and importing
at least in respect of the Indicant. For every indicated action ought not
presently to be reduced to Practice, neither can it be simply said to be
requisite, but only in reference to the Indicant: wherefore it must be exposed
to a further examination before the exercise of it can be resolved on; and if
neither the Spirits do dissuade, nor no other contra-Indicant does more
potently resist, then it is simply requisite, and must be put in practice in
its due time, with all possible convenience. And herupon the thing indicated is
rightly distinguished into profitable and unprofitable. The thing indicated
becomes unprofitable either by defect of Medical matter, wherewith it should be
accomplished, or by the presence of a stronger Prohibent, or contra-Indicant.

Again, A thing indicated and profitable is rightly subdivided into an
Indicate, Circumstantiate, and non-Circumstantiate. The first by which is meant
an Action rightly clothed with circumstances must be prosecuted without any
delay. The second must be deferred until it have perfectly acquired due
circumstances. We say fourthly, That a thing indicated in a concrete and
secondary sens does also include the Instrument, whereby the Indicated Action is
perfected. As for example, the state of health does primarily and formally
indicate an act of conservation, but secondarily and by consequence it does
withal indicate the Instrument, whereby we conserve it. This passage of an
Indication from the Action to the Instrument does not seem to depend upon the
sole virtue of the Indicant, but in part also upon some general certain and
commonly received principles, as like things are conserved by the like, things
contrary are cured by their contraries, and therefore we industriously said that
such an Instrument is the Indication or thing Indicated in a Secondary sens,
and by consequence inferred, and because it includes the Action together with
the Istrument, we termed it so likewise in a concrete signification.

Moreover, Seeing that the Practical duty of a Physician has great affinity
with the Indicated action; we shall here consider wherein they unite in some
agreement, and wherein they differ among themselves. The general Duty of a
Physician is to attain (as much as in him lies) the end of his Art, namely
Health. And that same obtaining of Health is in a manner the most general
Indicated Action, yet this is distinguished from the general Duty of a
Physician, because the Purchase, and restoration of Health is not always
attainable. Therefore although the obtaining of Health be perpetually Indicated;
yet when that is impossible, the Physician is disobliged, seeing that no man is
bound to impossibilities, and so consequently, it is no part of his Duty. In
like manner an Indicated Action is sometimes unprofitable for the reasons before
alleged, in which case it appertains not to the Duty of the Physician.
Again, An Indicated action, though when it is profitable it must be performed
in its place, yet so long as it continues an apparel'd and divested of due
circumstances, it presses not the Duty of a Physician. For it is the part of a
Physician not only to prescribe things profitable in the Species, but they must
be such, regard being had to time, order, and other conditions of a just and
regular administration. Finally a profitable Indicated Action being robbed in
all its due circumstances does truly exact the duty of a Physician. For a
Physician is obliged to execute such actions, and only such, at least when they
are conspicuous.

Besides; The scope and intentions of the Physician having a diverse respect to
the Indicated Actions and the Duties of the Physician, and holding some
commerce with each of them, we shall likewise here consider in what respect
this falls out. But in the very entrance into this Discourse these scopes seem
sometimes to be properly distinguishable into little notions or forms of enquiry
after every Duty of a Physician, and the things themselves to be enquired
after. The forms of enquiry are nothing else but apt Questions or
Interogations, which subdivide every Duty of a Physician into so many parts, as
it contains to be distinctly sifted and examined. Argenterius reckons up nine
Forms of this kind: First, Whether? Secondly, What? Thirdly, With what matter?
Fourthly, How much? Fifthly? Of what kind? Sixthly, After what manner?
Seventhly, When? Eighthly, Where? Ninthly, In what order a thing must be done?
Others contract these to fewer Heads, but for further satisfaction the
understanding Reader may consult with the Books. The real Scopes or things
themselves to be enquired are those very parts, into which each Duty of a
Physician may be aptly distinguished. They are therefore so many in number as
there are found parts in that duty to be examined. These Scopes thus found out
differ not really, but only in reason from those that are yet to be found out,
namely in respect of the diverse relation to the intellect seeking, and
actually understanding. From hence it appears what affinity there is between
these Scopes and the Duty of a Physician, and also the indicated actions. For
the notional Scopes or forms of Scopes, and the things themselves to be
enquired after under those forms do both aim at the same mark, namely the
distinct invention of all the parts of a Physicians Duty. But the things to be
sought out are the parts themselves of the Duty aptly separated and disjoined
from one another the better to facilitate the invention and examination.

Moreover, Those parts of this Duty, in as much as they are found out by the
force of Indication, are the very indicated Actions; so that the Scopes
invented by the Indication, and the Indicated Actions do really signify the
same things. We say really, because the Scopes even when found out differ in
reason from them as they are Scopes, seeing that besides the Indicated Actions
they seem to note together an intention of prosecuting the same Actions, as the
Scopes not yet found out do intimate an intention of enquiring into them. Thus
much of Indicates or things Indicated.

Thirdly, The action of an Indicant is Objective and Indicant, as an Object
besides it self, does in some sort insinuate another thing to the understanding.
Perhaps some may wonder, how an Object can represent any other thing besides it
self.

We answer, Such is the Nature of relatives, that (as such) they cannot be
conceived without an implication of their correlatives. For one relative in his
proper consideration does at least obliquely involve the consideration of
another, and by that means it easily ushereth the understanding to the knowledge
of the other.

Some may reply, If the force of the Indication be built upon the mere relation
of the Indicant to the Indicatum, How coms it to pass that the use thereof is
restrained solely to the Art of Medicine?

To this we answer, We deny not, but this instrument may be extended to other
Arts and Sciences, as we have before insinuated. For in moral Philosophy it is
lawful to say, that Virtue does Indicate the protection of her self, and Vice
the suppression of it self. But neither does this kind of relation consist only
between the States of things, and the Actions thereunto belonging, but also
between the terms merely speculative; as twice two are four, a man is not a
horse. But here we consider the Indication and the efficacy of the Indicant
only in order to the Method of Physic, so as it will not be here needful to
extend the use of this instrument further, neither indeed did Galen, because it
would contribute little to the scope thereof. Yet we affirm, that every relation
is not a sufficient basis of an Indication, but it must be such, as has either
an evident conformity and agreement between the Indicant and Indicatum, whereby
they may be fitly marshalled into a proposition of undoubted truth; or a
disparity and repugnance of them among themselves that so they may aptly be
divided from one another; that is, they may be disposed into a negative
proposition equally certain. Now because the propositions elected by this
indication are certain and evident, not needing any higher proof: from thence
it is manifest that every understanding that is Master of it self, not clouded
with a vail of prejudice, nor wittingly ensnared with skeptical Sophisms and
fallacies, must necessarily pay an assent unto them so soon as he understands
the terms. Moreover, the Scepticks themselves, though in their disputations they
will lie in wait to traverse any verity, how manifest soever it be, and busy
themselves to equal the most certain principles with things extremely doubtful,
yet in performing the necessaries of life, seeing that they relieve hunger by
food, hoard up money, avoid stripes, and do these and the like things constantly
and without any distemper of mind, they plainly discover that they are led by
some bad disposition of mind, or governed by a desire of glory, or tickled with a
hope of victory in the contention, rather that they doubt really of the truth
of such Propositions. In the interim, it must be observed, that the very
Indication is fallible and deceitful, where the absolute nature of the Indicant
or the Indicatum has not been exactly understood before. For in this art of
Indications, we do not presuppose only that a Physician should always have
learned before, and duly known what al those things are, which we call according
to Nature, as also in what the Essence of a Diseas, and all the parts thereof
consist, and to have an exact knowledge of all the causes of an Affect. Yea, it
is necessary that he understand all Medical actions, and upon occasion be able
to render a ready account what alteration is, what heating, what cooling, etc.
what evacuation, purgation, and the section of a vein, etc. what conservation,
and the like. For the Indication does not make manifest the absolute nature
either of the Indicant or the Indicatum; but presupposing this as already
known, it represents only a mutual relation; namly, either a strict connection
and conformity which they retain among themselves, or a disparity and
opposition, whereby they may be formed into an undoubted proposition: but the
certainty of the indicated proposition cannot exceed the certainty of the
knowledge of the Indicant. Therefore if at any time we scruple the certain
knowledge of the Nature of the Indicant, it is not safe to trust to the
Indication alone, til it shall better be confirmed by some other Reason or
experience. But this doubting must not be imputed to the Nature of the
Indication, but to the ignorance of the Indicant.

Moreover, it must be considered that the relation of the Indicant in the
Method of practice, does demonstrate besides the evidence somewhat of duty in
respect of the Indicated action, and that the propositions formed from the
Indication do either explicitly, or at least* implicitly insinuate that duty.
As in this Proposition, a Diseas does Indicate the ablation of it self, the
ablation is decreed and resolved upon, as a requisite action on the part of the
Indicant, that is a Diseas: as if one should say, a Diseas requires or
importuneth the removal of it self. Yet this duty of the action is more
frequently and indeed much more elegantly expressed by the Participle in dus,
as a Diseas is to be taken away: which Proposition in the fullness of its
signification has a manifest coincidence with the former.

There remains still an objection to be answered concerning the action of the
Indicant; and this it is, If the Indication be the very action of the Indicant,
how can it be called an operation of the understanding? For all writers refer
the Indication to some generation of the understanding.

We answer, The Indication is indeed an action of the Indicant, but yet an
objective action, and that it is united to the intellective faculty, and
abides in it as in its subject: Moreover, that the understanding a power, both
actuated, and as it were informed by its subject. Wherefore although the action
of Indication be objectively attributed to the Indicant, yet subjectively it is
ascribed to the Soul, and especially to the intellective part thereof, which is
as it were the act and form of it. And from hence it will be most easy to
reconcile Galen with himself, who sometimes defines Indication to be an
Emphasis, sometimes a Catalepsis.

Fourthly, It must be examined whether that distinction of an Indicated action,
into an action helpful and hurtful may tend. For some may urge, that Galen does
perpetually affirm, that one Indicatum only can be insinuated from one
Indicant; and that in his Method. Med. he does affirm, That they vainly attempt
the Method of cure, who are ignorant that one thing is Indicated from one
Indicant, and that all who have written of this matter do seem to attest the
same thing,

We answer, That Galen must be understood of the three distinct* kinds of
Indicants, which must by no means be confounded, nor their Indicates, that is,
the things indicated by them. For that which a Diseas does properly Indicate,
must not be attributed to the causes or the Spirits: In like manner that which
the causes Indicate must not be applied to the Spirits or the Diseas it self.
Finally, that which the Spirits Indicate must neither be ascribed to the Diseas
nor the causes. For in this respect one Indicate answers to one Indicant, and
he that observes not this, must unavoydably confound all things, and in the
employments of art makes an unsuccesful use of this instrument, according to
the judgment of Galen. But it must be considered, that in each of these kinds,
the Indicatum may be divided into two parts, one whereof is an advantageous
action, and to be prosecuted; the other is noxious and to be avoided* yet each
of them belongs to one and the same kind amongst the aforesaid three, and is
as it were a middle part of the whole Indicate: For the Spirits direct to an
election of such things as may cherish and protect them, and to an avoidance of
such things as may in a further degree empair them: and both these actions
concur to advance and ascertain the complete and final conservation of them. In
like manner, both in cure and restoration, and also in caution and prevention,
there is found an action as well to be embraced, as abandoned; yet whether of
them exceeds the bounds of its kind, so that no confusion can from thence be
feared. For whilst we cure, we make choice of those things that will demolish
the Diseas, and we deliver the application of such things as will augment it. In
like manner, when we preserve, we take away the causes, and withal we shun the
use of those things that may conspire either the continuation, or future
breeding of them. And for this Reason in the definition which we have presented
above of an Indication, we distinguished the action indicated into that which
ought to be prosecuted, and that which ought to be waved: which very thing also
we were about to do, in the enumeration of the particular Indications to this
Diseas.

It is now time for us to proceed to the second enquiry propounded at the
beginning, namely, Unto which operation of the Intellective faculty the
Indication belongs. We say, first, That the Indication does in some sort
include the simple apprehension of each term, both of the Indicant and the
Indicate. For he can never understand a Proposition who is ignorant of the
Terms thereof. Yet this knowledge is only preparatory and presupposed in the art
of Indications, as we have already noted. We affirm secondly, That composition
and division is an explicit operation of the Intellective faculty in the
perception of an Indication. For the Indicant by force of his relation does
represent the Indicate to be aptly continued together into a relative
proposition. Now that a Proposition thus constituted may in its own nature be
so manifest and evident, that no man can reasonably doubt of the truth thereof,
or need any cleerer proof, is expressly taught by Galen -- (...); and again in
another place -- (...). Here some calumniate Galen, as if he had devised an art
separated from all experience, and quarrelling with Reason; but because Galen
intended nothing else, than that Propositions framed by Indication are of self
credit, and need not any comprobation from Reason or Experience, these Critics
may perceiv their own rashness and retract the scandal. Senertus indeed
objecteth, that the Indication cannot belong to the second operation of the
mind, because the Indicate is neither affirmed nor denied of the Indicant. But
that learned man was herein mistaken. For although peradventure that the
Indicate be neither affirmed nor denied of the Indicant directly, and by the
bare Verb Substantive or Copulative (est.) Yet indirectly and obliquely it is
manifestly predicated of the same, and after the same manner as it uses to be
in relative Propositions. As for example, A sound State is the Indicant of its
own conservation; a sickly condition is the Indicant of some remedy, etc. And if
any man will express the Indicate with his relation to the Indicant by the
participle in dus, than the Predication will be direct. As a sound State is to
be preserved; a diseased State is to be cured, a Diseas must be removed, etc.
If the Learned Senertus can deny these to be Propositions, he may with the like
facility deny that an Indication belongs to this Operation of the
Understanding; but if he must needs confess that, there is no room left for the
denial of this. Now we have said that the Indication does belong to the second
Operation of the Mind, because the Understanding, in reference to the order of
time, does withal comprehend the mutual relation between the Indicant and the
Indicate, and thereupon frames a Proposition, which formation and contexture
of the Proposition is the very Indication; and explicitly a second Operation of
the Understanding. Now that the Understanding does together at one time
comprehend the Indicant and the Indicate in the Indication, is elegantly
expressed by Galen in a decompounded word which he uses in the definition
thereof, (...): also in another definition, (...).

We say Thirdly, That Indication may likewise implicitly be referred to the
third operation of the Understanding; Because in the order of Nature the
Understanding seems first to perceive the evident relation of the Indicant to
the Indicate before it can conclude of the certainty of the Proposition from
thence resulting. Although in the order of time the Mind (as has been said)
comprehends them together; neither is it necessary to form an explicit
Syllogism, for the truth is, The Understanding can comprehend those things
together at one time, which by the Institution of Nature are termed Successive,
as the Sun and Light, Fire and Heat, etc. But in regard that this simultaneous
comprehension of an Indication does include a certain dependence of the
knowledge of the Indicate from the perceived relation of the Indicant, it
supposes also that the said relation is sooner perceived at least in the order
of Nature, and that the Indicate is later understood and by an implicit
bringing in, for a kind of transition, in respect of the order of Nature does
seem to be here implied from the relation of the Indicant, as the Medius
terminus, to the Proposition constituted of the Indicant and the Indicate as to
the conclusion; and this may be called an implicit reasoning.

We say Fourthly, That by circumlocution and circumstances of speech, an
Indication may be reduced to an explicit reasoning or syllogism, or rather,
that the same thing which we pursue and argue at by Indication is to be found
out and proved by way of Syllogism. For the Reason of the evidance of an
Indicated Proposition may explicitly be applied, as the Medius terminus, to
infer that proposition. In the interim a Syllogism so pieced together will be
either absolutely frivolous and childish, or at the best only explicatory. As if
any one who would prove that a Diseas were to be removed, should thus proceed:
That which is contrary to Nature is to be removed; A Diseas is contrary to
Nature, therefore a Diseas is to be removed. The Medius terminus (that is
against Nature) is not the reason of the Relation of a Diseas to the Ablation
thereof, but it is only an Exposition of the general Nature of a Diseas. For
whosoever understands what a Diseas is, does at the same instant presently
conceive something not natural. And therefore such a syllogism is only
expository. Yet we do not suppose it to be always unprofitable, because it may
sometimes be serviceable to the conviction of a stubborn, or the information an
ignorant Distemper. Hither also we may refer the translation of an Indication
from the Action to the Instruments by virtue of general Rules: Likes are
preserved by their likes, Contraries cured by their contraries.

We say Fifthly, That a Collation of the Indications among themselves, whereby we
may guide our choice by the consent and dissent of the Indicants to what simply
and absolutely ought to be done, does necessarily involve the third Operation of
the Understanding. For the limitation of any Indication supposes a middle term
extraneous to that Indication, which being first understood, the limitation is
inferred as a conclusion. For he that finds out an external for a middle term
(thereby to assert the verity of any proposition) doubtless he manifestly
argues and disputes. Seeing therefore that besides the Indicant and the Indicate
a third term, and the affirmation or negation thereof is required to the
limitation of an Indication, evident it is that the third Operation of the
Understanding is requisite to the Invention thereof. Therefore although simple
Indications may subminister the first rudiments of Method to Practice, yet to
the complement and perfection of disputing the Art must likewise be joined with
it.

We affirm Sixthly, That the election of the Physical Matter in particular, and
the apt and prudent administration thereof, does not only employ every Operation
of the Understanding, but that it also requires experience; for without this,
who can sufficiently understand to administer a dose of Scamony or of any other
purging Medicament, or know what humors such and such a Plant draws away by a
peculiar propriety? Again, in Medicines alterant there may perhaps lurk some
hidden quality, which may be hurtful to the Patient, and this without
experience cannot be discerned. We conclude therefore (the proper force and use
of Indications being continued) that to a complete method of Medicine all the
dictates of Reason, and the contributions of Experience are pre-required.

We now proceed to the Third Title propounded at first, namly, Into what kinds
and differences Indication is distributed. Some differences may easily be
observed by what has already been spoken, which therefore we shall here omit.
Now here we distinguish Indication into general, succeeding, and specifical.
The general is derived from the general Indicant, the succeeding from the
intermediat kinds of Indicants, and the specifical from the lowest Species of
them. We have already noted that the general Indicant is the very state of the
Body considered in general, as it is frail and in motion; this state indicateth
that health must be intended, which is the most general physical action, and
the most general Indicate; yet this action is in some sort concrete, and equally
includes two general actions in the abstract, namly Conservation and
Correction. For the general state aforesaid is also concrete, and comprehends
two like Considerations in the abstract, namly, one of the parts yet qualified
according to the prescript of Nature, which require a pure Conservation: The
second of the parts somewhat degenerated from their integrity, which in like
manner require a pure correction. These two actions are perpetually conjoined
in every work of Art. For he that conserveth, withal corrects, that is, he
rectifieth some irregularities; and he which corrects, has at the same time
conservation for the object of his Undertakings. The complication of these
actions is so subtle, that it seems to have posed that most acute Physician
Argenterius, who in his Book Off. Med* affirms Conservation to be that very
Correction, which is exercised in the art of maintaining health. But his Error
is twofold. First, because he supposes Correction and Conservation in (...) to
be one and the same action, when indeed they are two distinct actions, however
they are complicated in the Exercises of Art. For they are indicated (as we
said before) from the several Considerations of the Indicant, and Conservation
has respect to those things which are according to Nature; but Correction
reflecteth upon preter-natural faultiness. Moreover, They are perfected by
instruments formally distinct, yea opposite: For Correction even in the very art
of defending health, is accomplished by Contraries, but Conservation by
Homogeneals; as in this Art we help Emptiness by taking Nourishment, contrary
indeed to the Emptiness, but homogeneal to the Parts which are to be nourished:
Therefore although these Actions be complicated in the Execution, yet indeed
they are formally distinct, and ought distinctly to be entertained by the
Understanding. The Second Error of Argenterius is, because he grants the
correction of Errors only to be the General Action of al Medicin, when as
Conservation is equally universal and alike exercised in all the works of Art.

No man doubts but we conserve in the Hygienal part, and that we correct.
Also Galen demonstrats in his Book, whether the matters of preserving health
belong to a Physician. You will say, That Galen in that place does prove every
Medicinal Action to be correction, and that conservation is comprehended under
the latitude of correction. But Galen must not be so understood, as if he
intended correction to be a kind of conservation, seeing that (as we have showed
before) conservation and correction even in this art of preserving health are
actions formally different and differently distinguished: for Galen's meaning
is, that every Medical action when it is actually administered, does imply and
comprehend correction, and in that respect may be called Correction, and so by
consequence Correction will be the general Action of all Medicine; yet Galen
confesses Conservation to be equally general. For what hinders but there may
be two general abstracted Actions in Physic? That does not destroy, if any man
have such conceptions, the unity of the Art, it rather indeed confirms it. For
the unity of an Art consists in some community, which may be attributed to
all the parts thereof; and this union is to be esteemed so much the more firm,
as all the parts of art are reciprocally conjoined among themselves by more
communities. If therefore there are two general Actions, and those common to all
the parts of Medicine, so much the more firmly will those parts conspire the
advancement of the Art. Wherefore he contradicts not Galen, that affirms
conservation also to be a general Action of all Medicine; seeing that the scope
of Galen was only to show the unity of the Medical art by the community of that
general Action, namely Correction; now he might as easily have showed it, if
the nature of the thing had required it, by the community of Conservation. For
in the Hygienal part of the most noble circumstance is the Conservation of the
whole concrete action, and thereupon the whole action is denominated from the more
principal part, and the Art it self an Art conservative. Although otherwise (as
has been said) it also includes Correction. But in the Prophylactical part the
principal scope of the Medical Action is preservation, namely the correction of
the cause of the imminent Diseas: yet this is so performed, and by such means
which the present spirits can allow, but in no wise by such things as may
destroy them. And therefore also in the Prophylactical part regard is had to the
Spirits, and their conservation is Indicated.

Now after the same manner the whole concrete Action (although as has been
said, it also includes Conservation) is called Preservation and Precaution
from the more Noble part. Finally, In the Therapeutical part, although in like
manner the whole concrete action be called Curation, and the art it self a
Curative Science from the principal part of the action, yet to speak properly
and truly all this action of cure may be divided into three abstracted parts,
and evidently distinct; namly, into the Cure of the cause, the Cure of the
Diseas, and the conservation of the Spirits. For the Vital or Conservative
Indication does evidently, and by the unanimous grant of all Physicians belong
also to this part of Medicine, and must be consulted of in every curative
action before it be undertaken. From whence it is manifest that this part
likewise of Medicine does perpetutually conserve, that is, provide and foresee
in every Cure, least the Spirits should receive more detriment than profit from
the prescribed remedies. Al these things therefore being thoroughly weighed, we
conclude, That a general Indicate is a certain concrete thing, and may be
properly distinguished into two general abstracted actions which are exercised
in every part of Medicine, and that in the work of art they pertually make one
complete or complicated action.

Moreover, The general Indicant, namely the State of the Body, as frail and in
motion may be divided, besides the parts or obstracted considerations already
proposed, into three kinds, or rather three succeeding kinds equally and alike
concrete: namely, into a sound state, a diseased state and a neutrality. These
three Species are the subjects of the three kinds of Method to Practice; namely
the sound state of the Hygienal part, the diseased state of the Therapeutical,
and the Neutral of the Prophylactical part. These three states are also
concrete Indicants, and respectively Indicate what is particularly to be done,
or what the Physicians Duty is in all those Arts: namely a sound state
indicateth the conservation of health; a diseased state the removal of some
affect, and the Neutral state that the cause of an imminent malady ought to be
corrected least it break out into a Diseas. Now these three Indicates are alike
concrete, and each of them as we have proved above, abstractively includes
both Conservation and Correction.

Finally, In a Diseased state the action of correcting is dissolved into two
Species; into the correction of Cause, and the correction of the Diseas, and so
here may be discovered three kinds of abstracted actions. For a diseased state
brancheth it self into three Species evidently abstracted, into the Essence of
a Diseas, the causes of a Diseas, and the Spirits or those things which remain
in this state according to Nature. For those things which are preternatural and
indicate correction in general, are here separated (as has been said) into two
parts, namely into the Essence of a Diseas, and the Causes of a Diseas; and
therefore there are three parts of this state, each of which do formally and
distinctly Indicate. Three kinds therefore (that we may put an end to this
matter) of Indications are to be considered in this state; namely, from the
Essence of the Diseas, the Curative; from the Causes the Preservative, and from
the Spirits the Vital or Conservative. To the Causes we refer all impediments
of cure, as also vehement Symptoms, and such as divert the Progress of the Cure
to themselves, for in this respect they are invested with the Nature of Causes.
And thus much of Indications in general.

CHAP. XXV. Indications Curative.
WE have already affirmed that these Indications are deduced from the Essence
of the Diseas, we shall therefore in this place slightly run over all the parts
of the Essence of this Diseas, that the Reader may perceive, what every one
insinuates to be done.

First, Therefore the Essence of this Diseas partly consists in a cold and
moist distemper, this Diseas therefore in respect of this part of its Essence
Indicateth, not only that all those things are to be avoided, which are in any
wise endued with a faculty to cherish and augment that distemper; but also that
the aid of such things ought to be implored, which may subdue the same; namely,
hot and dry.

Secondly, This Diseas partly also consists in the want of inherent Spirits,
therefore not only all those things are to be avoided, which can any further
scatter, and consume the Spirits; but such things must be elected which are
virtuous to restore, cherish, and multiply them. Strong discussing remedies are
therefore in this case to be declined, because withal they consume the Spirits:
in like manner such as are extremely hot, for they cause them to evaporate and
vanish into air; but much more such as have power to dissolve the parts, as
violent Catharticks. But the best nourishment must be chosen, and Medicines
that are easy of Concoction, as much as may be, and amicable and benign to the
Spirits.

Thirdly, The Essence of this Diseas consists partly in a numbness or
astonishment of the Spirits: this numbness insinuates a prohibition and
abstinence from all such things as vehemently make thick and fix the Spirits or
any other ways stupifie them, as narotical remidies, and many Minerals, which
participate of the nature of Lead, as Cerus, Litharge, Sinople or Vermilion;
and all such things as have power to excite the Spirits, to expel their
stupefaction, and to render them active and agile, are to be made choice of, as
exercises, motions, Frictions.

Fourthly, The Tone being over soft, loos, flavid, and withered, indicateth an
avoidance of such things as are wont to mollify, loosen and weaken the parts;
and that such Medicines are to be outwardly applied and inwardly given, as may
render them more firm and solid. The same Tone as it is internally too brittle
brings a suspicion upon all such things as abound much with an inward
slipperiness, and seems to desire some roughness, or indeed astriction in
those things applied or taken.

Fifthly, The corrupted Vital Constitution on the part of the Generation of the
Vital Spirits is not so considerable; but on the part of the distribution of
the Vital Spirits, the inequality thereof is of great importance, and indicateth
a caution to be had of those things which promove the flux of the Blood toward
the Head, as also of such things as retard the passage thereof to the first
affected parts, but that choice must be made of such things as stir the Pulses
of the Arteries in the parts first affected, and temper those that are in the
Head. A slow and diminute current of the Blood through the first affected parts
indicateth the same things, namely an evocation of the Pulls to those parts. But
an over facile and slippery passage of the Blood through the habit of the
parts, is coincident in its indication with the slipperiness of the Tone lately
recited. A defect of the Vital Constitution on the part of the union
sufficiently vigorous and pleasant between the Vital and the Natural Spirits,
indicateth an election of such things as can both nourish and cherish the
Spirits, and also excite them to a greater activity, and that their contraries
ought to be avoided. The Vital heat, as deficient indicates almost the same
thing as a cold distemper, provided that regard be had withal to the strength
of the Heart and Arteries, and to the vigor of the Vital Spirits.

Sixthly, The unequal Nutrition Indicateth those things which promove the even
and impartial distribution of the Aliment and Heat. Or indeed that which is too
liberal to the parts that are nourished beyond a due measure; the extenuation
of the parts requires a fuller Nourishment. The irregular magnitude of the
Head, chiefly things extenuant and such as are of the flux from the Head. The
Tumors of the Bones indicate the same thing; the crookedness of the Bones
require such things as attract the Aliment to the hollow side, as moderate
rubbings; but things repressing chiefly on the gibbous and bunched side, as
strong bindings. The bending of the Joints, insinuates an Artificial erection
of them, as much as is possible. The narrowness of the Breast points to
Pectorals, and such things as have a faculty to dilate the Breast; but the
sharpness thereof indicateth such things as have a dilative Virtue.

Sevently, The imperfect distribution of Animal Spirits, and somewhat defective
in the first affected parts indicateth Cephalicals, and such things as
facilitate the distribution, as exercises, rubbings, and the like. A defect of
due stretching in the Nerves, or Nervous and Fibrous parts, indicateth those
things as Corroborate the Nerves and strengthen the parts. Thus much of
Indications Curative, the Preservative follow.

CHAP. XXVI. Indications preservative.
THese Indications are deduced either from the Antecedent or the present causes
of a Diseas. Those which flow from the former kind of causes concern the
Prophylactical Part: here we only propound those which proceed from causes that
are present and contained in the Body; namly, from common causes, or such as
are proper to this Diseas.

Now although that common causes do not seem immediately to attain to the
production of the Essence of a Diseas; yet even in this respect that they are
esteemed an impediment, and may retard the cure, they Indicate their taking
away.

These causes are either impurities, or excrementitious humors collected and
impacted in the first passages, which unless they be taken away, do not only
infect the nourishment inward, but they somewhat dull, or otherwise hinder the
appropriate Medicines. They indicate therefore an evacuation either by a gentle
vomit, or by a lenitive purgation, as occasion shall rather persuade to this or
that: or they are common causes deeper imbited into the Parts of the Body, and
these also require an evacuation. But seeing that according to this kind of
common causes it is at the same time driven away and almost with the same
Medicaments, as are the causes which are proper to this Diseas, we shall conjoyn
both the kinds of them in this present consideration.

The causes therefore which are proper to this Diseas, as also the Common causes
which have a deeper penetration into the Body, may be divided into Blood and
Cacochymical humors. The Blood indeed, although it be rather deficient than
redundant in the first Affected parts, yet in the Head for the most part it
requires a particular evacuation, which usually is performed by scarification
of the Veins in the hollow of the Ear. Hither likewise we may partly refer
blisters raised between the first and second turning Joint of the Neck,
although these perhaps may relate over and above in part to the Cacochymical
humors.

Cachochymical humors are divided into those which still flow in the channel of
the Veins, and into those which are impacted in certain parts of the Body. The
causes or humors flowing in the Veins do (primarily and intentionally) Indicate
their evacuation. But if they be unapt for motion (as to the execution) then
they require some previous preparation. But because it happens for the most
part, that not all the humors are equally unapt, but that some are sufficiently
flexible, and others not so, but resist the Medecines, in this case they
indicate a less evacuation and then a preparation.

Moreover, These humors in the chanel of the Veyns may be subdivided into
Feverish (namly, if there be a putrid Fever) and not Feverish. The Feverish
humors are either swelling, or not swelling. The swelling, that is, those which
are unquiet, or impetuously agitated, do Indicate a sudden evacuation, at least
a lesser, unless perhaps they are carried of their accord to the external and
more ignoble parts, as it happens in the small Pox, the Meazels, and the like
Affects. But if a Fever be present, and that acute, and yet the humors are not
swelling, they chiefly Indicate that peculiar preparation which they call
coction, that by this means they may be obedient to the Medecin to be
aftergiven, and than evacution, but if the Fever not be acute but Chronical,
although the matter be not irritated, and yet some part of it be sufficiently
flexible; in this case, a lesser evacuation is first indicated at any time of
the Diseas, and afterward the coction of the relicts, that they also in their
time may be evacuated.

The humors contained in the Veins which are not Feverish, if they are
fluxible, they first indicate evacuation: but because in this Affect slow,
gross, and clammy humors are almost perpetually present, preparation (at least
where a lesser evacuation has gone before) is first Indicated; and indeed the
viscous humors Indicate incident, and the thick attenuant remedies. Again, when
the Diseas is very Chronical and extended to many months; yea, perhaps to a
year and upwards, it is not to be supposed that the whole matter causing the
Diseas can at once be prepared or evacuated; wherefore in this rerespect it
Indicateth, that we insist upon things preparatory and evacuant by turns.
Besides we must know that Choleric humors require one preparation and
evacuation, and Melancholy humors another, phlegm another, and watery humors
another. And that the preparation and purgation is Indicated variously
according to the diversity of the humors commixed with the Blood.

The humors that are impacted in certain parts of the Body do much more require
preparation before they are evacuated; according to that of Hippocrates, When
you would purg a Body, you must first make it fluxible. Neitherdoth a certain
general purgation suffice to subdu these humors, but such a preparation is
required, that has a peculiar reference to that part, in which they are
inherent, and therefore the humors in the Liver require one kind of preparation,
those in the Lungs another, etc.

Finally, Seeing that the propounded kinds of all humors, after they are
evacuated, may grow and breed again; they Indicate an avoiding of such things
which may dispose the Body to an easy generation of such humors: And thus much
of Indications Preservative, it remains now that we consider the Vital and
Conservative.

CHAP. XXVII. Indications Conservative, or Vital.
THis Indication arises from those things which are according to Nature. For
Life in it self consists in these things; namly, in a triple Constitution of
the Body, the Natural, Vital, and Animal above rehearsed.

The Natural comprehends under it

First, The Temperament.

Secondly, The Inherent Spirits with their plenty and vigor.

Thirdly, The Tone of the Parts.

Fourthly, The Structure of the Organs.

Fifthly, The Continuity.

The Vital contains First, The Generation Secondly, The Distribution
of the Vital Spirits.

Thirdly, Their participation with those parts, unto which they are
distributed; namely, from the union of them with the said parts, and the
communicated heat.

The Animal comprehends First, The Generation Secondly, The Distribution
of the Animal Spirits.

Thirdly, The due Stretching of the Parts depending upon the Influx of the
Brain.

All these things because life consists in them, are called Vital
Indications. But among Authors for the most part they are known by the common
name of the Spirits, but this name is somewhat to gross, seeing that in propriety
of speech, the Spirits are radicated in the said Constitutions, and are
faculties of them. Yet we have no design to innovate the custom of speech,
provided that the things may be understood as it is.

These Indicants so long as they continue firm and sound, they require only a
general and ordinary conservation by the right use of the six non-Natural
things* but when they are all alike vitiated or obnoxious to imminent hurt,
they require not only a general conservation, but such an one likewise, as is
mixed with cure and preservation. Again, Where some one Constitution, or some one
part thereof is depraved more than the rest or subject to such depravation,
besides the general preservation, it requires in like manner an especial one
to be associated to the peculiar Curation. Lastly, When a Constitution Subject
to error, or actually erroneous is fixed to some certain part, it does higher
specify that conservation; namly, that respect may be also had of the part so
laboring more than the rest.

But because some say, That the Vital Indication is the only, and that
Conservation is the simple end, and that they cannot be further subdivided,
because that all things, which are according to Nature are comprehended in the
word Spirits, and that they Indicate one Action; namly, the preservation of
themselves. We grant indeed that the Spirits, if (as we have already noted) they
be improperly taken for their causes; namly, the three Constitutions aforesaid,
may in one word comprehend al things which are according to Nature, but then
this word must be Generical, and divisible into three species; namly, the three
Constitutions, as Spirits Natural, Vital, and Animal. We grant also that the
end, or that the Indicated action is one; namly, Conservation, but by the unity
of the Genus, not of the ultimate species. For those very things which are
according to Nature, however they agree in the Genus, yet in the species they
may differ among themselves, and require a different conservation; yea, it is
possible that those things which conserv the Spirits on one part may impugn them
on the other; as for example: Wine given may in one respect cherish and
strengthen the Vital Spirits, or rather the Vital Constitution, but in the
interim it may offend and debilitate the Animal Spirits, or the Animal
Constitution. In like manner the Temperament requires one preservation, the
Structure of the Organs another, and the Continuity another. Yea, the very
different Constitution of the parts Indicates a various conservation, neither
do we after one and the same manner or by the same actions provide for the
special conservation of the Liver, Lungs, Brain, etc. Wherefore when some one
Constitution is more infirm then another, or when some one part is weaker than
another, it Indicates a proper conservation peculiar and special to it self,
and therefore both Conservation and Conservants may be divided into their
Species. For the Conservation and the Conservants appropriated to the Animal
constitution, differ from those which are destinated to the Vital or Natural:
And from hence the three first kinds of Conservation are to be deducted, namly,
the Conservation of the Animal, the Vital, and the Natural constitution. In
like manner the Conservation of the Liver is accomplished by the use of the
Hepaticals, and of the Lungs by Pectorals, etc. Yea, all parts of an eminent
diversity do subdivide the conservation into so many more species. Thus much of
the division of Conservation into its species.

Moreover, The same Conservation seems to be further divisible unto its
parts. For this Conservation is somewhat complicated, and does not only relate
to simples, but in some sort to contraries, to wit, Indicates both Curative and
Preservative, and either permits or disalloweth those same things being
estimated with the Spirits. It seems therefore to be branched into three
parts, into an election of like matters, into an election of contraries under a
certain condition, and into a prohibition of the same under a diverse condition.

The election of like things is the most appropriated Action to Conservation,
and seems withal to have reference to two kinds of things alike; namely, such
as are easily assimilated, and are properly nourishments, and such which
although they cannot be assimilated in respect of their substance, yet they
contain within the same qualities like unto the constitution of certain parts,
in respect whereof they are reputed amicable and familiar to Nature, and do
cherish and strengthen certain parts.

You will say, These are indeed Alterants and do belong to the kind of
contraries.

We answer, That in a diverse respect they may be referred to each kind, but in
as much as they obtain qualities like unto the du Nature of the parts, although
otherwise they alter some small matter, yet they are to be referred to the
similaries. For the very nourishments do in some degree alter, and are directly
contrary to emptiness, and conservation it self does implicitly include a
certain correction, as we have showed above. Now these indeed in regard of a
middle nature, which they have between similaries and Alterants, are not called
Medicaments, but Strengthners, Conservants, and Cordials; Again, these are
Indicated as Conservants by the peculiar debility of the Spirits, and as to be
elected, and not only permitted, and so they are esteemed in the Books of
Practical Authors.

The Permission of a remedy somewhat contrary to Nature does likewise belong to
this Indication. For such is the dignity and valu of this Indication, as it
summons both the Curative and Preservative Indicates to an examination before
they are reduced into practice, and does not only moderate and limit the
quality and quantity of the remedy, but also the very time of repeating it,
yea, whatsoever appertains to the use thereof, or the manner of using it, and
all this least in any wise it should exceed the Spirits of the Patient, or be
injurious to them: nor is the excellency of it thus circumscribed, but it
requires more; namly, that more profit and advantage may accrue to the things,
according to Nature by impugnation of the Diseas, then hurt or detriment by any
violence offered to Nature. And under this Law and Condition. Vital Indication
permits many things to be don, which of themselves are contrary to the
Spirits, yet always in favor of health, never to the prejudice of Life.

A prohibition of a contrary is altogether a commanding Action of this
Indication, and by a kind of Authority dictates this or that thing not to be
don, (although it were otherwise Indicated) because perhaps it endangers life it
self, or brings more disadvantage than benefit of health to the parts. And this
is the third and last force and use of this Indication. We shall now in one
word apply these things to the present Diseas.

All Constitutions in this Affect are very weak and infirm; and this is
manifest from the bare consideration of this tender age. But the Natural does
yet further suffer by the force of the first Essence of the Diseas; and from
hence also the Vital is somewhat weakened, and indeed neither does the Animal
escape wholly free, as was showed above. Wherefore both a general and also a
particular regard must be had to these Constitutions, as well in the Election of
Similaries, as in the permission or prohibition of contraries.

First, Therefore in this Affect you must make choice of the best nourishments,
such as are easy of concoction, and as near as you can agreeable to the custom
and age of the Patient, to the time of the year, etc. the contraries must be
abandoned, namly, such things as nourish little, are difficult of digestion,
and incongruous to the custom, age, and season.

Secondly, Those things must be chosen which cherish and strengthen the weaker
Constitutions, and the parts that are most Affected, and these must be either
exhibited severally, or they must be mingled with nourishments or Medicines;
but such things as are neither serviceable to this scope, nor otherwise
Indicated, must be totally avoided.

Thirdly, Benign and gentle evacuants, or othertherwise sufficiently corrected,
must be allowed in a moderate quantity, just and du interval of time being
observed. But the contrary things; namely, violent and fierce purgers,
especially such as are apt to dissolv the parts, or are exhibited in an undu
quantity, or too often repeated, are forbidden.

Fourthly, Remedies alterant, or such as prepare the humors, or correct the
Diseas must be permitted; such also as are friendly and familiar to Nature, or
such as may be made such by good company, that is, by composition or sufficient
correction. Remedies violently alterant, extreme hot, and vehemently
discutient, or any other which in any wise resolv and dissipate the parts.

CHAP. XXVIII. The use and right administrations of the Indications aforesaid.
HAving propounded the three kinds of simple Indications, and deduced them into
their lowest species, we shall in the next place consider the right use and
administration of them. The exact knowledge whereof seems impossible to be
obtained without rode and experience. For it descends unto Individuals, and
comprehends not only the Election of a thing among so many Indicates simply to
be don in the Species, but also the invention of quantity, place, form, time,
order, and matter of the remedy to be exhibited.

The Consent and Dissent of Indications do contribute much to this invention.
Now the Consent may be twofold: of Coindication and Permission. Permission may
be either an Advantage or a Loss to him that permits or neither of them. A
Permission that cannot be granted without hurt; must never be allowed without
the greatest circumspection, and so much the greater, as the damage may be the
more to him that permits. For although the Permittent may part with somewhat
of his private right to advance the public good, yet in respect that he is a
member of the whole he is supposed to be a gainer.

The Dissent of Indicants is twofold; namly, either Contradictory or Contrary.
The Contradictory among the Books is called Interdiction or Prohibition, and
for the most part it is appropriated to the Spirits, unto which in this respect
we must always yield obedience. The Contrary is called Contra-indication, and
this does not simply forbid, but so far forth as it undergoeth the Nature of an
impediment, or some more urgent Indicate.

First, Where Indicants consent, either by Coindication or Permission,
satisfaction if it be feasible must be given to all the Indicates: But if this
cannot be performed Medicines of that Nature are to be preferred before the
rest, which are correspondent to most, or at least to the most urgent Scopes.
But if such simples cannot be found out, then you must institute an apt
composition of diverse simples one with another.

The Essential parts of this Diseas, although they are very various, yet is
there not any considerable disagreement among them, and nothing hinders but in
a great part they may be considered together. For Medicines temperatly hot and
dry, may at once cherish the Inherent Spirits, and perhaps conduce to the
scattring of the numbness in them, and withal somewhat fortify the Tone of the
parts, and facilitate the equal distribution of the Blood, and consequently the
equality of the Nutrition: also it may increase vigor in the Vital and Animal
Spirits, proritate the Arteries in the first affected parts, and strengthen the
Nervs: unto which Heads almost all the Indicates of the Essence of a Diseas may
not unaptly be referred. Moreover, the Spirits also, although they prohibit all
extreme hot things, yet they allow of these as mo^derat, and very congruous to
Nature. In like manner there is little or no particular repugnance between
these causes and the Indicates, albeit in respect of time and the order of
administration some dissent may be observed, as we shall see afterward in due
place.

Wherefore in what respect and how far these agree together whilst we intend a
cure, we do at once respect not only the Spirits, but in some sort the causes,
by choosing such curative remedies, or by mingling such ingredients with them,
which are able both to attenuate the thick matter, to cut into the viscous, to
open the obstructed passages, and the like. In like manner, whilst we are
chiefly employed either in preservation, or in the rooting out of causes, we
make choice of such evacuants, or else we compound them with such remedies, as
are also partly contrary to the Diseas. And all these things we do to that
purpose; as that (as has been said) we may be subservient to the most
intentions we can.

Now having found out the actions simply requisite in the Species, in the next
place we shall enquire out their du circumstances.

1. In regard that this is a great Diseas it requires a great quantity of the
Remedy, in respect of it self. For a Remedy unequal to the Diseas cannot
extirpate it. It is necessary therefore that the dose of the Medicine be equally
to the magnitude of the Affect. But in this Diseas the Spirits permit not so
great a quantity of Remedies to be given at once. Wherefore that quantity must
be divided and given by turns. For this is a Chronical Diseas, and of slow
motion, neither does it necessarily require an hasty Cure, and although the
Spirits cannot well endure either vehement Remedies or such as are given in a
large dose, yet they permit the use of Evacuant Medicines by an Epicrasis.
Wherefore by turns, we must sometimes make use of Remedies Preparatory, sometimes
Evacuant, sometimes Alterant, and sometimes strengthing.

Secondly, For so much as belongs to the place of administration, the general
Rule is, that the remedy ought to arive at the seat, and penetrate to the very
Cause of the Diseas. If therefore it must have a passage into the Vessels, it
must be taken at the Mouth; but if it will suffice to touch only the thick
Guts, it must be injected by the Fundament. If the humors be naturally ready to
move upwards, expel them by vomit; if downwards evacuat them by siege. In like
manner you must humor the inclination of Nature, and root out the causes by
spitting, by Urin, or by sweating. Particular evacuations must be instituted in
the very affected parts, or in the parts adjacent. For so the force of the
Remedy does the more surely make way to the seat of the Diseas and the
morbifical Cause. And for the same reason external and topical Medicines must be
applied to the next convenient place. Yet you must know that there is a certain
Sympathy between some parts, in which case the remedies ar frequently
administered to the part, wherewith that consent intercedeth, and neither to the
affected nor the adjacent part.

Thirdly, The form of the Medicament does partly depend upon the Rule last
propounded. For if the scope be to lenifie the Jaws or the Windpipe, we choose a
licking or lapping form, that by degrees the remedy may slide over the affected
parts, and stay the longer upon them. In like manner, if the Stomach be
affected, we often prescribe Pills, Pouders or Electuaries, that they may the
longer abide in the Stomach. To the Kidneys we rather design liquid things,
that they may the more easily be carried down to them with the wheyish part of
the Blood. The forms do also in some part depend upon the very nature of the
Diseas, as in burning Fevers liquid things are for the most part convenient,
dry things are scarce admitted; on the other side, in moist Diseases, and when
the Belly is oversoluble, more solid forms are preferred. Finally, the forms of
the Medicines do also partly depend upon the nature of the Ingredients. So
Cassia works most effectually in the form of a Bolus; Hartshorn, Coral, and
the like in the form of a Powder; in like manner bitter things, such as beget a
vomiting, and stinking things are concealed in the form of Pills; sometimes also
they are gilded, or else they are enwrapped in Wafers, and exhibited in the
form of a Bolus.

Now it must here be noted, that for the most part the form of the Remedy is
not so considerable, as it gives place to the more easy and commodious
administration, in respect of the Admission or Reception of the Sick. For many
cannot swallow Pills, others presently reject their Potions by vomit, and
others are perhaps avers from other forms. In this Affect, in regard that all
Children almost are loath to take Physic, that form is to be preferred before
the rest, which shall be observed to be least distastful to them.

Fourthly, As for the time of action, you must so endeavor to sit your
administrations, that they may as little as possible be interupted with times
of eating, exercise, or sleep, for at this age the Spirits are scarce preserved
sound and perfect, without an interposition of those things by just internals.

Remedies evacuant, opening, attenuate and incident, must be taken early in the
morning upon an empty stomach; and if they must be repeated the same day, four
of the Clock in the afternoon (upon an empty stomach likewise) is the most
seasonable hour. Strengthening and astringent Medicines, and such as provoke
sleep, are to be taken rather in the evening than in the morning; but perhaps
some of these are most agreeable after meals.

Medicines that are mingled with the nourishment, ought to be gratful to the
Palate, lest they subvert the stomach and hinder concoction, or cause a loathing
of the meat, or else empair the Spirits.

As for the order of proceeding, there occur two general Rules. The former is,
That that must first be don, which being premised makes way for the following
Remedies, and therefore that ought first to be removed which has the
consideration of an impediment in respect of what must follow. The later is,
That we must ever give our first help to the more urgent and weighty Indicant,
unless some impediment intervene.

If the Question therefore be, Whether the Diseas, or the Cause of the Diseas
does first require the help of Physic? The answer will be obvious according to
the first Rule: For the causes are reflected upon under the notion of an
impediment in respect of the Cure of the Diseas; for they cherish it, and
infringe the virtue* of the Medicines. Wherefore, before that we are intent upon
the vanquishing of the Diseas, we premise all possible endeavors to root out
the Cause, or at least to lessen, abate and retund it, that it may oppose no
considerable force to retard the rooting out of the Diseas. Yet in the interim
whilst we are busy in the removal of the Causes, the Essence of the Diseas
must not be totally neglected, as we have before admonished. Yea when we have
so subdued the Cause that it cannot for the present much interupt the Cure, we
may (the Causes not being utterly overcome and cast out) the more diligently
and earnestly attempt the resisting of the affect; yet with this condition,
That if the Causes revert and become new impediments, that then we are obliged
presently to undertake the subduing and evacuation of them: so that in this
Chronical Affect, sometimes the Causes, sometimes the Diseas must be resisted by
turns: and the Spirits do better undergo this change of action, than if we
should continualy make our battery against the Causes, till they were
absolutely rooted out.

Moreover, When the Causes of the Diseas in this Affect are unapt for motion by
reason of their toughness, grosness, and perhaps setledness; they must first be
freed from this impediment and prepared before they are evacuated. For
according to the Rule of the great Dictator, Quae movenda sunt, fluida prius
facere oportet. In like manner, that thickness, toughness and setledness of
matter, if it be present, indicate Remedies attenuant, incident and opening.
But these things are not safly taken the impurities still flowing back*into the
first Passages, for then perhaps they are carried along with the Medicines into
the Veins, and more defile the Blood, or at least hinder the efficacy of the
Remedies. These therefore have the nature of an impediment, and must be in the
first place removed.

Lastly, Universal Evacuants must be premised before Particular and Topical
Remedies, especially where it is not permitted at once to mind both intentions.
For the Universal Causes flowing in the Body are easily surrogated in the room
of Particular Evacuations, and renew the Afflux to the first affected part: but
the thinner part of Particular Causes and that which is most apt for motion is
evacuated, but the thicker perhaps is more impacted. Wherefore Universal Causes
yet flowing to and fro in the Body, as considered are Impediments in respect of
Particular Evacuation, and by consequence must be first expelled.

The latter Rule was, That we must releeve the more urgent and weighty Indicant
first, unless there be an interuption of some impediment. That is termed an
urgent Indicant which threatens the most danger. Now every such Indicant is
supposed to induce great afflictions into the Body, and not without manifest
danger to wast the Spirits. Therefore in this respect, we must sometimes first
help the Diseas, the Cause being neglected: Sometimes also we must neglect both
the Diseas and the Causes, and adress our endeavors to the pacification of the
Symptoms, as in a vehement Flux of the Belly, long Watchings, profuse and
immoderat Sweating, and the like. But even in these cases, we must have a
prudent regard both to the Diseas and the Causes, and when the urgent Symptom
is corrected, or the violence of the Diseas repressed, then we must return to
the regular Method of proceeding; for this Rule belongs not to the ordinary and
legitimate order of Cure, but to the Method of Necessity.

Moreover, to perfect the right administration of Indications, there is
required an exact and accurat knowledge of the Medical Matter whereof we shall
discourse in the subsequent Chapters.

CHAP. XXIX. The Medical Matter answering to the Indications proposed, and
first the Chyrurgical.
THE Medical Matter must be found out by Experience and Analogismes, or
Arguments drawn by an answerable necessity from the Cause to the Effect;
although the truth is we conceive not any other Reasonings to be absolutely
excluded. It is vulgarly and not unaptly distributed into three kinds, The
Chirurgical, the Pharmateutical, and the Diatetical: Of these in their order.

The Chirurgical commonly received and approved in this Affect, and famous
above the rest, are chiefly two; Scarification of the Ears, and little
Fountains or Issues. But our enquiry (as we shall see anon) shall be extended to
many more, namly of Cuppin-Glasses, Leeches, Blisters, Ligatures, and
Swathing-bands: But the opening of a Vein the Spirits cannot brook, as every
one knows, who but observes the frailty of the age, the extenuation of the
habit of the parts, and the smalness of the Veins.

The Scarification of the Ears shall lead our discourse. The Empericks who
undertake the cure of this Diseas, make more of it than one would imagine. For
in their practice they celerate it with great vaporing, and without it scarce
hope for a happy cure. But we, although we disallow not this kind of remedy,
have seen many Children successfully recovered without the use thereof. And they
themselves who attribute most unto it, for the most part take away no
considerable portion of Blood. Yet some affirm that they have seen a large
quantity of Blood drawn away with good event. However it be, it is credible
that those Children do with most ease endure this remedy, and obtain most
profit by the use of it, which are of a Sanguin complexion and well habited, and
who are affected with an Alogotrophy, rather than an Atrophy or a Consumption,
or any other remarkable extenuation of the parts. Our Practitioners for most
part repeat this operation two or three times in a week. They seldom do it with
an Instrument or sharp Penknife, but most commonly with an ordinary blunt
Knife, taking no notice of the pain and crying of the Child. Moreover, For the
most part they perform it in the hollow of the Ear, but some extend it to the
inward and outward circumference of the upper part of the Ear, yea to the whole
circumference. No man hitherto as we know have attempted the Scarification of
the hinder side of the Ear, although indeed it is not easy to give a reason,
why it should conduce less being administered there than in the hollow part.

Yet it may be lawful for us to offer our conjectures why the hollow of the Ear
should be chosen before the other parts for this operation, which
notwithstanding we will not confidently assert, although we suppose we can at
least probably assert it, if that be true which the most diligent Chyrurgion
Fubricius Hildanus has written in his Observe. 4. Centur. 1. de nervo quinti
parts: For this conjecture is grounded upon this Observation, and if that be
ruinous this perhaps must perish with it. The Conjecture is this, The
distribution and use of the Nerve and of the fifth Pair before mentioned being
supposed, Scarification in the hollow of the Ear may very conveniently both
free that Nerve from any kind of oppression, and likewise shake off the
numbness, and give it vigor. For the hollow of the Ear is the next place unto
it which we can come at with an instrument. Wherefore evacuation being here made
may immediately drive away the matter which commonly oppresses the very
beginning of that Nerve, and withal causing pain and increasing the heat, and
may drive out all stupidness from within it, and ad vigor unto it. If this
Nerve therefore (as that famous Chyrurgion affirms) or a part thereof be
distributed unto the Marrow of the Back and never forsakes the Marrow of the
Back, but shoots out little Branches with the Nervs of the Marrow of the Back
to the ends of the very Legs and Feet; it may easily be granted, that this
Nerve thus delivered from obstruction, thus excited and having gotten vigor,
may likewise in some manner excite the Marrow of the Back it self, and all the
Nerves from thence arising, which by that opinion it does accompany to the very
end of the Body, and imprint some vigor in them. Wherefore Scarification being
made in that place must needs be of greater efficacy, than if it were
instituted in any other part of the same Ear, more remote from the aforesaid
Nerve. The same may almost be said concerning the little wound here made by a
blunt Knife. For some Practical Physicians affirm that the excellency of this
operation relats not so much to the quantity of the Blood to be drawn, as to
the stirring up of pain in that part; which any man may easily reduce to the
stirring up of the vigor of the Nerve of the Fifth Pair.

But omitting this Conjecture we will propound some other Considerations, in
respect whereof this Scarification may be useful in this affect. First, By this
means we obtain a certain particular evacuation of the Head, which part, if any
other is in this Affect oppressed with a particular fullness. Secondly, By the
very evacuation of the Blood we somewhat correct the thickness and toughness
thereof, and by consequence we promove the more equal distribution of it, and a
more regular and equal Nourishment of the Parts. Thirdly, By this means we in
some sort drive away the astonishment of the parts.

It must be noted that this operation when it performs a particular and local
evacuation, does not simply deserve the first place in the Method of Cure, but
must follow in its order, Universals being premised.

Lastly, It seems to be ridiculous and superstitious which some are busy about
when they administer this Scarification; whilst they fasten the Blood of the
right Ear sucked up into Wool to the left Hypochondry, and the Blood of the
left to the right. Thus much of Scarification.

Issues in this Diseas are much approved, and we have known some Children cured
only by the help of this means. For it does not only perform all those things,
which even now we ascribed to the Scarification of the Ears, but more
particularly it is a powerful remedy against the Hydrocephalus, both Curative
and Preservative, and very much conduces to lessen the unusual magnitude of
the Head, and to evacuate the superfluous watriness thereof. And lastly, to
repress the inordinate encreas of the Bones. Also it manifestly dries up the
too much humidity of the Spinal Marrow, exciteth heat, strengthens the Nerves,
and expels the astonishment.

Now because this kind of remedy is properly a little Ulcer* and causes some
small pain to the Child that has it, and brings daily some trouble to the
Nurs, it ought not to be prescribed, unless the greatness of the Diseas be such
that we despair to conquer it by other remedies without the concurrence of this.

This little Fountain must be made between the Second and Third turning Joint
of the Neck. Some Burn it with actual Cauterising, but we disapprove of this
way in regard of the vehemence of the pain: Some effect it with a potential
Cauterising: but neither do we like this, because all Causticks are advers to
the Nature of an Infant, insinuating some venomous quality, and at least do too
much dissipate the Spirits, and weaken the parts. Therefore we allow rather of
an Issue made by Simple incision with a sharp Penknife.

Some make use of Iron tongues contrived for this purpose, wherewith they take
hold of the Skin, the place of incision being first marked with ink, and by a
moderate compression they dull the sens of the part, and then they thrust in
the Penknife through the middle of the tongs which is pierced with a longish
hole, and so they make the incision. Having made the wound they stop in either
an Artificial or a Natural Pease, putting upon it a digestive Plaster: upon
this they wrap a Paper or a linen cloth diverse times doubled, and fasten to
it as it were a Buckler made of some solid matter, unto which four swathing
bands are sewed; thus much of Issues. In the next place we shall examine some
other kind of Chyrurgical Operations.

And first Leeches offer themselves. Truly we have not yet sufficiently tried
how beneficial the application of them may be in this Affect. But if we consult
Reason, we suppose that more hurt than advantage may be expected from this
remedy. For if they are applied to any part of the Head, by reason of their
continual sucking they would easily cause a more violent afflux of the Blood to
those parts. And if they be applied to other parts, they draw the Blood from
the parts which before had too little.

Secondly, Cuppinglasses are not (we conceive) so dangerous as needless; indeed
we altogether reject those that are ministered with Scarification, not only for
the Reasons just now deduced from the Leeches, but being moved both by fear of
dejecting the Spirits by reason of the pain, and also in regard of the
troublesomness of the administration. Cuppin Glasses without Scarification, as
we began to say, seem not refusable either by the Spirits, or the Diseas, or
the causes of the Diseas. But these are very little effectual, and we leave it
to be perpended, whether the profit arising from the use of them, whatsoever it
be, can recompense the trouble of the application.

Nevertheless it may happen by reason of the complication of some other Diseas,
that the use of them may be of some moment, as in a Pleurisy, a Phrensy, and
where some dangerous Flux is iminent against some principal part; in which case,
those perhaps that are adhibited with Scarification, may be admitted in great
and strong Children. But then you must apply them to the turning Joints of the
Neck, the Shoulders, the Hanches, to the inner parts of the Thighs, to the
soals of the Feet, and to other places as the peculiar complicated affect shall
require.

In the mean time it must be noted, that in an age so tender, you must make use
of very small Cuppin-glasses, and that they must be applied with a less flame
then they are wont to be in others of man's estate, and that the scarification,
if at all it be admitted, must be don with a gentle hand.

Thirdly, As for Blisters, although hitherto we have not had sufficient trial
of them, and although we banish from this Diseas both septical applications,
because they dissolve the parts, and also caustical, because they penetrate
deeper and produce a crusted substance, yet we conjecture that those Pyrotical
remedies which only raise Blisters in the Skin may be sometimes profitably
admitted.

You will say that Cantharides wherewith they are commonly made are extreme hot,
and besides suspected to be of a venomous quality.

We answer, That we may not here insert any thing of the qualities of
Cantharides, we grant that which is asserted. But because they are administered
only to the outward little Skin, and only to a little part thereof not much
extended, and because as soon as the blisters are raised they are removed, the
excess of their heat and their poison scarce penetrates deeper into the Body,
than the bottom of the Epidermis, and therefore this remedy may be applied
without any notable harm or danger. But then you may demand what profit can
arise from hence? We affirm, that it does effectually correct a cold and moist
distemper, and potently dissipate the astonishment of the Marrow of the Back,
the Brain, Nervs, and the Nervous parts, and withal that they make all the
parts more firm and steady, and stir up a stronger Pulse in the external parts;
al which things are of no small moment in the cure of this Diseas.

One amongst us affirms, that among other things he prescribed this remedy to
a Child of two years old who was troubled with the Rachites, and was also
fallen into a continual and malignant Fever, and grown almost frantic.
Hereupon the Child found present and manifest eas, and after a few days was
delivered from his Fever. Afterward having purged him twice or thrice with an
infusion of Rhubarb, etc. Beyond the expectation of all that saw it, he also
subdued this Affect almost without any other remedies. But as you can scarce
find any commodity without a discommodity: so neither is this remedy exempted
from al inconveniences. For it is unpleasing, full of pain and molestation to
Children: Moreover, for a time it interrupteth their exercise and pastime, in
respect of which things, unless perhaps some other complicated affect do point
at an interdiction of exercise, it may do much more prejudice than advantage.
Again, the force of it suddenly wastes, and afterward by degrees is consumed,
which does not in all respects keep touch with a Chronical Diseas. Finally, an
Issu which is proper to Chronical Diseases, may very well supply its place in
this affect. Wherefore we scarce admit the application of blisters in the cure
of this malady, unless some acute Diseas be complicated, which may require this
kind of Remedy, as it falls out in the Cause propounded.

Now where this administration is requisite, it is most commodiously performed
upon the turning Joints of the Neck, unless some Issu have prepossessed the
place; in which case you must administer them either behind the Ears, or four
Fingers below the Issu. We deny not but it may be fitted to several other
places in respect of the complication of other Diseases. But we here design the
place which a peculiar reference to the present Diseas.

Fourthly, Ligatures also may be referred to this Title, and indeed we grant,
that sometimes they are not altogether unuseful in this affect; namly, if they
be very moderate, and adhibited by just distances, and unto convenient places;
but you must beware that they hinder not the growth of that part, whereunto they
are applied; which is don if they be sufficiently loose, and made of soft wool,
if in the Day time, or for some part of the Day they are tied up, and unbound at
night, if they be fitted to the Thighs and Legs upon the Knee, and to the Arms
upon the Elbow.

Yet Ligatures do here seem to conduce much to the stoppage of the Blood from
flowing to the Head, and that it ought to be fastened to the outward parts that
are extenuated: besides, this Remedy is good to retard the over slippery return
of the Blood in those parts, unto which the Ligature is applied.

Fifthly, Hitherto also belong the Fasciation or swathing of certain parts, for
this has an affinity with Ligatures. For some use to enwrap the weak parts in
woollen blankets, thereby to strengthen them, and to cherish their heat; namly,
the Feet, the Legs, the Knees, and the adjacent parts of the Thighs. But you
must be careful that the overstraightness of them hinder not their growth.

Others, instead of these swathing bands use buttond Boots lined with woollen
Cloth; these they do not make use of only for strength and heat, but also to
correct the crookedness of the Bones, and to erect the bending of the Joints.
Some ad little Shingles, or pieces of Whale-Bone, but there are three things
worthy of observation in the making of these. 1. That they may somewhat crush
the prominent and unequal part of the Bone. 2. That they scarce touch the
hollow, but rather that they defend it from compression. 3. That they be well
fitted to the part, and do as little as possible hinder the motion of F

C

B

A

C

D

D

G

the Joints, to this purpose those Boots upon the outward part to the knee may
be cut overthwart, or, acros In like manner if there be any need that the
Shingles upon the knee be extended to sustain and erect the bending thereof,
then it is necessary that you fashion them with a double Joint in the bending
place, after this manner.

A

B

C

D

The Form of the Articulation of the Splents.

A B Two Iron rings.

C D The Diameter of the Joints of the Splents.

The Nails where with the Rings are fastened.

F G The two Splents.

Instead of the Splents you may more commodiously use thin plates of Iron, and
the whole Instrument may be made of Iron.

The two Axel trees or Diameters C D upon which the Shingles or Splents are
bended F G are fastened with two rings or hoops. But the hoops themselves A B C
are made of plates of Iron of an exquisit thinness, that they may not be
burthensom, and withal they ought to be well smoothed, and polisht that they
hinder not the motion of the Splents. These rings must be of an equal Latitude,
suppose about two fingers a cross, and they must be so fitted together, that on
every side they may be paralels; only let there be so much distance between
them, that they may fitly receive the tops of the Splents. Moreover, Those
hoops must not only be coupled with a double Axel C and D, but also with five
small Iron Nails. Lastly, The whole composition of the Instrument must be so
made, that it may be fast and fitly tied to the side of the bended knee
sticking out, and withal that it may serve as well for the extension as the
ordinary bending of it, but let it restrain the deflexion of it to either side,
especially to the part sticking out. Which is the cause why the Axels are
fastened with a double Hoop, namely lest the Joints should be loos, and yield to
the deflexion of the Knee.

In like manner the torsion and misshapen writhing of the Feet is also
frequently corrected with Swathing Bands. If the Toes are outwardly distorted,
they must every night be bound up, little balls of Cotton being put between the
Heels and the Ankles. But if the Toes bend inwards, then you must bind the
Ankles, and put a little Cotton between the great Toes.

Lastly, To straighten the trunk of the Body, or to keep it straight, they use
to make Breastplates of Whalebone put into two woolen Clothes and Sewed
together, which they so fit to the Bodies of the Children, that they may keep
the Backbone upright, repress the sticking out of the Bones, and defend the
crookedness of them from a further compression. But you must be careful that
they be not troublesome to the Children that wear them, and therefore the best
way is to fasten them to the Spine of the Back with a handsome string fitted to
that use.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Pharmacentical matter, and first of such things as cleanse
the first Passages.
THis matter is of manifold and most noble use, and satisfies very many
Indications. For it comprehends al Medicaments, those only accepted which
concern the Chyrurgion, which have a primary relation either to the causes of
the Diseas, or the Diseas it self, or the Symptoms.

It is divided into remedies Internal or External, and each of them into Simple
and Compound. Again the Internal may be subdivided into such as clens the first
passagss, as Medicines Preparatory. Into Electively evacuant, and such as are
Specifically alterant and Evacuant, and finally into those that correct the
Symptoms.

Among these the Internal obtain the precedence, and of those again such as
wash away the impurities of the first passages, because these (as has been
already observed) are justly accounted an impediment in respect of the
following remedies, and simply ought first to be removed. But in all the Titles
(as far as the Nature of the thing will licens or warrant us) we will place the
Simple before the Compound.

Moreover, these washing remedies comprehend these three kinds, namely,
Clysters, Vomits, and Lenitive Purgations.

The use of Clysters, and some forms of them.
The Injection of Clyster-pipes, before we more exactly and earnestly attempt
the Cure, is then chiefly prerequired, when the Belly is costive, and the
Excrements are hardened; or when some windy humors torment the Guts, or some
vehement pain in the Bowels afflict the Patient. In which cases they may not
only be injected before any preparation, but also before a Vomit, yea or a
Lenitive Purgation. These are frequently compounded of benign and gentle
Purgers, sometimes also of such as have only a faculty to make the ways
slippery, and to expel wind, but never of Cathartical ingredients that are
violent they are to be injected warm or lukewarm, and after a long abstinence
from meat. We shall present some forms.

Take Cows new-Milk, warmed, four or five ounces; Anis Seeds beaten to Powder
ten grains; Course Sugar, one ounce, one ounce and an half, or two ounces; The
Yolk of one Egg: mingle them and make a Clyster; to these may be added half an
ounce of new Butter.

Take a sufficient quantity of an emollient Decoction. An Electuary lenitive
half an ounce; Syrup of Roses Solutive, and Syrup of Violets, of each six
drachms; Oil of Chamomel one ounce; mingle them, make your Clyster and let it
be injected lukewarm.

Take the Roots of Marsh Mallows beaten together, half an ounce, or in lieu
thereof, the leaves or Flowers of Mallows half a handful; Flowers of Chamomel
one pugil; Hemp Seeds two drachms: boil them in a sufficient quantity of Whey
mingled with Beer: To four or five ounces of the Decoction ad of Diacassia, or
Electuarium Passulatum half an ounce, Syrup of Roses Solutive, and Kitchen
Sugar, of each one ounce; new Butter six drachms, you may if you see occasion
ad the yolk of one Egg.

Take Stone-Horsdung that is new, one ounce and an half; The Seeds of Annis,
Fennel, Mallows, beaten together, of each one dram and an half; Flowers of
Chamomel one pugil. Boil them in a sufficient quantity of posset drink: In four
or five ounces of the Decoction, dissolve ten drachms of Syrup of Violets,
common Sugar, and Oil of Roses, of each half an ounce: Mingle them and make
your Clyster.

The use of vomiting remedies, and some examples of them.
Emedical Remedies or Vomits, do chiefly perform three things. First they
evacuate crude or corrupt humors and all manner of impurities contained in the
Stomach, and that by a shorter and more expedite way, than if they were
conveyed through the involutions and labyrinths of the Guts. Secondly, By an
agitation and commotion raised in all the parts, especially the Bowels, they
loosen the gross and viscous humors adhering unto them, or impacted in them,
and frequently expel them, especially those which are collected in the Stomach
and Guts; in which respect they are profitable against torments of the Chollick
and very conducible to unlock Obstructions. Thirdly, They most effectually
irritate the expulsive faculty of all the parts of the Body, and especially of
the Bowels, and by this means many times upon a single application they compel
forth the hidden and unappearing causes and fomentations of Diseases, and
especially of intermitting Fevers. For by the very straining to vomit, the
Guts are also instimulated to cast out by siege. The Liver powers away the
Choler by the Biliary Pore; the Sweetbread voideth his peculiar excrement by
the new Vessel into the Guts; the Spleen also perhaps unburdens in a plentiful
manner his excrement into the Stomach by Vessels not yet thoroughly known: The
Kidneys exern through the Ureters, the Lungs by a strong Cough eject their
Phlegm through the Windpipe: The Brain emptieth it self of salt, waterish
Rhewms, and matter by the Palate, the Nostrils and the Eyes. Finally the whole
Body for the most part is rendered more prone to a Diaphoresis either by a
manifest sweating, or else by an occult and insensible Transpiration. In the
mean time it must be noted that not all gentle Vomits, nor indeed the more
vehement, if they be given in too small a dose will presently and fully perform
all these things, yet in their operations they effect more or less according to
the strength or quantity of the Medicine, and indeed if the stronger be
administered in a full dose they effectually attain to the three marks
propounded.

It is obvious, by what has been said, to the consideration of any Reader,
that strong Vomits prescribed in a full quantity are not competible to Children
affected with this Diseas, neither can their tender strength overcome and
subdue so great tumults in the Body, and such an Universal evacuation so
suddenly wrought, Wherefore this kind of remedy ought not to be prescribed to
Children without diligent precaution and circumspection, and both the strength,
quantity, and efficacy of the Medicine are duly to be prepondred. To this end
therefore we shall set down some Cautious in favor of unexperienced Practicers.

First, A Vomit is not to be provoked in this Diseas, unless the humors tend
upwards of their own accord, but then indeed they may be expelled by vomiting
remedies without difficulty.

Seeondly, Not unless Children are naturally or customarily apt to vomit, and
do easily endure it.

Thirdly, In Bloud-spitting, the Ptisick and Consumption, in any flowing of
Blood at the Nose, or any internal opening of the Veins, and the like cases,
abstinence must he enjoined from this remedy.

Fourthly, Vehement vomits exhibited in a larger dose are here forbidden. For
the fear is just and prudent that they may depopulate the Natural Spirits, and
further consume the very solid parts which before were overmuch extenuated.

It is necessary therefore that the Vomits here prescribed, be either in their
own nature gentle, or corrected if they be vehement and administered in a
lessened dose.

You will say, If they be of a mild and lenitive faculty, or exhibited in a
diminute quantity, they cannot compel the humors with any efficacy.

To this we answer, Indeed where Nature contributeth little or no assistance,
it cannot be denied; but in such cases we totally prohibit the administration
of vomiting remedies; but presupposing both a fitness of the Body and Humors to
this evacuation (as is required in the first and second Caution) even gentle
vomits may expel such humors as are seated in the first passages. The thing
must be said of the strong being prudently corrected and sparingly applied. For
by reason of the correction and diminute quantity they do not much shake and
discompose the Body, or provoke Nature; and again, through the proclivity of
the Stomach and Humors they are sufficient to reward this Scope with a laudable
success. We will now subjoyn some few Examples.

Take the tops of Groundsel half an handful, Raisons one ounce; boil them in a
pound of Ale to the consumption of one half. To three ounces of Colature, ad
half an ounce of Sir. Acetos. simpl. Mingle them and drink them lukewarm.

Or

Take the Infusion of Crocus-metallorum in Spanish Wine, made in a cold place
and well purified, by subsidence one dram, a dram and an half, or two drams
(according to the age and strength of the sick) half a dram of Sir. Acetos.
simp. Posset Drink an ounce and an half. Cinnamon Water ten drops: or instead
thereof if there be any fear of Convulsions, one scruple of Aq. Antepilept.
Lang. Mingle them and drink it warm.

Take the Juice of the Leaves of Asarabacca half a dram, two scruples or a
dram. Syrup. Acetos. simp. two drams. Mingle them with a sufficient quantity of
Posset Drink.

Take Salt of Vitriol from five to ten grains, Give it in Posset drink.

Lenitive Catharticks.
These Evacuant Medicines produce their Effects without tumult, and therefore
they requir not so great circumspection as Vomiting Compositions, or such as
are electively Purgant. Yet three things must be considered in the Use of them.
1. That they do not nausiat the Ventricle with such an ungrateful taste and
favor as may render an abhorrence from all future Medicaments. 2. That they
oppress not the Stomach by an immoderat quantity. 3. That the potion drunk be
not presently vomited up. To prevent this last danger it will be a good way
presently to bedew and moisten the Mouth with some pleasant and agreeable
Liquor, or with candid Cherries, or preserved Barberries 3 or to temper the
juice of Orenges, or the like.

These Lenitives may be divided into Simple and Compound: and these again into
such as are sold in the Shops, and such as are newly made and accomodated to
the present scope of the Physician.

There are found very few Simples that of themselves will satisfy this scope; as
Manna, Cassia fistula, Aloe soccatrina, Tamarinds, Polypodium of the Oak. But
very ineffectually, unless they be compounded with other Purgative Ingredients
(more follow) as Jujubes, Sebestens, sweet Prunes and Damascens, Figs, Dates,
the Pap or Pulp of roasted Apples, the Flowers of Mallows, Violets, Pellatory of
the wall, Mercury, the Roots of Marshmallous, Liquoris, the four greater cold
Seeds, the Seeds of Mallows, sweet Almonds, rare Eggs, Fatty substances, Butter,
Oil of Olives, Oil of Almonds, Whey, and the like. These although of themselves
they are of small efficacy, yet by the commixture of other Catharticks they
require a gentle purgative quality, not to be contemned.

The Lenitive compound Catharticks which are sold in Shops, are these: Cassia
extracted with, or without Senna, Diacassia, Electuarium Lenitivum, Diaprunum
lenitivum, Electuarium passulatum, A common Decoction for a Medicine, A
Decoction of Flowers and Fruits, Syrup and Honey of Violets, Syrup of Roses
solutive, Honey of Mercury, Honey of Raisons, Conserve of damask Roses, Of the
Flowers of Mallows, of Violets. To these may be subjoyned some extempory forms.
As

Take of the best Calabrian Manna six drams, Cremor of Tartar seven grains,
Posset-Ale in which a few Aniseeds have been boiled an ounce and an half.
Mingle and give them in the morning.

Take of Polypodium of the Oak two ounces, White Tartar prepared two drams,
sweet Apples twelve handfuls, Raisons of the Sun stoned one ounce: Boil them in
a sufficient quantity of Water to a pound. In the Decoction infuse all night
long Choice Senna an ounce and an half, Rhubarb two drams, Pulp of Cassia new
drawn half an ounce, Tamarinds an ounce, Liquoris, the Seeds of Annis and
Coriander of each a dram and an half: The next morning strain it through a
linen Cloth, and to eight ounces of the Decoction ad White Sugar six ounces;
Boil it a little; and when you have don so, ad to it Manna dissolved in Syrup
of Roses, of each two ounces; Syrup of Violets one ounce: Make of them a
Lenitive Syrup. Let the diseased Child take an ounce either in Succory Water,
or Water of Pellitory of the wall, with a dram of the Juice of Lemmons.

Take of Lenitive Electuary one dram and an half, or two drams; Syrup of Roses
solutive two drams and an half; Cremor of Tartar ten grains; Posset-ale a
sufficient quantity* Mingle and administer them early in the morning.

Take of Aloes washed, or Aromatical Pills seven grains; Make two Pills with
Syrup af Roses solutive, put them into two Candid Cherries the skius being
pulled off, and let them be swallowed whole lest the taste be offensive, about
sleeping time in the evening. In the morning give to drink after them, one
ounce of Syrup of Roses solutive in Posset Ale. Or

Take of Syrup of Roses solutive six drams; Violets half an ounce; Juice of
Lemons one dram; Electuarium Passulatum one dram: Mingle them with Succory or
Pellitory Water, and give them in the morning fasting. Thus much of those
Medicines as clear the first passages.

CHAP. XXXI. Remedies Preparatory, and their Use.
THese Remedies partly relate to the preparation of the Humors, partly to the
ways through which they are to be expelled, and partly to the passages
themselves, wherein they are contained. Now it must be known, That the Evacuation
which is perfected by Vomits, does least of any pre-requir any preparation; but
that which is accomplished by Catharticks or Medicines Purging, does most of all
exact it.

First, The Humors in general to be prepared are either Phlegmatic, namly cold,
which must be qualified and tempered with hot, thick, and must be attenuated;
viscous, and must be cut and opened; or Choleric, namly sharp, bitter,
burning, corrosive, which are to be mitigated with lenifying and aswaging
Medicines; or Melancholy, namly earthy, feculent, tartarous, which by a
benignity of application must be rendered fluxible; or lastly serous and
waterish, which must be disposed and as it were manuducted either to the
Urinary passages, as by pissing, or to the Belly as by siege, or to the parts
near the Skin that they may with the more facility evaporate by Sweating.

Secondly, The ways, through which the Evacuation must be effected, ought also
to be made fit and prepared, and not only the common, but also the special, by
which the peccant matter in particular is conveyed to those common Channels.
For there is one preparation of the Vessels of the Kidneys (which is chiefly
expedited by Medicines of a slippery and loosning faculty) another of the
Vessels of the Liver, which is don by opening, clensing, and somewhat
astringent Medicaments: A third of the Vessels of the Lungs, which is most
succesfully wrought by Lenient and Maturant Remedies, sometimes perhaps
according to the nature of the matter Medicines incident or atenuant being
administered, or on the contrary, Administrations making thick, and such as have
a virtue to arrest and avert the flux.

Thirdly, Those parts wherein the vicious humors principally flow or are
lodged, require the admixture of Medicaments peculiarly apropriated unto them.
And as this or that part is more or less affected, sometimes choice must be made
of Cephalicals, sometimes Hepaticals, and sometimes Pectoral Preparations.

Moreover, (that we may comprehend together most if not all of the qualities of
Preparatory Remedies required in this Affect) we say, That these Remedies
prescribed by Art ought to be moderatly hot (unless there be a Fever present)
also attenuant, incident and opening; in like manner, that by a peculiar right
they must have respect to the Liver, the Lungs and the Head, which parts for
the most part are commonly in this Affect oppressed with a plenitude of humors:
Again, That there are some things specifically apropriated to this Affect* and
if such things are not in Readiness which are regestred in the number of things
preparatory, and dedicated to the Diseas, than at least other specificals ought
to be mingled with the Preparatory Medicines.

These things being premised, we judged it expedient to set down such Simple
and Compound Medicines as are usually sold in the Shops, and also some examples
of decompounded Preparatory Remedies. Yet we forbid the expectation of all
Simples, or perhaps of any one, that should comprehend all the qualities, which
even now we attributed to those exquisite and apropriate Remedies; for then
there would be no need of any Composition, and we shall reckon up such and so
many that a prudent Physician may select and contemper them among themselves,
which being discreetly intermingled they may be correspondent to all the fore
recited qualities.

The Simples and Compounds prepared in the Shops in readiness are these. All
the Capillary Herbs, especially Tricumanes, Rhue of the Wall. Spica Roots of
Os^^^ed royal; the Buds of the male Fernbrake newly sprung up, Polipodium of
the wall; Hartstongue, Liverword, Ce^^^ach, Agrimony, Doddar, Scabious, Betony*
the Leaves and Bark of Tamarisk, the Bark of the Root of the Caper tree; the
Roots of Succory, Endive, Grass, Sparagus, Myrobalans; Liquoris, Raisons,
Primes, Damsens; the Seeds of Annis, sweet Fennel* Coriander, Caraway, Dill;
Syrup of Maidenhair, and Bot^ny, Simple and Compound, Syrupus Bizantinus, Syrup
of Succery, Eupatory the five Roots, S^aechadis, and Horstongue.

Out of these according to present Emergencies diverse others may be
Decompounded. As take the little Buds or Gems of the Roots of the male
Fernbrake five in number; boil them in half a pound of Milk to three ounes; let
him drink the Decoction in a morning upon an empty Stomach. This is most
agreeable to young Children that are tied to Milk. Or,

Take of the Buds of male Fernbrake newly budded out of the Earth, one handful;
male Betony, Hartstongue, Liverwort, of each half an handful; Flowers of
Tamaris one pugil; Raisons one ounce and an half; One Chicken the Guts pulled
out, and with a sufficient quantity of Oatmeal, make your Broth according to
art. Let the Child take three or four ounces in the morning, and at four of the
Clock in the afternoon, adding (if you pleas) ten grains of the Cremor of
Tartar. Or

Take Maidenhair, Liverwort, Agrimony, Doddor, of each half a handful; the
Roots of male Fernbrake, Grass, Sparagus, of each half an ounce; Flowers of
Tamaris, one pugil; Raisons one ounce; White Tartar prepared one dram; Liquoris
half a dram; Mace one scruple: Boil them in two pints of Fountain water. To one
pound of the Decoction ad 3 ounces of white or Rhenish Wine; Syrup of
Hartstongue one ounce and an half: Mingle them and make your Decoction, whereof
let the Child take a draught every morning, and at four of the Clock in the
afternoon. This is most prevalent and effectual against pertinacious
obstructions in the Mesentery, Liver, etc. Or

Take of Coltsfoot, Maidenhair, Hartstongue, Liverwort, of each half an
handful; the Roots of sweet Chervil and Sparagus, of each half an ounce;
Spanish Liquoris two drams; Mace a scruple; Raisins of the Sun stoned, an
ounce; Jujubes by number six, Sebestens eight, two Figs cut in pieces: boil
them in a sufficient quantity of Barly-water, and to a pound of the Decoction,
ad Syrup of Maidenhair, an ounce and an half: Mingle them together; and this
is a very good Drink for such as are troubled with an obstruction in the Lungs.

Take of sweet Wort two pound; Liver-wort, Maidenhair, Hartstongue, Scabious,
Coltsfoot, Featherfew, of each an handful; blue Figs cut in pieces, Raisins of
the Sun, of each half a pound; Liquoris, Anniseeds, of each two drams: boil
them over a gentle fire nine hours, strain it, and keep it for your use. It Is
good for that the former was.

Take Salsaperilla cut and well beaten three ounces; the Roots of China,
Hartshorn shavings, Ivory, of each one ounce; the Leaves of male Betony,
Liverwort, Scabious, of each three handfuls; the Buds of the Root called Royal
Osmond, and Fernbrake, of each two ounces: Boil them in four gallons and a
pottle of new Ale four or five hours over a gentle fire: Then after some hours
respit strain it through an Hair-Sieve: afterward put in of the Juyces of
Scurvigrass and Brook-lime, of each half a pound; a sufficient quantity of Barm
or Yeast: Let it work according to the usual manner, put it into a little
vessel and drawn out for the ordinary drink. This is most conducible, where
there is any suspicion of the Scurvy or Venerious Pox, being complicated with
the Rachites.

CHAP. XXXII. Remedies Electively evacuant.
THe matter of the Diseas being prepared, and the passages opened to facilitate
the evacuation, the next thing is, To consider what remedies will electively
expel the peccant humors in particular. Now these Medicines do partly concern
the humors, and partly the parts wherein they are lodged; but in each of them a
du regard must be had to the Spirits.

The violent must be either totally prohibited, or else exhibited after a du
correction or a circumspect diminution of the dose; and for younger Children,
and such as are weak, they must be the less in quantity, and the more gentle in
quality; for great and lusty Children you may prepare stronger remedies and in
a larger dose (provided that they exceed not the strength of the Child. In both
causes it is safer to favor and go less then the strength will bear, than to
transcend it in the least degree: and in this affect it is altogether better to
proceed by an Epichrasis, then together and at once to attempt the full
evacuation of the peccant humors.

Moreover the predominant humors in the Body require proper and peculiar
remedies; as Choler, Medicines purging Choler: Phlegm, Medicines purging phlegm:
Melancholy Medicines purging Melancholy: and waterish humors such as purge
water.

Again, If the Liver be oppressed with humors more than the other parts, such
Catharticks must be chosen as peculiarly belong to the Liver. In like manner
the Lungs being vehemently infested, or the Brain, and the other parts, such
remedies must be chosen as are appropriated to those parts. But if there be not
a ready supply of purging Simples peculiarly dedicated to those parts, that
defect must be made good by a prudent commixture of such ingredients as are
familiar to those parts.

Lastly, You must endeavor (as much as possibly you can) to make choice of such
purgers as are directly opposite to the Essence of the Diseas. In this respect
we commend Rhubarb above al other simples. For it is a Medicament moderatly hot
and dry, very familiar to the inherent Spirits of all the parts, it gently
dispelleth the stupefaction of the parts, and strengthens the softness and
looseness of the parts, somewhat corrects the internal slipperiness, summons
the Pulls to the Arteries, and increases the heat of the outward parts, and
finally it cherishes the vigor and activity of the inner parts, and especially
of those which are subservient to nourishment. Ad in a word, That it exceeding
rarely (provided that you give it in a just dose) causes superpurgation, for
it is a Medicament safe for all ages, and every Complexion.

These things being premised, we shall propound some simple purgative Medicines,
and some examples of the Compound. For nothing hinders, but that many of the
prerecited lenitives, may be commodiously referred hither, though in a
different respect. For there they are considered as quickners of the lenitives
which of themselves are somewhat dull: But here rather as they qualify and
attemper the violence of the strong.

Simple and Compound purging Medicines which are sold in the shops.
Manna, Cassia fistula, Tamarinds, all the sorts of Myrobalans, Rhubarb, Aloes,
Sir. of Roses solut. sir. of Cichory with a double quantity of Rhubarb,
syrup*Augustanus, Scammony, Agarick, the seeds of bastard Saffron, Mechoacan,
Jalap, Turbith, sweet Mercury, syrup of Roses solutive with Agarick, Epythymum,
Polypody of the oak, Senna, Syrup Magistralis against Melancholy, sir. of
Apples of King Sapor, Diabalzemer, Electar lenitivum de prunis. solut. Electar
passidat Diacatholicon, Confectio Hamech, Benedicta Lexativa.

Some Examples of extemporary Compounds.
Take syrrup Augustan one ounce, syrrup of Roses solutive two drams. Succhory
water half an ounce to dissolv the syrrups, make a potion to be administered in
the morning upon an empty stomach.

Take the best Rhubarb beaten to powder eighteen grains syrrup of Succhory with
a double quantity of Rhubarb six drams, sir. ros. solutive two drams, water of
the leaves of Fernbrake six drams, mingle them for a potion, this agrees best
with Choleric Constitutions, and such whose Livers are distempered.

Take the leaves of Senna, Polypody of the Oak, Epithymum of each a dram,
Rhubarb one scruple, Crystal of Tartar, Fennel seeds of each a scrupel, make
an infusion in a sufficient quantity of fumitory water, to the strayned
infusion, ad syrrup Magistralis six drams, Cinnamon Water, seven drops; else
Langius his Antipeleptical Water half a scruple: mingle them for a potion
accomodated to Melancholy Constitutions.

Take the leaves of Senna two drams, the pulp of Tamarinds six drams, the seeds
of Aniss, Liquorice of each half a dram, cremor of Tartar half a scruple, make
an infusion in a sufficient quantity of fountain water for the space of a
night, with three ounces of the strained infusion make an emulsion according to
art with sweet Almonds blanched, half an ounce. The four greater cold seeds of
each two scruples, for two doses, adding to each dose syrrup of succhory with a
fourfold quantity of Rhubarb, and the best Manna of each three drams. This
qualifieth and evacuateth sharp and adust humors.

Take lenitive electuary three drams, Rhubarb a scruple, Cremor Tartar and
Anni-seeds of each half a scruple, the flower of Burrage and Rosemary of each
half a Pugil, Fumatory water as much as is sufficient: after you have infused
them, certain hours strain it through a thick Cloth. And to an ounce and half
of the infusion ad syrup of Apples of King Sapor, half an ounce: mix them
together for a potion.

Take Elder flowers a pugil, Rhubarb two scruples, Jalap, Mechoacan of each a
scruple, Cremor Tartar half a scruple, Nutmegs fifteen grains, first infuse
them, then boil them gently in the water of broom flowers, and Rhennish Wine,
of each so much as is sufficient, strain it. And to an ounce and an half of the
decoction ad syrup of Roses solutive half an ounce or six drams: mix them
together and make of them a potion which will be very agreeable for such Bodies
as are troubled with phlegmatic or dropsical humors, or a Cachexia.

Take of the leaves of senna a dram and an half, Rhubarb two scruples, Agrick
trochiscated one scruple, Tamarinds two drams, Anni-seeds, Cremor Tartar, of
each a scruple, Rosemary flowers a pugil, make an infusion in a sufficient
quantity of fountain water, and after a very gentle boiling to an ounce and an
half of the decoction, ad syrup of Roses solutive with Agrick, Magisterial
syrup against Melancholy, of each three drams mix them together for a potion to
cleanse the Body of mixed humors.

Take the leaves of senna one dram and an half, or two drams, Agarick trochisc.
half a dram, Fennel seeds half a dram, flowrs of Chamomel ten in number. Boil
them in a sufficient quantity of fountain water, and to ten drams or an ounce
and an half of the decoction, ad half an ounce or six drams of syrrup of Roses
solutive with Agarick, Manna three drams, mingle them for a Potton dedicated to
evacuate thick and Phlegmatic Humors.

Take sweet Mercury fifteen grains, conserv of violets one dram, powder of Gum
Dragon* one grain. Mingle them; and make them into a Bolus, with syrups of
violets to be given in the morning drinking after it an ounce of syrup of Roses
solutive, dissolving a draught of posset drink. This is most proper for such
Children as are troubled as well with the Rachites as the worms, and on the
contrary; also for such as have the French Pox, complicate with the Rachites:
also to such as are troubled with a Struma.

Take sweet Mercury twelve grains, Jalap eleven grains, Nutmegs half a grain,
the pulp of Raisins a dram. Mingle them, and with syrup of Violets make a Bolus
to be taken in the morning. Instead of Jalap you may make use of Diagrydium, to
three or four grains: This is proper for Children that are afflicted with
Strumatical Affects, and such as are suspected to have the French Pox, and such
as are difficultly purged, and are averse from Remedies of an ungrateful taste.

Take of sweet Mercury a dram, gummy Jallop half a scruple, white sugar
dissolved in Betony water three drams or half an ounce, make them into Lozenges
according to art of a dram or two scruples and an half weight of which let the
diseased take one at a time.

Take the best Rhubarb one dram and an half, Raisins of of the Sun, the stones
being picked out, one handful, a pint of ordinary Ale, infuse them for twelve
hours, strain it and give it to Children that are greedy of drink in the night
season.

Take Aloes succotrine seven grains, Rhubarb in powder eleven grains, with
syrup of Roses solutive, so much as is sufficient to make it into pibbles which
must be given in preserved Cherries, the stones being taken away, or else you
may guild them for the more easy swallowing.

CHAP. XXXIII. Specifical alterant Medicines.
THe causes of the Diseas being now prepared and in part evacuated, or at least
so subdued, that for the present they cannot retard the cure, you must proceed
to these Medicines specifically alterant, which as it were fly at the very throat
of the Diseas, and in regard whereof the premised Medicines both preparatory and
evacuant took place.

Now these specificals may be defined to be, Remedies diametrically contrary to
the Nature of the Diseas, and such as directly impugn it.

These are either Simple or Compound, the Simple which hitherto we have had
knowledge of, are these that follow: the root of Osmund the Royal, or rather the
spike of the root, the middle being thrown away, the root of the male
Fernbrake, or rather, the little buds before their peeping forth out of the
earth; the roots of Grass, Succhory, Asparagus, Madder, Eringo, all the Maiden
hairs, Ceterach, Hearts tongue, Liverwort, Betony, the flowers and leaves of dead
Nettles, Borage, sage Rosemary, Tamarisk, Southernwood, Pontik Wormwood, The
greater Sulendine, Saffron, Turmerick, the roots of Sarsaperilla, Salsaphras,
China, the three sorts of Sanders, the wood of Guiacum, and its Bark, flowr of
brimstone, steel prepared, Crocus Martis, salt of steel, wine steelified, syrup
of steel, white and Rhennish wine Sperma Ceti, Musk, Ambergreece, Castoreum,
Earthworms, the Livers of Frogs and young Ravens, Woodlice, washed in white Wine,
baked inan Oven, and beaten to powder, and such like things.

But if any demand, After what manner, or by what action these Medicaments do
especially overruled the Essence of this affect?

We answer, That perhaps it is not necessary, that we presently fly to occult
qualities, which for the most part is but the Sanctuary and refuge of
ignorance: but that the primary and secondary parts of the Essence of this
Diseas above described ought to be reduced to Memory: for by making a
comparison between those parts, and these Medicaments, we shall plainly discern
an obscure contrariety and repugnance between them. For this Diseas consists
in a cold and moist distemper inherent in the Spirits together with want and
astonishment of the Spirit and weakness of the parts afflicted: on the contrary
these remedies heat and dry, cherish the Natural Spirits, dissipate that
numbness which is in them and strengthen the parts.

Moreover, In regard that these remedies with their heat and dryness obtain
withal a manifest friability and thinness of parts, it comes to pass, that they
cut through all viscous matter, they attenuate all gross and thick humors, and
procure a certain equality of all the juyces that have their circulation in the
Sanguinary Mass, and an even distribution (consideration being had of the
distance from the fountain of heat) both of heat and Blood. Herupon the
external parts which before were lean enjoy a more liberal heat and
nourishment, and the Parenchimata of the Bowels which were irregularly
increased, are delivered from thick and viscous alimentary juyces, and thereupon
are somewhat lesned: by this means that Alogotrophy or irrational Nourishment of
the parts, from whence so great a series of organical faults resulteth, is
corrected. Finally, These remedies do also strengthen and cherish the sinewy
parts, and likewise the extreme weakness of the Bone of the Back.

You will say, That all the Simples above recited by us, do not fully perform
all these things. For the several kinds of Sanders, though they may by their
dryness, friability and thinness of parts strongly impugn this Diseas, yet by
their coldness they seem rather to come near to the parts of the Diseas; we say
therefore that Simples of this Nature ought not to be given alone, but being
commixt with some other, which may prevalently correct the noxious quality; in
like manner some Simples extremely hot, as Saffron, Castoreum, Flowr of
Brimstone, etc. are very repugnant to this Diseas, yet you must refrain the
administration of them unless they be duly attempered. Moreover Sarsaparilla,
Sassaphras, Osmund the royal, the kinds of Fernbrake, all the Maiden-hairs,
Hartstongue, Ceterach, and the like, their heat and dryness being conjoined
with a notable friability and thinness of the parts they contribute very much
to the equal distribution of the Blood, as also to subdue many other parts of
the Diseas. But they scarce lend a sufficient strength to the sinewy and
fibrous parts; wherefore they seem to crave an admixture of Cephalical Remedies.
Again, Lignum Vitae, by its heat, dryness and friability, and by its Balsamical
and Rosinish substance, does very much strengthen the Tone of the parts, and is
contrariant to some other parts of the Diseas; yet because it helps very little
the contemperation of the Juyces contained in the Sanguinary Mass, but on the
contrary is rather an hindrance thereunto, it ought not without great caution to
be prescribed, and that in a small quantity and well corrected. Lastly, Among
the Simples here recited, some are received to strengthen all the Spirits
rather than to subdue the Essence of the Diseas, as Sage, Musk, Ambergrees, and
the like* which come not into use but when they are mingled with other
effectual and more apropriate ingredients.

If any shall further demand, Which among all these propounded Simples are to
be valued as the most noble and effectual; we comprehend our Answer in these
Rules.

First, They are the most noble Medicines, which jointly make the strongest
opposition against most parts of the Essence of the Diseas.

Secondly, Those Caeteris paribus, are to be esteemed the more noble, which
directly affront the Essence of the Diseas, especially if at the same time they
advance the equal distribution of the Blood and Vital Spirit, whereby so many
organical faults are corrected.

Thirdly, Such things as oppose the Diseas most eminently by an essential
contrariety, provided they be not as well too strong for Nature as the Diseas.

Fourthly, Those which are both repugnant to the Diseas, and yet withal,
grateful to Nature, in no wise offering any violence to her.

Fifthly, Those which are most grateful and pleasing to the sick Child, and such
as administered trouble not its Palate.

These things being premised we shall now subjoyn some examples of compound
Medicines.

Decoctions, and Physical Drinks.
Take the Spikes of the Roots of Osmund the royal, six in number; Paul's Betony,
Hartstongue, Ceterach, Liverwort, Maidenhair, of each one handful; Sage, and
Rosemary Flowers, of each half a handful: small Raisons three ounces; Spanish
Liquoris half an ounce; Mace two scruples; Boil them in six pound of Fountain
Water; take three pound of the Decoction and ad unto it three ounces of the
Syrup of Maidenhair, mingle them and make your Apozem. Let the Child take a
draught of it every morning, another at four a clock in the afternoon, and a
third in the night if he then call for Drink; yea if it pleas him, let him take
it for his ordinary Drink. This is most proper for those who are sadly
afflicted with the Rachites, complicated with a cough and an obstruction of the
Lungues.

Take the Leaves of Royal Osmond, Hartstongue, Liverwort, Ceterach, the Flowers
of Tamerisk, the Roots of the Male Fernbrake, of each a handful; Raisons two
ounces; white and red Sanders, Sassafras Wood, of each two drachms; Coriander
Seeds one dram; Mace one scruple; Sage Leaves, half a handful; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of Fountain Water according to art, to three pound; Let the
Decoction be sweetened with Sugar or Honey, for ordinary Drink. This is best for
such whose Liver is most afflicted.

Take Sasaperilla cut and beaten, three ounces; the Roots of China cut into
little pieces, two ounces: Infuse and boil them according to art, in seven
pound of fountain water, to four and a half: then ad two drams of Sassafras
roots, the roots of Osmond royal, the leaves of Hartstongue, Ceterach,
Maidenhair, Archangel, of each half an handful; Spanish Liquoris two drams;
Mace a dram: boil them to three pound. To the Decoction ad Honey or Sugar three
ounces. Mingle them for ordinary drink. This is most conducible where there is
suspicion of the French Pox, as also in Strumatical Affects.

Take the Flowers of Tamaris one handful; the male Paul's Betony half an
handful: bruis them gently, and infuse them in two pound of common Beer cold,
in a stone or glass Flaggon, well stopped with Cork for the ordinary drink.

Take Sarsaperilla eight ounces; China two ounces* Sassafras half an ounce;
Ivory an ounce; Osmond royal, Palus Betony, Hartstongue, Ceterach, Maidenhair,
Liverwort, tops of dead Nettles, of each two handfuls: cut them and bruis
according to art, and boil them in four gallons of new Ale till one be
consumed; then when you have taken it from the fire, ad another gallon of the
same Ale to it, and when you have added it, stir it up and down with a stick,
and when you have done so, strain it, and when you have strained it, put the
Ingredients in a Boulting-bag, and put a piece of Iron into them, and ad a bit
of Leaven to it, and hang it into the Ale with a string, and let the Child
drink it for its ordinary Drink; so soon as it has drunk half of it, draw out
the rest, and stop it close in stone Bottles for the Child's use.

Take Wine of S^^ll half an ounce; Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb two drams: let
the sick drink of it every morning for five or seven days or longer, unless
some looseness of the Bowels or debility of the Stomach do advise a prohibition:
in which case, instead of Syrup of Succory with Rhubarb, take Syrup of dried
Roses.

Broaths and Panadaes.
Take Hartstongue and Cetrach, Liverwort, Maidenhair, Sage, of each half an
handful; the Bark of Tamaris, red Sanders, of each two drams: Put them into the
Belly of a Cock-Chicken or Hen, or an old Cock. Sew up the Belly, and boil it
with two ounces of Malaga Raisins in a sufficient quantity of Fountain water,
adding also a sufficient quantity of pure Oatmeal flower: Make your Broth, and
let it be soundly boiled.

Take the roots of China cut into small bits, two ounces; white and medulous
Sarsaperilla sliced and well beaten, three ounces* Infuse them for a night in
ten pound of fountain water: In the morning after a gentle bubling, strain it,
and to the Decoction ad Hartstongue and Paul's Betony, of each an handful; Mace
half a dram; Currance an ounce; and with Mutton, Veal, or a Capon, adding
Oatmeal: make your Broth according to art.

But if thinner Broths be more desired, you may boil a crust of Bread instead
of the Oatmeal; and if you would have it thicker, you may mingle with it the
yolks of Eggs and grated Bread: Moreover, to help a weak concoction, you may
sometimes ad a few spoonfuls of Wine.

Panadaes also may be made of the same Broth strained, and boiled again with
grated Bread, adding at length a little Butter and Sugar. The same likewise may
be made of the Decoctions even now prescribed, unless peradventure they contain
some bitter and unpleasing mixture. Morrover, the Panadaes and ordinary Broths
may be altered with these ensuing Pouders, and by consequence apropriated to
the cure of this Affect; if the Child desire Milk most, let them be made in
Milk; if the Child desire it thick, you may make it thick either with Flower,
or Oatmeal; and if you mix a little Saffron with it, it will be the better. But
if any thing in the Pouders do nausiate and offend the taste, let them be
omitted, and substitute some other things that may be more acceptable to the
Palate.

Pouders and Electuaries.
Take the Roots, but rather the Buds of the male Fernbrake scarce sprung out of
the Earth, and dried in a shady place; the spike of Royal Osmond, of each two
drams; Mace, Anniseeds, of each half a scruple; Saffron half a grain: make a
Powder. The dose from half a scruple to a scruple, in Milk, or Posset drink,
some Decoction, Broth or Panadaes.

Take the medulous part of the Root of Sarsaperilla two drams; the Roots of
China one dram; the Root of Sassafras one scruple; the seeds of Caraway and
Coriander of each half a scruple; the Roots of the male Fernbrake, Osmond
royal, of each two scruples: Mingle them and make a Powder to be used as the
former.

Take Wood-lice, or as some Countries call them, Sows washed, first in water,
and then in White Wind, afterward calcined in a Crucible; Bread dried as much
as you pleas: make them into a Powder. The dose is from half a scruple to a
scruple, either in Broth, or any thing else: In the same manner you may if you
pleas prepare the Livers either of Frogs or young Ravens: We gave you the manner
before.

Take of Flower of Brimstone two drams; Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diatrion santalon,
of each half a scruple; Saffron half a grain; refined Sugar three ounces: All
of them being made into very fine Powder, make them into a Past with a
sufficient quantity of Rose water: Dry them, and when you pleas you may beat
them into Powder, and give a dram of them at a time.

Take Conserv of Red Roses one ounce and an half; Conserv of the flowers of
Borage, Archangel, Sage, Rosemary, of each half an ounce; Steel prepared one
dram; Cinnamon, Spanish Liquoris, of each half a dram: Saffron half a scruple;
Red Sanders a scruple: beat such things (as are reducible) to powder; make an
Electuary according to art, with syrup of Succory with Rhubarb a sufficient
quantity. Let the Sick take half a dram, two scruples or a dram every morning,
either by it self, or in a spoonful of Posset-Ale, or some appropriated Syrup,
or else in Wine.

Take Conserv of Archangel flowers one ounce; the flowers of Sage,
Clove-Gilliflowers, Rosemary-flowers, Myrobalans candied in India, Citron Pills
candied, of each half an ounce; red Sanders, Cinnamon, Spanish Liquoris, of
each half a dram; Salt of Steel, or else Saffron, half a scruple; with a
sufficient quantity of syrup of Wormwood, make your Electuary. The dose and
manner of using it is the same with the former.

CHAP. XXXIV. Remedies that correct the Symptoms.
SOme Symptoms supervening upon this Affect, do sometimes anticipate the
legitamat Method of Cure, and require a particular manner of proceeding. Of
this sort are the flux of the Belly, the Lask, wherewith somewhat of a Lientery
is frequently joined; profuse Sweats, laborious and painful breeding Teeth, and
the Toothach.

The flux of the Belly does very much follow this Affect; which if it persevere
for any long time, it is either very violent, and easily waters the Spirits,
consumes the solid parts, manifestly puts on the nature of a cause, and as a
cause indicates its own correction. A Bloody Flux rarely happens with this
Diseas. But a Lask with exulcerations in the Guts, or complicated with a
Lientery is very useful. For in respect of the debility to the parts
subservient to digestion, a Lask, or a Lyentery may easily supervene, but not a
Bloudy-flux. Yet there is a frequent concurrence of other causes; as of the
indigested nourishment vicious either in quantity or quality; some fever,
watchings, worms, painful breeding Teeth, etc. al which things do likewise
easily occasion a Lask, or Lyentery rather than a Bloudy-flux. As for the Cure,
it is partly perfected by Purgations, partly by astringent Remedies; partly by
such as open, and partly by such as strengthen the parts.

These Purgers are most proper which leave behind an evident binding after
evacuation; as Rhubarb, Senna, Tamarinds, Myrobalans, etc. out of which for the
most part we frame a Bolus or Potions, because they are most easily swallowed
under those forms. As,

Take Conserv of Red Roses half an ounce; Rhubarb in Powder twelve grains; with
a sufficient quantity of syrup of Coral make a Bolus to be given in the morning.

Take of the Pulp of Tamarinds one dram; Rhubarb in Powder seven grains; Sugar
of Roses half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Quinces, make your
Bolus. Instead of this Syrup you may use syrup of Coral, or syrup of Mint, or
syrup of Myrtles, or syrup of Pomgranats.

Take Senna half a dram; Rhubarb one scruple; Tamarinds a dram and an half;
Anniseeds bruised ten grains: Infuse them in a sufficient quantity of fountain
water: boil them very gently: and to an ounce and an half of the Decoction, ad
syrup of dried Roses half an ounce: mingle them together for a Potion.

Take Plantan or Succory water, or Saxifrage water, one ounce; Rhubarb in
powder ten grains; syrup. Augustan. syrup of dried Roses of each two drams:
Mingle them and make your Potion.

It must be observed, That a more full evacuation is sometimes requisite, namly,
when the flux has not been immoderat, or of long continuance, and in the mean
time the matter offending has bin copiously collected in the Body. In which
case, in lieu of the Syrup of dried Roses, you may take some drams of syrup of
Roses solutive, sir. Augustan. or of Succory with Rhubarb or Manna: But
commonly the safest way is, to augment the dose of Rhubarb, or else of Senna,
not omitting the syrup of dried Roses.

In the evening after the Purgation, you may administer ten grains of
Diascordium boiled in Wine, with Cloves, and a little Cinnamon, and mixed with
a third part of Erratick Poppy water, and some cordial Syrups, as Syrup of
Clove-Gilliflowers to strengthen the Spirits and to stay the Flux; or if the
Flux be stubborn, you may mingle two drams of Diacodium for a dose instead of
the Syrup aforesaid. Or

Take of Posset Drink made with White Wind, the Curd being taken off (aromatize
it with a little Saffron tied up in a rag, crushing it gently between your
Fingers) Confectio Alkermes one scruple; Pomgranat Pills in powder seven grains;
Diacodium two drams: mix them together to be taken when the Child is minded to
sleep. Or

Take Laudanum according to the London Dispensatory, half a grain; Magister* of
Coral twelve grains; Conserve of Clove-Gilliflowers, or Red Roses, one scruple,
with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Quinces, make a Bolus to be taken at
bedtime.

If there be obstructions, you may prescribe Crocus M^rtis, or Salt of Steel,
to be taken in the morning. As,

Take Conserve of Roses one ounce: the Roots of Succory preserved, Myrobalans
preserved in India, of each half an ounce: Salt of Steel half a scruple, or
Crocus Martis one scruple: Cinnamon, Liquoris, red Coral, of each eighteen
grains: Saffron a grain and a half: Syrup of Succory without Rhubarb a
sufficient quantity: make your Electuary according to art, whereof let the Child
take half a dram each morning. Red hot Iron may be quenched to the same purpose
in its ordinary drink.

If the Child be troubled with a violent flux, you may give it some binding
Conserves, imagine Conserve of Sloes, and mix it with such things as the Child
delights to eat, but in so doing be sure you pleas its Palate.

Sometimes a profuse and excessive sweating find a peculiar business for the
Physician in this affect: for it very much wastes the Spirits and retards the
cure of the diseas.

Yet caution must be used not to restrain it rashly, if perhaps there be a
Fever, or if any feverish fit, or immoderat heat has gone before: For in
these cases it may be upon a critical time, or at least it may bring more
advantage to the Body by the mitigation of the Fever, than damage by the loss
of the Spirits. For we know not whether any thing does more potently or indeed
more sweetly expel the feverish heat tha^ sweating.

In the interim when it flows inordinately and causlesly, it argues that the
Body is oppressed with obstructions, with crude juyces and unprofitable
superfluities, which whilst Nature striveth to master, and to subdu, by that
very labor, (the openness of the pores withal concurring) it is evaporated by
sweat, and indeed an unprofitable one, very laborious and such as wastes the
Spirits, which therefore as soon as possible must be corrected This Hippocrates
meant, where he advises, That that sweat which flows away without cause,
requires purgation. For what can more commodiously diminish and dissipate
these superfluities? Again, this motion is contrary to sweating, wherefore it
meriteth the pre-eminence among the remedies opposed to this Sympton, and seeing
that it clears the way for Medicines aperient, and such as strengthen the skin,
and move forward concoction, (which perfect the last part of the cure) it ought
in all right to be premised before them.

Purgative Medicines hitherto belonging, are those that are observed to be
friendly, and agreeable to Nature, and withal such as open obstructions, and
strengthen the Bowels: al which things whither any Simple can perform so well as
Rubarb, we very much doubt. Yet al those Simpl and Compound Medicaments
proposed above in the Chapter of Remedies Electively evacuant, may, according
to the Condition of the Patient, and the Prudence of the Physician, be
transplanted hither. Some very much commend Beer in this case medicated with
Rubarb.

Take Rubarb cut into any small pieces, two Drams; Raisins stoned and slit, one
ounce; small Bear, two pound; put them into a Glass or stone flagon stopped with
the best Cork; set it in a very cold place, and stir it very often, but before
you use it let it settle again, a whole day, then draw out the liquor for your
ordinary drink. When the flagon is empty fill it again with beer but put not in
a new quantity of Rhubarb.

Moreover, The most noble Aperients which both help concoction, and repress
unprofitable sweating, are French Wine, and Rhennish Wine. But if there be any
fear of their heat in this tender age, they may be tempered with roasted Apples,
Borage, or red Rose Water, adding a little Sugar and grated Nutmeg, let them be
also taken in a lesser quantity and only at meals.

They are likewise the most effectual Aperients, which do not only help
concoction, but also strengthen the Tone of all the parts, especially of the
Bowels. Among which we chiefly commend things made with steel, as wine made
with steel, and the Electuary before named, and the like. Now although steel
does indeed effectually perform those things which we have said; yet because it
does not in all respects answer to some other scopes of great moment in this
affect, but does more hurt sometimes in one particular, than it does good in
another; we thought it expedient to subjoyn these following Cautions concerning
the use thereof.

First, Seeing that Steel is an enemy to the Lungs, and does easily stir a cruel
flux of phlegmatic matter in tender Bodies, therefore you must totally abstain
from the use thereof, where there is any Cathar, Cough, obstruction of the
Lungs, and much more, if there be any Inflammation, Pleurisy, Blood-spitting,
or a proness of disposition to any of these affects.

Secondly, Because Steel contributes little or nothing to the operation of the
Blood: but on the contrary (however it may attenuat the tough and phlegmatic
part thereof) does rather expedit the separation thereof from the other mass of
Blood by reason of the tart quality that is predominent in it, it cannot be
admitted but with circumspection, especially that inequality of the Blood being
so importunat and urgent.

Thirdly, Seeing that the attenuating, cutting and opening faculty in Steel is
conjoined with an apparent and extreme dryness and binding, and therefore
perhaps does more compact those humors, than dissolve and scatter them; the use
thereof ought to be refrained, at least suspected in any considerable
Alogotrophy of the parts. For the fear is lest it should bind too close and
consolidate the short parts of the Bones and those that are too scantily
nourished; whereby afterward they may become less prompt and apt to grow in
length: but the parts sticking out (as also the unequal sides of the Bones)
which are liberally nourished it cannot dissolve, and then there may be a
jealousy that it will too much confirm them and make them stubborn; namly by
an extreme thickning and hardening of them.

Fourthly, In all acute Fevers the use of Steel is hurtful, because it
over-dryeth and binds the Parts, yea, for that very regard that it
restrains Sweating, and makes the humors more fierce and sharp.

These Cautions being rightly observed, we admit the use of Steel in this
Affect, but because Mountebanks and Quacks cannot distinguish between the use
and the abuse, we would not persuade any to make trial of this noble Medicine
without the advice and counsel of some prudent and knowing Physician, because if
it be not circumspectly administered, the danger is very great. Some other
Aperients of less note may serve this scope; as the Roots of Succhory or
Borrage, or Conserve of their Flowers; the Roots of Grass, Sparagus, Fernbrake,
Madder; the Leaves of Ceterach, Spleenwort, Maidenhair, etc. Among the
Compounds Species, Diatr. santal. Diarrhod. abbat. etc. Or

Take of the best Sugar three ounces, dissolve it in Rose Water and boil it a
little beyond the consistence of a Syrup, then ad Conserv of Barberies one
ounce; Diatri. Santal. and Diarrhod. Abbat. of each one dram; powder of
Saffron, one grain; mingle them and make your Electuary.

The painful breeding and the aching of the Teeth are the familiar Symptoms of
the Rachites; and because they breed Fevers, unquietness, watchings, and other
evils, they also deserve a peculiar mitigation; if the Tooth therefore as it is
working through the Gum puts the Child to very much pain, you must without
delay (unless it were done before) appoint some universal evacuation: as a
Vomit, which is thought to be a potent remedy against the Toothach. Now that
may be moved by the only tickling of the Throat, putting in a Feather, or the
Nurses Finger into the Child's mouth; or else with rubbing the Tooth that is
breaking forth with a Tobacco Leaf wrapped about the Nurses Finger, and a
little moistened with Beer; or lastly, by giving some vomiting draught above
described. But this remedy is forbidden reiteration in regard that it too much
may weaken the Stomach. The day following (the pain persisting or returning)
some Cathartick Potion or Bolus among those above rehearsed, or like unto those
must be administered. After this universal Evacuation you must descend to
Topical Remidies. Nurses are wont to rub the Gums with Corral polished for that
purpose. But the Physicians do rather commend the Root of Marsh Mallows, which
do mollify and loosen the Gums that they may obtain the more easy passage.
Others report it for a great secret to rub the aching Tooth with the Root of
the sharpest Sorrel. Others very much commend the rubbing of that Gum where the
Tooth is coming out with a Cocks Comb newley cut off, or with the hot Blood
distilling from that Wound. We have had no experience of those things which
they use to instill into the Ears; in like manner, neither the Plasters of
Mastich, Olibanum, or red Lead, which in those of full growth are observed to
stop the Rhewm. Others apply small Epispastick Plasters behind the Ears, which
perhaps compel back the matter that breeds the pain in the Teeth. But neither
do we interpose our judgment concerning these things. Only when Universals are
unavailable, we have recours to Hypnotical Remedies, which indeed by outward
application profit little, but being taken inwards they are very helpful,
especially being rightly prepared and duly corrected. Therefore when want of
rest and watchings beget molestation, thus we proceed.

Take Diascordium seven grains; Sir. de Meconio, one dram and an half, or two
drams; Posset Drink made of Milk and white Wine, with a little Saffron, one
ounce, or ten drams; mingle them and give it at Bedtime the next night
following after the Purgation.

Take Ladanum, according to the London Dispensatory, half a grain; the Cordial
Powder of the Claws of Crabs ten grains; Conserve of Clove-gilliflowers one
scruple; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Balm make a Bolus to be
swallowed in the evening at sleeping time. Thus much of such things as correct
the Symptoms.

CHAP. XXXV. External Remedies.
HAving finished the Disquisition of the matter and kinds of internal Remedies,
we shall now direct our Discourse to external Remedies. Which indeed we have
reserved for the last place, not because they must perpetually be last put in
execution, but because they are altogether of a different kind from the
internal: now Universals are to be administered immediately after Evacuants, or
at least after those that are electively Purgant, and withal with the
Specifical Alterants, unto which kind they belong, although indeed as they are
external, they differ from them. Now we desire that we may here be understood
by external Remedies to signify and intend every kind of Medicament which
cannot properly be referred to Chyrurgery, or those things that are inwardly
taken, provided that they have their use in the Cure of this Affect.

Therefore we divide it into two Kinds, namely, The manner of Exercise, and
things externally Applicable.

The Manner, or Kinds of Exercise.
All kinds of Exercise, unto which Children are accustomed, may be useful in
their time and season. But because Children who are molested with the Rachites
are somewhat avers from motion and by reason of their weakness of Spirit, and
unaccustomedness of Exercise do scarce after the beginning of the cure, or
indeed not at all endure violent motions; therefore they must begin perpetually
with gentle Exercises, and afterward proceed by degrees to stronger; in like
manner at first they must continue but a short time, but afterward a longer
space without any intermission.

We therefore distinguish Exercises into gentle, and vehement or Masculine. The
gentle we refer first to the manner of lying down. Secondly, To the agitation
of the Body in the Cradle. Thirdly, To the carrying them about in the Nurses
Arms. Fourthly, To sedentary pastimes.

First, Lying upon the Back among all the postures of the Body does chiefly
recede from Exercise, and is almost only allowable in the extreme weakness of
the Spirits, as in accute Fevers when the Spirits are spent, likewise in many
cases of the Chest and Hypochondriacal parts, as frequently in an inflammation
of the Liver, Spleen, Lungues, in a Pleurisy, in the growing of the Lungues
with the Pleura, and an Imposthume, etc.

The lying upon one side either right or left comes nearest to the Supine
Position, and participates very little of the Nature of Exercise. Wherefore it
is also allowable in any great weakness of the Spirits, at least in regard of
altering the posture of the Body, as also when a profound sleep is not
expected. Moreover, it is somewhat profitable to strong Bodies in the time of
the first or second sleep, after just internals still changing sides. But
afterward perhaps it is not so agreeable unto, nor beneficial for them,
especially when the Body is fully refreshed with sleep. For then that posture
is best which draws nearest to the Nature of Exercise.

The Simple Lateral Position contains somewhat more of Exercise, and is
inconvenient for weak Bodies and such as are not used to it in the time of
profound sleep: but otherwise it may be made familiar, if for a while they will
accustom themselves unto it. It is at all times good for strong Bodies, provided
that a due care be had to alter and vary it.

The lying on one side toward the Belly is laborious and troublesome, and not
to be continued long by strong and robustious Bodies that are not used to it.
But the molestation being overcome by custom, it is more easily tolerated: and
because it eases the pains in the Head, helps the Concoction of the Stomach,
mitigateth the pains of the Chollick, and loosneth a costive Body, it may be
sometimes useful when Nature is thoroughly satisfied with sleep, and in this
affect it may supply the place of Exercise. For it sometimes happens in this
Diseas, that Children for some time are not without disadvantage trusted to
their own Feet, yea many times they gain more by rest than walking up and down.
For walking rather confirms than cures the bended Joints; but lying down,
when the parts are well swathed, conduces not a little to their erection. Then
again, lying down helps very much to stretch and lengthen the short parts, as
may be perceived by the growth of the parts in length after a Diseas. Thirdly,
Lying down, in regard of the common Coverings of the whole Body, advances an
equal dispersion of the heat through all the parts. Lastly, lying down, if you
observe a right way of placing and making the Bed, may contribute very much to
correct the crookning of the Backbone and the whole Body, for when they lie
upon the gibbous and bunched Side, a little bag made for the same purpose may
be laid under the parts sticking out, and so made fit that the gibbous parts
may in a manner sustain the weight of the whole Body, and so they may be
compelled as it were to straightness. But when Children roll to the other side,
the bed should be so made, that if the little Pillow or Bay be taken away the
hollow part should scarce touch the bed unless he conform himself to a straight
line, that by his weight it may be depressed to a straightness.

Secondly, That kind of exercise which is performed by the rocking of the
Cradle somewhat emulates this lying down. The Cradles are sustained upon two
Arches, or two parts of a Circle: now the more they have of a Circle, the more
effectually they exercise the Infant. This motion in time of sleep must be
intermitted, or at least remitted; but whilst the Child waketh it must be
sometimes intended, and sometimes remitted. It is most profitable for weak
Infants that can scarce stand upon their Feet, or are otherwise hindered from
waking.

Thirdly, The bearing them about in the Nurses Arms is almost agreeable to the
same Children; and under the same conditions: in like manner the rejoicing of
the Child whilst the Nurs sings, either as it sits in her Lap, or is held up
in her Hands, as also the tossing of it up and down, and waving of it to and
fro, and if the Child be strong by holding it gently up by the Hands, if it be
weak, under the Arms, yet so that the Thighs and the whole Body may hang down.
Also the drawing of the Children backward and forward upon a Bed or a Table
between two Nurses, the one holding it by a Hand, the other by a Foot. The two
last motions seem to contribute somewhat to the erection of the crooked or
bended Backbone, especially if the Hand which is laid upon the depressed
Shoulder, and the Foot which is belonging to the elevated Hip be drawn with
more strength and vehemence than the other hand or foot. To the same end also
tends the lifting up of the Child, taking him by his Feet only, so that the
trunk of his Body and his Head may for a time hang down in an inverted posture;
although indeed this action may also seem in some manner to relate unto the
growing to of the Liver, if any such at that time be: as also that convolution
of the Body, whereby the Head being lowermost the Feet are lifted up; and then
again the Head being lifted up the whole Body is inverted. Hitherto also may be
referred that rouling of the Child, which some use, upon a Bed or Table, the
Body being laterally declined: which we more approve if it be not rouled quite
round about, but only backwards and forwards, laying a little hard Cushion
underneath, whereon the gibbous part may rest, and sustain the weight of the
Body. This exercise being rightly practiced does help much to straighten the
Body.

Fourthly, Sedentery Games and pastimes are the least profitable among all
exercises for Children that have the Rachites, and indeed they are only
allowable to still and quiet them. But the more beneficial will be to tempt them
to a frequent use of their Feet by playing some little Ball or Cat before them
that they may be often kicking them. But if the Body of the Child be crooked,
such sports must be invented as may allure him to move his Body to the contrary
side. When therefore one Shoulder is higher than another hold up some Gewgaw or
Rattle before the Child that he may stretch out the Hand belonging to the
lowest Shoulder to reach after the offered object. But a thousand such like
inventions may be found out, and we leave them to the Nurses industry.

The Masculine Exercises of greater note we reduce to these three Titles.

1 To Going. 2 To an Artificial hanging of the Body. 3 To Friction, rubbing,
and contrectation of the Hypocondries and the Abdomen.

First, Ostentation or waking may be numbered amongst the more noble Exercises.
For Children that are big and strong, and used to run up and down every day, do
by walking and stirring about, the more easily rid away this Diseas. But this
kind of Exercise must be refused unto them whose Joints are not knit and
confirmed, and whose Ankles, Knees and Back are so weak that they cannot
sustain the Body. For when Children by the negligence of their Nurses are too
soon committed to their Feet, it easily coms to pass, that they suffer those
Joints to be bended either inwards or outward, backwards or forwards, and
consequently they are the occasion of that deformity which befalls the Bodies
of most men and women. Moreover, those Children which have already contracted
such a bending in their joints, either by the natural weakness and looseness of
the Ligaments, or by the bad usage or indiligence of their Nurses, must be
trusted to exercise their Legs, till some splents or other instruments be
provided, which may be able to erect the bended Joints and to keep them in an
erected posture. The driving of Children up and down in their Coaches or
Chariots is much to the same purpose, provided that they be so contrived that
there be no danger of stumbling or overthrowing.

Secondly, The artificial suspension of the Body is performed by the help of an
Instrument cunningly made with swathing Bands, first crossing the Breast and
coming under the Armpits, then about the Head and under the Chin, and then
receiving the hands by two handles, so that it is a pleasure to see the Child
hanging pendulous in the Air, and moved to and fro by the Spectators. This kind
of Exercise is thought to be many ways conducible in this Affect, for it
helps to restore the crooked Bones, to erect the bended Joints, and to
lengthen the short Stature of the Body. Moreover, it exciteth the vital Heat,
and withal allureth a plentiful distribution of the Nourishment to the external
and first affected parts: and in the mean time it is rather a pleasure than a
trouble to the Child. Some that the parts may the more be stretched, hang
Leaden Shoos upon the Feet, and fasten weights to the Body, that the parts may
the more easily be extended to an equal length. But this exercise is only
proper for those that are strong.

Thirdly, Friction or rubbing may in some manner be likewise referred to
Masculine Exercises: nor indeed in respect of any active motion in the Child
requisite to the administration thereof (for it is performed by an action of the
Nurs rather than of the Child) but in respect of a like force and efficacy
which it has in the curing of this Affect. Now Friction seems to be twofold,
as partly belonging to the kind of Exercise, and partly to those things which
are outwardly to be applied, for which cause we have reserved it unto this
place, that it might be the last in the number of the Exercises, and
immediately precede the external applications. This must be done (at least in
the Winter time) by a warm fire, the Child being in all respects well fortified
from the injuries of the weather, and the violences of the cold Air. Some
Nurses administer this Friction with a hot hand, others with Linen Clothes
dried and heated; others with woolen Clothes; and others again with a little
Brush, and indeed some do most commend the Brush, and prefer it before the
other ways, but because there seems to be so little difference in all the
ways, we approve them all, and leave the choice to the Nurses wisdom. But let
them begin this Friction at the Back Bone, the Child being laid upon his Belly,
and let them stir their Hands now upwards, now downwards, now on each side,
then to the Thighs, Hips, Legs, Ankles, the Soals of the Feet, and all the
parts of the Body, those excepted where there is a sticking out of the Bones,
and there let them rub the hollow part of them. This action must not be
continued beyond a moderate ruddiness raised in the parts, lest the Natural
heat should be scattred, rather than cherished. This kind of exercise is most
agreeable to weak Children; and such as are scarce able to stand or go. For it
supplieth the defect of running up and down, exciteth the Natural heat,
summoneth the Vital, and attracteth the Nourishment to the affected parts. Yet
we grant that Friction does not so powerfully summon the heat and nourishment
to the Flesh of the Muscles, although perhaps it does more to the Skin, as
exercise does properly so called, and consequently that it must yield in
dignity and nature to true exercises. To Friction also belongs that
contrectation of the Belly, or of the Abdomen and the Hypochondries, sometimes
lifting up the Bowels, sometimes depressing them, sometimes removing them toward
the right, sometimes toward the left hand, and sometimes thrusting in the tops
of the Fingers under the Bastard Ribs. And Physicians hope, and not without
reason, that by this action they may deliver the Liver from any preternatural
growing with the Peritoneum, if any such should chance to be. And here we note
by the way that such growing of that Bowel may easily happen in this affect by
reason of the greatness of the Liver and the stretching of the Hypochondriacal
parts, whereupon the Peritoneum and the Membrane of the Liver are are most
nearly and strictly conjoined, and being conjoined may remain long in the same
Position, and so by the help of time they may easily grow together. This
growing together in as much as it depends (as we have said) upon the
stretching of the Hypochondries, and the bigness of the Liver, it may not
incongruously be referred to the secondary Essence of this Diseas, namely, to
the organical parts viciated, among which it deserves to be reckoned, although
above we chanced to omit it in its proper place, and therefore we thought good
to mention it here. Thus much of Exercises, now follow the External
Applications.

CHAP. XXXVI. Things to be Externally Applied.
THese remedies (as we have said) do not only prerequire Friction, but for the
most part they are administered with a gentle Friction.

Now they are either General, or Universal, respecting all parts alike, or
Particular, and dedicated to certain Regions of the Body. The matter of the
Universals is almost the same with that which we have propounded above in the
Chapterof Specifical Alterant Remedies: but the matter of the particulars must
be distinguished according to the variety of the Regions of the Body unto which
they are applied. The forms of either kind seem to be common, and they are five
in number, Liquors, Oils, Liniments, Ointments, Playsters: although Plasters
are dedicated rather to certain parts, and never are at once applied to the
whole Body.

Liquors that have been commended by long experience in this Affect are almost
all kinds of Wine; but especially Muskadine. But some do prefer the Pruisian
Beer, which indeed may help much to strengthen and consolidate the Parts, but
very little or nothing at all to effect the equation of the Blood, or an equal
distribution of it. The same judgment is also to be made of Aligant, as also of
red Wine. Some instead of Wine use ordinary Aqua vitae, which is believed to be
nothing inferior to Wine, Decoctions also may be prepared for the same use. As,

Take the Roots of Royal Osmond, the Leaves of Sage, the Flowers of Marigolds,
the Leaves of Bay Tree, Paul's Betony, Hartstongue, of each half an handful;
Rosemary, red Roses dried, of each one pugil; boil them in Fountain Water, and
ordinary Aqua vitae, of each a pound, to the consumption of the third part;
strain it and keep for your use. Or

Take the roots of the male Fernbrake one ounce, the leaves of royal Osmond,
Clary, Bay tree, Sage, Paul's Betony, of each half a handful, infuse them in
some Wine, and keep the strained liquor for your use.

But these Liquors are seldom or never administered alone, but must be mixed with
equal parts of Oils, Liniments, or Ointments; and indeed they must be used
before a warm fire, and rubbed on with a hot hand til they be dry.

Compound Oils such as are approved in this Affect are very few, and those
ineffectual: but there are many Simple Oils, as Oil of Earthworms, Chamamile,
Marygold flowers, Paul's Betony, Neats-foot Oil, unto which you may also ad Oil
of Foxes, Oil of Whelps, Oil of Swallows, provided that these last be prepared
Simply by themselves without any commixture of extreme hot ingredients.

Oil of Exeter, although some Practitioners use it, and though it be a little
hotter then is fit to be used alone to so tender an age as is troubled with
this Diseas, and so are other things which are vulgarly used, as Oil of
Castoreum, or Jacobi de Manliis, and Ung. Antiparalyticis, and other Ointments,
as, de Nervino, Martiato, Aregon, and the like. And the reason is, because such
a numness afflicts not these as it does such as are Paralitical, nor the same
Defect of Vital Spirits, nor the same unequal distribution of nourishment. But
because this is a new Diseas, if any desire Oils, Ointments, or Liniments
proper to the Evil, let him make use of a right Method, an able Physician, a
specifical way either of Oils or Ointments as we shall show you by these
examples:

Take the leaves of red Sage, Betony, Pimpernel, Marygold flowrs, of each two
handfuls: the roots of royal Osmund six ounces, May Butter three pound, white
Wine half a pound: cut the Herbs, bruise the Roots, and boil them according to
art til the Wine be consumed: Afterward strain them being yet hot, and put to
them oil of Nutmegs drawn by expression one ounce and an half, mingl them
diligently, and after settling, casting away the dregs, make your Ointment,
which you may reserve in a glass Vessel for your use. Or,

Take the leaves of Brooklime, Chamomile, Watercresses, garden Scurvygrass,
Paul's Betony, Motherwort, Maidenhair, Hartstongue, Ceterach, Bayleavs, the tops
of Mint, red Sage, Rosemary, Ivy-berries, of each half a handful: the Roots of
royal Osmund four ounces, Muscadale half a pound, May Butuer three pound: cut
the Leaves, bruis the Berries, and boil them all to the consumption of the
Wine, strain it whilst it is hot, and separating the pure substance from the
setlings, make an Ointment according to art. Or,

Take the leaves of red Sage, Paul's Betony, Hartstongue, stinking Gladon, of
each two handfuls: the roots of royal Osmond six ounces: the tops of Lavender,
Rosemary, Bay-leavs, of each a handful: common Aquae vilae, one pound: Oil of
Neats-feet, and Foxes, of each half a pound: Deers-suet, or the suet of an Ox,
Oil of Worms, of each one pound, boil them to the consumption of the Aquae
vitae: strain out the Ointment whilst it is hot, and making a separation of the
dregs, keep it for your use.

Fourthly, Take the green leaves of royal Osmond, six handfuls: Pimpernels,
Morigold-flowrs, the leaves of red Sage, Clary, Mother-wort, Brook-lime,
Watercresses, of each a handful: the leaves of Rosemary, Bay, of each half a
handful: chop them together very small, and beat them diligently in a Marble or
Wooden Mortar, with a wooden Pestle, with six pound of unsalted Butter, and so
let them stand fourteen days, then melt them gently in a Bath, and as soon as
they begin to be hot, strain them, and then put in a new quantity of Herbs as
before: at length strain and purify your Ointment, and keep it for occasions.

To these general external Remedies some particular ones relating to some certain
parts of the Body may be sub-joyned: as if the region of the Abdomen,
especially the Hypocondria, be stretched, hard and swelled, and this stretching
hardness, and swelling would not yield to a Purgation though rightly
administered, then you must proceed to Local Remedies: As,

Take Oil of Capers, Wormwood, Elder, of each one ounce: of the general
Ointment first described, one ounce and an half: mingle them and make a
Liniment.

Or,

Take Ointment of the opening juyces Foesius three ounces, the first general
Ointment two ounces, mix them together and make them one Ointment: also Oil of
Saxifrage made of a manifold infusion, and boiling of the bruised Herb in
common Oil is much to be commended to be mixed with it.

In the time of using it, this and the like Liniments or Unguents may be
mingled for penetration sake with some appropriat liquor: As,

Take the flowers of Elder, the flowers of red Sage, Bay Berries bruised, white
Sanders slightly beaten to powder, of each two drams, white Wine two pound,
steep them for three days in a cold place in a glass vessel accuratly stopped
with Cork, and shake it twice a day: when you use it, strain as much as will
serve your present occasion, then stop your vessel again. Or, if you desire a
stronger,

Take the roots of white Bryony well dried and sliced, Bay Berries, Goos-dung,
of each two drams: Cumminseeds one dram: the leaves of red Sage, the flowrs of
Elder, of each one pugil; boil them in one pound and a half of Rhenish-wine to
a pound: keep the Decoction in a cold place diligently stopped.

These and the like Liquors mingled with the Ointment, and heated at the fire,
must be rubbed upon the Abdomen, and especially the Hypochondries, even to
dryness. Let the Nurse also having well warmed her hands, handle those parts
gently, sometimes pressing the Bowels upwards, sometimes downwards, sometimes to
the right hand, and sometimes to the left, according to our former Directions.

The most galent thing of all is the Balsom of Tolu mixed with any Ointment or
Plaster, and so applied to the Region of the Back either in form of an
Ointment or Plaster.

Plasters also seem to contribute something. As Take three ounces of Ceratum
santalinum; Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Rhennish Wine, or in some other
medicated wine above described, purified and boiled again to a thickness, one
ounce: make your Plaster according to art. Spread part of this upon Leather
and lay it upon the right Hypochondry, or else the left, if the hardness be
there most sensible, which indeed is very seldom. Or

Take the Juyces of Brooklime, Watercresses, Garden-Scurvygrass, Wormwood, the
bark of Elder, the roots of the male Fernbrake, of each one ounce: Let the
Juyces be purified with a gentle heat, and being extracted reduce them to a
thick body, then ad one dram and an half of Mace, and two drams of yellow
Sanders in powder.

Take of this Mixture one ounce and an half: Gum Ammoniac. dissolved in Wine
and boiled to a body four ounces. Mingle them bot, and stir them continually
till they begin to wax cool and hard, and make a Plaster to be applied as the
former.

Moreover, when the Lungs are il affected many times a peculiar pectoral
Plaster is very useful. As

Take Oil of Violets, white Lillies, and the Ointment of Orange flowers, of
each one ounce: Mingle them and make a Liniment to be rubbed with a hot hand
upon the Breast, laying a Lawn Paper over it lined with Wool or linen cloth. To
this Liniment you may ad a small quantity of Natural Balsom. Or

Take two ounces Unguent. Pectorale; an ounce and an half of simple Ointment of
Liquoris: one ounce of Oil of Violets. Mingle them and make a Liniment to be
used after the same manner.

The Ointment of Liquoris is thus made.

Take new and Juycy Liquoris four ounces: new unsalted Butter washed in Rose
water one pound: slice the Liquoris and beat it well with the Butter in a stone
Mortar, afterward fry them, then strain and squeeze them, and repeat the same
labor thrice with a new quantity of Liquoris.

Again, Some Plasters may be prepared proper against the weakness of the Back,
which very frequently happens in this Affect. In the Shops you may have the
Plaster of Betony, and Diachalcitheos, unto which nevertheless when you use
them, you must ad Mastich and Olibanum in powder of each half a dram: the
Plaster also which is called Flos Unguentum may hither be referred, provided
that you omit the Camphire, in like manner also Emplastrum Nervinum. Or

Take two ounces of the first general Ointment; five of the Herbs that are
contained in that Composition, cut and chopped very small; Yellow Wax four
ounces; the purest Rosin eight ounces: the Ointment, Rosin, and Wax, being
melted ad the Herbs and according to art make a Plaistrr. Or

Take fifteen ounces of the third general Ointment; Litharge of Gold beaten
small and sifted nine ounces; boil them together continually stirring them to
the consistence of a Plaster; then ad Wax, Burgundy Pitch, of each three
ounces; Oil of Nutmegs by* expression three drams; Mastich, Olibanum, Mirrh, of
each one dram and an half; Costorium half a dram; white Vitriol in powder half
an ounce; make your Plaster according to art.

The Practioners in Physic differ in the Figure, and about the Application of
these Plasters. Some choose a longish and narrow Figure, and apply it according
to the length of the Backbone. Others appprove a broadish and almost
triangular Figure, such as you see here, and they extend it from the Loins,
downward upon the Os sacrum, even to the utmost end thereof. But when the lower
parts of the Backbone, as also the Knees and Legs, namely those parts which
borrow their Nerves from the lower part of the Spine, are weaker than the
Superior, we do not judge this latter to be a convenient form; but when the
upper parts of the Backbone seem to be the weaker, we suppose the former
longish form to be the more agreeable.

In like manner some commend a Liniment for the weakness of the Backbone which
consists of Gelly of Hartshorn, made with such things as strengthen the
Sinews, adding the Flowers of Sage, and the Roots of our Ladies Seal. In the
time of anointing mingle therewith a little Oil of Nutmegs by expression, or Oil
of Worms, or Man's Grass. And thus much of external Remedies.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THE Antiquity and first Origin of this Diseas, the Name of it, and
the Derivation of the Name. Page 1 CHAP. II. Anotomical Observations collected
from the Dissection and Inspection of Bodies subdued and killed by this Diseas.
p. 8 CHAP. III. Certain Suppositions are proposed for the easier finding out
the Essence of the Diseas. First of the Essence of Health. Secondly, of the
Essence of a Diseas. Thirdly, of a threefold Division of Health and Diseases.
The Explication of the third Division, and the Use of the same. The Description
of a Natural Constitution, and the Exaltation of it. The Fourth Supposition of
the Combination of three Constitutions in the same parts. p. 17 CHAP. IV. That
the Essence of this Diseas consists not in the Animal or Vital, but in the
Natural Constitution; not as Organical, but as Similar: Three Limitations are
propounded. p. 26 CHAP. V. The proposed Opinion is examined by Parts. First,
That this Diseas is a cold Distemper. An Objection, and the Answer thereunto;
That it is moist: that it consists in the penury or paucity of the Spirits.
An Objection, with the Answer. Finally, That this Diseas consists in the
stupefaction of the Spirits. p. 36 CHAP. VI. Of the Part first affected in this
Diseas. p. 45 CHAP. VII. Of the secondary Essence of this Diseas. p. 57 CHAP.
VIII. The secondary Essence of this Diseas in the Vital Constitution. p. 72
CHAP. IX. The viciated Generation of the Vital spirits in this Affect, and
whether that fault be a part of the secondary Essence? p. 75 CHAP. X. The
viciated Distribution of the Vital Spirits in this Affect, and whether it be a
part of the secondary Essence thereof? p. 80 CHAP. XI. The Inequality of the
Distribution of the Blood in this Affect? p. 94 CHAP. XII. The faults of the
Vital Participativ Constitution in this Affect. p. 99 CHAP. XIII. The Organical
faults of the Natural Constitution in this Affect. p. 108 CHAP. XIV. The
secondary Essence of this Diseas in the Animal Constitution. p. 144 CHAP. XV.
The Causes of the Rachites. And first those things which concern the Parents.
p. 151 CHAP. XVI. The Causes of this Diseas incident to Children after their
birth. p. 163 CHAP. XVII. Precedent Diseases which may be the Cause of this
Diseas. p. 180 CHAP. XVIII. The former Question. p. 187 CHAP. XIX. The latter
Question. Why this Diseas happens more frequently in England, than in other
Countries? And whether it be Natural to Englishmen? p. 202 CHAP. XX. The
Differences of the Diseas, called the Rachites. p. 215 CHAP. XXI. The Signs of
the Rachites, and first the Diagnostical Signs. p. 228 CHAP. XXII. The Signs of
the Differences of the Rachites, or the Diacritical Signs thereof. p. 241 CHAP.
XXIII. The Prognostical Signs in the Diseas of the Rachites. p. 251 CHAP. XXIV.
The Method to Practice and Indications in general. p. 257 CHAP. XXV.
Indications Curative. p. 279 CHAP. XXVI. Indications Preservative. p. 282 CHAP.
XXVII. Indications Conservative, or Vital. p. 284 CHAP. XXVIII. The Use and
right Administrations of the Indications aforesaid. p 302 CHAP. XXIX. The
Meddical matter answering to the Indications proposed, and first the
Chyrurgical. p. 310 CHAP. XXX. Of the Pharmacental matter, and first of such
things as cleanse the first Passages. p. 322 CHAP. XXXI. Remedies Preparatory,
and their Use. p. 330 CHAP. XXXII. Remedies Electively Evacuant. p. 335 CHAP.
XXXIII. Specifical Alterent Medicines. p. 340 CHAP. XXXIV. Remedies that
correct the Symptoms. p. 349 CHAP. XXXV. External Remedies. p. 357 CHAP. XXXVI.
Things to be Externally Applied. p. 366
FINIS.

