THE GLORY OF THIS KINGDOM: OR A DISCOVRSE BY WAY OF CONFERENCE AND ARGUMENTS,
OF THE HAPPINESS AND SUCCESS OF FORMER PARLIAMENTS.

WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE PROCEEDINGS OF THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for R. R. 1643.

THE GLORY OF THIS KINGDOM.
SIR
I Have according to my small abillity, and the the shortness of time
fulfilled your command, in sending to y^u this brief and plain discourse,
concerning the ancient opinions and esteem of English Parliaments, for that
was all that you desired; without any reflect^on upon the proceedings of this
present Parliament: accept it only as a plain piece of common ta^ke which I
would have delivered, had I been present with you; such discourses had no
need of Rhetoric.

The Constitution of our English Monarchy, is by wise men esteemed one of the
best in Europe, as well for the strength and honor of the Prince, as the
security and freedom of the People; and the Basis on which both are sounded, is
the convenience of that Council the high Court of Parliament.

Without which, neither can the Prince enjoy that Honor and Felicity, which
Phillip de Commines, a forrainer so much admires where he de ivers what
advantages the Kings of England have by that representative body of their
People; by whose assistance in any action they can neither want means, or
loose reputation, nor on the other side, can the People have any possibility of
pleading their own Rights and Liberties; For in the interim between
Parliaments, the People are too scattered and confused a Body to appear it
vindication of their proper Interests; and by too long absence of such assemb
ies they would loose all, for (as Iunius observes) Populus authoritatem suam
tante non utendo amittit, sic plerumque accidit ut quod omnes curare tenentur,
curet nemo quod omnibus Comissam est, nemo sibi commendatum putet.

The People sencib^y loose their power for want of useing it, for so it
happens, that what all should look after no man does, what is Committed to
all, no man thinks his own cha^g.

And in that interim it happens, those Optimates Regni (as he speaks) who
under the Prince are entrusted with Government, meaneing Counselors, Judges,
and other great Magistrates, either through fear, flattery or private
Corruption, do after betray the Peoples R^ghts to the Prince.

The state of government standing thus. If distempered times Continnue, as they
do, (as our Chronicles have showed some) whereby dissension between King and
People, and the Kingdoms ruin is endangered, it does not prove that the
Eng^ish government is not the best, as that the best Government may be abused
for in every Monarc^y how limmited soever, the Pr^nce his person is invested
with s^e much Majesty, that it would seem a mockery in State, if there were
not considerab e power entrusted into his hands, yea so much as that if he be
bad or weak he may not endanger the Ruin of the Kingdom, so necessa y is it
for all Humane Ordinances how wise soever, to leave somewhat to chance, and to
have always need of Recourse to God for his assisting and curing providence.

And though the Kingdom of England by virtue of the Government thereof, will be
as hardly brought into confusion as any Europe, yet there is no warrant against
the Probability of it, for it was ever heretofore seen that our Parliaments
were rather strength and advantage to an Honorable and a wise Prince, then a
remedy against a bad or weak one, or if we change the expression they were
rather an excellent diet to preserve a good Reign in strength, then Physic to
Cure a bad one, and therefore have been as much Loved by sound healthy Princes,
as loathed by them that were out of temper, the latter having thought them
depression of their dign^ty, as the former have esteemed them an advantage to
their strength so that in such times only the true convenience of that great
Council have been perceived by England, and admired by Foreign Authors, in
other times it was that those witty complaints have been in fashion, as Sir
Robert Cotton speaks of a bad time, that Princes in Parliaments are less then
they should be, and Subjects greater but on the contrary that they have been
an advantage to Kings, the constant Seires of our History will show.

1 First by those great Atcheivements which they have enabled our wise Kings to
make, who were most constant in calling them and consenting to them.

2 Secondly noe one Prince was ever yet happy without the use of them.

It may therefore seem A parrodox, that any Prince should disafect that which
is so High an advantage to him, and a great wonder that some Kings of England
not vicious in their dispositions, nor very shallow in their understandings,
have so much kicked against Parliaments, and that such have been before, we
show what reasons may be of it: see the chartecters of some Princes, whose
success and fortunes are known to all that read the Histories, as they are
de^ivered by Pollidor Virgill who in his sixteenth Book speaks thus of Henry
the Third, fuit ingenio, mitti, animo magis nobili quam magno cultor religionis
adversus inopes liberalis; he was of a Gent^e Nature, a mind rather Noble then
great.

In his 18. Book, thus of Edward the Second, fuit illi, natura bona in g^nium,
mitte quem primo juvneeli, errore actum in leviora vitia incidentem tandem in
graviora malorum consuitudiues et consilia traxerunt, non decreant illi animi
vires si repudiatis malis sua soribus illas just exercuisset.

He was of a good nature and mild disposition, who first by the errors and
rashness of Youth fading into small faults, was afterward drawn into greater
by the society and counsels of wicked men; there was not wanting in him
strength of mind, if (avoiding evil council) he could have made a just use
of it.

And in his 20th Book, thus of Richard the Second, fuit in illo spirritus non
villis quem consociorum improbitas et ins^sitas extinxit He was of a spirit not
^ow nor base, but such as was quite destroyed by the wickedness and folly of
unhapy consociates.

A reason of this accident may be, that their souls thought not visions have
not been so large, nor their affections so public, as their great calling
has required; but being to much mancipaid to private fancies and unhapy
Favorites: and long flattered in those affections, under the specious name of
firmness and friendship (not being told of that the adequate object of a
Prince, his love should be to the whole Peo le. And that they who receive
public honor should return as public love and care, they have too much
neglected the Kingdom, and grow at last afraid to look their faces in so true
a glass as a Parliament; And flying the remedy increase the disease, till it
come to that unhapy height, that rather then acknowledge any unjust action, they
strive for an unjust power to give it countenance; and so by a long consequence
become hardly reconcilable to a Parliamentary way.

Such Princes (though it may seem strange) have bin a greater afliction to
this Kingdom.

1. They have not been so conscious to themselves of great crimes, and
therefore not so apt to be sensible of what they have been accidentally made
to do against their People by evil Counsel, whose poison, themselves did not
perfectly understand: And therefore they are more prone to suspect the People
as unkind to them, then themselves as faulty, and so the more hardly drawn to
prevent their Actions, or meet heartily with a Parliament as from the People,
who Naturally look with honor upon the Prince, and when they find none or
few personal vices in him (nor considering that the true virtue of Princes
have a larger evtent then those of private men) will more hardly be brought to
think (though them selves feel and suffer for it) that he is faulty
therefore some times (which would hardly be believed if experience had not
showed it the People (have been so rash as that to mainetaine for the King an
unjust prerogative, which themselves understand not they have to their ruin
and the Kings too (as it has after prooved,) deserted that great Counsel
whom themselves have chosen, and by whom they could be preserved in their
just Rights, until to late for the Kings happiness, and therefore they have
seen and Repented their great folly.

Such a desertion was so sadly seen at the end of that Parliament of Edward
the 2. where the two Spencers were banished and the Tragical effects that
followed, when the King found so great a party both of Clergy and Laytie, as
enabled him to call home again his banished favorites, and proved fatal to so
many Parliamentary Lords, as the like execution of Nobillity had never before
been seen in England, over whose graves the People wept when it was too late,
and proceed, ^urther in their revenge, then became the duty and Alleagiance of
Subjects.

FINIS.

