God appearing for the Parliament, In sundry late VICTORIES Bestowed upon their
Forces, Which Command and call for great Praise and Thanksgiving both from
Parliament and People.

Die Martis; 4. Martii, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons House of Parliament, That Mr. Whitaker, Sir Thomas
Widdrington, Mr. Rous, and Mr. Millington, do peruse all the Letters that are
come from Shrewsbury, Plymouth, Scarborough, Glocestershire, and Weymouth; and
make a Narrative out of them, of all Gods great and late Mercies upon the
Parliaments Forces, to be Printed, and Read on the next day of Public
Thanksgiving.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed at London for Edward Husbands. March 10. 1644.

The Preamble.
THe Arm of the Lord daily brings mighty things to pass: But there are some
things which he brings to pass in such a manner, that therein He makes His
Arm bare and naked: He shows his power and mighty working, with such evidence
and demonstration that it strikes and shines like lightning, even into closed
eyes, and extorts an acknowledgement, That this is the power, and the very Arm
of the Lord: thus is it when effects arise in a notable eminence, far above
natural causes, or contrary to them: When weakness performs the work of
extraordinary strength; and when notable strength, even strength unto
presumption, is turned into extraordinary weakness: When the bows of the
mighty are broken; and they that stumbled, are girt with strength.

In this manner has the Lords Arm of late appeared visibly in sundry places;
But most eminently in the West, where with his own right Arm, he has gotten
Himself the Victory, and bestowed it upon us. The Towns of Weymouth and Melcomb
are near by situation, and one of them being dead, threatened death to the
other; yea, the Enemy spoke like the Egyptians of old (as it appears in
intercepted Letters) I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
my lust shall be satisfied upon them: But thy right hand, O Lord, is become
glorious, thy right hand has dashed the enemy in pieces; The living Town is
kept alive, and by it God wrought a Resurrection in that which was dead.

But to proceed according to the order of time, as first in that order (among
Gods late gracious dispensations of Victory to the Parliaments forces) is
presented to our view, and thankfulness.

Touching Scarborough.
An Extract out of Sir John Meldrums Letter written to the Speaker of the House
of Commons, dated from Scarborough 19. February, 1644.
IT has pleased God to give us happy success in the taking of the Town and
Harbor of Scarborough, which otherwise might have proved a receptacle for
Strangers, and a subject for the longer continuance of this war; besides the
inconveniences to the City of London, and other Southern parts by the
interruption of the Coal Trade.

The Service was done after this manner: After that, their three men of war,
which were appointed to scour along the Sands, were beaten and sunk, and
their Ordinance made unserviceable: A Summons being sent, and an Answer
returned, present order was given, for falling upon their Works and the Town;
which was done without any resistance, until they drew their Body within a
strong Work about the Church, which if they had maintained as they might have
done, they had pusled us; but upon view of the advancing of our foot, to cut
their passage betwixt the Castle, and the Church, they all retired within the
Castle in great disorder: There was a strife betwixt the Officers and
Soldiers, who should show most forwardness. Sir Hugh Cholmley did expect
relief within four days.


Two Letters intercepted, which were written from Sir Hugh Cholmley, to two
Commanders in the Kings Army.
SIr, we are close blocked up into the Castle, and though no Forces could be
sent to our relief, I admire I should not be supplied with those
accommodations which essentially conduce to the defense of this place; I am
bound in duty to let you know if we have not timely help the King will lose
his interest there, and yet I hope my self blameless. If it may advantage his
affairs, for me to fall into the hands of those which seek my blood, I can
willingly submit to it; but it will not be a president to draw others to serve
his Majesty with so little private ends, as I have done. The God Almighty
direct and protect us all.

Feb. the. 23. Your humble Servant. Hu. Cholmley.


Meldrum is the active man here, and Commands in chief; he has some six or
seven hundred of the Lord Fairfax his Foot, and a Regiment of Scots.
SIr, we are now blocked up close into the Castle, diverse of our soldiers run
away unto the Enemy, and it is to be feared, that the ill accommodation will
daily decrease our number; you know the Consequence, and believe me it requires
speedy supply, for reasons I cannot express. I pray signify where, or from
whence I may hope for relief, and whether any expectance of Forces from the
Queen, or Ireland, or probability of a good issue from the Treaty; of which
particulars I desire to be satisfied, that I may not be totally in ignorance,
not that the failing of any, or all these shall make me quit this trust
otherwise then becomes a Gentleman, and good Subject. Your Colonel Wharton
salutes you; And I am your humble Servant.

Scarbo. Castle, Feb. 24. Hu. Cholmley.
Here is ten Colors of Scots I imagine, though not above eight hundred men of
them; But Sir John Meldrum has six or seven hundred more of the Lord Fairfaxes
Foot, and Commands in chief.




Touching Plymouth.
An Extract out of a Letter written from Captain Pierce to Sir Io. Young, a
member of the House of Commons, 21. Feb. 1644.
ON the eighteenth of February last, the Enemy having the night before made a
work upon the old work at Mont-Stamford, with a very large Line both sides
from the work; the Seamen in the morning fell on them, and took one half
Moon, which was made at the south end of the Line; but the enemies horse
coming upon them, forced them to retreat, but with no loss on our side,
blessed be God; Upon which we were all commanded to Arms; several Companies
were drawn out to go over, and two Troops of horse; one being still quartered
on that side, to join with some Seamen taken on shore for that purpose, all
(I think) consisting of about five hundred, and all the rest of the Garrison
were commanded to march out to face the enemy on the North-side, and were
drawn without our Line within Musket Shot of their work under the Hill, the
Hill befriending us, that they could not play much on us: All we did, was only
sending out small Parties to shoot, as if we intended to fall on, that so they
might draw off some of their forces from the other side of the water, where our
purpose was to fall on: and it seems, they did draw off some horse; and about
two of the Clock in the afternoon, our men fell upon Mont-Stamford, where the
enemy powered out mighty vollies of shot, as I have seen or heard; but our men
went on with that resolution both horse and foot, that within little more then
half an hour we took the work, routed the enemy both horse and foot,
pursued them above a mile, hewing and cutting them. The names of them we took
were Lieutenant Colonel Mohun, Lient. Col. of Horse, Major Richard Heal,
Baronet Heales brother, Captain Maynard, (who had taken up Arms on our side)
Captain Hill, Captain Aston, Captain Huchins, Lieutenant Waring, Lieut.
Inglett, Lieut. Ashford, Lieut. Manwaring, Ensign Halse, Ensign Battishill,
and of private men ninety three, in all one hundred and eight persons, with
many more Arms. They also found there some Barrells of Powder, and Pioneers
tools, and some horses, and had near taken them all, but for the woods and
enclosures near adjoining. This day we had a Counsel of War, to try such of
them as had heretofore taken up Arms on our side, and proceeded upon three of
them, viz. Captain Maynard, Lieutenant Ashford, and Ensign Battishill, who
are to be executed to morrow, and some other common men will follow.


Touching Shrewsbury.
An Extract out of the Letters written from the Committees of Shrewsbury, to
the Speaker of the House of Commons, with the List of the Prisoners.
Right Honorable Sir:
IT has pleased God miraculously to deliver the Town of Salop into our hands,
with all the Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers therein; a List of the chief
of them we have sent enclosed. Upon the two and twentieth of this Month we
drew out of our Garrisons of Wem, Moreton, and Stoke, two hundred and fifty
Horse, and the like number of Foot, Sir William Brereton having sent us two
hundred and fifty Foot, and three hundred and fifty Horse; which party by our
order was Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Rincking (in the Marshalling of this
design he deserves much honor) and Captain Wyllier, and Master Huson a
Minister, led on the Fire-lockes, with fifty Troopers, dismounted under the
Command of Lieutenant Bendebue; they led on their men with undaunted
resolutions, after whom followed three hundred and fifty Foot, which by Severne
side stormed the Town, near unto the Castle wall, and marched unto the
Market-house, and there surpised the maine Guard, and then sent a Party to
secure the Castle-forehead Gate, which was effected without much difficulty,
and after a quarter of an hour, the Drawbridge was let down, and the Gate
opened, where Colonel Mytton, Colonel Bowyer, and all the Gentlemen of this
Committee with the Horse entered, and immediately became Masters of the Town,
within four hours after the Castle was delivered upon quarter, for all but
the Irish to march to Ludlow, and then the Enemy delivered up a strong Out-work
in Franckwell upon bare quarter for their lives: by twelve of the clock we
became Masters of the Castle and Town, wherein were taken many considerable
Prisoners (whereof the names of many are yet unlisted, by reason of the want of
time to secure them) good store of Ammunition, and great store of Ordnance. It
was our care to preserve the Town from plundering, but the promises of a large
reward would not satisfy the soldiers. Our horse the day before had a long
march, they being sent to surprise Sir William Whitmore, and Sir Thomas
Whitmore, his son being a Parliament man, which was effected, and they
brought safe to VVem. Sir, we shall not trouble you further, but to subscribe
our selves

Salop, Feb. 24. 1644. Your most humble Servants, A. Lloyd, Sam. Moore. Tho.
Hunt. To. Clives. Rob. Charlton. Leigh. Owen.



A List of the Prisoners taken at Salop the 22. day of Febr. 1644.
Sir Michael E^nely, Knight; And his brother. Sir Richard Lee Baronet. Sir
Thomas Harris Baronet. Sir Henry Frederick-Thyn Baronet. Sir William Owen
Knight. Sir John Wyld Senior, Knight. Sir John Wyld Junior, Knight. Sir Thomas
Lyster Knight. Francis Thorns Esquire. Herbert Vaughan Esquire. Thomas Owen
Esquire. Edward Kynnaston Esquire. Robert Ireland Esquire. Richard Trevis
Esquire. Thomas Morris Esquire. Arthur Sandford Esquire. Robert Sandford
Esquire. Pelham Corbet Esquire. Thomas Jones Esquire. Lieut. Colonel Edward
Owen. Lieut. Colonel Thomas Owen. Major Francis Ranger. Doctor Lewin. Doctor
Arnewey. Capt. Raynsford. Capt. William Lucas. Capt. John Cressy. Capt. Thomas
Collyns. Capt. William Long. Capt. Pontesbury Owen. John Pey Feodary. Capt.
Henry Harrison. Cassy Benthall Gentleman. Edward Talbot Gentleman. Richard Lee
Gentleman. Edward Stanley Gentleman. Francis Maynwaring Gentleman. John
Bradshaw Gentleman. John Jones Gentleman. Edward Leighton Gentleman. Peter
Dorrington Gentleman. Thomas Barker Gentleman. John Whittakers Gentleman.
Joseph Tailor Gentleman. Francis Sandford Gentleman. Richard Gibbons Gentleman.
George Maynwaring Gentleman. Charles Smith, Edward Palmer, Matthew Wightwicke,
Ancients. Vincent Tailor, Thomas Dew, Humphrey Davies, Richard Brain,
Sergeants. Nicholas Proud, Clerk. Master James Laton. Master Leadall. Moses
Hotchkys. George Bucknall Corporal. Patrick Lawry an Irishman, forty nine
other Prisoners.
Touching Weymouth.
BY the treachery of diverse malignant Inhabitants of Weymonth and
Melcomb-Regis, with the knowledge and consent of some Gunners upon duty in the
Forts, on the 9 of February, the Enemy from Portland was let in by Sea, into
the north Fort; there being then no Parliament ships in the Road, and into the
Chapel Fort by land: who seizing upon the Guard and Gunns, possessed
themselves of both Forts about twelve at night.

Sir Lewis Dives was by the same Confederates to be let into the Town of
Melcombe, the Malignants having combined together to let out our prisoners,
kill the Major of the Regiment, and seize upon the Maine Guard: This surprisall
of Melcombe was prevented, the Allarm being received at Weymouth first.

The Plott and Plotters are every day more and more discovered, diverse of them
(by a just vengeance from Heaven) have been since slain, some wounded and
others imprisoned, and in a posture speedily to be hanged.

We endeavored the recoverie of the Chapel Fort within an hour after it
was surprised, but it was so strengthened with the assistance of the town
Malignants that we were put to a retreat and Major Francis Siddenham slain.

Being ignorant what number the enemy was of in the Forts, and certain of a
thousand at least not many miles off in the field: we were forced to betake our
selves to Melcombe only, and to resolve to stand upon a posture of desence as
long as we were able.

All that week they played upon us with their Cannon, battered many of our
houses and fired some.

February the 16. we took of their horse about eighty and forty five
prisoners upon a rout.

Sir Lewis Dives Sir Thomas Austins and. Cleevelands horse with some foot lay
against us to block us up on the other side

The next week was spent in batteries as the former:

On Sabbath day morning February twenty third Gorings forces being joined to
those before mentioned drew down in a body and faced us.

The same night they began to cast up a work about a furlong from the Town,
out of which we beat them on Monday morning, killedsome of their men, and took
all their working tools.

An Extract of the Letter written from Captain Batten, to the Speaker of the
House of Commons 28. Febr. 1644. from aboard his Majesty's Ship called the
Reformation in Weymouth Road.
Honorable Sir,
SInce my last, thanks be to God, we are in far better condition then we
were then; On the 25 of this month the Governor went out of Melcombe with a
party of Horse and Foot, the Enemy on Weymouth side, drew out a party of Horse
and Foot to meet them, and so faced each other sometime; the Governor making
an orderly retreat with his Forces into Melcombe (having drawn away great part
of the enemy from their works) let down the Drawbridge, fell over into
Weymouth, stormed the Chapel Fort, and carried it and all Weymouth, without
the l^sse of one man, and took about 60. prisoners besides what were slain,
with diverse horse that were in their stables.

The 26. and 27. days, We played hard upon the Enemy, and they on us, both with
great and small shot, and the 27. at night a Prisoner of ours ran from them,
who gave us notice, that they would storm the Town that night, in all places
that they could, which was performed accordingly; the Enemy getting within our
Works near to Weymouth Bridge, but were gallantly repulsed by our men, with
the loss of some hundreds of the Enemy. The Governor himself behaving
himself like a gallant man, as he has done in all the siege; The Enemy at
length was beaten back into their Works.

The 28. about ten of the clock, they having received this great blow, (and I
believe having some notice of Sir William Wallers approach) drew out all their
forces, and left all our Works, with the Guns in them, as they found them, and
so are gone in a very confused manner, so that we now enjoy all our Works, and
both Towns as formerly.

We have not lost ten men, in the losing and taking all these Works, nor in
all the time of the Siege; I have two of my own Company, one has lost a leg,
and the other dangerously wounded, and will hardly escape, and three of Captain
Jordans men scalded by a mischance, by the fireing of some powder: indeed the
Seamen have shown themselves very brave men in all this business.

We have many prisoners on board, and in town, besides 40. sent away, to
morrow we shall shorten the number, by hanging some of the townsmen, who are
prisoners aboard us, and were the betrayers of the town.

Within three hours after the Enemy had quitted our Works, the Endeavor, a
ship of Weymouth, of twelve pieces of Ordnance, laden with Salt, (and some part
of her belonging to Malignants, and was got close under Portland Castle) cut
her Cables, and came off to me, although the Castle made seven or eight shotts
at her, so that God has blessed us both by Sea and Land, to him be the glory

WILLIAM BATTEN.


Worthy Sir,
SInce my last (perceiving the enemy secure, a party of my horse and theirs,
having been lately engaged, and foot on each side to their assistance) I fell
on with about a hundred and fifty musketeers in the middle of the day, regained
Weymouth, and Chapel Fort, and took one Leivtenant Colonel, one Major,
three Captains, three Leivtenants, and one hundred common men with store of
provisions which the enemy had newly got together, and all with the loss of
but one man of ours, this did so enrage the enemy that the Lord Goring would
needs be revenged, and to that purpose advanced with his whole body on thursday
night, and fell upon us about midnight at several places, but entered only one
of our Barracadoes, whence our men wear beaten back, just as I came by, which
perceiving, I got a fresh party, and heat them off, recovered that Fort, which
was Captain Thornhills and killed and took some of the enemy there; this night
we gave them such a brush, that Mr. James Framp^on of Buckland, reported
yesterday that two of their regiments were spoiled, besides what they left in
the Street, and in the Sea, its reported eighty dead men were carried into
Week, upon which (perceiving it seems no good to be done by them, in keeping
longer on the north, which we valued not when we had the Chapel) they
suddenly stole out yesterday, and have left both Beneleff and the North Forts,
without either burning the Corn, or Houses, or spoiling our Guns, which I
admire. Thus miraculously has God wrought for us in preserving this little
disadvantagious place against the other Town and Forts, and an Army, and which
is more in giving us such success, and at last the possession of all in the
face of that Army which came to relieve them; I hope (whatsoever we have
suffered) that this will tame the Cavies, and has (in detaining that body here
which might have done mischeife else where) much advantaged the public; God
bringing good out of evil, my Soldiers Horse and Foot, have all had very hard
service of it day and night, I shall entreat you to write to the Parliament,
for something for their encouragement, they have neither money, nor clothes,
and yet unwearied in this business. I have nothing else to add but that I am.

Feb. 28. 1644. Your affectionate servant. W. Siddenham.


An Extract of Colonel Siddenhams letter to the Committee of the the West.
Dated. 1. March. 1644.
Right Honorable,
Having now some few hours of freedom, from those continued Sallyes, Alarms,
Fireings and batteries which almost these three weeks have kept me from the
least leisure to do any thing, but attend the enemy. I think it my duty to
give you an account of Gods miraculous dispensations toward us. All (as you
have formerly received) being treacheronsly deliver into the hand of the enemy
except Melcombe. On tuesday last Feb. 25. the enemy having drawn out many of
their foot to relieve a party of their horse, being endanger to be engaged by a
party of ours which I sent out to discover the enemy. I fell presently upon
Weymouth, which Town (together with the Chapel Fort) was in an hour
regained; where we took prisoners, one Lieutenant Colonel one Major, three
Captains, and one hundred of inferior Officers and Common Soldiers, which so
enraged the enemy that upon thursday last about Midnight they furiously stormed
us at several places of both Towns, out of all Weymouth we were not able to
keep them, and therefore resolved to make good so much of it as might let us,
upon any occasion, too and from the Chapel Fort. The enemy came in great
multitudes through the Streets and backesides at both ends of the Town, and
disputed with us very hotly about three hours for that small part of it, which
we were willing to keep. The Chapel Fort, and Melcombe being likewise
stormed at the same time from all which places God enabled us to repel them.
In all this time they wounded but one of my men. What execution was done upon
the enemy, I am not certain they carrying off as many as they were able before
day, amongst whom (as the people of the Town have since informed me) were
diverse in Buffe-Coats, and Velvet-lackets they left much blood behind them in
the Streets and slain men upon the place, they carried (as it is reported)
many wounded men into one Village a mile from the Town. Upon Friday about 10
of the Clock, they suddenly left (except plunder) all which they had formerly
gained, quitted their Forts, and marched away in a body, lying now at a little
distance but blocking us up still as before, what they mean to do next I know
not, but do expect some further design upon us, for they are now summoning in
the Country at Dorchester from sixteen to sixty.


An Extract of Collonell John Binghams letter Governor of Poole, to the
Committee of the West. dated the first of March, 1644.
Right Honorable,
AS soon as this most happy news came to my hand, which our great and good God
has freely don for us, in giving us those unlookt for lost Forts with Weymouth
Town, I have sent it you in a true copy of the Governors, Collonell
Siddenhams Letter to peruse: He begs relief for his vahant tired men, I
beseech you to tender his case and believe they have been put upon much
extreme hard duty.

My Lords and Gentlmen here is little of man seen in this, all is Gods great,
free, and not to be forgotten mercy, in manifesting his power in their much
weakness, with which very well agrees the profession of the Governor of
Weymouth Collonell Syddenham himself in these words. God has discovered
himself very graciously unto us in several acts of providence, which I would
not have wanted the experience of for a world. My Lords I am your faithful
servant.

John Bingham.
There are in our Country now gotten into a body near a thousand Country men
with Gunns and Clubbs, to resist the French and Irish amongst the Cavalliers:
We have sent eighty horse to their desired aid




A true Copy of a Letter intercepted written from Sir Lewis Dives, to the
Earl of Bristoll.
Dorchester 26. of February. 1644.
MY LORD,
THe Church Fort by a strange misfortune was surprised this night by the Enemy
in Melcombe, but the principal Forts, where all our Ammunition and Provision
lies, we still maintain; Sir John Berkley is sent for hither by my Lord
Goring, to draw his Forces hither to join with ours, he having set up his rest
for the taking both that and the Town of Melcombe together, which by Gods
assistance we doubt not to effect, Wallers Forces being so scattered by the
withdrawing of Essex his Horse, and Manchesters Foot from him, as he is not in
a condition to advance toward us, and this news was last night confirmed to
us by Kell. Digby, who came from Oxford. I beseech your Lordship be pleased to
employ all your Interests with Sir Richard Greenvile, to hasten the sending of
fifteen hundred Foot, or two thousand Horse at the least toward us, to make
good Devonshire against the Forces about Taunton, and that we may be at a near
distance to join together if there be occasion, and he shall want no Horse
from us that he shall have need of: The business is of that importance, as
little less then the Crown depends upon it, so as we are confident he will
not be wanting to us in this extremity, so ceasing your Lordships further
trouble, I remain,

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Bristoll at Exeter. Your Lordships most
humble servant, LEWIS DIVES.


Another Letter intercepted From Sir Lewis Dives, to Sir John Berkley at
Teverton.
Noble Sir,
YOu will, I presume, receive notice by Colonel Froad, before this will be
with you, of the difaster that happened to us this day, by negligence of ^ome
of our Horse, which were beaten off their Guards, and persued by the Enemy to
Waymouth; VVhereupon a hundred Musketeers were drawn out of Waymouth to
relieve them, which the Enemy in Melcombe, taking all advantage of, made a
sally over the Drawbridge, and have surprised the Chapel Fort, but the two
principal Forts, where our Provisions and Ammunition lies we still maintain,
and doubt not by Gods assistance to keep them still, hoping that this
misfortune will turn to our advantage, and be a means that we shall gain
both the Town and Fort together. Whereupon my Lord Goring has set up his rest
to go through with it, being confident of your speedy assistance in a work of
that infinite importance to his Majesty's service; and in case Waller should
draw this way, which is not probable, yet your strength united with my Lords,
will be much superior to Wallers, so as doubtless, we may fight with him
upon advantage, for Kell. Digby came this night to Sherborne from Oxford, who
assured me that Essex and Manthesters Forces have absolutely left him, and
that he has not a considerable party with him, his Army being utterly broken,
so that this place being taken, which we are confident cannot be a work of
many days, the West is not only secured thereby, but my Lord Goring will
likewise have an opportunity of advancing into the Associated Counties, which
are now left naked: And there is order likewise taken, that two thousand Horse
from Oxford and the Vize, shall be ready to attend Wallers motion, so shall by
Gods blessing our game go fair, if not marred in the playing.

Feb. 26. 1644. LEWIS DIVES.


Touching the taking of Cardigan Castle and Town.
An Extract out of a Letter Written by Captain William Smith, to the Lord high
Admiral, from aboard the Ship called the Swallow in Milford Haven, Dated the
5. of February, 1644.
AFter many great raines which have fallen in these parts (which was no
invitation for a Soldier to lie in the nelds) yet such was the gallantry of
Major General Laugherne to promote the Cause in hand, that the Almighty no
sooner crowned his desires with a happy season, but in a graceful
acknowledgement, he placed a Garrison in Laugherne Castle, and from thence
marched toward Cardigan, with about five hundred Horse, and three hundred
Foot; and on the 21 of December, 1644. he sat down before Cardigan Castle,
demanding a surrender thereof for the service of the King and Parliament: But
Major Slaughter who commanded in chief, replied, he held that Castle for the
service of the King, and so long as he had life he would keep it for his
Majesty, (though therein he was not a man of his word.) After three days
siege, the Major General perceiving all further attempts would be in vain,
unless a breach could be forced, and having no artillery with him he forthwith
gave order the Demy-Culverin should be brought from Laugherne, which with much
difficulty and industry came safe to Cardigan, and being placed to the best
advantage he fell to battery.

The enemy within the Castle-yard cast up a half moon some distance from the
place on which the Demy-Culverin played, in which they placed their great
gunnes laden with Case-Shot, that in case a breach should be made those guns
might disanimate our men in entering, or perform sudden execution on them:
Our men plying the Demy-Culverin forced a breach, and being full of resolution
entered, running in the mouth of their guns, recovered the half moon, where
the enemy, as men bereft of all sense, having not the power to give fire to
their guns, although the Linstocks were in their hands ready lighted, cast
down all their arms, and cried for quarter, the which was granted: from
thence we entered the Castle and took Prisoner Major Slaughter and his wife,
one Captain Vaughan with their Lieutenant and Ensign, one Doctor Tailor a
Divine with about an hundred Common Soldiers, six great guns, a hundred and
fifty arms, a quantity of powder, ball, and other provisions, and this was
done the 29. of December last. On the fourth of January, General Gerrard set
down before the Castle with about 1200 horse and 1300. foot; Major General
Laugherne recruted his forces to about 600. horse, and 300. foot, and advanced
toward Cardigan to redeem his friends, who were in the Castle out of the
power of the Enemy; Lieutenant Collonell Powell in the night sent a Soldier
who swume through the river, and informed Major General Laugherne, that
unless he could relieve the Castle, within eight days, he should be enforced
to surrender it for want of victuals, and ammunition, which he believed might
be supplied, if some seam^n versed in managing a water fight, and climing up
rocks were employed; So 120. Seamen were sent, who after a view had of the
place, undertook it, which was performed on this wise: A boat laden with
provisions was placed in the middle between four boats on each side, two of
which were manned with Seamen, who in flanks faced both ways, plying their
Musketts on the enemy, who from the shore played on them with about 300.
Musketeers, yet our Seamen gallantly proceeded, put all the provisions into the
Castle, and returned without the loss of one man only two slightly wounded.
After this Colonel Laugherne having drawn his foot into a body, being without
Seamen in all about 350 he encouraged them to give an assult on the Town,
which after some debate was attempted, and on the 22. of January last our foot
forced their passage over the Bridge, in which we lost but one man and having
beaten the Enemy from their first guard, they pressed on to the second, which
they also took, and pursuing the victory beat them out of their maine guard,
which was at the market place, and then out of the Church, where our Forces
took two brass Demy-Culverins, which Gerrard brought from Bristoll, with some
Powder, Ball, and all their provisions, and following the enemy beat them all
out of the Town, and so we are now Masters both of the Town and Castle. Of
the enemy were slain in the place, 85. besides those that were slain before
the Castle, 100. prisoners were taken, and their whole Forces routed, and I
believe in their flight they never looked behind them, until they came to
Castle Emlyne, which is six miles from Cardigan: In the Town we also took 250.
arms I have not heard since these unhappy differences begun in this Kingdom,
that the hand of the Almighty has more visibly appeared in giving so great
victories to so small a handful then has been manifested in these parts, and
to his own power we attribute all the praise and glory.


Die Martis 4. Martii, 1644.
REsolved upon the Question by the Commons Assembled in Parliament; That
Public Thanks shall be given unto God for his great Mercy and blessing upon
the Parliament Forces, in the regaining of Waymouth, the gaining of
Shrewsbury, and Scarborough, the late deliverance at Plymouth, and the great
Victory over the Forces under Sir John VVinter.

Resolved upon the Question,

That Wednesday come seven-night (being the 12. of this present March, be
appointed for this day of public Thanksgiving.

Ordered that the Lord Major of the City of London be desired to give notice
of this day of public Thanksgiving, to all the Ministers within the Lines of
Communication, that they may give notice of it to their Parishioners in their
Pulpits on the next Lords day.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis 4. Martii, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That the Lord Major of the
City of London, and his Brethren be desired to be at the Thankesgiving on the
12. of this instant, in Christ Church, London, where the Members of both Houses
have appointed to meet to praise God for his blessing to the Parliament, for
the good success at Shrewsbury and Weymouth. And that the Church be kept empty
for the Lords and Commons.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parl.

The Conclusion.
ANd now since the Arm and Power of God has so plainly appeared; and a fire
is come down from Heaven into the hearts of those that fought for Gods Cause,
to inflame them with zeal and courage, by which fire also their Adversaries
have been consumed; Let the people no longer halt between two opinions, but
confess as in the days of Eliah, That the Lord is God, and let it be seen,
That God at last has turned the heart of this people. Let them no longer fight
against God; for who ever fought against him and prospered? Howsoever let Gods
own people, behold and magnify the work of God, and let their hearts be
lifted up in dependence upon him, and in the maintenance of that Cause which he
so manifestly owneth. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things?
Prudent, and he shall know them; for the ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

FINIS.

