A TRUE RELATION OF A Great Victory obtained by Sir THOMAS FAIYFAX, Against
the Kings Forces, (on Saturday the 14. of June, between Naesby and Clipston in
Northamptonshire.
FOR the glorious Victory that it has pleased God to give unto our Army under
the command of that Heroic General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, deserves to be taken
notice of in in an extraordinary manner: For as we ought to consider of it as
a gracious return of our Prayers and Fastings, so are we hereby deeply obliged
to bless God for it, by giving him the honor in the humble acknowledgement of
our thankfulness, unto him that is the giver of all Victories, which that we
may the better do it, will not be amiss to take notice how the Enemy had
plotted to destroy us.

When Leicester was taken (which before is said not to be very strong) the
Enemy were so in love with the situation, that they cast with themselves how
they shall gain time to refortifie it, as they had to win it. Upon which
Hastings Viscount Loughborough (alias Robcarrier) is made the Governor
thereof; who presently falls to re-edifie the Wales, especially a place
called the New work Yet lest Coll. Cromwell, which they heard grew numerous,
with other of our forces, should fall upon them before all things were settled
in a defensive way (though part of His Majesty's powers faced Derby, and
pretended more, and so to go forward) they diverted their course; and as if
they intended to draw a Line from Newark to Oxford (and stop our Commerce with
diverse Counties) they return into Northamptonshire, steal thirty thousand
Sheep, and eight thousand Head of other Cattle, which they carried into Oxford.

In their countercourse they leave none of the fattest soyles, for they come by
Walcot Langhton, Harborough, Rugby, and so dispiersing themselves in
Northamptonshire, take up their Head quarters at Deintrey in the Road to
Coventrey, many skirmishes have been betwixt Northampton forces and Partees of
the Kings, and prisoners taken on both sides: Here they spoil and destroy both
Corn and Hay, saying, they will make our Garrison seek further off for their
provision; and boast how many fat Cattle they have made stop of for coming to
London.

Presently upon this, the Kings Forces did face Northhampton, but at their
drawing away, a partee of our Horse followed them, who met with another of
the Enemies, charged them, slew some, and took twenty Horse and diverse
prisoners, which they brought to Northampton, not receiving any loss at all
on our side.

At this time, Sir Thomas Fairfax was at Stoney-Stratford, in the County of
Buckingham, and sent a Partee under the command of Colonel Butler to Tossiter,
and within a day or two removed his head quarters thither, and so got in part,
betwixt the Kings Army and Oxford, and began to gain upon the King^ quarters,
the Enemy still pretending that they would give Battle, and to that purpose
made a flourish (as heretofore they used to do) on Thursday night and Friday
morning, sending away before their carriages toward Leicester.

Nobe Sir Thomas finding that the Enemy made no haste to sight, suspected that
they were stealing away, and having his whole Army in a readiness, and a great
part drawn into a Body, sent out diverse Scouts, and at length intelligence was
brought, that they were drawn away, and were marching again toward Leicester,
having gotten much ground before our Army.

Upon this, Sir Thomas forthwith persued them, and by a hard march forced them
to fight; As you may see by this ensuing Letter.

SIR,
He Kings Army endeavoring to get away again toward

Leicester, we marched very hard after them, and this Morning the Enemy
perceiving that we were not farte from their Rear, and finding we pursued with
such speed, that if they made any stay (as needs they must, to refresh their
men and Horse) we should be ready to fall on their quarters before they came to
Leicester, about nine of the clock in the morning we found them in Battalia,
within four or five miles of Harborough* between Naesby and Clipston, upon
which we drew up our Forces near Naesby Warren, and planted our Ordnance, and
when our army came to view the enemy, they gave a great shout; and about ten of
the clock the Ordnance on both sides began to play, and our army being divided
into several Brigades, diverse partees were drawn out; and after the Scouts
had skirmished a while, whole partees became engaged, the Oidnance still
playing, and the success doubfull; but between elaven and twelve of the clock,
(Lieutenant General Crrmwell being joined with us) Sir Thomas Fairfax
commanded the right Wing, and Lieutenant General Cromwell the left, who
charged the enemy through and through, routed the Horse, killed and took a
great number of them, and being gallantly seconded by our Foot, at length we
beat the enemy from some of their Ordnance, took most of their Carriages, and
put them them to flight.

The fight was extreme hot for the space of half an hour or more, and we
took many Colors of Horse and Foot, among which the Kings Standard is
supposed to be one, it having the portracture of a Lion with a golden Crown.

We have also taken some hundreds of Officers prisoners, amongst which are many
persons of qualiaie, besides a great number of common Soldiers, with Horse and
store of arms and baggage, the particulars as yet I cannot relate, neither
have I had time to view the Corpse that are slain upon the place, but the
general rvmor is two thousand killed and taken,. But let this suffice out
friends, that it has pleased God to give us a glorious victory. We hear some
of the Kings Forees are taken toward Litchfield, but it is though to the
greatest part of those that are left, are flying toward Newark, whither its
said the King himself is going. Lieutenant General Cromwell with a gallant
partee of Horse, is in the pursuit; and some of our Scouts have just now
brought intelligence that Prince Rupert is taken.

Since the writing of this letter, it is reported, that Major General Skippon
has received some hurt, but it is hoped he will soon recover. Our General was
in some danger, hazarding his own person, but blessed be God came off well.

Sir, I am yours, ^. W.
Dated in the Field Saturday the 14. of Iune^ 1645.
June 15. 1645.
IT is desired, that all Ministers in London, the Liberties, and within the
Lines of Communication, do this Sabbath day, bless God that has been pleased
to hear our Prayers, in the behalf of our Army, and has given the Parliament
a Glorious Victory; killed many, taken many prisoners, the Standard, with the
Ramping Lion in gold, with the Crown upon it taken, and Colonel Cromwell
persuing. The fight began on Saturday the 14th. of June, about 12. of the
clock at noon, and held a terrible sight foor about half an hour. And its
reported, in the persuit Prince Rupert is taken.

Thomas Atkins, Mayor.


