(...) Outer, and an Inner. The outer, in the Letter, Christian Prudence. The
inner, in the Allegory, Christian Patience.

Prudence in a seasonable flight, when a danger threatens. Enter thou into thy
chambers, shut the doors about thee etc. Genesis 27.44.
As Rebecca commanded Jacob to fly to Haran, Exodus 11.22.
till Fsau's sury was assuaged: or as the Israelites came not out of doors,
till the morning, when the destroying Angel was abroad: So when a Persecution
rages, we must nor stand to our-face it, but retire into our chambers. This
sense Athanasius gives the words, who grounded his Apology profuga on the
letter of the text.

Patience in a quiet expectation of the Divine pleasure, A Lapide. etc.
Enter into thy chambers, etc. Not the chambers of Death, Purgatory,
Limbus-patrum, or the Grave, as the Popish Commentators interpret it, of the
retirements of mortality, till the day of Judgment. Nor the chambers of
pleasure, such chambering has wantonness always behind the Hangings,
Carthusian B^. Muse^.
but the chambers of devotion, patiently waiting for the salvation of the Lord.
For if you please to light one candle by another, this of the Prophet, Luther
in locum. Cubicula ingredimur, susecreta mer^ nostrae in^ m^ (...) illicita
(...) ria^ ^us. Greg. 1.4. mor. 6.26.
by that of the Psalm. Luther sales they give the same light; Frett not thy
self, because of the ungodly rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him.
Psalm. 77. 7 O if this candle burn too dim, will you borrow a Taper of the
Fathers? Cubicula ingredimur, says Gregory, we enter into our chambers, when
we retire into the secret closets of our souls, we shut the doors about us,
when we coerce unlawful desires; or as the ordinary gloss, when we put a
watch before the doors of our lips, least the greatness of our misery, Pone
custodiam ori, ne ex vehememia tribulationis verkaper rumant in offensam dei.
Gloss, ordin.
prompt our tongues to blasphemy and murmuring.

Lastly the Argument of both, drawn from 1. The brevity of Affliction,
Paululum ad momentum, for a very little moment. If there be any ods in minutes
take the least of them: and that not multiplied, but donec pertranseat ira,
till the indignation be over past: It Is a verb of speed, and bids you look up
to the sky, and see how fast this cloud posts away on the wings of the wind.
2. The speedy releife we shall have from 1. Heaven. Ecce venit dominus, behold
the Lord comes. etc. 2. Earth. Terra revelabit, the earth shall reveal her
bloods, and no longer cover her slain.



These are the parts of our present discourse, and for their multiplicity, I
shall need no other apology, then that they are like the six cities of refuge,
each a Sanctuary, and I cannot throw open too many in these times of
Persecution, yet because he that has many places to visit, must not stay long
in a place, I shall discover them to you, with all possible brevity, beginning
with that which begins all our discourse, the Complement, in (...) My people.

And a mere complement you may think it indeed, 1. The Complement.
that he should call a company of poor captive Jews, His people. He is not a
true Courtier on earth, that will bestow more then a Complement on men in
misery. But there is no such base Courtship in heaven. All God's complements
are real performances: He is not ashamed to own his people when they are at
the worst. In captivity, as well as in liberty, the worst condition: In
Babylon, as well as Jerusalem, the worst place. Populi mei, my people, in both.
Nay when all happiness and comfort seem to disclame them, then he invites them
to himself, Come my people. Come? Lord, they have but a short step to thee,
who art always present with them. When the world was covered with a Sea, Genesis
6.17.
for fecit inhabitare, he brought a flood of waters upon the earth, Jerome
reads it, Deus inhabitans, God dwelt upon the deluge. He would not trust his
little world in the Arc, but li^e another Neptune, he must sit upon the waters
and seem to venture the hazard of a shiprack with it. Ere Israel trod a step
toward Egypt, I will go down with thee, Genesis 46.4.
says the Lord. Down? what a word is that for a Deity? into Egypt? what a
place, that, for his holiness. Yet, O the humility of our God! He never thinks
himself low enough to do his people good, no place too had for his society,
which made it a rule among the Hebrew Doctors, Menos Ben. Isr. in Genesis
that God and his peole are inseparable, he will bear a share in their
misfortunes. Moses had the Hieroglyphick of it, when he appeared to him in a
burning bush. A strange throne for such a majesty: yet here he lays aside the
state of a Deity, and to rescue his people from the fire, puts himself into the
midst of it. Will you but knock at Joseph's prison door, and there they will
tell you, Dominus cum illo, Gen, 39.21.
the Lord was with him. Will you but cast your eye with Nabuchadnezar into the
Furnace, and with Darius peep into Daniels den, and in both Angelus Domini,
the Angel of the Lord, put nature to a contradiction; you have a fire burning
and not consuming, The devourers devoured by their own prey, My people are gone
into captivity, Isai. 52.4, 5.
Ashur has afflicted them without a cause, Et quia mihi nunc hic, says the
the Lord, what do I now here? why, where would thou be, O Lord, but in
heaven? is not that the Palace of thy Majesty? yet he seems to be at little
ease in heaven, whilst his people are in durance on earth: his bondage is
their captivity, and there is no heaven to him like his peoples Prison: or if
you will read it otherwise (as some do) Quid mihi nunc, what is now left me?
you will wonder the more, that in the loss of a few Jewels, he should esteem
himself Plundered of the whole Cabinet. Yet as the rights of the Crown are
all equal, and by slipping off one of those flowers, it is a shrewd figne given
all may be liable: so the divine providence has an even property in all his
Saints, and if he should suffer some to be lost, he would bring his original
right in question. But this has bin disputed by a deluge, and that could not
obliterate; with the flames, and they would not consume; with age, and that
could not antiquate, with all the powers of darkness, and they could never get
it by conquest. It has puzzled the whole Presbytery of hell to forge a
Smectimuus against this Iure divine.

But what a bold enemy has God now upon earth, that dares out law whole
kingdoms, and dash a nation at once out of the book of life, as if none were
truly Subjects to the King of heaven, but the stoutest Rebels against their
King on earth. O malice, where are thy bounds? Is it not enough, that thou have
banished us from our cities, our country, our houses, but will thou
disfranchize us of the new Jerusalem, disinherit us of heaven, our truest home?
Is it not sufficient, that thou have stiptus of our dearest friends and
fortunes, but will thou rob us of our God too? Is it no ease to thee, to
condemn us for dead men while we live, and to make us incapable to serve God
and the King, but will thou pursue us in our gaves, and persecute us to the
sentence of an eternal rume.

Though I ever esteemed S. Ribad. in vit. S. Aug
Augustine the more prosound Doctor, for being called by the Manichees Prado
anima^am the Pyrate of souls: Tortus p, 97.
King James the founder Protestant, for being the Popes Heretic, and you the
more orthodox Christians, because you are the Traitors Papists: yet I pray God
our wicked lives have not atticulated this Blasphemy to them. For will you
esteem Him a Roman, that always walks in a Persian habit, Him an Israelite,
whose language is pure Egyptian, or Him an Englishman; whom nature has died a
very Ethiopian? If we are God's people, true Israelites indeed, we should
wear the habit, speak the language, and live according to the Laws and
Constitutions of his Kingdom. When the Curashier Bishop was presented to the
Pope, Speed Hen. 4.
he would not own him for his Son, Hae non est tunica filij, This is not the
eoate of my Son. And when God shall behold us in our exotike fashions,
dressed with the vanities of all foreign Nations, when the times call for
sackcloth and ashes: when he shall hear us speak in that infernal language
of execrations and blasphemies, when bleeding England begs for our prays: When
he shall see our faces speckled and pyed, to court and adulterous eye, when our
present miseries should bedew them with tears to pacify our angry God, what
can we except but a Non novi, I know you not. This is not the habit, the
language, nor complexion of my people: very true in the old law, where we do
not read that every your strange spotted beasts were accepted for sacrifice. The
claim God lays to us is by right of Colof. 1.16.17.
dominion, and so we owe him subjection; by right of purchase, 1. Cor. 6.20.
so gratitude; by right of Romans 6.18.
Con quest, so Homage; by Exek. 16.8.
Covenant, so Fidelity: yea by a sweer 1. Cor. 15.10.
Communion and so we owe him our dearest affection. And cannot all the cords of
love bind our Allegiance? Into what a sacred snare has the Almighty brought
himself, whereby he is chained up as it were, and bound to be Our God, and yet
no bonds can hold us to our Obedience. Necessity has forced the proudest heart
to be assistance of that hand, which prosperity taught him to scorn: And me
thinks, if there were no other argument left us but our own misery, it should
teach us so much wisdom as to keeepe God our friend. The Church of England
has long called upon her lovers, but she finds them, as her elder Sister did,
False, Lament. 1.19
Deceperunt me, they have deceived me. Humane friendship is like Quicksilver,
which you may incorporate into Gold, but cast it into the fire, and 'twill
steal away, as if it scorned it is acquaintance: but the divine love is not
made of such running metal; The Christian cannot be cast into a Furnace of
affliction, that is too hot for his maker. It Is a fiery trial indeed, but of
God's love, as well as the Christian's faith. As the King of Arragon was
sailing into Sicily, he observed the brids attending the ship, Panormitan lib.
1. derelus gest. Alphonsi.
whilst he threw corn to them: but when they had eaten that up, away they
flew, whereupon says he, Persimiles his garriss purpur all and curiales mei,
My Peers and Courtiers are very like these birds; I shall have their company
by sea and land, so long as I feed and dignifie them: but if my treasure fail,
they take their wings, leaving me and the ship to the mercy of the storm.
Great Alphonsus, thy Court is but the emble me of all mankind: so Scottish and
coveteo us are the hearts of men, that there cannot be a true loves-knott tied
amongst them, but in chains of gold, and threads of silver: but our God is no
mercenary diety. He follows not our ship for booty or pillage: but as Queen
Elizabeth one styled her self, Speed, Cron.
the poor man's Queen: so out God is the Banished, Imprisoned, Plundered,
poor man's God. My people? Lord, whom do thou speak to? will thou own us in
our blood, and look upon us in our misery? We have been indeed, Gens deo chara,
A nation beloved: but now (O our misfortune!) Invisa deo, Abhorred of the
Almighty. Once Rignum Dei, the Kingdom of God: but now, (O our fall!) Magnum
latrocinium, A den of Thieves. May we not say with Rebecca, if it be so, why am
I thus? if we are still thy people, Lord, why are we thus efflicted? But did
you never hear, what Ausonius answered Caesar, when he desired a copy of his
Verses, Epist. ad Aug. Cas.
Non habed idingenij, I have not so good a fancy, O Emperor: but command me
and I shall have, Cur me poRe negern, poRe quodille putat, why should I say, I
cannot do, what he thinks I can: So if God still call us his people, why
should we think we are not? Did he own us in our Sins, and will he disclaim
us in our Sorrows? could our very Injuries move him to compassion, and shall
our calamities enrage him against us: Is it his custom to make men miserable,
and then obhorre them? If he chasten every Son whom he loves, adversity sure
is but an argument of his dearer affection. Will any man take the pains to
prune a Vine, that is none of his own, or weed the Garden, that is another
man's? Propriety is the ground of care, and by this we know we are his people,
that he cares for us. Ezekiel. 34.11.15.
When King Edward told John of France, his Prisoner, that he should have his
liberty, if he would but do him homage for the Realm of France, French Hist.
in John. 51. King.
He answered him freely, like a King, That he must not speak to him of that,
which he neither ought, nor would do, to alienate a right inalienable:
Affliction may engage my person, but never the invielable right of my Crown.
And do you think the God of heaven will debase himself to do homage to those
two proud usurpers, the World and Devil for his dominions? no, His Propriety
is as in alienable and immort all as Himself. Though now our ship be almost
sinking, yet because it is his Vessel, it is an undoubted argument to me, that
he will rebuke the tempest, and bring it safe to land. Do you think the God
of heaven will loose his right? Though our Sovereign be now persecuted his
life and honor, yet because, He is God's Anointed, you may be confident, he
will restore him to his Crown and Dignity. Do you think the God of heaven
will loose his right? Though the Church ne now almost buried in her own
ruins, yet because it is His house, He will repair it into it is former Beauty
and Luster. Did you ever know the God of heaven cheated of his right? In a
word, where ever we cast our eyes now, we behold nothing but misery and
destruction, yet because he is still pleased to own us as His peculiar people,
we may assure our selves, that notwithstanding our manifold provocations, he
will yet look upon us for good, Malach 3.17.
and in the day, that he makes up his fewels, sparens, as a man spares his
own Son. Never thinks the God of heaven will loose his right: But that we
may still take the boldness to present our selves before him, as his own in
Christ, and with the Priest between the Porch and the Altar, make it the
argument of our devotion, Iocl. 2.17.18.
spare thy people, O God, and give not thy heritage to reproach. And so least
you should think I meant to entertain you only with a Complement, I descend to
the Counsel, my second general: And therein, First the Advice of the Letter
Christian Prudence in a seasonable flight. Enter thou into thy Chambers, shut
the doors about thee, and hide thy self.

A Chamber was never but safe and delightful to a contemplative mind, 2. The
Counsel.
but now so much the better, as the world is worse. 1. Literal.
It Is a happiness not to be a witness of the mischeife of the times, which
it is as hard to behold, and be innocent, as to converse with and be safe: so
that he, who needs not a chamber for contemplation, may for Protection. The old
law opened cities of refuge, Math. 10.23
and sure the Gospel has not shut them. He that gave the persecuted counsel,
to fly out of one city into another, allows every man the choice of his own
Sanctuary. When a danger approaches so near, that there is no safety in
staying, and God offers us the wings of a Dove, fair and certain means of
escape, not to fly then, Athonasus Apolog. pro fuga.
were (...), in Athanasius phrase, to condemn providence it self, and to
scorn deliverance, when it is kindly administered. For though God be omnipotent
and can fetch a deliverance for us out of an Impossibility, yet because his
power is commanded by his will, and his will is to save by means,
Abomnipotentia Dei non est inferendum quidlibet, We must not presume to infer
more from his omnipotency, then what is authorized by his will: else we should
make no more use of God's imperial power, then we do of juglers, only to show
tricks to the world, and to please every man's humor, with a fresh miracle.
Who can read without admiration, that God should fly from a weak man that he
before whom the earth moves, and the seas go backward, Apoca. 20. v. 11
should be put to this poor shift to save his life from him, Psalm. 104.7.
whom a despicable worm could conquer: yet our Savior fled into Egypt,
leaving us an example that we might follow his steps. 1. Pet. 2. v. 21.
He could have commanded an officer of heaven to have stroke Herod dead, or
called out a Legion of Angels for his lifeguard, but that he would instruct
our presumption, not to expect an Act of grace, where the Common Law may
relieve us: not to look for a Miracle, where ordinary prudence will protect us.
Why do you not call home your Armies, and dismount your Ordinance, if you can
ortaine the victory by sounding of Rams-hornes and breaking of Pitchers, yet
with such an Artillery, Israel battered Jericho to the ground? Nay, why so much
provision for a Seidge, if you can persuade the heavens to fill your Magazins
with Manna enough? yet they were so courteous to the Israelites camp: but, if
you dare not trust such an Artillery, or Sucklers to your Army, why will you
venture your lives on a certain danger, upon the presumption of an
extraodinary and disingaged providence?

Nor does it excuse the rashness, that Persecution is God's visitation. For
what evil is not? The sword of Pestilence, as well as the sword of War, both
are weapons of divine justice: And why will you court one more then the other?
do you make any difference, whether you perish by a stab or by an infection?
Since then the danger is equal, why not to be declined with equal prudence.
Lot did not think it safe staying among the flames of Sodom, because they came
from heaven: nor would the people embrace the Leper, for the divine hand that
smote him. This were not to perish by Gods visitation, but our own
presumption, and to fetch in a judgment, not to have it sent us; he that bid us
fly, when we are persecuted, did not except himself, when, with reverence be
it spoken, he became a Persecuter.

But whether can we fly from God's hand? Can we be too nimble for our destiny?
or cheat the fates by changing our Hemisphere? No, as Alexander of Alexandria
told Athanasius, whom he had elected his Successor in that See, but saw him
decline it: so our destiny says, Ribadin. in vit. Athnasi.
Fugere licet, Athanasi, non tamen effugies. Fly thou may, Athanasius, but
thou salt not escape. Death is a common debt we owe to nature, yet he is not so
cruel a Creditour, as to demand it before'tis due. The time of payment is set
down in God's book, and so long as we have any lawful means to preserve our
lives, the dare is not yet expired. Ierom. in Ioh.
Nomest nostrum arripere mortem, sed illatam libenter accipere: We must bid
death welcome when he comes, but not hale him to us, and put the sit he in his
hand whether he willor no: this were to antidare our own ruin, and to make
death it self guilty of murder by cutting us down before our time. Though
Martyr dome be the Crown of Christianity, yet we may not be so ambitious of
it, as to betray our selves to the Prison or Stake, Furiosum genus hominum.
Aug. epist. ad Bonifac.
as those furious Heretics, the Circumcellions in Austines time, that went up
and down begging Martyr dome, Come, Plunder, Stab, Burn us; and if none would
be so kind as to kill them, they were so cruel as to become their own
executioners. The Friars relate of their good Saint Francis, that he went up
and down to Majorka, Bonavent. and Ribadin in vita Francisci.
and Minorka, among the Mahometans, desiring to be put to death for Christ's
sake; pity, he should go so far for a halter, that had such a mind to it.
But Christ himself was of another opinion, who hearing the Jews had consulted
to destroy him, John. 11.54.
(...), he walked no more openly, but retired into a Village near a
Wilderness, to teach all his Disciples, Origin in catana Pat^m in locum.
Origin says, (...). Not to be too rash and hot upon dangers, though it be for
truth it self. A wise Pilot will not run his ship wilfully on a rock, but if a
tempest drive it, he will show his skill and courage to save it from splitting.
That Commander needs not an enemy, that will drive his men on the Cannons
mouth. His temerity shall slay more then the enemies sword:or if he chance to
slunder upon success, yet he is more conquered with such a Victory, then by a
discomfiture. So, he that seeks death, before death seeks him, dies not a
Martyr, but a Man. slayer. (...), Clem. Alex. l. 4. Strom.
For what difference is there, between falling on my own and running upon the
point of another man's sword? He that dilivers himself into the hand of danger,
(...), He joins in conspiracy with his persecuter against his own life.
Clem. d. l.


But if any man should be so unkind to his own soul, as to throw it away, yet
he owes so much charity to his very persecuter, as not to give him an occasion
to shed innocent blood: As Nazianzen observes of Marcus Arethusius his flight,
that it was not so much in love to himself, Nazlan. orat. 3. adv. Iusian.
(...), but in compassion to his persecuters, least he should fuel their
malice with his own blood.

Think me not though, so faint hearted an Orator, as to persuade any man to
fly from his Colors. Christianity is no such cowardly Religion: but there go
so many flowers to make up this crown of Martyrdom, that he, who does but
simply dye for Christ, without other circumstances, is like to wear but a
single flower, not the whole crown.

Cuipatientia, men's been conscia, congruacausa,
Tempus and adsuerit, hic been Martyr erit,
As my Countryman Alexander sir-named of Hales, a hamlet near Sudely Castle in
Gloucester shire The only learned writer my Country has to boast of. Speed.
Alexander of Hales makes the^ into a Posey. He that has patience, a good
conscience, a just cause, and (what makes the Crown complete) a fit
opportunity to dye for Christ, He only deserves the name of a Full Martyr. The
other three are like flowers in Autumn, withered and dry, till God's appointed
time: then they will blossom and spring, and flourish in the Crown so that a
future threatened danger we may decline without imputation of Cowardice, (...),
Origin. loc: dect.
because of the uncertainty of the event: but a present unavoydable one, we
must undergo with the highest expression of valor. When our Savior's hour
was come, Mat. 16.23. Mat. 26.50.
he called his friend Peter, Devil, for dissuading him from his Passion, and
the Devil Judas, friend, for betraying him to it. Wonder not at Ignatius, and
Germanicus, Ignat: Ep. al Romans Luseb. l. 4. c. 15. Socrates. Scholastic. l. 4.
c. 16. et 16.
who being both condemned to the mercyles teeth of wild Beasts, provoked those
savage creatures to tear them in pieces. Censure not St Basil's Vtinam, when
his immodest persecuter Modestus threatened him, with present death. Would to
God it might go so well with me, said he, as to leave this carcass of mine in
the quarrel of Christ. Did you behold the three Christians laid on a griditon
by Amachius, Socrat. l. 3. c. 15.
to be broyled to death, what could you expect, but tears, and supplications
for mercy, or an open renouncing of their faith: yet as if those burning coals
had only kindled their zeal, they gave him this flour, If thou do long, O
Amachius, after broyled meat, turn the other side of us, least thou make but a
raw feast of it, and the blood run about thy teeth. Such was the undaunted
courage of the Saints, when they saw a necessity of suffering, that they more
tormented the Persecuter with their constancy, then he could them with his
torments, God knows, how many of our lots is may be, to drink of this bitter
cup: keep in our chambers we may, and pray with our Savior. If it be possible
let this cup pass from us: yet if God shall put it into any of our hand, take
it off we must with the greatest cheerfullnes: It Is but a mornings draught, to
that long and happy day, Aeternity.

Tertull I de suga in persecut. De corond wilit c. 1. Thammerus 1. de suga.
Tertullian, and Theobaldus Thammerus, would have the Priest begin to you in
this cup, against whom they shut up all Sanctuaries in time of persecution. The
Apostles might decline it, if it were offered them in one city, by flying into
another, because they were Preachers-generall, Ministers to the whole world,
and so whither soever they went, they were still in their Parish, but we who
are Sheepheards to one little flock, if the wolf come, must perish with them.
Forth people are their own, the minister the People^s; Them God has trusted
with their bodies, Him with their souls: Nay, shall we preach to them, Mat.
10.28.
Netimete, Fear not them that kill the body, and we first take our heels? or
did Christ say it, only to the Laity, Luke 12.9.
He that denies me before men, Him will I deny before the Angels of God.

Specialiter adversus Ecclesiam texuit volumina de pudicitia, de persecutione,
etc. ter. lib. de Ecclesiast. scriptor. Martyrium aded extolleret, us ne fugam,
aliasique latebras vel redemptionem vitae admitteret. Baron. an Christi. 201.
n. 9.
Yet all this is but a kind of zealous Montanisme. For Tertullian taking a
discontent that his countryman Victor was preferred before him to the
Bishopric of Carthage, after the death of Agrippinus, turned Montanist, and
employed those acute parts of his, in defending many the Heresies of that Sect,
in which catalogue is the deny all of flight to the persecuted. For the
Cataphrygians so magnified Martyrdom; that they would not allow a man to save
his life, though he could without scandal For my part, I did never love to
uncover the nakedness of any the ancient Fathers of the Church; But when their
opinions stand in co^petition with the truth, then St Cyprian has given me a
rule, Non debemus attendre quid aliquis ante nos faciendam putaverit, Cyprian.
l. 2. Ep. 3.
sed quid, qui ante omnes, Christus prius fecerit. We must not look what any
did before us, but what Christ did before all. He scarce saluted the world, but
declared himself a man by flight, as well as by those querulous passions of
hunger and thirst. And what he did (...), after the manner of men, (...),
Athanasius says, Athan Apol. pro suga.
is common to the whole kind: And shall nature be so cruel a Stepmother to
our tribe only, as to deny us the privilege she indulgeth all her sons? Look
into the Saints Geography, and you shall find a double Synod, 1. Kin. 18.13.
each consisting of fifty Prophets in a cave: The first Apostolical Council
held in Golgotha, Quaresmius Tom. 2. elucid terrae sanctae. l. 4. c. 1.
peregrin. 9. et. c. 22. peregr. 7.
among dead men's bones: The Apostles had no other Convocation-house, Quaresmius
says, but a larg cave or an ample sepulcher: Nor did they like men, but
beasts, In Latibulis, in their denns and burrowes: Shall I give you a map of S.
Paul's flight, out of his covert at Damascus, Latibulum Pauli fuit antrum in
plaga meridionalt Damasci, Quares. t. d. l. 7. c. 1. per. 6.
to Iconium, from Iconium to Lystra, from Lystrato Ephesus, thence to
Macodonia. You cannot forget old Polycarpe Eusebius. Eccles. hist l. 4. c. 15.
Ribad. to Vit. S. Aug. Ille in Vit. S. Basilij. Soz. hist. Eccles l. 6. c. 2.
and 3.
(...), hid in the cockloft, when his persecuters searched the house for him.
S. Cyprian in his chamber, when the people cried, Cyprianum ad Leones, Away
with him to the Lions. S. Augustine locked within doors, when the Manichees,
that could not confute him with argument, would have done it with the poniard.
S. Basil in the solitude of Pontus, when the peevish Prelate Eusebius molested
him at Caesaroa. And though Origin in his youthful years was such a hot
spur, as to run upon danger, yet in his riper age and judgment, when
Alexandria was too hott for him, he was glad to accept of a corner to save his
life. What should I tell you of S. Chrysostom, Non t^ultil ut judices ferat
c^s qui essent manefesti hosts, Soz ^ 8. c. 17.
who, when there was a Synod pack't by Theophilus to condemn him, withdrew
himself, and sent them word by Demetrius, that they must not take him, for Tam
slultum, so very a fool, as to be tried by such Judges, as were his professed
enemies, but in a full convention he would make his defense. Nay great
Athanasius, Socrat Schol. l. 1 6 35 l. 2. c. 1, etc. Ri^ad in l^it Athan.
who for forty six years, was chased up and down by those Arian blood. hounds,
Constantine, Constantius, Julian, and Valens, with so much malice and severity,
that scarce any of the four Elements did dare protect him, but he was
compelled to live in a Cisterne, and sometimes in his Fathers toomb like a dead
man.

And here I cannot pass by, that false imputation, which Thammerus casts on
this reonowned Prelate, Thammerus de fug. l. 1. fol. 16.
viz. That the occasion of his flight, was his own Avarice, in engrossing the
corn, Constantine sent to the poor of Alexandria: A foul crime in a Bishop,
Socrates. l 2 ^ 19 ad 28 Niceph. l. 9. c. 9. Theod. biss. Eccles. l 2, c 7, 8.
etc. Lib 1 d^c. 25. ad 32. S^ l 1. c 35
to rob the poor: but of this, and other false accusations preferred against
him by the Arians, he was acquitted before the Emperor, and in a Council at
Sardica, a city in Illyria; when Julius Bishiop of Rome sent a sharp Epistle to
the Bishops of Antioch, for endeavoring to stain so Spotless an innocence:
the true cause of his flight being the bloody malice of the Arian faction
against him.

Fugiant cum little quisquam. specia^ter a persecutori^us queritur, etc. Aug Ep.
180. ad Honorat.
And truly where the life or liberty of a Minister is sought (as at this day)
I am to learn what obligation should stay him for ruin. For he is not so much
the peoples, but he is still Lord of his own life: Nor because he has the
care of their souls, is it any warrant, he should neglect his own. Our
charity may begin at our selves, though I would not have it end there. If my my
conscience tells me, I shall not be able to contest with the temptation, that I
have not patience for aprison; nor courage for a stake, Mat. a. v. 13.
Then as the Angel said to Joseph, Arise I must, and take the young Child, My
weak faith, and fly into Aegytt. Better a prudent flight, then a presumptuous
residence. I had rather accept of S. Paul's basket at Damaseus, and keep my
faith, Act, 9 25.
then fit by the high Priests fire with Peter, Mat. 26. 691
and deny my Master: Pet. Mart. Ep ad Lucens. Eusebius. l. 14. c. 14.
With Peter Martyr rather leave my Church at Luca and enjoy a good conscience:
then keep my Living and loose my faith with Quintus. Sure he cannot be faid to
deny Christ by flying, who flies least, he should deny him. Nay what more
real, and public confession can he make of his faith, then to leave all for
his Savior? Lock upon his plundered house, his scattered patrimony, nay the
poor man's cheeks, that were fed with his bread, and do they nor all suffer a
kind of Martyrdom for his Allegiance? Can you behold his Wife and Children,
the constant addition, and companions of his misfortunes, and do they not all
see me to you so many confessors of his Loyalty? Nay where another Curate
cannot be had, what if I should say, Domus ipsa divinat, The very Parsonage
house, can Preach obedience to the whole Parish? Tell me now, which denies
Christ before men, He that sits secure at home, and Rebels, or He, that
exposes himself to all difficulties, to keep a good conscience. He that
stays in his house, and goes to Mass, or He, that flies to keep himself from
Idols. Peter Martyr upbraydes the presumption of his Parishioners, who
esteemed him a Coward for his prudence, and boasted that they were Equites
Christi fortes and probati Valiant and approved Cavaleirs of Heaven, Pet Mart
Ep. 2. ad fra: Lucens. p. 1104.
that would rather dye, then stir a foot from. Christ's Banner, and yet ran
to the enemy, and faught under a Popish Ensign. O quam multos fefellit haec
vana spes? How many has this vain hope deceived? whilst they despise this
common remedy of weakness, or rather true Christian policy, they run their
consciences on a wilful, and deserved ruin.

Nor is the Ministers absence uncharitable, where his presence is unprofitable:
For it is not his absence, but the peoples profession, that exposes them to
the Wolf: not his flight, but their faith, that invites the persecuter. Or if
he did stay, when his office cease, He is spiritually absent (the worst of
the two) though corporally present: yea, how unable were he to confirm the
weak, who himself is the weakest? so that, where the people can have no
benefit of his presence, they are his greatest Persecuters, that quarrel with
his absence. Will you not allow him to learn to handle his weapon in a
chamber, that he may come prepared, and not be hissed off the stage? Athan.
Apol. pro fugd.
(...), Flight is a fencing School, where we exercise our selves at foyles
with death, ere we come to a public encounter. Call it no more Fear that he
is gone, but Art: not cowardice, but strategem. He is stepped aside, as the
Fencer falls back sometime, to give the feircer onset: or the Soldier
retreats, only to return with greater courage to the battle. Have you but the
patience, till the cloud breaks, and the Sun will recompense your short
darkness with a more glorious light. Christ shall stay no longer in Egypt,
then till Herod is dead: then, the Sun of righteousness shall rise in Inry
with heading in his wings. Let not Carthage think they have quite lost their
Cyprian, Cypr. Ep. 9.
in less then two years Decius dies, and he returns their vigilant Bishop
and Pastor. Does Alexandria despair of ever seeing Athanasins again? why,
the very same power, that first banished, restores him again to his seized
Bishopric. Theod. l, 1, and 2.
For Constantius is now sending his Imperial letters, to invite him home, and
devout, George the sequestratour, must out of his usurped Prelacy. Do but
permit Luther to keep close, Sleid. Anno 1521.
till the Popes Bull has done roaring, and you shall hear him again in his
pulpit at Witenberge. Suffer Melancton to hide a while in the Cities of
Harcinia: when the Seidge is raised, Sleid: 1547.
he will return to his Divinity school in that University. The text allows
not of such chamber, as should entertain you in a perpetual security, but by
the septuagints word, (...), they are like the Cabinet, where you put up your
Jewels safe, till you please to wear them, or the common Magazins, where you
lay in provision, till necessity calls it forth.

Besides, will you make the Almighty so unskillful a General, as to venture
all his Army on the very first charge: some Reserves he will have for the
Necessities of his Church: As Demosthenes, when one upbrayded his flight,
answered, Serve me patrioe, Plat.
I keep my self for my Country: so the learned Clergy, that take fanctuary
here, and in other places of safety, are but the Churches Reserve, not to be
commanded up, till the very last plunge of the Battle. And how many triumphs
does the Church owe to this one Persecuted Brigade? When all the world was
Arian^, Atha^as ^ ad orthedox: frat.
stout Athanasius lead up the Reserve of Orthodox Bishops, and quite roused the
Here sie, that it could never gather a head since. When the Pope had the necks
of all Christian Princes under his club foot, and they held their Consciences,
and Domions in Vassalagae from him, did not that poor Reserve, Lather a single
Monk cut off this Philistin's head with his Own Sword? I cannot tell what we
should have done for a Redeemer, had not David saved his life in a Cave Could
you have had the branch, if the stock of Iesse had been cut down and withered?
Nay we had all been Pagans till this day, Baronius t. 1. annal.
had not some of those fifteent thousand, that fled from ferusalem at the
Stoning of Steeven, Act. 8. 1.
crossed the British seas: By this, the Roman Scepter was prevented by the
Cross of Christ, and England made one of the first Chambers, where
Christianity was borne. In all the rety rements of these worthies, the Church
has reaped a very plentiful harvest. Had shoe nor many of Psalm, 3. In the
Cave, Ps. 57. In the Wilderness, Ps. 63. His prayer in the Cave, Ps. 142.
Eusebius l. 3. c. 15.
David's Psalm, out of a Wilderness, and a Cave? choice flowers, for so
barren a soil. Saint Ihon's Revelations, out of the I Will Patmos, the place of
his banishment: The Apostles Greed, Oblonga cisterna in rupe montia excisa etc.
Quaresmius, tom. 2. elucid. terra sanctae. l. 4. c. 1. pereg 9.
out of a long vault at the foot of mount Olivet: where the Twelve drew it up,
ere they dispersed themselves throughout the world: The Athanasian Nauclerus
vol. 2. Chronol generat. 12. p. 608. Ribad in Vit. eypr.
out of an old cisterne at Treveris in Germany, where that Father penned it
against the Arians. Godly and learned men are of such a diffusivanature, that
like the rivers, if they be denied passage in their proper channelts, they
swell above the banks, and water the sterill country about it. S. Cyprian being
banished Carthage, retired to Curhis, confirming the Martyrs, and releiving the
poor. S. Chrysostom in his exile to Cucusus wrote that divine Paradox, Nemo
Laeditur, nisi a seipso, Zo^. l. 8. c. 27. Ribab. in Vit. Chrysom.
and though he found the People Pagan, yet he lest them Christian: For by his
unwearied pains and exemplary piety, he planted a Christian Chruch, and at his
departure, ordained seven Bishops, and many Presbytens there. You would think,
Ivpbraided your Idleness, should I tell you of Origen's preaching at Caesanea,
Erasm in Vit. Origin Pet Mart. ad Lucens. Sleid. l. 3. an. 1521. extant tom. 1.
and 2.
when he was driven from Alexandria: Of Peten Martyr's. Divinity Lectures at
Argentoratum, When he could Preach no longer at Luce: of Lather's tomes, which
he wrote in the Castle of Wartenburg, when they laid wait for his life at
Wormatia: and of Brentius his Commentaries in his recesse, Sleid. k 20. an 1548.
when the Spaniards expolled him his Church at Hala. You are not of this
reserve, whom your Parishes have spued out for your drunkenness and luxury:
Nor any, that come hither, as to a Garden of pleasures, to live at ease, or as
to a Fair of preferments, to ger honor and advancement, as too many follow
our Aimies, only for Quarter and pillage, who never mean to draw a sword.
None are of the Churches Regiment, but those whom Conscience and Loyalty to God
and the King, have brought to this place, and are willing, when God shall call,
to lay down their lives for the Churches good. As often as I think of Witenberg,
I esteem every such Champion (How mean soever he seem to the eye of the
World) a Pledge of divine protection. For when Charles the sift besiedged that
University, God so heard the prayers of Pomeranus and other learned men, Sleid
l. 19. Wig de Jugd ministe.
that, when the Souldiens entered, instead of Violence, they showed them all
reverence, and spared the City for their sakes. Pray God, We never meet with a
worse enemy.

By the divine Indulgence, we have this Zoar, this Pella yet left us: but if he
has purposed, this shall not be the last stage of our slight, as the Poet of
himselse and his friend, Martial. E. pigr.
Quocunque, in loce, Roma duobus erit: so, let this be our comfort, that God
and a Christian, wherever they are, make a great city. He cannot want the
conveniences of one place, who is accompanied with him that fills all places,
and we may besure of His society, who fly for his sake, as Nazianzen said of
A. thanasius, Nor. orat. 21.
(...), He sled for the Trinity, and therefore with the Trinity.

Ask me not, What you shall cate, or what you shall drink, or where withal
you shall be clothed? Rather then your Heavenly Father will suffer you to want
any of these, The Heavens shall rain Manna, the Rocks run with a pleasant
stream, and the winds serve in Varieties for you. You have forgot the Dry
cruse, that sprang with oil, the Lion's jaws, that distilled honey, the Raven,
that carried meat in his bill, and the Fish, that brought money in his mouth, to
defray the charges of God's people. All the creatures are ready to bring in
Contribution, either provision or money for their relief. We cannot sure be
driven into a more barren soil, Ps, 63. v. 6.
then the wilderness of Ziph; yet there David was satisfied, as with marrow
and fatnes. Do you not think the Angel mistaken, Math. 2.
that he should send foseph with our Savior into Egypt, A Nation always
abhorred of the Jews: this were, in your judgment, to deliver him out of one
danger into another: yet there the divine providence designed him a safe
quarter, and provided our tender Jesus a bed in Heliopolis, for his hard manger
in Bet blehem. Whether could you imagine St Chrysostom was going, but as a
certain prey to famine and misery, Zor. l. d. Ribad. in vit.
when he went in banishment into Armenia, without friend or fortune? yet there
God raised him two noble friends, Philadelphus, and Diescorus, who esteemed
themselves happy in so rich a prize, and became not only Patrons to his Person,
but Proselytes to his Religion. How was it possible, great Athanasius could
live six years in a cisterne, Naucler. vol. 2. chronol. genesis 12.
and sour months in his Father's monument, had not God moved the heart of a
Virtuous matron to conveigh him daily relief? Will you behold you own
misfortunes in reverend Brentius, who after twenty six years constant
preaching at Hala in Swethland, with his Wise and Children was, by the bloody
Papists, thrown out of his own house into a hospital, and, Sleid. l. 20. an.
1548.
as if that had been too stately a Palace for a poor Protestant, sent a
begging, had not Vlrichus Duke of Witenberg, Hospitium occultum, entertained
him privately in his own Court. What should I tell you of poor Merlin, Fr.
Hist.
who during the massacre at Paris (a fortnight together) was fed with one egg
a day, which a Hen laid in the Hey-mow, where he hid himself? or of distressed
Peter Martyr, Pet. Mart ep. adfr. Lucens.
whom Martin Bucer relieved at his own Table, till he preferred him to be
Divinity reader at Argentoratum, and procured him an honorable stipend of the
Senate Since the divine providence has found out so many unexpected ways of
relieving his people, why should we think his hand will be shortened toward any
of us, who are now under the like persecution? In the Civil Wars of France,
Fran Hist.
the Papists scoffed the Protestants, that they had neither Men nor money, but a
God for all purposes, and this Magazine never failed them. We have almost for
got our mean beginning: who it was, that advanced us out of the dust to be a
terror to our enemies? Had our King any Arsenall of Arms, but the divine
providence? any Magazine left him, but his God? do but continue your affiance
in Him, and he will be Riches, honors, friends, maintenance, All to you. Or,
put the worst that can be, if our Enemies should bear us off God's earth, yet
they will but drive us into Heaven: and poor prize, they will have of our
bones, (but a lasting monument of their own shame) when our immortal Souls
shall mount above the Stanes, (...), Clem Alex. l. shrow. 4.
a Place above the reach of a persecution As Luther answered Cajetan's Oratous,
when he asked him, Melanston in presat ad town 2. Lutheri.
where he could live safe, if Prince Frederick did not protect him, Sisb Coelo,
Vuder the Firmament somewhere, bur if Earth will not entertain me, Heaven
shall, In my Father's house are many mansions, which puts me in mind of our
Inner chamber, The Allegory, in Christian Patience. Enter thou into thy
chambers, etc. This, as well as the Other, my next particular.

But we have been so long in the other, The Counsel, 2. Allegorical.
that as Cyprian, De patieptia dicturus, patiention vestram, Before I discourse
of Patiences I had need be seech your patience: yet as Moses from mount Nebo,
Had only a view of Canaan a far off, and then dyed: so, Please you only to
look into this Inner room, and I shall conclude.

Patience is a retiring Virtue: she always keeps her chamber, and never goes
abroad to meet affliction, but bids it welcome, when it comes. He is too
delicate for her acquaintance, that cannot entertain so churlish a guest.
Erras, erras frater, says S. Jerome to Heliodore, Ier, Ep. ad Heliodor.
You are mistaken Brother, you are mistaken, if you think to be a Christian and
not to suffer. It Was Iulian's scoff, but a true one, (...), etc. It Is your
duty, Soen. 1.3.6.12.
when Insuries are offered you, to bear them patiently. And if our duty, why
are we such strangers to this noble virtue? Sure you are not so straightened in
room, but that you may spare Patience a chamber. She expects not any stately
palace, but a Quiet mind: the least closet you have will serve her turn, But
your Hearts. A cheap guest she is: you may save your hangings and Perfumes, she
delights in no Ornaments, but the Cross: no delicacies, but faith and hope:
she keeps not her chamber for state, but devotion, and shuts the doors
against all company, but afflictions. A strange humor this! Can she dwell with
misery and not the destroyed with it? Why not? Do you not see the Keeper sport
with his Lion, when the Spectatour will scarce trust his chain. Misery looks
terrible only upon strangers. Let patience bring you acquainted, and though it
look grim upon you at first, yet you will find it a very sweet companion. For
Patience can tell thee, All thy misery is fetched in by thy self, or sent from
God.

If by thy self, No greater argument for patience. He that could never forgive
another, will not sure be so unkind to himself, this were to add Impatience
to Imprudence, and by the same reason thou vexest at thy former error, thou
may vex at thy vexing?

If from God, Tertul. l. de patient.
Cui magis patientiam, quam domino? To whom is our Patience more due, then to
the Lord? He has borne with our Injuties, and shall not we endure his
chastisements? Proud clay, will thou ever be checking the Potter? Insolent
earth, would thou control, where thou should admire? Is his Wisdom
himself, Himself infinite, and shall not be know what is most expedient for
thee? Is his Justice himself, Himself merciful, and because his proceedings
seem harsh, will thou call them unjust? In fine, Is his will the rule of his
actions, His goodness of his will? And can any thing, but what is good,
proceed from goodness it self? Cul dew dignatur irasci Tert I.de.pat.
Tertullian is in the right, Beatum illum servum, etc. Happy the man, with whom
God vouchsafes to be angry! Suffer him, O suffer him to scourge thee here, that
he may spare thee hereafter. For did Mercy open all her bowels upon thee, yet
she could not produce such another mercy, as this very Anger.

Indeed for a man to be thrown out of plenty into want, out of a large
Revenue, unto almost an Alms, is as great a temptation, as now common. Yet
remember, The greater the evil; The more glorious the conquest. It Is no
Victory, to vanquish a poor worm, No praise, to wade over a shallow foard; but
to cut the Ocean, and encounter a potent Enemy is the true gallantry, that
deserves the laurel. Great evils have this benefit with them, that their
difficulties are not so large, but their Crowns are proportionable, and though
they require much patience to conquer them, yet that is, only that they may
Crown the Victor with the greater glory. Many of us, I know, were never in the
list before; now we are set upon by a fierce Judgment, show what patience you
have, what fortitude. Let not the Heathen Philosopher shame you, who could
laugh at his own shipwreck, when we cry out, as if our eternal happiness
were embarked in a Coffer. He could throw that careless Epitaph after his
goods, Pereant, ne Peream, Let them perish, least I perish with them; but we
wish, we had sunk in the same bottom, or with the discontented Israelites,
That we had dyed, ere we came out of Egypt. What means this Impatience, this
cowardice? Have the Enemy sequestered your hearts, as well as your Lands? Have
they plundered you of your Faith together with your Goods? me thinks I hear
you talk like Laban, Wherefore have they taken away my Gods? As if you knew
not, what to do for a God, a Christ, a Heaven, now your wealth is gone. Come,
dissemble no longger, but profess thy self an Atheist, who know no Diety,
but thy Mammon: Be no more a Christian, who can not suffer for
righteousness sake. Never was any man looser by a sjust cause, Totum seculum
pereat, modo patientiam lucri ^a^am, Text. de pat.
though he had nothing left him, but his patience. He is richer with this then
with the whole Indies. Righteousness will not be long in his debt: but he that
has lost a friend for Her she will pay him with a God. He that is deprived of
his liberty for her, she will recompense him with a Redeemer, He that shall
loose Lands, or Houses, or Life for Hes, she will repay him with a Kingdom, a
Crown, yea Aeternity it self. O let me ever be such a looser, and Impatience
it self cannot complain?

Wherefore, let not your Hearts be troubled, but possess your Souls in
patience. Non Villas, August.
non Lauds, Not your Farms, not your Lordships, those you are least masters
of now:but Animas, Your Souls, That manor you have still left you: nothing
can dispossess you of it, but your Impatience. And why will you make a
Foreign evil domestical, and fetch in those furies, that are now abroad, to
disquiet patience in her chamber? When Luther saw Melancton torn in himself
at the distractions of the Church, Sleid. l. 7. an. 1330.
Cur ad hunc modumte crucias, etc. said he, Why do thou thus torment thy
self with impatient thoughts? If our Cause be naught, why do we not throw it
up? If Just, why should we make God a liar in so many promises of success? If
ever a sad Melanction be in this Assembly, let him entreat his patience to keep
her chamber but a moment, and he, that is to come, will come and will not
tarry: which is the last particular, I shall at this time treat of, the First
argument, which like a key locks both chamber doors, Vsque ad momentum, for a
very little moment.

But are there any minutes in God's Ephemerides? Argument, 1. from the Brevity
of our affliction.
do such atoms of time come under his observation? Our Philomathists have
kept their account so well, that they have lost us some part of our year: but
God numbers the days, the hours, yea the very minutes of our affliction. No
so exact a Chronologer, as the divine providence.

Yet you may say unto me, as the Disciples to Christ, Joh. 16. v. 18.
Quid est hoc modicum, What is this little while? we know not what he means.
For the Jews were seventy years in Babylon, and yet he calls it, Tanquam
param momenti, Not a full minute. Nay, Our four years Troubles, which have
seemed almost an Age to us, will he esteem, but a moment! o longum modicum! O
modicum longum, pledomine, longum est and multum valde ninis, Bern. 74. Ser. in
Cant.
these are long minutes indeed, when shall we see an end of our sorrows? But
the Almighty measures time by another dyall then we do: Not the motion of the
Sun, but the purpose of his will. The clock was set from all eternity, but
the fly cannot denore the minutes and faster then the poize, The divine
pleasure, drives it. Did we set our wills by his will, God's clock, and ours
would always agree and strike deliverance together. There was a Dial in
Campus Martius at Rome, that never went according to the Sun: And if Our
moments, and God's differ, it is because they are not set by his will. Our
desires are poized with the heavy weights of self love, and our private ends,
and therefore move faster, then God's will: so that the divine assistance may
happily come too late in respect of our Hasty desires, but never in regard of
our True necessity. The shortest stay seems long to a running mind, the
longest short to the patient.

Esteem not God then slow, who keeps the very minute of his promise, though
he come not at the moment of thy expectation. In Chronicall diseases you must
be ruled by your Physician: though you may desire Physic in the Paroxisme or
hot sit, yet he may think it time enough when the sit is over. so, Nospeed to
this same God's-speed, and then we are to judge our deliverance quick enough,
when he shall esteem it seasonable,

Again, I have seen the twelve signs of the Zodiac compass a Dyall, and
denote the twelve hours of the days God has signs about his Watch too,
Faith, Repentance, etc. but Deliverance is one of the last: now would you have
the clock strike Twelve before One, deliverance before repentance? this is
against the order of Numeration; The hand must point at Repentance, and
newness of life, ere it stand at Deliverance.

But will you give me leave to follow Luther's advices to put this noment in
the Predicament of relation, Luther. in Psalm. 2.
and then he says, it will Absorbere praedicamentum quantitatis, quite swallow
up the predicament of quantity: that is, compare the time of our sufferings
with that other of our sins, and the vasteternity, which expects us
hereafter, and you will confess, it is not half a moment.

both sides, Their Guilt and Duration. The Guilt is eternal, though the Act be
transient. Chrysostom in 5. Joh. Caten. part. gr.
For (...), God judges not always of sin by it is Continuance, but it is
Nautre. Now, what proportion between a temporal punishment and an eternal
one due? The very meditation of an everlasting fire, Aug. Med.
made Austine cry out, Hie ure, hic feca modo in aeternum parcas, Burn me, O
Lord, cut me in pieces here, so thou would spare me for ever? O merciful
God, do we murmur under a short Purgatory in this life, when we are liable to
an eternal torment? if every sin merit everlasting death, how many
eternities of misery are due to out many crying sins? yet thou have given us,
but a Sip of sorrow, that by a Praelibation of this bitter cup, we may prevent
the drinking the very dregs in Hell: that by atast of tempor all misery, we may
never be devoured by an eternali.

King. 17.5.
But will you as Elijah upon the Widows Son, stretch this moment upon your
sins, lay mouth to mouth, and hands to hands, and what a vast disproportion
will you find, between this Little David, and that Huge Goliath? A Child of
four years old, Our present sorrows, and this Philistin of threescore, Our
past iniquities? The very fingar of this man of Gath, Our sins, is bigger
then the whole body of our sufferings, Job compares his sins to the sands of
the Sea, and if you will sit down and tell the sands of the Sea, and your
sufferings together, what Alps, what mountains of sin will you lay aside
for one little heap of sorrow? O our Impanitency is our greatest Calamity!
This has spun out the moment into so many years already. For War is an
Itinerary, not a mansionary evil: It is going it circuit through the World,
and would soon pass through England, did not our many crimes deteine it in so
long an Assize with us, Ask no more, Jer. 4.21, 22.
How long shall I behold the Standard and hear the sound of the Trumpet? When
God does still complain. My People are foolish, they have not known me: they
are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. Wonder not, that
the desire of our hearts, Peace, has been so long an abomination to our
Enemies, when the Almighty does yet stretch out his hands te Us, a disobedient
and goine saying People. Lord, what Unreasonable Creatures are we? Salv. l. 6.
de gub. dei.
Volumus delinquere and nolumus Verberari, We would of offend and not suffer
for it. Thou must remove thy judgments, O God: but we may retain our sins:
Thou must not afflict us, but we may dishonor thee. I see I must be plain
with you: Is there a nasty drunkard, a rotten adulterer, or a damned swearer
the less for these sad times? Are we not all more undone in our manners then
our estates; and have we not less of virtue left us, then of our substance?
Nay, would Salvian's complaint were not verified, Assiduitas calamitatum,
augmentum criminum, o Incredible, The Continuance of our misery does but
increase our iniquity, like that snaky monster, that multiplied the more for
the beheading? Boast not to me, what a good Subject thou art, when thou do
recruit the King with thy money, and rout him with thy sins. Tell me not, what
a friend thou art to thy Native Country, when thou will not expend a lust, to
save it from ruin. How far short art thou of the very Heathens piety, who
did not think the safety of their Nation too dear, at the price of their
blood, and yet thou will not part with one of thy sins to redeem it from
destruction? Never speak of peace more, so long as thou art thus at open War
with Heaven. If you would have God keep his moment in punishing, why do not
you observe your modicum in sinning. Can you blame the Physician, if the
disease continues, when the Patient will not forbear the meats that nourish
it? An intemperate stomach does but poison physic, and so feed the malady with
the medicine. And will you think the Almighty cruel, That the War lasts,
when Nos per nostrum non patimur seelus, etc. Our sins will not suffer the
Enraged Diety to put up his Sword. Alas! His moment has hitherto waited upon
Ours: O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when will it once be? For
God's sake, for the King's sake, yea for Sion's sake, let this be the day. God
has even put Deliverance in our own power, and why will you defer your
happiness any longer? Humble your Souls under the mighty hand of God, and he
will bend the stubborn hearts of our Enemies to Peace. Do but Repent of your
sins, and the War is ended: make your Peace with God, and go, Proclaim
Peace, throughout all England.

But Once more; Compare the time of your suffering on Earth to that of your
reigning in Heaven, Thousand years be but as a day in that Kingdom, we have
not yet suffered the hundred thousand'th minute of an hour of that day. The
vast circumference of the Earth conteines more then two thousand and five
hundred miles, yet the Mathematician will prove it is but a Point in respect of
the Heavens, Kecher. Geograph.
because from any superficies he does not less behold halfethe Heavens, then
if he were in the Center of the Earth. So the many thousand years extension of
sorrow, is butan Instant in respect of eternity: Because eternity seems not
less eternal if you look upon it from the very Center of misery. Will you see
it tried by Saint Paul, who stepped up into the Third Heaven, to wrigh the Cross
and the Crown. And returned with this joyful Probatum est, The most ponderous
Cross is but a feather in the scales, 2. Cor. 4.17.
a Momentary lightness, in comparison of that surpassing, exceeding, eternal,
(where shall I stay?) weighty Crown of glory.

Complain not then of thy short pain, when an eternal ease expects thee.
Think not that sorrow long, that ends in everlasting joy: but hold out this
little moment, thou have but this one step to thy Crown. Bishop Fisher, in
Hen. 8.
And as the Bishop, when he was going to suffer, threw away his staff, and bid
his legs do their duty, He should not trouble them far. So command thy
Faith and Patience to do their last office, Jam patum itineris restat, Thou
art almost at thy journyes end, at the very gates of Immortality: And what a
dishonor to faint at the end of the Race? what a misfortune, to suffer
shipwreck in the Haven? stretch thy patience, but a moment, and what a blessed
Change will thou find it, To breath thy Soul out of sorrows into joy, out of
misery into happiness, out of terments into pleasures for evermore. For our
present affliction, will but add to the degrees of our Happiness, and we
shall be the more blessed, that we were once so miserable.

O dear Lora, so inflame our hearts with the love of Aeternity, that the
longest affliction may seem short, the heaviest light, in comparison of that
everlasting bliss which thou have prepared for us in thy Kingdom. Unto which
bring us, for the merits of Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Honor and Glory, for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. l. 8. r. Their bondage is His captivity. l. 21. for would, r. could.


