A SERMON PREACHED (before God, and from him) To the Honorable House of
COMMONS.

At a public Fast, November. 27. in the year

GoD Is Our refVge, Our strength; a Help In Troubles Very aboVnDant We
Find. By George Gipps Rector of Elston in Leichestershire, one of the ASSEMBLY
of DIVINES.

Published by ORDER of the said HOUSE.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Pauls-Church-yard, 1645.

Die Mercurij, 27. Novembr. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That M. Salloway and M.
Knightly, do from this House give Thanks to M. Pickering and M. Gipps, for the
great pains they took in the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty
of this House at S. Margarets Westminster, it being a day of public
Humiliation, and to desire them to print their Sermons. And it is ordered, That
none shall presume to print their or either of their Sermons without leave
under their or either of their hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do appoint Christopher Meredith to print this Sermon, GEORGE GIPPS.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
SEeing it is made a matter of course and order, that we speak to you in
print; and that you press me to the print, which whilst I remained a
Volunteere I have not hitherto been guilty of; Imprimatur, I say not, Cum
Privilegio, that I am not so ambitious to challenge; nor ex mero permissu, this
were more ambitious to affect: but my present scantling is, Jussu Superiorum,
which I cheerfully obey, the rather because sweetened also cum gratia. For so
your Order phraseth it, You are desired to print, namely by them, who may
Command: which is so far from weakening, that it strengthens the Command by a
double tie of Obedience. Qui impetrare vo u^t cum ^perare possunt, ij obligant
dum obsecrant.
I hope therefore that this Sermon may crowd through the press, as many a
meaner person does with others of greater note. Gods Blessing go with it, so to
imprint the truths thereof in the hearts of the Readers, that the use thereof
may be read in the course of their lives.

I only add in mine own behalf two things: First, I having nothing wherein
to boast, but mine infirmities, both of mind and body, do confess that I
shall not be able to present to your eyes in the same dress of words that I
did to your ears, those self same notions; the notions were duly penned, the
words not, my memory would not bear it; how ever the debt be not paid in the
self same covne, which I did then tell forth unto you, yet I hope you shall
have the just sum in value to your content, and my discharge, I having
withal saved the burden of carrying in memory the words. Secondly, whereas to
spare the wearying of you, as much as of my self, I did cut off the better
part of the last point, I shall now pay down unto you the arrerages not
formerly tender'a, with whatever was overseene in the former telling; I return
(with Joseph's brethren) with double money in this sacks mouth. I desire you to
daigne me this favor, in lieu whereof for the present I shall only add that I
am

Your most humble Servant in the Cause of God and of Christ, GEORGE GIPPS.

A Sermon Preached to the Honorable House of Commons on their Monthly Fast
Novem. 27. 1644.
PSALM. 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
THis being the first verse of the Psalm, Gratiarum actiapro mira^us. losit
beneficijs divinis, etc. Quam cane^at Israel, etc. Quem psalmum ecclesia nunc
ca^it in laudem Dei potenter and mirabiliter ecclesiam and verbum suum to
servantis contra.
it is independent: neither shall I trouble you with the title of the Psalm,
but only usher in my Text with Luthers descant upon the Psalm. It is (says
he) a thanksgiving to God for his wonderful benefits, in keeping his Church
safe from all the Enemies thereof, those nations which circled them in on every
side, who both in hostile and perfidious manner sought their utmost ruin. This
therefore the Jews sang to support their faith, and to raise their fainting
spirits in all their extremities: 1. Hereses p^naticorum spirituum. 2. Torque
tyrannos.
which also (adds he) let us now sing to the honor of God, powerfully and
miraculously preserving his word and Church.

Against the errors and heresies of giddy brained spirits, 3. Impugnationem,
mundi carr^s and peccati.


Against the power and policy of cruel tyrants.

Against the baits of sin, the world, and the flesh,

Against all malice of Satan by all his engineers. 4. Et huic contra portas
inserorum and infinitu^ odum diaboli. Luther^.


A Psalm in all these respects as well suiting our present, as both those
former times and conditions. Thus therefore we close with our Text, wherein
(according to my usual method) I propound these three things.

1. Explication of the sense of the words. 2. Observation of their doctrinall
truths. 3. Application thereof to our own behoof.
Begin we with the first, the Explication, wherein we should not at all trouble
you with the diversity of readings of Expositors, Concordia d^s^rs, Di^corddia
concors.
did not their harping upon several strings make up a full harmony of sense:
strange it is, yet not so strange as true, that their jarring does fill up the
sweet musical sense. Briefly my tongue shall tune them, that your ears may
deseant upon the words in order.

1. God, 58. words.
even that God whom Paul describes. Acts* 17. 24. that made the world, and all
things therein: that dwells not in Temples made with hands. ver. 28. In whom
we live and move and have our being. This for the first word.

The 2. follows, Is as we read it. Others, shall be. Others neither, nor any
thing in lieu thereof, but simply, God our refuge. So is the Original. All
which differing readings in one give us the full sense* thus. Experimentally,
God is: resolvedly, God shall be: pathetically, God our refuge, an exclamation
with exultation. Ravished affections utter broken sentences, with elevation of
voice, transported above rules of Grammar. Experience of Gods mercies passed
rightly improved, beget resolution for the time to come, and from both an
exultation of the heart in admiration of Gods mercy. Let this suffice for the
second word.

The 3. follows. Our, which some read affixed to God, thus our God; others
to refuge, thus, God is our refuge. Both united give the full sense, thus, Our
God is our refuge. First make we God our God by Covenant, then may we make him
our refuge by claim. This for the third word.

The 4. follows. Refuge, as we read it, others Hope, others Shelter. Which
three thus differ. Hope is that grace in our hearts, which puts us upon
refuge (which signifies a flight, or flying and mooving) by which flight we
arrive at shelter to repose our selves in. All which three readings joined make
up the full sense, thus, A heart rightly anchored by hope in God, may safely
fly unto him, and so doing, securely shelter himself in him. Suffice this for
the fourth word. Ainsworth. God will be to us a hopeful shelter, and a
strength, a help in distresses we shall find very great: to wit, a very great
help in distresses we shall find him, or, he is found; or a help in
distresses which we shall find very great.


The 5. follows ( And) strength. Not only strong in the concrete, but
strength it self in the abstract: that is absolute, infinite and alfufficient
strength. And so it may look, either backward to shelter, or forward to help.
Both are most full, thus, God is so all sufficient in strength that who fly to
him for shelter, shall certainly have help from him. This for the fifth word.

The 6. follows ( A) help, or helper. So is it diversely read. The former
signifies the quality, the latter the person so qualified: both in one make up
our fulness or comfort. God who undertaketh, is fully gifted and qualified for
what he undertaketh: not as many men bear the name of what they have no skill
to perform, both in Church and State. Let this satisfy for the sixth word.

The 7. follows ( In) trouble, or troubles. So are the several readings;
Hieror. out of the Hebrew reads it thus.
all comes up to one full sense. The former the singular number, so take it
distributively, in each and any single trouble whatsoever: the latter the
plural number, Deus nostra spes and fortitudo, auxilium in tribulationibus
inventus es validum. And out of the Septuagints thus.
so take it collectively, in all troubles doubled and multiplied how many
soever. The next word will perfect these, which we pass unto.

The 8. and last word (or rather words and phrase) very present, so we read
it: but the original with diverse translations express the verb Find, and
that either thus, we shall find very present, great, abundant: yea too too
present, great and abundant. And all these several readings are the least
part of the variety of their expositions; Deus noster resugium and virius
adiutor in tribulationibus quae im^enerunt nos nimis. Whom Augustine and
generally the ancients follow, Ambrosius thus glosseth on it. Be.
for as much as some, to fill up the sense, do join them to ( help) thus: we
shall find (God) a very present, yea too too present, great and abundant help:
others to troubles thus: God a help in very present, yea too too present,
great and abundant troubles which we shall find. A third sort join both in
one, and take all together, as the most full sense, thus, Gods Saints in this
life are sure to find very present, great and abundant troubles, yea too great
for them to bear, but that their comfort is, that they are as sure to find God
a very present, great and abundant help in all those their troubles: yea too
great to be overcome by them. Some more varieties of readings there are of
less moment, which I shall pass over when I shall have acquainted you with
Augustins descant: namely, ^atimes and ad ^atorem: ut ^culationes abundant,
ad^at Moll^us Deus nobis pro^ obur, aux^. in tribulaationibus abuale, ^
in^entus est valde.
in as much as the verb ( find) may also be read ( Be found) passively: we
find in the world outward troubles: but me are found of our sins, which do
dog us home to our consciences, troubling them: and these are those too too
great troubles: but herein also is our comfort, that we are found of God as a
help in this most desperate case also: For so, Acts* 2. upon Peter's preaching
their crucifying of the Son of God, their sin found them out, that they
were pricked at the heart, and cried out, what shall we do? yet heard this
word of comfort, Repent and be baptized for the remission of your sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. What may not be forgiven when this
is forgiven, for a patient to kill his Physician coming to cure him: yea and
so forgiven, as the blood of that Physician, which they let out, is given him
to drink for his perfect cure: Thus Augustine. Non invenerum peccata ^ua sea
inventisunt in eis: sed ^nerunt ad^torium: Quid ^us agro quam (...) dimitditur,
quid non ^ttitur? ag^ite and bap^zemint, ^s. Austin.
Give me leave to add one thing more to complete the sense, and so put an end
to the first general part propounded, the explication of the words. There
being no other verb in the Original Hebrew expressed but this, ^inde: not
that other, is, or shall be, nor any other in liew thereof, what necessity is
there that we supply any? but string all the words of our text upon this verb,
Find (which we find in the Hebrew) and let it run through them all, making
one entile rich chain thus, we shall find God our refuge, strength and very
present help in trouble: thus in our English; not to repeat the descants any
more. Thus of the explication.

The second general follows, Observation of the doctrinall truths: where
give me leave, first to recount all those hitherto found out, and thence to
cull out some choice ones.

List, Own we that one only God that made all, etc. as Acts 17.

Second, Rest we not, until we have made this God our God, by most sure and
firm covenant.

Third, So doing, we may securely anchor our hope in him.

Fourth, So hoping, we may in all straights fly unto him.

Fifth, So flying, he will give us shelter and harbor.

Sixth, And yet no tottering shelter, but of strength alsufficient.

Seventh, Yet not securing us from finding troubles very present, great and
abundant, exceeding our strength to bear.

Eighth, Yet with this comfort, that in all of them we are sure to find God a
more present, great and abundant helper, most able and willing to help us
through.

Ninth, Hasten we to find out our sins by repentance, least that we be found
out by them in an accusing conscience.

Tenth, Yet even therein is our comfort, that we shall upon our repentance for
the most heinous sins, be found out of God in pardon and forgiveness; yea if
we are of the election of grace, we shall be sought and found out of God, to
bring us to repentance and salvation.

Lastly, from all this jointly in one, let us so gather experiments of what is
past, as to settle our resolution for that which is to come, and from both
exult we with elevation both of heart and voice; We shall find God our refuge,
and strength, a very present help in trouble.

A Text full of comfort, were we as full of faith to improve it with best
advantage to our souls.

But however all these are excellent divine truths, and might plentifully be
made good out of Gods word: yet in as much as they are but several descants,
yea and discords, upon our text, although thus struck into musical harmony; I
shall rather contain my self within the plain song thereof, held forth unto
you in these three following Propositions.

First, A threefold Proposition.
That it is the Portion of Gods Church and Children to find in and through
this life very present (yea too too present) great and abundant troubles, for
them to wade thorough.

Second, That it is the wisdom of Gods Church and Children, to make God their
hope, refuge, and shelter in all these troubles.

Third, That it is the comfort of Gods Church and Children, that so doing they
shall find God a very present (yea too too present) great and abundant help
in all these troubles.

Thus we have passed from our first Branch of our Method propounded, namely the
Explication of the sense of the words, unto the second branch thereof, the
Observations doctrinall: which in their method we proceed to handle, with their
Use and Application.

Only to save multiplied labor, these three points being so in nature linked
together, that very many Texts of Scripture do prove them all jointly, we will
premise those Scripture proofs, and refer you thereto in the several and
distinct handling of the points. Thus Psalm. 18. generally throughout:
particularly, ver. 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly
men made me afraid, so ver. 5. there is the first point. Ver. 2. My God, my
rock, my fortress, my strength, my buckler, my high tower, in whom I will
trust: there is the second point. ver. 2. my deliverer. ver. 3. l will call
upon the Lord, so shall I be saved from mine enemies, ver. 48. He delivers me
from mine enemies. etc. there is the third point. So Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the
afflictions of the Righteous (the first point) but the Lord delivers him out
of all (the third point) v. 22. None that trust in him shall be desolate (the
second and third point jointly) so inweaved into all the Psalm. So frequently
elsewhere: we shall occasionally overtake them in our following discourse:
wherefore enter we upon our first Proposition.

That it is the Portion of Gods Church and Children to find in this life very
(yea too too present) great and abundant troubles. The first Proposition.
The ratifying of which truth shall be, first, in a brief enumeration of these
troubles. Secondly, in deducing thence Conclusions. For the first;

Our following Conclusions, 2. 4. Conclusions.
which are these four:

First, Adams offspring, both godly and wicked alike in this life. Eccles. 9.
1. None knows love or hatred by all that is before them. ver. 2. All comes
alike to all, to the righteous and to the wicked. v. 3. One event is unto all.
Job 5. 6, 7, proves both the first and the second Conclusion: in that it is
said born, not created thereto. This deluge brake in by our tall.
Secondly, this common condition did not flow from our creation by Gods
sovereign right of dominion, but is an act of Gods justice upon Adams fall,
Gods punishment upon all his posterity, whereby the whole world of creatures is
cursed unto them, as Genesis 3. appears the execution of that doom, Genesis 2. In
the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Thirdly, yet in the upshot
thereof shall be a vast difference between the Godly and wicked, even, as vast,
as there is a distance between the highest Heaven and the lowest hell. Matt.
25. 32. separate them as the goats and sheep, Come ye blessed, v. 34. and v.
41. Depart yecursed. v. 46. and the righteous shall go into life eternal, and
the wicked into everlasting punishment.

Let this suffice for the Doctrinall part of this first Proposition: the first
use whereof is, for satisfaction of that querulous query: why God will be so
harsh to his own children, as the doctrine does hold forth. The answer to
which is twofold. First, that he seems so, in putting them into a common
condition with others in the kinds of their sufferings: but truly is not so,
through the vast difference, not only in the close, but in carrying them along
throughout all their sufferings, All does co-work for their spiritual and
eternal good, as has in part and will occasionally be more fully specified.
Jobs commendations, Job. 1. 9.
that he served God whilst that God had made an hedge about him, but thought
that afflictions would have staggered and shattered his faith, though that Job
confuteth him therein, which was a great foil to Satan. Many can swallow dry
meat for the pleasantnes of the sauce. Therefore God orders Christian
profession to have sower sauce, to see if we will embrace it merely and
entirely for Christ his sake. Secondly, on the contrary; did the wicked only
escape, and the godly only were troubled; this would too much daunt these, and
encourage those: seeing, that though it be not so, yet the waters appear too
troubled. How did Iohs friends charge him for an hypocrite, because God had so
afflicted him? which proved so great a trial, that in the like case it did
stagger David, and swelled up his adversaries, that the Church suffered, and
they prospered. Yea this moved patient Moses to be so strangely importunate
with God, not to destroy Israel in the wilderness, least the Egyptians should
say, Exodus 32. 11, 12 Numb. 14. 16.
God brought them forth of Egypt for mischief, to slay them in the mountains;
Yea, because not able to bring them into Canaan. Therefore Gods wisdom has
ordered it, that his justice shall be satsfied by all suffering alike troubles,
and his grace and mercy showed, by so sanctifying troubles unto his childrens
good, both of Grace and of Glory. See more hereof hereafter


2. Tim. 2. 12
Had we in England thus sympathised with the Churches in Germany, and France,
yea, more lately of Ireland, and Scotland, by Prayers and tears for them, with
other succor and aid, according to their necessities and our abilities,
together with self-reformation, most probably we might have escaped this fierce
storm, that is now pouring down upon our own pates, Ezekiel. 9. 4, 5, 6. Amos 6.
1, 3, 6, 7. Matthew. 11. 17.
even therefore because we did put far off the evil day, when God summoned
us to it. But alack we are so far from sharing with our Brethrens sufferings,
that we will not own that general charge of all Christians at all times, to
be crucified to the world, and the world unto us: to use the world as if we
used it not, by sitting loose unto it, and not fashioning our selves after it,
with the like, which in the midst of prosperity we should do, and yet in our
most sad present condition (when summoned to mourning and fasting) we please
our selves in the vain delights of worldlings, that never knew nor tasted
better, yea, and that with pleading for, and practicing of the same, and that
by Ministers of Christ, who would be counted faithful. I never heard nor saw
the like in all my life, until within these very few days; in so much as when
I came up to London, (upon your Summons unto this present public employment)
and was showed such and such Divines of note, I had much ado to believe it,
and still it lies as Lead at my heart, to consider what ruffianly hair, what
Cavalerian garb of cloths, with answerable diet we are fallen upon, even in
these sad times, as easy and loose herein, as rigid and strict in what is both
of smaller evidence and consequence. Let me ease my heart, and discharge my
Conscience in some measure herein. As the Kingdom of Heaven stands not in
meats and drinks, so the heirs of this Kingdom should not stand so much for
them, nor take care for wordly pomp and pleasure: for after all these things
seek the Gentiles, Matt. 6. 32, 33.
this is Christ's argument, namely, because they want better, as in the
opposition follows: but seek ye first the Kingdom of God: and having met
with such choice game, ye will never stoop to, nor strain for so poor
delights: as the Greyhound, that is well entered at the stately Dear, will
never again strain hard after the silly goe-by-ground Hare. Out voluntary
exemplar abstinence should evidence, not that we are not worthy of the world,
but that it is not worthy of us: not that these things are too good for us, but
we for them to place our affections thereon: shall we, because we refuse to
have holy vestments pinned on us by Canon, confute this no way, but by all
loose, new, costly attire, and fashions, Cavaleere-like, that nothing of our
outside may have any color, or show of gravity, and modesty? Certainly it was
not so within these few years, when the poor fugitives posted to new England
in another cut of hair and clothing. True, by their fruits you shall know
them: and are not temperance and modesty some of these fruits? In so many
thousand plants, which God has created, the Herbalist is able to distinguish
each one, not only by their fruits, but even by their leafes also, both for
color and cut: and sure our outward dress (with your leave) may answer
thereto, if not unto fruits. Whether do the Divines of other Reformed
Churches, who own no holy vestments, take this Christian Liberty (if not
rather unchristian licentiousness) to themselves? How shall we weane others
from that teat, which we so banker after our selves? A Law from great Persons
that poor men kill not Dear and Partridge, whilst themselves do it so
eagerly, breeds the higher esteem thereof, and a more longing desire to do
the like, and yet there are in our like case, who, having no colorable plea
for it, fear no colors to do it. But I take up, and crave pardon, that I
have so eagerly followed the game, whilst in view, O that it may prove the
hunting it to death, and then I shall think it labor well spent.

I add as briefly a third Use, only effectual means to take us off from the
world, and so to improve aright the former Use, Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30, 31. which I
commend to your reading, and so

I pass unto the second Proposition, The second Proposition.
namely, That it is the wisdom of Gods Church and Children, to make God their
hope, refuge, and shelter in all these their troubles. The proof of Scripture
I gave you in the general of all the three Doctrines; we shall now add the
demonstrative grounds of reason, which are summarily these twain. First,
because in God is full, certain, and sufficient help in all troubles.
Secondly, because out of God in no Creature, no not in all the Creatures, is
there full, certain, and sufficient help. If these two be as strongly
confirmed, as they are easily affirmed, I am sure you cannot question the
validity of their proof: For as much as instinct of nature teaches every
creature to fly thither for shelter, where it hops for help, and succor;
Psalm. 104. 18. Prove. 30. 26.
as both David and Solomon tell us, that the Conies fly unto the holes of the
rocks, as the Goats to the steep craggy tops thereof. Our only work therefore
is, to make good these 2. reasons.

The former one being the affirmative, and the express third Doct. we shall
meet with it seasonably there.

In the mean time clear we here the latter negative one, that out of God, in
no one, no not in all the creatures in one, is full, certain, and sufficient
help: and that by these three Reasons.

First,

The second reason is, because these isntrumental helps (such as they be) are
likewise but partial and particular helps, utmost improvement of that natural
faculty, whereby he has enabled them to act and work. In the first Creation,
as well as in Noabs flood, the waters covered the surface of the whole earth,
and should perpetually do so, bu^ Gods (...), (...). be dispensed therewith for
the good of man.
Fire heateth and dries, but withal it burns and consumes, but that water
moistneth and cools: water moistneth and cools, but withal it sinketh and
drowneth, did not earth support; earth supporting we should be soon smothered
without air to breathe in: and it with all would make up but a vast dungeon,
did not the heavens inlighten, by which, with their other influence, they make
all the elements fruitful and serviceable for the use of man. Hence had the
Heathen so many gods, as they had several helpers, for that they knew not that
they were one Gods arbitrarie instruments to do his pleasure, which Gods
revealed will has cleared unto us.

Obj. But here may be objected: I but God thus blessing each creature to act
his part, they all jointly can afford sufficient help in all our wants and
necessities?

Answer. As he that tries to pluck up a tree, if it settle after that shaking,
it takes faster root, so will this second reason be much firmer upon answer to
this objection, that has seemed to loosen it: which I shall render threefold.

First, Psalm. ^ulcius ex ipso sonte, etc.
50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou
shall hereby glorify me. Who will scrape to a keeper for a piece of Venison,
who may have free access to the master of the game to ask and have?

A second answer is, Fiat in all the workings of all his creatures, without
which all is null and void ( ipso facto) they will not, they dare not, they
cannot do it. God presently withdrawes his blessing from the creature, when
man neglects him, and rests on it. And the ground of equity herein is full
of comfort: namely God does all this in much grace and mercy unto man, that man
in a constant free kind of familiarity may have recourse unto himself, who
without these occasions and invitations, would serve God as many graceless
children have served their parents, when they have put the staff wholly out of
their own hands so that the child has no farther hope to get any more from
them, they slight them, and neglect all observance of them. As it was with the
Prodigal son in the Gospel, who having received his portion from his Father,
went into a far country, and returned not until he wanted bread to satisfy
hunger; whereas on the contrary, necessity enforces us, as the case now
stands, to have daily recourse to God, and so use brings onward to delight
therein. Hence our Savior most wisely teaches us to pray, Give us this day
our daily bread, to enforce upon us a daily duty, to crave from hand to mouth,
if not rather from mouth (in prayer) to hand; and this is the true ground and
reason of the duty of prayer, and praising of God; not to inform him of our
wants, who knows them better then our selves; nor to quicken him to supply
our wants, who is more ready to give, then we to ask, and preventeth us with
requisites uncraved; least of all that he has any need of, or advantage by our
service, to whom the whole creation can add nothing, neither does he want any
thing; nor any the like reasons; but merely and purely in mercy and grace he
will have us see our wants, know where is the springhead for supply, 1. Tim.
3. 4, 5.
and to have recourse thereto, to beget in us his Saints and servants a delight
to converse with him, as he dealt with Adam in Paradise, to stablish us in our
new creation. The more is their sin who neglect so great grace offered unto
them.

Take the third and last answer to the objection, ipso facto) we make all void,
and do out our selves of Gods grace, Psalm. 73. 24, 25, 26. Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and none in earth that I desire besides thee -- Thou art my
portion; which truth does utterly rout the Papists in their doctrine of merit;
of invocation of Saint or Angel whatsoever.

And if any shall here farther object, that God uses his ministry and
ordinances as means in this behalf. To this we answer: First not colourably
so in matter of Election and glorification: no nor of Redemption, wherein Christ
alone is interested, God blessed for ever. Secondly, I say in the rest, these
means are not natural within the compass of the creation, but supernatural,
immediately from God, from heaven sent for those ends, as are those ends
themselves. Thirdly, such as they are these means do wholly work
supernaturally and arbitrarily, not naturally and necessarily; only when,
where, how, and how free God pleases: yea and when so, it is not in virtue of
any infused inherent quality in them: but immediately from God, by the
concurrence of his grace, in our use of his means prescribed, in obedience of
faith unto him. Fire burns, and water wetteth by virtue of inherent qualities
from God, therefore they do so burn and wet all alike, who are at alike
distance and alike disposed; but the Ministry converteth one when not 99. at
one time, when not at twenty other times, by one man's ministry, when not by
others, without any difference, yea often with disadvantage on the creatures
part, only by the gracious pleasure of our good God, as is aforesaid, 1 Cor. 2.
3. I was with you in weakness and much fear, (...) Chapters. Cathedra^.
ver. 4. And my preaching was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit and power (namely of the same spirit, perfected in
my weakness) ver. 5. That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. Chap. 1. 23. We preach alike to all, but ver. 26. Ye
see your calling, that not many wise, mighty, noble, ver. 27. but the foolish
and weak things of the world to confound the wise and mighty, ver. 31. that he
that glories should glory (ver. 29. only) in the Lord, Romans 9. 15. I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, ver. 16. It is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, ver. 18. yea and whom
he will he hardens. Act. 16. 13. We spoke to the women resorting thither,
ver. 16. And a certain woman (named and described there, as one of a hundred
and worth a hundred uncertain ones) heard us (indeed, but) her heart the Lord
opened, etc.

Finally, form ore evidence hereof, God often infuseth grace without any
means, as in those sanctified in and from the womb. John Baptist and the
rest; yea above and contrary to means, as in the thief converted on the
cross, who might have argued probably with others, He that saves not
himself, how shall he save me? Act. (...) etc. See v. 15, 16.
And in persecuting Saul, who in heat of pursuit of the Saints was himself
made a chief one, a choice one; yea God has wrought many miracles, even in
natural and civil affairs of men above and contrary to natural principles,
to convince his sovereignty, that we may go to and rest wholly on him, and not
on the creature.

So much (I hope not too much) to settle the second reason against objections.
We have made lies our refuge, and have hid our selves under falsehood, ver. 17.
The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, Jer. 16. 19. O Lord my
strength, my for tresse, my refuge in the day of affliction, -- surely our
Fathers have inherited lies, The Anti^hesie is between God and all things
(...).
vanity and things wherein there is no profit. Briefly demonstrate we this
thus. Either the creature is a mere natural agent, without free choice; and
this proves a lie to us not by any venom of malice in it, but by Gods
blasting and cursing it to us, for our trusting to it. Thus he makes the earth
as iron, and heaven as brass unto us, etc. Or secondly, if the creature be a
voluntary agent (as are men and angels) then it often proves a lie to us in
rancour of malice and perfidiousnesse, as do wicked men and devils: the devil
generally at last pays home in their own coin to witches, his most
faithful servants, that shame in the world which he owes them. And witches
themselves usually bewitch them or theirs at last, through some check they
take who did most fear and humor them, having no power over them who most
neglect and defy them. Or thirdly, if good men, they prove a lie to us through
weakness, undertaking above their strength, through, heedlesnesse,
forgetfulness, or other weaknesses, frustrating their good intentions, being
first themselves deceived, This particular I forgot in my Sermon, so evidencing
man's weakness thorough my forgetfulness.
and so deceiving others. And this (beloved) is the most candid interpretation
that we can put upon very many of our present State affairs: we hope their
failings are from humane frailty, not from devilish malice and treachery;
yet with all I say: our charity herein will help us, not them who offend of
malicious wickedness. God will find them out and call them to account, and as
he mocketh not, so will he not be mocked. The Lord give us all an awful dread
of him in what he betrusteth us withal in this particular. Lastly, even good
Angels prove a lie unto us, not by any malice or weakness in them, but by our
casting and forcing our hopes on them, promising our selves more from them then
they do, dare or can promise to, or undertake for us. Though indeed properly
in this case (as in most of the others) we rather prove a lie unto our selves,
forcing our slight to the creatures, which they would not have us to do. And
herein are the Papists again miserably foiled in their adoration and
invocation of Saints and Angels glorified, Revel. 19. 10. and Chap. 22. 9.
which they do detest; witness that of John, who falling at the Angels feet
to worship him, he said, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servants, worship
God. And the Scripture abundantly charge us, that we do not, and for that
we do trust to our own wits, wisdom, wills, wealth, strength, favor of
Princes, multitude of people or whatever creature; even our inherent holiness,
for that this also is a creature, not only when with the Papists placed in
superstitious will worship, but when in the truly holy works of the moral law,
most religiously in faith performed. Thus have you the demonstration of our
second doctrine; the whole creature is vanity and a lie to trust in: Therefore
it is the Saints wisdom to fly unto and rely upon God only in all their
troubles. Improve we it by Use.

As first Reproof of all bare negative not trusting in God, would certainly
trust in him. What greater disparagement to men in place, then to distrust, or
not to trust them (I now speak of a civil trust due to men in and for God,
raised up by God, as means under him, which is lawful, if it do not out, nor
overtop, but is sub-servient unto our trust in God) though they may fail in
ability, in fidelity, through infirmity, death may frustrate all, yet what a
sour upbraiding will these belch forth, as stomacking the matter: what will
you not trust me? How can we answer God, or how dare we ever come to him again
having once thus ill used him? Psalm. 25. 2. I trust in God, let me not be
ashamed; the only way not to be ashamed ever to look God again in the face;
and that God shame thee not in giving thee into the hands of thy enemies, as
there follows: See more ver. 20. And yet the common bane of these times is,
that we will trust God no farther then we see him. What do we call that man
concerning whom we so express our selves? Yet so we deal with our God. Hence
it is, that men turn from side to side, and alter counsels, votes, company, and
what not upon each disaster in battle, or upon other secondary causes failing,
we quite forsake our colors, namely all the Protestations and Covenants, which
we colourably took up.

But then secondly, Moses, which burned, and was not consumed, Exodus 3. 2, 3.
Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
and all thorough the good will of him that dwelt in that bush, which turned
afterward to a form of prayer; that is, though we have Gods assurance that for
all our thorny perplexities wherein we are involved, and stick for the present,
as did that Ram which Abraham offered up, Gods wise and gracious providence
will at length entricate us out of them, and set us at liberty, they shall not
consume us, yet we faint, and call out, Oh that we might once see and find it.
In this regard even such as like well enough of reformation both in Church and
State, and were pretty well persuaded, Modo quolibet, modo rem.
that God was about that work, yet finding the many great difficulties and
remoraes which clogge the business, are now content to take up with any
reasonable (rather unreasonable) accommodations for peace, even with impatience
to hear of the contrary, merely because they dare not trust God with a
thorough reformation, and the perfecting his work so happily begun, and
miraculously thus far carried onward in despite of all difficulties, and the
powers of hell banding themselves against it. Tantum ^upponimus (...) nihil
pon^mus de ^eo.
is, that we suppose all, but express nothing of our repose in God, which
wears and wearieth out our memory, esteem and honor of God; and on the
contrary we think, talk, yea and dote wholly of the worth of our Councillors
and strength of forces, and the like, Jam. 4. 13. Ye that say we will do thus
and thus, ver. 15. for that ye ought to say, if the Lord will. I, we suppose
that. I but you must rather say that then the other: that is, have God actually
in your thoughts and tongues, to settle your faith and trust in him, ver. 16.
But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all such rejoicing is not good: not
good? Speak out, it is stark naught, its flat atheism, and plain idolizing
the creature; therefore God will remove from us these our idols, if he intend
good unto us, as he has some of our prime Councillors and Commanders, and
often infatuated and dissipated the endeavors of the survivers, to teach us to
trust in him the living Lord, who never fails those that trust in him.

A third and last Use is Exhortation, The Lord is my portion, says my soul,
therefore will I hope in him, ver. 25. The Lord is good to them that wait for
him, that seek him, ver. 26. It is good that we should hope and quietly wait
for the salvation of the Lord. I shall drive on this exhortation by propounding
four Rules, which may serve both as means directing us so to do, and as
marks of trial whither we so do, and esteem of God in all his attributes of
power, wisdom, truth, goodness, mercy and providence, first out of his word,
then from thy experimental observation, and if thou have not yet attaired this
latter, trust him on his bare word, which so honoreth God that he will make is
good to thee sooner or later in thine experience. Ps. 9. 10. They that know thy
name (that is these thy attributes) will put their trust in thee, for thou Lord
have not forsaken them that seek thee. 2. Hence learn to trust God freely and
fully, Ps. 44. 6, 7, 8. notable to our purpose.
or seeking to any other, Prove. 3. 5. Trust to the Lord with all thy heart, and
lean not to thine own understanding. 3. Trust in God constantly, at all
times, in all difficulties and improbabilities, in thy greatest extremities, in
thy greatest securities: in all conditions, be thy estate never so good, that
thou have all that, which worldings trust in, yet not then therein, but in God:
or be it never so bad, that thou have nothing, which worldings stay themselves
upon, yet even then in him securely. Happy is he that has a most even spun
hope in all passges and occurrences whatsoever. Scaliger tells us, that the
least thread, that is spunne, if it were spun with an absolute perfect
evennesse, it would hold up hanged in it the weight of castles, yea of
mountains, and he gives a very subtle reason for it, for if it brake in one
place rather then the rest, then it argues that place weaker then the rest, and
to break in one instant throughout every parcel thereof, were plainly to
annihilate it, therefore it would not break at all: however this be one of his
subtilties, I am sure that a complete evenspun hope, and trust in God would
bear us up against the most mountainous troubles that can befall us, whereas
for want hereof we build castles in the air, by creating new troubles to our
selves in our distracting fears and jealousies. Ps. 62. 5, 6, 7, 8. a
remarkable text.
4. Trust in God perpetually, unto and in death it self; this is proper to the
believer, who has hope in death, when as all the worldlings hopes do perish.
This made the blood of the Martyrs such seed to the Church, Sanguis martyrum
semen ecclesiae.
that whilst that they, who obeyed not the word, were won without the word,
whilst they beheld the Martyrs resolution, coupled with fear of God, and so
devoid of fear of death, this convinced them of a more glorious estate after
death, and did dispose them to instruction, and so occasioned their saving
conversion, in the interim they rest in perfect bliss, free from sin and
sorrow, expecting a glorious resurrection, and in this regard also likened in
Scripture to seed, 1 Cor. 15. Isa. 26. 4. Trust in the Lord Jehovah for ever,
for in him is everlasting strength, Job 13. 15. Though he kill me yet will I
trust in him.

Let this suffice for the second Proposition; That it is the comfort of Gods
Church and children (so trusting in him) that they shall find God a very (yea
too too) present strong and abundant help in all their troubles whatsoever.
The proof and improvement whereof has in part bin made good in the second
point, in recompense whereof this third will do as much for the second point,
this being the prime demonstrative argument for it, as we then showed, so nigh
of kin are these two. The clearing of this point by Scripture proof is (as the
former) referred to those general premised texts. For farther clearing hereof
I shall first gather up the graduall arguments in our text thus. 1. God is our
hope, refuge and shelter, that is, our hope makes us sly to him for shelter. I
so do many, and find small comfort, miserable comforters, as Job found his
three friends, weak props. As some in a storm hasten to a tree, which so
pelteth them with droppings, that they leave it and rather expose themselves to
the weather. Therefore secondly, our text adds, And strength; that is,
alsufficient to protect them, who make him their shelter. I so are many men
more able, then willing to help, as Dives was to relieve Lazarus? 3. Therefore
our Text adds, a help we shall find him ready and willing. I happily in
some few small troubles without much cost or trouble? Lastly, therefore our
Text says, in very great and abundant troubles, though we find them too too
great and abundant, yet will he bear us through, and out of them all. So that
nothing is desirable in this point, in which our Text holds not forth comfort.

It were easy from Scripture to show you experiments in all particulars, which
your own observation may supply, both in temporal and spiritual troubles, as
our first point branched them forth: but I choose rather to remoove a cavil,
which makes battery against this truth, the removal whereof will much settle
the same. Thus,

Obj. Experience tells us (whatever you say) that the godly aer overborne
with troubles, and sink and perish under them. I shall give you a seven fold
answer hereto.

Answ. 1. Know that this third does not enterfeer with the first Proposition,
That the troubles that befall in this life are common to godly and wicked men,
and that the godly may die under the pressures thereof, death being the period
and closure of this life, Mat. 10. 17. Christ forewarneth, thereby to fore-arme
us herein. And then again know that the first does not trip up the heels of
this third Proposition, but that nevertheless God is our help in and out of
them all. etc. the manner is Gods respect unto man troubled, and man's respect
back again to God, both for ground and end why, and degrees how fare God orders
that they be so troubled. According to which distinctions we settle the point
in a four fold conclusion.

First, David to say, Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but
now have I kept thy Word. ver. 75. Thy judgments are right: thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled. In all which temporal troubles
the delivery is conditional, not absolute, namely, when, how, and how far
Gods wisdom sees best for his glory, and his Childrens good.

A second Conclusion is, Gal. 5. 17.
which (as contraries) are in continual combat. Hence the Godly cannot
totally, or finally sink under sin, because the Spirit cannot be subdued to,
and conquered by the flesh, 1 John 4. 4. Ye are of God, little children, and
have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in
the world.

A third Conclusion is,

The fourth and last Conclusion is, Paul speaks 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fought a
good sight -- ver. 8. henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
-- and not to me only, but to those also that love his appearing, which causes
that his triumphant challenge Romans 8. 33, 34, 35. In all which the wickeds
condition is quite contrary: they sink without help everlastingly under all
these troubles.

But here may some object, John 11. 37. Could not he that opened the eyes of
the blind, have caused that this man should not have dyed? So could not God
without more ado have prevented man's fall into sin and misery, and so Christ's
death? or at least by his death have perfectly freed his children from all sin
and misery, the two troublers of his Israel?

I should have cut short this curious question with Paul's answer. O man, who
art thou that disputest with God? but that a fuller satisfactory answer will
afford choice heavenly notions: Therefore, I say, doubtless his power could,
if his wisdom had seen it meet so to have ordered it: which however we cannot
fathom to its bottom;

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly, particular all his works of wonder, and miracles we do own to speak
so much unto us; as his leading Israel 40 years through the wilderness, Exodus
12. 37, 38. Psalm. 78. 12. etc. and Christ his miraculous feeding so many with
so few loaves. Joh. 6 5. Matthew. 15. 32. And are not Gods ordinary works of
nature as admirable? From one of which a Heathen Philosopher concluded, without
the light of Scripture, that doubtless there is one God, whose universal all
powerful providence orders all things. To this effect he reasoned concerning
the conception of a child in the womb: who distributeth that little mass of
seed into flesh, skin and bone, rather then all into slesh only? or being thus
changed, who caused it to branch forth into head and members, wiith all their
distinctions, rather then to congeale into a lump of bone inwrapped in flesh,
and covered over with skin? or yet why two arms, and legs, and but one
body? who branched forth the hands into five fingers with all their useful
joints? who distributed the intrals, and gave life to all, with the faculty of
concoction, and growth, all in a due porportion, with a multitude of such like
observations? All which are so far from the parents power to dispose of, that
they are often wholly ignorant thereof, until at hand to bring forth, however,
they cannot choose to have male or female; proper, fair, witty children, or
other; the like of Eggs turned into Chickens, Acrons into Oaks: with such a
certain rule, that doubtless they are from one overruling power of God. David
sweetly meditateth this thing of his own conception, Psalm. 139. 13. to the 16.
yet these, and the like, because they fall out in an ordinary course of nature,
foreseen in their causes and means, are not admired, yea, little considered,
as is each least miracle: so true is it, that Familiarity breeds contempt:
whereas it is as rare a work of God to turn water into wine by the ordinary
course of nature, were it truly considered, as by Christ his miracle: Oh, its
the nature of the Vine to do it! I but who gave it this nature and virtue? Oh,
but it is common and ordinary: so much the more admirable providence, that for
so long continuance never faints, nor fails in his work: what is carried
with constancy and certainty is most with wisdom and with power. I might be
large herein, but I contract, and reduce all to the satisfying our present
objection. Its true: God could, if he would, have prevented man's fall, Christ's
death, his childrens sin and suffering: but then, 1. We had not seen the
weakness of the choicest creatures, men, and Angels, when not supported by
God. 2. Nor Gods rich love in Christ given a ransom for us; nor Gods severe
indignation against sin, and sinners, with the highest pitch of Gods exact
justice against reprobates, and of his unfathomed free grace toward his elect
ones, and of his unblemished holiness, that spares not sin, but must have
it punished, though in his children, by way of chastisement, and in his Son
by way of satisfaction; nor the power of the grace of God in his Saints, that
is stronger then death, and so exercises them in all the tossings and turnings
of this life, that all things co-work in the close with best advantage for Gods
glory, and their eternal Salvation; that with admiration looking into these
paths of God, we may say with Paul, Rom 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out? ver. 34. 35. For who has known the mind of the
Lord, etc. ver. 36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: to
him be glory for ever. Amen. This is the end of all, Gods glory, that man
cannot trace his paths. He brings good out of evil, which could not be, had
he not first permitted evil to be. These are Paul's miraculous Riddles and
Paradoxes, 2 Cor. 6. 4. to the 10. v. with which the Spirit of God by faith
acquainteth his children, which the natural man discerns not, neither can
he. Nothing so confounds Satan with all his Assassinates, foiling him at his
own weapon, letting him have his most malicious will, and thereby
accomplishing his own most holy will. As that Joseph's brethren should sell him
into Egypt, that they might not worship him, whom thus they came to worship;
That Sampson should be bound by the Philistines, to deprive him of his
strength, thereby to exercise and evidence his strength to their ruin; That
David should kill Goliath with his sling, and smooth stones out of the brook,
and so cut of Goliahs head with his own sword. All several types of Satan
bringing Christ to death, so working man's salvation, and his own kingdoms
desolation, the things Satan so feared, and hereby thought to prevent, Psalm.
76. 10. Surely the wrath of man (and devils) shall praise thee, and the
remainder of wrath shall thou refrain, that is, when God has let as much
malice run forth, as will make most for his glory, God will turn the cock,
and damme up the residue, when at the fiercest; then is his fit time: and that
is as ver. 9. When God arises to judgment, to save all the meek of the
earth. Let this suffice for clearing of this last doctrine.

The first Use whereof is Instruction of the several ways that God has for
delivery of the godly from all their troubles:

1. God often smites the hearts of the enemies of his Church and children with
sudden fears and jealousies of dangers to themselves, Assyrians, 2 King 7. 6,
7. whom the Lord caused to hear a noise of chariots and horses, and of a great
host, and so were utterly routed. Yea Stories mention the like in ordinary,
through mistake of trees and Sunshine upon waters, and cattle for armies; of
rattling winds, yea dreams striking horror and amazement, as a notable example
of the Midianites dream with the following stratagem, Judge. 7. 13. does
evidence.

2. God often smites the enemies hearts with relenting pity, Judah and Reuben
toward Joseph. Genesis 37. 19. to spare his life. So Ahashuerosh toward Hester,
and the whole Nation of the Jews to reverse the sentence gone forth for their
destruction, Esth. 7. So Nebuchadnezzars heart was set before hand to free
Daniel (in his measure) as well as after to joy in it, and in the interim to be
troubled for him, Dan. 6. These twain are Gods preventing ways of help.

3. God often suffers his Churches and childrens enemies to ride on
prosperously in their projects, Joseph's brethren, who sold him into Egypt, the
Philistines binding Sampson, and the betraying Christ unto death. Also in Saul
his giving Michal to David to wife to be a snare unto him in the dowry of a
hundred Philistines fore-skins, that so David might fall under their hands,
which was his rise to greater honor, 1 Samuel 18. 22, etc. The like in the
accusers of the three children, Dan. 3. and of Daniel himself, chap. 6. both
which tended to the rise of them and ruin of their adversaries.

4. God often lets the principals alone, Pharaoh's host fell off in pursuit
of Israel through the red Sea, Exodus 14. 25. So the band of soldiers, that
came to attach Jesus, as soon as he said, I am he, went backward and fell to
the ground, Ioh. 18. 5, 6. And Ecclesiastical Story tells us, that John
being put into a Caldron of boiling lead, came forth without any hurt.

5. God often suffers the devil and all his instruments to do their worst,
King. 19. 35. The stars in their courses fought against Sisera, Judge. 5. 20.
the Sun and Moon stand still to give light to his people to be avenged of
their enemies, Josh. 10. 12, 13. Yea the river Kishon swept them away, Judge. 5.
21. Yea God has hosts of lice, flies, fleas, frogs, hail, murten, and what
not, to punish kings for their sakes.

6. God often suffers the wicked to prevail even unto martyrdom against his
Church and Saints: how far his wise providence sees best for his own glory
and his childrens good, however delivering them from eternal death and giving
to them life everlasting. I need not recount unto you our own experiences of
our Church of Englands wonderful deliverances: that from the Spanish invasion
of eighty eight, and that of the hellish powder plot, with those in these our
late and present calamities, which we may name Gad, for lo a troop comes;
many deliverances already brought forth, and many more we trust are yet in the
womb.

Gods children are men of observation, and thereout suck they no small
advantage to their souls; which shall usher in a second Use of Exhortation,
David a man after Gods own heart, who inditeth Songs of Gods providence in all
his wondrous works of grace to his Church; both historically from the beginning
of the world down to his own times; and prophetically from his own time unto
the worlds end, yea and the former historical ones with so prophetical a
spirit, that they serve most aptly for future use unto all posterity: and
therefore his book of Psalms remains the only Church music unto the worlds
end unto the Church of Christ.

A third Use is farther Exhortation, have this for thy retiring biding place;
If thither thou dare not, whither will thou fly? how comfortless is that
man's condition, who having no safety abroad, dares not retire, having no quiet
at home through a brawling wife, both at bed and board restless? yea, worse is
the trouble that sin procures, disquieting the Conscience: Such ones are
like to the Citizens of Ai, pursued, and thinking to return to their City, it
was all on fire, and so they fell all by the sword. Josh. 8. not much unlike
was the condition of the Benjamites, Judge. 20. 40 etc. yet worse, even as ill
as may be, is the present condition, because we carry this house, the retiring
place of Conscience about with us, wherever we go, and cannot leave it
behind us; and therefore take we heed how we disquiet it with our sins: Faber
deasciat lignain superficie putrida, si auutem sana invenerit intue in
aedificium provehit, non valdae de superficie putrida and laeso solicitus: Quid
proderit exterius sanum putrefacta medulla conscientiae?
To which purpose let us be sure to find out and surprise our sins before
they find and surprise us, if we discover our sins first, we may kill them;
if they find us out first, they will greatly hazard our ruin, if God show us
not the greater mercy. Let our sins therefore be our greatest trouble. Take
Austins expression. The Carpenter heweth timber, which is rotten on the
outside, but if he finds it sound within, he squareth it, fitting it for
building, regardlesse of the outward unsound chips, if they be burnt in the
fire; it will nothing avail us to have sound bodies, and hollow hearts with
corrupted consciences; these be the troubles which seize on us, that we sink
under them: Get a good heart and sound conscience, and in whatever troubles,
Istae sunt tribulationes quae invenerunt nos nimis. Si sanum sit intus,
ubicunque alibi passus sit, ill^c confugiet, and ibi invenerit Deum, etc.
thither thou may (with Hezekiah) retire, and appeal to God with comfort,
who will there meet thee, speaking peace, however troubles do dog, and pursue
thee from place to place: otherwise they will drive thee out of thy self, and
make thee thine own accuser and tormentor, haunting thy self with perpetual
vexation in every place, and at every turn; and that so much the more
fiercely, by how much the more inwardly and secretly: and yet even in these
extremities God, yea, God alone is out refuge, Te sequitur, teque cruciat tanto
ardentius, quanto interius: tamen and in his adjutor est Dominus. August.
and present help; wherefore find we out our sins, and with the help of our
God, rout we them, that they destroy not us utterly: and make we sure to have
our God at peace within us, thither to retire. When men rush out of a sort
against their enemies, and make good their sort, they may retreat thither
safely in all straights: but if the enemy break in upon them by surprise, or
step in between them and home, or pell mell crowd in with them, they may repent
at leisure (if God give them the grace, I mean in this our spiritual conflict
with sin) wherefore as some have voluntarily bound themselves to their good
behavior, thereby to retain their liberty, that their enemy bind them not
thereto, for then it is very difficult to get loose: so let out Christian
wisdom teach us to do. Though we are all borne in our sins, yet take we
heed how we live in our sins, for then we shall dye in our sins: the godly
however sin is in them unto death, yet they are not in their sins, but in
Christ Jesus, new creatures, continually mortifying all their sinful lusts: Oh
let it be so with me, with thee, yea, and with thee also whoever thou art: as
we tender the eternal salvation of our souls.

Take a fourth Use of Exhortation, Isai. 26. 3, 4. is a full text to this
purpose. Let no carnal reasonings stave or draw us off from this our repose in
God: as that is a maine one: Objecting that Cities,

Answer hereto is,

First,

Secondly, Judah's sins grew to that height that there was no remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Matthew. 23. 32. Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers. Psalm.
107. 34. A fruitful land he turns into barrenness, for the iniquity of them
that dwell therein.

Thirdly, ver. 4, 5. after our Text. Thus all Judea and Palestina being laid
waste, the Church settles in Grecia; it being overrun, it removes into these
Western, and Northern parts: and happily it may take its flight into America:
certainly it will not be extinct until the worlds end, nor then neither, but
perfected in Heaven.

Lastly, Psalm 60. 9. ad 12. excellent to our purpose is that text. I say, make
we him so, as we usually make great ones our friends; by applying our selves in
giving him all full content that possibly we can, and so our selves shall be
all made for ever.

First, break we off all league with our sins which are so offensive to God,

Secondly, must be unto thee all in all: Of, through, and to whom are all
things, to him be all praise for ever. Romans 11. 36.

Thirdly, David by songs of degrees pegged up his heart to an exact praising
God this way.

Fourthly, David argues, God delivered me from the Lion, and the Bear, 1 Samuel
17. 34, 35 2 Cor. 1. 10.
therefore will he also from this uncircumcised Philistine. So Paul. God has
delivered us, does deliver us, in whom we trust that he will deliver us.

Fifthly, Ahabs outside humiliation shall have outward temporal salvation.

Lastly, 1 Kin. 21. 29.
by faith, prayer, praise, repentance, and obedience, make God thy hope,
refuge, and shelter, not only in, but also out of troubles, in the height of
prosperity, if thou look for his help in the depth of adversity; that so the
duty may not be uncouth unto thee, nor thou to it, in time of need; that so
also God may not seem strange, nor look strange upon thee, when thou come
to him, but thou may have gained his care, and favor, and free recourse to
him in need; that so like wise thou may rather prevent then remove troubles,
which is the easier task: God will not prescribe thee this Physic, if thou
keep so constant a good diet; yea, thus small distempers will sweat forth by
such daily exercise, yea, and one or other greater distemper may be recovered
by speedy repentance, and God not proscribe thee more bitter physic.
Finally, I say, discharge the duty, which this our Text prescribes, and thou
may confidently infer, as follows, Thou need not to fear, though the
earth be removed, etc.

God Almighties Blessing go herewith.

FINIS.

