A FORM FOR Church Government AND ORDINATION OF MINISTERS, Contained in CXI
Propositions, propounded to the late GENERAL ASSEMBLY at Edinburgh, 1647.

Together With an ACT concerning Erastianisme, Independencie, and Liberty of
Conscience.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT BOSTOCK, at the King's Head in Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXLVII.

Act approving VIII general Heads of Doctrine against the Tenants of
Erastianisme, Independencie, and Liberty of Conscience, asserted in the CXI
Propositions, which are to be examined against the next ASSEMBLY.
BEing tender of so great an engagement by solemn Covenant, sincerely, really,
and constantly to endeavor in our Places and Callings, the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in this Kirk of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government, the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, in Doctrine Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word
of God, and the example of the best Reformed Kirks, and to endeavor the
nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in all these, together with the extirpation
of Heresy, Schism, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine:
And considering withal that one of the special means which it becomes us in
our Places and Callings to use in pursuance of these ends, is in zeal for the
true Reformed Religion, to give our public testimony against the dangerous
tenants of Erastianisme, Independency, and which is falsely called Liberty of
Conscience, which are not only contrary to sound Doctrine, but more special
lets and hindrances as well to the preservation of our own received Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government, as to the Work of Reformation and
Uniformity in England and Ireland. The General Assembly upon these
considerations, having heard publicly read the CXI following Propositions
exhibited and tendered by some Brethren who were appointed to prepare Articles
or Propositions for the vindication of the Truth in these particulars, Does
unanimously approve and agree unto these eight general Heads of Doctrine
therein contained and asserted. viz. 1. That the Ministry of the Word, and the
Administration of the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the Lords
Supper, are standing Ordinances instituted by God himself, to continue in the
Church to the end of the world. 2. That such as administer the Word and
Sacraments* ought to be duly called and ordained thereunto. 3. That some
Ecclesiastical censures are proper and peculiar to be inflicted only upon
such as bear Office in the Kirk; Other censures are common, and may be
inflicted both on Ministers, and other Members of the Kirk. 4. That the censure
of Suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, inflicted because of
gross ignorance, or because of a scandalous life and conversation; As likewise
the censure of Excommunication, or casting out of the Kirk flagitious or
contumacious offenders, both the one censure and the other is warrantable by
and grounded upon the Word of God, and is necessary (in respect of Divine
institution) to be in the Kirk. 5. That as the Rights, Power and Authority of
the Civil Magistrate are to be maintained according to the Word of God, and
the Confessions of the Faith of the Reformed Kirks, So it is no less true and
certain that Jesus Christ, the only Head and only King of the Kirk, has
instituted and appointted a Kirk Government distinct from the Civil Government
or Magistracy. 6. That the Ecclesiastical Government is committed and
entrusted by Christ to the Assemblies of the Kirk, made up of the Ministers of
the Word and Ruling Elders. 7. That the lesser and inferior Ecclesiastical
Assemblies ought to be subordinate and subject unto the greater and superior
Assemblies. 8. That notwithstanding hereof, the Civil Magistrate may and ought
to suppress by corporal or civil punishments, such as by spreading Error or
Heresy, or by fomenting Schism, greatly dishonor God, dangerously hurt
Religion, and disturb the Peace of the Kirk, Which Heads of Doctrine (howsoever
opposed by the authors and fomenters of the foresaid Errors respectively) the
General Assembly does firmly believe, own, maintain, and commend unto others
as solid, true, orthodox, grounded upon the Word of God, consonant to the
judgment both of the ancient, and the best Reformed Kirks. And because this
Assembly (through the multitude of other necessary and pressing business)
cannot now have so much leisure as to examine and consider particularly the
foresaid CXI Propositions: Therefore a more particular examination thereof is
committed and referred to the Theological Faculties of the four Universities
of this Kingdom, and the judgment of each of these Faculties concerning the
same, is appointed to be reported to the next General Assembly. In the mean
while, these Propositions shall be printed, both that Copies thereof may be
sent to Presbyteries, and that it may be free for any that pleases to peruse
them, and to make known or send their judgment concerning the same to the said
next Assembly.

A. Ker.

CXI PROPOSITIONS Concerning THE MINISTRY AND GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH.
1.
AS our Lord Jesus Christ does invisibly teach and govern his Church by the
Holy Spirit: So in gathering, preserving, instructing, building and saving
thereof, he uses Ministers as his instruments, and has appointed an order of
some to Teach, and others to Learn in the Church, and that some should be the
Flock, and others the Pastors.

2.
For, beside these first Founders of the Church of Christ extraordinarily sent,
and furnished with the gift of Miracles, whereby they might confirm the
Doctrine of the Gospel, he appointed also ordinary Pastors and Teachers, for
the executing of the Ministry, even until his coming again nnto Judgment,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Wherefore, also as many as are of the number of God's
People, or will be accounted Christians, ought to receive and obey the ordinary
Ministers of God's Word and Sacraments, (lawfully, though mediately called) as
the Stewards and Ambassadors of Christ himself.

3.
It is not lawful for any man, how fit soever, and how much soever enriched or
beautified with excellent gifts, to undertake the Administration either of the
Word or Sacraments by the Will of private persons, or others who have not power
and right to Call; much less is it lawful by their own judgment or
arbitrament to assume and arrogate the same to themselves: But before it be
lawful to undergo that sacred Ministry in Churches constituted, a special
Calling; yea beside, a lawful Election (which alone is not sufficient) a
Mission, or sending, or (as commonly it is termed) Ordination, is necessarily
required, and that both for the avoiding of confusion, and to bar out, or shut
the door (so far as in us lies) upon Impostors; as also by reason of divine
Institution delivered to us in the holy Scripture, Romans 10. 15. Heb. 5. 4. Tit.
1 5. 1 Timothy 1. 14.

4.
The Church ought to be governed by no other persons then Ministers and
Stewards preferred and placed by Christ, and after no other manner then
according to the Laws made by him; and therefore there is no power on earth
which may challenge to it self Authority or Dominion over the Church: But
whosoever they are that would have the things of Christ to be administered not
according to the Ordinance and will of Christ revealed in his Word, but as it
likes them, and according to their own will and prescript, what other thing go
they about to do, then by horrible Sacrilege to throw down Christ from his own
Throne.

5.
For our only Lawgiver and Interpreter of his Fathers will, Jesus Christ has
prescribed and fore-appointed the rule according to which he would have his
Worship and the Government of his own House to be ordered. To wrest this rule
of Christ laid open in his holy Word, to the Counsels, Wills, Manners, Devices
or Laws of Men, is most hight impiety; But contrarily, the Law of Faith
commands the counsel and purposes of men to be framed and conformed to this
rule, and overturneth all the reasonings of worldly wisdom, and brings into
captivity the thoughts of the proud swelling mind to the obedience of Christ:
Neither ought the voice of any to take place or be rested upon in the Church,
but the voice of Christ alone.

6.
The same Lord and our Savior Jesus Christ, the only Head of the church has
ordained in the New Testament, not only the Preaching of the Word and
Administration of Baptism and the Lords Supper, but also Ecclesiastical
Government, distinct and differing from the Civil Government, and it is his
will that there be such a Government distinct from the Civil in all his
Churches everywhere, as well those which live under Christian, as those under
indfiell Magistrates, even until the end of the World. Heb. 13. 7. 17. 1 Timothy
5. 17, 19. Romans 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 These. 5. 12, Acts 1. 20, 28. Luke 12.
42. 1 Timothy 6. 14. Apoc. 2. 25.

7.
This Ecclesiastical Government distinct from the Civil, is from God
committed, not to the whole body of the Church or Congregation of the
faithful, or to be Exercised both by Officers and People, but to the Ministers
of Gods Word, together with the Elders which are joined with them for the care
and Government of the Church, 1 Timothy 5. 17. To these therefore who are over the
Church in the Lord, belongs the Authority and Power, and it lies upon them
by their office, according to the rule of Gods Word to discern and judge
betwixt the Holy and Profane, to give diligence for amendment of delinquents,
and to purge the Church (as much as is in them) from scandalls, and that not
only by enquiring, inspection, warning, reproving, and more sharply
expostulating, but also by acting in the further and more severe parts of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, or exercising Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, even unto
the greatest and weightiest censures, where need is.

8.
None that is within the Church ought to be without the reach of Church Law,
and exempt from Ecclesiastic Censu^es; but Discipline is to be exercised on
all the Members of the Church, without respect or consideration of those
adhering qualities which use to commend a man to other men; such as Power,
Nobility, illustrious Descent, and the like: for the judgment cannot be right,
where men are led and moved with these considerations. Wherefore, let respect
of Persons be far from all Judges, chiefly the Ecclesiastical: And if any in
the Church do so swell in pride, that he refuse to be under this Discipline,
and would have himself to be free and exempt from all trial and Ecclesiastic
judgment, this man's disposition is more like the haughtiness of the Roman
Pope, then the meekness and submissivenesse of Christ's Sheep.

9.
Ecclesiastical Censure moreover is either proper to be inflicted upon the
Ministers and Office-bearers only, or with them common to other Members of the
Church; the former consists in Suspension or Deposition of Ministers from
their Office (which in the ancient Canons is called (...)) The latter
consists in the greater and lesser Excommunication, (as they speak.)
Whatsoever in another Brother deserves Excommunication, the same much more in
a Minister deserves Excommunication: But justly sometimes a Minister is to be
put from his Office, and deprived of that Power which by Ordination was given
him, against whom nevertheless to draw the sword of Excommunication, no reason
does compel.

10.
Sometime also it happens that a Minister having fallen into Heresy or
Apostasy, or other grievous crimes, if he show tokens of true repentance, may
be justly received into the communion of the Church; Whom notwithstanding,
(...) is no way expedient to restore into his former place or charge; yea,
perhaps it will not be found fit to restore such a one to the Ministry in
another Congregation, as soon as he is received into the bosom of the Church;
Which surely is most agreeable as well as to the Word of God, 2 King. 23 9.
Ezech. 44. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. as to that Ecclesiastical Discipline, which in
some ages after the times of the Apostles was in use.

So true is it that the Ministers of the Church, are liable as well to peculiar
as to common censures; Or that a Minister of the Church is censured one way,
and one of the people another way.

11.
Ecclesiastical censure, which is not proper to Ministers, but common to them
with other Members of the Church, is either suspension from the Lords Supper,
(which by others is called the Publicanes Excommunication,) or the cutting off
of a Member, which is commonly called Excommunication. The distinction of this
twofold censure (commonly, though not so properly passing under the name of the
lesser and greater Excommunication) is not only much approved by the Church of
Scotland, and the Synod now assembled at Westminster, but also by the Reformed
Churches of France, the Low Countries, and of Pole-land, as is to be seen in
the book of the Ecclesiastic Discipline of the Reformed Churches in France.
Chap. 5. Art. 9. In the harmony of the Belgicke Synodes. Chap. 14. Art. 8. 9.
In the Canons of the general Synod of Torn, held in the year 1597.

12
That the distinction of that twofold Church censure was allowed also by
antiquity, it may be sufficiently clear to him who will consult the sixty one
Canon of the sixth general Synod, with the Annotations of Zonaras and
Balsomon; also the thirteenth Canon of the eighth Synod (which is termed the
first and second) with the Notes of Zonaras; Yea besides, even the penitents
also themselves of the fourth degree, or (...), that is, which were in the
consistency, were suspended from the Lords Supper, though as to other things of
the same condition with the faithful; For to the communion also of Prayers,
and so to all privileges of Ecclesiastical society, the Eucharist alone
excepted, they were thought to have right: So sacred a thing was the Eucharist
esteemed. See also beside others, Cyprian 1. Book. Epist. 11. That Dyonisius
the Author of tha Ecclesiastic Hierarchy. Chap. 3. Part. 3. Basil. Epist. to
Amphilochius. Can. 4. Ambros. lib. 2. De officiis, Chap. 27. Augustine in his
book against the Donatists, after the conference, Chap. 4. Chrysostom Homil.
83. in Matthew. Gregor. the great Epist. lib. 2. Chap 65. and 66. Walafridus
Strabo of Ecclesiastical matters. Chap. 17.

13.
That first and lesser censure by Christ's ordinance, is to be inflicted on such
as have received Baptism, and pretend to be true Members of the church, yet
are found unfit and unworthy to communicate in the signs of the grace of
Christ with the church, whether for their gross ignorance of divine things,
the Law namely and Gospel, or by reason of scandal either of false Doctrine
or wicked life. For these causes therefore, or for some one of them, they are
to be kept back from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (a lawful judicial
trial going before) according to the interdiction of Christ, forbidding that
that which is Holy be given to dogs, or Pearls be cast before swine, Matthew 7.
6. and this censure of suspension is to continue, till the offenders bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance.

14.
For the asserting and defending of this suspension, there is no small
accession of strength from the nature of the Sacrament it self, and the
institution and end thereof. The Word of God indeed is to be Preached, as well
to the ungodly and impenitent that they may be converted, as to the Godly and
repenting, that they may be confirmed: But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
by God instituted, not for beginning the Work of Grace, but for nourishing and
increasing Grace, and therefore none is to be admitted to the Lords Supper, who
by his life testifies that he is impenitent, and not as yet converted.

15.
Indeed if the Lord had instituted this Sacrament, that not only it should
nourish and cherish faith, and seal the promises of the Gospel, but also
should begin the work of Grace in sinners, and give regeneration it self, as
the isntrumental cause thereof, verily even the most wicked, most unclean and
most unworthy were to be admitted. But the Reformed Churches do otherwise judge
of the nature of this Sacrament, which shall be abundantly manifest by the
gleaning of these following Testimonies.

16.
The Scottosh Confession, Art. 23. But we confess that the Lords Supper
belongs only to those of the household of faith, who can try and examine
themselves, as well in faith, as in the duties of faith toward their
neighbors. Whosoever abide without faith, and in variance with their brethren, do
at that holy Table eat and drink unworthily. Hence it is that the Pastors in
our Church do enter on a public and particular examination, both of the
knowledge, conversation and life of those who are to be admitted to the Lords
Table. The Belgic Confession. Art. 35. We believes also and confess that our
Lord Jesus Christ has ordained the holy Sacrament of his Supper, that in it he
may nourish and uphold them whom he has already regenerated.

17.
The Saxon Confession. Art. 15. of the Lords Supper. The Lord wills that
every receiver be particularly confirmed by this testimony, so that he may be
certified that the benefits of the Gospel do appertain to himself, seeing the
Preaching is common, and by this testimony, by this receiving, he shows that
thou art one of his members, and washed with his blood. And by and by. Thus
therefore we instruct the Church, that it behooveth them that come to the
supper, to bring with them repentance or conversion, and (faith being now
kindled in the meditation of the death and resurrection, and the benefits of
the Son of God) to seek here the confirmation of this faith. The very same
things are set down, and that in the very same words in the consent of the
Churches of Pole-land in the Sendominian Synod, Anno 1570. Art. of the Lords
Supper,

18.
The Bohemian Confession. Art. 11. Next our Divines teach that the Sacraments
of themselves, or as some say, ex opere operato, do not confer Grace to those,
who are not first endued with good motions, and inwardly quickened by the Holy
Spirit, neither do they bestow justifying faith, which makes the soul of man
in all things obsequious, trusting and obedient to God; for faith must go
before (we speak of them of ripe years) which quickens a man by the work
of the Holy Spirit, and putting good motions into the heart. And after: But if
any come unworthily to the Sacraments, he is not made by them worthy or clean,
but does only bring greater sin and damnation on himself.

19.
Seeing then in the holy Supper, that is in the receiving the Sacramental
Elements (which is here distinguished from the Prayers and Exhortations
accompanying that action) the benefits of the Gospel are not first received,
but for them being received are thanks given; neither by partaking thereof does
God bestow the very spiritual life, but does preserve, cherish and perfect
that life; and seeing the Word of God is accounted in the manner of letters
patents, but Sacraments like seals, (as rightly the Helvetian Confession faith,
Chap. 19) it plainly follows that those are to be kept back from the Lords
Supper, which by their fruits and manners do prove themselves to be ungodly
orimpenitent, and strangers or alients from all communion with Christ; Nor are
the promises of Grace sealed to any other then to those to whom these promises
do belong, for otherwise the seal annexed should contradict and gainsay the
letters patents; and by the visible Word those should be loosed anst remitted,
which by the audible Word are bound and condemned: But this is such an
absurdity, as that if any would, yet he cannot smooth or heal it with any
plaster.

20.
But as known, impious, and unregenerate persons have no right to the holy
Table: So also ungodly persons, by reason of grievous scandal are justly for a
time deprived of it; for it is not lawful or allowable that the comforts and
promises which belong only to such as believe and repent, should be sealed
unto known unclean persons, and those who walk inordinatly, whether such as are
not yet regenerate, or such as are regenerate, but fallen and not yet restored
or risen from their fall. The same Discipline was plainly shaddowed forth under
the Old Testament; for none of Gods People during their legal pollution, was
permitted to enter into the Tabernable, or to have access to the solomne
Sacrifices and society of the Church: and much more were wicked and notorious
offenders debarred from the Temple ever until by an offering for sin,
together with a solemn confession thereof, being cleansed, they were
reconciled unto God. Number. 5 6, 7, 8. Lev. 5. to the 7. verse Lev. 6. to verse. 8.

21.
Yea that those who were polluted with sins and crimes, were reckoned among the
unclean in the Law, Maimonides in more Nevo^him, Part. 3 Chap 47. proves out
of Lev. 20. 3. Lev. 18 24. Number. 35. 33. 34. Therefore seeing the shedding of
man's blood was rightly esteemed the greatest pollution of all; Hence it was,
that as the society of the leprous was shunned by the clear, so the company of
murderers by good men was most religiously avoided. Lament. 4. 13, 14, 15. The
same thing is witnessed by Ananias the high Priest, (...) Josephus of the
Jewish war. 4. Book, Chap. 5. where he says that those false Zelots of that
time, bloody men, ought to have been restrained from access to the Temple, by
reason of the pollution of murder; Yea as Philo the Jew witnesses in his book
of the Officers of Sacrifices; Whosoever were found unworthy and wicked, were
by edict forbidden to approach the holy thresholds.

22.
Neither must that be past by which was noted by Zonaras, Book 4. of his
Annals, (whereof see also Scaliger agreeing with him, in Elench. Triberes.
Nicferrar. Cap. 28) namely that the Essenes were forbidden the holy Place as
being heinous and piacular transgressors, and such as held other opinions, and
did otherwise teach concerning Sacrifices then according to the Law, and
observed not the ordinances of Moses, whence it proceeded that they Sacrificed
privately; Yea and also the Essenes them selves did thrust away from their
Congregations those that were wicked. Whereof see Drusius of the three sects of
Jews, Lib. 4. cap. 22.

23.
God verily would not have his Temple to be made open to unworthy and unclean
worshippers, nor was it free for such men to enter into the Temple. See
Nazianzen, Orat. 21. The same thing is witnessed and declared by diverse late
writers, such as have been and are more acquainted with the Jewish antiquities.
Consult the Anotations of Vatablus and of Ainsworth an English writer upon
Psalm. 118. 19, 20. also Constantius L'empereur Annotat. in Cod. Middoth, Cap.
2. Page 44, 45. Cornelius Bertramus, of the Commonwealth of the Hebrews. Cap.
7. Henry Vorstius, Animadvers. in Pirk. Rab. Eliezer. Page 169. The same may
be proved out of Ezech. 33. 38 29. Jer. 7. 9 10, 11, 12. whence also it was
that the solemn and public Society in the Temple, had the name of the
Assembly of the Righteous, and Congregation of Saints. Psalm. 89. 5, 7. Psalm.
111. 1. Psalm. 147. 1. Hence also is that, Psalm. 118. 19, 20. of the gates of
righteousness by which the righteous enter.

24.
That which is now driven at, is not that all wicked and unclean persons should
be utterly excluded from our Ecclesiastical Societies, and so from all hearing
of Gods Word; Yea there is nothing less intended: for the Word of God is the
instrument as well of conversion as of confirmation, and therefore is to be
Preached as well to the not converted as to the converted, as well to the
repenting, as the unrepenting: The Temple indeed of Jerusalem had special
promises, as it were pointing out with the finger a Communion with God through
Christ, 1 King. 8. 30, 48. Dan. 6. 10. 2 Chronicles. 6. 16. and 7. 15, 16. But it is
far otherwise with our Temples, or places of Church Assemblies, because our
Temples contain nothing Sacramental in them, such as the Tabernacle and Temple
contained; as the most learned Professors of Leyden said rightly in Synops.
Pur. Theologiae Disput. 48. These. 47.

25.
Wherefore the point to be here considered as that which is now aimed at, is
this, that howsoever even under the New Testament, the uncleanness of those to
whom the Word of God is preached be tolerated; yet all such, of what estate or
condition soever in the Church, as are defiled with manifest and grievous
scandals, and do thereby witness themselves to be without the inward and
spiritual Commnnion with Christ and the faithful, may and are to be
altogether discharged from the Communion of the Lords Supper, until they
repent and change their manners.

26.
Besides, even those to whom it was not permitted to go into the holy Courts
of Israel, and to ingyre themselves into Ecclesiastical Communion, and who did
stand between the Court of Israel and the utter wall, were not therefore to be
kept back from hearing the word; for in Solomon's Porch, and so in the
intermurale or Court of the Gentiles the Gospel was preached both by Christ,
John 10. 23. and also by the Apostles, Acts 3. 11. and 5. 12. and that of
purpose because of the reason brought by Pineda, of the things of Solomon, Book
5. Chap. 19. because a more frequent multitude was there, and somewhat larger
opportunity of sowing the Gospel: Wherefore to any whomsoever, even heathen
people meeting there, the Lord would have the Word to be preached, who
notwithstanding, purging the Temple, did not only overthrow the tables of
Money Changers, and chairs of those that sold Doves, but also, cast forth the
buyers and sellers themselves, Matthew. 21. 12. for he could not endure either
such things, or such persons in the Temple.

27.
Although then the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, the Lord in
express words commanding the same, Mark 16. 15. yet not to every one is set
open an access to the holy Supper. It Is granted that Hypocrites do lurk in the
Church, who hardly can be convicted and discovered, much less repelled from
the Lords Supper. Such therefore are to be suffered, till by the fan of
judgment the grain be separate from the chafe: But those whose wicked deeds
or words are known and made manifest, are altogether to be debarred from
partaking those symboles of the Covenant of the Gospel, left that the Name of
God be greatly disgraced, whilst sins are permitted to spread abroad in the
Church unpunished; or lest the Stewards of Christ by imparting the signs of
the Grace of God to such as are continuing in the state of impurity and
scandal, be partakers of their sins. Hitherto of Suspension.

28.
Excommunication ought not to be procceded unto except when extreme necessity
constrains: But whenever the soul of the sinner cannot otherwise be healed,
and that the safety of the Church requires the cutting off of this or that
Member, it behooves to use this last remedy. In the Church of Rome indeed
Excommunication has been turned into greatest injustice and tyranny (as the
Pharisees abused the casting out of the Synagogues, which was their
Excommunication) to the fulfilling of the lust of their own minds; Yet the
Ordinance of Christ is not therefore by any of the Reformed Religion to be
utterly thrust away and wholly rejected. What Protestant knows not that the
vassals of Antichrist have drawn the Lords Supper into the worst and most
pernicious abuses, as also the Ordination of Ministers, and other Ordinances of
the Gospel? Yet who will say that things necessary (whether the necessity be
that of command, or that of the (...) or end) are to be taken away because of
the abuse?

29.
They therefore who with an high hand do persevere in their wickedness, after
foregoing admonitions stubbornly despised or carelessly neglected, are justly by
Excommunication in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ cut off and cast out from
the society of the faithful, and are pronounced to be cast out from the
Church, until being filled with shame, and cast down, they shall return again
to a more sound mind, and by confession of their sin and amendment of their
lives, they shall show tokens of their repentance, Matthew. 18. 16, 17, 18. 1
Cor. 5. 13. which places are also alleged in the Confession of Bohemia, Art.
8. to prove that the Excommunication of the impenitent and stubborn, whose
wickedness is known, is commanded of the Lord: But if stubborn Heretics, or
unclean persons be not removed or cast out from the Church, therein do the
Governors of the Church sin, and are found guilty, Rev. 2. 14, 20.

30.
But that all abuse and corruption in Ecclesiastical Government may be either
prevented and avoided, or taken away; or lest the power of the Church either by
the ignorance or unskilfulnesse of some Ministers here and there, or also by
too much heat and fervor of mind, should run out beyond measure or bounds, or
contrariwise being shut up within straiter limits then is fitting, should be
made unprofitable, feeble, or of none effect: Christ the most wise Lawgiver of
his Church has foreseen, and made provision to prevent all such evils which he
did foresee were to arise, and has prepared and prescribed for them
intrinsecall and Ecclesiastical remedies, and those also in their kind (if
lawfully and rightly applied) both sufficient and effectual: Some whereof he
has most expressly propounded in his Word, and some he has left to be drawn
from thence by necessary consequence.

31.
Therefore by reason of the danger of that which is called Clavis erra^^, or a
wrong Key; and that it may not be permitted to particular Churches to err or
sin licentiously, and lest any man's cause be overthrown and perish, who in a
particular Church had perhaps the same men both his adversaries and his judges;
Also that common businesses which do belong to many Churches, together with
the more weighty and difficult controversies (the deciding whereof in the
Consistories of particular Churches is not safe to be adventured upon) may be
handled and determined by a common council of Presbyteries. Finally, that the
Governors of particular Churches, may impart help mutually one to another
against the cunning and subtle enemies of the truth, and may join their
strength together (such as it is) by an holy combination, and that the Church
may be as a camp of an Army well ordered; lest while every one striveth singly,
all of them be subdued and overcome; or lest by reason of the scarcity of
prudent and godly counselors (in the multitude of whom is safety) the Affairs
of the Church be undone: For all those considerations particular Churches must
be subordinate to Classical Presbyteries and Synods.

32.
Wherefore it is not lawful to particular Churches, or (as commonly they are
called) Parochial, either to decline the authority of Classes or Synods, where
they are lawfully settled, or may be had (much less to withdraw themselves from
that authority, if they have once acknowledged it) or to refuse such lawful
Ordinances or Decrees of the Classes or Synodes, as being agreeable to the Word
of God, are with authority imposed upon them. Acts 15. 2, 6, 22, 23, 24, 28,
29. and 16. 4.

33.
Although Synods assemble more seldom, Classes and Consistories of particular
Churches more frequently; Yet that Synods both Provincial and National
assemble at set and ordinary times, as well as Classes and Parochial
consistories is very expedient, and for the due preservation of Church Policy
and Discipline, necessary. Sometime indeed it is expedient they be assembled
occasionally, that the urgent necessity of the Church may be the more speedily
provided for, namely, when such a business happens, which without great
danger cannot be put off till the appointed time of the Synod.

34.
But that besides occasional Synods, ordinary Synods be kept at set times, is
most profitable, not only that they may discuss and determine the more
difficult Ecclesiastical causes coming before them, whether by the appeal of
some person agrieved, or by the hesitation or doubting of inferior Assemblies
(for such businesses very often fall out;) but also that the state of the
Churches whereof they have the care, being more certainly and frequently
searched and known, if there be any thing wanting or amiss in their Doctrine,
Discipline or Manners, or any thing worthy of punishment, the slothful
Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord may be made to shake off the spirit of
slumber and stothfulnesse, and be stirred up to the attending and fulfilling
more diligently their calling, and not suffered any longer to sleep and snort
in their Office; the straglers and wanderers may be reduced to the way; the
untoward and stiff-necked, which scarce or very hardly suffer the yoke of
Discipline, as also unquiet persons, which devise new and hurtful things may
be reduced to order. Finally, whatsoever does hinder the more quick and
efficacious course of the Gospel, may be discovered and removed.

35.
It is too too manifest (alas for it) that there are, which with unwearied
diligence do most carefully labor that they may oppress the liberties and
rights of Synods, and may take away from them all liberty of consulting of
things and matters Ecclesiastical, at least of determining thereof, (for they
well know how much the union and harmony of Churches may make against their
designs.) But so much the more it concerns the orthodox Churches to know,
defend and preserve this excellent liberty granted to them by divine right, and
so to use it, that imminent dangers, approaching evils, urging grievances,
scandals growing up, schisms rising, heresies creeping in, errors spreading,
and strifes waxing hot, may be corrected and taken away, to the glory of God,
the edification and peace of the Church.

36.
Beside Provincial and National Synodes, an Occumenicall (so called from
(...), that is from the habitable World) or more truly a General, or if you
will, an Universal Synod, if so be it be free and rightly constituted, and no
other Commissioners but orthodox Churches be admitted (for what communion is
there of light with darkness, of righteousness with unrighteousness, or of
the Temple of God with idols) Such a Synod is of special utility,
peradventure also such a Synod is to be hoped for, surely it is to be wished,
that for defending the orthodox Faith, both against Popery and other Heresies,
as also for propagating it to those who are without, especially the Jews, a
more strait and more firm consociation may be entered into. For the unanimity
of all the Churches as in evil it is of all things most hurtful, so on the
contrary side, in good it is most pleasant, most profitable and most effe^^uall.

37.
Unto the Universal Synod also (when it may be had) is to be referred the
judgment of controversies, not of all, but of those which are controversia
juris, controversies of right, neither yet of all those, but of the chief and
most weighty controversies of the orthodox faith, or of the most hard and
unusual cases of Conscience. Of the controversies of fact there is another and
different consideration to be had; for besides that it would be a great
inconvenience that plaintifes, persons accused, and witnesses be drawn from
the most remote Churches, to the general or universal Counsel; the visible
communion it self of all the Churches (on which the universal Counsel is
built, and whereupon as on a foundation it leans) is not so much of company,
fellowship, or conversation, as of Religion and Doctrine. All true Churches of
the World do indeed profess the same true Religion and faith; but there is
beside this a certain commixture and conjunction of the Churches of the same
Nation, as to a more near fellowship, and some acquaintance, converting and
companying together, which cannot be said of all the Churches thorowout the
habitable world.

38.
And for this cause, as in Doctrinall Controversies which are handled by
Theologues and Casuists, and in those which belong to the common state of the
orthodox Churches, the National Synod is subordinate and subjected to the
Universal lawfully constituted Synod, and from the National to the
Occumenicall Synod (when there is a just and weighty cause) an appeal is open:
So there is no need that the Appeals of them who complain of injury done to
them through the exercise of Discipline in this or that Church, should go
beyond the bounds of the National Synod: But it is most agreeable to reason
that they should rest and acquiesce within those bounds and borders; and that
the ultimate judgment of such matters be in the National Synod, unless the
thing it self be so hard, and of so great moment, that the knot be justly
thought worthy of a greater decider: In which case the controversy which is
carried to the Universal Synod is rather of an abstract general Theological
Proposition, then of the particular or individual Case.

39.
Furthermore, the Administration of the Ecclesiastic power in Consistories,
Classes and Synods, does not at all tend to weaken in any wise, hurt or minish
the authority of the Civil Magistrate, much less to take it away or destroy
it; yea rather, by it a most profitable help comes to the Magistrate,
forasmuch as by the bond of Religion men's consciences are more straightly tied
unto him. There have been indeed fantastical men who under pretense and cloak
of Christian liberty would abolish and cast out Laws and Judgments, Orders
also, Degrees and Honors out of the Commonwealth, and have been bold to
reckon the function of the Magistrate armed with the Sword, among evil things
and unlawful: But the Reformed Churches do renounce and detest those dreams,
and do most harmoniously and most willingly confess and acknowledge it to be
Gods will that the World be governed by Laws and Plicy, and that he himself
has appointed the Civil Magistrate, and has delivered to him the sword, to
the protection and praise of good men, but for punishment and revenge on the
evil, that by this bridle men's vices and faults may be restrained, whether
committed against the first or against the second Table.

40.
The Reformed Churches believe also and openly confess the power and authority
of Emperors over their Empires, of Kings over their Kingdoms, of Princes and
Dukes over their Dominions, and of other Magistrates or States over their
Commonwealths and Cities, to be the ordinances of God himself, appointed as
well to the manifestation of his own glory, as to the singular profit of
mankind: and withal, that by reason of the will of God himself revealed in
his Word, we must not only suffer and be content that those do rule which
are set over their own Territories, whether by hereditary, or by elective
right; but also to love them, fear them, and with all reverence and honor
embrace them as the Ambassadors and Ministers of the most high and good God,
being in his stead, and preferred for the good of their Subjects; to power out
Prayers for them, to pay tributes to them, and in all businesses of the
Commonwealth which are not against the Word of God, to obey their Laws and
Edicts.

41.
The Orthodox Churches believe also, and do willingly acknowledge, that every
lawful Magistrate, being by God himself constituted the keeper and defender of
both Tables of the Law, may and ought first and chiefly to take care of Gods
glory, and (according to his place, or in his manner and way) to preserve
Religion when pure, and to restore it when cecayed and corrupted: And also to
provide a learned and Godly Ministry, Schools also and Synods, as likewise to
restrain and punish as well Atheists, Blasphemers, Heretics and Schismatics,
as the violaters of Justice and Civil Peace.

42.
Wherefore the opinion of those Sectaries of this Age is altogether to be
disallowed, who though otherwise insinuating themselves craftily into the
Magistrates favor, do deny unto him the authority and right of restraining
Heretics and Schismatics, and do hold and maintain that such persons, how
much soever hurtful and pernicious enemies to true Religion and to the Church,
yet are to be tolerated by the Magistrate, if so be he conceive them to be
such as no way violate the Laws of the Commonwealth, and in no wise disturb
the civil Peace.

43.
Yet the civil Power and the ecclesiastical ought not by any means to be
confounded or mixed together: Both Powers are indeed from God, and ordained for
his glory, and both to be guided by his word, and both are comprehended under
that precept, Honor thy Father and thy Mother: So that men ought to obey both
civil Magistrates and ecclesiastical governors in the Lord; To both powers
their proper dignity and authority is to be maintained and preserved in force:
To both also is some way entrusted the keeping of both Tables of the Law; also
both the one and the other does exercise some jurisdiction, and gives sentence
of Judgment in an external court or judicatory: But these, and other things
of like sort, in which they agree notwithstanding; yet by mavelous vaste
differences are they distinguished the one from the other, and the rights of
both remain distinct, and that eight manner of ways, which it shall not be
amiss here to add, that unto each of these Administrations its own set bounds
may be the better maintained.

44.
First of all therefore they are differenced the one from the other in respect
of the very foundation and the institution: For the political or civil Power
is grounded upon the Law of Nature it self, and for that cause it is common to
Infidels with Christians: the Power ecclesiastical depends immediately upon
the positive Law of Christ alone, that belongs to the Universal Dominion of
God the creator over all Nations; but this unto the special and Occonomicall
Kingdom of Christ the Mediator, which he exercises in the church alone, and
which is not of this World.

45.
The second difference is in the object, or matter about which: The power
politic or civil is occupied about the outward man, and civil or earthly
things, about War, Peace, conservation of Justice, and good order in the
Commonwealth; also about the outward business or external things of the
Church, which are indeed necessary to the church, or profitable, as touching
the outward man, yet not properly and purely spiritual, for they do not reach
unto the soul, but only to the external state and condition of the Ministers
and Members of the Church.

46.
For the better understanding whereof, it is to be observed that so far as the
Ministers and Members of the Church are Citizens, Subjects, or Members of the
Commonwealth, it is in the power of the Magistrate, to judge, determine and
give sentence concerning the disposing of their bodies or goods; As also
concerning the maintenance of the poor, sick, the banished, and of others in
the church which are afflicted; To regulate (so far as concerns the civil
order) Marriages, Burials, and other circumstances which are common both to
holy, and also to honest civil societies; to afford places fit for holy
Assemblies and other external helps by which the sacred matters of the Lord
may be more safely, commodiously, and more easily in the church performed: To
remove the external impediments of divine worship or of Ecclesiastical Peace,
and to repress those which exalt themselves against the true Church and her
Ministers, and do raise up trouble against them.

47
The matter may further be thus illustrated: There is almost the like respect
and confideration of the Magistrate as he is occupied about the outward things
of the church, and of the Ecclesiastic Ministry as it is occupied about the
inward or spiritual part of civil Government, that is about those things
which in the government of the commonwealth belong to the conscience. It is
one thing to govern the commonwealth, and to make political and civil
Laws; another thing to interpret the Word of God, and out of it to show to the
Magistrate his duty, to wit, how he ought to govern the commonwealth, and in
what manner he ought to use the sword. The former is prop^r and peculiar to the
Magistrate (neither does the Ministry intermeddle or entangle it self into
such businesses,) But the latter is contained within the office of the
Ministers.

48.
For to that end also is the holy Scripture profitable, to show which is the
best manner of governing a commonwealth, and that the Magistrate as being Gods
Minister may by this guiding Star be so directed, as that he may execute the
parts of his office according to the will of God, and may perfectly be
instituted to every good work; yet the Minister is not said properly to treat
of civil businesses, but of the scandalls which arise about them, or of the
cases of conscience which occur in the Administration of the commonwealth:
So also the Magistrate is not properly said to be exercised about the
spiritual things of the church, but rather about those external things which
adhere unto and accompany the spiritual things.

49.
And in such external matters of the church, although all Magistrates will
not, yet all, yea even heathen Magistrates may and ought to aid and help the
Church; Whence it is that by the command of God, Prayers are to be made also
for an heathen Magistrate, that the faithful under them may live a quiet life
with all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 1 2.

50.
Unto the external things of the Church belongs* not only the correction of
Hereticlis and other troublers of the Church, but also that civil order and
way of convocating and calling together Synods which is proper to the
Magistrate; for the Magistrate ought by his authority and power both to
establish the Rights and Liberties of Synods assembling together, at times
appointed by the known and received Law, and to indict and gather together
Synods occasionally, as often as the necessity of the Church shall require the
same; Not that all or any power to consult or determine of Ecclesiastic or
spiritual matters does flow or spring from the Magistrate as Head of the
Church under Christ; but because in those things pertaining to the outward man,
the Church needs the Magistrates aid and support.

51.
So that the Magistrate calls together Synods, not as touching those things
which are proper to Synods; but in respect of the things which are common to
Synods with other meetings and civil public Assemblies; that is, not as they
are Assemblies in the name of Christ, to treat of matters spiritual, but as
they are public Assemblies within his Territories; for to the end that public
conventions may be kept in any Territory, the license of the Lord of that
place ought to be desired. In Synods therefore a respect of order, as well
civil as ecclesiastical is to be had; And because of this Civil order,
outward defense, better Accommodation, together with safe access and recesse,
the consent and commandment of him who is appointed to cake care of and defend
humane order, does intervene.

52.
Moreover when the Church is rent asunder by unhappy and lamentable Shcismes,
while they who have raised the troubles, and have given cause of solemn
gathering a Synod (whether by their Heresy, or Schism, or Tyranny, or any
other fault of others) use to place the great strength and safeguard of their
cause in declining and fleeing the trial and sentence of a free Synod, as
being formidable to them: Who sees not that they cannot be drawn to a public
and judicial trial, nor other disobedient persons be compelled to obedience
without the Magistrates public mandate and help?

53.
The object of Ecclesiastical Power is not the same with the object of the
civil Power, but much differing from it; for the ecclesiastical Power does
determine and appoinr nothing concerning men's bodies, goods, dignities, civil
rights, but is employed only about the inward man, or the soul; not that it
can search the hearts, or judge of the secrets of the conscience, which is in
the power of God alone: Yet notwithstanding it has for its proper object those
externalls which are purely spiritual, and do belong properly and most nearly
to the spiritual good of the soul; Which also are termed (...), the inward
things of the Church.

54.
Those things then wherein the ecclesiastical Power is exercised, are the
preaching of the Word, the Administration of Sacraments, public Prayer and
Thanksgiving, the catechizing and instructing of children and ignorant persons,
the examination of those who are to come the holy Communion, the
ecclesiastical Discipline, the Ordination of Ministers, and the abdication,
deposing, and degrading of them (if they become like unsavory salt), the
deciding and determining of controversies of Faith, and cases of conscience,
canonical constitutions concerning the treasury of the Church, and
collections of the Faithful, as also concerning ecclesiastical Rites, or
indifferent things, which pertain to the keeping of decency and Order in the
Church according to the general rules of Christian love and prudence contained
in the Word of God.

55.
It Is true, that about the same things the civil Power is occupied, as
touching the outward man, or the outward disposing of divine things in this or
that Dominion, as was said; not as they are Spiritual and Evangelicall
Ordinances piercing into the conscience it self; but the object of the Power
ecclesiastical is a thing merely and purely spiritual; and in so far as it is
spiritual (for even that jurisdiction Ecclesiastical which is exercised in an
outward court or judicatory, and which inflict^^ public censures, forbidden
from the use of the holy Supper, and excludes from the society of the church)
does properly concern the inward man, or the repentance and salvation of the
soul.

56.
Surely the Faithful and Godly Ministers, although they could do it
unchallenged and uncontrolled, and were therein allowed by the Magistrate (as
in the prelaticall times it was) yet would not usurp the power of life and
death, or judge and determine concerning men's honors, goods, inheritance,
division of Families, or other civil businesses; seeing they well know these
things to be heterogeneous to their office: But as they ought not to entangle
themselves with the judgeing of civil causes, so if they should be negligent
and slothful in their own office, they shall in that be no less culpable.

57.
To the object also of Ecclesiastical power belongs the assembling of
Synodes, so far as they are spiritual Assemblies proper to the church, and
assembled in the holy Ghost; for being so considered, the governors of
churches after the example of the Apostles and Presbyters, Acts 15. in a
manifest danger of the church, ought to use their own right of meeting
together and conveening, that the churches endangered may be relieved and
supported.

58.
Thirdly, Those powers are differences in respect of their forms, and that
three ways: For first the civil Power, although in respect of God it be
Ministerial, yet in respect of the Subjects it is Lordly and Magisteriall.
Ecclesiastical power is indeed furnished with authority, yet that authority is
liker the Fatherly then the Kingly authority; Yea also it is purely Ministerial,
much less can it be lawful to Ministers of the Church to bear dominion over
the flock.

59.
Emperors, Kings and other Magistrates are indeed appointed fathers of they
country, but the are withal Lords of their People and Subjects; Not as if it
were permitted to them to bear rule and command at their own will and as they
list (for they are the Ministers of God for the good and profit of the
Subjects) yet it belongs to their power truly and properly to exercise
dominion, to hold principality, to proceed imperiously. It is indeed the duty
of Ministers and Rulers of the Church to oversee, to feed as shepherds, to
correct and rectify, to bear the keys, to be Stewards in the house of Christ,
but in no wise to be Lords over the house, or to govern as Lords, or Lordlike
to rule; yea in brief, this is the difference between the civil Magistrate and
the Ecclesiastical Ministry, in respect of those that are committed to their
trust, that the lot of the former is to be served or ministered unto, the lot of
the latter to minister or serve.

60.
Now we have one only Lord which governes our souls, neither is it competent
to man, but to God alone to have power and authority over consciences. But the
Lord has appointed his own Stewards over his own Family, that according to
his commandment they may give to every one their allowance or portion, and to
dispense his mysteries faithfully; and to them he has delivered the keys, or
power of letting in into his house, or excluding out of his house those whom he
himself will have let in or shut out. Matthew. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Luke 12. 42. 1
Cor. 4. 1. Tit. 1. 7.

61.
Next, the civil power is endued with authority of compelling; But it belongs
not to the Ministry to compel the disobedient; if any compulsion be in or
about Eclesissticall matters, it is adventitious from without, to wit, from the
help and assistance of the Magistrate, not from the nature of Ecclesiastical
power, from which it is very heterogenous; and therefore if any Suspended or
Excommunicate persons should be found, who shall be so stiff-necked, and so
impudent that at once he cast off all shame, and make no account at all of
those censures, but scorn or contemn the same, or peradventure shall insolently
or proudly engyre and obtrude himself upon the Sacrament, or being also filled
with divelish malice, do more and more contradict and blaspheme; the
ecclesiastical Ministry in such cases has nothing more to do by way of
jurisdiction: But the Magistrate has in readiness a compelling jurisdiction
and external force, whereby such stubborn, rebellious and undaunted pride may
be externally repressed.

62.
Last of all, the power of the Magistrate works only politically or civilly,
according to the nature of the Scepter or Sword, makes and guardeth civil
Laws, which sometimes also he changes or repealeth, and other things of that
kind he eff^cteth with a secular power: But the ecclesiastical power deals
spiritually, and only in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by authority
entrusted or received from him alone: neither is it exercised without prayer or
calling on the Name of God: nor lastly, does it use any other then spiritual
weapons.

63.
The same sin therefore in the same man may be punished one way by the
civil, another way by the ecclesiastical Power; By the civil Power under the
formality of a crime, with corporal or pecuniary punishment: By the
ecclesiastical Power, under the notion or nature of scandal, with a
spiritual censure; even as also the same civil question is one way deliberate
upon and handled by the Magistrate in the Senate or place of Judgment; another
way by the Minister of the Church, in the Presbytery or Synod: By the
Magistrate, so far as it pertains to the Government of the Commonwealth;
by the Minister, so far as it respects the conscience; for the ecclesiastiall
Ministry also is exercised about civil things spiritually, in so far as it
teaches and admonishes the Magistrate out of the Word of God what is best and
most acceptable unto God; or as it reproves freely unjust judgments, unjust
wars, and the like, and out of the Scripture threatens the wrath of God to be
revealed against all unrighteousness of men: So also is the Magistrate said to
be occupied civilly about spiritual things.

64.
Therefore all the actions of the civil Magistrate, even when he is employed
about Ecclesiastical matters, are of their own nature, and essentially,
civil. He punishes externally Idolaters, Blasphemers, Sacrilegious persons,
Heretics, Prophaners of holy things, and according to the nature and measure
of the sin, he condemns to death or banishment, forfeiture of goods, or
imprisonment: he guardeth and underproppeth Ecclesiastical Canons with civil
authority, gives a place of habitation to the Church in his territory,
restrains or expels the insolent and untamed disturbers of the Church.

65.
He takes care also for maintaining the Ministers and Schools, and supplyeth
the temporal necessities of Gods Servants, by his command assembleth Synods,
when there is need of them: and summoneth, calls out, and draws to trial the
unwilling, which without the Magistrates strength and authority cannot be done,
as has bin already said: he makes Synods also safe and secure, and in a civil
way presideth or moderateth in them (if it so seem good to him) either by
himself, or by a substitute Commissioner. In all which the power of the
Magistrate, though occupied about spiritual things, is not, for all that,
spiritual but civil.

66.
Fourthly, they differ in the end: The immediate, nearest end of civil power,
is, that the good of the Commonwealth may be provided for and procured,
whether it be in time of Peace, according to the rules of Law and counsel of
Judges; or in time of War, according to the rules of Military prudence: and so
the temporal safety of the Subjects may be procured, and that external Peace
and civil Liberty may be preserved, and being lost, may be again restored.

67.
But the chiefest and last end of civil Government is, the glory of God the
Creator, namely, that those which do evil, being by a superior power restrained
or punished, and those which do good, getting praise of the same, the subjects
so much the more may shun impiety and injustice: and that Virtue, Justice and
the Moral Law of God (as touching those eternal duties of both Tables, unto
which all the posterity of Adam are obliged) may remain in strength, and
flourish,

68.
But whereas the Christian Magistrate does wholly devote himself to the
promoting of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, and does direct and bend all the
might and strength of his authority to that end: This proceeds not from the
nature of his office and function, which is common to him with an Infidel
Magistrate; but from the influence of his common Christian calling into his
particular vocation.

69.
For every member of the Church (and so also the faithful and godly Magistrate)
ought to referr and order his particular vocation, faculty, ability, power and
honor to this end, that the Kingdom of Christ may be propagated and promoted,
and the true Religion be cherished and defended: So that the advancement of the
Gospel, and of all the Ordinances of the Gospel, is indeed the end of the
godly Magistrate: not of a Magistrate simply; or (if ye will rather) it is not
the end of the office it self, but of him who does execute the same piously.

70.
But the end of Ecclesiastical power, yea the end as well of the Ministry it
self, as of the godly Minister, is, that the Kingdom of Christ may be set
forward, that the paths of the Lord be made straight, that his holy mysteries
may be kept pure, that stumbling blocks may be removed out of the Church, least
a little leaven leaven the whole lump; or least one sick or scabbed sheep
infect the whole flock; that the faithful may so walk as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, and that the wandering sheep of Christ may be converted and
brought back to the Sheepfold:

71.
And seeing this power is given of the Lord, not to destruction but to
edification; Therefore this same scope is propounded in Excommunication, (which
is the greatest and last of Ecclesiastical censures) namely, that the soul of
an offending brother may be gained to Christ, and that being stricken with
fear, and the stubborn sinner filled with shame, may by the grace of God be
humbled, and may (as a brand plucked out of the fire) be snatched out of the
snare of the Devil, and may repent unto salvation; at least, the rest may turn
away from those which are branded with such a censure, least the soul infection
do creep and spread further.

72.
Fifthly, they are distinguished by the effect. The effect of civil power is
either proper or by way of redundance: The proper effect is the safety temporal
of the Commonwealth, external tranquillity, the fruition of civil Liberty,
and of all things which are necessary to the civil Society of men. The effect,
by way of redundance, is the good of the Church, to wit, in so far as by
execution of Justice and good Laws, some impediments that usually hinder and
disturb the course of the Gospel, are avoided or taken away.

73.
For by how much the more faithfully the Magistrate executes his office in
punishing the wicked, and cherishing and encouraging good men, taking away
those things which withstand the Gospel, and punishing or driving away the
troublers and subverters of the Church; so much the more the orthodox Faith and
Godlyness are reverenced and had in estimation, sins are hated and feared:
Finally, and all the subjects contained (as much as concerns the outward man)
within the lists of Gods Law: Whence also by consequence in happens, by Gods
blessing, that the Church is desiled with fewer scandalls, and does obtain the
more freedom and Peace.

74.
But the proper effect of the Ecclesiastical power, or keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven is wholly spiritual; for the act of binding and loosing, of retaining
and remitting sins, does reach to the soul and conscience it self (which cannot
be said of the act of the civil power:) And as unjust Excommunication is void,
so Ecclesiastical censure being inflicted by the Ministers of Christ, and his
Stewards, according to his will, is ratified in Heaven, Mat. 18. 18. and
therefore ought to be esteemed and acknowledged in like manner as inflicted by
Christ himself.

75.
Sixthly, they are also differenced in respect of the Subject: The politic
power is committed sometimes to one, sometimes to more, sometime by right of
election, sometime by right of succession: But the Ecclesiastical power is
competent to none under the New Testament by the right of succession, but he
who has it, must be called, by God and the Church, to it; neither was it given
by Christ to one, either Pastor or Elder, much less to a Prelate, but to the
Church, that is, to the consistory of Presbyters. It Is confessed indeed, and
who can be ignorant of it, that the power (as they call it) of order, does
belong to particular Ministers, and is by each of them apart lawfully
exercised? but that power which is commonly called of jurisdiction, is
committed not to one, but to the unity, that is, to a consistory; therefore
Ecclesiastical censure ought not to be inflicted, but by many. 2 Cor. 2. 6.

76.
Seventhly, they differ as touching the correlative: God has commanded, that
unto the civil power, every soul, or all Members of the Commonwealth, of what
condition and estate soever, be subject; for what have we to do with the
Papists, who will have them, whom they call the Clergy or Ecclesiastical
persons, to be free from the yoke of the civil Magistrate? The Ecclesiastical
power extends it self to none other subjects, then unto those which are called
Brethren, or Members of the Church.

77.
Eighthly, there remains another difference in respect of the distinct and
divided exercise of authority. For either power ceasing from its duty, or
remitting punishment, that does not (surely it ought not) prejudice the
exercise of the other power; namely, if the Magistrate cease to do his duty, or
do neglect to punish with secular punishment, those malefactors which by
profession are Church Members: Nevertheless, it is in the power of the
Governors of the Church, by the bridle of Ecclesiastical Discipline, to curb
such men; yea also, by virtue of their office they are bound to do it; and on
the other part, the Magistrate may, and ought to punish in life and limb,
honors or goods, notwithstanding the offenders repentance, or reconciliation
with the Church.

78.
Therefore the one sword being put up in the scabbard, it is free, and often
necessary to draw the other. Neither power is bound to cast out, or receive
him, whom the other does cast forth or receive: The reason whereof is, because
the Ecclesiastical Ministry does chiefly respect the repentance to salvation,
and gaining of the sinners soul; wherefore it also imbraceth all kind of wicked
men repenting, and receives them into the bosom of the Church. The Magistrate
proposes to himself another, and much differing scope; for even repenting
offenders are by him punished, both that Justice and the Laws may be satisfied,
as also to terrify others; hence it is, that absolution from Ecclesiastic
censure, freeth not at all the Delinquent, from civil Judgment, and that
external sword.

79.
Seeing then there are so many and so great differences of both Offices, and
seeing also, that the function of Ministers and Elders of the Church, is not at
all contained in the office of the Magistrate; neither on the other part, this
is comprehended within that; Magistrates shall no less sin in usurping
Ecclesiastical power, ministering holy things, ordaining Ministers, or
exercising Discipline Ecclesiastical, then Ministers should sin in rushing
into the borders of the Magistrate, and in thrusting themselves into his
calling.

80.
Neither are those powers more mingled one with other, or less distinguished,
where the Magistrate is a Christian, then where he is an Infidel; For, as in a
believing Father and in an Infidel Father, the rights of a Father are the same,
so in a Christian Magistrate, and in an Infidel Magistrate, the rights of
Magistrates are the same: So that to the Magistrate converted to the Christian
Faith, there is no accession of new right, or increase of civil power, although
being endued with true Faith and Piety, he is made more fit and willing to the
undergoing of his office and the doing of his duty.

81.
So then the Word of God and the Law of Christ, which by so evident difference,
separateth and distinguishes Ecclesiastical Government from the Civil,
forbids the Christian Magistrate to enter upon, or usurp the Ministry of the
Word and Sacraments, or the juridicall dispensing of the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, to invade the Church Government, or to challenge to himself the right
of both swords, spiritual and corporal: But if any Magistrate (which God
forbid) should dare to arrogate to himself so much, and to enlarge his skirts
so far, the Church shall then straight way be constrained to complain justly,
and cry out, that though the Pope is changed, yet Popedom remains still.

82.
It is unlawful moreover to a Christian Magistrate, to withstand the practice
and execution of Ecclesiastical Discipline, (whether it be that which belongs
to a particular Church, or the matter be carried to a Class or Synod:) Now the
Magistrate withstandeth the Ecclesiastic Discipline, either by prohibitions
and unjust Laws, or by his evil example, stirring up, and inciting others to
the contempt thereof, or to the trampling it under foot.

83.
Surely the Christian Magistrate (if any time he give any grievous scandal to
the Church,) seeing he also is a member of the Church, ought no ways disdain to
submit himself to the power of the keys; Neither is this to be marvelled at:
for even as the office of the Minister of the Church is no ways subordinate and
subjected to the civil power, but the person of the Minister, as he is a member
of the Commonwealth, is subject thereto: So the civil power it self, or the
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, is not subjected to Ecclesiastic power; yet that
man who is a Magistrate ought (as he is a member of the Church) to be under the
Churches censure of his manners, after the example of the Emperor Theodosius,
unless he will despise and set at naught Ecclesiastic Discipline, and indulge
the swelling pride of the flesh.

84.
If any man should again object that the Magistrate is not indeed to resist
Ecclesiastical Government, yet that the abuses thereof are to be corrected and
taken away by him: The answer is ready, in the worst and troublesome times, or
in the decayed and troubled estate of things, when the ordinance of God in the
Church, is violently turned into tyranny, to the treading down of true
Religion, and to the oppressing of the Professors thereof, and when nothing
almost is sound or whole, diverse things are yielded to be lawful to godly
Magistrates, which are not ordinarily lawful for them, that so to
extraordinary diseases, extraordinary remedies may be applied. So also the
Magistrate abusing his power unto tyranny, and making havoc of all, it is
lawful to resist him by some extraordinary ways and means, which are not
ordinarily to be allowed.

85.
Yet ordinarily and by common or known Law and Right in settled Churches, if
any man have recourse to the Magistrate to complain, that through abuse of
Ecclesiastic Discipline, injury is done to him, or if any sentence of the
Pastors and Elders of the Church, whether concerning Faith or Discipline, do
displease or seem unjust unto the Magistrate himself; it is not for that cause
lawful to draw those Ecclesiastical causes to a civil tribunal, or to bring
in a kind of political or civil Popedom.

86.
What then? Shall it be lawful ordinarily for Ministers and Elders to do what
they list, or shall the Governors in the Churches, glorying in the Law, by
their transgression dishonor God? God forbid. For first, if they shall
trespass in any thing against the Magistrate or municipal Laws, whether by
intermedling in judging of civil causes, or otherwise disturbing the peace and
order of the Commonwealth, they are liable to civil trial and judgments, as it
is in the power of the Magistrate to restrain and punish them.

87.
Again it has been before showed, that to Ecclesiastical evils Ecclesiastical
remedies are appointed and fitted, for the Church is no less then the
Commonwealth, through the grace of God, sufficient to it self in reference
unto her own end: and as in the Commonwealth, so in the Church, the error of
inferior judgments and Assemblies, or their evil Government, is to be corrected
by superior judgments and Assemblies, and so still by them of the same order,
lest one order be confounded with another, or one Government be intermingled
with another Government. What shall now the adversaries of Ecclesiastical power
object here, which those who admit not the yoke of the Magistrate may not be
ready in like manner to transfer against the civil Judicatories and Government
of the Commonwealth? Seeing it happens sometimes that the Commonwealth is
no less ill Governed then the Church.

88.
If any man shall prosecute the argument, and say, that yet no remedy is here
showed, which may be applied to the injustice or error of a National Synod:
surely he stumbleth against the same stone, seeing he weighs not the matter
with an equal balance; for the same may in like sort fall back and be cast
upon Parliaments, or any supreme Senate of a Commonwealth: for who sees not
the judgment of the supreme civil Senate to be nothing more infallible, yea
also in matters of Faith and Ecclesiastical Discipline, more apt and prone to
Error (as being less accustomed to sacred Studies) then the judgment of the
National Synod? what medicines then, or what sovereign plasters shall be had,
which may be fit for the curing and healing of the Errors and miscariages of
the supreme Magistrate and Senate? The very like, and beside all this, other
and more effectual medicines, by which the Errors of National Synods may be
healed, are possible to be had.

89.
There wants not a Divine Medicine, and Sovereign Balm in Gilead; for
although the Popish opinion of the infallibility of Counsels, be worthily
rejected and exploded; yet it is not in vain that Christ has promised, he shall
be present with an Assembly, which in deed and in truth, meets together in
his Name; with such an Assembly, verily he uses to be present by a spiritual
aid and assistance of his own Spirit, to uphold the falling, or to raise up
the fallen. Whence it is, that diverse times the Errors of former Synods are
discovered and amended by the latter: sometimes also the second, or after
thoughts of one and the same Synod are the wiser and the better.

90.
Furthermore, the line of Ecclesiastical Subordination is longer and further
stretched, then the line of civil Subordination; for a National Synod must be
subordinate and subject to an Universal Synod, in the manner aforesaid,
whereas yet there is no Occumenicall Parliament, or general civil Court
acknowledged, unto which the supreme civil Senate, in this or that Nation,
should be subject. Finally, neither is the Church altogether destitute of
nearer remedies, whether an universal counsel may be had or not.

91.
For the National Synod ought to declare, and that with greatest reverence, to
the Magistrate, the grounds of their sentence, and the reasons of their
proceedings, when he demands or enquireth into the same, and desires to be
satisfied: but if the Magistrate nevertheless do dissent, or cannot by contrary
reasons (which may be brought, if he please) move the Synod to alter their
judgment, yet may he require, and procure, that the matter be again debated and
canvassed in another National Synod; and so the reasons on both sides being
thoroughly weighed, may be lawfully determined in an Ecclesiastical way.

92.
But as there is much indeed to be given to the demand of the Magistrate; so is
there here a twofold caution to be used: For first, notwithstanding of a
future revision, it is necessary that the former sentence of the Synod, whether
concerning the administration of Ecclesiastic Discipline, or against any
Heresy, be forthwith put in execution; least by lingering and making of
delays, the evil of the Church take deeper root, and the gangreen spread and
creep further: and least violence be done to the Consciences of Ministers, if
they be constrained to impart the signs and seals of the Covenant of Grace to
dogs and swine, that is, to unclean persons, wallowing in the mire of
ungodliness; and least subtle men abuse such interims or intervals, so as that
Ecclesiastical Discipline altogether decay, and the very decrees of Synods be
accounted as cobwebs, which none fears to break down.

93.
Next it may be granted, that the matter may be put under a further
examination, yet upon condition, that when it is come to the revision of the
former sentence, regard may be had of the weaker which are found willing to be
taught, though they doubt, but that unto the wicked and contentious tempters,
which do mainly strive to oppress our liberty which we have in Christ, and to
bring us into bondage, we do not for a moment give place by subjecting our
selves: For what else seek they or wait for, then that under the pretense of a
revising and of new debate, they cast in lets and impediments ever and anon,
and that by cunning lyings in wait, they may betray the liberty of the Church,
and in process of time may by open violence, more forceably break in upon it,
or at least, constrain the Ministers of the Church to weave Penelop's web,
which they can never bring to an end.

94.
Moreover, the Christian Magistrate has then only discharged his office in
reference to Ecclesiastical Discipline, when not only he withdraws nothing
from it, and makes no impedient to it, but also affords special furtherance
and help to it, according to the Prophecy, Esai. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy
nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers.

95.
For Christian Magistrates and Princes embracing Christ, and sincerely giving
their names to him, do not only serve him as men, but also use their office to
his glory, and the good of the Church: they defend, stand for, and take care to
propagate the true Faith and Godliness, they afford places of habitation to
the Church, and furnish necessary helps and supports, turn away injuries done
to it, restrain false Religion, and cherish, underprop, and defend the Rights
and Liberties of the Church: so far they are from diminishing, changing or
restraining those Rights, for so the condition of the Church were in that
respect worse, and the Liberty thereof more cut short, under the Christian
Magistrate, then under the infidel or heathen.

96.
Wherefore seeing these nursing fathers, favorers and defenders, can do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, nor have any right against the
Gospel, but for the Gospel; and their power in respect of the Church, whereof
they bear the care, being not privative or destructive, but cumulative and
auxiliary, thereby it is sufficiently clear, that they ought to cherish, and by
their authority, ought to establish the Ecclesiastical Discipline; but yet not
with implicit Faith, or blind obedience: For the Reformed Churches do not deny
to any of the faithful, much less to the Magistrate, the judgment of Christian
prudence and discretion, concerning those things which are decreed or
determined by the Church.

97.
Therefore, as to each Member of the Church respectively, so unto the
Magistrate belongs the judgment of such things, both to apprehend and to judge
of them; for although the Magistrate is not ordained and preferred of God, that
he should be a judge of matters and causes spiritual, of which there is
controversy in the Church: Yet is he questionless judge of his own civil act,
about spiritual things; namely, of defending them in his own Dominions, and of
approving or tolerating the same; and if in this business he judge and determine
according to the wisdom of the flesh, and not according to the wisdom which is
from above, he is to render an account thereof before the supreme Tribunal.

98.
However the Ecclesiastical Discipline, according as it is ordained by Christ,
whether it be established and ratified by civil authority, or not, ought to be
retained and exercised in the Society of the faithful (as long as it is free
and safe for them to come together in holy Assemblies) for the want of civil
authority is unto the Church like a ceasing gain, but not like Damage or loss
ensuing; as it superaddeth nothing more, so it takes nothing away.

99.
If it further happen (which God forbid) that the Magistrate do so far abuse
his authority, that he does straightly forbid what Christ has ordained; yet the
constant and faithful servants of Christ, will resolve and determine with
themselves, that any extremities are rather to be undergone, then that they
should obey such things, and that we ought to obey God rather then men; yea
they will not leave off to perform all the parts of their office, being ready,
in the mean time, to render a reason of their practice to every one that
demands it, but specially unto the Magistrate, (as was said before.)

100.
These things are not to that end and purpose proposed, that these functions
should be opposed one against another, in a hostile posture, or in terms of
enmity, then which nothing is more hurtful to the Church and Commonwealth,
nothing more execrable to them who are truly and sincerely zealous for the
house of God (for they have not so learned Christ:) but the aim is, First and
above all, that unto the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ the only
Monarch of the Church, his own prerogative Royal (of which also himself in the
World was accused, and for his witnessing a good confession thereof before
Pontius Pilate, was unjustly condemned to death) may be fully maintained and
defended.

101.
Next, this debate also tends to this end, that the power as well of
Ecclesiastical censure as of the civil sword being in force, the
licentiousness of carnal men, which desire that there be too slack
Ecclesiastical Discipline or none at all, may be bridled, and so men may sin
less, and may live more agreeably to the Gospel. Another thing here intended
is, that errors on both sides being overthrown, (as well the error of those
who under a fair pretense of maintaining and defending the rights of
Magistracy, do leave to the Church either no power, or that which is too weak;
as the error of others, who under the vail of a certain suppositious and
imaginary Christian Liberty, do turn off the yoke of the Magistrate) both
powers may enjoy their own Privileges; add hereto that both powers being
circumscribed with their distinct borders and bounds, and also the one
underpropped and strengthened by the help of the other, a holy concord between
them may be nourished, and they may mutually and friendly embrace one another.

102.
Last of all, seeing there are not wanting some unhappy men, who cease not to
pervert the right ways of the Lord, and with all diligence go about to shake
off the yoke of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, where now it is about to be
introduced, yea also where it has been long ago established, and as yet
happily remains in force, it was necessary to obviate their most wicked
purposes; Which things being so, let all which has been said, pass with the
good leave and liking of those orthodox Churches in which the Discipline of
Excommunication is not as yet in use: neither can any offense easily arise to
them from hence; yea (if the best conjecture do not deceive) they cannot but
rejoice and congratulate at the defense and vindication of this Discipline.

103.
For those Churches do not deny but acknowledge and teach, that the Discipline
of Excommunication is most agreeable to the Word of God, as also that it ought
to be restored and exercised; Which also heretofore the most learned Zachary
Vrsi^^, in the declaration of his judgment concerning Excommunication,
exhibited to Prince Frederick the third, Count Elector Palatine, the title
whereof is, Judicium de Disciplina Ecclesiastica and Excommunicatione, etc.

104.
For thus he, In other Churches, where either no Excommunication is in use, or
it is not lawfully administered, and nevertheless without all controversy, it is
confessed and openly taught, that it ought justly to be received and be of
force in the Church: and a little after, Lest also your Highness by this new
opinion do sever your self and your Churches from all other Churches, as well
those which have not Excommunication, as those which have it: Forasmuch as all
of them do unanimously confess, and always confessed, that there is reason
why it ought to be in use.

105.
To the same purpose it tends which the highly esteemed Philip Melancthon in
his Common places, chap. of civil Magistrates, does affirm: Before (says he) I
warned that civil Places and Powers are to be distinguished from the adhering
confusions which arise from other causes, partly from the malice of the devil,
partly from the malice of men, partly from the common infirmity of men, as it
comes to pass in other kinds of life and Government ordained of God. No man
doubts, that Ecclesiastical Government is ordained of God, and yet how many
and great disorders grow in it from other causes. Where he mentions a Church
Government distinct from the civil, and that jure divino, as a thing
uncontroverted.

106.
Neither were the wishes of the chief Divines of Zurick and Berne wanting, for
the recalling and restoring of the discipline of Excommunication. So Bullinger
upon 1 Cor. 5. And hitherto (says he) of the Ecclesiastical chastising of
wickedness, but here I would have the brethren diligently warned, that they
watch, and with all diligence take care that this wholesome medicine, thrown out
of the true Church by occasion of the Popes avarice, may be reduced, that is,
that scandalous sins be punished: fon this is the very end of Excommunication,
that men's manners may be well ordered, and the Saints flourish, the profane
being restrained, lest wicked men by their impudency and impiety increase and
undo all. It is our part, o brethren, with greatest diligence to take care of
these things; for we see that Paul in this place does stir up those that were
negligent in this business.

107.
Aretius agrees hereunto. Problem. Theolog. loc, 33. Magistrates do not admit
the yoke, they are afraid for their honors, they love licentiousness, etc.
The common people is too dissolute, the greatest part is most corrupt, etc. In
the mean while I willingly confess, that we are not to despair, but the age
following will peradventure yield more tractable spirits, more mild hearts,
then our times have. See also Lavater agreeing in this, Homil. 52. on Nehem.
Because the Popes of Rome have abused Excommunication for the establishing of
their own tyranny, it comes to pass, that almost no just Discipline can be any
more settled in the Church, but unless the wicked be restrained, all things
must of necessity run into the worst condition, See besides, the opinion of
Fabritius, upon Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8, 9. of spiritual corrections, which he
groundeth upon that Text compared with Matthew. 16. 19. and 18. 18. John 20. 23.

108.
It can hardly be doubted or called in question, but besides these, other
learned and Godly Divines of those Churches were and are of the same mind
herein, with those now cited; and indeed the very Confession of Faith of the
Churches of Helvetia, Chap. 18. may be an evidence hereof. But there ought to
be in the mean time a just Discipline amongst Ministers, for the doctrine and
life of Ministers is diligently to be enquired of in Synods: Those that sin are
to be rebuked of the Elders, and to be brought again into the way, if they be
curable; or to be deposed, and like wolves driven away from the floek of the
Lord, if they be incurable. That this manner of Synodical censure, namely of
deposing Ministers from their office for some great scandal, is used in the
republike of Zurick, Lavater is witness, in his book of the Rites and
Ordinances of the Church of Zurick, Chap. 23. Surely they could not be of that
mind, that Ecclesiastical Discipline ought to be exercised upon Delinquent
Ministers only, and not also upon other rotten Members of the Church.

109
Yea the Helvetian Confession in the place now cited, does so tax the
inordinate zeal of the Donatists and Anabaptists (which are so bent upon the
rooting out of the tares out of the Lords field, that they take not heed of the
danger of plucking up the wheat) that withal it does not obscurely commend the
Ecclesiastical Forensical Discipline, as distinct from the civil Power, and
seeing ( say they) ttis altogether necessary that there be in the Church a
Discipline; and among the Ancients in times past Excommunication has been
usual, and Ecclesiastical Courts have been among the People of God, among whom
this Discipline was exercised by prudent and goods men; It belongs also to
Ministers according to the case of the times, the public estate and necessity,
to moderate this Discipline; Where this rule is ever to be held, that all ought
to be done to edification, decently, honestly, without tyranny and sedition;
The Apostle also witnesses, 2 Cor. 13. that to himself, was given of God a
Power unto edification, and not unto destruction.

110.
And now what rests, but that God be entreated with continual and ardent
Prayers, both that he would put into the hearts of all Magistrates, zeal and
care to cherish, defend, and guard the Ecclesiastic Discipline, together with
the rest of Christ's Ordinances, and to stop their ears against the importunate
suits of whatsoever clawbacks, which would stir them up against the Church; and
that also all Governors and Rulers of Churches, being every where furnished
and helped with the strength of the holy Spirit, may diligently and faithfully
execute this part also of their function, as it becomes the trusty servants
of Christ, which study to please their own Lord and Master, more then men.

111.
Finally, all those who are more averse from Ecclesiastic Discipline, or ill
affected against it, are to be admonished and entreated through our Lord Jesus
Christ, that they be no longer entangled and enveagled with carnal prejudice,
to give place in this thing to humane affections, and to measure by their own
corrupt reason spiritual Discipline, but that they do seriously think with
themselves, and consider in their minds, how much better it were, that the
lusts of the flesh were as with a bridle tamed, and that the repentance,
amendment, and gaining of vicious men unto salvation may be sought, then that
sinners be left to their own disposition, and be permitted to follow their own
lusts without controulment, and by their evil example to draw others headlong
into ruin with themselves: and seeing either the keys of Discipline must take
no rust, or the manners of Christians will certainly contract much rust: what
is here to be chosen, and what is to be shunned, let the Wise and Godly, who
alone take to heart the safety of the Church, judge.

FINIS.

