THE Preface to the Reader.
AS I did not begin this present Controversy, so I do not desire to hold up
the Ball of contention: yet having appeared in it (neither alone nor without a
calling and opportunity offered) I hold it my duty to vindicate the truth of
Christ, the solemn League and Covenant, the Ordinances of Parliament, the
Church of Scotland, and my self; for this end was I borne, and for this end
came I into the world, that I might bear witness to the truth. Whereunto I am
so much the more encouraged, because it appears already in this debate, that
magna est vis veritatis, great is the force of truth, and so great, that my
Antagonists (though men of parts and such as could do much for the truth, yet)
while they have gone about to do somewhat against the truth, they have mired
themselves in foul errors; yea (so far as in them lies) have most
dangerously shaken and endangered the authority of Magistrates, who are Gods
Vicegerents, and particularly the authority of Parliament, and of
Parliamentary Ordinances; they have stumbled and fallen, and shall not be able
to rise, but by the acknowledgement of the truth.

In this following Reply, I have not touched much of the argumentative part in
Master Hussy his plea for Christian Magistracy, reserving most of it to an
other work, unto which this is a Prodromus. (howbeit much of what he says, is
the same with what I did confute in my Nihil respondes, and his Book coming
forth a month after, takes no notice of that second piece of mine, but
speaks only to the first) Mean while, let him not believe that his
bigge-looking Title can like Gorgons head, blockify or stonify rational men,
so as they shall not perceive the want or weakness of Argument: It has ever
been a trick of Adversaries to calumniate the way of God and his Servants, as
being against authority. But, I will by Gods assistance) make it appear to
any intelligent man, that the Reverend Brother has pleaded very much against
Magistracy, and so has fallen himself into the ditch which he has dug
for others, whiles I withal escape.

But now what may be the meaning of Master Math. Martinius in lexi philol.
Maledico, malum loquor sive just sive injuria.
Colemans Cabbalisticall Title, male dicis maledicis: Great philologs will tell
him, that maledico is taken in a good sense, as well as in a bad, according to
the difference of matter and circumstances. If any kind of malediction be
justifiable, it is maledicere maledicis, to speak evil to evil speakers; for
as he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in blessing,
so let it be far from him. But, he does worse, and his Title with a
transposition of letters, will more fitly reflect upon himself male dicis de
amicis: you Sir speak evil of your friends, and of those that never wronged
you: For my part, I have not shared with him in evil speaking, nor rendered
revilings for revilings. I am sorry that he is so extremely ill of hearing, as
to take reason to be railing, and good sayings to be evil sayings. He applies
to himself the Apostles words, Being reviled, we bless. But where to find
these blessings of his, those unwritten verities, I know not. I am sure he had
spoken more truly, if he had said, being not reviled, we do revile.

For the matter and substance of his Reply, there are diverse particulars in it
which serve rather to be matter of Mirth, then of Argument, as, that a
Parliament parasite cannot be called an abuser of the Parliament, and that
passage; How can a clause delivered in a post script concerning my opinion of
my way, be abusive to the Parliament? A great privilege either of
post-scripts, or of his opinions, that they can not be abusive to the
Parliament. Many passages are full of acrimony: many extravagant and not to the
point in hand: many void of matter; concerning such Lactantius Lib 2. c. 4.
gives me a good rule, otiosum est persequi singula; It is an idle and
improfitable thing to prosecute every particular. And much more I have in my
eye the Apostles rule, let all things be done to edifying; 1 Cor. 14. 26
I have accordingly endeavored to avoid vain jangling, and such debates as
are unprofitable and unedifying, making choice of such purposes as may edify,
and not abuse the Reader.

Peradventure some will think I might have wholly saved my self this labor; I
confess I do not look upon that which I make Reply unto, as if it were like
to weigh much with knowing men, yet the Apostle tells me that some men's mouths
must be stopped, and Hierome tells me, there is nothing Hieron. Eustochio.
written without skill, which will not find a Reader with as little skill to
judge, and some men grow too wise in their own eyes, when they pass
unanswered. Besides all this, a vindication and clearing of such things as I
mentioned in the beginning, may by Gods blessing anticipate future and further
mistakes. Read therefore and consider, and when thou have done, I trust thou
shall not think, that I have lost my labor. I pray the Lord that all our
controversies may end in a more cordial union, for prosecuting the ends
expressed in the Covenant, and especially the Reformation of Religion,
according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches,
and more particularly the practical part of Reformation, that the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ may be kept from pollution, prophannesse and scandals shamed
away, and piety commended and magnified.

MALE AUDIS.
CHAP. I.
That Master Coleman does still contradict himself in the stating of this
present Controversy about Church Government.

IT was before both denied and yielded by Mr Coleman, that there is a
Churchgovernment which is distinct from the Civil, and yet not merely
Doctrinal. He did profess to subscribe heartily to the Votes of Parliament,
and yet advised the Parliament to do contrary to their Votes, as I proved in
Nihil Respondes, page 3. He answers now in his Maledicis, page 4. I deny an
Institution; I assent to Prudence; Where is the self-contradiction now? and
page 5. The advice looks to Jus Divinum; The Parliament votes to Prudence. Sir,
you have spoken evil for your self; you have made the self-contradiction worse.
Will you acknowledge you own words in your Sermon, page 25. Lay no more burden
of Government upon the shoulders of Ministers then Christ has plainly laid
upon them; have no more hand therein then the holy Ghost clearly gives them.
The Ministers have other work to do, and such as will take up the whole man,
etc. I fear an ambitious ensnarement, etc. and in your Re-examination, p. 14.
He should have said, I advised the Parliament to lay no burden of Government
upon them whom he this Commissioner thinks Church Officers, then had he spoken
true. Now let the Reverend Brother take heed to check-meat; and that three
several ways (but let him not grow angry as bad players use to do;) For 1. Eo
ipso, that he denies the Institution, by his principles he denies the Prudence;
For he that denies the Institution, and advises the Parliament to lay no more
burden of Government upon Ministers then Christ has plainly laid upon them,
is against the settling of the thing in a prudential way, because it is not
instituted. But Master Coleman denies the Institution and advises the
Parliament to lay no more burden of Government upon Ministers then Christ has
plainly laid upon them. Ergo, Master Coleman is against the settling of the
thing in a prudential way, because it is not instituted. And how to reconcile
this with his denying of the Institution, and yielding of the Prudence, will
require a more reconciling head then Manasseh Ben Israel Conciliator himself.
2. He that advises the Parliament to lay no burden of Government upon
Ministers, because they have other work to do which will take up the whole man*
and because of the fear of an ambitious ensnarement, is against the laying of
any burden of corrective Government upon Ministers, so much as in a prudential
way. But Master Coleman advises* the Parliament* etc. Ergo, The consequence in
the proposition is necessary, unless he will say that it is agreeable to the
rules of Prudence, to lay upon them more work besides that which will take up
the whole man, or to commit that power unto them, which is like to prove an
ambitious ensnarement. 3. He that advises the Parliament to lay no burden at
all of corrective Government upon Ministers and other Officers joined with them
in Elderships, but to keep that power wholly in their own hands, is against the
Prudence of the thing, as well as against the Institution of it. But Master
Coleman advises the Parliament to lay no burden at all of corrective
Government upon these, but to keep that power wholly in their own hands. Ergo.
The Proposition is proved by that which himself says, The Parliament Votes
look to Prudence. So that the Parliament having voted a power of Suspension
from the Sacrament, unto Elderships, for so many scandals as are enumerate in
the Ordinance (which power is a part of that which he calls corrective) he that
is against this power in Elderships, is both against the Prudence and against
the Ordinance of Parliament. The Assumption I prove from his Reexamination,
page 14. where after his denial of the power to those whom we think
Church Officers, being charged with advising the Parliament to take
Church Government wholly into their own hands, his answer was, If you mean the
corrective power, I do so.

And now after all this, I must tell the Reverend Brother that he might have
saved himself much labor, had he in his Sermon to the Parliament declared
himself (as now he does) that he was only against the Jus Divinum, but not
against their settling of the thing in a Parliamentary and prudential way. Did I
not in my very first Examination of his Sermon page 32. remove this stumbling
block?

And withal, seeing he professes to deny the Jus Divinum of a
Church Government differing from Magistracy, why does he hold p. 19. that the
Independents are not so much interested against his Principles as the
Presbyterians? Did he imagine that the Independents are not so much for the Jus
Divinum of a Church Government and Church Censures as the Presbyterians? But,
says he, The Independents Church Power seems to me to be but doctrinall. But
is their excommunication doctrinall? and do they not hold excommunication to be
Jure Divino? Either he had little skill in being persuaded, or some others had
great skill in persuading him that the Independents Church Power is but
doctrinall, and that they are not so much interested against the Erastian
Principles as the Presbyterians are, as if forsooth the Ordinance of
Excommunication (the thing which the Erastian way mainly opposes) and a
Church Government distinct from Magistracy, were not common to them both.

Lastly, If the Reverend Brother deny the Institution of Church Censures, but
assent to the Prudence, Why does he allege the Zurick Divines to be so much
for him? Maledicis p. 23. for it was upon prudentiall grounds, and because of
the difficulty and (as they conceived) impossibility of the thing, that they
were against it, still acknowledging the Scripturall Warrants for
excommunication, as I shall show, yea have showed already. So that if Master
Coleman will follow them, he must rather say, I assent to an Institution, I
deny a Prudence.

CHAP. II.
A confutation of that which Master Coleman has said against
Church Government; showing also that his last Reply is not more but less
satisfactory then the former, and for the most part is but a tergiversation and
fleeing from Arguments brought against him, and from making good his own
Assertions and Arguments, concerning the distinction of Civil and
Church Government.

1. THe Reverend Brother said in his Sermon, I could never yet see how two
coordinate Governments exempt from superiority and inferiority can be in one
State. To overthrow this general Thesis, I brought some Instances to the
contrary, as the Governments of a General and an Admiral, of a Master and a
Father, of a Captain and a Master in a Ship. He being put to his Vindication,
replyeth, The Commissioner acknowledges he did not apply them to the Assembly
(I said the General Assembly) and Parliament; yet that was the controversy in
hand, Male dicis page 5. But by his favor, that was not the controversy, for
he was not speaking particularly against the distinction of the Government of
the General Assembly, and of the Government of the Parliament (neither had he
one syllable to that purpose) but generally against the distinction of Church
Government, and Civil Government, and particularly against Excommunication, in
all which, he excluded Presbyteries as well as General Assemblies. Wherefore he
does now recede not only from defending his Thesis, but from applying it
against the power of Presbyteries. And so far we are agreed.

2. I having confuted his Argument grounded on Psalm. 33. 15. Prove. 27. 19. He
shifteth the vindication of it, and still tells me he grounded no Argument on
those places, but spoke by way of allusion, Male dicis p. 6. Now let the Reader
judge. His words to the Parliament were these, Might I measure others by my
self, and I know not why I may not, (God fashions men's hearts alike; and as in
water, face answers face, so the heart of man to man:) I ingenuously profess I
have a heart that knows better how to be governed, then govern; I fear an
ambitious ensnarement, etc. This Argument there largely prosecuted, has no
other ground but the parenthesis using the words (though not quoting the
places) of Scripture. And now forsooth* he has served the Parliament well*
when being put to make good the sole confirmation of his Argument, he tells it
was but an allusion. But this is not all* I confuted the whole Argument, drawn
from his own heart to the hearts of others, and gave several Answers: but
neither before nor now, has he offered to make good his Argument.

3. The Reverend Brother cited 1 Cor. 10. 33. to prove that all Government is
either, a Heathenish Government, or a Jewish Government, or a Church
Government. This I denied, Because the Government of Generals, Admirals,
Majors, Sheriffs, is neither a Jewish Government, nor a Church Government, nor
a Heathenish Government. What says he to this? I deny it, a Jewish General is
a Jewish Government, etc. Male dicis p. 6. Deny it: No Sir, you must prove
(because you are the Affirmer) that a Christian General, a Christian Admiral,
are Church Governments. For I deny it: You tell us Page 7. you are persuaded it
will trouble the whole world to bound Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
the one from the other. You shall have them bounded and distinguished ere long,
and the World not troubled neither. Mean while you have not made out your
assertion from 1. Cor. 10. 33.

4. The Reverend Brother had cited Romans 13. 4. to prove that the corrective
part of Church Government belongs to the Christian Magistrate. And now he
brings in my Reply thus, that I said he abuses the place, Because spiritual
censures belong not to the Civil Magistrate: Which says he, begs the Question,
Male dicis p. 7. I replied no such thing upon this Argument: Look my words
again. How can the Brother answer it, to shape Answers of his own devising, as
if they were mine. My Answer was, That the Punitive part Romans 13. 4. belongs to
all Magistrates, whether Christian or Infidel, which he takes notice of in the
second place, and bids me prove That Scripture-Commands belong to Infidels: Not
observing that the Question is not of Scripture-Commands, but whether a Duty
mentioned in this or that Scripture, may not belong to Infidels. There are two
sort of Duties in Scripture, Some which are duties by the Law of God, written
in man's heart at his Creation, some Principles and Notions whereof remain in
the hearts of all Nations, even Infidels by nature; Other Duties are such by
virtue of special Commands given to the Church, which are not contained in the
Law of Nature. The first sort (of which the punishing of evil doers mentioned,
Romans 13. 4. is one) belongs to those that are without the Church, as well as
those within. The other only to those that are within.

5. The Reverend Brother had said in his Sermon; Of other Governments besides
Magistracy, I find no Institution. I cited 1 These. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb.
13. 7, 17. to prove another Government (yea, the Institution of another
Government) besides Magistracy. And in my Nihil Respondes, I told he had
laughed, but had not yet loosed the knot. Now hear his two Answers, Male dicis
p. 8. First, for the Institution, for the Commissioner affirms so much. Had he
said that these Texts hold out an Office or Officer already instituted, the
words would have bourn him out, etc. But the Institution in this place I cannot
see. See the like in Master Hussy, p. 19. 22. I thank them both. That
Scripture which supposes an Institution, and holds out an office already
instituted, shall to me (and I am confident to others also) prove an
Institution; for no Text of Scripture can suppose or hold out that which is not
true: Nay, has Master Coleman forgotten that himself proved an Institution of
Magistracy from Romans 13. 1, 2? Yet that Text does but hold out the office of
Magistracy already instituted: But the Institution it self is not in that place.

Secondly, Master Coleman answers to all these three Texts. To that 1 These.
5. 12. Them which are over you in the Lord, he says that these words prove not
that it is not meant of Magistracy. But he takes not the strength of the
Argument. My words were, Here are some who are no Civil Magistrates set over
the Thessalonians in the Lord. This the Reverend Brother must admit to be a
good proof, or otherwise say, that the Civil Magistrates set over the
Thessalonians, though they were Heathens, yet were set over them in the Lord.

For that of 1 Timothy 5. 17. He says it does not hold out Ruling Elders: Whether
it does hold Ruling Elders or not, does not at all belong to the present
Question. It is easy to answer something, so that a man will not tie himself
to speak to the point. The place was brought by me to prove another Government
beside Magistracy, which he denied. Now suppose the place to be meant only of
Preaching Elders, yet here is a Rule or Government, Elders that rule well; and
these are no Civil Magistrates, but such as labor in the Word and Doctrine.
Come on now. But I will deal clearly, says the Brother, these Officers are
Ministers, which are instituted not here but elsewhere, and these are the
Rulers here mentioned. And so have I loosed the knot. Now Sir, you shall see I
will not male dicere, but been dicere. My blessing on you for it. You have at
last loosed the knot so perfectly, that you are come to an agreement with me,
in this great point: Which I thus demonstrate. He that acknowledges Ministers
to be instituted Rulers, acknowledges another instituted Government, beside
Magistracy. But Master Coleman acknowledges Ministers to be instituted Rulers.
Ergo, Master Coleman acknowledges another instituted Government beside
Magistracy.

To the other Texts, Heb. 13. 7. 17. He says nothing against my Argument,
only expounds the Rulers to be guides, as Master Hussy also does, of which,
more elsewhere. Mean while it is certain, that (...) is usually taken for a
name of highest Authority, yea, given to Emperors, for which, see learned
Salma^ius in his Walo Messalinus, page 219, 220. It is Joseph's highest title to
express his Government of Egypt, Acts 7. 10. It must the rather be a name of
Government, and Authority in this place, Heb. 13. 17. because subjection and
obedience is required. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves. When the word signifies (...) sen viae ducem (and it is very rarely so
used by the Septuagints, but frequently and almost in innumerable places, they
use it for a name of Rule and Authority) obedience and subjection is not due to
such a one qua talis; For obedience and subjection cannot be correlata to the
leading of the way, when it is without Authority and Government.

6. I having charged Master Colemans doctrine with this consequence, That there
ought to be neither Suspension from the Sacrament, nor Excommunication, nor
Ordination, nor Deposition of Ministers, nor receiving of Appeals, except all
these things be done by the Civil Magistrate: Which things I said, are most of
them corrective, and all of them more then Doctrinal. In stead of making
answer, the Reverend Brother expresses the error which I objected to him thus,
That here are no Church Censures, which is the Quaesitum says he, Male dicis,
page 10. Here again he brings an imagination of his own, both for matter and
words, in stead of that which I said, and does not take the Argument right. If
the Ministers power be merely Doctrinal, and Government wholly in the
Magistrates hands, then all the particulars enumerated, for instance,
Suspension from the Sacrament, and the receiving of Appeals (which he must not
bring under the Quaesitum, except he bring the Ordinance of Parliament under
the Quaesitum) shall be wholly in the Magistrates hand, and Elderships may not
suspend from the Sacrament, Classes and Synods may not receive Appeals, which
yet by the Ordinance they have power to do. One of the particulars (and but
one) the Reverend Brother has here touched, and it is thus; For Ordination of
Ministers, I say it is within the Commission of Teaching, and so appertains to
the Doctrinal part. This is the effect of his zeal to maintain, that all
Ecclesiastical Ministerial power is merely Doctrinal. But mark the consequence
of it. He that holds Ordination of Ministers to be within the Commission of
Teaching, and to appertain to the Doctrinal part, must hold by consequence*
that the power of Ordination is given uni as well as unitati, that is, That
every single Minister has power to ordain, as well as the Classis. But Master
Coleman holds Ordination of Ministers to be within the Commission of Teaching,
etc. The reason of the Proposition is clear, because the Commission of Teaching
belongs to every single Minister; so that if the power of Ordination be within
that Commission, it must needs belong to every single Minister, Quid Respondes?

7. The Reverend Brother having brought an odious Argument against me, which
did conclude, the Magistrate to manage his Office for and under the Devil, if
not for and under Christ. I show his Syllogism to have four terms, and
therefore worthy to be exploded. I get now two Replies.

First, This is an error (if one) in Logic, not Divinity; is it an error in
Divinity to make a Syllogism with four terms? Male dicis, page 15. See now if
he be a fit man to call others to School, who puts an If in this business. If
one; Who did ever doubt of it? And if it be an error in Divinity to be
Fallacious, and to deceive, then it is an error in Divinity to make a
Syllogism with four terms, yea, as foul an error as can be.

Secondly, He admits not my distinction* of those words under Christ, and
for Christ. I said the Christian Magistrate is under Christ, and for Christ,
that is, he is serviceable to Christ: But he is not under Christ, nor for
Christ, as Christ's Vicegerent vice Christi, in Christ's stead as Christ is
Mediator. The Reverend Brother says, He foresaw that this would be said (the
greater fault it was to make his Argument so unclear and undistinct) but he
rejects the distinction, as being distinctio sine differentia. If a
Magistrate, says he, be thru far a servant of Christ as Mediator, that he is
to do his work, to take part with him, to be for his glory; then he does it
vice Christi: He adds the simile of a servant: Hence it follows, by the
Reverend Brothers Principles, That the Kings Cook, because he does work and
service for the King, therefore he does it vice Regis, and as the Kings
Vicegerent: Likewise, that a servant who obeys his Masters Wife, and
executes her commands, because it is his Masters will, and for his Masters
honor, does therefore obey his Masters Wife vice Domini, as his Masters
Vicegerent; and by consequence, That the duty of obedience to the Wife, does
originally belong to the Husband; for the capacity of a Vicegerent, which he
has by his Vicegerentship, is primarily the capacity of him whose Vicegerent
he is. These and the like absurd consequences will unadvoidably follow, upon
the Reverent Brothers Argumentation, That he who does Christ service, does it
vice Christi, as Christ's Vicegerent; and that to be a man's Vicegerent, and to
do a man's work or service (which I made two different things) are all one. But
further observe his Tergiversation. I had Page 13. proved my distinction out of
these words of his own. The Commissioner says Magistracy is not derived from
Christ: I say, Magistracy is given to Christ to be serviceable in his Kingdom.
So that though the Commissioners Assertion be sound (which in due place will be
discussed) yet it infringeth nothing that I said. I asked therefore, qua fide
he could confound in his Argument brought against me, those two things which
himself had so carefully distinguished. There is no Reply to this in Male
dicis. When the Brother thought it for his advantage, he denied that the
Magistrate his being serviceable to Christ, does infer the derivation of his
power by a Commission of Vicegerentship from Christ (for that was the
derivation spoken of) and yielded that the Magistrate may be said to be
serviceable to Christ, though his power be not derived from Christ. Now he
denies the very same distinction for substance.

8. Whereas the Reverend Brother had told the Parliament, that he sees not in
the whole Bible any one act of that Church Government which is now in
controversy. I brought some Scriptural Instances against his Opinion, not
losing either the Argument from Matthew. 18. (concerning which, he asks what is
become of it) or other Scriptural Arguments, which I intend by Gods assistance
to prosecute elsewhere. Now hear what is replied to the Instances which were
given: First to that 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away that wicked person from among you;
His answer is, I say, and it is sufficient against the Commissioner, If this be
a Church censure, then the whole Church jointly, and every particular person
has power of Church censure, Male dicis page 10. I hope Sir, it is not
sufficient against me, that you say it, so long as you say nothing to prove it.
I told you that Master Prynne himself (who holds not that every particular
person has power of Church censure) acknowledges that Text to be a warrant
for Excommunication. And when you say every particular person, you say more
then the Independents say; and I am sure, more then the Text will admit; for
the Text says, Put away from among you: Therefore this power was given not
uni* but unitati. And this unitas was the Presbytery of Corinth, the sentence
was inflicted (...) by many, 2 Cor. 2. 6, it is not said by all. I might say
much for this; but I will not now leave the Argument in hand; for it is enough
against Master Coleman, that the place prove an act of Church Government,
flowing from a power, not Civil, but Ecclesiastical. To whom the power
belonged, is another Question.

To the next Instance from 2 Cor. 2. 6. (which is coincident with the former) a
punishment or censure inflicted by many. It is only a reprehension, says he,
(...), which by all the places in the New Testament, ^an amount no higher then
to an objurgation, and so it Doctrinal. Answ. 1. He made it even now an act of
the whole Church jointly, and of every particular person. Why did he not clear
himself in this, How the whole Church, Men, Women, Children, and all did
doctrinally reprehend him? 2. If the Objurgation must be restricted, to whom?
Not to a single Minister (yet every single Minister has power of Doctrinal
Objurgation) but to the Presbytery, it was an act of those (...) I spoke of;
and this is a ground for that distinction between Ministerial and Presbyterial
admonition which Master Coleman, page 22. does not admit. 3. If it were granted
that (...) in this Text amounts to no more but an Objurgation. Yet our
Argument stands good; for the Apostle having in his first Epistle required the
Corinthians, to put away from among them that wicked person, which they did
accordingly resolve to do (which makes the Apostle commend their obedience, 2
Cor. 2. 9.) No doubt either the Offender was at this time actually
excommunicated and cast out of the Church, or (as others think) they were about
to Excommunicate him, if the Apostle had not by his second Epistle prevented
them, and taken them off with this Sufficit; Such a degree of censure is
enough, the party is penitent, go no higher. 4 When the Reverend Brother
appealeth to all the places in the New Testament, he may take notice that the
word (...) is no where found in the New Testament, except in this very Text.
And if his meaning be concerning the Verb (...), he may find it used to
express a Coercive power, as in Christ's rebuking of the winds and waves,
Matthew. 8. 26. Mark 4. 39. His rebuking of the Fever. Luke 4. 39. His rebuking
of the Devil (which was not a Doctrinal, but a Coercive rebuke) Mark 1. 25. and
9 25. Luke 4. 35. and 9. 42. Sometimes it is put for an Authoritative charge,
laying a restraint upon a man, and binding him from liberty in this or that
particular, as Matthew. 12. 16. Mark 3. 12. and 8. 30. Luke 9. 21. The word (...)
I find in the Apocryphal Book of Wisdom, Chap. 3. ^0. it is said of the wicked
(...) they shall have correction or punishment. The whole Chapter makes an
opposition between the godly and the wicked, in reference to punishments and
judgments. The Hebrew (...) (which if the Observation hold which is made by
Arias Montanus, and diverse others following Kimchi, when it is construed with
(...) signifies ^bjurgavit, duriter reprehendit; when without (...), it
signifies corrupit, perdidit, or maledixit) the Septuagints do most usually
turn it (...), and that in some places where it is without (...), as Psalm. 119.
21. Thou have rebuked the proud, that are cursed; (...). Pagnin, disperdidisti,
thou have destroyed, so the sense is, it is rebuke with a judgment or a curse
upon them: the second part of the verse in the Greek is exegetical to the first
part. Thou have rebuked the proud: (...), cursed are they, etc. So Zech. 3. 2.
The Lord rebuke ((...)) thee O Satan. (The same phrase is used in Jude verse.
9.) (...). Quod propemodum valet ac si dicas, ^acite ut pondu^ and auctoritatem
habeat charitas erga illum. Lequitur enim velut ad Judices and concienem,
quorum suffragiis velit absolvi eum, qui traditus fuerat Satanae. Nam (...)
concionem significat, in qua creantur Magistratus, quae Latini vocant comitia,
and diem alieujus rei causa praestitutum, and jus aliquod agendi. Quin and
(...) Graeci dicunt scriptum authenticum, authoribus Hesychio and Suida. Mihi
videtur and ea sententia quae vicissetin suffragiis dicta fuisse (...).
Which must needs be meant of a coercive efficacious divine power restraining
Satan. The same original word they render by (...), (which signifies to
separate and to excommunicate) Mal. 2. 3. Behold I will corrupt your seed etc.
In the preceding words God told them that he would curse them. The same word
they render by (...), extermino, Isa. 17. 13. a place which speaks of a
judgment to be inflicted, not of a doctrinall reproof. Yet Aquila reads
there (...). Likewise the word which the Septuagints render (...), perdition,
Prove. 13. 1. and (...), wrath, Isa. 51. 20. in other places they render it
(...), as Psalm. 76. 6. At thy rebuke O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse
are cast into a dead sleep. Psalm. 80. 16. They perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance. These are real rebukes, that is, judgments and punishments.

4. What says Master Coleman to Pasor, who expounds (...) to be the same with
(...), mulcta, and that 2 Cor. 2. 6. it is meant of excommunication, which he
proves by this reason, Because in the same place the Apostle exhort the
Corinthians to forgive him. Add hereunto Erasmus his Observation upon the word
(...), (verse. 8. to confirm your love toward him) that it implies an
authoritative ratification of a thing by judicial suffrage and sentence. Which
well agrees to the (...) verse. 6. that is, that they who had judicially
censured him, should also judicially loose him and make him free. Now therefore
the circumstances and context being observed, and the practice 2 Cor. 2. 6.
compared with the precept 1 Cor. 5. 13. I conclude that whether this (...) was
Excommunication already inflicted, or whether it was a lesser degree of Censure
tending to Excommunication; a Censure it was, and more then ministerial
objurgation. And it is rightly rendered by the Hesych* (...). Julius Pollux lib.
8. cap. ^. (...), etc. Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. lib. 1. cap. 10. uses
promiscuously (...) and (...) in one and the same sentence to express
punishment: (...). Which Gentianus Hervetus his Interpreter reads thus: Cum
peccatorum poe^as, and facilem and tanquam ven^is perflabilem eorum
dissipationem ostendisset Paedagogus, per poenam a causa dehortatus est. Again,
Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 2. ad finem: (...). The Interpreter thus: Quin etiam
Sichimitae puniuntur, qui lapsi sunt, sanctae Virgini probrum inferen^es.
Sepulchrum eis est supplicium, and poen^ monimentum nos ducit ad salutem.
English Translators punishment or censure. Which well agrees with the
signification of the Verb (...), given us by Hesychius, and by Julius Pollux
who makes (...) to punish or chastise, and (...) punishment or chastisement.
Clemens Alexandrinus uses (...) as well as (...) pro poena vel supplicio. So
Stephanus in These. Ling. Gr. From all which it may appear that the Text in hand
holds forth a corrective Church Government, in the hands of Church Officers;
the thing which Master Coleman denies.

To the next instance from 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against an Elder receive not an
accusation but before two or three witnesses: The Reverend Brother answers,
It is either in relation to the judgment of charity, or ministerial
conviction, as the verses following. Answ. 1. That of two or three witnesses,
is taken from the Law of Moses, where it is referred only to a forensicall
proceeding. But in relation either to the judgment of charity, or ministerial
conviction, it is not necessary that there be two or three witnesses. If a
scandalous sin be certainly known to a Minister, though the thing be not
certified by two or three witnesses, yet a Minister upon certain knowledge had
of the fact, may both believe it, and ministerially convince the offender. But
there may not be a Consistoriall proceeding without two or three witnesses. 2.
Since he appealeth to the following verses, let verse. 22. decide it: Lay hands
suddenly on no man. To whom the laying on of hands or ordination did belong, to
them also it did belong to receive an accusation against an Elder: But to the
Presbytery did belong the laying on of hands or ordination, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ergo,
to the Presbytery did belong the receiving of an accusation against an Elder.
And so it was not the act of a single Minister, as ministerial conviction is.

To the last instance from Rev. 2. 14, 15, (...) the Reverend Brother answers
that he had striven to find out how Church Censures might be there grounded,
but was constrained to let it alone. But what is it in his opinion which is
there blamed in the Angels of those Churches? Does he imagine that those who
are so much commended by Christ himself for their holding fast of his Name and
of the true Faith, did not so much as doctrinally or ministerially oppose the
foul errors of the Balaamites and of Jezebel? No doubt but this was done: but
Christ reproves them because such scandalous persons were yet suffered to be in
the Church, and were not cast out. I have a few things against thee because
thou have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam: and verse. 20. Thou
suffer that woman Jezebel. And why was the very having or suffering them in
the Church a fault, if it had not been a duty to cast them out of the Church?
Which casting out could not be by banishment, but by excommunication. It did
not belong to the Angel to cast out the Balaamites out of Pergamos: but he
might and ought to have cast them out of the Church in Pergamos.

9. Master Coleman has another passage against the distinction of
Church Censures and Civil punishments. But what are Ecclesiastical Censures,
says he, (let us take a taste) is deposition from the Ministry? This Kings
have done etc. Maledicis p. 7. Now similia l^bra lactucis. But for all that,
the taste is vitiated, and does not put a difference between things that are
different. Deposition is sometimes taken improperly for expulsion, as Balsamon
in Conc. Nicae^. Can. 19. does observe. And so the Christian Magistrate may
remove or put away Ministers when they deserve to be put away; that is, by a
coercive power to restrain them, imprison or banish them; and in case of
capital crimes, punish them with capital punishments. King James having once
heard a Dispute in Saint Andrews about the deposition of Ministers, was
convinced that it does not belong to the Civil Magistrate; Yet, said he, I can
depose a Ministers head from his shoulders. Which was better Divinity then this
of Master Coleman. If we take deposition properly, as it is more then the
expelling, sequestring, or removing of a Minister from this or that place, and
comprehends that which the Council of An^yra Can. 18. calls (...), The honor
of Presbytership to be taken away; or a privation of that Presbyteratus the
order of a Presbyter, and that (...) the authority and power of dispensing the
Word, Sacraments, and Discipline, which was given in Ordination: so none have
power to depose who have not power to ordain. It belongs not to the
Magistrate either to make or unmake Ministers. Therefore in the Council.
Antioch. sub Constantio Can. 4. Si quis Episcopus a Sy^^do dep^situs, vel
Diaconus a proprio Episcopo, sac^um celebrate a^sus fuerit etc. Council. Hispal.
2. Can. 6. ut nullus nostrum sine concilij examine, dejicere quemlibet
Presbyterum vel Diaconum audeat. Episcopus enim Sacerdotibus and Ministris
solus honorem dare potest: au^erre solus non potest. Vide etiam Conc. Afric.
Can. 20. Conc. Carthag. 4. Can. 23.
ancient Church, the Bishops had power of the deposition as well as of the
ordination of Presbyters: yet they were bound up that they might not depose
either Presbyter or Deacon, without the concurrence of a Presbytery or Synod in
the business. Mark of the Synod, not of the Magistrate. As for the Testimonies
brought by Master Coleman, he does both here and in diverse other places name
his Authors, without quoting the places. It seems he has either found the
words cited by others, but durst not trust the quotations, or else has found
somewhat in those places which might make against him. However all that he can
cite of that kind concerning deposition of Ministers by Emperors, i^ meant of
a coercive expulsion, not of that which we call properly Deposition. And to
this purpose let him take the Observation of Salmas. appar. ad lib. de primat.
page 298. 299. Non enim potestatem quam in ordinatione accepit per impositionem
manuum, potest ^ripere Princeps, cum nec eam possit dare. Si Princeps igitur
velit Ministrum aliquem ob sua peccata prorsus degradari and (...), and
Ministerium simul cum ejus functione amittere, per Pastores ipsos id faciendum
debet curare, qui Judices very ipsius sunt, and auferre soli possunt quod per
ordinationem dederunt. Imperatores Romani quos per vim ejicerent, quia
intelligebant potestatem Ministerij fungendi non aliter iis adimere posse, in
exili^m eos mittebant. Quod possemus infinitis testimoniis demonstrare.
Relegatus hoc modo Episcopus remane^at nihilominus Episcopus, non ordine
excideba^ Episcopali, nec ad laicorum ordinem redigebatur.
a great Antiquary.

And withal he may take notice that Protestant Writers do Gerhard. loc. Com.
Tom. 6. page 201. Pro^ari nequit illorum Pseudopoli^icorum opinio, qui ad jura
re^alia Magistrates rem^tionem Ministrorum pertinere censent. See Fr. Junius
Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 3. and Animad. in Be^^. Co^^r. 4. ^^b. 1. cap. 20.
not. 8. ^alduin. de cas. conscient. lib. 4. cap. 5. cas. 12.
disclaim the Magistrates power of deposing Ministers; and hold that
deposition is a part of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Ministers being always
punishable (as other Members of the Commonwealth) according to the Law of the
Land, for any offense committed against Law.

CHAP. 3.
That Master Colemans and Master Husseys opposing of Church Government, neither
is, nor can be reconciled with the solemn League and Covenant.

MAster Colemans Doctrine was by me charged to be a violation of the solemn
League and Covenant. This he acknowledged in his Re-examination, page 13. 17.
to be a very grievous charge, and a greater fault in him then in diverse others,
if made out: and he desired seriously, yea challenged it by the right of a
Christian, and by the right of a Minister, that I should prosecute this charge;
whereupon I did in my Nihil Respondes prosecute it so far, that by five
strong Arguments I did demonstrate the repugnancy of his Doctrine to the
Covenant. About a Month afterward comes out Master Husseys Book, wherein the
charge it self (before desired to be prosecuted) is declined expressly by
Master Coleman in the few lines by him prefixed (which are ranked together with
the Errata) in which he desires that the argumentative part may be so
prosecuted, as that the charge of Covenant Breaking may be laid aside, which if
it be taken up, he lets me know beforehand it shall be esteemed by them a
Nihil Respondes. It is also declined by Mr. Hussy, page 15. The Argument of
the Covenant is too low to be thought on in this Discourse: we are now in an
higher region then the words of the Covenant, etc. A Tenent looked upon by the
reformed Churches, as proper to those Vide apud Synod Do^d^a^ Sess. 2^.
conditione^ Syn^^^ legit^im^ instituendae quas Remonstra^tes etc, con^it. 9.
that are inspired with the Ghost of Arminius, for the Remonstrants both at and
after the Synod of Dort, did cry down the Obligation of all National
Covenants, Oaths, etc. in matters of religion, under the color of taking the
Scripture only for a rule. Well, we see the charge declined as nothing; but
this is not all: almost two months after my proof of the charge, Mr. Coleman
comes out with his Maledicis, and declines both the charge it self (which he
calls An impertinent charge, page 22.) and my five Arguments too, without so
much as taking notice of them, or offering replies to them; yea all that I said
in my Nihil Respondes, page 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. in prosecution of
this Argument concerning Covenant Breaking, the Reverend Brother has skipped
over sicco pede in the half of one page, viz. page 23. all that follows is
new and other matter, wherein he did not mind his own Answer to the learned
Viewer, page 33. I will keep you to the Laws of Disputation, and will not
answer but as it is to the matter in hand, I leave it to be Judged by men of
knowledge and piety, whether such a one, does not give them some ground to
apprehend that he is (...), that is self-judged, who first calls so eagerly
for making out a charge against him, and then when it is made out does decline
the charge, and not answer the Arguments; and such as esteem the charge of
Covenant Breaking to be a Nihil Respondes, and the Argument of the Covenant too
low to be thought on in a controversy about Church Government, O my Soul,
come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, my glory, be not thou
united. It is in vain for them to palliat or shelter their Covenant Breaking,
with appealing from the Covenant to the Scripture, for subordinata non pugnant.
The Covenant is norma recta, a right rule, though the Scripture alone be norma
recti, the rule of right. If they hold the Covenant to be unlawful, or to have
any thing in it contrary to the Word of God, let them speak out. But to
profess the breach of the Covenant to be a grievous and great fault, and
worthy of a severe censure, and yet to decline the charge and proofs thereof,
is a most horrible scandal; yea, be astonished O ye Heavens at this, and give
ear O Earth! how small regard is had to the Oath of God, by men professing the
Name of God.

As for that little which the reverend Brother has replied unto, First he
takes notice of a passage of his Sermon at the taking of the Covenant, which I
had put him in mind of, but he answers only to one particular, viz.
concerning that clause, Doubtless many materials of Prelacy must of necessity
be retained as absolutely necessary. I asked what he understood by this clause?
Now observe his answer. I answer ingenuously, as he desires, and fully, as I
conceive, these materials of Prelacy are Ordination. Remember you said, many
materials of Prelacy. I beseech you Sir, how many is Ordination? Ordination,
Ordination, Ordination; tell on till you think you have made many materials;
and withal tell us (if this be the meaning, that Ordination should be retained
without any power of Ecclesiastical Government in the Ministry:) how was it
imaginable that he could hereby satisfy that scruple which then he spoke to,
viz. the scruple about the purging away of the exorbitancies of Prelacy, and
retaining a regulated Prelacy? And after all this, I shall desire him to
expound that other clause (which I desired before, but he has not done it)
taking away (said he) the exorbitancies, the remaining will be a new
Government, and no Prelacy. Either he means this of a new Church Government
distinct from the Civil, so that the Ministry should have new power of
Government; or he meant it of the way which now he pleads for. If the former, I
have what I would. Master Coleman himself as well as other men took the
Covenant, with an intention to have an Ecclesiastical Government distinct from
the Civil. If the latter, then let him answer these two things. 1. What good
sense there was in applying such an Answer to such a Scruple, as if the
Erastian way, or the appropriating of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction wholly
to the civil Magistrate, could be the way to satisfy those who scrupled the
total abolition of Prelacy. 2. How will he reconcile himself with himself,
for here page 22. he says, That his way was in practice before I was borne,
and the constant practice of England always. This, as it is a most notorious
untruth (for the constant practice of England has granted to the Clergy (as he
calls them after the Popish Dialect) a power of Deposition and Excommunication,
whereas his way denies all corrective power, or Church Censures to the
Ministry) so if it were a truth, it is utrerly inconsistent with that which he
said of the remaining part, namely, that it will be a new Government. If it be
his way, how will he make it the constant practice of England always, and a
new Government too?

In the next place the Reverend Brother makes short work of my five Arguments,
to prove the repugnancy of his Doctrine to the solemn League and Covenant.
They were too hot for him to be much touched upon, All is but this much, says
he, The Covenant mentions and supposes a distinct Church Government. It is
hard when Arguments are neither repeated nor answered. He repeats a Point which
was proved (and but a part of that) but not the proofs. And so he answers
(rather to the conclusion then to the Arguments) these two things. First, says
he, the expressions in the Covenant are according to the general apprehensions
of the times, which took such a thing for granted; yet I believe Master
Gillespie cannot make such a supposition obligatory. Now you yield Sir what
before you eagerly contended against, viz. That the Covenant does suppose a
Church Government. Remember your Simile of the Jury sworn to enquire into the
felony of a Prisoner, which Oath does not suppose the Prisoner to be guilty of
felony, but he is to be tried, Guilty or not Guilty. We are now so far
agreed, that the Covenant does suppose a Church Government distinct from the
civil Government, and yet not merely Doctrinall, for that was the point which
I proved, and which here he yields. As for the obligation of an Oath sworn
upon such supposition, I answer. 1. It is more then supposed, the words and
expressions of the Covenant do plainly hold out the thing as I proved, and as
the Reverend Brother seems here to yield. 2. That which an Oath does
necessarily suppose, if the Oath be lawful, and the thing supposed lawful, is
without all controversy obligatory. Now the Reverend B^other does acknowledge
both the Covenant it self, to be a lawful Oath, and that which the Covenant
supposes, namely a Church Government distinct from the Civil Government, and
yet not merely Doctrinall to be a lawful thing, for he professes to yield it
(though not Jure divino, yet) in prudence, which he cannot do, if he make the
thing unlawful. 3. That which an Oath does suppose is sometimes supposed Vi
materiae, or consequentiae, that is, the words of the Oath do necessarily
imply such a thing, though it be not intended by the swearer; and here I will
tell Master Coleman one Story of Alexander for another. When Alexander was
coming against a Town to destroy it, he met Anaximenes, who (as he
understood) came to make intercession and supplication for sparing the Town,
Alexander preventeth him with an Oath, that he would not do that thing which
Anaximenes should make petition for, whereupon Anaximenes made Petition that he
would destroy the Town, Alexander found himself bound by the plain words of
his Oath to do what he intended, and so did forbear. And to add a divine
Story to an humane, Joshua, and the Princes of Israel did swear to the
Gibeonites upon a supposition that was not true, yet they found themselves tied
by their Oath. So he that swears to his own hurt must not change, the Oath
being otherwise lawful, Psalm. 15. 4. yet that self hurt which is wrapped up
in the matter of his Oath was not intended in swearing. Sometimes again, that
which is supposed and employed in an Oath lies also in the thoughts and
intention of those that swear. Now where those two are co-incident; that is,
where the thing supposed in an Oath is both employed necessarily in the words of
the Oath, and is also according to the apprehensions of those that swear
(which is the case here in the Covenant, and is acknowledged by the Reverend
Brother) I should think it most strange how any Divine can have the least
doubt concerning the obligation of such a thing, except he conceive the thing
it self to be unlawful.

His second Answer is this, In my way, says he, the Governments Civil and
Ecclesiastical, are in the subject matter clearly distinct; When the
Parliament handles matters of War it is a Military Court; when business of
State, it is a Civil Court; when matters of Religion, it is an Ecclesiastical
Court. If this hold good, then it will follow. 1. That the Parliament when they
deliberate about matters of War, or matters of Religion, are not (at least
formally and properly) a Civil Court; else how makes he these so clearly
distinct? 2. That Ministers may be called Civil Officers; for consider his
words in his Re-examination, page, 11. I do not exclude Mininisters, neither
from Ecclesiastical nor Civil Government, in a Ministerial way, doctrinally
and declaratively. Compare this with his present Answer, it will amount to thus
much, That different denominations being taken from the different subject
matter, Ministers when they handle Doctrinally matters of Religion, are
Ecclesiastical Ministers; and when they handle Doctrinally matters of Civil
Government, (which himself allows them to do,) they are Civil Ministers.
But now to apply his Answer to the Argument; How does all this salve the
repugnancy of his Doctrine to the Covenant? If he had examined my Arguments, he
had found that most of them prove from the Covenant, a Church Government
distinct from Civil Government, Suctjective as well as Objective, that is,
another Government besides Magistracy; different Agents, as well as different
Acts; different hands, as well as handling of different matters: I know the
Christian Magistrate may and ought to have a great influence into matters of
Religion; and whatsoever is due to him by the Word of God, or by the Doctrine
either of the Ancient or Reformed Churches; I do not infringe, but do
maintain and strengthen it. But the point in hand is, That the Covenant does
undeniably suppose, and clearly hold forth a Government in the Church, distinct
from Magistracy, which is proved by these Arguments; (which* as they are not
yet answered, so I will briefly apply them to the proof of that point which
now Master Coleman sticks at,) 1. The Church Government mentioned in the
Covenant, is as distinct from the Privileges of Parliament, as the first
Article of the Covenant is distinct from the third Article. 2. The
Church Government in the first Article of the Covenant, the Reformation whereof
we are to endeavor, differs from Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. mentioned in the second Article, as much as a thing to be reformed
differs from a thing to be extirpated; so that the Church Government formerly
used in the Church of England, is looked upon two ways in the Covenant, either
qua Church Government, and so we swear to endeavor the Reformation of it,
(which I hope was not meant of reforming that part of the Privileges of
Parliament, whereby they meddle with Religion in a Parliamentary way,) Or, qua
Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and so we swear to endeavor
the extirpation of it. This difference / between the first and second
Articles, between Reformation and Extirpation, proves that the Covenant does
suppose, that the Church Government formerly used in the Church of England, in
so far as it was a Church Government, is not eatenus, to be abolished, but in
so far as it was a corrupt Church Government, that is, Prelaticall, 3.
Church Government in the Covenant is matched with Doctrine, Worship, and
Catechizing; Now these are subjectively different from Civil Government for
the Civil Magistrate does not act doctrinally nor catechistically, neither can
he dispense the Word and Sacraments as Master Coleman acknowledges. 4. In the
first part of the first Article of the Covenant, concerning The preservation of
the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine Worship,
Discipline, and Government, It is uncontroverted, that Discipline and
Government are Ecclesiastical, and subjectively different from Civil
Government, that is, though diverse who have a hand in the Civil Government are
ruling Elders; yet it is as true that diverse Members of Parliament, and
inferior Civil Courts, are not Church Officers^; and of the Ministry none
are Civil Governors, which makes the two Governments clearly distinct
subjective. Now the second part of that Article concerning the Reformation of
Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, cannot so far differ from the first part of that
Article in the sense of the words, Discipline and Government, as that the same
words in the same Article of the same Covenant should signify things differing
t^to genere, which will follow, unless Discipline and Government in the second
branch, and form of Church Government in the third branch, be understood of
the power of Church Officers, and not of the Magistrate. 5. We did swear to
endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland,
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the Word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches. Now the Word of God holds forth
another Government besides Magistracy; for Master Coleman himself has
acknowledged, that he finds in the New Testament Ministers to be Rulers, yea
instituted Rulers. And the example of the best Reformed Churches (without all
doubt) leads us to an Ecclesiastical Government, different from Magistracy.
Neither has the Reverend Brother so much as once adventured to allege the
contrary, except of the Church of Israel, which as it heterogeneous, (being
none of the Reformed Churches mentioned in the Covenant) so it shall be
discussed in due place. From all which reasons I conclude, that the wit of man
cannot reconcile Master Colemans Doctrine with the Covenant. I add, 6. A
confutation of him out of himself thus. No such Church Government as Master
Coleman casts upon an uncertainty, whether the Word hold out any such thing,
can be by his Principles the power of Magistracy in things Ecclesiastical, but
another Government beside Magistracy. But the Church Government mentioned in
the first Article of the Covenant, is such a Church Government as Master
Coleman casts upon an uncertainty, whether the Word hold out any such thing.
Ergo, the Church Government mentioned in the first Article of the Covenant,
cannot be by his Principles the power of Magistracy, but another Government
beside Magistracy; The Proposition he will easily admit, unless he alter his
assertions; the assumption is clear from his Re-examination, page 15.

CHAP. IIII.
Master Coleman and Master Hussy their errors in Divinity.

MAster Hussy all along calls for Divinity Schoolrs; I confess himself has
much need of them, that he may be better grounded in his Divinity; and that if
he will plead any more for Christian Magistracy, he may not involve himself
into such dangerous heterodoxies as have fallen from his pen in this short
Tractate. I instance in these:

First, In his Epistle to the Parliament, he has diverse passages against
Synodicall Votes, he will have no putting to the Vote; For Votes, says he,
page 6 are of no other use but to gather parties, and ought no where to be used
but by those that have the power of the Sword. And page 3. he will have the
business of Assemblies to be only Doctrinall, and by dispute to find out
truth; their Disputes ought to end in a brotherly accord, as in Act. 15. much
disputing, but all ended in accord, no putting to the Vote. And page 5. he will
have things carried with strength, of Argument and unanimous consent of the
whole Clergy. Behold how he joyneth issue with the Remonstrants against the
Contra-Remonstrants, to introduce not only an Accademicall, Vt de controversis
articulis non ^ia^ decisio, sed accmodatiooni studeatur: cujus tamen via and
ratio rata non ha^eatur, nisi accedente ^tri^^que partis consensu.
but a Scepticall and Pyrrhonian Dubitation and uncertainty, so that there
shall never be an end of controversy, nor any settlement of truth and of the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, so long as there shall be but one tenacious
Disputer to hold up the ball of contention. One egg is not liker another, then
Master Husseys Tenent is like that of the Arminians, for which see the Synod of
Dort Sess. 25. It was the nin^h condition which the Arminians required in a
lawful and well constituted Synod, that there might be no decision of the
controverted Articles, but only such an accommodation as both sides might
agree to. And generally they hold that Synods ought not to meet for decision,
or determination, but for examining, disputing, discussing. So their Examen
Censurae, cap. 25. and their Vindiciae, lib. 2. cap. 6. page 131. 133.

Secondly, In that same Epistle to the Parliament, page 4. he has this
passage; Will Worship is unlawful, I mean in matters that are essential to
Gods Worship, which are matters of duty, as for circumstantials of time and
place (except the Sabbath) which are matters of liberty, in these the
Commonwealth may Vote, etc, and this is your christian liberty, that in
matters of liberty ye make Rules and Laws to your selves, not crossing the
ends that you are tied to in duty. And is the Sabbath only a circumstantiall
of time contra-distinct from matters of duty? It seems he will cry down not
only the Jus divinum of Churchcensures with the Erastians, but the Jus divinum
of the Sabbath with the Canterburians. And if Will Worship be unlawful only
in the essentialls of Gods Worship, why was the Argument of Will Worship so
much tossed, not only between Prelates and Non-Conformists, but between
Papists and Protestants, even in reference to Ceremonies? And whether has not
Mr. Hussy here engaged himself to hold it free and lawful to the Christian
Magistrate, yea to private Christians (for he calls it Christian liberty, not
Parliamentary liberty: now Christian liberty belongs to all sorts of
Christians) to make Laws to themselves for taking the Sacrament anniversarily
on Christmasse, Good Friday, and Easter, or to appoint a perpetual Monthly
Fast, or Thanksgiving: yea another Parliament may (if so it should seem good
to them) impose again the Surplice and Cross in Baptism, Fonts, Railing of
Communion Tables, the reading of diverse passages of Apocrypha to the
Congregation, Doxologies, Anthems, Responsories, etc. as heretofore they were
used: or they may appoint all and every one to sit in the Church with their
faces toward the East, to stand up at the Epistles and Gospels, etc. yea what
Ceremonies, Jewish, Popish, Heathenish, may they not impose, provided they
only hold the foundation, and keep to those essentials which he calls matters
of duty: by restraining the unlawfulness of Will Worship to the essentialls,
he leaves men free to do any thing in Religion, pr^ter verbum, so that it
appear not to them to be c^ntra verbum; any thing they may add to the Word,
or do beside the Word, so that the thing cannot be proved contrary to the Word.

Thirdly, Mr. Hussy, ibid. page, 4. 5. says, That the Parliament may require
such as they receive for Preachers of truth, to send out able men to supply the
places, and that without any regard to the allowance or dis-allowance of the
people. Where in the first part of that which he says, there is either a
Heterodoxie, or a controdiction. A heterodoxie, if he mean that Ministers are
to be sent out without Ordination: a contradiction, if he mean that they must
be Ordained; for then he gives Classes, a work which is not merely Doctrinall.
But most strange it is, that he so far departs from Protestant Divines in
point of the Churches liberty in choosing Ministers, He tells us, page 14. that
Mr. Herle for want of skill and Theological Disputations has granted to
people a right to choose their Minister. Master Herles skill both Logical and
Theological is greater then it seems he can well Judge of: neither can this
bold arrogant censure of his derogate from Mr. Herles but from his own
reputation. For the matter it self, it is one and not the least of the
Controversies between the Papists and Protestants, what right the Church has
in the Vocation of Ministers, Read Bellarmine de cleric. and those that writ
against him, and see whether it be not so. The Helvetick confession tells us
that the right choosing of Ministers is by the consent of the Church, and the
Belgic confession says, We believe that the Ministers, Seniors and Deacons,
ought to be called to those their Functions, and by the lawful elections of
the Church to be advanced into those rooms. See both these in the Harmony of
Confessions, Sect. 11. I might here (if it were requisite) bring a heap of
Testimonies from Protestant Writers, the least thing which they can admit of
is, that a Minister be not obtruded renitente Ecclesia, Factum valet, fieri non
debet. It may be helped after it is done, without making null or void the
Ministry: but in a well constituted Church there ought to be no intrusion into
the Ministry, the Churches consent is requisite, for which also I might bring
both Scripture and Antiquity: but that is not my present business. One thing I
must needs put Mr. Hussy in mind of, that when the Prelates did intrude
Ministers without any regard to the dis-allowance of the people, it was cried
out against as an oppression and usurpation: And we are often warned by Mr.
Prynne, by Mr. Coleman, and by my self, to cast away the Prelates usurpation
with themselves. But who Lords it now over the Lords inheritance, the
Presbyterians or the Erastians? Nay he who will have Ministers put in churches
without any regard to the allowance or dis-allowance of people, falls far
short of diverse Prelaticall men, who did much commend the ancient primitive
form of calling Ministers, not without the churches consent. See Dr. Field of
the Church, lib. 5. cap. 54. Bilson de gubern Eccl. cap. 15. page 417. The
Author of the History of Epic^pacy, part 2. page 360.

Fourthly, Master Hussy, Epist. page 7. says, That upon further consideration
he found the Minister charged only with Preaching, and Baptizing. The like he
has afterward, page 39. Let any man prove that a Minister has any more to
do from Christ then to teach and baptize. And again, page 44. he propounds
this Quaere, Whether Christ gave any more Government, (he should have said any
more to do, for Preaching and Baptizing are not acts of Government) then is
contained in Preaching and Baptizing, and he holds the negative. If only
Preaching and Baptizing, then not praying, and reading in the Congregation,
ministering the Lords Supper, visiting the Sick and particular families.

Fifthly, He holds, page 20. that a Heathen Magistrate is unlawful, and for
his government, if sin be lawful, it is lawful. A gross heterodoxie. The
Apostle exhorts to be subject even to Heathen Magistrates, Romans 13. (for
there were no other at that time) and to pray for them, 1 Timothy 2. so that by
Mr. Hu^sseys Divinity the Apostle would have men to be subject untoa and to
pray for an unlawful Government. It is an An baptisticall Tenent that an
Heathen Magistrate is not from God: which Gerhard de Magistratu position, page
498. 499. fully confutes.

Sixthly, he says of Christ, page 40. He does nothing as Mediator, which he
does not as God, or as man. It is a dangerous mistake; for take the work of
Mediation it self, he neither does it as God, nor as man, but as God-man.

Seventhly, He says, page 35. Nothing can be said of Christ as second Person
in Trinity in opposition to Mediator, but in opposition to man there may. So
that he will not admit of this opposition; Christ as the second Person in the
Trinity is equal and consubstantiall to the Father, but as Mediator he is not
equal to his Father, but less then his Father, and subject and subordinate to
his Father; a distinction used by our Divines against the Antitrinitarians and
Socinians. Now by his not admitting of this distinction, he does by consequence
mire himself in Socinianisme, for Christ as Mediator is the Fathers servant,
Isa 42. 1. and the Father is greater then he, Joh. 14. 28. and as the head of
the man is Christ, so the head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. If therefore it
cannot be said of Christ as he is the second Person in the Trinity, that his
Father is not greater then he, and that he is not subordinate to God as his
head, then farewell Anti-Socinianisme. I dare boldly say, it is impossible to
confute the Socinians, or to assert the eternal Godhead of Jesus Christ,
except somewhat be affirmed of him as the second Person of the Trinity, which
must be denied of him as he is Mediator, and something be denied of him as he
is the second Person in the Trinity, which must be affirmed of him as he is
Mediator.

Eighthly, He says, page 36. That Christ by his Mediation has obtained from
the Father that he shall not Judge any man according to rigor, but as they are
in or out of Christ; all deferring of Judgment from the wicked is in and for
Christ, which otherwise the Justice of God would not allow. Then Christ did
thus far make satisfaction to the Justice of God in the behalf of the
wicked, and dye for them, that Judgment might be deferred from them: and thus
far perform Acts of Mediation for the Savages, and Mahumetans, and for them
that never heard the Gospel, that by such Mediation he has obtained of the
Father that they shall be Judged not according to rigor, but by the Gospel.
Which intimates that Christ has taken away all their sins against the Law,
so that all men shall now go upon a new score, and none shall be condemned or
Judged by the Law, but by the Gospel only; for if Christ have not taken away
their sins against the Law, the Justice of God will judge them according to
the rigor of the Law. Must not every jot of the Law be fulfilled? and is there
not a necessity that every one underlye the cusre and rigor of the Law, o^
el^e that the Mediator has underlyed it for them.

Ninthly, He propounds this Quere, page 44. Whether Ministers have any right to
those Privileges which are given to the Church, more then another Christian;
and he holds the negative. Now the Preaching of the Word, and the
administration of the Sacraments, the power of the Keys are Privileges given
to the Church, that is for the Churches good, For all things are yours, says
the Apostle, whether Paul, or Apollo, etc. c. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. Therefore by
Mr. Husseys Divinity, any other Christian has as much right to administer
Word, Sacraments, Keys, as the Minister.

Come on now to Mr. Colemans errors in Divinity, not to repeat what was
expressed in my Nihil Respondes, but to take off the Maledicis in the maine
points.

The tenth, Heterodoxie shall therefore be this, That whatsoever is given to
Christ, he has it not as the eternal Son of God. Into this ditch did Mr.
Coleman first fall, and then Mr. Hussy, page 25. after him. I said this Tenent
leads to a blasphemous Heresy. For the better understanding whereof let it
be remembered what I did premise in my Nihil Respondes, page 11. in reply to his
Proposition, That which is given to Christ he has it not as God. This (said I)
is in opposition to what I said, page 45. concerning the Headship and Dignity
of Christ, as the natural Son of God, the Image of the inv^sible God,
Colossians, 1. 15. and page 43. of the dominion of Christ, as he is the
eternal Son of God. This being premised, etc. Mr. Coleman without taking the
least notice of that which I did purposely and plainly premise, begins to
speak of God essentially, and that if something man be given to Christ as God,
then something may be given to God, and then God is not absolutely perfect, etc
Maledicis, page 13. 14. Thus he turns over to the Essence and Nature of God,
what I spoke of the second Person in the Trinity, or of Christ as he is the
eternal Son of God. Was not the Question between him and me, Whether the
Kingdom and Dominion over all things may be said to be given to Christ, as he
is the eternal Son of God? This is the point which he did argue against,
because it takes off his Argument first brought to prove that all Government
even civil is given to Christ, as he is Mediator. And still from the beginning
I spoke of Christ as the second person in Trinity, or the eternal Son of
God. Thus therefore the case stands; The Reverend Brother to prove that an
Universal Sovereignty and Government over all things is given to Christ, as he
is Mediator; and to confute my Assertion, that it is given to Christ as he is
the eternal Son of God, does frame this Argument against me, That which is
given to Christ he has it not as God. But here dignity is given to Christ.
Therefore not here to be taken as God. Where there is more in the conclusion
then in the Premises, for the conclusion which naturally follows had been
this, Therefore Christ has not here dignity as God. It seems he was ashamed
of the conclusion, yet not of the premises which infer the conclusion. But
this by the way. I speak to his Proposition; That which is given to Christ he
has it not as God. These words, as God, either he understands (...)
essentially, or (...) personally, that is, either in regard of the nature and
essence of God, which is common to the Son of God, with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, and in respect whereof they three are one, or in regard of the
person of the Word, as Christ is the second Person in the Trinity, and
personally distinct from the Father and the Holy Ghost. If in the former sense,
then he must lay aside his whole Argument, as utterly impertinent, and making
nothing at all against my Theses, which affirmed that an Universal Dominion
and Kingdom over all things is given to Christ, not as he is Mediator, (in
which capacity he is only King of the Church,) but as he is the Eternal Son
of God. In opposing of which Assertion, as the Reverend Brother was before
Nihil Respondens, so now he is twice naught. But if in the other sense he
understands his Proposition, (which I must needs suppose he does, it being in
opposition to what I said,) then I still aver his Proposition will infer a
blasphemous heresy, as I proved before by a clear demonstration. That which
is given to Christ, he has it not as God. But life, glory, etc. is given to
Christ; Ergo, Christ has not life, glory, etc. as God. The Reverend Brother
says, I acknowledge the conclusion unsound, and I deny not but that the Major
is mine own, and the Minor is the very Scripture. Yet he denies the
conclusion, and cleares himself by this simile, That which was given this
poor man, he had not before, but a shilling was given this poor man: Ergo, He
had not a shilling before. Where both Propositions are true, yet the conclusion
is false, says he, contrary to the axiom, Ex veris nil nisi verum. You are
extremely out Sir, your Syllogism of the poor man is fallacia ab amphibolia.
The Major of it is ambiguous, dubious, and fallacious, and cannot be admitted
without a distinction. But here you acknowledge the Major of my Argument to be
your own, and so not fallacious in your opinion. You acknowledge the Minor to
be Scripture. You have not found four terms in my Premises, nor charged my
Major or Minor with the least fault in matter or form, and yet forsooth you
deny the Conclusion, and do not admit that uncontrovertible Maxim in Logic,
Ex veris nil ^^stem. l^g. lib. 3. cap. 5.
nisi^^rum, or as Kekerman has it. Ex veris praemiss^s fal^^^ conclusionem
colligi est impossible; It is impossible that a false Conclusion s^^uid be
gathered from true Premises. Now let us hear what he would say against my
Conclusion; it is concerning the sense of the word has, For has, says he, by
me is used for receiving or having by virtue of the gift, but by him for having
fundamentally, originally. You are still out Sir; I take it just as you take
it; for though the Son of God, as God essentially, or in respect of the
nature and essence of God, which is common to all three Persons in the blessed
Trinity, has originally of himself a Kingdom and Dominion over all, yet as
he is the second Person in Trinity, begotten of, and distinct from the Father,
he has the Kingdom and Dominion over all, not of himself, but by virtue of
the gift of his Father. So that the Reverend Brother is still Nihil Respondens,
and therefore he shall be concluded in this Syllogism. He who holds that
whatsoever is given to Christ, he has it not by virtue of the gift, as he is
the eternal Son of God, or second Person in the Trinity, but only as
Mediator; he holds by consequence, that Christ has not glory by virtue of his
Fathers gift, as he is the eternal Son of God, or second Person in the
Trinity. But Master Coleman holds the former, Ergo, Master Coleman holds the
latter. The consequence in the Proposition is proved from Joh. 7. 22. The glory
which thou gave me. The assumption he will own, or else quit his argument
against my distinction of the double Kingdom given to Christ, as the eternal
Son of God, and as Mediator. The conclusion which follows is heretical; for
whereas the Nicen Creed said that Christ in regard of his eternal generation,
that he is Deus de Deo, Lumen de Lumine, God of God, Light of Light; Master
Colemans argument will infe^^e that he is not only ex seipso Deus, but ex
seipso filius; and so deny the eternal generation of the Son of God, and
the communication of the Godhead, and the Sovereignty, Glory, and Attributes
thereof, from the Father to the Son. For if Christ, as he is the eternal
Son of God, has not glory by virtue of his Fathers Gift, then he has it not
by virtue of the eternal generation and communication, but fundamentally and
originally of himself.

As for the other branch of Master Colemans Argument, tending to prove, that
Christ as he is the eternal Son of God cannot be given, which he endeavors
to vindicate, page 14. 15. I answer these two things:

First, Granting all that he says, he concludes nothing against me, for I did
from the beginning expound those words, Ephesians. 1. 22. And gave him to be the head
over all things to the church, in this sense, that Christ as Mediator is given
only to the Church, to be her head, but he that is given as Mediator to the
Church, is over all. So that the giving of Christ there spoken of, is as
Mediator, and he is given to the Church only, which I cleared by the Syriak,
And him who is over all, he gave to be the head to the church. But his being
over all, there spoken of, if understood of glory, dignity, excellency over
all, so Christ is over all as Mediator, (yea in regard of the exaltation of his
humane nature,) and this helps not Master Coleman, who intends to prove from
that place, That all Government, even Civil, is given to Christ as Mediator.
But if understood of a Kingdom and Government, over all, so he is over all as
he is the eternal Son of God, or second Person of the Trinity, and not as
Mediator.

Secondly, The Question which the Reverend Brother falls upon, concerning the
personal inhabitation of the Holy Ghost, will never follow from any thing
which I said, more then Gods giving of his Son to us, will infer a
personal inhabitation of the Son of God in us. That which I said was to this
intent, That both the Son of God and the Holy Ghost are given, not as God
essentially; that is, in respect of the Godhead it self, or as they are one in
nature with the Father, (for so the Father that gives, and the Holy Ghost
which is given, could not be distinguished) but the Son is given as the Son
proceeding from the Father; and the Holy Ghost is given as the Holy Ghost
proceeding and sent from the Father and the Son; whether he be given to dwell
personally in us, or by his gracious operations only, is another question,
which has nothing to do with the present argument, and therefore I will not
be led out of my way.

The Eleventh Heterodoxy is this, I see an absurdity to hold that every man in
authority is either Christ's Vicegerent, or the Divelo Maledicis, page 16. Here
I make this inference; Heathen and Infidel Magistrates, either they are not
men in authority; or 2. They are Christ's Vicegerents; or 3. They are the Devils
Maledicis. If he say they are not men in authority, he shall contradict the
Apostle Paul, who calls them Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1. and men in activity, 1 Timothy 2. 2. speaking in reference even to the Magistrates of that time, which
were Infidels. If he say they are Christ's Vicegerents, Then 1. I must say, that
Christ as Mediator reigns without the Church, and is a King to those to whom
he is neither Priest nor Prophet. 2. He must find a Commission given by Christ
to the Infidel Magistrate. 3. Whom in authority will he make to be the Devils
Vicegerents, if Infidel Magistrates be Christ's Vicegerents? If he say that
they are the Devils Vicegerents, then it follows, 1. That they who resist the
Devils Vicegerent, resist the Ordinance of God, for they that resist an
Infidel Magistrate and do not submit to his lawful authority, (which his
Infidelity takes not away,) is said Romans 13. v. 2. to resist the Ordinance of
God. 2. That the Apostle Paul bade pray for the Devils Vicegerent, 1 Timothy 2. 1,
2. The Reverend Brother does but more and more wind himself into a lab erinth
of errors, while he endeavors to take away the distinction of the two fold
Kingdom, and the two fold Vicegerentship of God and of Christ.

The twelfth Heterodoxy follows; Now it is true, that Christ being God as
well as man, has of himself originally as God, whatsoever he has by virtue
of gift as Mediator Maledicis, page 13. Now subsume, Christ has by virtue of
gift, as Mediator, the Priestly office. Ergo, By Master Colemans Principles,
Christ has of himself originally as God, the Priestly office. And if Christ
has it of himself originally as God, then the Father and the Holy Ghost has
it also; so that by his Doctrine the Father and the Holy Ghost shall be the
Priests of the Church as well as Christ, for Christ has nothing of himself
originally as God, which the Father and the Holy Ghost have not likewise.

The thirdteenth and last error concerns the office of Deacons. Not only a
Widow but a Deacon is denied to be a Church Officer, or to have any warrant
from Scripture. I hold not a Widow a Church Officer, says he: no more do I a
Deacon; both having a like foundation in Scripture, which truly is none at all.
Maledicis, page 9. If this was his opinion formerly, why did he not in so maine
a point enter his dissent from the Votes of the Assembly concerning Deacons,
together with his Reasons? Well, his opinion is so now, whereby he runs
contrary not only to the reformed Churches (which it seems weigh not much in
his balance) but to the plain Scripture which speaks of the Office of a
Deacon, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and this could be no civil Office, but an
Ecclesiastical Office, for the Deacons were chosen by the Church, were
ordained with Prayer, and laying on of hands, and their charge was to take
special care of the poor, all which is clear, Act. 6. If he had given us the
grounds of his Opinion, he should have heard more against it.

CHAP. V.
The Prelaticall way and Tenants of Master Coleman, and Master Hussy:
Repugnant also in diverse particulars to the Votes and Ordinances of Parliament.

1* MAster Coleman in his Re-examination, page 14 makes the Parliament to be
Church Governors, and Church Officers to the whole Kingdom. It was an
Argument used against the Prelates that Ecclesiastical and civil Government,
Spiritual and Secular administrations are inconsistent in the same Persons,
either of which requires the whole man. It was another exception against the
Prelate that he assumed the power of Church Government, and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction over the whole Diocese, which was much more then he could
discharge. How will Master Coleman avoid the involving the Parliament into
Prelaticall guiltiness, by his Principles, which we avoid by ours?

2* The Prelates sought great things for themselves rather then to purge the
Church of scandalls. What other thing was it when Master Coleman in his third
Rule, instead of exhorting to the purging the Church, called only for learning
and competency, and told it out, that this will get us an able Ministry, and
procure us honor enough. Master Hussy in his Epistle to my self tells me,
that our attending on reading Exhortation and Doctrine (without Government)
will obtain the Magistrates love, more honor, more maintenance: something for
shame he behooved to add of the punishing of sin, (yet he will not have the
Minister called from his Study to be troubled or to take any pains in
Discipline) but behold the love of the Magistrate, more honor, and more
maintenance are strong ingredients in the Erastian Electuary.

3 Master Hussy will have Ministers placed without any regard to the allowance
or dis-all^wance of the people. Epist. to the Parliament. This is Prelaticall,
or rather more then Prelaticall.

4 The Prelates were great enemies to ruling Elders. So are Mr. Coleman, and
Mr. Hussy who acknowledge no warrant from the Word of God for that calling,
nor admit of any ruling Elders who are not Magistrates. A distinction which was
used by Saravia and Bilson in reference to the Jewish Elders, and by Bishop
Hall in reference to the Elders of the ancient Church, who were not Preaching
Elders. Assert. of Episcop. by divine right, page 208, 209, 221. And now
forsooth Mr. Hussy in his Epistle to the Parliament does earnestly beseech
them to set up Classes consisting only of Ministers, whose work should be
only to Preach the Word, etc. Such Classes I dare say the Prelates themselves
will admit of. Sure the Scottish Prelates, when they were at their highest
yielded as much.

5 Master Coleman and Mr. Hussy hold that ruling Elders and a
Church Government distinct from the civil Government in the times of
Persecution and under Pagan Magistrates, can be no warrant for the like where
the State is Christian. This plea for Christian Magistracy was Bishop Whitgifts
plea against the ruling Elders. Answ. to the Admon. page 114.

6 Master Hussy, page 22. says, that granting the incestuous Corinthian to be
Excommunicated, the decree was Paul's, and not the Corinthians, and that it no
way appertained to them under the notion of a Church. This is Saravia his
answer to Beza, De tripl. Epist. genere, page 42, 43: yea the Papists answer to
Protestant Writers, by which they would hold up the Authority and sole
Jurisdiction of the Prelates (as the Apostles successors) to Excommunicate.

They do not more agree with the Prelaticall Principles, then they differ from
the Votes and Ordinances of Parliament, which is the other point that I have
here undertaken to discover; and I shall do it by the particular instances
following:

First, The Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the
calling of an Assembly of Divines begins thus: Whereas among the infinite
blessings of Almighty God upon this Nation, none is, or can be more dear unto
us then the purity of our Religion, and for that as yet many things remain in
the Liturgy, Discipline, and Government of the Church, which do necessarily
require a further and more perfect Reformation then as yet has been attained:
And whereas it has been declared, and resolved by the Lords and Commons
as^embled in Parliament, that the present Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. is evil and justly offensive, etc* and that therefore they are
resolved that the same shall be taken away, and that such a Government shall be
settled in the Church, as may be most agreeable to Gods holy Word, and most apt
to procure and preserve the peace of the Church at home, and nearer agreement
with the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches abroad. Afterward it
was resolved and Voted in both the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and sent as
one of the Propositions to the Treaty at Vxbridge, That many particular
Congregations shall be under one Presbyteriall Government. Now therefore what
can be more contrary to the Votes and Ordinances of Parliament, then that which
Mr: Coleman and Mr. Hussy hold, that there ought to be no Ecclesiastical
Government, beside civil Magistracy, except we please to take Preaching and
Baptism under the name of Government, as if forsooth the Parliament had meant
by Presbyteriall Government, Parliamentary Government; or as if by the purity
of Religion in point of the Discipline of Government of the Church they had
intended nothing but their civil rights and privileges, or as if the wise and
Honorable Houses had understood themselves no better then to intend that for a
nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland, and other reformed Churches,
which is the widest difference from them, to wit, the Erastian way.

Secondly, In the same Ordinance of Parliament for the calling of an Assembly
of Divines, it is Ordained, that the Assembly after conferring and treating
among themselves touching the Lyturgie, Discipline, and Government of the
Church, or vindication and clearing of the Doctrine of the same, shall deliver
their opinions or advices of or touching the matters aforesaid to both or
either of the Houses of Parliament, yet Mr. Hussy Epist. to the Parliament,
page 3. 6. will not have Classes and Assemblies to put any thing to the Vote,
but to hold on the Disputes till all end in accord, and in unanimous consent of
the whole Clergy. But how can the Assembly after Disputes, express their
sense, and deliver their opinions and advice to the Parliament, as they are
required, except they do it by putting to the Vote. Mr. Coleman himself has
consented, yea sometime called to put things to the Vote. And as for Classes,
will any man imagine that when both Houses of Parliament did Vote that many
particular Congregations shall be under one Presbyteriall Government, their
meaning was that the Classical Presbitery shall only Schoole-wise Dispute,
and put nothing to the Vote: Or that the Classical Presbitery shall in common
dispense the Word and Sacraments to many Congregations, and that either the
Classical Presbitery shall go to the several Congregations successively, or
the many Congregations come to the Classical Presbitery, for Preaching and
Baptizing? I admire what opinion Mr. Hussy can have of the Parliamentary Vote
concerning Presbyteriall Government.

Thirdly, Mr. Hussy, Epist. to the Parliament, page 4, 5. will have Ministers
placed without any regard to the allowance and dis-allowance of the people, yet
the Ordinance of Parliament for giving power to Classical Presbyteries to
ordain Ministers, does appoint that he who is examined and approved by the
Presbitery shall be sent to the Church or other place where he is to serve (if
it may be done with safety and convenience) there to Preach three several
days, and to converse with the people, that they may have trial of his gifts
for their edification, and may have time and leisure to enquire into, and the
better to know his life and conversation: after which the Ordinance appoints
public notice to be given, and a day set to the Congregation, to put in what
exceptions they have against him,

Fourthly, Mr. Hussy in that Epistle to the Parliament, page 5. says, Oh that
this Honorable Court would hasten to set up Classes consisting only of
Ministers, whose work should be only to Preach the Word, and weekly meet in
Schools of Divinity. Here Is a double contradiction to the Ordinances of
Parliament, for in the directions of the Lords and Commons for choosing of
ruling Elders, and speedy settling of Presbyteriall Government, it is appointed
that ruling Elders shall be Members both of Classes and Synodicall Assemblies,
together with the Ministers of the Word. Again, the Ordinance about suspension
of scandalous Persons from the Sacrament appoints other work to Classes,
beside Preaching and disputing, namely the receiving and judging of appeals
from the Congregationall Eldership. Mr. Coleman in Maledicis, page 12.
professes that he excludes ruling Elders from Church Government, yet he can
hardly be ignorant that as the Parliament has Voted, That many particular
Congregations shall be under one Presbyteriall Government; so their Votes do
commit that Government to Pastors and ruling Elders jointly.

I will not here repeat the particulars wherein I showed in my Nihil Respondes
that Mr. Coleman has abused the Honorable Houses of Parliament, unto which
particulars he has answered as good as nothing. The Honorable Houses in their
wisdom will soon observe, whether such men, whose avou^hed Tenants are so
flatly repugnant to the Parliamentary Votes and Ordinances, are like to be good
Pleaders for Christian Magistracy.

CHAP. VI.
Master Coleman's wronging of the Church of Scotland.

MAster Coleman ends his Maledicis with a resentment of accusations charged
upon him by a stranger, a Commissioner from another Church. The lot of
strangers were very hard, if when they are falsely accused to Authority, they
may not answer for themselves. He may remember the first accusation was made by
himself, when in his Sermon to the Parliament, he did flatly impute to the
Commissioners from the Church of Scotland, a great part of the fault of
hindering Union in the Assembly of Divines, as having come biased with a
National determination: his Doctrine also at that time being such, as did not
only reflect upon the Government of the Church of Scotland, but tend to the
subversion of the Covenant in one principal Point, without which there can be
small or no hopes of attaining the other ends of the Covenant* Since that time
he did in his Re-examination, and now again in his Maledicis fall foully upon
the Church of Scotland, not only by gross mistakes and misrepresentations of
our way, but by most groundless aspersions, and most uncharitable and unjust
calumnies. I am sure I am not so much a stranger to his Doctrine as he is to
the Church of Scotland, of which notwithstanding he boldly speaks his pleasure,
in diverse particulars which he will never be able to make good.

First, He has aspersed that Church in the Point of promiscuous communicating.
This I confuted in my Nihil Respondes, and told him both of the order of the
Church, and practice of conscientious Ministers to the contrary. Now what
replieth he? First, This refining work, I think, is not one year old in
Scotland, or much more; I was lately informed that in Edinbrugh it is begun:
whether anywhere else I know not. Maledicis page 20. Are not these now good
grounds of censuring and aspersing a Reformed Church, (whose name has been as
precious ointment among other Churches abroad) I think, I was informed, whether
it be otherwise I know not? He will sit in Cornhill, and tell the world what he
imagines or hears of the Church of Scotland, and that forsooth must be taken
for a truth. Yet there was both Rules and Practice in the Church of Scotland,
for debarring ignorant and scandalous persons from the Sacrament, before he was
born: though all was put out of course under the Prelates.

Secondly, says the Reverend Brother, It is not a very effectual,
sin-censuring, and Church-refining Government, under which after fo^rscore
years constant practice, diverse thousands in the Kingdom, and some hundreds in
one particular Parish, because of ignorance and scandal, are yet unfit to
communicate. Maledicis page 20. Answ. 1. It is notoriously false that there
has been fourscore years constant practice of Presbyteriall Government in
Scotland: for the Prelates there, were above thirty years standing. 2. Shall the
Earth be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a Nation be born at once?
says the Prophet, Isa. 66. 8. It is no easy matter to get a whole Nation
purged of ignorant and scandalous persons. 3. He may take notice that the
Apostle Paul almost in all his Epistles, makes mention of scandalous persons
among those to whom he wrote, warning them not to have fellowship with such, to
note them, to avoid them. If the Apostolic Churches were not free of such,
what great marvel if we be not? 4. Before he objected promiscuous
communicating. This being cleared to be a calumny, now he objecteth that there
are such as are unfit to communicate. But while he thus seeks a quarrel
against Church Government, he does upon the matter quarrel the preaching of the
Gospel it self. For ^e that imputes it as a fault to the Church Government
that there are still diverse thousands, who by reason of ignorance or scandal,
are unfit to communicate, does by consequence, yea much more, impute it as a
fault to the Preaching of the Gospel in England, Scotland, Ireland, France,
Germany, the Low Countries, Switzerland, Swede, Poland, that in all these and
other Reformed Churches after fourscore years constant Preaching of the Gospel
(which is appointed of God to turn unconverted and unregenerate persons, from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God) there are not only
diverse thousands, but diverse millions who by reason of ignorance or scandal,
are yet unfit to communicate. If the Word do not open the eyes of the ignorant,
and convert the scandalous, what marvel that Church Government cannot do it?
Church Government is not an illuminating and regenerating Ordinance as the Word
is. But this Church Government can and will do, yea has done where it is duly
executed; It is a most blessed means for keeping the Ordinances from visible
and known pollution, which does very much honor God, shame sin, and commend
piety. It puts a visible difference between the precious and the vile, the
clean and the unclean, the silver and the dross; and may well be therefore
called a Churchrefining Ordinance.

The second Calumny was this, I my self, said he, did hear the Presbytery of
Edinbrugh censure a woman to be banished one of the gates of the City. I
answered him in his own language, It is at the best a most uncharitable
slander. And told him, there is no banishment in Scotland, but by the Civil
Magistrate; and that he ought to have enquired and informed himself better.

Now he does neither adhere to his Calumny, or offer to make it good, nor yet
quit it, or confess he was mistaken; but propounds three new Queres (Male
dicis, pa. 21.) still forgetting his own rule of keeping to the Laws of
Disputation and Matter in hand. For the particular in hand, he only says thus
much, I did make enquiry, and from the Presbytery it self, I received
information; but not satisfaction. He tells not what information he received.
If he will say, that he received information that the banishment was by the
Magistrate, how could he then report that it was by the Presbytery. If he say,
that the information he had from the Presbytery gave him any ground for the
report which he has made, let him speak it out, and the world shall know the
untruth of it. He may remember withal, that by his principles an accusation
may not be received against an Elder (much less against an Eldership) in
reference either to the judgment of charity, or to ministerial Conviction,
except under two or three Witnesses. If therefore he would have his accusation
believed, let him find two or three Witnesses.

Thirdly, Whereas I had rectified a great mistake of the Reverend Brother, when
I told him It is accidental to the ruling Elder to be of the Nobility, or to
Nobles to be ruling Elders; there are but some so, and many otherwise: He is
not pleased to be rectified in this, but replyeth, I say, first, it is
continually so. Secondly, The Kings Commissioner in the General Assembly, is
his presence accidental? Male dicis, page 10. See now here whether he
understands what he says, or whereof he affirms. That which he says is
continually so, is almost continually otherwise, that is, there are continually
some Ruling Elders who are not Nobles, and there are continually some Nobles
who are not Ruling Elders: So that if any thing be accidental, this is
accidental, that an Elder be of the Nobility, or Nobles be Elders; they are
neither Nobles qua Elders, nor Elders qua Nobles. It is no less accidental,
that the Kings Commissioner be present in the General Assembly; for there have
been General Assemblies in Scotland, both before the erection and since the
last casting out of Prelacy, in which there was no Commissioner from the King.
And when the King sends a Commissioner, it is accidental that he be of the
Nobility; for the King has sent Commissioners to General Assemblies, who were
not of the Nobility.

A fourth Injury, not to be passed in silence, is this, Master Coleman has
endeavored to make the world believe, that the Commissioners from the Church
of Scotland, came to the Assembly, biased with something adventitious from
without, which he calls a National determination, and that we are not permitted
by those that sent us, to receive any further light from the Word of God. I
shall say no more of the byas, because as I told him before, the standers by
see well enough which way the byas runs. But most strange it is, that after I
had confuted his Calumny, not only from our Paper first presented to the Grand
Committee, but from the General Assemblies own Letter to the Assembly of
Divines, showing that they had ordered the laying aside of some particular
Customs in the Church of Scotland for the nearer uniformity with the Church of
England, so much endeared unto them; yet he still adhereth to his former
Calumny ( Male dicis, page 20.) without taking notice of the Evidence which I
had given to the contrary. And not content with this, he still qua^relleth with
my allegation of certain parallel examples, which are by him so far
disesteemed, that he has not stuck to pass the very same censure upon the
foreign Divines who came to the Synod of Dort, which the Arminians did: The
same he says of Alexander his coming to the Council of Nice; and of Cyril his
coming to the Council of Ephesus. All these (I say) he still involveth under
the same Censure with us; for whereas he had alleged that I justified the
byas, this I denied and called for his proof; his Reply now is thus, Is not the
allegation of examples of the like doing, a justification of the act done? Male
dicis, page 20. This Reply can have no other sense but this, That I justified
the thing which he thinks our byas, because I justified those other Divines who
(as he holds) came also biased in like manner. I am persuaded this one
particular, his joining with the Arminians in their Exceptions against the
Synod of Dort, would make all the Reformed Churches, if they could all speak to
him uno ore, to cry Male audis. And I am as firmly persuaded, that the
Confession which I have extorted from him in this place, That he knows no
adventitious engagements those Divines had, makes him irreconcileably to
contradict himself; for he made them but just now biased in the same manner as
he thinks us, and made my allegation of their examples to be a justification of
the byas charged by him upon us: As therefore he does most uncharitably, and
untruly judge us to be biased with adventitious engagements, so does he judge
of them. Neither can he assoil them, while he condemns us; for the Articles
concerning Predestination, the death of Christ, grace, freewill, and
perseverance, were determined before the Synod of Dort, by most (if not by all)
of those Reformed Churches who sent Commissioners thither, as much as
Presbyterial Government was determined in the Church of Scotland, before the
Reverend Assembly of Divines was called. And this Preingagement and
Predetermination of those Reformed Churches, was the main objection of the
Arminians, against the foreign Divines who came to the Synod of Dort. To
conclude this point, Master Coleman himself in his Reexamination, page 7.
avoucheth roundly, That the foreign Divines came to Dort, not as Divines by
dispute and disquisition to find out truth, but as Judges to censure all
different Opinions as Erroneous.

CHAP. VII.
Calumnies confuted, and that Question briefly cleared, Whether the Magistrate
be Christ's Vicegerent.

MAster Hussy in his Title page tells us he has prosecuted the argumentative
part without any personal reflections; yet I could instance diverse personal
reflections in his Book which any moderate impartial man will extremely
dislike; but what should this be to the edifying of my Reader, the end which
next to the glory of God and the promoting of Reformation, I have proposed to
my self? Yet I must needs take notice of some calumnies.

First, In his Epistle page 8. he offers it to be examined whether I was not
beside my Text, Mal. 3. 2. when I pressed from it Reformation by
Ecclesiastical Discipline? whether that refiners fire and fullers soap, does
not point at another, and a nearer operation upon the souls and spirits of men
by the Blood, Word, Spirit, and Grace of Christ? and whether such handling of a
similitude in a Text be to preach the mind of God, or men's own fancy? It is no
discontent to me but I shall rejoice in it, that men of piety and judgment
examine my Doctrine by the Word of God, and hold fast what they find agreeable
to the Scriptures, and no more. But i^ this brotherly, or fair, or conscionable
dealing, to offer my Sermon to be examined under such a notion, when he has
not only said nothing, to confute any of my Doctrines, as not arising from my
Text, or any of my applications, as not arising from my Doctrines; but has
also untruely represented my Sermon, as coming short of, or not expressing that
which indeed it has most principally and most expressly in it? That of
Reformation was but a part of my Sermon: and that of Church Censures against
scandalous sinners was but the least part of that part. And why should not the
fullers soap in the House of God, take off those spots in our feasts? Why
should not the refiners fire purge away the wicked of the Earth like dross, so
David calls them? That Reformation is one part of the holy Ghosts intendment in
that Text, is Gualther's opinion as well as mine, yet he thinks Gualther his
own. Nay, I proved it from comparing Scripture with Scripture, which is the
best way that I know to clear Scripture. Why did he not answer my proofs? But
beside all that I said of Reformation, had I not other three Doctrines out of
that Text, comprehending all that which Master Hussy hinteth as omitted by me
and yet intended in the text? Dare he say that I did not take in purgation by
the Word? (though I confess he does not well prove it from the words which he
cites, Is not my word an hammer? but it is proved by the words which he cites
not* Is not my word like as a fire?) Did I not expressly say that Christ is to
us as a refiners fire and as fullers soap, three ways, by reformation, by
tribulation, by mortification? Did I not handle the last two as well as the
first? Oh let no more any such gross calumnies be found among those who
profess to be Brethren.

Secondly, Master Hussy in his Epistle to my self gives it out that I say We
have leave from the Civil Magistrate to preach the Gospel, which he
interprets, as if I denied that we preach the Word with Authority from Christ.
It was de facto, not de Jure, that I spoke it. The Magistrate has power in his
hand to hinder both Doctrine and Discipline, if he be an adversary: though it
be the will of Christ that there be both Doctrine and Discipline, and the
Authority of both is from Christ. When the Magistrate assisteth or
countenanceth, or so much as he does not hinder the preaching of the Gospel,
then he gives leave to it.

Thirdly* Master Coleman in his Maledicis page 1. says, I am confident, the
Church of Scotland sent this Commissioner to dispute down our reasons, not to
revile our persons. Maledicis Maledicis page 1. Why did he not (if he could)
give instance of some reviling word written by me against his person. I have
not so learned Christ. The Lord rebuke every railing and reviling Spirit. I
have given him reason against railing; he has given me railing against reason,
I spoke to his doctrine, he speaks to my place and relation, which is both the
Alpha and Omega of his Maledicis.

Thirdly, ibid. Knowledge says he is only with Mr. Gillespie, others
understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirms. He will sooner
bring water out of flint, then prove this consequence out of my Title page.
Although I confess himself has affirmed diverse things of the Church of
Scotland, which he does not understand, as I have made plainly to appear. If
he take a review of the Title page of his re-examination, he gives more ground
for this consequence, that Mr. Coleman is the only man that denies himself:
others seek great things for themselves. Or from the Title page of his
Maledicis, this consequence will be as good that Mr. Coleman is the only man
that blesses, others are revilers.

Fourthly, Thus says Mr. Coleman, O y^e Honorable House of Parliament, Take
you notice that you manage that great place of yours under Christ and for
Christ: He is your head and you are his servants. And take you notice withal
that Mr. Gillespy accounts this your reproach. Maledicis Maledicis, page 17.
But O ye Honorable House of Parliament, be pleased to take notice of my own
plain expression of my mind in my Nihil respondes, page 13. The Christian
Magistrate manageth his Office under and for Christ, that is, so as to be
serviceable for the Kingdom and Glory of Christ. And now judge whether it be
suitable to the sincerity and candor of a Minister of the Gospel, to endeavor
to make me odious to authority, by imputing to me that which not only I did
not say, but the contrary whereof I did plainly express? The thing which I
charged his doctrine with was this, that by holding all government to be given
to Christ as Mediator, and from him as Mediator derived to the Magistrate as
his Vicegerent, he shakes the foundation of Magistracy. I am sure that which I
hold, that all lawful Magistrates are Powers ordained by God* and are to be
honored and obeyed as Gods Vicegerents, is a firm and strong foundation for
Magistracy. But that which Mr. Coleman and Mr. Hussy hold, viz. That the
Christian Magistrate holds his Office of, under, and for Christ as he is
Mediator, and does act vice Christi, as Christ's Vicegerent, gives a most
dangerous wound to Christian Magistracy, which I can demonstrate in many
particulars: I shall now give instance only in these few. First, They must
prove from Scripture that Christ as Mediator has given a Commission of
Vicegerentship to Christian Magistrates, and appointed them not only to be
seviceable to him and to do his work: (for that they must serve Christ, and
be for his Glory, is not controverted, nay can never enough be commended to
them) but also to govern vice Christi, in Christ's stead, and that not only as
he is God (which is not controverted neither,) but as he is Mediator. This (I
say) they must prove, (which they will never be able to do) or otherwise they
do by their doctrine lead the Magistrate into a snare; and leave him in it.
For how shall he be acknowledged for a Vicegerent who can show no Commission
nor warrant for his Vicegerentship? Secondly, Their doctrine tends to the
altering of the surest and best known tenure of Magistracy, which is from God:
for they hold that God has put all Government and all authority civil, and
all into the hands of Christ as Mediator; if the tenure from Christ fail,
then by their doctrine the tenure from God shall fail too. Thirdly, The
Vicegerent cannot act in that capacity nor assume that power which his
Sovereign whose Vicegerent he is, ought not to assume if he were personally
present. So that by their principles it will follow that the Christian
Magistrate can act no further, nor assume any other power of Government, then
Christ himself might have assumed when he was on earth, or might now assume
and exercise as Mediator if he were on earth. But Christ himself when he was
on earth neither did exercise nor was sent to exercise civil Judgment, Luke
12. 14. and the temporal sword. John 18. 36. nor external observation and
State. Luke 17. 20, 21. and he declined to be an earthly King. John 6. 15.
Therefore by their principles the Christian Magistrate ought to forbear and
avoid all these.

A fifth Calumny is this, Mr. Coleman descanting upon the Governments
mentioned. 1 Cor. 12. 28. charge me with a circular argumentation: he
circularly argues says he: They are civil because God placed them there, and
God placed them there, because they are civil. Maledicis Maledicis. page 9. I
neither argued the one nor the other: they are both Sir of your own forging.
But this is not your first allegation of this kind. I sometime admire what
oscitancy or supine negligence (to judge it no worse) this can be, to fancy to
your self that I have said what you would, and then to bring forth your own
apprehensions for my arguments.

CHAP. VIII.
That Mr. Coleman does great violence both to his own words, and to the words
of others whom he cites.

THE Reverend Brother has offered extreme violence to his own Declaration; of
which let the Reader now Judge, comparing his Declaration with his
Interpretation.

Declaration.
For much of what is reported of my Sermon I utterly deny, and refer my self
to the Sermon it self; for what I have acknowledged to be delivered by me,
although it is my judgment, yet because I see it has given a great deal of
offense to this Assembly, and the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland; I am
sorry I have given ^ff^nce in the delivery thereof: And for the Printing,
although I have an Order, I will forbear, except I be further commanded.

THO. COLEMAN.

Interpretation.
It is a truth, and a Scripture truth which I have delivered, and because I see
a Scripture truth has given offense to the Commissioners of Scotland, etc. I
am sorry. This must needs be the sense; I am sure this was the sense intended.
Maledicis, Maledicis, page 18.

Surely if such Orleance Glosses be admitted upon men's Declarations signed with
their hands; and if he who has subscribed himself sorry that he has given
offense in the delivery of such a doctrine, shall be allowed to expound
himself thus; that he meant he was sorry others had taken offense at a
Scripture truth, that is, he was sorry for our fault not for his own: I know
not how men shall trust one another Declarations: or how we can practically as
well as doctrinally confute the Jesuiticall aequivocations and mental
reservations. And if this must needs be the sense which now the Reverend
Brother gives; and was the sense intended, Why says he that he did publicly
recall that Declaration? He might make a revocation of it, in the sense wherein
I understood it: but how could he make a revocation of it, as himself
understood it, and as he faith the sense must needs be? Was this his sorrow
for our taking offense at a Scripture truth, a sorrow to be sorrowed for? Why
did he not rather make a second Declaration the next day, interpreting the
former? And whereas he thinks that his Revocation ought to have been mentioned
together with his declaration, because the whole truth is to be told as well as
the truth, his own heart knows that he himself has not told the whole
truth, for he could tell much more, if he pleased; how he was brought upon the
business, and particularly upon that Revocation. Why will he challenge others
for not telling the whole truth, when himself does it not? I should have
thought, that this Revocation was neither here nor there, as to the point of
scandal, for proof whereof his Declaration was brought: and that as it was
not to the business in hand, so it might rather, serve for impairing his
credit then for any thing else. But seeing himself thinks it more for his
credit, to tell the world of his saying and unsaying, declaring and
undeclaring, let him be doing.

In the next place will you see how much violence he offers to Divines whom
he cites? I had cited plain and full Testimonies of the Zurick Divines,
showing that Gualther expounds I Cor. 5. all along of Excommunication: that
Bullinger holds excommunication to be instituted by Christ, Matthew. 18. That
Aretius says God was the Author of excommunication in the Old Testament, and
Christ in the New; all which see in Nihil respondes, page 32.

The Reverend Brother notwithstanding of their plain Testimonies speaking for
me and against him in the maine Controversy between him and me, does still
allege that they are for him, not for me, Maledicis, pap. 23. yet he does not
so much as offer any answer to their Testimonies by me cited: only he brings
three other passages of theirs, intimating that there may be a true Church
without Excommunication: that they thought it not necessary where they lived:
that they thought it hard yea impossible: arduum nec non impossible, to
introduce Excommunication in those parts. By which citations the Brother has
proved nothing against me, but confirmed what I said. Let him remember, first,
he himself makes the maine controversy between him and me, about the
Scripturall warrants of Church censures: now in that, they are clearly against
him. Next Aretius who thought it hard, yea impossible, to bring in
Excommunication at that time, says also, dabit posterior at as tractabili^res
forte animas, peradventure the following age shall bring forth more tractable
souls: and thereupon he advises, not to despair of the restitution of
Excommunication. I cited also other Testimonies to show that the Zurick Divines
did endeavor and long for the discipline of Excommunication, though as things
stood then and there, they did prudentially supersede the restoring of it where
they lived, because of the difficulty and apprehended impossibility of the
thing. If Mr. Coleman will follow the Zurick Divines, he must change his tone,
and quite alter the state of the Question, and make it thus: Whether as things
now stand it be expedient to settle Excommunication in the Church of England?
Now, if he make this the state of the Question, then he must make a Revocation
of that word, I deny an Institution, I assent to a Prudence. For the Tables
were turned with the Zurick Divines: they assented to an Institution, they
denied a Prudence; they held an affirmative precept for Excommunication, but
that it does not bind ad semper, that the thing is not at all times, nor in all
places necessary; that weighty inconveniences may warrant the superseding of it.

The Reverend Brother brings another Testimony out of Aretius against
Suspension from the Sacrament; And further says he, for this grand desired
power, Suspension from Sacrament, these are his words, etc. A Testimony three
ways falsified. 1. Aretius speaks not at all in that place of the power or
duty of Church Officers, of which Suspension is a part: but he speaks of
private Christians, and what is incumbent to them. 2. He speaks of Separation
(not of Suspension) from the Sacrament; that a man is not bound to withdraw and
lie off from the Sacrament, because every one who is to communicate with him
is not in his opinion a Aret. probl. Theol. loc. 8. Privatis satis est far
utrinque utrosque (infir^^s and p^^am s^^l ratos) emendare autem quotie* fort
ex mplo and doctrina. Si parum vel nihil etiam proficiat, non habet ob id
causam seced ^di. Nec est quod centaminationem m^^uat, modo no^ consintist seel
ribus etc nihil ad me attinet in Communio^^^oen^ Domi i, in caeu public^ ^um
audio verbum Dei, (which last clause Mr. Coleman leaves out without so much as
etc) quales singuli sint mecum participantes.
Saint. 3. He speaks against Separation from both Word and Sacrament, because
of the mixture of good and bad in hearing and in communicating: but scandalous
sinners are invited to, not suspended from the hearing of the Word. Wherefore
take Aretius his words as they are, and then let the Reverend Brother consider
what he has gained.

What has this now to do with Church Officers their power of suspension from
the Sacrament?

Observe another Testimony which he adds out of Augustine lib. de fide,
Excommunicatio debet supplere locum visibilis gladii, which he Englisheth thus,
Excommunication comes in only to supply the want of the civil sword. But how
comes in your only Sir? Augustines says no such thing. And when I have
expunged that word, I must tell you further, that I can find no such passage in
Augustines Book de fide: But I find somewhat to this purpose in another Book of
his, which is entitled de fide and operibus, a Book which he wrote against the
admission of such persons to Baptism, as being instructed in the faith, are
notwithstanding still scandalous in their lives (which by the way will hold ^
fortiori for the exclusion of notorious scandalous sinners from the Lords
Supper: for they who ought not to be admitted to the Sacrament of initiation,
ought much less to be admitted to the Sacrament of Confirmation) Now because
diverse Scriptures speak of a mixture of good and bad in the Church, Augustine
takes there occasion to reprove those who abused these Scriptures against the
exercise of Discipline and Church censures: the necessity whereof he shows to
be the greater, because the Magistrate does not punish by death all such crimes
as under the Law were punished by death: as namely adultery, (the scandal
chiefly by him insisted upon) As for that Aug. de fide and operibus cap. 2. Et
Phi^es sacerdos adulteros simul inventos ferro ultore consixit. Quod utique
degradationibus and excommunicationibus significatum est esse f^^^endum in his
tempore, cum in Ecclesie Disciplina visibilis fuerat gledius cessaturus.
passage concerning Excommunication its supplying the place of the sword, it
plainly holds forth Excommunication under Christian Emperors and Magistrates,
(for such they were at that time) so far it is from making against us. For
these are the words which say no such thing as Mr. Coleman would make them say.
And Phine^as the Priest did thrust through the adulterous persons found
together, with the avenging sword. Which was signified that it should be done
by degradations and excommunications in this time, when in the discipline of
the Church the visible sword was to cease.

If the Reverend Brother had let me know where to find his other Testimonies
of Origin and Chrysostom: peradventure I had given him as good an account of
them. Tertullians words which Tert. apologet. cap. 39. Ibidem etiam
exhortationes, castigationes, and censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum
pondere, ut apud certos de De^ conspectu: summumque futuri Judicii praejudicium
est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione orationis, and conventus, and
^m is sancti commerc^i relege^ur. Praesident probati quique Seniores, bonorem
i, iu^ non pretio sed testimenio adepti.
he cites, Praesident probati seniores, I know very well where to find; and I
know also, that if there be a passage in all Antiquity against the Erastians,
that is one. Which therefore I here offer as it is to be considered.

One Instance more of his mis*alledging and perverting of Testimonies. In the
close he cites a passage of Mr. Case his Sermon August 22. 1645. He (Christ)
is King of Nations and King of Saints. As King of Nations he has a temporal
Kingdom and Government over the world, etc. and the rule and regiment of this
Kingdom he has committed to Monarchies, etc. Here is Erastia^isme, (says Mr.
Coleman page 38.) a step higher then ever I or Erastus himself went. And I
desire to know of Mr. Gillespy, if he will own this as good divinity. Yes Sir
I own it for very good divinity, for my Reverend Brother Mr. Case, says not
that Christ as Mediator it King of Nations, and has a temporal Kingdom in
the world, and has committed rule and regiment to Monarchies or other lawful
Magistrates, (which is the point that you and Mr. Husses contend for, being a
great Heterodoxy in Divinity) but he says of the Son of God, that he is King
of Nations, and has committed Rule to Monarchies, which I own with all my
heart. The distinction of the twofold Kingdom of Christ, an universal
Kingdom, whereby he reigns over all things as God: and a special
Oeconomicall Kingdom, whereby he is King to the Church only, and rules and
governs it, is that which being rightly understood, overturneth, overturneth,
overturneth the Erastian principles. Let Mr. Coleman but own this distinction
and that which Mr. Case adds concerning the Kingdom which Christ as King of
Saints (and so as Mediator) does exercise both invisibly in the conscience, and
visibly in the Church, First, by conquering a people and visible Subjects;
Secondly, by giving them Laws distinct from all the Laws and Statutes of all
the Kingdoms and Republics in the world Isai. 33. 22. Thirdly, By
constituting special Officers in the Church not only to promulgate these
Laws, Math. 28. 19. but to govern his people according to them, Acts. 20. 28.
Romans 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Cro. 14. 32. Fourthly, In that he has commanded
all his people to obey these Ecclesiastical Officers. Heb. 13. 7. 17. Fifthly,
And has appointed Censures proper to this Government. Math. 18. 17. 1 Cor. 5.
13. I say let Mr. Coleman but own this Doctrine of Mr. Case, which was printed
by Order of the Honorable House of Commons, as well as his was: then we are
agreed. And so much for this time.

Errata.
Pref. page 4. marg. lib. ^. 3. 2. read lib. 2. cap. 4. p. 7. l. 12. bourn r.
b^^ne. p. 13. l. 28. exhort r. exhor^eth. p. 21. l. 18. to do^ r. not to do.
p. 25. l. 4. Sch^^llrs r. Sch^^lrs. p. 30. l. 9. cusre r. curse. p. 32. l. 28.
falsum r. falsa^^. p. 33. l. 19. that r. of. p. 34. l. 29. ^nabsurdi^y r. ^o
absurdity. Ib. l. 30. Div^ll r. Devils. Ib. l. 36. activity r. (...). ^. 35.
l. 1. I^. H^. p. 48. l. 35. ^^ he does r. as does. The smaller typographicall
faults the Reader will pardon

FINIS.

