THE ENGLISH INTELLIGENCER; Showing the most Remarkable Passages which have
happened from Saturday the nineteenth, till Saturday the six and twentieth of
this present November in these following places; NAMELY, At Darby. Durham.
New Castle. York. Oxford. London. Middlesex. Excester. Norwich. Lincolne-shire.


Faithfully collected by C. H.

nou: 26 London, Printed for Francis Wright.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM a device with an open book, a sword, and surrounding
motto
The English Intelligencer.
Saturday, November. 19.
THis day from Boulfouer a House of the Earl of New-Castles, came into the
Town of Derby certain Gentlemen as Agents to the said Earl, demanding the
Arms which were in the Town to be lent to their Master, which the Townes-men
slatly denied them, being resolved to continue in their due obedience to the
order of Parliament.

This day also in the same Town was a mutiny made by some Malignants who would
have had the Arms delivered to the Gentlemen, wherein one Frost a principal
Malignant and a Papist is reported to be slain.

In London there was a great rumor that they were up in Arms in Kent to defend
the County against the entrance of Prince Robert; but neither did the Prince
advance that way further then Kingston, nor did they ever put themselves into a
posture of defense.

To day there was a Post came from Chester that brought certain news that the
Lords Justices of Ireland, Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Borlace had
instituted a solemn Fast to be held on every Wednesday the last of each Month
in imitation of the Fast ordained here in England by the High Court of
Parliament, the said Express declaring also the growing miseries of that
unhappy Kingdom, and that God had pleased to show his mercy toward them in
the midst of their miseries, by granting a great and glorious victory to the
Marquess of Ormond against the Munster Rebels, wherein three thousand of them
were slain, and twelve hundred taken prisoners, with diverse Priests and
Jesuits.

From Yarmouth it is certified that the Mary Rose, a good stout Ship of theirs
at Sea, bound from France homeward, was set upon by two Pirates men of War, with
whom after a long and desperate cruel fight, Mary Rose sunk one of them and
laid the other aboard, which was found to be when they had taken her an Argier
Vessel laden with Ammunition, most of her men being Irish, and bound for
Berehaven.

In the City of Coventry there happened a sudden accident this day, some popishly
affected Malignants of Stratford upon Avon, being at the Sign of the Bull at
one Ellis Jones his house, in their cups began to speak ill of the Proceedings
of the Parliament. Jones being an honest man, and a true honourer of the
Parliament, told them it was uncivil in them to speak ill of their betters,
and that for his part he did not desire any such discourse should be in his
house, at which word one of them with a Damme stabbed the poor man to the
heart, and getting to their horses, all of them escaped out of the City.

Sunday, November: 20.
THis day there happened in the afternoon a shrewd dissension in the Parish
Church of Saint Andrews Holborne in London. Diverse over precise Zelots in the
Divine Service-time pulling the Minister out of his Pue, and rending off his
Surplice; but by the mediation and help of some good religious persons the said
Fray was appeased, the Minister defended from danger, and those tumultuous
fellows turned out of the Church.

This day arrived near Minehead in Sommerset-shire, in a little by creek, a
Fisher-boat with some Cavaliers, sent out of South Wales by the Marquess
Hertford, with Letters to his old confederate Sir Ralph Hopton, they being in
the course habit of Fishermen came to the Town and went to a poor blind
Alehouse, where they lustily carowsed, and in their drink spoke diverse
reproachful words against the Parliament; the Host went and informed the
Constable, who with a sufficient guard made stay of them, they being four in
number, and searching them found their Letters; which testified what they were:
Which Letters with the said Cavaliers, he caused to be safely conveyed to
Taunton, where the Cavaliers are in custody till further order be taken for
their diposall.

In York this day there was a mutiny in the Earl of Cumberlands Army for want
of pay, plundring diverse men's houses of worth in the time of Divine Service,
which the said Earl could not, or at leastwise would not punish; so that he
and his Cavaliers are grown very odious to the Citisens.

Monday, November. 21.
THis day came forth an Order from the High Court of Parliament, for
restraining the misdemeanour of the soldiers, prohibiting them under pain of
death to forbear plundring any Houses in or about the City of London.

This day an aviso from Holland testified that the Queen is instantly to take
shipping thence, but not as it was reported with any forces: The States being
careful lest any detriment should arrive to the kingdom of England, either by
their permission or furtherance.

It was absolutely certified from Excester, that that rich and good City had
resolved to send up to the Parliament a very large quantity of Plate, amounting
to at least 20000 l. to be secured them in the public faith for the defense
of the subject.

In Norfolk diverse Malignants (as it is informed)) strived to seduce the
Country people Gentlemen and others, to raise moneys for the support, as they
pretended, of the King and Protestant Religion; but their endeavors by the
wisdom and care of some well affected persons of quality was frustrated, and
they laid hold of, are at Norwich in safe custody.

Diverse of the Essex men that came up to attend his Excellence the Earl of
Warwick out of that County this day with many thanks for their forwardness,
had license to depart home for the security of that Country, lest any danger
should arise there through the absence of the said Forces.

Tuesday. November. 22.
HIs Majesty this day arrived at Oxfard, whereas it is credibly believed he
intends to reside all this Winter at that noble and famous University, the
fountain of learning and piety, being converted into a receptacle for those
mischievous Cavaliers, who lie at rack and manger at the ablest Citizens
houses, without paying a penny, either for meat, drink, or lodging.

This day the Earl of Cumberland, with some thousand men, made a sally upon
Master Hothams trenches, but he was bravely repulst with the loss of 200 of
his men; our soldiers pursuing them to the very gates, and entered with them,
had not they within dischargeh their Ordnance, which lighted more on their own
then on our soldiers. It is a lamentable estate that flourishing City is
reduced into, Wheat being already at a mark a bushel, and the poor people
ready to starve; so that if the Earl of Newcastle relieve it not, who has
been long looked for there, but dares not come, it must be surrendered within a
week at most.

This day my Lord of Newcastle, with a considerable strength of horse and foot,
came into Durham, his army being one half Papists. It is thought here he
intends to billef some part of his forces about this City all this Winter, God
deliver us from them, they do more mischief by one half then the Scots.

This day also was driven into Boston in Lincolnshire by reason of her leaks,
an Esterling of Lubeck of four hundred tun, her lading being most part
Ammunition, and sent out of the same to Newcastle, of which stay is made, till
the order of the higher powers shall dispose on it.

Wednesday, November. 23.
This day in F^^ter Lane, some rude soldiers plundered the ^^^s^ (...) a Papist
an Apothecary, it being against the (...) ^igh Court of Parliament; diverse of
them were (...), and committed to prison, till they receive punish^^^^.

(...) rumor was abroad that the King of Denmark was a^^ with a great fleet,
whereupon his Excellency, the noble Earl of Warwick, and to prevent all
dangers that might happen by sea, having before surrendered his charge of
General, is, as it is believed; bound again for the narrow seas as Admiral
of the Navy.

Report was in this City, that his Excellence the Earl of Essex, was to
advance toward Oxford, to fetch in the Cavaliers and Malignants; and that
Sergeant Major Skippon, that should have commanded the four thousand horses
raised by the City for that purpose, has command of greater honor and trust
conferred on him by his Excellence. Colonel Hurrey having command of those
forces in his stread.

It was also rumor'd, that new Propositions were in agitation in the honorable
the high Court of Parliament to be drawn up and sent to his Majesty to Oxford
for an accommodation of peace; so willing and ready is that wise and sacred
Senate, to seek peace for the good of the people, though they have been so
injured by the malignants on the Kings party.

Thursday, November. 24.
THis day Letters came from Newcastle, that testified that there lately, since
the last news arrived there two more ships with Ammunition, and that the
Queen is expected there daily.

This afternoon came out a Declaration of seven sheets of paper, printed at
Oxford by his Majesty's command, in answer to the late Observations upon his
Majesty's former Declarations, but nothing in it to any great purpose, but
controverting the Kings prerogative with the power and privileges of
Parliament.

This day also it was assured from Excester, that Sir Ralph Hopton being well
beaten with his Cavaliers from that City, was retired again with Sir Bevil
Greenvill into Cornwall.

A memorable accident happened at Norwich, certain Cavaliers coming into that
City, and one of them drinking a health to the confusion of the Parliament, was
choked with his sudden draught, and fell down dead.

Diverse Cavaliers were this day brought up to Newgate, and other prisons, that
were taken roming in the County of Middlesex, by some of his Excellence the
Earl of Essex his forces. It was credibly reported, that the Earl of
Cumberland had proffered to deliver up the City to Sir Edw. Rhodes and Master
Hotham conditionally he and his Cavaliers might depart with drums beating and
slying colors; but his proposition would not be accepted, it proceeding out of
mere necessity.

Friday, November. 25.
THis morning came out an Order and Declaration from the high Court of
Parliament, instituting and confirming the Lord Fairsax General of the forces
in Yorkshire.

This day also were brought to town five or six Cavaliers, and committed to
safe custody. There came news to town from York, that the City was
surrendered by the Earl of Cumberland to Master Hotham and the Parliaments
Forces, upon what condition is not yet known. It was reported that the Scots
in Ireland have had a great victory over Sir Philim O-Neale the arch Rebel,
and that Rori MacGuire is there prisoner. It was also reported, that the plate
which the City of Excester proffered to lend the Parliament on the public
faith, is with a sufficient guard coming up to Guild Hall, and is credibly
believed, that the good Cities of Norwich and Bristoll, in an emulous imitation
of Excester, will also lend on the same terms good store of plate to the
Common-welth. Certainly it was affirmed this day, that some ships laden with
ammunition were taken in the narrow seas, and are at Margate to come up the
River.

FINIS.

