Nihil Respondes: OR, A DISCOVERY OF The extreme unsatisfactorinesse of Master
Colemans Piece, published last week under the Title of A Brotherly Examination
re-examined.

Wherein, his self-contradictions: his yielding of some things, and not
answering to other things Objected against him: His abusing of Scripture: His
errors in Divinity: His abusing of the Parliament, and indangering their
Authority: His abusing of the Assembly: His Calumnies, and namely against the
Church of Scotland, and against my self: The repugnancy of his Doctrine to the
solemn League and Covenant, are plainly demonstrated.

By George Gillespie Minister at Edinburgh.

1 Timothy 1. 7. Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Published by Authority.

Printed at London for Robert Bostock dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
sign of the Kings head. 1645.

A Discovery of the extreme unsatisfactorinesse of Master Colemans Piece,
published last week under the Title of, A Brotherly Examination re-examined.
AFter that Master Coleman had Preached and Printed such Doctrine as I was in
my conscience fully persuaded was contrary to the Covenant of the three
Kingdoms, and destructive (if it were put in practice) to the Reformation of
Religion: he having also flatly and publicly imputed to the Commissioners from
the Church of Scotland, a great part of the fault of hindering union in the
Assembly here. I thought my self obliged in duty and in the trust which I
bear, to give a public testimony against his Doctrine, (which others did also)
upon occasion not sought, but by Divine Providence, and a public Calling then
offered, first for Preaching, and after for Printing; in either of which I
think there did not appear the least dis-respect or bitterness toward the
Reverend Brother. The Lord knows my intention was to speak to the matter, to
vindicate the truth, and to remove that impediment of Reformation by him cast
in: And if he, or any man else had in meekness of spirit, gravely and
rationally, for clearing of truth, endeavored to confute me, I ought not, I
should not have taken it ill; but now when this piece of his against me, called
A Brotherly Examination re-examined (I think he would or should have said
examined, for this is the first examination of it) I find it more full of
railing than of reasoning, of gibing than of gravity; and when polemicks do so
degenerate, the world is abused, not edified. He tells me if I have not work
enough I shall have more; I confess the answering of this Piece is no great
work, and the truth is, I am ashamed I have so little to make answer unto, yet
I shall do my best to improve even this work to edification. When other work
comes I wish it be work indeed, and not words. Res cum re, ratio cum ratione
concertet, as the father said; Arguments Sir, Arguments, Arguments, if there be
any: you have affirmed great things, and new things which you have not proved.
The Assertions of such as are for a Church Government in genere, and for the
Presbyteriall Government in specie, are known; their Arguments are known, but
your Solutions are not yet known. If Mr. Prynnes Book against the suspension
of scandalous persons from the Sacrament be the work for the present, which he
means, I hope it shall be in due time most satisfactorily spoken unto both by
others and by my self; I desire rather solid then subitane lucubrations: in
the mean while, Let not him that puts on his armor, boast as he that
puts it off. And let the Brother that puts me in mind of other work,
remember that himself has other work to do which he has not yet done.

I have for better method and clearness divided this following Discourse into
certain Heads, taking in under every Head such particulars in his Reply as I
conceive to be most proper to that point.

That Master Coleman does not only prevaricate but contradict himself,
concerning the state of the Question.
HE tells us often that he does not deny to Church Officers all power of
Church Government, but only the corrective part of Government: that the
doctrinall and declarative power is in the Ministry, see Page 11. and 14 He
denies that he did advise the Parliament to take Church Government wholly into
their own hands, I never had it in my thoughts says he, that the Parliament
had power of dispensing the Word and Sacraments. I must confess it is to me
new language which I never heard before, that the dispensing of the Word and
Sacraments is a part of Church Government; sure the word Government is not, nor
was never so understood in the Controversies concerning Church Government: But
if it be, why did the Brother in his Sermon oppose Doctrine and Government,
Give us Doctrine, said he, take you the Government.

But behold now how he does most palpaply contradict himself, in one and the
same Page; it is the 11th. I know no such distinction of Government, says he,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in the sense I take Government for the corrective
part thereof; all Ecclesiastical (improperly called) Government, being merely
Doctrinall; the corrective or primitive part being civil or temporal. Again
within a few lines; I do acknowledge a Presbyterian Government, I said so
expressly in my Epistle, and do heartily subscribe to the Votes of the House.
If he heartily subscribe to the Votes and Ordinances of Parliament, then be
heartily subscribeth that Elderships suspend men from the Sacrament for any of
the scandalls enumerate, it being proved by Witnesses upon oath; This power is
corrective, not merely doctrinall. He must also subscribe to the subordination
of Congrigationall, Classical, and Synodicall assemblies in the Government of
the Church, and to appeals from the lesser to the greater, as likewise to
Ordination by Presbyteries; and I pray, is all this merely Doctrinall? And will
he now subscribe heartily to all this; how will that stand with the other
passages before cited? or with Page 17. where it being objected to him, that he
takes away from Elderships all power of spiritual Censures; his Reply neither
yields Excommunication nor Suspention, but Admonition alone, and that by the
Ministers who are a part of the Elderships, not by the whole Eldership
Consistorially. Again, page 14. he confesses; I advised the Parliament to lay
no burden of Government upon them, whom he, this Commissioner thinks Church
Officers, Pastors and Ruling-Elders. Now I argue thus; he that advises the
Parliament to lay no burden of Government upon Ministers and ruling Elders, he
advises the Parliament to do contrary to their own Votes and Ordinances, and
so is far from subscribing heartily thereunto. But Mr. Coleman by his own
confession advises the Parliament to lay no burden of Government upon
Ministers and ruling Elders; Ergo, etc. how he will reconcile himself with
himself, let him look to it.

Page 11. He takes it ill that one while I make him an enemy to all Church
Government, then only to the Presbyteriall; Only is his own addition. But I
had reason to make him an enemy to both, for so he has made himself; yea, in
opposing all Church Government he cannot choose but oppose Presbyteriall
Government: for the consequence is necessary, A genere ad speciem, negatively
though not affirmatively. If no Church Government, then no Presbyteriall
Government.

The particulars in my brief Examination, which Mr. Coleman either grants
expressly, or else does not reply unto.
MY Argument Page 32. proving, that as many things ought to be established Jure
divino as can well be, because he cannot answer it, therefore he grants it.
Page 5.

He had in his Sermon called for plain and clear institutions, and let
Scripture speak expressly. Now page 7. he yields, that it is not only a
Divine Truth (as I called it) but clear Scripture, which is drawn by
necessary consequence from Scripture.

He has not yet (though put in mind) produced the least exception against the
known Arguments for Excommunication and Church Government, drawn from Mat. 18.
and 1 Cor. 5. he tells the affirmer is to prove; But the affirmers have proved:
and their Arguments are known, (yea he himself page 1. says; I have had the
opportunity to hear almost what man can say in either side, speaking of the
controversy of Church Government) therefore he should have made a better
answer, then to say that those places did not take hold of his Conscience, yet
if he have not heard enough of those places he shall I trust ere long hear
more.

He had said, I could never yet see how two Coordinate Governments exempt from
superiority and inferiority, can be in one State, Page 35. I gave him three
Instances, a General and an Admiral, a Father and a Master, a Captain and a
Master of a Ship; This page 8. he does not deny, nor says one word against it;
only he endeavors to make those Similes to run upon four feet, and to
resemble the general Assembly, and the Parliament in every circumstance; but I
did not at all apply them to the general Assembly, and the Parliament. Only I
brought them to overthrow that general Thesis of his concerning the
inconsistency of two Coordinate Governments, which if he could defend; why
has not he done it?

His keeping up of the names of Clergy and Laiety being challenged by me, page
36. he has not said one word in his Re-examination to justify it.

I having page 37, 38. confuted his Argument drawn from the measuring of others
by himself, whereby he did endeavor to prove that he had cause to fear an
ambitious ensnarement in others as well as in himself, God having fashioned all
men's hearts alike; now he quitteth his ground and says nothing for vindicating
that Argument, from my exceptions.

I showed page 40. his misapplying of the King of Sodonus speech, but neither
in this does he vindicate himself.

That which I had at length excepted against his fourth Rule concerning the
Magistrate, and his confirmation thereof, he has not answered, nor so much as
touched any thing which I had said against him from the end of page 42. to the
end of page 48. except only a part of page 43. and of page 44. concerning 1
Cor. 12. 28. some contrarious argumentations he has page 21. (of which after)
but no answer to mine.

Page 10. He digresseth to other Objections of his own framing, instead of
taking off what I had said.

His abusing of the Scriptures.
MAster Coleman did ground an Argument upon Psalm. 33. 15, Prove. 27. 29. which
cannot stand with the intent of the Holy Ghost, because contrary to other
Scriptures, and to the Truth, as I proved page 38. He answers in his
Reexamination that my sense may stand, and his may stand too; but if my sense
may stand, which is contrary to his, then his Argument had no sure ground for
it; yea, that which I said was to prove that his consequence drawn from those
Scriptures did contradict both the Apostle Paul's Doctrine and his own
profession, which still lies upon him since it is not answered.

Page 14. He cites 1 Cor. 10. 33. Give none offense neither to the Jews nor
to the Gentiles, nor to the Churches of Christ; to prove that all Government is
either a Jewish Government, or a Church Government, or a Heathenish Government,
and that there is no third; yes Sir, your self has given a third, (for you
have told three) but Transeat cum caeteris errorihus. To the matter. This is a
perverting of Scripture to prove an untruth; for the Government of Generals,
Admiralls, Majors, Sheriffs, is neither a Jewish Government, nor a Church
Government, nor a Heathenish Government. Neither does the Apostle speak any
thing of Government in that place; he makes a distribution of all men who are
in danger to be scandalized, not of Governments. And if he had applied the
place rightly to the Parliament of England, he had said, They are either of the
Jews, or of the Gentiles, or of the Church of God, and this needs not an
answer. But when he says; The English Parliament is either a Jewish
Government, or a Church Government, or a Heathenish Government, I answer it is
none of these, but it is a Civil Government.

Page 15. Declaring his Opinion of Church Government, he cites Romans 13. 4. For
the punishment of him that does evil; to prove that the punitive part belongs
to the Christian Magistrate. But what is this to the punitive part which is in
Controversy, spiritual Censures, suspention from the Sacrament, deposition
from the Ministry, Excommunication. The punitive part spoken of Romans 13.
belongs to all civil Magistrates whether Christian or Infidel.

Page 18. He makes this reply to 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 1 Timothy 17. Heb. 13. 7. 17.
Why man! I have found these an hundred and an hundred times twice told, and yet
am I as I was. Why Sir, was the Argument so ridiculous, I had brought those
places to prove another Government (and if you will the institution of another
Government) beside Magistracy, which he said he did not find in Scripture.
Here are some who are no civil Magistrates set over the Thessalonians in the
Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Paul writes to Timothy of Elders that rule well, 1 Timothy
5. 17. the Churches of the Hebrews had some Rulers who had spoken to them the
Word of God, Heb. 13. 7. Rulers that watched for their souls as they that must
give an account, verse 17. Now let the reverend Brother speak out, what can he
answer? Were these Rulers civil Magistrates? Did the civil Magistrate speak
to them the Word of God? If these Rulers were not Magistrates but Ministers, I
ask next, Is it a matter of indifferency and no institution to have a
Ministry in a Church or not? I hope though he do not acknowledge ruling
Elders Jure divino, yet he will acknowledge that the Ministers of the Word are
Jure divino; yet these were some of the Rulers mentioned in the Scriptures
quoted. Let him loose the knot, and laugh when he has done.

Page 19. 20. He labourerh to prove from 1 Cor. 12. 28. that Christ has placed
civil Government in his Church, and whereas it is said, that though it were
granted that civil Governments are meant in that place, yet it proves not that
Christ has placed them in the Church: He replyeth; I am sure the Commissioner
will not stand to this: he that placed Governors was the same that placed
Teachers. But his assurance deceives him, for upon supposition that civil
Governments are there meant, (which is his sense) I deny it, and he does but
petere principium. God placed civil Governments, Christ placed Teachers; God
placed all whom Christ placed, but Christ did not place all whom God placed.
Next, whereas it was said, that Governments in that place cannot be meant of
Christian Magistrates, because at that time the Church had no Christian
Magistrates; He replyeth, that Paul speaks of Governments that the Church had
not, because in the enumeration, ver. 29, 30. he omits none but helps and
Governments. I answer, the reason of that omission is not because these two
were not then in being (for God had set them as well as the rest in the Church,
ver. 28.) but to make ruling Elders and Deacons contented with their station,
though they be not Prophets, Teachers, etc. Thirdly, I asked how comes civil
Government into the Catalogue of Ecclesiastical and Spiritaall
administrations. His reply is nothing but an affirmation, that Christian
Megistracy is an Ecclesiastical admiration, and a Quere whether working of
Miracles and gifts of Healing be Ecclesiastical. Answ. Hence follows, 1.
That if the Magistrate cease to be Christian, he loses his administration. 2.
That though a worker of Miracles cease to be Christian, yet it is a question
whether he may not still work Miracles. Lastly, where I objected that he puts
Magistracy behind Ministry, he makes no answer, but only that he may do this
as well as my rule puts the Nobility of Scotland behind the Ministry. No Sir,
we put but ruling Elders behind Ministers in the order of their
administrations, because the Apostle does so. It is accidental to the ruling
Elder to be of the Nobility, or to Nobles to be ruling Elders: there are but
some so, and many otherwise. That of placing Deacons before Elders, 1 Cor. 12.
28 is no great matter, sure the Apostle, Romans 12. places Elders before Deacons.

His Errors in Divinity.
1. Page 21. He admits no Church Government distinct from Civil, except
that which is merely doctrinall. And pa. 14. He advises the Parliament to take
the corrective power wholly into their own hands, and exempteth nothing of
Ecclesiastical power from their hands but the dispencing of the Word and
Sacraments. Hence it follows that there ought to be neither suspension from
the Sacrament, nor excommunication, nor ordination, nor deposition of
Ministers, nor receiving of Appeals, except all these things be done by the
Civil Magistrate. If he say the Magistrate gives leave to do these things. I
answer. 1. So does he give leave to preach the Word, and minister the
Sacraments in his Dominions. 2. Why does he then in his Sermon, and does still
in his Re-examination, page 14. advise the Parliament to lay no burden of
corrective Government upon Ministers, but keep it wholly in their own hands: It
must needs be far contrary to his mind, that the Magistrate gives leave to do
the things above mentioned, they being most of them corrective, and all of them
more than doctrinall. 3. He gives no more power to Ministers in
Church Government then in Civil government: for page 11. he ascribes to them
a ministerial, doctrinall, and declarative power, both in Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government.

2. Page 11. and 14. he holds, that the corrective or punitive part of
Church Government is Civil or Temporal, and is wholly to be kept in the
Magistrates own hands. And in his Sermon, page 25. he told us he sees not in
the whole Bible any one act of that Church Government in controversy,
performed. All which how erroneous it is, appears easily from 1 Cor. 5. 12.
Put away that wicked Person from among you: which Mr. Prynne himself in his
Vindication, page 2. acknowledges to be a warrant for Excommunication, 2 Cor.
2. 6. there is a punishment or censure inflicted by many, 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against
an Elder receive not an accusation but before two or three witnesses. Where
acts of Church Government or censures were neglected, it is extremly blamed.
Rev: 2. 14, 15. 20. was not all this corrective, yet not civil or temporal?

3. Page 9. Whereas I had said that without Church Government, Ministers shall
not keep themselves nor the ordinances from pollution. He replyeth page 9. That
he understands neither this keeping of themselves from pollution, no^ what this
pollution of the ordinances is. I am sorry for it, that any Minister of the
Gospel is found unclear in such a point. I will not give my own, but
Scripturall answers to both. The former is answered, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Be not
partaker of other men's sins, keep thy self pure. It is sin to dispense
ordinances to the unworthy whether Ordination, or Communion in the Sacrament.
For the other the pollution of Ordinances is the Scripture language. I hope he
means not to quarrel at the holy Ghosts language, Ezekiel. 22. 26. Her Priests
have violated my Law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no
difference between the holy and profane. Mal. 1. 7. Ye offer polluted bread,
upon mine altar: verse. 12. Ye have profaned it. Mat. 21. 13. Ye have made it a
den of thieves. Matthew: 7. 6. Cast not pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under their feet.

4. Page 11. Whereas I had objected to him, that he excludes ruling Elders, as
well as Ministers from government: He answers, that Ruling Elders are either
the same for office and Ordination with the Minister (which as he thinks the
Independents own, but not I) or they are the Christian Magistrate, and so he
says he does not exclude them. Mark here he excludes all ruling Elders from a
share in Church Government, who are not either the same for office and
Ordination with the Minister, or else the Christian Magistrate; and so upon the
matter he holds that ruling Elders are to have no hand in Church Government.
Those ruling Elders which are in the votes of the Assembly, and in the Reformed
Churches, have neither the power of Civil Magistracy ( qua Elders and many of
them not at all being no Magistrates) nor yet are they the same for office and
ordination with the Minister, for their office, and consequently their
ordination to that office, is distinct from that of the Minister, among all
that I know. And so excluding all ruling Elders from Government who are neither
Magistrates nor the same with Ministers, he must needs take upon him that which
I charged him with.

5. Page 21. Where he makes reply to what he had said against his Argument from
Ephesians. 1. three last verses. He says he will blow away all my discourse with
this clear demonstration. That which is given to Christ, he has it not as God,
and Christ as God cannot be given. But this place (Ephesians. 1. three last verses)
speaks both of dignity given to Christ, and of Christ as a gift given.
Therefore Christ cannot be here understood as God. This is in opposition to
what I said page 45. concerning the headship and dignity of Christ, as the
natural Son of God, the Image of the invisible God. Colos. 1. 15. And page 43.
of the dominion of Christ as he is the eternal Son of God. This being
premised, the Brothers demonstration is so strong as to blow himself into a
blasphemous heresy. I will take the Proposition from himself, and the
assumption from Scripture, thus. That which is given to Christ, he has it not
as God. But all power in heaven and in earth is given to Christ, Matthew. 28. 18.
Life is given to Christ, Joh. 5. 26. Authority to execute judgment is given to
Christ, Ibid. ver. 27. All things are given into Christ's hands, Joh. 3. 35. The
Father has given him power over all flesh, Joh: 17. 2. he has given him
glory, Joh: 17. 22. Ergo, by Mr. Colemans principles, Christ has neither life,
nor glory, nor authority to execute judgment, nor power over all flesh, as he
is the eternal Son of God consubstantiall with the Father, but only as he is
Mediator God and Man. As for the giving of Christ as God, what if I argue thus.
If Christ as he is the eternal Son of God, or second Person of the ever
blessed Trinity, could not be given, then the incarnation it self, or the
sending of the Son of God to take on our flesh, cannot be called a giving of a
gift to us. But this were impious to say. Ergo. Again, if Christ as he is the
second Person of the blessed Trinity could not be given, then the holy Ghost as
he is the third Person cannot be given (for they are coessentiall, and that
which were a dishonor to God the Son, were a dishonor to God the holy Ghost)
But to say that the holy Ghost cannot be given as the third Person, were to say
that he cannot be given as the holy Ghost. And what will he then say to all
these Scriptures that speak of the giving of the holy Ghost? Act. 15. 8. Romans
5. 5. 1 John: 4. 13. etc.

Finally, as Mr. Colemans demonstration has blown away it self, so it could
not hurt me, were it solid and good (as it is not) for he should have taken
notice that in my examination I did not restrict the dignity given to Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 21. Nor the giving of Christ, verse. 22. to the Divine nature only.
Nay I told page 44, 45. that those words of the Apostle hold true even of the
humane nature of Christ.

6. Page 21. he concludes with a Syllogism which he calls the scope of my
Discourse (I know not by what Logic the Proposition being forged by himself,
and contrary to my Discourse) thus it is.

Whosoever do not manage their office and authority under Christ and for
Christ, they manage it under the devil, and for the devil, for there is no
middle, either Christ or Belial. He that is not with me is against me.

But according to the opinion of the Commissioner, Christian Magistracy does
not manage the Office and Authority thereof under Christ, and for Christ.

Therefore,

He believes I shall be hard put to it, to give the Kingdom a clear and
satisfactory answer. Its well that this is the hardest task he could set me.

The truth is, his Syllogism has quatuor terminos, and is therefore worthy to
be exploded by all that know the Laws of disputation. Those words in the
Proposition under Christ, and for Christ, can have no other sense, but to be
serviceable to Christ, to take part with him, and to be for the glory of
Christ, as is clear by the confirmation added, He that is not with me is
against me. But the same words in the assumption must needs have another sense,
under Christ and for Christ, that is, Vice Christi, in Christ's stead. For that
which I denied was, that Magistracy is derived from Christ as Mediator, or that
Christ as Mediator has given a commission of Vicegerentship and Deputy-ship to
the Christian Magistrate to manage his office and authority under and for him,
and in his Name. As is clear in my Examination, page 42. Nay Mr. Coleman
himself a little before his Syllogism, pa. 19. takes notice of so much. His
words are these. The Commissioner says, Magistracy i^ not derived from Christ:
I say Magistracy is given to Christ to be serviceable in his kingdom: So that
though the Commissioners assertion be sound (which in due place will be
discussed) yet it infringeth nothing that I said. Now then qua fide could he in
his Argument against me confound these two things which he himself had but just
now carefully distinguished. If he will make any thing of his Syllogism, he
must hold at one of these two senses. In the first sense, it is true that all
are either for Christ or against Christ. And it is as true that his assumption
must be distinguished. For de facto the Christian Magistrate is for Christ when
he does his duty faithfully, and is against Christ if he be unfaithful. But de
jure, it holds true universally that the Christian Magistrate manageth his
office under and for Christ, that is, so as to be serviceable for the kingdom
and glory of Christ.

In the second sense (which only concerns me) taking under and for Christ,
to be in Christ's stead as his Deputies or Vicegerents: so his Assumption, is
lame and imperfect, because it does not hold forth my opinion clearly. That
which I did and still do hold is this. That the Civil Magistrate, whether
Christian or Pagan, is Gods Vicegerent, who by virtue of that vicegerent-ship
is to manage his office and Authority under God, and for God, that is in Gods
stead, and as God upon earth. But he is not the Vicegerent of Christ as
Mediator, neither is he by virtue of any such Vicegerentship to manage his
office and Authority under Christ, and for Christ, that is, in Christ's stead,
and as Christ Mediator upon earth. This was and is my plain opinion (nor mine
alone, but of others more learned) and Mr. Coleman has not said so much as
(...) to confute it. So much for the Assumption. But in the same sense I
utterly deny his Proposition as being a great untruth in Divinity, for the
sense of it can be no other then this, Whosoever do not manage their office and
authority in Christ's stead, or as Deputies and Vicegerents of Christ as he is
Mediator, they manage it in the Devils stead, as the devils deputies and
Vicegerents. Now I assume. Pagan Magistrates do not manage their office as the
Deputies and Vicegerents of Jesus Christ, as he is Mediator: Ergo as the devils
deputies. Which way was the Authority derived to them from Christ as Mediator.
Mr. Coleman page 19. says in answer to this particular (formerly objected)
that Christ is rightful King of the whole earth, and all Nations ought to
receive Christ, though as yet they do not. But this helps him not. That which
he had to show, was that the Pagan Magistrate, even while continuing Pagan, and
not Christian, does manage his office as Christ's Deputy and Vicegerent. If not,
then I conclude by his principles, a Pagan Magistrate is the devils deputy and
vicegerent, which is contrary to Paul's doctrine, who will have us to be subject
for conscience sake, even to Heathen Magistrates as the Ministers of God for
good. Romans 13. first 7 verses. By the same Argument Mr. Coleman must grant that
Generals, Admirals, Majors, Sheriffs, Constables, Captains, Masters, yea every
man that has an office, is either Christ's Vicegerent, or the devils
vicegerent: then which what can be more absurd? I might beside all these show
some other flawes in his Divinity, as namely, pa. 9. and 13. He does not agree
to this Proposition, that the admitting of the scandalous and profane to the
Lords Table, makes Ministers to partake of their sins. And he supposes that
Ministers may do their duty, though they admit the scandalous. But of this
elsewhere.

His abusing of the Honorable Houses of Parliament.
MOst Honorable Senators, I humbly beseech you to look about you, and take
notice how far you are abused by Mr. Coleman.

1. While he pretends to give you more then his Brethren, he takes a great
deal more from you, and (so far as in him lies) even shakes the foundation of
your Authority. The known tenure of Magistracy is from God, he is the Minister
of God for good, and the powers that are, are ordained of God, says the
Apostle; The Magistrate is Gods Vicegerent. But now this Brother seeks a new
Tenure and derivation of Magistracy, which takes away the old. He told in his
Sermon, pa. 27. Christ has placed Governments in his Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Of
other Governments beside Magistracy I find no institution, of them I do. Romans
13. 1, 2. I find all government given to Christ, and to Christ as Mediator, (I
desire all to consider it) Ephesians. 1. three last* verse. and Christ as head of
these given to the Church. Here you have these three in subordination. God,
Christ, and the Christian Magistrate. God gives once all government even civil
to Christ, and to him as Mediator. Well but how comes it then to the
Magistrate? Not straight by a deputation from God. Mr. Colemans doctrine makes
an interception of the power. He holds that God has put it in Christ's hands as
Mediator. How then? The Brother holds that Christ as Mediator has instituted
and placed the Christian Magistrate, yea and no other Government in his Church.
This was the ground of my Answer, page 42. that he must either prove from
Scripture that Christ as Mediator has given such a Commission of
Vicegerent-ship and Deputy-ship to the Christian Magistrate: or otherwise
acknowledge that he has given a most dangerous wound to Magistracy, and made
it an empty title claiming that power which it has no warrant to assume. I
added: As the Mediator has not any where given such a Commission and power to
the Magistrate, so as Mediator he had it not to give: for he was not made a
Judge in civil affairs, Luke 12. 14. and his kingdom is not of this world.
Joh. 18. 36. Now but what reply has he made to all this? pa. 19. he says
granting it all to be true and sound, yet it infringeth not what he said. The
Commissioner (says he) says Magistracy is not derived from Christ: I say
Magistracy is given to Christ to be serviceable in his kingdom. But by his
good leave and favor he said a great deal more then this, for he spoke of
Christ his being head of all civil Governments, and his placing these in his
Church, as he is Mediator. Yea that fourth rule delivered by him in his Sermon,
did hold forth these assertions. 1. That God gave all government even civil to
Christ, and to him as Mediator. 2. That Christ as Mediator has power and
authority to place and substitute under and for him the Christian Magistrate.
3. That Christ has placed and instituted civil Governments in his Church, to
be under and for him as he is Mediator. 4. That the Christian Magistrate does,
and all Magistrates should manage their office under and for Christ, (that is,
as his Vicegerents) he being as Mediator head of all civil Government. Now in
stead of defending his Doctrine from my just exceptions made against it, he
revileth, and having brought the Magistrate in a snare, leaves him there. He
endeavors to vindicate no more but this, that Magistracy is given to Christ to
be serviceable in his kingdom. But if he had said so at first, I had said with
him, and not against him in that point. And if he will yet hold at that, why
does he page 19. refer my Assertion to further discussion?

Secondly, he has abused the Parliament in holding forth that rule to them in
his Sermon, Establish as few things Jure divino as can well be. And yet now he
is made by strength of argument to acknowledge page 5. that this is a good
rule. Establish as many things. Jure divino as can well be.

Thirdly, I having stated the question to be not whether this or that form of
Church Government be Jure divino, but whether a Church Government be Jure
divino? whether Christ has thus far revealed his will in his Word, that there
are to be Church censures, and those to be dispensed by Churchofficers. I said
the Brother is for the negative of this question, pa. 32. This he flatly
denies, page 5, 6. Whereby he acknowledges the affirmative, that there is a
Church Government Jure divino, and that Jesus Christ has so far revealed his
will in his Word, that there are to be Church Censures, and those to be
dispensed by Church Officers. But how does this agree with his Sermon? Christ
has placed Governments in his Church. Of other Governments (said he) beside
Magistracy I find no institution, of them I do. Is Magistracy
Church Government? Are Magistrates Church Officers? are the civil punishments
Church Censures? Is this the mystery? Yes, that it is: He will tell us anon
that the Houses of Parliament are Church Officers; but if that bolt do any
hurt I am much mistaken.

Fourthly, He professes to subscribe to the Votes of Parliament concerning
Church Government, page 11. and yet he still pleads that all Ecclesiastical
Government is merely Doctrinall, ibid. the Parliament having Voted that power
to Church Officers which is not Doctrinall (as I showed before) And he advises
the Parliament to keep wholly in their own hands the corrective part of
Church Government, page 14. though the Parliament has put into the hands of
Elderships a power of suspention from the Sacrament, which is corrective.

Fifthly, he did deliver in that Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons,
diverse particulars, which being justly excepted against, and he undertaking a
Vindication, yet he has receded from them, or not being able to defend them,
as that concerning two coordinate Governments in one Kingdom, and his
Argument concerning the fear of an ambitious ensnarement in Ministers; these
being by me enfringed he has not so much as offered to make them good.

Sixthly, having acknowledged under his own hand that he was sorry he had given
offense to the Reverend Assembly, and to the Commissioners from Scotland, he
now appealeth to the Parliament, and tells us they are able to judge of a
scandalous Sermon, and they thought not so of it, page 3. I know they are able
to judge of a scandalous Sermon, that they thought not so of it, its more then
I know or believe; however I know they have a tender respect to the offense of
others even when themselves are not offended, and so they and all men ought to
do according to the rule of Christ: for his part after he had acknowledged he
had given offense, it is a dis-service to the Parliament to lay over the thing
upon them; for my part, I think I do better service to the Parliament in
interpreting otherwise that second Order of the House, not only desiring but
injoyning Mr. Coleman to Print that Sermon; as near as he could as he Preached
it. This was not (as he takes it) one portion of approbation above all its
Brethren (for I shall not believe that so wise an Auditory was not at all
scandalized at the hearing of that which was contrary both to the Covenant, and
to their own Votes concerning Church Government; nor at that which he told them
out of the Jewish Records, that Hezekiah was the first man that ever was sick
in the world, and did recover) but as I humbly conceive it was a real censure
put upon him: his Sermon being so much excepted against and stumbled at, the
Honorable House of Commons did wisely injoyne him to Print his Sermon, that it
might abide trial in the light of the world, and lie open to any just
exceptions which could be made against it abroad, and that he might stand or
fall to himself.

Seventhly, he abuses the Parliament by arrogating so much to himself as that
his Sermon will in the end take away all difference, and settle union, page 3.
and that his Model will be when he is dead the Model of Englands
Church Government, as he says in his Postscript, whether this be Prophesying
or presuming, I hope we are free to judge And what if the Wisdom and
Authority of the Honorable Houses upon advice from the Reverend and learned
Assembly choose another way than this? Must all the Synodicall debates, and all
the grave Parliamentary Consultations resolve themselves into Master Colemans
way, like Jordan into Mare Mortuum.

Eighthly, He does extremely wound the Authority of Parliament in making their
Office to be a Church Office, and of the same kind with the Ministers Office,
page 14. Do not I hold Ministers Church Officers? And a little after. I desire
the Parliament to consider another Presbyterian principle, that excludes your
Honorable Assembly from being Church Officers. If so, then the Offices of the
Magistrate and of the Minister must stand and fall together; that is, if the
Nation were not christian, the Office of Magistracy should cease as well as
that of the Ministry; and if he make the Magistrate a Church Officer, he must
also give him Ordination, except with the Socinians he deny the necessity of
Ordination.

His abusing the Reverend Assembly of Divines.
WHereas I had objected that his Sermon had given no small scandal and
offense, he replyeth page 3. But has it given offense? to whom? I appeal to
the Honorable Audience. Is this candide or fair dealing when he himself knew
both that he had given offense, and to whom. I shall give him no other answer
but his own Declaration which he gave under his hand, after he had Preached
that Sermon.

For much of what is reported of my Sermon I utterly deny, and refer my self
to the Sermon it self; for what I have acknowledged to be delivered by me,
although it is my judgment, yet because I see it has given a great deal of
offense to this Assembly, and the Reverend Commissioners of Scotland; I am
sorry I have given offense in the delivery thereof. And for the Printing,
although I have an Order, I will forbear, except I be further commanded. Tho.
Coleman.

Page 33. I had this passage: And where he asks where the Independents and we
should meet? I answer; In holding a Church Government Jure divino, that is,
that the Pastors and Elders ought to suspend, or Excommunicate (according to
the degree of the offense) scandalous sinners. Who can tell but the purging of
the Church from scandalls, and the keeping of the Ordinances pure (when it
shall be actually seen to be the great Work endeavored on both sides) may
make union between us and the Independents more easy then many imagine. What
reply has he made to this? page 6. Sure I dream (Awake then) But I will tell
you news: The Presbiterians and Independents are (he should have said may be)
united; nay more, the Lutherans and Calvinists: nay more yet, the Papist and
Protestant: nay more then so, the Turk and Christian. But wherein? In holding
that there is a Religion wherein men ought to walk. No Sir; they must be
united upon the like terms: that is, you must first have Turks to be
Christians, and Papists to be Protestants, and then you must have them as
willing to purge the Church of scandalls, and to keep the Ordinances pure. We
will never despair of an union with such as are sound in the Faith, holy in
life, and willing to a Church-refining and sin-censuring Government in the
hands of Church Officers. In the mean while it is no light imputation upon the
Assembly to hint this much, that the harmony and concord among the Members
thereof for such a Government as I have now named (though in some other
particulars dissenting) can no more unite them, than Turks and Christians,
Papists and Protestants can be united; and now I will tell you my news; the
Presbiterians and Independents are both equally interested against the Erastian
Principles.

He reflecteth also upon the Assembly in the point of Jus divinum, page 6. But
what his part has been in reference to the proceedings in the Assembly is more
fully, and in diverse particulars expressed in the Brief view of Mr. Coleman
his new Model, unto which he has offered no answer.

His Calumnies.
PAge 3. He desires me with wisdom and humility to mind what
Church-refining, and sin-censuring work this Church Government with all his
activity has made in Scotland, in the point of promiscuous communicating; I
shall desire him with wisdom and humility to mind what charity or conscience
there is in such an aspersion; I dare say diverse thousands have keen kept off
from the Sacrament in Scotland, as unworthy to be admitted, where I my self
have exercised my Ministry, there have been some hundreds kept off; partly for
ignorance, and partly for scandal. The order of the Church of Scotland, and
the Acts of general Assemblies are for keeping off all scandalous Persons,
which every godly and faithful Minister does conscientiously and effectually
endeavor; and if here or there it be too much neglected by some Archippus who
takes not heed to fulfill the Ministry which he has received of the Lord, let
him and his Eldership bear the blame, and answer for it.

Page 4. I having professed my unwillingnesse to fall upon such a Controversy
in a Fast Sermon. He replyeth; How can you say, you were unwilling? But how can
you in brotherly charity doubt of it, after I had seriously professed it? My
doing it at two several Fasts (the only opportunities I then had to give a
testimony to that presently controverted truth is no Argument of the contrary.
May not a man do a thing twenty times over and yet do it unwillingly?

Page 5. He slandereth those that did in their Sermons give a public testimony
against his Doctrine, the occasion (as he gives out) not being offered, but
taken. But had they not a public calling and employment to Preach as well as
himself? And if a Fast was not occasion offered to them, how was a Fast an
occasion offered to him to fall upon the same controversy first, and when none
had done the like before him?

A fourth Calumny is this. He had first blamed two Parties that they came
biased to the Assembly; I answered, How then shall he make himself blameless
who came biased a third way, which was the Erastian way; and that for our part
we came no more biased to this Assembly then the foreign Divines came to the
Synod of Dort, Alexander to the Council of Nice, and Cyrell to that of
Ephesus, and Paul to the Synod at Jerusalem; but now page 6. 7, instead of
doing us right he does us greater injury, for now he makes us biased not only
by our own judgments, but by something adventitious from without, which he
denies himself to be, (but how truly I take not on me to judge: beholders do
often perceive the byassing better then the Bowlers) yea he says, that I have
acknowledged the byas, and justify it. Where Sir, where? I deny it; Its no
byas for a man to be settled, resolved, and engaged in his judgment for the
truth, especially when willing to receive more light, and to learn what
needs to be further reformed. Has he forgotten his own definition of the
byas which he had but just now given? But he will needs make it more then
probable by the instances which I brought, that the Commissioners from Scotland
came not to this Assembly, as Divines by dispute and disquisition to find out
truth, but as Judges to censure all different opinions as errors; for so came
foreign Divines to Dort, Alexander to the Council of Nice, Cyrill to
Ephesus. Is it not enough to slander us, though he do not for our sakes
slander those worthy Divines that came to the Synod of Dort, Alexander also and
Cyrill, prime Witnesses for the truth in their days? could no less content
him then to approve the Objections of the Arminians against the Synod of Dort,
which I had mentioned page 33? but he gets not away so; the strongest instance
which I had given he has not once touched: it was concerning Paul and Barnabas
who were engaged (not in the behalf of one Nation, but of all the Churches of
the Gentiles) against the imposition of the Mosaicall Rites, and had so
declared themselves at Antioch before they came to Jerusalem. Finally, whereas
he doubts, though not of our willingness to learn more, yet of our permission
to receive more: That very paper first given in by us (which I had cited, and
unto which he makes this reply) did speak not only of our learning, but of
the Church of Scotlands receiving; and which is more, there is an actual
experiment of it, the last general Assembly having ordered the laying aside of
some particular customs in that Church, and that for the nearer uniformity
with this Church of England, as was expressed in their own Letter to the
reverend Assembly of Divines.

A fifth calumny there is, page 9. 6. The Commissioner is content that Jus
divinum should be a Noli me tangere to the Parliament, yet blames what himself
grants. I was never content it should be a Noli me tangere to the Parliament,
but at most a Non necesse est tangere, for so I explained my self, page 32,
33. If the Parliament establish that thing which is agreeable to the Word of
God, though they do not establish it as Jure divino, I acquiesce; in the mean
time both they and all Christians, but especially Ministers ought to search the
Scriptures, that what they do in matters of Church Government they may do it
in faith and assurance that it is acceptable to God. It was not of
Parliamentary Sanction, but of Divines doctrinall asserting of the will of God
that I said, Why should Ius Divinum be such a Nolime tangere?

6 It seems strange to him that I did at all give instance of the usefulness
of Church Government in the preservation of purity in the Ordinances and in
Church Members. He says for an Independent to have given this instance, had
been something; but it seems strange to him that I should have given an
instance of the power and efficacy of Government, as it is Presbyteriall, and
contradistinct to Congregationall. This is a calumny against Presbyteriall
Government, which is neither privative nor contradistinct, but cumulative to
Congregationall Government; and the Congregationall is a part of that
Government which is comprehended under the name of Presbyteriall. But in cases
of common concernment, difficulty, appeals, and the like, the preserving of the
Ordinances and Church Members from pollution, does belong to Presbyteries and
Synods.

7 He says of me, page 9. He ascribes this power of purif^ing men, and means
of advancing the power of godliness afterward, to Government. A calumny. It
was only a sine quo non which I ascribed to Government, thus far, that
without it Ministers shall not keep themselves nor the Ordinances from
pollution, page 23. But that Church Government has power to purify men, I
never thought it, nor said it. That which I said of the power (which he
points at) was, that his way can neither preserve the purity, nor advance the
power of Religion; page 40. and the reason is, because his way provideth no
ecclesiastical effectual remedy for removing and purging away the most gross
scandalous sins, which are destructive to the power of godliness. God must
by his Word and Spirit purify men, and work in them the power of godliness.
The Church Government which I plead for against him, is a means subservient
and helpful, so far as removere prohibens, to remove that which apparently
is impeditive and destructive to that purity and power.

8 Having told us of the proud swelling waves of Presbyteriall Government, I
asked upon what coast had those waves done any hurt, France, or Scotland, or
Holland, or Terra incognita? He replieth page 12. I confess, I have had no
great experience of the Presbyteriall Government. Why make you bold then to
slander it, when you can give no sure ground for that you say? He tells us, his
fears arise from Scotland, and from London. The Reverend and worthy Ministers
of London can speak for themselves aetatem habent. For my part (though I know
not the particulars) I am bound in charity not to believe those aspersions put
upon them by a discontented Brother. But what from Scotland? I my self (says
he) did hear the Presbytery of Edingburgh censure a woman to be banished out
of the gates of the City; was not this an encroachment? It had bin an
encroachment indeed, if it had bin so. But he will excuse me if I answer him in
his own language (which I use not) page 3 and 5. It is at the best a most
uncharitable slander. And, there was either ignorance or mindlesnesse in him
that sets it down.

There is no Banishment in Scotland but by the Civil Magistrate, who so far
aideth and assisteth Church Discipline, that profane and scandalous persons
when they are found unruly and incorrigible, are punished with Banshment or
otherwise. A stranger coming at a time into one of our Presbyteries, and
hearing of somewhat which was represented to or reported from the Magistrate,
ought to have had so much both circumspection and charity, as not to make such
a rash and untrue report. He might have at least enquired when he was in
Scotland and informed himself better, whether Presbyteries or the Civil
Magistrate do banish. If he made no such enquiry, he was rash injudging. If he
did, his offense is greater, when after information he will not understand.

9 He makes this to be a position of mine, page 13. That a learned Ministry
puts no black mark upon profaneness more then upon others. A calumny. For
first he makes me to speak Nonsense. Secondly I did not speak it of a learned
Ministry, but of his way page 40. How long ago since a learned Ministry was
known by the name of Master Colemans way? His way is a Ministry without power
of Government, or Church Censures. Of this his way I said, that it puts no
black mark upon profaneness and scandal in Church Members more than in any
others. And the reason is, because the corrective or punitive part of
Government he will have to be only Civil or Temporal* which strikes against
those that are without, as well as those within. Put the Apostle tells us of
such a corrective Government, as is a judging of those that are within, and of
those only 1 Cor. 5. 12. And this way (which is not only ours, but the
Apostolical way) puts a black mark upon profaneness and scandalous sins, in
Church members more then in any others.

10. He says of me page 17. The Commissioner is the only man that we shall
meet with, that forsaking the words, judges of the Intentions. A Calumny. I
judged nothing but ex ore tuo. But in this thing he himself has trespassed. I
will instance but in two particulars. In that very place he says Admonition is
a spiritual censure in the Commissioners opinion. Whence knows he that to be
my opinion? Consistoriall or Presbyteriall Admonition given to the unruly, may
be called a censure. And if this were his meaning, then ascribing to Elderships
power of Admonition, he gives them some power of spiritual Censures, and so
something of the corrective part of Government; which were contrary to his own
Principles. But he speaks it of the Ministers admonishing, who are but a part
of the Elderships, as himself there grants. Now where did I ever say or
write, that Admonition by a Minister is a spiritual censure? Again page 4. He
so judges me, that he not only forsakes but contradicts my words, How can
you say you were unwilling?

11. He says page 16. Now the Commissioner speaks out, etc* What! not the
Parliament of England meddle with Religion? A horrid calumny. Where have I said
it. Dic sodes. I never preached before (...) but I exhorted them to meddle with
Religion, and that in the first place and above all other things. I shall
sooner prove, that Master Coleman will not have the Parliament of England to
meddle with Civil affairs, because he makes them Church Officers. Its a
non-sequitur. Their power is Civil, Ergo they are not to meddle with Religion?
It will be a better consequence. They are Church Officers. So he makes them,
page 14. and Christian Magistracy is an Ecclesiastical Administration. So he
says, page 20. Ergo, they are not to meddle with Civil Government.

The Repugnancy of his Doctrine to the solemn League and Covenant.
Mr Coleman, page 13. acknowledges that to assert any thing contrary to the
solemn League and Covenant, is a great fault in any, in himself more then in
diverse others, if made out: He having for his own part taken it with the first,
and not only so, but having adminstred it to diverse others: Yes, and take this
one circumstance more. In his Sermon upon, Jer. 30. 21. at the taking of the
Covenant, September. 29. 1643. He answers this objection against the
extirpation of Prelacy. But what if the exorbitancies be purged away, may not I
notwithstanding my Oath, admit of a regulated Prelacy? for satisfaction to this
objection; He answers thus, First, we swear not against a Government, that is
not. Secondly, we swear against the evils of every Government, and doubtless
many materials of Prelacy must of necessity be retained, as absolutely
necessary. Thirdly, taking away the exorbitancies, the remaining will be a new
Government, and no Prelacy. Let the Brother now deal ingenuously; What did he
understand by those materials of Prelacy absolutely necessary to be retained?
did he understand the dispensing of the Word and Sacraments, which is common to
all Pastors? Or, did he understand the Privileges of Parliament? Were either
of those two materials of Prelacy? And if he had meant either of these, Was
this the way to satisfy that scruple concerning the extirpation of Prelacy?
Again, what was that new Government which he promised them, after the taking
away of the exorbitancies of the old? Was it the Ministers doctrinall part?
that is no new thing in England. Was it the Parliaments assuming of the
corrective part of Church Government (as he improperly distinguishes) wholly
and soly into their own hands, excluding the Ministry from having any hand
therein? This were a new Government I confess. But sure he could not in any
reason intend this as a satisfaction to the scruples of such as desired a
regulated Prelacy, whose scruples he then spoke to; for this had been the way
to dissuade them from, not to persuade them to the Covenant.

But I go along with his Re-examination, page 14. He explaineth himself and
me thus, He should have said that I advised the Parliament to lay no burden of
Government upon them whom he this Commissioner thinks Church Officers, then had
he spoken true; I thank him for his explanation. And I pray who were the
Church officers, whom I said he excluded from Church Government? Were they not
Pastors and ruling Elders? And does not himself think these to be
Church Officers? Yes, of the Ministers he thinks so, but of ruling Elders he
seems to doubt, except they be Magistrates. Well but excluding these
Church Officers from Church Government he takes with the Charge. Why seeks he a
knot in the rush? But now, how does he explain himself? He will have the
Parliament to be Church Officers (of which before) and such Church Officers as
shall take the corrective part of Curch-Government wholly into their own hands;
yet not to dispense the Word and Sacraments, but to leave the Doctrinall part
to the Ministry, and their power to be merely Doctrinall as he says, page 11.
Thus you have his explanation. But does this salve the violating of the
Covenant? Nay, it makes it more apparent; for the Government of the Church,
which the first Article of the Covenant speaks of, is distinguished from the
Doctrinall part, That we shall endeavor the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government. So that excluding Pastors and ruling Elders from the corrective
part of Government, and from all power which is not merely Doctrinall, he
thereby excludes them from that Discipline and Government which the Covenant
speaks of, as one special part of the Reformation of Religion. Come on to the
Reasons.

I had given four Reasons: He takes notice but of three. This is the second
time he has told three for four, yet even these three will do the business.

1. The extirpation of Church Government is not the reformation of it; Here the
Brother adds these words following as mine, which are not mine, therefore he
that finds no Church Government, breaks his Covenant. His reply is, we must
reform it according to the word of God: if that hold out none, here is no
failing. He adds a simile of a Jury sworn to enquire into the felony of an
accused person, but finds nor guilty: and of three men taking an oath to
deliver in their opinions of Church Government (where by the way he lets fall,
that I hold the National Synod to be above all Courts in the Kingdom; which if
he mean of Ecclesiastical Courts, why did he speak so generally? if he mean
above all or any Civil Courts, it is a gross calumny.) But now if this be the
sense (which he gives) of that first article in the Covenant, then 1. all that
is in the second article might have been put into the first article; for
instance, we might in Mr Colemans sense, have sworn to endeavor the
reformation of Prelacy, and even of Popery it self, according to the word of
God and the example of the best Reformed Churches: that is, taking an oath to
deliver in our opinions of these things, according to the word of God, and to
enquire into the evils of Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans
etc. whether guilty or not guilty. I strengthened my argument by the different
nature of the first and second article; I said, the second article is of things
to be extirpated, but this of things to be preserved and reformed. Why did he
not take the strength of my argument and make a reply? 2. By the same principle
of his we are not tied by the first article of our Covenant to have any either
doctrine or worship, but only to search the Scriptures, whether the Word hold
out any; for Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government go hand in hand in
the Covenant. 3. His own simile has this much in it against him. If a Jury
sworn to enquire into the felony of an accused person, should after such an
oath, not only find the person not guilty, but further take upon them to
maintain that there is no such thing as felony; surely this were inconsistent
with their oath. So he that swears to endeavor the Reformation of Religion in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, and yet will not only dislike
this or that form of Government, but also hold that there is no such thing as
Church Government, he holds that which cannot agree with his oath. 4. This
answer of Mr Colemans, leaving it free to debate whether there be such a thing
as Church Government, being his only answer to my first argument from the
Covenant, must needs suppose, that the Government mentioned in the Covenant
(the reformation whereof we have sworn to endeavor) is understood even by
himself, of Church Officers, their power of corrective Government; it being
the corrective part only, and not the doctrinall part, which he casts upon an
uncertainty whether the Word hold out any such thing.

2. Church Government is mentioned in the Covenant as a spiritual, not a
civil thing. The matters of Religion are put together, Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government. The Privileges of Parliament come after in the
third article. The Reverend Brother replies, What if it be? therefore the
Parliament is not to meddle with it, and why? And here he runs out against me,
as if I held that the Parliament is not to meddle with Religion; an assertion
which I abominate. Princes and Magistrates their putting off themselves all
care of the matters of Religion, was one of the great causes of the Churches
mischief, and of Popish and Prelaticall tyranny. But is this just and fair,
Sir, to give out for my opinion, that for which you are not able to show the
least color or shadow of consequence from any thing that ever I said? That
which was to be replied unto, was, whether do not the materials of the first
article of the Covenant differ from the materials of the third article of the
Covenant? or whether are they the same? Whether does the Privilege of
Parliament belong to the first article of the Covenant? Whether is that
Government mentioned in the first article, a civil thing or a spiritual? If
civil, why is Discipline and Government ranked with Doctrine and Worship, and
all these mentioned as parts of the reformation of Religion? If spiritual,
then why does the Brother make it civil or temporal page 11. To all this
nothing is answered: but, what if it be? Then is my argument granted.

And to put it yet further out of question, I add other two arguments from
that same first article of the Covenant. One is this; In the first part of that
first article we swear all of us to endeavor the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government: where all know that the words Discipline and Government (especially
being mentioned as two of the principal things in which the Reformed Religion
in that Church does consist) signify Church Government, and Church Discipline,
distinct both from Doctrine and Worship, and from civil Government (which, by
the way, how Mr Coleman endeavors to preserve, I will not now say, but leave
it to others to judge:) Therefore in that which immediately follows, our
endeavoring the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland
in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; the words Discipline and
Government must needs be understood in the same sense thus far, that it is a
Church Discipline, and a Church Government distinct from the civil power of
the Magistrate, and distinct also from Doctrine and Worship in the Church; for
we cannot make these words Discipline and Government in one and the same
article of a solemn oath and Covenant, to suffer two senses differing toto
genere, (especially considering that the civil Government is put by it self
in another article which is the third) unless we make it to speak so as none*
may understand it.

The other argument which I now add, is this; In the third part of that first
article we swear that we shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the
three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
confession of faith, form of Church Government, Directory for worship and
catechizing; where 1. Church Government does agree generically with a
confession of faith, Directory of worship, and catechizing: I mean all these
are matters of Religion, none of them civil matters. 2. It is supposed there
is such a thing as Church Government distinct from civil Government; and
therefore it is put out of all question, that so far there shall be an
uniformity between the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms (and otherwise it
were an unswearing of what was sworn in the first part of that article) but it
tieth us to endeavor the nearest conjunction and uniformity in a form of
Church government; which were a vain and rash oath, if we were not tied to a
Church government in general, and that as a matter of Religion. 3 The
uniformity in a form of Church Government which we swear to endeavor, must
needs be meant of corrective Government, it being clearly distinguished from
the Confession of Faith, and Directory of Worship. So that Mr Colemans
distinction of the Doctrinall part, and of the dispensing of the Word and
Sacraments cannot here help him.

From these two Arguments (beside all was said before) I conclude, that the
Covenant does undeniably suppose and plainly hold forth this thing as most
necessary and uncontrover^able, that there ought to be a Church Government
which is both distinct from the Civill-Government, and yet not merely
doctrinall. And if so, what Apollo can reconcile Mr Colemans Doctrine with the
Covenant? And now I go on.

My last reason formerly brought was this: Will the brother say that the
example of the best reformed Churches leads his way. For the Covenant tieth
us to a reformation of the government of the Church both according to the Word
of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches: that, as regula
regulans: this, as regula regulata,

The Reverend brother replieth: 1. The best reformed Church, that ever was,
went this way, I mean the Church of Israel.

Answ. 1. Is the Church of Israel one of the Reformed Churches which the
Covenant speaks of? 2. Was the Church of Israel better reformed than the
Apostolical Churches? why then calls he it the best reformed Church that ever
was? 3. That in the Jewish Church, there was a Church Government distinct from
civil government, and Church censures distinct from civil punishments, is the
opinion of many who have taken great pains in the searching of the Jewish
antiquities; and it may be he shall hear it ere long further proved both from
Scripture, and from the very Talmudicall writers.

2. I desire (says he) the Commissioner to give an instance in the new
Testament of such a distinction (Civil and Church government) where the state
was Christian.

Answ. I desire him to give an instance in the new Testament of these three
things, and then he will answer himself. 1. Where was the State Christian? 2.
Where had the Ministry a doctrinall power in a Christian State? 3. Where does
the new Testament hold out, that a Church government distinct from civil
government may be where the State is not Christian, and yet may not be where
the State is Christian? Shall the Churches liberties be diminished, or rather
increased where the State is Christian?

In the third and fourth place, the brother tells us of the opinions of
Gualther, Bullinger, Erastus, Aretius. The question is of the examples of
Churches, not of the opinions of men. But what of the men? As for that
pestilence that walks in darkness through London and Westminster, Erastus
his book against Beza, let him make of it what he can, it shall have an
Antidote by and by. In the mean while he may take notice that in the close of
the sixth Book Erastus casts down that which he has built, ^ust as Bellarmine
did in the close of his five books of justification. But as for the other three
named by the brother, Gualther Archetyp* in ^ Cor* 5. 5. decrevi impurum hunc
t^ad^ndum esse Satanae, id est ^jiciendum ex Ecclesia, etc Ratio locution^s
quia extra E^cl^siam ^atan Regnat. In ver. 6. ^^a ve^o in nuit disciplinam
necessariam esse, ne contagiu^ peccan^i se^p^t. In ver. 9. 10, 11. Catalogus
eorum qui debent excomm^n ca^i, Ibid. ^mo non su^^i^iunt ministri nisi publica
authoritate juven^ur. Idco Paulus Corint^io^ tam (...) m^net, ut Ecclesiae
disciplinam instaurent, and sermentum omne expurgent. In ver. 13. Tollite, etc.
Si Christiani es^is si Ecclesiam vul^is ^abere purem, utin ini jure ve^l^o.
Billinger in 1* Cor. 5. v. 3, 4, 5 V^ri ergo Apostolici and ve^re^ quoque
contum^ces and Ecclesiastica ^^ns^^ a digno^^ co^^ubernio Sanctorum a^jeceru^t,
excl^den^e^ ^os a s^^ris (...) and communione c^rporl^ and sangui^^^ mysti^^.
And a little after, Quod sihis quoque addas ordinationem christi ex Math^^,
vide^is eam huc quoque specta^e, ut publi^e mulc^^tur quisp^^tis (...) in
honest^ per^exeri^ vivere. Esse enim E^^^icum and Publi^^^um, est (...) e
Catalogo Ecclesi^s^ico and recen^^ri haberique inter ^^cino^osos quibus nihil
neque o^^icii, ^eque sinceri ^u^o commi^^as.
they are ours, not his in this present controversy. Gualther expounds the
fifth chapter of 1 Cor. all along of excommunication, and of the necessity of
Church discipline, in so much that he expounds the very delivering to satan
(the phrase most controverted by Erastus and his followers) of excommunication;
and the not eating with the scandalous, v. 9, 10, 11. he takes also to import
excommunication. He thinks also that Ministers shall labor to little pupose,
except they have a power of government. Bullinger is most plain for
excommunication, as a spiritual censure ordained by Christ: and so he
understands, Matthew. 18. 17.

Aretius holds, that God was the author of excommunication Aret. Theol. probl.
loc. 133. a Deo originem habit, and a Christ^ confirmata fuit. And after, Supra
de origin dixi, indicans ^ ^^o in^i^tam suisse ^anc disciplinam, etc. Demum
Christus filius dei tandem Ecclei^ ^u^ commendavit.
in the old Testament, and Christ in the New. And now, are these three Master
Colemans way? or does not his doctrine flatly contradict theirs? Peradventure
he will say, yet there is no excommunication in the Church of Zurik (where
those Divines lived) nor any suspension of scandalous sinners from the
Sacrament. I answer, this cannot infringe what I hold, that the example of the
best reformed Churches makes for* us, and against him* For first, the book
written by Lavater, (another of the Zurike Divines) De ritibus and institutis
Ecclesiae Tigurinae, tells us of diverse things in that Church, which will make
the brother easily to acknowledge that it is not the best reformed Church: such
as Feastivall days, cap. 8. that upon the Lords days before the third Bell,
it is published and made known to the people, if there be any houses, fields
or lands to be sold, cap. 9. They have no Fasts indicted, ibid. nor Psalms
sung in the Church, cap. 10. Responsories in their Letany at the Sacrament, the
Deacon upon the right hand says one thing, the Deacon upon the left hand says
another thing, the Pastor a third thing, cap. 13. Wolphius com. in li. Esdrae
page ^1. Atque hoc exemplo veteris Testamenti discimus quid facto opus sit in
n^vot Nempe ut crebris Synodis ac censuris, in vocationem in Doctriuam, in
vitam aec mores Ecclesiastarum inspiciatur.


2. Yet the Church of Zurike has some corrective Church Government, besides
that which is civil or temporal, for that same Book, cap. 23. tells us that
in their Synods, any Minister who is found scandalous or profane in his life,
is censured with deposition from his office, ib Officio deponitur. Then
follows, Finita censura, singuli Decani, etc. Here is a Synodicall censure,
which I find also in Wolphius a Professor of Zurike. And the Book before
cited, cap. 24. In Ecclesiis (...) Tigurinae, deligantur Seniores, qui un^ cum
pastore vitia corrigant. Postea Magistratus de (...) blasphemis, (...) s^mi^.
Tells us of some corrective power committed to Pastors and Elders. Which
Elders are distinguished from the Magisteates.

3. The zurike Divines themselves looked upon Excommunication Bullinger in 1.
Cor. 5. Et hac tenus de castigatione sceler^i Ecclesiastica. Hic tamen
diligenter admoni^os ^olo fraires, vigilent, and omni diligenti^ curent, ut
salviare hoc Pharmacum, e caetu sanctorum Pontificis avaritia eliminatum,
reducatur, hoc est ut scelera offendentia plectantur. Hic enim unicu^ est
Excommunicationis fini^, ut mores excolautur and floreant Sancti, prophani ve^o
coerceantur, ne mal^ porro impudentia ac impietate grass^tur. Nostram est ista
^ fratres, summa cum diligentia curare. Videmus enim and Paulum cess^ntes hoc
loco incicare. Aretius ubi supra. Magistratu^ jugum non admittunt, timen^
honoribus, licentium amant etc. Vulgus quoque and plebs d^ssolutio^: major pars
corruptissima est, etc. Int^^^^ non (...) esse (...) ^ateor dabit posterior
aetas tructabiliores for^^ anima^, minor^ pectora, quam nostra habent seculas
Lavater in Nehem. Homil. 52. Quia pontifices Romani Excommunicatione ^endum
^suam tyrannidem abusi sunt, factum est ut nulla fere justa discipl^na amplius
in Ecclesiis jnstitui possit Nisi autem sl^g ^i^si coerceantur, omnia ruant in
pejus necesse est.
as that which was wanting through the injury of the times, the thing having
been so horribly abused in Popery, and the present licentiousness abounding
among people, did hinder the erecting of that part of the Church Discipline at
that time. But they still pleaded the thing to be held forth in Scripture, and
were but expecting better times for restoring and setting of Excommunication,
which they did approve in Genevah and in other reformed Churches, who had
received it. I give you their own words for the warrant of what I say.

I have been the longer upon this point, as being the chief objection which
can be made by Master Coleman concerning that clause in the Covenant, the
example of the best reformed Churches.

He has only one thing more, which may well pass for a Paradox. He will
take an instance foresooth, from Genevah it self, though Presbiterian in
practice. And why? because in the Genevah Annotations upon, Mat. 9. 16. It is
said that, the external Discipline is to be fitted to the capacity of the
Church. This is no Scotland Presbytery, says the Brother. Nay Sir, nor yet
Genevah Presbytery, for it does not at all concern Presbytery. It is spoken in
referrence to the chooseing of fit and convenient times for Fasting and
Humiliation; that as Christ did not at that time tie his Disciples to Fasting,
it being unsuitable to that present time, so other like circumstances of Gods
Worship which are not at all determined in the Word, are to be accommodated to
emergent occasions, and to the Churches condition for the time: which both
Scotland and Genevah, and other reformed Churches do.

If I have now more fully and convincingly spoken to that point of the
Covenant, let the Brother blame himself that put me to it.

The Lord guide his people in a right way, and rebuke the Spirit of error and
division, and give us all more of his Spirit to lead us into all truth, and
into all self-denial: and grant that none of his servants be found unwilling
to have the Lord Jesus Christ to reign over them in all his Ordinances.

FINIS.
Faults in the Printing.
PAge 3. line 20. primitive, r. punitive, ib. l. 24. be r. he p. 8. l. 23.
admiration, r. administration, p. 11. l. 6. he had, r. I had, p. 16. l. 10.
revileth, r. resileth. p. 17. l. 17. being r. been, p. 21. Cyrell r. Cyrill.


