The Gloucester shire Ministers TESTIMONY TO THE Truth of Jesus Christ, AND TO
The Solemn League and Covenant; AS ALSO, Against the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them.

Sent to the Ministers within the Province of London, Subscribers of the former
Testimony.

Together with a Letter annexed, from a faithful Minister, to a Friend of his
in London.

March 28th LONDON. Printed by John Clowes. 1648.

THE CONCVRRENT Subscriptions of us Ministers of the Gospel in the County of
GLOUCESTER, with our Reverend Brethren, the Ministers of Christ, within the
Province of London.
To a Testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ and to our solemn League and
Covenant: As also against the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times.
Reverend, and beloved brethren,
WE have lately seen, and seriously perused a Book entitled as above, and
subscribed by you, with a great deal of satisfaction, and contentment; wherein
you have spoken the very thoughts of our hearts, and our Judgments freely and
fully concur with you, and shall be ever ready to discharge, and ^cquit
ourselves, and our Consciences, with you, with the hazard of our very lives,
both in mainetaining our solemn league and Covenant, as also in prote^ing in
our places and callings, against these inundations of Errors and Heresies,
which all other our endeavors and addresses, are not able to hinder.

I subscribe with the reservation of my Brethren of the Assembly in the
testimony. William Mew. Tho: Iackson Minster at Gloucester. Io: Trap Minister
of Welford. William Edwards Minister of Tedbury. William Dolman Minister of
Hampton. Alexander Gregory Minister of Cyrencester. James Sta^field Minister of
R^dborough. Richard Britten Minister of Bisleigh. Rich^^ Kent Minister of
Wotton, Subedge. William Hall Minister of Aveninge. Richard Hall Minister of
Beverstone. Geo: Vaen Minister of Vleigh. Thomas Gwinne Minister of C^wley.
Obadiah Higgins Minister of Weekewarre. Richard Fowler Minister of Westerleigh.
James Stephensen Minister of Tormarton. William Sheeve Minister of Oldsodbury.
Robert Greenehald Minister of Dodington. Thomas Sar. Minister of Redford. Henry
Hurst Minister of Mickleton. Jo: Riland Minister of the Gospel. William
Albright Minister of Clifford. Io: Batchelour Preacher of the Gospel. William
Cooper Minister at Marston Sitra. Timothy Wharton Sen. Minister of
Child-Wickam. Timothy Wharton Iu. Preacher of Gods Word. Jonathan Davis
Preacher of Gods Word. Richard Davis Minister of Buckland. William Pilsworth
Minister of Ozelworth. Samuel Hieron Minister of Horsley. Io: Pell Minister of
Hawks bury. Henry Heane Minister of Olveston. Giles Workman Minister of
Alderly. John Barnsdale Minister of Chipping-Sodbury. Io: Nelme Minister of
Michaels, Gloucester. Tho: Easton Minister of Battleford. Rob. VVickins
Minister of Todenham. William Reale minister of Stowwold. William Tray
Minister of Odington. Giles Oldisworth Minister of Bunton Supra Mont. James
Rutherford D. D. Minister of Nympsfield. Helye Fox Minister of VVood chester.
Walter Prichard Minister of Frocester. Tho: VVallas Minister of Stonehouse.
William Hodges Minister of King stauly. William Hodges Minister of Newington
Bagpath. Ben: Jones Minister of Christ's Gospel. Richard Eedes Minister of
Beckford. Joseph Malden Minister of Asckurch. Anthony Palmer Minister of Burton
supra aquam. Ezra Grayle Minister of Lassington. William Edwards Minister of
Barnewoode. George Dorwood Minister of Painsweeke Tho: Iennings Minister of
Matson. Walter Powell Minister of Standish. Richard Cox Minister of Boxwell.
Thomas VVorrall Minister of Stanley Leonard. Ios. VVordward Minister of Dursley.
Bristoll
Henry Stubs Lecturer at Phillips. Io: Paul Minister at James. Constant Iessop
Minister of Nicholas.

We likewise whose names are here subscribed, to whom the Covenant was never
tendered, do notwithstanding concur with our Brethren to the Testimony of
Jesus Christ, against all Errors and Heresies. William Jones Minister of
Christ in Tedrington. Richard Cooper Minister at Tewksbury. Richard Beesten
Minister of Tyrley. Benjamin Baxter minister of Forthampton.


A Letter from a faithful Minister to a friend of his in London.
Dear Brother,
I Have sent the Concurrent subscriptions of the Ministers of GLOUCESTER-Shire,
and thus much they assure you that they could largely expatiate in their
affections to you, if they did not desire to be of the number of them that act
much and speak little, and truly they as earnestly desire to be found
faithful in this cause (to which they are so solemnly engaged) as they desire
the Lord Jesus to plead for them in that great day; and they have all set up
their resolutions with God, that it is better to dye Martyrs then Mongrels.
Wherefore they desire you to go on in the name of the Lord, and the Lord help
you to abound in this glorious work, in as much as your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. The people are so taken, that as I understand, they are
seconding their Ministers Subscriptions with a Petition to the Parliament, for
a settlement in government, and they all say the breach of Covenant will ruin
them and their posterity, without speedy repentance, neither can they be ever
brought to believe that the fruit of all their prayers, sighs, tears, and
sufferings, yea the very blood of their friends and children shall produce
nothing at last, but a curs^d and monstrous Toleration. Blessed be the God of
heaven who has set you upon such a work as this, it is the very alarm of God
to awaken the whole Land, we look upon it as a pledge of the Lords favor to
this wretched Kingdom, as the arrow of the Lords deliverance, as the blessing
in the bunch, as Manna in wilderness, as water in the Desert, as that which
shall be abundantly rewarded to you. The Lord Jesus be with your spirits. Amen.

The most unworthy of the Servants of Jesus Christ. I.W.

FINIS.

