A DISCOVERY OF Truth: Presented to the Sons of TRUTH.

1. These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that whih is good.

Matthew. 1.19. Wisdom is justified of her children.

Psalm. 36.9. In thy light we shall see light.

The truth is one, and never truly understood by any, till they be one with it.
Printed in the year, 1645.

To THE READER.
Courteous Reader;
IT is the property of souls possessed with truth, accordingly as they are
refreshed by the discoveries of it; so are they carried out to discover the
same things to others, according to the Apostles words; We cannot choose but
de^lare the things which we have ^een and heard, Acts 4.20. And ^^kewise (in 1 John 1.3.) he says, That which we have seen and ^eard, we declare to you; that
so ^ou may have fellowship with us. The same things may I speak, I being
desirous to know something of the difference between the Law and the Gospel,
and so to understand it in one; that so I might see them both to be one, as
handed to us by Christ. My desire of you (Christian Reader) is, that you may
rather by truth, endeavor to see truth in it, then catch at any broken
expressions you may gather from it: For it is rather set forth to declare
truth, then man's wisdom: and so I leav^ you to the truth desiring that yo^ by
it, may be made able to judg^ of it.

T. T.

The places of Scripture which are answered in the following Treatise.
JOHN 14.4. LEt not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in
me. JOHN 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. JOHN 14.8. And Philip
said, Lord show us the Father, and it suffices. REV. 21. latter part of the 9.
Come hither, and I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife. ESAIAS 40. latter
part of the 11. And he shall gather the Lambs with his arms, and carry them
in his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young. REV. 16. beginning of
the 19. And the great City was divided into three parts. HOS. 10.12. Sow to
your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy, break up your fallow grounds,
for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and reign righteousness upon
you. JER. 4. latter end of the 3. Break up your fallow grounds, and sow not
amongst thorns.
In the second part of this Treatise, these four Questions are answered.
I. Whether a Christian is freed from the moral Law, yea, or no?

II. Whether a Christian is to strive against sin, when tempted, yea or no?

III. Whether Sanctification can evidence Justification, when justification
lies dark?

IV. Upon what ground a Christian may tender comfort to a soul, that sees no
goodness in it self?

A DISCOVERY OF TRVTH: PRESENTED To the Sons of Truth.
DEar friends, I salute you in the Lord; rejoicing much to to hear the
breathing of Christ by you. I should rejoice to have an opportunity to exchange
somethig of the language of Christ with you, face to face I have received your
Letter, the sum of which I conceive is this; that I, or rather Christ by me,
would give you an answer of certain places of Scripture thus.

First, what I by the spirit of God do apprehend to be the mind of God in them.
2. What conclusions naturally may be drawn from them. Which Scriptures, as you
express in your Letter, seems to contradict each other: some of them
breathing forth the Gospel, wherein all duties are sweetly laid upon the power
of life, given in by God; the other laying duties upon the creature to get life
from God. To which I answer, according to that light which God has given in to
me, so is he apprehended by me, and according to that you shall have an answer
from me.

For the Scripture, Psalm. 36.9.
which is the word of God, none can understand but such as live in God, and so
receive the knowledge of his mind, not from the second, but first hand, which
is the priviliedge of the Saints; who know truth from falsehood, and that by
living in truth: Now this word of God, which indeed is God but as it is looked
upon by us, and given out to us, in those two things is the word considered, as
Law and Gospel, and if you look upon these not in God as God but as the word
held out to us, then there is a difference, and that thus. We may describe the
law thus. Deuteronomy. 4. Lev 18.5.
A declaration of duties holding forth life, not to be given to us, but wrought
out by us. The Gospel we may describe thus; It is a tender of a full Christ,
from a free God to a nothing creature, in which tender, God is pleased to give
down life from himself, not only to be held out to us, but also to be revealed
in us. So that this light in us, really becomes life for us, John 1.4 Romans 8.3,
4 Ioh. 15.5.
to produce in us and act by us, what in the Law is required of us; in which
description you may consider these Corrolies.

First, that the coming of Christ from God the father, to the sons of men,
was not the cause, but the effect of the love of God. Ioh 3.16.


Secondly, whatsoever is required of us, or can be desired by us, is to be
found alone in Christ, as he is held out to us.

Thirdly, Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6. Romans 4.5. Romans 5.8. John. 14.6.
that the tender of Christ to us, is not to any qualification in us, or any
good wrought by us.

Fourthly, it is Christ alone that Brings down life from God, and carries up
the soul again to God.

Fifthly, what we gather from the supposition, in the description is this; that
the tender of Christ in a promise, which is the sum of the promise, Christ
first receives us in the going forth of himself through the promise, To 10 20.
before we receive him in going out to the promise, and that is clear from
this ground: Because we cannot go out to him, till we enjoy a power from him,
and we never iujoy power from him, till we by the going forth of himself, are
laid hold on by himself.

Dear friend, for the use of the Corolies, I leave to you, or rather the truth
in you, which is able so to unfold it self, as to overcome your heart with it,
and silence al disputes of reason that is against it.

Now for the Law; to those that see it only by a light that flows from it,
and not according to the rules of the Gospel, it will not only seem to be
contrary to the Gospel, but will cause the beholder to convert the Gospel into
Law, and preach the Gospel as Law, and that one Element where Antichrist
lives. And that is the reason why we have so many men in these days that
preach, and press men to make brick without straw. But passing, over that,
the Law I must confess, is not looked upon directly from the Gospel, by rules
of the Gospel, which darkens to us, both the Law and Gospel: But we are to
consider the law thus, that the Law is, that wherein God discovers his
authority as a God over us, requiring duties of us; and although we have lost
that ability to answer Law, yet the Law continues to declare Gods authority,
but not our ability. And for such expressions, in the word, you must work, yon
must do this and that; it is not to declare our ability* but left to declare
Gods authority, and this is the first rule to judge of the expression of the
Law, so as they may not contradict the Gospel.

Object. This seems not to be a truth, because that such expressions in
Scripture are not few but many, it is not only at one time but often; to which
I answer.

Answer. Had God withdrawn and made out these discoveries, which manifest his
authority, it would have been conceived, that when there was an alteration in
the creature, that this alteration wrought an alteration in God; And so it
might be apprehended, that some thing below God, had the power to cause an
alteration or change in God; which the Holy Ghost will by no expression admit
of such a construction.

Second Rule. God was pleased from his infinite love, to give a Christ, not
only to fulfill the Law for us, 2 Cor. 3.15.18. Heb. 12.18.22.
but also to be a light; as in us, so also a light held out to us, in which
light we are to see the Law: For we are not now to see the Law in the valid
light of Moses, but in the uncovering light of Christ; and if you thus see the
Law, you shall see that which in the hand of Moses was required to get life; in
this light of Christ you shall see it held out, as actions to be done by, or as
begotten of life; in the other, to work that we may be loved, here to work, in
that we are beloved; and this presents the Law lovely.

For dear friend know this, that nothing is injoyrd by us as it is in its self,
unless it be apprehended by a light suitable to it self; for if we look upon
a white object through a red glass, the object is not white to us as it is in
its self, but red according to the light through which it is apprehended by
us. So God in the law, if judged by the bare expressions of the Law, and not in
the light of love, he appears rough and not lovely; but when we being led
forth, by Christ, and sweetly gathered up in Christ, and there see the Law, we
shall then see the Law lovely; Romans 7.12.
and say as the Apostle, the Law is holy, just, and good. And so we shall not
see such a contradiction betweext the Law and Gospel.

When we thus see truth in truth, we shall then see an one-nesse betwixt truth,
or rather the truth to one, and that only one; which was which is, which shall
be.

But I say no more of the Law, but come to give an answer to your Scripture in
particular; according to your desire.

And first of the first; being the 14. of John and the first:

Let not your hearts he troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me.

In which Scripture, in general it holds forth these two things.

First, a dehortation; Let not your hearts be troubled.

Secondly, a direction; Yea, believe in God, believe also in me: But that we
may understand the meaning of the words, before we come to draw conclusions,
consider these things:

First, the party speaking; Christ.

Secondly, his ends of his thus speaking, which was this; he being to depart
from them in his bodily presence, and knowing what evil disposition there was
in them, knew well at his departure they would be full of fears, through much
trouble, and so sin against God.

Doct. The Doctrine from thence observed is this, that it was the way of
Christ's care in all his teachings, to keep his Disciples from sin-full fear,
Ioh 16.33 Luke 12. Luke 1 74.
contrary to some men's teaching now, which preach obedience to be drawn forth
from the terrors of a Law, and not from the power of love; which teaching
produces directly such effects as these.

First, it rather drives men from God, then draws men to God, for men are
drawn to love, only by love, and God is love.

Secondly, the creature to help it self, rather sets upon that which is
properly the work of God, then for it to work from a power of GOD, seeing all
come from GOD.

Thirdly, Such teaching teach men rather to live upon the creature then GOD;
which we do, first, when we live upon the actings of God to us; and secondly
when we live upon the acts of God in us, toward himself; This condition is
full of fear, and whether this be a sinful fear ye or no, I leave you to
judge, which I hope have other ways learned Christ; And so much of the party
speaking, with the end of his speaking: Now of the matter spoke, and first, of
the dehortation, Let not your hearts be troubled: The nature of a dehortation
implies sin, and in this do not only consider the dehortation, but the parties
dehorted, which was the Disciples that were possessed with Christ, Luke 8.24
25. Mat 6.30.
from whence observe their conclusion; That not only other, but even the
members of Christ, through want of knowledge of Christ, are apt to be troubled
with such a trouble, that is condemned by Christ; I shall speak nothing of that
trouble which is lawful and approved of by Christ, nor of that trouble which
is sinful and contrary to Christ, because I have spoken of it in the
conclusion before; only from one term in this conclusion, I will draw one
Corrolarie, that is this, that all trouble that is a sin against Christ, does
directly arise from ignorance of Christ, Mat. 16.8, 9, 11.
and so much of the dehortation.

For the direction, Ye beleve in God, believe also in me:

First, Ye believe in God; in which words is not only a direction but an
acknowledgement, ye believe in God, implying thus much: which shall be as a
conclusion from the words, which is this, that believing in God is the only
way to remove sinful trouble from the hearts of the people of God: Sinful
trouble arises in us, from the not living upon God: but from a living upon
some thing below God; now so soon, and so far as a man has power from God, to
believe in God, so soon, and so far is he really taken up in God, and from
thence made able to live upon God; now because it is not a bare believing, but
a believing rightly rectified, Christ ads this expression, ye believe in God,
believe also in me. Before we draw any thing from these words, we will first
consider the meaning of them, when he says believe in God, believe in me, not
that he intends God one object of faith, and himself another, as being two,
for they are one; Therefore he says in that same Chapter, He that has seen
me, has seen the Father, therefore I conceive the meaning of the place to be
thus; Ye believe in God, believe also in me: That is, believe in God as he is
held out in me; the conclusion from thence is this, that that faith which is
the way of God to remove sinful troubles from the Spirits of the people of
God, 2 Cor. 5.19. Ioh. 17.3. 2 Cor. 3.18. 1. John 5.20.
is not a bare believing of God, but a believing in God, as he is held out in
his Son Christ: The Devils believe, and tremble, the truth has a power and
authority in it self, presented to men to subject their spirits and overturne
the reasons of men, that they are so carried out to assent to truth, that they
are made to accknowledge Truth to be Truth.

So Simon Magus and Judas, etc.

This faith men may have, and go to hell, Apo. 18.13. Iam. 19.
this faith though it carries men to assent to truth, yet it never gives men to
live in truth: nor gives men power from muth, to live answerable to truth; but
this faith which is believed in God, held out in his Son Christ is a Gospel
faith* Such a faith, Heb. 11.1
the life of which, believing in Christ is the very excellency and glory of the
Godhead held out by Christ: and may be thus described.

1. It is for a soul by the supernatural coming in of God to en^oy a
supernatural light from him: by which the soul is made able to see a
sufficiency in him to supply all its wants, carrying with it a consent of
will. from which description we may draw these corrolies.

First, that the life of believing in Christ is not only of Christ, but is
really in Christ, but is really the excellency that is in Christ, which is the
matter, or object of faith, believed by all that are possessed with Christ, but I
speak this to show what a sweet union there is between the object and the joy.

Second corolarie, that power that produces faith, is not the bare discoveries
of God in Christ to us: But it is by a supernatural and divine revelation and
discovery of Christ in us: I speak this for this cause, to show that truth
does and must take hold of us before it can be truly believed by us.

Thrirdly, that soul that truly by faith sees Christ, sees such transcendent
and matchless excellency in Christ, Can. 5.10 to 16. Cant. 2.3. Psa. 110.3
that he is so overcome by it, that he is by the virtue of it voluntarily
carried out, to consent and submit to it. And this is the cause, why souls
when once they come to see Christ, they see nothing lovely like Christ.

Secondly, that is the cause and reason why souls delight and love to live in
those sweet beams of love, which sweetly runs forth from God through Christ,
which is not only light to them, but life in them; John 1.4 Gal. 2.20
dear friend, for the uses of the conclusions, I shall leave to you, and so
much in answer to this place of Scripture.

Now the next Scripture being John 14.6, 7, 8. The words being thus: Jesus
says to him, I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the
Father but by me; Philip says to him, Lord show us the Father and it
suffices ut.

First, of the sixth verse, in which words we may consider an answer, to a
querie, Christ speaking in the fourth verse, saying, whether I go ye know, and
the way ye know. Thomas answers in the fifth verse, we know not whither thou
go, and how can we know the way? This seems to be a Paradoxe, Christ
affirming the thing, and yet Thomas denying it.

Doct. Thence we may observe this conclusion, it is one thing to know, and
another to know that we know.

The second conclusion is, that Christ may know that in us, and for as, that we
do not, cannot know, in nor for our selves; I speak this for these ends.

First, to show it is a greater thing, and a higher privilege to be known of
Christ, then to know Christ.

Secondly, it should teach us to live, not upon our knowing, but upon our being
known of Christ: Hos. 11.3.
He that lives upon his knowing, and not upon the thing known, he lives upon
the Streams, but not in the Fountain; upon the beams, but not in the body;
such a man may have his discoveries of divine things presented to him, but he
has little of the marrow of those divine mercies enjoyed in him: and now I
come to the words themselves: I am the way, the truth and the life: No man
comes to the Father but by me: In which words you may consider a sweet
discovery of that divine Excellency and sufficience that is in Christ. To
speak plainly, these words hold out;

First, all that can be said concerning the giving down of the Divine and
sweet Excellencies of God through Christ to us.

And secondly, all that can be said of the sweet bringing up of a soul from the
coming in of GOD through Christ to us.

And this is clearly held forth in these words, where he says; I am the way,
the truth, and the life. I am the way that God gives down himself to you, and
reveals all that is in himself for you; and I am the way through which you are
given up to God, and through whch you have sweet records and Communion with
God, and in which you are made able sweetly to see (as in an open glass) the
divine unfoldings of Gods bosom secrets, I mean the mystery of his mind, so
that a soul is minded sweetly with the mind of God; from which words thus
paraphrased on, we may observe these brief conclusions.

Doct. First, Coll. 2.9. 2 Cor. 3.18. Col. 2.9.
that God does no way give down himself to us, as he is in himself; but through
Christ, whom was for that end ordained; by himself, he is a suitable light to
present such an object. If this be so, what shall we think of those that have
found out other ways to bring down God to the creature, under the same
consideration before spoken of? Not to speak of the dead way of nature, nor
much of the dark way of the Law; but also of some gilded path, and ways of
the Gospel, which men do by using some expressions of the Gospel; do
endeavor to make a conjunction of Law and Gospel, as one way to bring down
God. Nay men have an art in these times, to turn the very effects produced by
God, they go about to make them causes to cause an alteration in God: My
meaning is this, that even prayer and fasting, which in Gods way I much prise.

Which if true, is alone produced by a power from God; the end is, to fit and
alter us and not God. Men now a days make these means, as a way to tie and
constrain GOD, to alter and to change GOD; O monstrous, I desire to love the
work but abhor the way.

Objest. Surely this fasting you speak of, is not so as you say, but must needs
be true fasting and praying, and that for this cause; because We have so many
answers after one fasting and praying, of our desires in them.

Answ. To which I answer, if it be so, bless God; and I desire to do the same.
But if you judge of the truth of fasting and prayer, by an answer after it, and
not by a right performing of it, then what difference is there I pray you,
betwixt the Fast of David, and the Fast of Ahab? But I say no more of this
thing.

Doct. The second conclusion from this first thing is this, Ioh. 6 44.
that no soul does or can give himself up to God, till he enjoys power from the
sweet giving down of GOD to him through his Son Christ; There may as well be
reflections of the beams of a Sun without a Sun, as returns to God
without the enjoyment of God; then things act really to its proper end, when
they act not only from but in their own Element. But what it is to love from
the strength of love, and to act living acts, to a living end, from the
distilling of a living power, I leave you to judge, whom I hope lives in those
sweet streams? Whose spirit is filled by living under the drops of that divine
fountain.

Doct. The third conclusion, that we see nothing truly in God, nor have no
real communion with God, but that which we see and enjoy in Christ as the way;
And so much of this first thing; I am the way.

He says also, I am the Truth; Christ, may be said to be truth these waves;

First, in that he is the cause, declaring truth.

Secondly, he is the object or matter declared by truth; for all the Prophets
writ of him; for all the Prophesies, and promises, pointed at him.

Thirdly, he is not only so truth, but he is truth essentially; For God was the
Word, and the Word was God. He faith he is also life, that hereby he may appear
to be as he is, all in all.

There is but three things essential in a man's way.

First, a way to walk in.

Secondly, a light of truth to discover the way.

Thirdly, a power to carry us on in the way, or else you must lie still. So by
this you may see, that Christ is all in all to a Christian soul. For we are by
Christ in Christ carried out to Christ, he being the way to God, and the truth
that discovers God; and also the life that carries you on according to the
truth discovered to God in that way.

Doct. And therefore the conclusions from all this, 1 Cro 1.30. 1 Cro. 3.22.
is this; That Christ is all in all to a christian soul, he is all in them, all
to them, all for them.

The use of this should teach us;

First, to see all in him.

Secondly, to look for all from him.

Thirdly, to teach us to give all to him,

Now for the next words, wherein Christ says, No man comes to the Father but
but by me; This is but an explication of, the former words, and the same
conclusion does naturally arise from it, which was this; That we see nothing
truly in God, nor have no real communion with God, but that which we see and
enjoy in Christ, as the way; and I shall say no more of this conclusion, nor of
this verse.

Now I shall speak a word or two of the eight verse, where Philip said, Show us
the Father, and it suffices us; In which words in general, is discovered
these two things.

First, a manifestation of a great desire, in these words; Show us the Father.

Secondly, the reasons or grounds of this desire. First, he is a Father;
Secondly, the knowledge of him is a satisfying good, in these words; and it
suffices us.

In the desire, consider first the party desiring, with the special occasion
producing that desire, which was the sweet manifestations of God by Christ, how
he was to be understood as held out in Christ. The person desiring, was a soul
possessed with God, from whence observe this conclusion.

That the discoveries of God by Christ, Doctr. Cant 5.4, 5,16.
do abundantly enlarge and take up the heart and desires of that soul, that is
really possessed with God, as he gives forth himself through Christ.

Everything loves to live in its own light; God is the light of a soul
possessed with himself.

Secondly, every thing loves, and in love is most enlarged to its own center;
but the foul which is possessed with God, is by him really centred in him.

Thirdly, nothing stirs up a thing, or inlarges the desire of a thing, so much
as that which is the only suitable good to the thing: but that soul that is
possessed with God, and the life of the joy in the soul really flows from God,
nothing is so suitable good to that joy, as the unfolding of God himself.

Fourthly; men are carried out most sweetly and swiftly to that they apprehend
most lovely. But that soul that understands the unfolding of God, from being
really possessed with God, sees nothing so lovely as God himself, as he is held
out in his son Christ. I say no more of this conclusion.

Secondly, in the desire, you may observe, the matter desired shows the thing
desired was to see God; hence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That the manifestations of God in the way of the Gospel, John 4.10 John
4.41
is a very desirable thing, and they that know it will desire after it: From
the terms of the conclusion you may observe this;

That the sight of God is an object worth viewing.

Secondly, the Gospel is the only way to see God in the objects of love.

Thirdly, that no soul can truly desire God in the way of the Gospel, till he
by him has a knowledge of him.

Fourthly, that soul that ever had a real knowledge of God, can be satisfied
by seeing nothing but God: And so much of that conclusion.

Thirdly, we are to consider not only the thing desired, but the extent of the
desire; Show us. Philip did not only desire it for himself, but for others as
well as himself: Thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That those desires that run forth to God, and really flow from God, are
not desires limited within a man's own breast, but extends it self for the good
of others, as for it self. That life which is given out to us and produces
desires in us, does really produce a self-dividing power in us: That is the
cause why Christians are so free in their desires for others, and in their
discoveries to others what is discovered in them.

Streams that flow from the fountain as their center, need not have secondarie
causes to carry them to their center again, for they naturally run into it,
being really, one with it: So it is with Christians, they stand hot in need to
have something put in their mouths in a secondary way: Mich. 3.5.
Like those Priests in Micah, whom unless you put something in their mouths
will bite: Or like some, whom when they hear that there is an opportunity to
preach Christ to creatures, they presently demand what they shall have from the
creature? And if they can have more from the one then from the other, their
desires is taken off from the least to the most, though there is most need
where there is lest: it is to be feared, that it is not the need of the man,
but the love of the means and money that carries him. It is not so with souls
possessed with Christ, whose desires run out for others as well as for it self,
in a selfdenying way, they cannot choose but breathe forth to others what Christ
breaths forth in them: So much of that conclusion.

Fourthly, consider the object of their dsires, or the person of whom they
desire, which was Jesus Christ, in these words; Lord show us. The conclusion
from thence is this.

Doct. That it is the sole work of Jesus Christ, Mat. 12.27.
to reveal God the Father to the sons of men: He alone was designed of God
the Father for that end.

Secondly, none can truly and fully discover God, but those who truly and fully
know God; but no man truly and fully knows God in the first sense, but the
Lord Christ: Ergo, none can make known God the Father to the sonns of men but
Christ: Besides, if you consider what the true knowledge of God the Father, is
through the teaching of the Son, the very nature of that description will
confirm this doctrine.

First, we will show you what this knowledge is not.

First, not a natural light of seeing God, wherein reason in apprehending does
so comprehend, that reason is the proper judge of what is apprehended.

Nor secondly, do we intend a legal knowledge, which light flows from the
Law; wherein the soul is made able to see God, as a God over him, but hot as a
God for him, unless they be for him.

Nor thirdly, we do not intend a gospel knowledge in a notionary way; by that I
mean, men's running out to fetch in notions of the truth, and are not fetched in
by the power of the truth, and so they rather carry notions of truth then the
power of truth carries them: And that is the cause why some walk loosely in,
the profession of the gospel, which is a matter of great grief. But men do
exceeding ill in laying these scandals upon the truth, and not distinguish
professors from possessors of truth.

But to give you a description of the true knowledge of God through Christ, we
may describe it thus;

It is a supernatural light set up in the soul by God, the life of which
light has his residence in God, the actings of which light is all together for
God.

From whence you may observe these corolies.

The first is this, that all means, Mat 11.27.
nay the perfection of all things below God, cannot bring a natural man
spiritually to understand God, for it is produced by a supernatural light, set
up in the soul; from that word set up in the soul, you may observe this corolie.

That that soul that really understands truth from being possessed with truth,
John 3.29.30. phil. 4.8.
nothing in that soul is exalted above truth.

Then from this word, Psa. 21.13
set up in soul by God; from whence you may observe this corolie:

It is alone the power of God that exalts truth. And from this expression, the
life of which light has his residence in God; observe this corolie.

That soul that truly knows God from the commings in of God, that light is
really maintained by a life that is in God. Col 3.3. Cant. 4.16*
Then from this word, the actings of which light is altogether for God; thence
observe this corolie.

That all true light that flows from God does sweely carry out a soul, Ioh.
1.2, 4, 5. Gal. 1.16.
in every act to live to God: the light of knowing is the life of conforming,
and so much of that conclusion.

The next thing is the matter desired, Show us thy Father. Whence observe this
conclusion.

Doct. To see God as a father, Esa. 63.16
is that which is very desirable; that is the way that God presents himself
through Christ to the sons of men, to draw forth love in them to himself. It
is the very tenor of the gospel, thus to present God, and thus to see GOD. It
is a relation that upohlds and indeers more then any: it remove fears, and
confirms faith: we are not to present this relation in the gospel to be
begotten by obedience, but to beget obedience; but no more of this conclusion.

The last thing is the reason; and it suffices us. Where you may not only see
the reason, it suffices; but the extent of it, it suffices us: Thence observe
these two conclusions.

Doct. First, it is a satisfying good to a soul possessed with GOD, Psalm. 4.6,
7. Ps. 17.15.
to see GOD; such a soul as he lives and so sees, so also he lives by seeing,
and so far as he sees GOD, so far he rereally enioyes what he sees, and in the
inioyment can see nothing like it. And as Jacobs sheep, who was made to
conceive by a sight of the speckled rods in the Troffes where they drank; so
Believers who are (...) forth to drink of these still waters, which are to
refresh the City of God, and in them see the beauty and sweetness of God, and
immedeiatly conceive and bring forth fruit suitable to God. It is reported that
the Dove is made fruitful by kissing, but I am sure that Believers who are
called Doves By Christ, by the lest kiss of the mouth of Christ, are made
presently to return reflections of love to Christ: My beloved is mine, and I
am his. No more of this conclusion.

And from these words not only satisfy, but saisfie us, you may see;

As before the desire of Philip, that others as well as himself might see God;
so in this place you may see his faith and knowledge in this word; It will
satisfy us. Thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That those that are acquainted with the effects of the truth in
themselves, can also judge what satisfaction other enjoy from truth as well as
themselves, that live in the same truth with themselves. But I shall speak no
more of this conclusion nor of this verse.

The next Scripture is in the 21 of the Revelation, and the latter end of the
ninth verse, Come hither and I will show thee the bride, the Lambs wife; The
Revelation holds forth two things:

First, a discovery of Christ;

Secondly, a discovery of Antichrist.

First, of Christ, and that in these things; in the sweet excellency of
himself.

Secondly, the near oneness the Saints have with himself.

Thirdly, Reve. 1.13, 14, 15 16. and 5.12. and 9.7. and 12.9. and 13.1, 2. and
13* 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 18.2.
the great victory and privileges the Saints have by Christ.

Secondly, the discovery of Antichrist is held out in three things: First, in
his Rise. Secondly, in his Reign. Thirdly, in his Ruin.


The discovery of Christ in the last thing, which is the privilege; the
victory, and the deliverance the Saints have by Christ, is sweetly held forth
in t^ese words; Come hither and I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife, In
which words you may consider two things.

First, an exhortation in these words, Come hither.

Secondly, the reasons or encouragements to back on the exhortation in these
words; And I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife.

1. Of the exhortation, wherein you may consider these things.

First, the party exhorting, an Angel.

Secondly, the party exhorted, JOHN, a soul possessed with Christ; from thence
observe this conclusion.

Doct. That God has not only men but Angels if need require, Revel. 1.1 Luke
2.10.
to preach the privilege that comes by Christ to christians; Nay, rather, then
they shall be untaught, God will teach them himself so much for that
conclusion.

Secondly, consider the exhortation it self, in these words, Come hither, in
the bowel of which exhortation, is included a sweet admiration; from thence
observe this conclusion*

Doctrine. That the understanding of the union between CHRIST and CHHRISTIANS,
Ephesians. 5.23.
is full of high divine misteriall wonders, and this will appear if you consider
the nature of it, the privileges the Saints have in it, or the glorious
effects that flow from it, nay if you consider no more but this, the nearness
betwixt the seeing, and the object seen, and the sweet, and swift acting of the
spirit when it sees, in running out to the thing seen, so that it really
injoyes and lives in the thing seen: but no more of that. Now from this word,
come hither, his meaning is, not to come from one place to another, nor from
one person to another, for places and persons, of themselves, and from
themselves cannot farther discover truth. So this word, Come hither, does imply
a drawing up of the spirit of JOHN to a higher degree of the enjoyment of the
light of God, that from thence he may be made able to understand a further
discovery of God, from thence you may observe this conclusion.

Doct. That no soul can nor does any further see the manifestations of truth,
Reve. 1.10 Psa. 26.9.
then they by it, gathered up in it; the reason of this is because that the
truth is as well the life of the eye, as the glory of the object, unless the
eye be enlarged, as well as the glory of the object, we cannot see what is
dicovered, and the being taken up in the truth, is the enlargement of the eye
to see the truth; and there is a sutablenesse betwixt the eye and the object:
that is the reason Bats and Owls do not love to fly but at evening tide, and
that is the cause the Eagle loves to look upon the sun, because the Eagles eye
and the Sun has a sutablenesse on them, and so, people legallised, by the Law,
do not delight to look upon the glorious discoveries of the Gospel, and those
that are Gospellised, love to see nothing else but the glory of the Gospel, but
I shall say no more of this conclusion. And so much of the exhortation, now for
the encouragement. I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife.

First, I will show thee, thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That the manifestation of Christ, prove. 8.31.31.
is encouragement enough to Christians to hearken to Christ, that soul that
ever was acquainted with it needs no more encouragement to draw sorth its
Spirit to Christ, then to hear it shall have a manifestation of Christ, they
see such excellencies in it, and receive such sweet content by it, that by the
discoveries of the mystery of the Gospel, ye may even as with a twined thread
lead a soul Gospellised round about the world. So much of that conclusision.

Come hither and I will show thee the Bride, in these words is the matter
shown, which is the marrow of the encouragement set out in these two words;
The Bride the Lambs wife.

1. The Bride, which metaphor sets out the oneness betwix Christ and his
church, therefore the spirit declares her to be a Bride, and to make this title
appear gloriout he says, the Lambs wife; that so it may appear that this
title given to her by Christ is so far glorious, as it flows from union with
Christ.

But first I will begin with the word Bride, from whence observe this
conclusion.

Doct. That there is a sweet Matrimonial contract betwixt Christ and his
Church, Hos. 2.19. Isa. 26.5. John 3.29
for proof of which conclusion, I shall do these three things.

First, I shall prove it by Scripture

Secondly, I shall show you how it agrees with a Matrimonial contract too, and
therefore fitly set out under that title.

Thirdly, I shall show you wherein it transcends all other matrimonial
contracts in the world; for this title is but a metaphor, and metaphors are not
to compare, but to declare Christ, and therefore there is a transcendent
excellency in the union betwixt Christ and his church, that is not to be found
in the limits of this metaphor.

But first for the proof of the thing. Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee to me
for ever. Esa 62. the latter end of fifth verse; As a Bridegroom rejoices
over this Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee. Joh. 3.29. He that has
the Bride, is the Bridegroom.

And for the second thing, wherein it does agree wish the matrimonial
contract, therefore fitly so called; as appears in these things.

First, because there is a particular woing, before there is an actual
possessing or uniting; as you may see 2 Cor. 5.20. Now we are Ambassador for
Christ, as though God did beseech you to be reconciled. Gods woing is nothing
else but the sweet expostulations of love with the soul, by which he brings
home a soul to himself, and makes a soul one with himself.

Secondly, a mutual consent of will is the essence, as in other, so in this
marriage. 1 John 12. To as many as received him; but the word should be read,
as many as consented to him, unto them he gave the privilege of the sons of
God.

Thirdly, as in other Marriages so in this, there is a special living with
each other, Christ lives with the soul and the soul lives with Christ not
only as domestics, but as bosom friends, in which familiarity, there is
sweet imbracemehts and spiritual salutings, and making kriowne the miseries of
each others mind to each other, through which they are sweetly wrapped up in
each other, these soul-ravishing refreshments, that the Saints enjoy in this
fellowship with Christ, none knows but they that enjoy it, for Christ lives so
with a soul, and a soul so with Christ, that under that consideration, a soul
is but a Nowne adjective, and cannot stand nor sit by it self, without Christ.

Fourthly, as in other Matrimonial unions, so in this, the soul is made
fruitful by living with Christ, for it is alone the sweet and glorious
discoveries of Christ, that makes a soul bring forth fruit suitable to Christ,

Fifthly, as in other marriages there is a kind of trans-acting of each others
condition to each other; the riches of the Husband to the Wife, and the
poverty of the Wife to the Husband: So it is betwixt Christ and a Christian,
as you may see in the 2 Cor. 5. and last; He that knew no fin became sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Whatsoever Law, sin, or conscience has against a man, is taken away by
Christ, he being one with Christ, and all that is in Christ given forth by God
through Christ, is made over to a christian made one with Christ, and is as
really a christians as Christ himself.

Sixthly, as in other Marriages there is a sympathising one with the other, so
in this Christ sweetly simpathises with his spouse, and the spouse sweety
simpathises whith Christ.

Seventhly, as in other matrimonial union so in this; in their absence from
each other, where is much longing for each other, and in the presence of each
other much rejoicing and delight in each other: And so much of the second thing.

For the third, where it transcends all other matrimonial contracts in the
world; that it does in these perticulars.

First, in that the mutual consent of will, flows from one and the same
power; it is not so in other matrimonial contracts: for though a man has a
will to marry a Virgin, yet he has not a power to make her willing to consent
to him. But it is so with Christ, that, that power of love that carries out
Christ to be willing to make himself one with us, the same power makes us
willing to be one with him.

Secondly, in other manages men's love is carried out to the party beloved, as
being beautiful; but it is not so with Christ, for Christ does not match with
us because we are beautiful, but being deformed, to make us beautiful: And
this you may see in the 16. of Ezekiel. 5, 6, 8. where you may see the time of
Gods love was, when they were in their blood: And God there entered into
covenant with them, not because they were beautiful, but even when they were
in their blood, and this he did to make them beautiful. As you may see Ezekiel.
16.14. where God says, I beautified you in my own beauty: If a Moses marry an
Ethiopian, she is an Ethiopian still, but it is not so betwixt God and the
soul.

3. In other marriages, commonly men marry such that are suitable in portion, but
Christ never mary's such that are rich, but being poor he marries them to make
them rich; and for that end, Christ became poor that we might be made rich.

Fourthly, in other marriages infirmities in a wife, or accusations against a
wife, does many times take off the love of a husband from the wife, but its
never so with Christ: Will the devil accuse Job to the Lord? Yet the Lord is
not changed by it, but declares the same approbation of Job as before: And so
the Spouse who has infirmities in her, and she confesses the same, saying she
is black; yet Christ to the same Chapter says, she is fair and comely.

Fifthly, that which is a just ground according to law, to take off the love of
a husband from his wife, so that there is no acceptance to be found with a
husband in the return of his wife; its not so betwixt God and the soul: And
this you may see at large in the third of Jeremiah and the first verse.

Sixthly, that which makes a separation in part or whole betwixt a man and his
wife, neither in part nor whole can make a separation betwixt Christ and a
christian.

As poverty, imprisonment, and banishment, may make a separation in part, and
death makes a total separation; But know this, if the world makes a christian
poor, or sends him into prison or banishment, all this cannot deprive them of
sweet fellowship and communion with Christ; who has engaged himself to be with
them, and to unfold himself to them, not less but more at such times: when
Jeremiah and Paul were in prison, when more enjoyments from God, and
unfouldings of God than then? And then for death, it is so far from separating us
from God, that then is the time we have a full enjoyment of God. And herein I
have discovered, wherein this matrimonial contract does transcend all other: I
should draw a corolie from each of these particulars, but for brevities sake I
will pass them over; and make only a brief use or two of instruction, from
the whole conclusion.

And first to instruct us; if this be so, then let it teach us to look
upon-Christ as a husband; and that we do when we do these things:

First, when we look upon him, as none like him.

Secondly, when we look for all law and government from him; It is not the
vives duty to make laws, but to obey laws; so it is not the churches duty to
make laws for the worship of Christ, but to conform to such laws for worship,
given forth by Christ.

Thirdly, we are said to look upon Christ as a husband, not only when we go on
in our duty to conform to him, but also when we lay all our poverty and debts
upon him. But it is here with christians as it is with some simple women, who
out of a pretended humility (though real pride) instead of laying their debts
upon their husbands (whom have enough) they pinch themselves to pay their debts
from themselves: So many christians, when the law and conscience comes to them
with a writ, they not knowing their freedom from them, do not send them to
Christ, and lay them upon Christ, but endeavor to answer, such things from
their resolutions against sin, and from their conformity to Christ; and so set
up their resolutions and conformity as a Christ.

Fourthly, in looking for all maintenance from him.

Fifthly, in doing all things for the honor of him.

Next use is of comfort; to comfort all the people of God, that they have such
a husband provided for them, which is God: It is a comfort to them in these
perticulars.

First, in that he is a husband, that looks for nothing in you to draw his
love to you.

Secondly, no infirmity in you, can draw his love from you.

Thirdly, nothing that befalls you can make a separation betwixt Christ and you.

Fourthly, he will call you to no duty, but he will give you a power suitable to
perform duty.

Fifthly, ye may be sure he is such a husband, that will be so far from
failing in his love, that he will transcend all in love: So much of this use,
and of this conclusion.

For these words, the Lambs wife; which is an explication of the former, to
make the former title glorious; Thence you may observe this conclusion: That
titles gven to us by Christ, are so far glorious, as they flow from union with
Christ. Nay, we may add one word in the conclusion, and draw it thus.

Doct. That all titles given to us by Christ, nay our very actings toward
Christ, is so far glorious as it flows from union with Christ; for if we
believe, Ioh. 15.4.
or love, or rejoice, or conform, this is no farther glorious, then it is a
fruit of Christ, flowing from union with Christ: But no more of this doctrine,
nor of this verse.

The next Scripture is the 40 of Isaiah and the 11. verse, the words being
these: He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs
with his arm, and carry them in his boseme, and shall gently lead those that
are with young; Which Scripture is so full of divine sweetness that I do not know
how, briefly to give an answer to it; all things that are essential to the
bringing home of a soul to Christ, and all divine privileges belonging to a
soul, thus brought home, and all objection that can be made by a soul against
these, are swetly held forth and answered in this verse.

If a soul does object and say, I am dead and have no power? How shall I come
to Christ? Christ answers; I will gather them with my arms; the arm of Christ
is his, the streength of Christ, and the strength of Christ is the power of
love held forth in Christ, and further, whereas they may object and say, If I
am brought home to Christ, I shall have many oppositions, troubles and trials,
how or where shall I be preserved?

Christ answers; That, in this word, I will carry them in my bosom, an
expression full of divine refreshment: and whereas they may further object and
say. I am but weak and newly begotten by Christ, and am not able to answer the
commands of Christ, Christ sweetly answers; I will drive them gently that are
with youg, We will begin with the first expression.

First, Ioh. 10.16 John 14.6
I will gather my Lambs with my arms: Gathering implies, bringing home,
thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That the bringing home of a soul to Christ, is the sole work of Christ;
And this is clear from many places of Scripture, and so if you consider these
things.

First, what conversion is.

Secondly, if you consider the metaphors the Holy Ghost takes up to declare
conversion by.

First, what conversion is, it is not a turning from a rude course of life, by
the power of education, nor it is not a legal conformity to the Law, produced
by the power of conviction, that merely arise from the terrors of the Law,
neither is it a bare profession of the Gospel, without being possessed with
it: but it is for a soul, by the supernatural commings in of God, so to be
taken up in God, and overcome by God, by the virtue of which he is carried
after God, against all oppositions, whatsoever, from the terms of which
description, for your better information observe this corolie.

First, that it is above the reach of nature to bring home a natural man to
God, Pro 161.
but it is singly and solely, the power of God.

Secondly, that every soul brought home to God by a power of God, is sweetly
taken up in God himself; Christians are not only under love, but they really
in love, they do not only rest on, but they sweetly rest in the bosom of God
himself.

Thirdly, That the excellency showed in God, by souls brought home to God, is
an overcomming excellence: Truly friend, a man cannot speak of this from a
real enjoyment of it, but he is really, sweetly and swiftly overcome by it; O
what divine wonders, what refreshing sweetness, what objects of love, nay what
all love, does that soul see in God, that really lives in the bosom of God. It
is not posible for a soul to see it, but he must, he shall be overcome by it.

Fourthly, the running forth of the Excellency of God, seen in God, is the
virtue and power that carries on souls after God.

Fifthly, that no oppsition against Christians in the following after Christ,
can any way take off the love and desire to Christ. Esa. 43.2. Ier. 33.3.


The reason is because the more they are opposed for professing of him, the
greater incomes they have from him.

The second reason is, because they see a macthlesse excellency in him; once
see Christ, and none like him: water will quench fire in any place, only in
lime, and there it will make it burn the more.

Oppositions may hinder men's going on in professing of Christ, if not possessed
with Christ; but they that are not only professors but possessed with Christ,
it will make them run forth after Christ much the more: the kingdom of God
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. And so much of this first
thing, what conversion is.

Secondly, for the metaphors that the holiest takes up to declare conversion,
does declare it is done alone by the power of christ, and nothing else;
sometimes he says it is a begetting; well he may so say, for a child can do
as much toward his own begetting, 1 Pet 1.3.
as a man toward his own conversion.

Secondly, he compares it to a resurrection; he may well so say, for a man may
as well rise out of the grave and live of himself, Col 3.1.
as a man can rise out of the grave of sin, and live to God, without a power of
God.

Thirdly, it is compared to a creation; which is to make something of nothing,
Ephesians. 5.10.
which is proper to an infinite power: What shall we think of those then who
preach for preparations for christ, and stir up men in the work of conversion
too, to work with Christ; and think they do well in so doing? We may say of
these men, as those the Apostle said would take upon them to preach the law,
put knew not what they said, nor whereof they affirmed: But I say no more of
them but this, the Lord lead them and us so forth by the truth, that in all our
expressions of such things, we may lay down all things, and exalt the truth: so
much of this first conclusion.

And from the second thing, I will carry them in my bosom: First, I will
carry; then I will carry; them in my bosom.

From the first, I will carry them, observe this conclusion.

Doct. That all souls brought home to God through Christ, shall undoubtedly
be carried on by Christ; That appears from these grounds.

First, because the power of carrying on to God, is the same power that brought
a soul home at the first to God, which is alone the power of God; therefore we
may draw the sillogisme thus.

That which depends upon the power of God, that should stand. 1 Pet 1.5.
But as well the carrying on a soul, as the bringing home a soul, depends upon
the power of God; Ergo, Ier. 32 40.
it must needs stand.

Secondly, that which has a dependence on the faithfulness of God without us,
and not to any qualification within us, that must needs stand: But our carrying
on to God as well as our being converted by God, has a dependencie upon the
faithfulness of God without us, Ergo, it must needs stand. But if this be so,
what shall we think of those that would have a man be a child of God to day,
and a child of the devil to morrow? but I say, no more of that thing.

Next Use, is a use of comfort to the people of God; in that their preservation
and carrying on to God through Christ, is really done by a power of Christ: For
we are kept by the power of God, through faith to salvation. So much of this
first thing I will carry them: Now for the next thing, I will carry them in my
bosom.

The word bosom, is a metaphor, in general it holds forth love, from that we
may draw this conclusion.

Doct. That all souls brought home to christ, do not only live by, but really
in the love of christ, but this word bosom, holds forth many particulars.

First, it holds forth a neerenesse to christ.

Secondly, a familiar and sweet communion with christ, from which particulars
observe these conclusions.

Doct. First, that there is a sweet neernesse betwixt christ and a christian,
this is set out in diverse things by christ himself, where he says, You are
the Branches, and I am the Vine; A Vine and the Branches live by the virtue of
one life, they are of a nature, they bring forth one and the same fruit, this
neernesse and oneness is to be considered in these things.

First, in their being, A christan has not only a being in God as a creature,
but he also has a being in him as a christian, which is a riches being
consideredy m^erl in the will and free love of God; and this was before for
him, before he was brought forth into the world by God: and what is christ
considered as christ; but the brightness of his Fathers Image, which is
nothing else but the runnings forth of the fathers free love, whatsoever
directly flows from a thing as the first efficient cause has a direct beinig
in the thing that is thus the cause of it; and so christ as a christ, and his
Father are one.

Secondly, there is an union of persons in time, and that two fold.

First, an union of possession, or as some would have it, an union of portions,
and that is by the righteous being that was in God before all time, and does in
time through christ put forth it self in the revelation of it self in a soul,
and takes up the soul in it self, and gives the soul actually to see it self to
bring forth fruit suitable to christ.

Secondly, there is a union of will and affections, and that is that which
Christ aims at in the 17. of John, speaking thus, He came not to do his own
but his fathers will, and in the 17 of John, he prays to his Father, for his
disciples, that they may be as we are, one; and yet they were one in the first
and second sense, and therefore the un on he prays for, is of will and
affection, the perfection of which union, is the highest pitch that ever the
creator shall attain to, this union is increased and built up by the commings
in of God, and that thus, God is pleased by the sweet, unfoldings and commings
in of himself, so to fould up the spirit of a man in himself, that so the
soul is brought not only to will suitable to the will of God, and love suitable
to love, but is so minded with Gods mind, that he will in his will, and loves
in his love; the use of this is, to teach all christians, not to comprehend,
but so to apprehend, as to admire the wonderful depth of the riches of the
love of God in making his people thus one with himself, so much of this
conclusion Secondly, the word bosom holds forth a sweet familiarity and
acquaintance; from thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That all that are called home by Christ, are not only called to be his
servants, but they are called unto a sweet familiarity and friendship with
himself, they are called to be bosom friends, they shall know the heart of
Christ, they shall be dandled upon the knee of Christ, they shall be hugged in
the sweet imbracements of Christ, they shall be refreshed by the kisses of the
mouth of Christ, they shall sup with him, they shall lie with him, they shall
live with him; they shall die with him.

How lovely is it to live and die in the arms of love, none knows it but he
that enjoyes it, this love is the privilege of the Saints; And so much of this
conclusion.

And so much of the second thing; I will carry them in my bosom.

The third is, I will drive them gently, that are with young; he sets the
drivings of the Gospel or love, in opposition to the driving of the Law, hence
observe this conclusion.

Doct. The drivings of the Gospel are gentle drivings.

That which carries one on by the power of love, and not by the terrors of a
Law, that is a gentle driving; but the drivings of the Gospel are so: Ergo,
Therefore they he gentle drivings.

Secondly, those commands which does not only command duty, but in the bowels
of the commands brings a power to perform duty; that is a gentle driving: But
whatsoever Christ in the Gospel requires of us, those commands brought home to
us, brings power in them to conform a soul sweet ly to them* these and many
other ways may we prove the conclusion: but I shall not at this time speak of.
But from all this whole verse, in a conclusion of what we have said, we may
gather this conclusion in a way of comfort to poor souls.

Doct. That whatsoever can be objected by them, concerning their bringing home
to Christ, and their preservation in Christ, and their being carried on after
Christ; by Christ is answered for them in these words: I will gather my Lambs
with my arms, and I will carry them in my bosom, and drive them gently that
are with young. But I shall speak no more of this verse.

The next Scripture is in the 16. of the Revelations, and the beginning of the
19. verse, the words being these; And the great City was divided into four
parts.

I shall speak something to these words, though not much: I might speak
something of them in referenc to the words going before; and so we may speak
something of the seven Vials, and something of the three unclean spirits, that
came out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out
of the mouth of the false Prophet: The unfolding of which things, would give a
great light to discover what the City is, and what the three divisions are: But
I having spoke so largely to the other Scriptures, I shall not speak much to
this Scripture: And therefore passing over all the matter before, I shall speak
briefly to the words themselves.

And first for the great City. If you ask me what I conceive that to be? I
answer, I conceive it to be the Antichristian state, or the state of
Antichrist, which state is against Christ, and condemned by Christ. It is a
state of pride, which word begins with P. And for those three divisions here
spoken of, it is three Powers or Governments which live in it, and is dawn
forth of it as dranches from the body; and surely in that they live in it, they
must needs be like to it: And I told you the great city was the state of
Antichrist, a state of pride; that is set up in opposition against Christ, and
being a state of pride as I told you before, begins with P; and those three
states in it, or branches drawn forth out of it, unquestionably is like to it,
and as that begins with P, so I believe do they.

As first, Popery.

Secondly, Prelacie.

And as for the third state in it, or branch flowing from it as part of it,
unquestionably it begins with P, as well as the two farmer; but when we see it,
or rather feel the smart of the execution of it, then shall we the better
understand it; and be able to give a description of it; but I speak no more of
this Verse.

But you may object and say, though I will not give forth my thoughts any
further of this Scripture, or especially of the third state that lives in it,
or flows from it: but you say we shall better understand it when we feel the
execution of the power of it; but may we not in the mean time have some
symptoms how to discover it?

Dan. 7.8. Popery and Prelacie did rather in deavour a continuation with each
other th^n a ruin of each other.
To which I answer, that unquestionably it is made up of pride, and must needs
begin with P. as the rest do, Daniel gives some light for the understanding of
it. First, in that he says it is a little horn; it does not appear great in
substance, but sharp in the nature; covered over with fairer shows then the
other, fairer in expressions, but as evil intentions as any. It is a horn that
throws down other horns to set up it self; and it is a horn as it is the
least, so it is the last.

And Daniel seems to hold forth something for the understanding of it, Dan
7.20.
given forth in the languishing of it: Therefore surely in the language and
doctrine held forth in such a power, we may somewhat guess of it; and that
doctrine which does directly cross and contradict the doctrine of Christ, must
needs be the doctrine of Antichrist: as these doctrines do, which I shall name
to you.

First, that doctrine which teaches men not to work from a power of love given
forth by God, but teaches men to work, and in their working so to work, as to
alter God, and get love from God, that is a doctrine of Antichrist, and not of
God.

Secondly, that doctrine that holds forth Religion as only entered in a law,
and not produced by love, that is not a doctrine of Christ; who was sent by his
Father, only to hold forth a doctrine of love.

Thirdly, that which ties the seat of Christ to be regulated by the law of a
creature, that takes from Christ, and gives to the creature, that must needs be
a doctrine of Antichrist.

But that doctrine which holds forth such a Religion, as to bind the
conscience in matter of worship, which conscience is the seat of Christ, to be
regulated and only guided by the law of the creature, I mean the civil Law of
the nation, Further observe from verse 19.29. that the fall of the Nations, and
the filling of the Islands was not till this third division appeared. Heb. 3 5, 6
this must needs derogate from Christ; and if this Argument holds good in one
civil State, it must needs hold good in all: Then so many sundry States, so
many sundry Laws, then so many sundry rules of worship, to worship Christ by.
And how injurious this is to Christ, and contrary to the mind of Christ: who
was as faithful in his house as Moses, I leave to you to judge.

Fourthly, I believe it is such a doctrine or language, that ties all further
discoveries to a present light: But no more in answer to these things, nor to
this Verse.

The next Scripture, it seemingly speaks not as the former have done; and is in
the 10. of Hosea and the 12. verse, the words being these;

Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap its mercy; break up the fallow
ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and reign righteousness
upon you. To give my thoughts of this Scripture; consider.

First, that the expression is suitable to that Law which was a covenant of
works: which taught men to work for life, as I told you before, but did not
teach men to work from a power of life to acknowledge life; Lev. 15.18. Eze.
20.11. Romans 10.4 2 Cot. 3.11. Gal. 4.5. Heb. 8.13.
which covenant by Christ we are freed from. But because the duty in it, in an
Evangelicall way is to be observed by them that are freed from it, therefore we
shall speak something to it.

And first we must know this; that being freed from that old covenant, which
taught men thus to work; so the language of that covenant proper to it self,
must be kept to it self, and not applied to them that are freed from it.

But in the Evangelicall observing any duty in it, it is to be observed not
according to the obligement and language of the old covenant from which we are
freed, but according to the language and rules of the covenant which we are now
under, which is of a more noble nature: In which covenant God is pleased to
make the blessings that were annexed to the old covenant, which was the end of
an act under that covenant, now to be a cause producing acts under this
covenant.

And so according to that rule, should we observe all the duties we do observe
as to instance in some particulars: Whereas the Prophet says, the Lord will be
with you while you are with him, that is the language of the old covenant. 2
Cor. 1.15, 2.

Now we are not to understand it nor observe it thus, that the Lord is kept
with us by our keeping with him, but we are kept with the Lord by his being
with us: And so the prophet in another place, where he says to some that had
not the Lord; Seek the Lord, and ye shall find him: We are not now to
understand it nor observe it as though our being found of God, was the fruits
of our seeking; but we are to understand it thus: That our seeking God is a
fruit of being found by God, for none Evangelically seeks God, till he is found
of God. So in this place, Hos. 10.12. Sow to your selves in righteousness,
reap in mercy: Which words seem to hold forth so much, according to the
language of the old covenan; as though we were to act righteousness before we
receive mercy, but believers under the covenant of grace are not so to observe
it; but we are now to observe it, so that we act righteousness in that we have
received mercy. For Christ and his Apostles still draws forth duty from a
power of privilege, as appears by such expressions as these; blessed are
they that hunger and thirst; the blessedness is not placed in the future
tense, as a thing to be got by hungring and thirsting, but it is placed in the
present tense, as that which is the producing cause of it. So the Apostle
says, seeing we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves. According to
these rules, are we to understand this Verse; Sow to your selves in
righteousness, reap in mercy: And understanding these words according to the
former rules, this conclusion will arise.

Doct. That acts of righteousness are fruits of mercy. If you ask me in the
first place, Romans 2.1. Luk 7.47. 2 Cor. 7.1
what I mean by acts of righteousness? I answer, by that I mean the acts of
sanctification. If you ask me in the next place, what the righteousness of
sanctification is? I answer, it is a conformity to the will of God, produced by
the power of God, in which the soul is carried out to live to God in particular
acts. If you in the next place ask me, what I mean by mercy that the acts of
righteousness is a fruit of? I answer, by that mercy I mean the sweet and
glorious commings in of God, by which the soul becomes really possessed with
God, and is made able to live in the light and love of God, and so is made able
from thence to bring forth acts of righteousness suitable to God: and therefore
thus I desire to speak to all that love God, act righteousness suitable to God,
in that you have received mercy from God.

The reason to prove this point is this; No soul can act a living act without a
living power, but no soul injoys a living power, till he has received mercy
from God, therefore no soul can act acts of righteousness, which are living
acts, till they have recived mercy from God which is a living power, the use
of this same is, to show the folly of two sorts of people.

First, those who teach men to work to get mercy, and not to act from a power
of mercy received, they may as well say to a dead man, act living acts, and I
will give you life.

Secondly, it serves to show the folly of those who say, they have received
mercy from God, and yet walk loosly with God, I know not what they say; For
that heart that really has received mercy from God, in being possessed with
God, they are so overcome with God, that they love to live to him, and look
upon the duties they are to perform, as a high privilege, but no more of this
conclusion.

And for the next words, break up your fallow grounds, which is an explication
of the former, or a direction for a right performance of the former, for as it
is a foolish thing to sow in unbroken ground, so it is an impossible thing to
act righteousness, with an unmelted, or unbroken heart, from whence observe
this conclusion.

Doct. That a heart is changed and broken by God, before he can bring forth
acts of righteousness to God, an old principal cannot bring forth new fruit,
when I say, God breaks the heart, I do not mean; breaking the heart by the
terrors of the Law, but a melting of the heart by the commings in of love, but
I say no more of of that conclusion.

For the next word, It is time to seek the Lord. Iplying, that is, some
special times of seeking God, or that it is a a special thing to seek God,
thence observe this conclusion.

Doct. That it is the duty of all souls possessed with God to seek God.

The ne next words are, till I reign down righteousness upon you; implying
thus much, That that soul that has power from God, to seek to God, for the
pouring down of his mercy, shall surely have answer; From thence observe this
conclusion.

Doct. That God is not, nor God will not be a forsaking God to a seeking
people; This is clear if you look upon the promise of God, consider the love of
God.

God cannot, will not, forsake a seeking people; Why? because it is alone from
the enjoyment of God, that we seek God and under that sense we may as well say,
God can as well forsake himself, as forsake those that seek him, from an
enjoyment of him.

Use.

First, to inform us of one corolie that naturally arises from the
Conclusion, and that is this, that no soul can seek God, til he is found of
God, the reason to this corolie is this: Because the power of our seeking, is
the fruit of Gods finding, then this shows the folly of those men which
stirred up people to seek, not from a power of being found, but stir them up to
seek, that they may be found.

The next use is, a use of comfort; If our seeking be a fruit of Gods finding:
this should comfort Gods people thus, that there is no sear of failing to find
God, when we seek him, because the power of seeking God flows from the
privilege of being found of God, and so much of this conclusion, and of this
verse.

And for that place in Jer. 4.3. and beginning of the fourth verse, which words
are these.

For thus says the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, break up the fallow
grounds, and sow not among thorns: Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and
take away the foreskin of your hearts* and had I time I should speak to this
Scripture as I have spoken to that in Hosea, which is to be understod in the
same way, and according to the same rules, before laid down, but at this time I
shall speak no more.

Dear friends according that small ability I have given me by God, I have given
an answer to your desires: if I had more time, and more light, I should speak
more fully and more spiritually, but I must needs confess that it is but a
little of God, I do yet know, but may desire for you and my self, is that we
may know God, from God, that we may rather live upon our being known of him
then knowing of him, so at this time I say no more, but leave you to God, and
the Word of his grace, who is able to build you up, and to give an inheritance
among all them that are sanctified;

Your loving brother in Christ. P. H.

DEar friend, and brother in Christ, my indeared love presented to you, giving
to you thanks for all your love to me: this is to put you in mind of your
promise in sending me a leter, in the letter I beseech you give me an answer to
these four questions. 1. Is a Christian freed from the moral Law yea, or no?
2. Whether a Christian tempted to sin, should strive against sin, yea or no. 3.
Whether sanctification can evidence justification, when justification lies
dark. 4. How shall a poor soul that has not the witness of the spirit, nor
cannot se any goodness it self, how I say shall such a soul take comfort? or
on what foundation shall we tender comfort to such a soul.


Dear friend, I pray fail not to give me an answer, I long to speak with you,
that I may tell you how abundantly my soul is overcome by God, and finds sweet
content in God, since I have had a discovery of free Grace: Which Doctrine I
was not only ignorant of, but oppofite unto, till I by the love of it, was
fetched into it, and I now see it is not a Doctrine of looseness; but if any
thing indeares a soul to God, and makes a soul able to bring forth fruit to
God, then it is to know God in the way of his love. O that the world did but
know what the Saints do enjoy in this way, then the pulpits would not be so
full of Calumnies, and the press so full of reproaches, against the doctrine
of free grace, as now they be, so in have, I rest, leaving you to God.

Your dear friend in Christ. M. W.

DEAR FRIEND:
I Have received your letter; I rejoice much to see and hear of the sweet
commings in of Christ: I desire to bless God in your behalf, and for your
questions, I have here sent you an answer according to my small ability, as God
has given in unto me.

Vale.
Four Questions answered.
1. Question. IS a Christian freed from the Moral Law, yea or no?

Answ. Without all question a Christian is thus as it was held out by the hand
of Moses; and by that expression, I mean, Romans 7.4. Romans 10. 2 Cor. 3.11. Heb.
8.13.
as it was a Covenant of works: and so a Law where God did declare himself a
God over us, and not a God for us, except we were for him; and so we are not
under the Law, but as it is handed to us in a Christ: By that I mean, as it is
made known to us in a covenant of grace, in which covenant of grace, in which
covenant God does engage himself to do by us, what in the other covenant and
Law he required of us; Ier. 33.8. Heb. 8.10.
So that the materials of the Law are not destroyed, but much exalted: for now
it is not only a duty, but a high privilege, to work and to walk by the power
of God to acknowledge God: and so we do not go about to destroy the matter of
the Law, but the old obligement of the Law, was do and live. But now we are to
do because we live, we are not to do for love, but to acknowledge love from the
power of the incomes of it self, which is in God for us, which freely runs out
from God to us, without reference to any thing in us, but to produce in us
whatsoever is required of us.

If any one now object and say, this is to lay aside all duty, and live as we
list?

To this I answer, this is not so; for love enjoyed, ties and indeares more
then love supposed: but I know, those that are not by God gathered up into the
bosom of God, and so made able to understand the nature of love, within the
limits of its own light, they will, they cannot choose, but so judge. For men
judge of a thing, according to the nature of that light in which they live: I
say no more of that.

Q. 2. Whether a Christian tempted to sin, should strive against sin, yea or
no?

Answ. To which I answer, that it is our duty but not our ability: The
alteration of the covenant does destroy duty, but lays it upon a higher power;
therefore the Apostle Phil. 2.12, 13. in all his exhortations, draws forth
duties from the power of privileges, as thus: Seeing we have these promises,
let us cleanse our selves, etc. And the grace of God which brings salvation,
teach us to deny ungodliness, etc.

Dear friend, I may strive, and sin in striving; there is a way of striving,
which its our privilege to be acting in: but if self strive against self and
sin, we are more wrestled into self and sin. Or when self by the terrors of
the old covenant, goes about to lay down self, by such layings down: Or when I
strive from such a light as is gathered up, which light presents God as set
against me, and to be altered by something done by me; this is again to return
to Egypt, and to live upon a covenant of works, and so we may sin in striving
against sin: For though the work, as a work be approved on by God, yet the way
in the work, is altogether contrary to the mind of God: But when we by the
power of God do strive against sin, which is against God, the more I strive
in this way, the better it is; and I count it not only a duty, but a high
privilege: the Lord make you and I thus to know God, that by that light we may
be carried out to live upon God, and to God, in all our actions. For dear
friend, you know that sin is not made less, but a great deal the more
unlovely, by the apprehending of God in the light of his own love.

Let men say what they will, this I know, that a man is not truly
Christianized, and really crucified to sin, till he see a higher good and
excellency in God presented to him, and for him, then he can possibly see in
any way of sin; So much in answer to that.

Quest. 3. Whether Sanctification can evidence justification, when
justification lies dark?

Ans. If the question be so, I answer it does not; for if I question the
acceptance of my person, I must needs question so far the acceptance of my
actions: For ( Genesis 4.4.) Abel believed the acceptance of his person, and so
of his sacrifice. Therefore for me to go about to answer a doubtful
justification, by a doubtful sanctification, is to answer a doubt by a
doubtful thing; whereas the doubtfulnesse of the thing answering, arises from
the doubtfulnesse of the thing to be answered: and how impossible and
uncomfortable this is, I leave you to judge, which I am confident have
otherwise learned Christ. Besides acts of sanctification as bare acts, they say
do not evidence it, but as sanctified acts; for say they, love as a bare act
does not evidence; but as an act rising from a right principle, which principle
is the discovery of Gods love to me, which discovery produces in me love to
himself; Now do but take notice of this seriously: I may not look upon my love,
as evidencing further then it arises from Gods love to me discovered: So then
when there is no discovery of Gods love to me, I cannot look upon my love as
an Evidencing love, further then it arises from Gods love to me; therefore by
their own argument, love cannot make out to me a property in Gods love, when
Gods love is hid and not made manifest to me by a foregoing witness of the
Spirit: And so sanctification is not nor cannot be an evidence of
justification, when justification lies dark. Therefore those Scriptures in the
Epistle of John, (1 Ioh. 3.14.) and elsewhere, are not to be understood as
first, but second evidences.

But it may be objected, if the witness of the spirit must go first, this is a
foolish thing, for it is but to light a candle to look upon the Sun.

To which I answer; which is the greatest folly, for a man to light a candle to
look upon the Sun? Or for a man to light a candle to look for his eyes when he
has lost them, judge you?

If you ask me whether there be much danger in preaching and pressing men to
believe in God, according to their measure of love, and not to press them to
believe a propriety in love, though they cannot love, that so they may love;
to this answer.

For men to preach, and press men to believe a propriety in God according to
their measure of love, and not press them to believe, though they do not love,
that they may love; This is to reduce them again to a covenant of works: So to
preach, and hear, is very dangerous.

Quest. 4. If this be so; How shall a poor soul that has not the witness of
the Spirit, nor can see any goodness in it self: How I say, shall such a soul
take comfort, or on what foundation shall we tender comfort to such a soul?

Answ. To which I answer, that the foundation on which I am to tender such souls
comfort, is not the actings of God in them, but the unchangable disposition of
himself for them, which runs out to them, without reference to any good in
them; but to produce in them whatsoever God required of them, and this
foundation is held out to them in the Gospel, where God offers from himself, a
free God, a full Christ, to a nothing creature; and if the promise of Salvation
and Justification, had been tendered to us, as a looking upon some qualification
in us, and not bringing in the bowels of it a power to produce all
qualifications in us; it had not been free, but still a covenant of works, but
it is free, therefore there is a great deal of comfort to poor souls, although
they be nothing, yet there is warrant to believe they may be something; Though
they cannot do, yet there is ground to believe; that so believing, they may do;
and further know that this foundation is not laid for me to rest upon, when I
can do, but a foundation to rest upon, to recover me when I am fallen through
infirmity and cannot do, that so through believing, I may enjoy power to do;
and this is a great comfort, therefore a want of power to do, though it be
matter of grief, yet it is no ground of discouragement to keep us from
believing, but rather an encouragement to believe the more; this I speak not to
declare any ability in the creature to believe, but the warrantablenesse of a
poor soul believing, though it be thus and thus with them, as before said.

Thus having given yea a brief answer to your Queries, I leave you to the
teachings of the truth, which is able so to make forth it self to us, as to
discover what is to be eyed in it, and observed from it, and to that truth I
leave you. And rest;

Your friend and brother in CHRIST. P. H.

FJNJS.

