THE REPLICATION OF Master Glyn, In the name of all the Commons of ENGLAND, to
the general answer of THOMAS Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
to the several Charges exhibited against him in Parliament by the house of
Commons, April the 13. 1641.

London Printed, 1641.

The Replication of Mr Glyn, in the name of all the Commons of England, to the
general answer of Thomas Earl of Strafford L. Lieutenant of Ireland, to the
several Charges exhibited against him in Parliament, by the House of Commons,
April the 13. 1641.
My Lords,
BE pleased to give me but a little respite, and I make no doubt but to
represent to your Lordships Thomas Earl of Strafford, now prisoner at the Bar,
as subtle in his answers, as he has been cunning in his practices.

The said Master Glyn retiring himself for the space of half an hour, and
returning, thus began.

My Lords, We are here entrusted by the house of Commons, in the name of all
the Commons of England to recollect our evidence, and to apply it to the
general charge, whereunto it is directed.

My Lord of Strafford recollecting the evidence of his defense (under favor)
did express how subtle he therein was, which I shall make appear to your
Lordships in sundry particulars.

But my Lords, before I enter upon it, I shall make some observations and
answers to that, reducing it again to that method, though not so exactly (I
fear) as I have proposed it to my self.

It will easily appear to your Lordships; That the Earl of Strafford has
expressed whatsoever may seem to make for him, but concealed the rest.

He has misrecited, and miswrested proofs, both on his own side and ours.

He has My Lords, taken this advantage, that it might make for his defense.

He has disjoynted those testimonies and witnesses that made against him: That
they might appear like small scattered drops of rain, which nevertheless
being gathered together, would overflow the body of the earth it self.

My Lords, I doubt not in the general, but to make good what I have spoken
against him, who has made a flourish this day (as he has formerly) that if he
had longer time, he is confident he could have cleared himself of those great
crimes wherewith he stands charged.

Give me leave therefore to inform your Lordships, that he is no way scanted
by time, whatsoever his flourishing Rhetoric may endeavor to insinuate.

My Lords, it may as easily, as plainly appear, that there is nothing wanting
to him, for he has several Copies of papers of the Councell-Table here, and
of the Parliament in Ireland, and yet he still pretends, he is not ready; only
to protract and gain time.

My Lords, he has often mentioned this day, and the day before, that many
Articles wherewith he stands charged, are proved but by one witness, and
therefore he takes advantage of the Statute, 1 Edw. 6. That a man ought not to
be condemned by one witness.

My Lords, This is a fallacy of his own heart, for the several charges against
him are not deposed by one witness only, but many.

My Lords, His charge is for subverting the fundamental Laws of the Land, and
endeavoring to introduce a tyrannical government.

If your Lordships put these together, you shall find clearly, by how weak a
thread his answers hang.

My Lords, Another comparison I shall be bold to make, is, That he was pleased
to cast an aspersion in the entrance of his answer, upon those which were and
are entrusted by the house of Commons; by pretending the several charges were
not proved, which indeed are proved sufficiently.

My Lords, We stand here to justify and maintain what we have spoken, and
however he is pleased to cast it upon us, we are bold to retort it upon him,
but should be loath to be so guilty in this, as he is found in the several
charges.

My Lords, He has been pleased to make a general plea, that these
particulars, though put together in one body, cannot possibly make a Felony,
nor 100. Felonies a Treason; instancing in that of a bloody knife in a
murderers hand, but I make no doubt he well knows, that the case of
murdering a private man, and of a whole Kingdom differ, and that there may be
Treason intended in the latter, though by Gods mercy prevented.

He that intends to kill a King, though it be not perpetrated, is
nevertheless guilty of high Treason, yet a King, though murdered, may live in
his posterity; but to kill the whole Kingdom, and their posterity, to bring
them into perpetual bondage and slavery, if this be not high Treason, and the
highest degree of Treason, I must profess I yet know not what Treason is.

Besides, my Lords, (under favor) I shall put you in remembrance, that Faux,
the greatest and most desperate Traitor that any Age has brought forth, might
have pretended this excuse, That the taking in of barrels of gunpouder, and
putting them under the parliament house, laying the train of powder, and
kindling the match (to execute the most horrid villainy that ever hell teemed)
was no treason, because not effected; but if you consider the circumstances,
you will find it capital treason, and he might have had as much excuse for
his villainy, as the Earl of Strafford in this case.

My Lords, Thomas Earl of Strafford endeavored and attempted to kill the
Laws, the fundamental Laws of this kingdom: and if this be not high
treason, it may with very good reason seem strange. My Lord of Strafford
distinguishes of treasons, viz. That there are treasons by Statute at Common
Law, and treasons arbitrary or constructive.

My Lords, Be pleased to give me leave to trace him a while, and afterward to
discharge my duty, truly to represent the cause, and I will avoid (as much as I
can) falling into my Lord of Straffords error.

My Lords, he begins with the fifteenth article, and pretends the substance
of the Charge is, That he caused a warrant to be executed by Robert Savil
Sergeant at arms, and diverse others, (who as he conceives, ought not to swear
in his own justification) and that he condemned the proceedings of the Council
board in Ireland. Now says he, this warrant is not produced.

But my Lords, The Judges know and will tell you, That if a man be charged with
felony, although the thing stolen be not produced, yet nevertheless the man
stands charged. I say therefore this is but a new way and invention, found out
newly by his Lordship (for ought I can see) to commit high treason, and to say
he had a warrant for it.

I beseech your Lordships patience, and I trust to c^eare this assertion; and
whereas he pretends the Sergeant at arms to be no competent witness, I wonder
much at it.

He is pleased to spend much of his Rhetoric when he says, That moneys were
levied but by two or three soldiers, and no more. But your Lordships know it is
as much mischief to be overmastred by four, as four thousand.

Your Lordships may remember, that the warrant does not particularly express
the number of men that should raise it in that warlike manner.

I might as well say, The King has given me an army in Ireland, therefore I
will turn it upon the bowels of the Kings people.

I thought, my Lords, he would have insisted upon the other two articles, but
it seems he has been better advised. And for the fears of his transporting
the Irish army, my Lords, those fears were warrantable and just.

The Commons of England also feared, and justly, or else they would never have
charged him therewith. And the Lo. fears he mentioned arise from a true and
real cause, and he has showed himself a good subject in this and all other
things, and whatsoever my Lord of Strafford is pleased to say against him, his
reputation stands untainted.

Whereas he cites that of Master Treasurer Vanes Charge, who affirms he said
(speaking at that time of a defensive war with Scotland) Your Majesty has
hyed all ways and means, and in this your extreme necessity, for your own and
your peoples safety, you may employ the Irish army to reduce this Kingdom to
obedience. My Lords, we could plainly have prooved this testimony by notes
taken by Secretary Vane (which notes were accordingly taken the beginning of
the last June) and by two other witnesses; because he affirms he could have
proved the contrary.

My Lords, I tell you what testimonies we could have brought (if there had
been need) to prove his intentions to bring in the Irish army.

True it is, the last recited words were spoken by Master Treasurer Vane the
fifth day of May; whereas he says, How can it be true, for the Army was not on
foot a month after. Yet, with his Lordships favor, in April before, he had
given order for it: so that (my Lords) this objection is taken away out of his
own testimony.

Now, my Lords, before I fall upon the other words which he calls constructive,
I shall humbly desire your Lordships to look on your notes how he handled the
argument.

My Lords (says he) I am taxed to say, that Ireland was a conquered Nation,
Ergo I am a Traitor for speaking truth. If your Lordships please to look on
the articles, you shall find how he does dissect and cut them in several
pieces, to serve his own turn.

And so I descend to the fourth article, which he says was proved but by one
witness: but I do extremely wonder that he should affirm it, for it was
proved by three or four several Witnesses, and the words themselves were
proved by four witnesses, to be exceeding often spoken by him: and if we would
have troubled your lordships with more proofs, we could have proved almost as
many charges against him, as he remained days in Ireland.

My Lords, then he falls back to the second article, where he should have
expressed these words, viz. That the Kings little finger should be heavier than
the loins of the Law. This, my Lords, was expressly prooved by five
witnesses, to make good the charge; and therefore with your Lordships patience,
you shall find it by plain demonstrations fully proved.

My Lords, I shall not answer to his pieces, but bring them together, and then
their foulness will more fully appear.

Whereas he mentions, That of the Kings prerogative for raising of moneys, and
particularly that of the Ship money, by the Judges testimony to be law; My
Lords, for him to bring in that which is already condemned, and proved contrary
to Law; For him therefore to counsel a King, that he is absolved and free
from all rules of government, to invade upon posterity, to make denial of
property: my Lords it rests in your great judgments, and in all that hear
me, what argument this is of defense; but it is no wonder: for more of the like
stuff follows.

My Lords, He stands charged for bringing two armies into the field; and
thinks to put it off, by saying he had been in the country.

My Lords, I shall make it appear, that the providing of this war was the
principal and maine design to bring his ends about. My Lords, in the passage
hereof he says, that Secretary Vanes words were, That himself was for a
defensive war; but he for an offensive: and that there was no difference in
these. Which may well be strange to any reasonable man, that there should no
difference at all be set, betwixt defending a man's self, and offending others.

My Lords, In the 24 Article he mentions part of the Charge, That he was an
occasion of the dissolution of Parliaments. Whereto he answers, It is not
proved. But my Lords it shall appear to be indeed, as the Witnesses have
already dedeposed.

He goes on with these words: Can any man think him the occasion of breaking
up Parliaments? when such counsels would have been a hinderance to his own
designs.

My Lords, He comes from thence to the seven and twentieth Article, and
answers, That it seems very strange to him, That people should once imagine,
that a man can walk so safely 'twixt two Armies in time of war, as an
Attorney, who in Term goes from one Bench to another, with a bundle of Papers
under his girdle. My Lords, he makes it very strange, that he should be charged
with treasons for subverting the laws of this kingdom.

My Lords, I answer: Does not the Law make it treason to kill a Judge on the
Bench? For why, he is the living voice of the Law: And shall not he that kills
the King in his people, be equally guilty?

And whereas he alleges, He never purposed to introduce a tyrannical
government, or to subvert the fundamental laws of this Kingdom; I answer (my
Lords) although, praised be God, he has not effected it, yet it is too
apparent he intended it.

My Lords, The sole help the Subject has to conserve his liberties, if he be
detained against Law, is by prohibition, or Habeas Corpus: And yet both of
these were by him restrained; and I refer it to your Lordships great
judgments, whether this was not, as much as in him lay* to introduce an
arbitrary power in the King.

And my Lords, Whereas he says as aforesaid, That the Kings little finger
should be heavier than the loins of the Law: (for he buzzed this into the
Peoples ears, that they should find it so) and then to speak those words at
such a time, when the body of the Kingdom was to meet, was such a vile
matter, and a crime of so exorbitant a nature, that it endangered a general
insurrection against Majesty, and this is proved by five witnesses, and not
disproved by any, but Sir William Penniman, who says, he heard them not; yet
nevertheless if five would say such a thing, and other five deny it, the
affirmative ought to sway.

My Lords, When he was sent into Ireland with commission and authority, it was
not long but he pursued his intents, and produced them into act, and had not
God blown upon his devices, he had wrapped us all up in desolation.

And then my Lords, that he, when all the lights of Justice were open, should
execute such punishment on a Peer of the Realm of Ireland, (as sufficiently
appears) does plainly demonstrate his mischievous intents.

My Lords, That he which is under the Law, should take a power above Law, nay,
without and against Law, in putting a man to death.

My Lords, I shall not omit somewhat he thereupon said, That he hoped to have
pardon of your Lordships therefore, if he did any thing amiss therein.

Moreover, (my Lords) he adjudged my Lord Corks estate, a lay fee dependant
upon the Church, and deprived him thereof by a paper petition, which was a
course usual with my Lord of Strafford, to put men out of their inheritance,
against all law or equity.

My Lords, He goes further, and says, That he would make my Lord Cork, and
all Ireland know, That Acts of Council are equal, and should be as binding to
the Subjects of that Kingdom, as Acts of Parliament.

My Lords, Here he judged also another, though a Peer, puts him out of his
inheritance, and yet cannot find one president to ground him for his so doing.

The next is the 27. Article, whereto he makes his defense, when as he was
not yet charged.

And whereas he alleges, That seeing the Warrant he sent, he presently
recalled it, and recalled it willingly, therefore he hopes favor from your
Lordships.

My Lords, The Warrant was three whole years in execution before it was
recalled.

Your Lordships have heard, he is not contented herewith, but spreads it over
the face of the whole Kingdom, and arrogates authority to himself above the
Laws in his answer to the 10. Article, touching his notorious abusing of the
King in his Customs: He pretends It is rather matter of fraud than otherwise;
(which tends to his Majesty's so great disservice) and this plainly appears,
for the King has lost thereby extremely.

His Majesty lost 5000. pound per an. of the old Rents.

And my Lords, for the Earl of Strafford, he has gotten 100000 pounds by
Tobaco at least, besides his other Monopolies.

My Lords, In pursuance of his intents he crossed the proceedings of the whole
court of parliament in Ireland.

The next charge against him is upon the nineteenth Article, For endeavoring
the subversion of the fundamental laws of both kingdoms, and that he should
compel conscience, by forcing the Kings subjects there, to take an oath
contrary to Law and justice.

My Lords, this his design to subvert the Law, and exercise power above the
Law, was a design conceived in his heart long before it was executed; That the
King might do every thing that power would admit, and that the King, if he
pleased, might reduce this kingdom to obedience, by the army he had in Ireland.

My Lord Primate testifies, That before the Parliament he said, That if the
Parliament would not apply themselves to his Majesty* the King was acquitted
before God and man, and might make use of his prerogative. My Lord Conway
charge him with the same; adding withal, That if he took this course, the
people would give 12 Subsidies.

Whereupon a Parliament was called, but soon by his means dissolved, and so
the Kings necessities unsupplied. Either therefore my Lord of Strafford must
be thought a Prophet, of else that he projected and effected the dissolution
of the Parliament.

The next Article is, That he told and counseled his Majesty, That the City
was undutifull and unthankful, and that no good would be done with them till
they were made an example, and laid by the heels, and some of the Aldermen
hanged up.

My Lords, That he gave this counsel, plainly appears, for thereupon four
Aldermen were instantly committed. So that it is evident, the Earl of
Strafford had premeditated this design.

Now my Lords put all these together, whether the occasion of the war, and
dissolving of the Parliament, were not the end of his devices and counsels, to
bring this kingdom to an arbitrary and tyrannical government.

So, my Lords, if words and intentions, if counsels and actions, of such
dangerous consequence to whole kingdoms, be a sufficient evidence of a design
to subvert the Laws, I hope I have satisfied your Lordships therein. And so,
my Lords, I have done with the proofs on the Commons side.

My Lords, I mentioned the seventeenth Article before, which spoke of making a
Warrant to levy the Kings money by force: This, my Lords, was acted at the
command of the Deputy, as it is confessed* by Sir William Pennyman.

My Lords, It is plain my Lord of Strafford commanded it: for Sir William
says that the Warrant was made at the pursuance of the direction of my Lord of
Strafford.

Put all these together, and I doubt not but he will be found, and it will
plainly appear he is the occasion of all the evils that have fallen upon the
Nation, wherewith he is charged in this article.

I come now, my Lords, to the last passage my Lord of Strafford has expressed,
which I will observe.

For the first, my Lords, please you to take notice how he begs your pity and
compassion. My Lords, If he had exercised compassion toward others, he might
perhaps have expected some extenuation, some mitigation of his offenses. But
when he has been the Incendiary to so many mischiefs, and calamities which
have befallen and infested his Majesty's Subjects both in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, how can he hope or expect but that the reward of his hands be
given him.

My Lords, Your Lordships have heard him often say, it is very strange he
should be questioned for words, being no matter of fact, and therefore to sweep
away him, and his posterity from among the living, for things (as he says) of
no consequence, of no solidity at all, is very hard.

My Lords, I answer, what respect, what pity, or Christian compassion did he
ever demonstrate, when he was in his Kingdom, in Ireland, when he caused those
that refused to pay, to be committed; when he compelled the great Council of
the Kingdom to stoop to his devices, when he trampled on the Peers, and
oppressed the Kings subjects, with what great indignity did he use them, how
did he insult upon people of all ranks?

My Lords, He is charged with offenses of the highest nature: And whereas he
alleges by way of excuse, that if these things be made crimes, the affairs
of the Kingdom will be left so waste and desolate, that no man of wisdom will
meddle with them.

Please my Lord of Strafford therefore take notice, That the Kings Ministers
ought to serve his Majesty according to Law, and no otherwise.

Can he then my Lords, pin these misdemeanors (as he calls them) upon his
Majesty, which no prudent Statesman ever did.

What is it but Treason, to make the cause of the groans and sighs of his
Majesty's subjects to proceed from his sacred Majesty?

This is a course no wise Minister ever practiced, thus to question his great
Master, and as much as in him lies, to make the subject weary of serving, and
the King of protecting.

What is this, but to make his Majesty think, That his Royal prerogative is
neither comprehended within the limits of Law, nor the bounds of Reason; For if
he had not an intention to subvert the Laws, why should he suggest these
things into the Kings ears? what is this my Lords, but as much as in him lies,
to confound all Law?

What is this, but to make his Majesty think, that the protection and defense
of his people, is the way to his ruin and destruction. To make the people begin
to loath the Crown, and the King hate his people; and should I often repeat
it, sure I am there is so much candor in the Kings heart, that it will justify
what I have said.

My Lords, There is no greater safety to Prince or People, than to have the
Throne established by good Counselors, and no greater danger can befall a
Kingdom, than to have such who are wicked and dangerous.

He alleges for himself the great hazard every Counselor will run, if
they shall be questioned for giving their Counsels freely, according to their
oaths, who then, says he, will be a Counselor?

My Lords, For many years you know it, and I cannot without grief of heart
once mention it; there has been an evil spirit of contention that has moved
and stirred amongst us, which has been the author and fomenter of all our
distractions, viz. Necessity and Danger. These evil Counsels have brought the
King into necessity, and necessity has ever had danger its attendant.

The foundations hereof are laid upon that of Shipmoney, and dissolution of
Parliaments, by persuading the King not to stick to any rules of government,
but to govern without rule or Law.

But I pray my Lords, consider what ill courses my Lord of Straffords Counsels
have produced, and how pestilent to both Kingdoms.

Your Lordships may remember how he has scandalized some Peers of your Realm
of Ireland, when he openly expressed, at the Parliament there, That things were
carried against him by faction and correspondence, and what threats he then
used to terrify them.

To conclude all my Lords, The Earl of Strafford is here arraigned of high
Treason, for going about to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.

My Lords, You are sons of the same Ancestors, that enacted, maintained, and
preserved these Laws which he would have ruined, and the same blood runs in
your Veins.

You cannot my Lords, think him worthy to live, who has attempted these
things against all Law: What Law has he not broken?

He has attempted the ruin of three Kingdoms at one blow, it was by him
projected: but blessed be our good God, here it stopped, it was never effected.

Therefore my Loeds, if you would be safe, or live in peace, and still enjoy
those Laws, for the maintenance whereof, your Fathers shed their dearest
blood; then cast this Jonas (who yet lies asleep on the bed of security) into
the Sea, lest the Ship of the Commonwealth split and sink.

My Lords, It is a cause concerns the King, and here is the remonstrance of
the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, who all humbly beg it.

My Lords, What the danger and horror of it would have produced, had these
mischiefs been brought to birth, I leave to your great judgments seriously to
consider.

And thus my Lords, have I delivered the charge given me by the House of
Commons, as briefly and plainly as I could, and therefore do here with all
humility conclude, and submit.

FINIS.

