Mr. GLYN, HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, UPON The reading of the Accusation of the
House of Commons against Mr. Herbert the Kings Attorney, for advising and
drawing the Accusation of High Treason against the Six Worthy Members of the
House of Commons. February 19. An. Dom. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

Mr. GLYN, HIS Speech in Parliament: UPON The reading the Accusation of the
House of Commons, against Mr. Herbert, the Kings Attorney, for advising, and
drawing the Accusation of High Treason against the 6. worthy Members of the
House of Commons. February the Eighteenth, An. Dom. 1641.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THE Subtilty and Policy of Man corrupted, and for evil Actions, in danger of
Punishment, is always working, although by the destruction of the virtuous and
Innocent, to free and clear himself; The Actions and endeavors of the good
man and the bad are always opposite, The good man practices to defend virtue
and piety, bring to deserved punishment, the vicious and Malignant, out of duty
to God, his King and Country. The wicked man strives to defend himself and
vices to the dishonor of God, the destruction of his true Religion, of his
King and Country, if opposite to his designs; We have had the experience of
the evils and great troubles that have been raised in this State, by ill
instruments, men of power and authority in the same; and not only of open and
public misdoers, but of private disaffected spirits, whose outward carriage
has procured to themselves great esteem and respect in their country; hay,
so well have they been approved of, that their country has entrusted them
with their estates and privileges, as electing them members of this High Court
of Parliament, wherein also for a long time they have discharged their duties
to their King and Country; nay, and obtained the general estimation and
respect of all men, as worthy members of the Commonwealth; but their hearts
agreeing not with their outward carriage, being not upright and perfect, have
at last showed themselves in their own colors, and brought to themselves
shame and dishonor.

This Gentleman now accused by this Honorable House, had the honor to be a
Member of the Parliament, and so well esteemed by his Majesty, that he was
entertained his Attorney General; which had he been contented withal, and
not been ambitious or malicious, which of the two I am not able to distinguish
was his error, or whether he is guilty of both: however, it is clear, his
heart was not right in discharging his duty in that great place committed to
him; and as he was a member of the Parliament, had he been faithful to his
King and Country, he would never have undertaken this enterprise, to presume
to advise his Majesty to accuse the Members of this House of high treason, and
draw himself their accusation.

Mr. SPEAKER,

His Offense is of a high nature, of dangerous Consequence, a manifest Breach
of the Privileges of Parliament, an Apparent Treachery against the persons of
those Worthy Members; and Consequently an offense against the whole State,
deserving great punishment for the same.

By this he has made himself guilty of the same misdemeanors that other
delinquents are impeached and accused for, not inferior to them in this crime.
This his practice and design was a great offense against his sacred Majesty
himself, in seeking to work an evil opinion in his Majesty of his Parliament,
and their proceedings in the great affairs both of Church, and State. This
discouraged and dis-heartned the Parliament to proceed in any business for the
good and honor of their King and Country, when they perceive that all their
endeavors and dutiful actions are not well accepted by his Majesty, but ill
thought of. This might prove a cause to alienate the hearts of King and people
one from another. This has caused all the trouble and distraction in this
State, ill counsel.

Mr. SPEAKER,

I humbly desire that this Accusation may be perfected, and that we may proceed
to voting him upon the same, as by this Honorable House he shall be found
Guilty, and with all Convenient Expedition that may be presented to the Lords,
And that he may proceed with cheerfulness to settle all disorders in this
Kingdom, both in Church and State, redress all Grievances of his Majesty's
good Subjects, expedite our endeavors for a timely relief of Ireland, and
bring all delinquents in this Common* wealth to deserved punishment for their
many misdemeanors, and dangerous Crime by them committed, and the establishing
such a form of Government, and dicipline Ecclesiastical, in the Church, for
the true worshipping of God, as may be agreeable to his Word and verity.

FINIS.

