April the 15. 1642.

A glorious Victory, obtained by S. Henry Tichbourne, and Captain Marroe over
the Rebels, at a place called Dundalke near Dubl^n; with the number of men
slain and taken prisoners in that skirmish. Amongst the rest Sir Philome O
Neale, narrowly escaping, fled to Newry, whither Sir Henry with a new supply of
600. Soldiers is now gone.

Also how the Lord Mac Guere was examined, and three of his Footmen hanged.
With many other very remarkable passages, brought over by the last Post.

With an Order of the House of Commons, concerning the free offer of 6000. li.
of the County of Buckingham, toward the relief of Ireland.

Ordered forthwith to be Printed.

H. Elsinge, Cleric Parli. Com.

woodcut of cannoneer firing cannon

Printed at London for John Wright, 1642.

NEWS FROM IRELAND.
Sir,
SIn^e my last letter, you may be pleased to take notice of these particulars.

On Monday morning came three Gentlemen to our City of Dublin from Sir Henry
Tichbourne, who brought a Message to the State, of agreat and happy victory
obtained by the aforesaid Sir Henry against the Rebels in this manner
following. The week before Sir Henry Tichbourne with 2000 horse and foot
marched to Ardee, and there put 400 of the Rebels to the sword, yet lost not
one man of our side; from thence upon the Saturday following, he mustered up
his Forces against a place called Dundalke, some 14 miles northward from
Tredath, where the enemy was 5000 strong, and well fortified; At his first
approach there issued out of the Town 3000 of the Rebels, who all presented
themselves in Battali^, our Forlorn hopes of horse and foot, had no sooner
fired upon them, but they routed the Rebels; Captain Marro's Troop of horse
setting on, killd great store of the Rebels, who thereupon retreated to the
Town, made fast the Gates, and ran out at the other end to their boats,
beforehand provided; our Army coming in fired the Gates, entered, and killed
those within, Captain Marroe followed the flying foe, and slew abundance of
them upon the strand, and it is reporte^ by them, that if he had known the
Foards and the River, he had cut them all off if he had gained the other side
of the River, but being a stranger, could not do it (wanting a guide) without
endangering the Troop: There was slain of the Rebels in this sudden skirmish
not less then 1100, besides what they took prisoners. Sir Philomy O Neale
fled with the rest of the Commanders; but 10 common Soldiers were lost of our
side; Sir Philomy O Neale made speed away to a place called Newry, a chief
Garrison of the Rebels. Sir Henry Tichbourne has sent 600 men more to Dublin,
intending that place shall be the next he begings withal, which is granted,
and to morrow there goes to him 500 men, if not 5000, for whose safety and
prosperity in the mean time, is the subject of our daily prayers that he may
have as good success, as in all his other designs from the first till this
time; for no man was ever so beloved by his Soldiers, that protest to follow
him while they can stand. We are in great hope he will recover the Newry,
very shortly; it is credibly reported, that they got 20000 pounds at least in
pillage at Dundalke. The Lord make us thankful for this weekly good news,
and continue the same to his glory, and the good of his Church.

On Friday last in the afternoon one Barwell of Kilbrew, a Gentleman of the
Pale of some estate, was racked, and confessed enough to hang himself and others
of his friends: upon the same day the English Soldiers entered a Masse-house
where they were at Mass, took away their massing implements and stripped their
Priest; we had news that day also, that in the North about Done, the Rebels
killed most of the English prisoners they had, and fired the Town.

Upon Saturday we heard news that the Lord Crunwels Troop in the North had
killed some 60 of the Rebels; that day had we news of the Earl of Roscommons
death, the Earldom is fallen to the Lord Dillon his son a Protestant.

Also we had news that the great Rebel Lord Mongarrat was sick; the
Countess of Ormond and her children were sent for by Sea to a place called
Carucke, the Rebels will part with her, but not with her children, but she
will stay, except she may have her children with her, a good woman she is, and
is reported, that before the Rebels took possession of her Castle at Kilbenny,
wherein was 10 large and small brass Pieces, she has so conveyed them away,
that the Rebels cannot at all as yet find them, on that day also the Lord Mac
Guier was examined, and three of his footmen hanged.

Tuesday following, on the 29, we had a messenger that brought sad news out of
the Kings County, that the Rebels under the command of the Lord Demsie, h^d
brought a great Piece against the Castle called Gass^ll, wherein was all the
Lord Digbies Children, and the Lady Offalia, they took the Castle and put a
great part of them to the sword, and the Lady and the Lord Digbies Children are
taken prisoners. This was done on the 25. of March; very sad news it was to
us, for this Castle held out from the beginning as many more had there abouts,
which is feared will be now all taken, and a great fault of this was for want
of pay for our Soldiers, which has stayed the journey of our Army, which have
been going that way these three weeks, nothing but want of pay hindering them
if you will tell it to Master Woodward you may, but it will be sad news for
both my self, and he lost goods and friends there.

We had the same day also news, that a strong Castle in Wicklow called Carnow,
that had held out from the beginning, was now because of their extreme
distress forced to yield it up upon quarter, at some of their lives.

On the next day we had again news, that the Castle of Gassell was only hard
besieged, and not taken as it was reported, but could not well hold out, if
some speedy supply were not sent.

The Rebels are gathered into a great body, some six miles of Dublin, ^t a
place called Leslop, and another great body of them on Wicklow side, some 12.
miles of us, toward the King and Queens County.

What their intent is we yet know not.

I have no more at this present to inform you of, but all our loves to all our
Friends, praying for the settling of peace and unity amongst you, and that it
would please God to grant us that happiness to hear of the healing of those
distractions in your parts, till the next week I rest,

Dublin, the 10. of April.
Die Sabbati. 9. April. 1642.
WHereas the Gentlemen of the County of Buckingham, have offered unto this
house freely, to lend six thousand pounds upon the Act of Contribution for the
affairs of Ireland, and to pay in the same before the first day of May next
ensuing; This house does take in very good part that offer, and accept the
same, and does hereby Order, that the said six thousand pounds shall be repayed
out of the first moneys that shall be raised in that County upon the Bill of
four hundred thousand pounds, and Master Hampden, Master Goodwyn, Master
Winwood, Master Whitlocke, are appointed to return thanks to the County of
Buck. from this house for their kind offer and acceptable service.

And it is further Ordered and declared by this house, that if any other
County, or persons shall do the like, the same will be taken as a very good
service to the Commonwealth, and such as will be well accepted by this house,
and the m^nies which they shall lend, shall be repayed unto them with interest,
if they desire it, out of the moneys that shall be raised in those Counties
where such persons inhabit, out of the Bill of four hundred thousand pounds.

And it is further ordered, that this Order shall be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. Com.

FINIS.

