

LONDONS LAWLES LIBERTY: OR A Gozmonian party licensed.

Being a true discovery of a pack of prodigious knaves, who have under
pretense of an Act of Common Council of the City of London, seized (as they
term it) and taken away from diverse freemen of the same City, their true and
proper goods, and that in such a horrid and uncivil manner, as no heathens
whatsoever, could with more cruelty have exercised the same.

Together with a particular of the names of some of those persons which have
had their goods illegally taken away, as the same was attested under their
hands, and presented to the Adjurators of the Army, under the Command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the forces in England
and Wales, the 27, of August, 1647.

Published by John Harvey Gentleman.

Isaiah, 1.23.24. Thy Princes are rebellious and Companions of Thieves, every
one loving gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherless,
neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them, therefore says the Lord,
the Lord of Host, the mighty one of Israel: Ah I will ease me of my
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.

Zachariah 5.4. J will bring it forth says the Lord of Host, so that it shall
come to the house of him that falsely swears by my name, and shall remain in
his house, and consume it with the timber and stones thereof.

Zephaniah 3.3. Her Rulers within her, are as roaring Lions, her Judges are as
Wolves in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow.

London, Printed, for the good of all freemen, who desire to maintain their
own privileges in their calling, in the year, 1647.

LONDONS LAVVLES LIBERTY. OR Gozm^^ or the Spanish Rogue.
A Gozmonian Party licenced.
YOu worthy Citizens, Freemen, and Apprentizes of the City of London, and all
others who have taken the late National Covenant. I doubt not but you well
remember that you thereby solemnly engaged your selves to maintain, preserve,
and defend the fundamental laws of this kingdom, and to square your actions
accordingly, imprecating the wrath and vengeance of the great God of heaven and
earth to fall upon you, when you cease to perform what you then swore to and
declared.

Now therefore Gentlemen, that you may the better perform what you then vowed
and protested to maintain, I shall hereby acquaint you with a most illegal,
(and as the same is executed) a tyrannical Act of Common Council of the City
of London, the Contents whereof is as follows.

Commune Concil^ tent in Communia Guihald Ciuitat London, Sexto die Iulii, 1602.
WHereas by the priveledges and Franchises of the City of London, confirmed by
Parliament, every Warehouse, shop and other place within the City of London
and the liberties of the same, having open show into any of the streets or
laines of this City, has time out of mind been reputed, and known to be, and
so ought, and has been accustomed to be, and in very deed is an open and
public market place for show and sale of wares, and Merchandise within the
said City, and the liberties of the same. And whereas in ancient time, the open
streets and laines of the said City, have been only used and accustomed, and so
ought to be used and accustomed for open passage, as the common high way only,
and not for Huxters, Pedlers and Haglers to stand and sit to sell their wares
in, and to pass from street, and place to place, hawking and offering their
wares to sell; other then certain places of the said City, which have been of
ancient time accustomed to be specially used for country people to stand and
sit to fell victuals in, and that only upon certain days in the week, and
certain hours of the day. And whereas now of late years, there be two sorts
of people which are greatly increased and do greatly hinder the ordinary and
honest trades men, being shopkeepers in their several trades, within the City
and the liberties of the same, and impover^sh others, and utterly undo many of
them, the one of which two sorts be Fattiners, and others which wa^ke up and
down the streets, hawking with wa^es, and offering the same to be sold openly
to all sorts of people as they stand, sit or pass, and likewise come to men or
women's doors, and into their houses or rooms and offers the said wares to
sell. And the other of the two sorts be for the most part women, and some
others also sitting or standing at men's doors or stalls with their wares lying
or hanging for show and sale there, and some of them standing or sitting with
their wares upon tables or stools in the open streets, laines on high ways of
the said City, ordained and appointed for passage and not for sale or wares, by
reason whereof very many househoulders who have been in great trade, and raised
great profit by retailing in their shops, are very much hindered and some forced
to set Haglers and Hawkers at work, to carry abroad their wares up and down
the streets, to the end to take some money to h^lpe to relieve themselves and
their families, which inconveniences, if due remedy be not in time provided,
are like to g^ow in a very short time to do very much hurt, not only in
abating or her Majesty's profit in her subsidies and other services, but also
in weakening the Citizens in such sort, as they shall not be able to yield their
aid in baring Scor and Lo^; and other charges ordinary and extraordinary for
the maintenance of the good estate of the said City, and very many of them only
by means of the said inconveniences made utterly unable to maintain their own
households and families. For remedy therefore of the said inconveniences: Be it
inacted, ordained and established, by the right honorable the Lord Major of
the City of London, and his right worshipful Brethren, the Aldermen of the
said City, and the Commons in this present Common Council assembled, and by
authority of the same, that no person or persons whatsoever inhabiting, or
which hereafter shall inhabit within the City of London, or the liberties of
the same, shall at any time hereafter by any color, ways or means
whatsoever, let or willingly suffer to be used any stall, incroachment or
purprestures scituat or being before his, her, or their house, shop or other
place whatsoever, in any open street or lain of this City whatsoever, to or by
any person or persons whatsoever, which shall there sell, utter or put to sale
any Linen cloth, or any ware made of Linen cloth, or any Starch or other
wares or merchandise whatsoever, nor shall willingly suffer any person or
persons whatsoever, to sell, show, offer or put to sale any Linen cloth,
Starch, wares or merchandise whatsoever, upon any stool, seat or other thing
before his her, or their house or stall, upon pain to forfeit the sum of 20 s.
of lawful money of England, for every time wherein he, she or they, shall
offend contrary to the true meaning hereof. And be it further inacted by the
authority aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever, shall at any time
hereafter, by any color, ways or means whatsoever, directly or indirectly,
sell, utter, or put to sale by way of hawking, or as a Hawket, any Linen cloth
or any other ware made of Linen cloth, Starch or any other wares or
merchandises whatsoever, in any open street or lain, within the said City or
the liberties thereof (victual in the market place, and in market time only
excepted) otherwise then upon the stall of his, her, or their own shop or
dwelling house, or in his, her, or their ware house, shop or dwelling house,
upon pain to forfeit for every time he, she or they shall so offend, all the
Linen cloth, or other ware whatsoever to be sold, uttered or put to sale,
contrary to the true meaning hereof, and to forfeit also the sum of 20 s of
lawful money of England. And be it further enacted, ordained and established by
the authority aforesaid, that the one mo^tie or halse part of all the pains,
penalties and forfeitures to be forfeited by virtue of this Act, shall be to
the Chamberlin of the City of London for the time being, to the use of the
Major and Commonalty and Citizens of the same City. And the other moity thereof
to him or them that will therefore sue by Action of debt Bill or information,
to be affirmed, exhibited or commonsed and prosecuted in the Queens Majesty's
Court to be hosden before the Major and Aldermen of the said City, in the
chamber of Guild Hall of the same City, wherein no wager of Law shall be
admitted for the Defendant. And that it shall and may be lawful, to all and
every person or persons whatsoever thereunto authorized by the Lord Major, and
Court of Aldermen of the City aforesaid, for the time being, who shall see or
know any Linen cloth, wares made of Linen cloth, Starch or other wares or
merchandises whatsoever, which shall be bought, sold, uttered or offered to be
put to sale, contrary to the true meaning of this present Act. And thereby
shall be forfeited by virtue of this Act, to seize the same, and to carry and
convey the same to the Guild Hall of the said City, or to some place near unto
the same, there to remain in safe custody, until the same shall be disposed
of according to the true meaning of this present Act.

This Act of Common Counsel, City of Londons ^ase. Devinets ase. an 2. ^hil.
and ^ary. 7 2. Edw. ^. 1, ^o. Hen. ^.14.
is utterly void and against law, for that no Citizen or free man of London can
be restrained by an act of Common Council to sell or proffer his wares in the
street upon pain of forfeiture.

Secondly, This Act of Common Council is void, for that every act of Common
Council ought to have these quallifications. First, it ought to be agreeable
to law. Secondly, it ought to be moderate, imposing a pecunary, and not a
corporal pain, and no forfeiture of goods. Thirdly, for suppressing of evil
things. Fourthly agreeable to reason. Fifthly, for common profit.

This Act is void of all these, It is not agreeable to law, neither is there
any moderation, but extremity by penal, pain, and forfeiture, here is no
evil suppressed, for there is no evil done by a Citizen of London to sell his
goods in London,

London is an open market every day in the year, but Sunday, for a free man to
sell his goods in open marker is no evil.

It is not agreeable to reason to debar a free man of a City, to trade freely
therein, reason being the fountain of honest laws, gives to every man
propriety and liberty, property of interest, freedom of enjoyment, and
improvement to his best advantage.

It is not for the common profit, the sellers being manufactors and freemen of
the City, pay taxes and tallages. This Act is in effect to raise prices, for
the manufactor sells cheaper then the shop keeper, who endeavoring to bring
all the custom to their shops, is only to advance a kind of a monopoly, which
the law abhorteth.

For as Sir Edward Cook in the third part of his Institutions, fol. 181.
commenting upon the Statute of the 21 James 3. which Statute is absolutely
against Monopolists, and Monopolizers, he there possitively says, that they
are against the ancient and fundamental laws of this Kingdom, and that he may
be the better understood what he means by Monopoly, he thus defines it.

A Monopoly, is an institution or allowance by the Kings grant, Commission or
otherwise, to any person or persons, bodies politic or corporate o^, or for
the sole buying, selling, making or useing of any thing whereby any person or
person, bodies politic or corporate are sought to be restrained of any
freedom or liberty, that they had before, or hindered in their lawful trades.
Deuteronomy. 24 6.
And he there says, that the law of this Realm against Monopolies, is grounded
upon the law of God, No man shall take the nether or upper millstone to pledge,
for he takes a man's life to pledge. Whereby it appears that a man's trade is
counted his life, the Monopolist or shop keeper which takes away a man's trade
takes away his life, and therefore he is so much the more odious, because he
is Vir sanguinis, a man of blood against those inventors and propounders of
evil, the holy Ghost has spoken, Romans 1.30.
Inventoris, malorum, etc. digni sunt morti, the Inventors of evil, etc. ate
worthy of death.

This Act of Common Council, is also contrary to the light of nature, which
teaches men to walk by congruety and equallity, not to oppress because they
would not be oppressed, nor to take away another man's right, because they would
not have another to use the same measure to them, which principle of nature is
ingrav^n upon the hearts of Heathens, who certainly will one day rise up in
judgment against them, which would make us slaves in our own land, contrary to
the honor of nation, because by it the people are put into a condition of
vassalage in their own country.

This Act of Common Council being also against the common right and profit of
the people, and not approved before the execution thereof, by the Lord
Chancellor, Treasurer, both the chief Justices, or three of them, the party
which put the Act in execution forfeit 40. l. 19. Hen. 7.7.


Nevertheless although it be the known freedom of every free man of London,
handicrafts man, shop keeper or merchant, to sell his goods Manufactors wares
or commodity either to free man or Farriner, English man or stranger, in ware
house, shop, private house or Inn: yet the shop keepers have and do
unconscionably repine at the use of this liberty in the Manufacterors: and as
time have favored, injustice have accustomed to struggle against this their
lawful liberty, to the great oppression and hindrance of multittudes of the
poorer sort of trades men and to the extreme misery and affliction of their
families, for that, if in vacations and dead times, necessit us people, had not
this liberty but were in effect bound up to the shop keeper, or to sell to
f^ee men they would so frequently be put either upon pawning their goods to
Userers, or selling them to extreme loss for money to buy their food that they
would be thereby undone an brought to beggary.

All which the Shopkepers well knowing, the better to accomplish their unjust,
unlawful and unconscionable design petitioned Mr. Alderman Adams, when he was
Major, for a warrant to seize and take away such goods and commodities as the
Manufacture^ should conveigh or send to his Merchant or Chapman, upon which
petition they obtained a warrant, the contents whereof is as follows.

(viz) Adam, Major Martis 16 Die Junii. 1646.
Anno 2. Regis. Carrol 2 This day upon the humble petition of diverse Citizens,
for redress of abuses and inconveniences by Huxiers, Pediets and H^g^ers,
hawking and offering their wares to sell in the open streets of this City, this
Court does hereby appoint and authorize that Edward Hancock, Robert Petly, John
Co^pson, Nicholas Wainew^ight and Perigrin Stevenson, Free men of this City,
according to an Act of Common Counsel, made the sixth day of July 1602 jointly
and severally to see that one said Act for the future, be duly executed in its
particular branch, according to the tenor and true meaning thereof.

Which Act (albeit the same was never put in execution against Freemen; in
above forty years before) the patties authorized being persons of a mean
cond^^on but of cruel and malicious spirits, have according to their
unconscionable and unchristianlike will and pleasures cruelly and maliciously
put the same in execution, and have taken from diverse weavers and other
Manufacturors, being free men of London several parcells of wares, to a (...)
the same tending to the utter ruin and undoing of them and their families, and
in particular from the persons here after mentioned, (viz,)

Upon the second day of September 1646. they by force and violence took from
the person of William Smith at Besomes (...) in L^wtence lain, London, a
parcel of Silk Ribb^ns (being his own Manufactory) to the value of 20 l or
thereabouts and upon the 12 day of January following, John Crown Merchant,
bought of him the said Smith, another parcel of Silk Ribbins, to the value of
70. l or thereabouts, some of which parcel, he the said Mr. Crown carried a
vay with him, and the residue Smiths wife carried to Rude lain, London, to a
place where the said Merchant appointed, at which place the above named
parties, did by force and violence take the same from her, together with her
basket and cloth in which the warn was to the value of 5. s more, putting her
in great fear and danger of her life, she being then great with child.

That upon or about the second day of September, 1646. John Williams bought of
Thomas Poole a parcel of Silk Ribbins, being his own Manufactory to the value
of 30 l the same being by the direction of the said Merchant to be carried to
Bosoms J^n in Lawrence lain, London, Poole sent the same by -- his wife, and
Elizabeth his daughter to the place so appointed, where the said Petly, Hancock
Compson, Wainright and Stevenson, by force and violence took the same parcel
of R^bbins from Elizabeth, the daughter of the said Poole, most inhumainly and
barbarously abusing both her and her mother, so that they were by them enforced
to cry out murder.

That upon the 8 day of June last, Richard Russell sold unto Thomas Hind
Merchant a parcel of Silk Lace, to the value of 5. l 10. s being his own
Manufactory, and according to the direction of the said Hind, he the said
Russell delivered the same to him at his lodging at the bare in Basing
shawstreet, London, where the said Petly, Hancock, Compson, Wain Wright and
Stevenson did by force and violence take the said parcel of Lace from the said
Hind, under pretense of their warrant aforesaid.

That upon the 23 day of June last, one Mr. Ogliby a Merchant bought of Roger
Rockly Cutler a parcel of Swords to the value of 3. l being his own
manufactury, which commodities were by Rocklyes wife carried to Mr. Coals in
Rude lain London, where the said Compson, Hancock, Petly, Wainwright and
Stevenson by force and violence took the same from her, and inhumainly beat
thrust, and abused her, she being great with child cried out to them to have
pity upon her, to which Compson answered, that he neither cared for her or
her child, upon which fright and abuse she presently sell in labor and the
child dyed, and with in 7 days after she also dyed, all the time she lived
crying our for justice against the murderer, but as yet none can be had.

They also took from the wife of Nicholas Govers, a parcel of Silk Ribbins
being his own Manufactury, to the value of 7. l which parcel of wares was sold
to Andrew Dove Merchant.

They the said Hancock, Petly, Compson, Wain Wright, and Stevenson also took
from George Persons a parcel of Silk Ribbins, being his own Manufactury to
the value of three pounds.

Which said wrongs and oppressions were by the parties above mentioned
presented unto the Adjutators of the army, under the Command of his
Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the forces raised in
England and Wales, the 27 of August, 1647.

All which said, and diverse other such illegal and unwarrantable seizures,
since the making of the said warrant, by Mc. Alderman Adams as aforesaid, have
so cu^ely, and with such rigor and unchristian like demeaner been acted by
them, the said Edward Hancock Robert Petly, John Compson, Nich. Wainwright, and
Perig^in Stevenson, as no Heathens, or Infidels whatsoever could with more
cruelty have exercised the same. But should I particularly mention all the free
men of London, from whom they have by force and violence taken away their crew
and proper goods, together with the manner of their uncivil and inhumaine
carriage toward them, a quire of paper would not be sufficient to contain the
same. And further to make their sufferings more grievous, the parties thus
wronged and abused, can neither have Law nor justice against their oppressors.

For when Roger Rockly complained against Compson for murdering his wife, to
Sir John Woollaston Knight, and desired him to bind Compson over to answer the
same at the Sessions, he refused so to do. And when diverse free men complained
to Mr. Alderman Geares now Lord Major of London, for relief against the said
Hancock. Compson and their confederates, for taking away their goods, the same
have been denied and the parties offending countenanced in their actions,
approving the same to be good and warrantable, willing them to persist therein.
By reason whereof the parties thus wronged being denied justice, they have
sought their relief at common law, and Smith and Poole have brough their
several Actions in his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, against the said
Wainwright, and his confederated consorts, whereby the potencie of the City,
and policy of their Recorder, they have been delayed these four rearmes, and
can by no means bring their actions to a try all, contrary to that clause in
the grand Charter of England expressed in these words. ^en. 3.
No free man shall be taken or imprisonned, or be disseazed of his free hold or
liberties, free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any other ways
destroyed, nor will we pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the lands, we will sell to no man, we
will not deny or defer to any man either justice, or right.

That forasmuch as the said Hancock, Compson, and Wainwright and the rest of
their Competitors, perceiving themselves to be thus countenanced, and
maintained in their unlawful actions, they most impudently and audatiously
give out in speeches, that they will ruinate and utterly undo Smith, and
Poole, and make them run away, further saying that they have collected of the
shop keepers who employed them about taking away the wares and commodities
which they so unlawfully seized, as aforesaid 500 l in two days, which they
will expend but they will accomplish the same, Accordingly they have caused
Smith and Poole to be arrested upon great Actions for saying (as they pretend)
that they stole the commodities from them, Wainewright in two Terms brought
his action to a try all, did Smith what he could, and procured only Petly his
fellow taker (or rather fellow) to prove the words, and he according to his
unlimitted conscience swore he heard the same, whereupon the Jury gave
Wainewright 20. l damage, upon which Smith was cast in prison, where he
remained until he had made satisfaction.

The parties thus wronged and their true and proper goods so illegally taken
away by the said Compson, Wainwright and their conferated consorts by the
Monopolizing shop keepers, which contrary to the Statute disbursed money to
maintain law against them, have been threatened, that if they take any course
against the said Compson, Wainwright, 32.8.
and the rest of them, for the recovering of the goods which they so illegally
took a company of elboe fellows, as they be which lke drones do, but live
upon their labors, I would not value one penny, although the Sly'st
shopkeeper of them should say it. But would take my lawful remedy (if I might
have it) both against them for taking away my goods, and against such of the
proudest of the shopkeepers, as I could prove, did uphold them in law against
me.

You honest Citizens, Apprentices and others, which Esan like will not be
contented to sell (or which is worse) to give away out Birth rights and
inheritance, the fundamental laws or the Kingdom, which the meanest of you,
as he is a freeman of England, may as lawfully claim as the greatest,
Gentleman, or Nobleman in the Kingdom. Do not therefore any of you
countenance, maintain or suffer either Compson, Hancock or any of their said
confederates, so unlawfully to seize (as they term it) to take away free men's
goods in execution of their pretended warrant, granted unto them, for the
putting of that illegal and unwarrantable Act of Common-Counsell in execurion
-- Which Act being against the fundamental laws of this Kingdom, the parties
which made their warrant, and they which execute it, and also those which
assist them, may be the known and declared laws of the kingdom, be indicted
as accessories for taking away such goods as they shall so seize, or rather
steal) from any freeman of the City in persuance of the said Act of Common
Council, Accursed be he that is afraid of man that shall die, and of the son of
man which shall be made as grass. If the late Earl of St^affo^d, and the
Bishop of Canterbury had so he^vie a doom for endeavoring only to subvert the
laws and liberties of England, what do these men deserve which have seen
their punishment before their eyes, and yet have subverted the laws and
liberties of the kingdom, and endeavor to make us slaves by a law after we
have spent the blood of so many thousand gallant Englishmen for the
preservation of our freedoms, for says the Parliament in their Declaration,
page 694. Slavery would be our condition, if we should go about to overthrow
the laws of the land, and the propriety of every man's estate, and the liberty
of his person All which three diverse of the Grandees of the City of London, and
the monopolizing shop keepers and their adherents have done, without any
remorse or conscience, and their latter practices are worse then their
beginning. It would be great honor benefit and profit to the common wealth,
that guilty persons should be punished, lest by the omission of the punishment
of one, many men by that evil example should be encouraged to commit more
heinous offenses. And excellent to this purpose is that saying of the
Parliament which I desire may never by any true hearted Englishman, be
forgotten, Book Decl. page 39. "Which is, that they are very sensible that it
equally imports them, as well to see justice done against them which are
criminous, as to defend the just rights and liberties of the subjects and
Parliament of England, and therefore page 656. they call the execution of the
law, the very life and soul of the law, as indeed it is, without which it is
but a dead letter and a senseless block. But woe unto you Citizens of London,
and to your competitors and agents, if the law should be executed against you,
for that you would be in a worse condition then you were, when some of you with
a joint fraternity like brethren in iniquity gave above 60. th^usand pounds ot
one time for a bribe, in the days of the Council table to preserve you from
law and justice, and to destroy the law, and to buy and rob your fellow
Citizens, as free as your selves, of their liberties, franchises, trades and
lively hoods. Read the discourse for free trade.

And know ye further, you Free men and Apprentices of London, that they which
now give warrant and authority to seize, and take away the true and proper
goods of any freeman of London in the the streets, may if he please by as good
a principle, and as warrantable give power and authority to take his or any of
your goods out of his or any of your houses, which without all doubt (if speedy
justice be not done against them) they will hereafter do.

FINIS.

