A LETTER From Colonel Harvie, To his Excellency ROBERT EARL of ESSEX.

November. 10. 1643.
IT is his Excellencies Pleasure that this Letter be forthwith printed.

John Baldwyn, Secretary to his Excellency.



LONDON: Printed for John Wright in the Old-bailey, November. 11. 1643.

A LETTER FROM Colonel HARVEY, to his Excellency ROBERT Earl of Essex.
Right Excellent,
THe Kings forces to be revenged on us, for our falling into their Quarters on
Thursday last, came on Saturday morning with seven or eight Regiments of their
Horse, four hundred Dragoneers, and two hundred commanded Musketeers, mounted
behind the Troopers, this party commanded by Prince Rupert, about seven in the
morning fell upon our Quarters, our Scouts gave us the Alarm some what too
late, not above a quarter of an hour before their body appeared within Musket
shot of the Towns end, and they assured us that they had well viewed their
whole party, and that it could not be more than five hundred, which imboldned
me to draw forth, our Troop into the Field, but no sooner had we drawn out,
but their gross appeared, at which time but eight Troops were marched out of
the Town, but not drawn up, the Enemy came down the hill amain to charge us,
to prevent our embattelling, the want of which, with the sight of their great
body, occasioned ours to retreat too fast, and disorderly into the Town, and
some much farther. The Enemy entered the Town, and upon their first falling in,
we beat them out again with a very small number, but they sent a fresh and a
greater supply, and forced us to retreat over the Bridge, at the end of which,
we drew up all we could prevail with to stand, which was about two hundred,
and the Enemy came also over the Bridge, and drew up in the same Meadow, but
with forty Horse or thereabouts, I charged those then there drawn up in number
about sixty, and they most hastily retreated over the Bridge, we pursuing them,
where many of them were wounded, slain, and tumbled over the Bridge, but with
their Musketeers they beat us back again, to the end of the Bridge next
Newport. This done, we again marched over the Bridge with fifty Horse, and in
despite of them, entered into the Town, and advanced, and kept the Town, and
cleared it, and drew out into the Field, and faced them. In great haste and
fear, (as those we took after confessed) they marched away, and some of those
beaten out of the Town (as some of Towcester assu^ed us) ran thither and told
the rest that the Roundheads had cut them all off, which gave them a hot
Alarm, so that thence they sent three hundred Musketeers to their relief,
and the better to make good their retreat. There were found dead upon the
place 19 persons of theirs and ours, and twenty of theirs were dressed two
miles beyond Oulny, and the Lieutenant to the Earl of Down, with our other
there by us taken Prisoner who stayed behind; We ^ooke also a Coronet of theirs
Prisoner, whose name as I remember is Gatton, one of your Excellencies
Lifeguard, and sir others, three persons of quality of theirs (by their habit
slain) one reported to be a Major, another a Captain of Horse, whose bodies
they in our sight carried away; they took eight or nine of ours prisoners, the
revenge I hope they will not brag of, we lost about forty Horses and took of
theirs more, we saved our own Colors, and took none of theirs. My Lord be
pleased to excuse me for the delaying, as to give your Honor a speedy account
as was my duty, which I ommited, save only, I sent my Captain Lieutenant to do
it verbally that so in writing I might set it forth more certainly, then at
that time I could, which is all I dare present (save only) that from the
Committee at Northampton yesterday, I received advertisement, which instantly I
sent to the Major General, that four other Regiments of Horse the night
before, were come from Oxford to Prine Rupert, and more Foot to march up unto
him: when this party was abroad they left a guard of Horse and Foot, with their
Ordinance in Towcester, which was before those four Regiments came up, so that
it is apparent they have a great party, and they give it out they will have
Newport again what ever it cost them. With pardon for my boldness in
presenting these unto your Excellency, I remain

Oulny November. 6. 1643. My Lord your most humble Servant Edmond Harvey.

FINIS.

