A true and perfect RELATION OF THE Surrender of the strong and impregnable
Garrison the Island of SCILLIE, To Captain Batten Vice Admiral of the
Parliaments Navy at SEA.

WITH The Discovery of a bloody Design of Pendennis, for the blowing up of
the Castle, and poisoning of fourscore Pieces of Ordnance.

Also a perfect Account of the Ammunition Provision, and other necessaries that
were left in the Castle at the surrender thereof.

Together with a List of the names of all the Colonels Majors, Captains,
Lievtenants and other Officers that were therein.

Whereunto is annexed, an excellent Copy of Verses, made in Pendennis Castle,
when it was besieged by Sea and Land.

Certified by two several Letters from Mr. John Hoselock, Chyrurgion to the
Vice Admiral Captain Batten in the St. Andrew. And now Printed and published
by the Original Copies, according to order of PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed by B. I. 1646.

A true Relation of the Surrender of the Island of SILLY, to Capt. Batten,
Vice Admiral of the Parliaments Navy, Aug. 25. 1646.
Loving friend,
IN my last I writ to you at large of all our proceedings at Pendennis; But
since I have been in the Castle, I can give you more true and just account: Of
which more in the ensuing Letter, because I thought it meet to insert in this
place, the gallant proceedings of our Vice Admiral in the reducing of the
Island of Silly, viz. Upon the 24. of August, 1646. Some of the chief
Commanders of the Garrison of the Island of Silly, (having before sent a
Trumpetter to the Vice Admiral for a Treaty, came aboard the Andrew, where
they laid open and presented their propositions for the surrendering of that
Island. Where, after some consultation between the Vice Admiral and the rest
of his Officers, their earnest requests were admitted, and immediately began to
debate upon the Articles, and at last concluded that the Garrison and Island of
Silly, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, should be surrendered to
Captain Batten, Vice Admiral of the Parliaments Navy, upon the 25. of August,
1646.

A true Relation of the surrender of Pendennis and the Island of Scillie.
Loving Friend the well wishes of a friend besides this, these may as well
certify you of our health as of the surrender of Pendennis Castle to Colonel
Fortescue and our Commanders, the very truth is, they would not have yielded
to the Colonel, but to avoid contention the Admiral desired they would
treaty with both which tretie at first did not hold for they had no mind to the
land forces (neither valued them) as in my hearing the governor of the Castle
told the Admiral, (but as sure as may be at the breaking of the first treaty
they went into the Castle and took on oath (all the Gentrey) to split the
ordinance of which we have found fourscore and odd, and to blow upp the Castle
and so to fall upon the land forces to live and die together, this you may
very credible report for I hove heard it from the mouths of the best of them
and and Sir Henry Kilegrew my patient with home I was two hours before they
surenderd to us, but the prevention of this plot was by means of the Admiral,
for he had so wrought with some that came a board, that he put all the
Soldiers in a mutiny, and by this means Digbie and his crew could not
perform there bloody design, and so they came again to treat (and
surrendered the 17. Day there was (noe bread) not drink only a little water nor
meat only a cask of horse salted but powder and shot enough, we had taken there
best shallop from them that no other durst venture to them I believe there is
betwixt 3 and 400 sick left behind, the rest are matched to their homes, only
some that are to be transported into france, have calls a way but I hope to
prattle more with thee over a pin^e shortly, therefore only remembering my love
to father Hadley mastarwarton, Brother Baker and all the honest crew I rest.

Your loving fiend John Hastock.

IT is ordered, and Col: Ienens Lev^: general Buchly and Mayor brittayne are
hereby desired and appointed to veiw all the horses with in this Garrison and
that they take particular notcie of all such hoeses as aee fit to be killed for
beef, for provisions for the Garrison, and that they give an account of their
doeings herein to morrow at two of the clock in the afternoon unto the
Governor and Council;

Iohn-Arundrell Governor of Pendennis

A List of the Officers and Soldiers belonging to Pendennis Castle at the
surrender thereof.
Colonels.
John Arundel Governor. General Digby. Major Genesis Harris. Sir Abraham Shipman.
Richard Arundel. Henry Shelley. Water Slingsby. Matthew Wise. William Slaughter.
Charles Jennens. Lewis Tremaine.
Lieutenant Colonels.
Dolly Dyer. Anthony Brocket. Porter. Ralph Coningsby. Grils Hicks. Coswarth.
Majors.
Mills. Rustat. Monday. Mugent. Fitzaldelme. Brittayne. Polewheele. of Horse.
Captains.
Bishop. Rockcliffe. Shelley. Tresaer. Mackland. Arundel. Freeman. Morgan.
Join. Parry. Blake. Howel. Cannon. Gill.
Reformad. Capt.
Corney. Bligh. Bedlake. Burleigh. Lewis.
Captains.
Spurway. Whithead. Kellio. Dinham. Courtney. Thurlow. Cottel. Taverner. Spry.
Pomerey. Richardson.
Lieutenants.
Williams. South. Favors. Courtis. Shelley. Shepton. Carey. Malvin. Johnson.
Plunket. Grimes. Rimrow. Morgan. Lower. Eviley. James. Stevens. Sherbrough.
Rous. Tramayne. Holder. Hallimore. Lobb. Vosper. Winston. Gullet. Richards.
Tresaer. Arundel.
Ensigns.
Cullum. Shelley. Stevens. Green. Mayners, Slowman, Randal.
Ensigns.
Hailes, Weeks, Gaith, Tippet, Waddon, Smith, Powell; Landry, Tresaer, Wright.
Quarter Masters.
Dalton, Oath, May.
Of. Common Soldiers, 732.

Of all these there is upward of three hundred

Gentlemen that had command in the Castle.
Sir Sam. Cosworth, Knight, Sir John Grils, Knight. Walter Langden, Nevill
Bligh, Esquire Mr. George Spry, Mr. Thomas Moulton, M. Abraham Biggs, Gentlemen.
Of the Council of War.
Sir Henry Killigrew, Joseph Jane Esquire Nath. Lugar, Clerk of the Council of
War.
Of the Train of Artillery.
Lieurenant General Burleigh. John Burleigh, Controller, Richard Hippisley,
Commissary of of the Magazin. Robert Hewet, his assistant. Thomas Penraddock
Quartermaster. William Adamson, Marshall of the Garrison. John Matthewes,
Ambrose Pile, Conductors.
Gunners.
Edw: Nichols, Master Gunner. Richard Pain, William Pain, Tho. King,
Christopher Warden Sampson Penleath, Fohn Leatherby, Laurence Welcot. Th.
Standard, William Pow, Nath. Cliver, Rich Kent, John Rounsewall, Richard
williams, William Williams, Jacob Awson, Powel Johnson, Powel Johnson,
Christopher Gowin, Ralph Jackson. Edward Stevens. Henry Geake, Robert Rawlins,
Richard Inch, John James, Math. Bell, Waggon-Masters Man.
Chaplains.
M. Bagly. Lionel Gatford, Mr. Lewcy, Mr. Nicholson, Mr. Emmiot.
Chyrurgions.
Mr. Head, M. Penwarden, Mr. Gerish,
Verses made in Pendennis Castle when it was beseiged by sea and land
LAdy Penelope, fair Queen, most chaste
Pendeunis, of all Royal Forts the last,
The last the only Fort nere conquered was
Nere shall be, who in constancy does pass
The rest of all thy sisters, who to thee
(The enlips of all the Kind) but strumpets be:
Great Fairfax. son of Mars, Bellonaes love
Whose victories she prizes highly, far above
Caesar's: presents the Trophies: and renown
Promising the Queen of Forts a Triple Crown
Scorn the high Climbering Pharton; or let the sun
Thy husband be; or be for aye, a Rune
Brave Hamond Coveteous is, but cannot speed
But Fortescue as harsh, of him take heed
He that so dogged is: now he is a wooing,
His suite once granted: will be thy undoing
If now the man his humor cannot hide
Wise Abegall, his suite will not abide
Batten In's floating Castle; Neptune like
For love of thee; His lofty sails would strike
Become thy Captain (might it be his hap)
Thou should fall fast: into fair Thetes lap.
Or where they love: forth Indies to be sold
Heed danas Bosom fill with showers of Gold
Heed court his Lady; like a filver swan
Upon the main; nor should there be a man
In's winged fleet; that should not speak thee fair
But with his cannon thunderings in the air
Would make the music, and withal to wonder
To here him speak so sweetly and to thunder,
Weep not;, as one forsaken; and forlone
Thine own Ulysses; will in time return
Embrace and hug the in his Royal Arms
Never conquered yet by force or won by charms
Brave Governor; be still but what thou art
England may be subdued er'e thy great heart
The Author of these verses afterth surender added the ensuing;

OVID. Penelopen ipsum perses: modo tempore vinces



