NEO'PHYTO-'ASTPO'LOGOS: THE Novice-ASTROLOGER INSTRUCTED: IN A NEW-YEARS-GIFT
TO Mr. William Lilly;

Occasioned by the Scurrility, Scandal, Ignorance, and Flattery of his Merlin
for the ensuing year.

With two Dedicatory Epistles; the One to the Learned Divines, the Other to the
Honest Astrologers of this Nation.

By G. J. or J. G. which Lilly the Parasite pleases.

See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool, then
of him, Prove. The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, etc. Wherefore rebuke
them sharply [cuttingly, (...)] that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.12,
13. London: Printed for E. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange,
Westminster Hall, and Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the Learned Divines of this Nation, whether Presbyterians, or Independents.
Learned Sirs,
ALthough by reason of the self ends and private Interests of vainglorious and
ignorant persons, the Science of Astrology has had the misfortune to be
thought repugnant to your Sacred Studies; yet if it be duly (and without
prejudice) considered, they may not only both stand together, but be assisting
unto each other: The one, consulting the Lesser [though the more Divine] Book
of Scriptures; the other, the Greater [and the more Natural] Book of Creatures.

In ancient times, among the Egyptians (as your learned selves well know)
there were none admitted into your Holy Order without being vested with a
competent knowledge in Astrology. I readily acknowledge, that the Errors
vented, and Imposturisms practiced under the Golden wings of this Art, are
sufficient to anticipate your better thoughts from a serious Inspection and
examination thereof. And it were a thing superlatively unjust, to enforce you,
with the good Wine thereof, to drink the Dregs also.

Astrology is a fair and beautiful Virgin, though by many rendered a Notorious
strumpet! The Fair Urania is every way most accomplished and lovely! It is my
humble request therefore, that you would not consider it as it is rendered by
Ignorant persons practicing it; but as it is (untainted) in it self. The Lute
is a most melodious Instrument, being touched by the skilful fingers of a
Master in Music; but handled by a Porter, or Carman, from a Barndoor you may
hear as pleasing a sound. It is Astrologies greatest unhappiness, that her
pretended favorites are her greatest enemies.

Learned Friends! The Design of this little Book is to take off the ugly and
deformed vizzard from the face of Astrology, that for many years it has been
compelled to wear, by the subtle cunning of one, who under pretense thereof
has been ( sine ratione, vel religione) too bold and saucy, not only with her,
but your Learned selves. The Author hereof wishes all honor to a Learned
settled Ministry, and Astrology freed from Sycophantique Practisers; and that
the learned Divine and honest Astrologer (as in times past) might shake hands
with each other, and Divinity and Astrology stand together.

To the Honest Astrologers of this Nation.
GENTLEMEN!
YOu need not wonder at the sight, or subject of this small Tractate; for it
drives at nothing but the Salvage of Astrologers Honor and Credit, and your
own Reputation. If you would know why I oppose Mr. Lilly, ( who pretends
himself the only Master of Astrology) it is because he has opposed his Art,
and turned his back upon the truth thereof. Had he been true to the Science,
unto which he so largely pretends, I had forborne this pains, and prevented your
trouble of perusal: But he appearing so repugnant (as I have showed) to his Art
in every thing he writes, has not only made Shipwreck of his own Repute, but
[like a prodigious Prodigal] lays the Honor of Astrology, and your selves
(also) in the dust. For what person is he, that can be brought to believe there
is life and moisture remaining in the smaller Trees, when the [pretended] Cedar
is dry and sapless?

I well hoped that some of you (more able) would have eased me of this task,
and unmasked this Arch Pretender before now. But since his Errors are so
eminently spread and promoted, to the great scandal of Astrology, and hitherto
no one has offered to question him -- I adjudged it convenient (in recompense
of his scurrilities) to stop his course at this time, lest in the height of his
folly, he surfeit more dangerously, and run mad beyond the cure of all probable
Reason.

If, for this my pains, I am not requited with a Trepan, I shall not need to
fear the force of my Antagonists Pen; being conscious to my self, I have not
misrepresented him in a syllable. However, if he judge himself injured, or
find himself troubled at any thing in this Discourse, let him, rationally, (not
railingly) acquit himself from those Errors charged upon him; or else by his
silence, acknowledge himself as great an Impostor, as this Treatise pronounces
him; that so the world may be undeceived, and the Honor of Your Selves and
Art, preserved.

Vale.
NEO'PHYTO-'ASTPO'LOGOS: The Novice-Astrologer INSTRUCTED: IN A NEW-YEARS-GIFT
TO Mr. William Lilly.
NO sooner came the Merlin of Lilly (that Arch-Parasite) from the Press, flying
about into the world, after its wonted rate; but being informed that he had
brought his Legs to the Stocks, and his Stiff Neck to the Halter of Confession,
I was desirous to see whether he had acquitted himself like a true Penitent,
sousing his seared Conscience in the brinish tears of Contrition; acknowledging
(with sorrow) his Mistakes committed, and all those Errors and Ignorances
charged upon him, in the King of Swedes Nativity, and the Spurious
Prognosticator.

But behold! upon a due Examination of this his pretended Recantation Almanac,
I find him lysping and jabbering after his wonted nonsensical manner, as if he
were every way incapable of rendering one wise Sentence or Word in his own
defense. And although he has been so notably baited, even to the loosing the
Nose of his Reputation and Credit in the Art he professes, he passes his
Hunters like a slye Deer, and gives all their Checques, and Counter-Checques a
fair go-by, even as he were none of their game, or any thing at all concerned
in their chasing him. Only thus -- (that you may adjudge him sufficiently
heated and affrighted) he frisks up his dirty tail in a fury, and like the
Scythian Beast, squirts out his filth (thereby hoping the better to escape) in
the Faces of his Pursuers. -- Complaining of his being hard dealt with by
Stitching Pens, and by Botchers, not Artists; and that it is beneath him to
answer a Boy, or impudent ranting Fool, that dares not own his name to be G. J.
or J. G. says he should render himself ridiculous (being an Eagle, an Owl
rather) to catch at a Fly; and insinuates to his Readers, That he has no
Antagonists but Ranters and Atheists, (both which Epithets the best befit
himself of any that I know.) After all which Billings-gate Language, (instead
of a solid Vindication) with a company of Ignorant, Contradictory, Groundless
Quacks for the Swede, and a Bundle of Abuses to Astrologers, and Astrology
beside, -- Exit Merlinus Anglicus.

Of all which Barbarous and Ridiculous Stuff, I need in strictness, take no
further notice then this -- LILLY WRIT IT! A Fellow that cannot tell how to
reason, but to rail only! That knows nothing of Astrology, but the name;
which he makes use of, as a Cloak to cover his Ignorance! That knows neither
how to take, or to make an Argument! That complies with any Government, so that
he may be thought the State-Astrologer! In which respects, I account him
beneath the revenge of the Pen of any ingenious Person or Scholar; and would
have him therefore to know, that the grand reason why I set not my name at
length in my Books against him, is, the probability of my purchasing the
censure of the ingenious and learned Artists, for entering the Lists per
Nominem, with so base and low-orb'd a Fellow; unfitting for a Man to Cope with,
much less an Artist.

Nevertheless, in regard of my promise to the world in my last Lash of this
Quack, entitled, (...); or, The Spurious Prognosticator; and lest that he
should cry Victory before he be harnessed for the Battle, and so in his own
conceit pass for a Conqueror; -- I will rip him up, and show his Nakedness and
Folly to the world, somewhat more largely then he has done, although his own
Pen has been a sufficient Index thereof, in his idle and addle Fictions for
the ensuing year. Wherein (as briefly as I may) I will prove him to be the
greatest Enemy to Astrology that this age has brought forth; a mere Ignorant
in it, though he quack so much under the Canopy of it; an Illiterate, Abusive,
Pragmatical Fellow, void of Civility, Ingenuity and Learning.

And that I may not loose him in my Chase, I will observe the same Method as in
my last, viz. First, to begin with his Epistle; Secondly, his general Prog;
Thirdly, his Monthly Fictions. And then I shall appeal to the world, whether
he be not an Owl, rather then an Eagle in Astrology.

SECT. 1. His Epistle Examined.
WIlliam Lilly in the beginning of his Epistle, makes his Introduction to his
Excuse, with a notorious Contradiction of himself, and a most high and
injurious Scandal to Astrology, and the ingenious Students thereof, in these
words -- The many turnings, and windings, and changes of Government in England
in 1659. what Man or Angel could predict? -- And a little further he says, --
They (meaning the Changes, etc.) were not in any way demonstrable, or to be
found out by the sharpest Rules of Astrology. Had Mr. L. been Friend, either
to Himself, Astrology, or Astrologers, he could never have made so
Contradictious, Senseless and Ridiculous an Excuse: for (1.) herein, he gives
the Lie to all that ever himself has formerly, and now written: and (2.) he
bespatters all those ingenious Artists that did predict (and that from the
known Rules of Astrology) those many Changes that happened in England 1659.
And (3) he casts dirt in the beautiful Face of Astrology it self, insinuating
an incertainty, or deficiency of its Rules and Aphorisms, and a perfect
impossibility of any Man or Angel to predict those Changes mentioned thereby.

1. He gives the Lie most broadly and shamefully to himself; for in all his
partyworks formerly, he rantingly (and ravingly also) argues against the
Divines -- That in the great Book of Heaven, are all Changes on Earth written;
and that himself was born to predict them, sometimes more tacitly, at other
times more largely. See his Alm. 1655. and his Epistle to his Alm. 1658. in
particular, where he says, -- There is no Emergency, good or bad, that happens
on Earth, but has a full manifestation from the Configurations of the Heavens.
And that Italy, France, and his Holiness himself, have cause to remember how
ominous his Predictions have proved to them. Nay, he cracks more largely in his
Worlds Catastrophe, -- That what he cannot do by Common Rules of Astrology, he
can by Angels and Spirits: yea, so well is he acquainted with such Whimsies,
and Vanities (as he proclaims it himself) that he shall go near (when time
serves) to give every Nation of Europe a touch of its duration and continuance,
from considering the Angel, or Genius of it. But now neither He, nor Man or
Angel is able to predict any thing of Mundane Affairs, from the Rules of
Astrology: by which it conspicuously appears, that Mr. L. and his skill also
is subject to a strange kind of Fluctuation.

Nunc huc, nunc illuc, exemplo nubis aquosae. Now here, soon there, much like a
Watrish Cloud. But tell me, Mr. L. can thou expect to pass thus to the world
undiscovered, and still be thought an Astrologer? Do thou think and believe,
all men are as ignorant and contradictious as thy self? If not, -- Oh! William!
William! monstrous William Lilly!
How came thou here, to show thy self so silly?


2. He abusively bespatters all ingenious Artists too. For, does it handsomely
follow, because Mr. L. is ignorant in Astrology, and (by consequence) of
predicting those eminent Changes which happened in 1659. that therefore all
Ingenious and true-born Artists are so too? If Mr L. like an unexpert
traveller, misseth the way he is to go, and tumbleth into a Bog, or Quagmire,
Must he therefore be angry at those persons acquainted with the Road, that they
do not tumble in with him for company? What fault was it of Mr Wharton, Trigg,
Tanner, Wing, Gadbury, etc. that Mr L. presented himself an Ideo^ (instead of
an Artist) to the World, in his botching, bungling Predictions? That he must
thus traduce their skill, and impeach their Reputation in Astrology, as if they
were as very ignorants therein as himself.

But Mr L. having proved himself a perfect Ignorant in the Art he professes,
by his unclerklike and unwarrantable Predictions, (and seeing R.L. P. gone, and
his Northern Lion Rampant going,) is resolved, as much as in him lies, to down
with Astrology also, that the honest Astrologers themselves may fall likewise:
Whose ruin and destruction it is plain he thirsts after, for their presuming
to detect him and his Ignorance, he being (it seems) captivated by that Ranting
and Tyrannical Principle, described by the Poet, -- Pereant amici, dummodo una
and inimici pereant. He cares not though Friends ruined be,
So Enemies bear them company.


3. He casts dirt in the face of Astrology also: for if by the Aphorisms and
Rules thereof, others were enabled to predict those Changes spoken of, then is
not Astrology so incapacious or deficient, as Mr L. here renders it, but by the
Rules thereof other persons (viz. those several men before mentioned) were
enabled to predict those Changes, etc. Ergo, etc. But Mr L. seeing plainly
enough his own Reputation begin to sink, and his Writings every where hissed
off the Stage with disparagement, is not contented to fall alone, but would
fain give Astrology its fatal blow, that both might perish together. Not
unlike the Devil, or Dragon, mentioned in the Revelations, who not well
pleased to tumble headlong from Heaven singly, drew down a third part of the
Stars with him. But how will Mr L. excuse his Gypsie-like Juggling (to say no
worse of it) to the King of Sweden? Or, has he promised him victory over the
rising King of Denmark by an Art more certain and indubitable than he believes
Astrology? If so be he has so done, he cannot but suffer a cloud of sorrow to
pass over his brazen brow, and Vermilion to distain his shameless cheeks, to
hear of the success that has answered his spurious presages. But of this more
anon.

I proceed to some other passages. M. L. is now come to Apologize more
particularly, and endeavors to excuse himself for flattering R.L.P. thus --
Observing Richard, by consent of the Council of State, and Officers of the
Army, owned Protector -- And seeing him courted by Ambassadors and Agents in
October, at what time we were writing our monthly Observations, for we write
those first, in regard that the Ephemeris and Table of Houses are difficult to
Print, so that nothing seriously (as we ought to have done) we laid it as a
positive foundation (without observing the punctum temporis of his first
admittance, or birth, etc.) These are the wise words of William Lilly: Now, let
but the Ingenious Reader behold the notable Nonsense and unconnexedness of
them; and if he can (after a due and impartial scanning thereof) make either
head or tail, truth or sense of them, I shall not in the least envy his
happiness; but I must protest impartially my ignorance of them. I have pointed
them exactly, and truly related them, as I find them in his Book, that he may
not complain of Abuse, or mis-representation.

But to run them over a little, -- I would demand of Mr L. what stead this
Apology stands him in, if I should admit he means something by it? What is it
to us, or to the wiping off the ignorance and imposturism that sticks and
clings as close as a Convulsion to him, to say -- That he writes his Ephemeris
and table of Houses first? As if the World were any thing concerned which part
of his fooleries first pollute the Press: but were there any kind or color of
excuse in this silly conceit, it is nevertheless a mere forgery. -- For he
writes neither the Ephemeris, nor Tables of Houses himself; but honest J.
Sponge transcribes the Ephemeris for him, and the Table of Houses has been
standing (ready composed) this ten years and upwards at Mrs Brudenels within
Newgate; so that the edge of this pitiful Apology is perfectly blunted, and
the difficulty of his Table of Houses to Print, clearly invalidated. (2.) I
would demand of Lilly what he means by this strange Parenthesis -- (as we ought
to have done) -- for it has no manner of relation, nor is any way kin unto the
premises; unless we shall adjoyn it to -- So that nothing seriously -- This
way, I confess, although we cannot make sense of it, we may Truth -- For Lilly
in his Almanac has done nothing seriously, or like an Artist, as he ought to
have done. So that you see he is caught with a truth before he is aware. Saepe
quod insipiens finxerat esse, fuit. What for a time this fellow feigned to be,
He Is proved at last so in reality.
Or, if his -- so that nothing seriously, etc. can bear any other
interpretation, it must be this -- That he writes altogether in jest! (3.) I
would fain be informed by Mr L. what he intends his Reader should understand by
these words -- We laid IT as a positive foundation? If the Relative IT have any
Antecedent, it must then be, either his Ephemeris, and Table of Houses, or
else, the Addresses made to Richard L.P. The Ephemeris and Tables of Houses
cannot be the Antecedent, because they are no foundations of Astrologicall
Predictions; but a time truly proposed or known, with the figure of heaven set
thereunto, is the true Radix of them. Nor can the Addresses to R.L.P. etc. be
the Antecedent, unless we conclude, that Lilly writes altogether by Ghess: It
must therefore follow, -- That Lilly is guilty of gross Nonsense in the
passage urged before us. Thus we see that Lilly, by endeavoring to excuse
himself, contracts greater Errors; making his writings the only pattern of
Penelope's Web: Just as if he were either besides himself, or haunted with that
evil Spirit mentioned by the Poer. -- Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata
rotundis. He pulls all down, he sets up all again,
His Squares for rounds are changed in his brain.
A little after Mr L. comes to confession in earnest, and thinks he explains
himself to purpose, when he acknowledges, -- Our too much credulity upon the
many addresses, -- led us into an error. Did it so? Do you not therefore
deserve to be lashed for the same? What had you to do to mind the Addresses?
You pretend to Astrology: Unless by this you implicitly confess your self a
States-Mountebanke, and one that Quacks under pretense thereof; and acknowledge
your self thereby to be (as in truth you are) only the Astrological
News-monger. May not any man, perfectly ignorant in Astrology, predict
prejudice or happiness to Protectors, Kings, and Nations, as well as wise
William Lilly, that ghesses thereat (as he confesses to have done) by the
Addresses and Complexions of the times? Is this to be the most faithful
propagator of an Art? Or, an Eagle in Christian Astrology? Is it not rather to
be an Impudent-ignorant Quack? Oh, the sordid Ignorance and quackism of
William Lilly!

After he has made himself thus ridiculous, as you have heard; to prove
himself (yet) more sottish and vain, he cracks of his predicting the change of
Government in England to some of the Protectors friends privately: telling
them, that the Government was too heavy for his shoulders. -- And then makes an
Appeal to the Court of Equity in the indifferent Reader, (concluding himself
cast at the Common Law of Sense and Reason). Whether, if he had discovered his
dissolution, it had been either wisdom or discretion to have been publicly
free in his Judgment unto the Protector or the World, etc. To which I answer:

If you had known any thing thereof, it had been your duty to have acquainted
the World therewith; or else to what purpose, or under what pretense, do you
invade the World with your Spurious Oracles? Besides, William Lilly, if my
memory fail me not, you were of another opinion, when you ignorantly scribled
against Captain George Wharton; the Example of Gauricus could no way startle
your stubborn spirit then, although you hope to creep out at that hole now. But
why not tell the Protector, or the world thereof, as well as some of his
private friends, I pray Sir? Surely, surely, Mr Merlin, if you had had but the
least knowledge or information of the downfall of Richard, you would have
presented him (as you did the long Parliament in 1652. when you were truly told
what the Soldiery would do with them) with an Epistle, thereby premonishing
him of what he should expect: And made the world to have heard of the Change
from your Parasitical Pen, Battus-like, on both sides; -- Sub illis
Montibus, inquit, erant, and erant sub montibus illis.
By yonder Mountains were thy Kine,
The Kine by yonder Mountains were.
Yea, and although you had received the same, as you did the news of the long
Parliaments dissolution, you would have pretended to have read poor Richard's
downfall in the book of Heaven, as then you did theirs. But neither these
confident Cracks, nor yet the two first sheets you as vainly refer us to, as
tattle or boast of, your self, do any way make it appear that you had the least
knowledge thereof, by information, or that you understood so much of Art as to
direct you thereunto: Only you boast and brag of things that are not, hoping by
such silly shifts and sleights to redeem your (near) shipwrack'd Reputation.
And it is every way as unlikely, and strange to the truth -- That Lilly should
acquaint any of his (that is, Richards) private friends therewith; for he durst
not lay or adventure a wager thereof himself with a Gentleman that desired the
same of him, for satisfaction in that particular. Oh! William, William, all the
world are not such Idiots, as to be wrought upon so easily, as A Chalk-Jury.
But suppose we should admit that you had known any thing thereof, and had said
something of it in your two first sheets, (which were an affront to sense to
conclude:) I would then fain know, how you came to repent for your folly and
ignorance therein? Surely, Mr Lilly, the morning before he writ this Epistle,
made some such like supplication at the Altar of the Goddess Laverna -- as this
-- -- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem?
Goddess most fair! this suit deny me not,
That quack and lie I may, and yet be thought
A Person just: my knavish frauds orespread
With sable-clouds, that they may never be read.
Certainly, William Lilly, your great Patrons cannot but shake their heads at
you, when they seriously consider what a silly Jack-daw, instead of Eagle, they
have for many years protected. Would any man think, by these your
contradictions and ignorances, that you were the Person, whose Pen formerly was
accounted of equal value to a Regiment of Horse? May we not more rationally
believe rather, that a Parrot may prove as good an Astrologer as simple W.
Lilly? Oh! but William was mindful of his Commitment in 1652. where he lay 13.
days together, laboring to be bayled (in no sad condition sure, for he was
feasted at Sergeant Birkhead's Table all that time, and paid no fees at last)
and what was his fault forsooth! he said in effect, that the Parliament stood
upon a tottering foundation, and that the Army would dissolve them. By which
words he would needs insinuate himself to have been a Quondam true Prophet in
Astrology. But I pray, M. Merlin, deal fairly with the world, and then tell
them truly, That your commitment was not for what you said in effect, but for
the sawciness which you used plainly to that Power you had a protection from,
and a quondam Salary too; as I have heard your self confess. But Lilly was then
in hopes of a better Master of old Oliver; therefore (when every man else as
well as he, saw plainly that the Soldiery would dissolve the Parliament) out
peeps wise William like a Positical Parasite, and pretends Astrologically to
predict it. An admirable Piece of Art to be boasted of!

And is not he, a Quackist singular,
When things are done, that reads them in his Star?
Mr. Lilly not forgetting his usual canting clawing humor, is come to flatter
the present Power; and in his Quacking-strain, pre^ends to demonstrate the
Armies Declarations satisfactory to the whole English Nation; and mentions some
of the heads thereof, the better to insinuate himself into their Favors and
Affections. For Lilly cannot fill an Almanac of six sheets of Paper, (although
he have three of them done to his hand, as I have before proved) without
relating a packet of News. But Lilly! I would fain know what you have to do
with any thing of News, or the humor of the times at all? Does Guido Bonatus,
Haly, Junctine, Origin, Ptolomy, or any other Astrologer warrant any such
course? I am confident, Mr. Merlin, they do not: and you prove your self but an
impudent indigent Quack in Astrology, and make that also to be looked upon,
but as a higher degree of Lieger-demaine, by doing it. But Mr. Lilly goes on,
saying, That no mortal man could have conceived that R. L. P. should have lost
his Government, without one or two broken heads. But I beseech you, Sir, what
is this to Astrology, whether he lost his Government by force of blood, or
peaceably? I am sure, notwithstanding your insulting over that modest Gentleman
thus basely, you your self are like to loose your Credit in Astrology at a far
easier rate; and if you consider every thing, you cannot but see it plainly.
For whereas you thought to be famous in after-Ages for your skill therein, you
are now like to dye basely, ignominiously, and un-bemoaned; and (that which is
worst of all) will always be esteemed of, as a Quack and Impostor in
Astrology, and a notorious Incendiary among Nations. However, it is some
Credit to Astrology, and Comfort, (yea, and Honor also) to Astrologers, that
this Arch-pretender is unmasked and discovered in his life time, to be what he
is; and that he dare not, or cannot, answer for himself.

Notwithstanding all this, William Lilly thinks he has dealt by his Reader
like a good Christian Astrologer, when he says, We solemnly profess our
mistake concerning R. L. P. yet it is not so great, as to blast us perpetually;
if our Writings since 1644. be civilly perused by Artists, not Botchers. What
this Addle-headed Fellow means by his civilly perused, I understand not, except
it be this, -- That for him to be read with applause, whether he deserve it or
not, is to be civilly perused: or to read him, without taking Cognizance of his
Ignorance; or if we take notice thereof, yet not to tell the world of it: this
surely is to read him civilly. But Sir I although I have avoided all these
Parasitical ways, (which, as your Trade is to flatter, so you love to be
flattered, yet) I have civilly perused all your writings since 1644. ( i. e. I
was not, I dare aver, so drunk with Wine, when I read them, as you with
Ignorance, when you writ them:) and really, I find them every way so empty and
idle, that it is a shame for any but William Lilly to own them. But to
particularize some of them: -- Take from your Introduction (which is the best
you dare to boast of) what you have stolen from Haly, Origanus, and Albubater,
concealing their better names, to make the world esteem it yours; and then it
will prove the exact Emblem of your ignorant self. As for Example: Who but a
Botcher in Art, would have printed a Nativity with Directions no less then
seven or eight years false; as you have done the Moons in your Introduction? Or
would any but a Novice in Astrology have given the Sun, and Midheaven two
different Right Ascentions apiece, as you have? And is not he a silly Stitcher,
and most notorious Botcher in Art, that knows not Apogeon, from Perigeon? These
with a hundred more, are to be found in Lillies Introduction. And all his other
Pamphlets are exactly of the same Complexion.

Nec lac lacti; nec ovum ova similius. 'Twixt Milk and Milk, the likeness is
not greater;
Nor Egg to Egg, more parallel in feature.
And as they may call each other Brethren, by reason of their exact
similitudes; so they may truly call him Dad, it being impossible for them to be
begotten by any other. But e diverticulo viam. I shall return to his solemn
profession concerning Richard L. P.

Since you are come to the Stool of Repentance, (though most unwillingly) why
do not you (to make but one work of all) solemnly profess all your other
mistakes, which are at large charged upon you in (...); or, Spurious
Prognosticator, and in the King of Swedes Nativity? This you ought to have
done, if you had any hopes of being received into mercy, or expected to escape
blasting perpetually. Can the accursed Murderer, any way reasonably hope to be
reprieved from the Gallows, by confessing a petty Fact of Theft he has
committed? Sir! it is not your acknowledging your Error concerning R. L. P.
that any way excuses you from the unpardonable Crime of betraying the King of
Sweden, under pretense of telling him, you read what you writ for him, in the
Heavens: Neither does this simple Blind, you cast before the eyes of the world,
any ways protect your ignorance all along in Art; viz. in setting Figures forty
one minutes of time false; and in raising your Whimsical Judgments (under
pretense of judging according to Art) upon such deformed and erroneous
foundations. Nor is it less then an ignorant and effeminate slight, and juggle
of you, to insinuate to the world that your Antagonists are Botchers, not
Artists. If they are Botchers in Art, is it not the easier work for you to
answer them? And would it not more and better become you to invalidate their
skill therein, and weaken their many charges against you, then for to rail thus
upon either their Persons or Parts? Or, are they Botchers in Art because they
write against so worthy a Workman as they have proved you to be? Surely,
surely, Lilly, it is more evident then your knowledge in Astrology, that you
have proved your self a Botcher and Bungler also, in the Art you pretend to
steer the Affairs of Kings and Kingdoms by, in not vindicating your own
Repute, but suffering it to be trampled upon at pleasure; even by the ignorant
sort, as well as the ingenious and skillful. The Tongue of each Child, is now
become a Trumpet of William Lillies ignorance.

But wise William Lilly comes here, simply endeavoring to answer that which is
urged against him concerning the Swedes, thus: -- We were not obliged to give
an account of any thing which might prejudice him; (the Swede) or give
encouragement to his many enemies. And why not, I pray Sir? Were you bribed to
secrecy, that you might the better betray him, by puffing him up with false
hopes? Or did you flatter him with the weak Wind of your Cathedral Cunning;
thinking thereby his Enemies were so Pusillanimous as to be affrighted at your
Quacking Skill? If the first, have you not shown your self a plain Ambodexter?
If the latter, what Idiot (besides Merlinus Anglicus) would have been guilty of
so gross a piece of Pride? But that you may adjudge Lilly to be in earnest, he
interrogates -- Is Pomerania quite lost? or is he beaten out of Prussia? etc.
And behold! at the same time that he wrote those Boasts and Cracks, (as if
Providence intended to stigmatize him for a notorious Liar) the K. of Swedes
leaves his Leaguer, and flees to Cronenburgh Castle, having lost all his Army
in Fuenen. Which News is still fresh in memory, and cannot but make Lillies
Ears to tingle, and Cheeks to blush, unless he has sold himself an absolute
Vassal to Impudence and Quackism. But Lilly like a Liar of the first Magnitude,
goes on, interrogating further: Is not the King of Swede still strongly
encamped before Copenhagen? which City we hope God will give him. Indeed, Mr. L
he is not before Copenhagen, but in Cronenburgh, possibly blocked up himself by
this time: And what reason (I pray) had you to hope God would give him
Copenhagen? None in Astrology, I am sure; although you ignorantly reported
that it should be taken in Novem. 1658. Besides, has it not been in print
resolved according to the Rules of Art, that the K. of Swede shall never gain
Copenhagen? You should have rendered the Author of that, a person mistaken, or
a Botcher in Art (as you say all your Antagonists are) before you had promoted
your own simple hopes in the room of Astrology; which if you know any thing
therein, you cannot but confess plainly, denies Copenhagen, and indeed any part
of the Danish Territories, to be long curbed by the King of Swede.

Well, but what of all this? says this Parasite, the King of Swedes condition
is not so bad as rendered by some stitching Pens. If by stitching Pens he mean
the Pen of Merlinus Verax for one, who has published this Princes Nativity, I
shall tell him, that that Person has so Art-like whipped and stitcht him up,
that he appears to the world a mere bundle or lump of Nonsense and flattery,
instead of an Artist. And has indeed given that King more and better advise
for nothing (as is to be seen by the Book, to be sold at William Larnar's upon
Ludgate Hill) touching his present affairs, than ever Lilly did, or indeed was
able to do, for the Gold Chain he received from him. And he has shown more
Art, and done Astrology greater honor, in that small Tract, than Lilly ever
did in all his Idle and Addle Stories, which he nicknames his works, since
1644. But if by stitching Pens, he means some Tailors Pens, that have been
active to discover his ignorance in Art; Is it not a shame that he can answer
for himself no better? But were there any such thing, does not Lilly appear to
be an Impudent, Proud, Pragmaticall, Domineering fellow, so to forget his own
Original as to complain of stitching Pens? What was Lilly at first himself? was
he not a Tailors boy, viz. an Apprentice to old Pawlin in the Strand? Ask the
Watermen that ply at Strand-bridge, and they will affirm it: Or if you are
loath to take that pains, read Captain Wharton's Merlini Anglici Errata; who
proves him not only a Tailor, but a womans-taylor, in which regard he might
perhaps have proved a better Astrologer for Queen Christina, than Carolus
Gustavus King of Sweden. Come William Lilly, I would have you hereafter to knit
your knots better in Astrology, to prevent the being marked for an Idiot
therein by stitching Pens; that is, to keep your self within compass, and not
give such large opportunities to men of your own Trade to stitch you up, as you
have done. And do not hereafter bewray your own Nest; for had not your own Pen
been the Index of your Pride and Folly, the world had willingly rocked your
Taylorship asleep; and were indifferently well contented that you should pass
for a Quack in Astrology among them, without any regard had to the Botching you
prove your self guilty of, in translating Ptolomies Aphorisms. But William,
William, if you are so Lord-like grown, as to forget the stayers of your
Taylorship, by which you have climed (as you think) to your Eagleship in
Astrology, can you be angry, if those whom you (scurrilously) term botchers,
(not Artists) in a just recompense, press down the Plumes of your Pride with
your own Tailors Goose? Oh, William, William, remember Talion's Law.

But Mr Lilly tells us, he writes this year in great perplexity of spirit. I
am content to believe you Mr Lilly; It appears so indeed, by what you have
presented us with! And what either Art or sense can we expect from a
distempered man?

To conclude his Epistle, he says -- Many will expect that he should say
something touching the Northern Quarrel. Do they so Sir! Who are those many you
mean, I wonder? I am certain they cannot be of the number of the Learned and
Ingenious. But it is no matter; be they who they will this I can tell them, they
are like to loose their longing: for Lilly has not yet had intelligence
sufficient to officiate their desires. And that which is more considerable, he
is not engaged (yet) to Pimp for either of those two able English Generals, as
he flatteringly styles them, in hopes (perhaps) he may be entertained to Quack
for one of them under pretense of Astrology. But I shall advise them both,
rather to implore the Dust of Mother Shipton for Counsel, than either the
Addle Pate, or Yiedling Pen of this Proditorious Parasite. And so I pass from
his Epistle to his Book, which the ingenious Reader, as well as I, shall find
as empty and void of Art, as this his Epistle is of good Apology, Ingenuity,
Sense, or Learning.

SECT. 2. His General Judgments examined.
MR. L. being a little entered into his General Judgments, lets glide from his
Pen a truth before he is aware -- telling us -- That he will deliver his WEAK
CONCEPTIONS upon the two Eclipses, which happened in October, and November, 1659.
Certainly Sir, you are not in earnest now; you were wont to set a better value
upon your own Commodities. What? Is our Eagle-like-skill in Astrology, and our
deep knowledge in the Doctrine of Angels, and our sharp understanding in
Theurgie and the Crystal, all on a sudden departed! Never a Dick-Mye left to
strengthen us? Nothing left us but weak Conceptions? This is hard indeed! but
possibly Sir! by this your humble style, you expect that others should deem
your Conceptions strenuous; which (Sine dubio) they will have little reason to
do, when they have once read you over. But by the Complexion and Temperature of
your Conceptions, we shall (I hope) ere we make an end, be able to pass a
Judgment upon their weakness, or worth.

To proceed -- Mr L. tells us -- That the Lunar Eclipse on October. 19. portends,
that as Venus, Ruler of it, leaves her own house for a worse, approaching
Saturn's presence; so near these Months (he names none, unless we must
understand October in the Plural!) do many unhappy persons (made so) either by
an uncomfortable Ministry, or the Rigor of the Law of Nations, leave good and
large possessions, etc. Why Venus her propinquity to Saturn should undo people
by Ministers, either comfortable or uncomfortable, I understand not; neither
does Mr Lilly I suppose; for his Art takes no knowledge of any such thing; what
his disaffection to the Ministry may, I trouble not my self to enquire. But
that he may discover his unparalled hatred to Ministers, he runs over his old
song again in a higher strain, thus, -- As Venus is hastening to a Conjunction
of Saturn, he much questions whether the mere illiterate man will not get
ground of many of those LAZY MEN, whom we call Gospell-Ministers,
Church-Divines, or Preaching Divines. Although Venus (as I said before) and
Saturn have nothing to do with the Ministry, yet Lilly (the better to spit his
venom at the persons of that Sacred Order) wrests his Art from the true
meaning thereof, to bring that within the verge of his Saucy Pen. But the main
reason why this Envious-insolent-fellow cannot Print a foolish Pamphlet without
dishonouring that Heavenly Function, is, because the Moon is in square to
Jupiter in his Swinish Geniture. But pray Sir! What is the reason that you tell
us not when this Eclipse begins and ends by your Calculation; that we may see
what reason you have (by the figure thereof) to predict at so malicious a rate
of Ministers? but you (I presume) understand the Doctrine of Eclipses, and that
of Angels, a like.

But why Lazy men, which we have called Gospell-Ministers, etc? Really, I judge
it impossible for any of them you mean to be so lazy in Divinity as you are in
Astrology. And why (I pray) such as we have called Gospell-Ministers? etc. Do
you believe them to be persons not deserving that Title? Or, are you turned
Anabaptist or Quaker all of a sudden, that you thus grudgingly give them the
Epithets that are their proper due? But your love and affection to the
Ministry, is sufficiently known; your scurrilous Pen has been the Conveyer of
your Gall toward them for many years together. Which very thing should, me
thinks, make you more civil toward your Antagonists (or your self rather) than
to brand them as Ranters and Atheists; when you cannot but be sensible, that
there are none such notorious Ranters and Atheists as those that scandalously
abuse God's dearest Messengers. But Lillie's Religion and Astrology are known
to be of a stamp.

After many Tautologies and impertinencies, Lilly is passed from the Moons
Eclipse to that of the Sun, on November. 4. but gives us neither the time of
beginning or end; only presents us with the middle, and duration, and Digits
eclipsed, though not truly. The middle (he says) is at 9. min. past 3. in the
Evening. But he is strangely out in this; for Mr Wing has calculated it, and
my self has proved it, the middle thereof was at 4. min. 30. sec. past 3. So
that observe what difference there is between 4. min. 30. sec. and 9. min. for
so much is M. L. distant from the truth. The Duration, he falsely says, was 2.
h. 3. m. But the true Duration was 2. h. 21. m. 19. sec. as is demonstable by
Astron. Instaur. So that Mr Lilly is no less than 18. mi. distant from the
truth in this also. Then he says the Digits eclipsed were 7. degrees. 32. sec. but
the true Digits, etc. eclipsed, were 8. degrees. 48. min. 1. sec. So that ignorant
William Lilly is out no less than one whole digit, 47 min. 29 sec. in the
quantity of the Eclipse. Now from all these Errors in Calculation, is not Lilly
likely to make excellent Predictions? But as are his Calculations, so are his
Judgments, without either Art or Order. Nevertheless, hence Lilly can take
opportunity to abuse Scorpio, and call it a rugged treacherous, violent Sign,
accounted so by all wise men. But, I pray Sir! how prove you that? except you
conclude, what your self agrees to, all wise men must needs consent to.
Certainly, Mr. Lilly, you cannot have so short a head, as to think that the
fortieth part of wise men understand any thing at all of Scorpio. And I suppose
you would not be so understood, as to censure all men for Fools, that
understand nothing thereof. This therefore must pass for one of your wooden
(...) (i.e.) ranting boasts.

But why, I entreat you, Sir, is Scorpio grown so odious in your eyes? Is it
because Saturn is therein, in your Nativity, and in Opposition to your Sol? Or
is it because you have an ignorant (undeserved) hatred to any, that have it
Horoscopical at Birth? If so, were I a Scorpionist, I should tell you, You have
foamed out your filth in scandalizing and abusing a noble, fixed, immovable
Sign of the Zodiac, as violent, etc. whise you are compelled to draw your
poisonous breath under a more treacherous, dissembling, and double-bodied sign
of your own, viz. Pisces; perhaps a main reason of your forked tongue and
actions. Scorpio scorns the ignorant, cold, effeminate, reasonless Evasions,
and low-orbed silly comeoff's, of Pisces; and that galls mutable, and
turn-about William Lilly, so that he must needs wreak his weak and worthless
revenge in Print against it.

But what will Lilly say, if I prove he has bespattered Pisces in as base a
manner as he has Scorpio? and that in this very Almanac of his too? Will he
not confess himself more rigling and uncertain in his Judgment than an Eele?
Let him be pleased to peruse what in page two he has written, viz. -- When the
Angles of the Figure of any Eclipse are of double-bodyed Signs, as those of
the Lunar defect are, the Councels of the then times are uncertain, various and
mutable, treacherous, carried on with abundance of Fraud, Violence and Juggling,
etc. But perhaps Lilly will say, -- Th^^ Pisces is no double-bodied Sign:
Indeed it is no matter what he says; for by this notorious Contradiction, We
may estimate his Conscience to be as large, as his Pen liberal. But passing
these things, let us hear him in his Pontificalibus of Language, threatening the
poor City of London: Mars in Gemini, gives us great cause to fear LONDON will
be the place, and Plague or Pestilence the devouring Disease, etc. -- God
defend it from more, etc. for it was here, here, here, that -- and it must be
here, here, here, that --

What this Frenzie-Fellow should mean by his three Couple of HERE IS, unless it
should be to hear an ignorant Quack simply prate, I understand not. Is it not a
sign by this, that he writes not only in perplexity of spirit, as he
complains of, but in distraction of mind also? Howbeit, he can (in this
distracted temper) ignorantly threaten London with a Plague, although
Astrology does not (yet) this three years. He has indeed done so ten years
together, and missed; possibly he may hit it at last; if the M.C. ad Saiurn and
Solis give him leave to present himself a scribbling Fool in print to the world
a little longer.

But he advances, saying, -- The Clergy run high, -- and stir up Tumults: a
thing very frequent with men of that Order, these six or sevenscore years last
past; yea, in all ages, etc. Still you see this Fellow must be abusing the
Ministry, and make that the main burden of his bungling Predictions. Had his
Antagonist been guilty of any such Crime, he must have been rendered a Ranter,
Atheist, and what not? And does Lilly think that we shall esteem him any other
then a Ranting-raving Atheist, that thus bespatters those worthy Lights of the
Church, that constantly spend their Lamps of Life, to dispel the dark Clouds of
Ignorance, that such Atheists and Scoffers endeavor to bring upon the Sun of
our Religion? Or can he take himself to be less then a person of a foul
surfeited Soul, that thus licentiously traduces the whole Body of Christ's
Ministry with the Poison of his polluted Pen? But he thinks he can come off
from all this, by colloguing thus: -- Still we retain all Civility both in
Heart and Soul for the godly Ministers. Here you may behold the true Emblem of
this Hypocrites dissembling Ascendent, viz. Pisces. First, he most basely and
undeservedly abuses the whole Ministry, and exhibits an impious and unjust
Charge against them, viz. of six or sevenscore years long; nay, as long as the
age of the world; and almost in the same breath, -- He retains all Civility of
Heart for them. Oh, the notorious Hypocrisy and Dissimulation of this
Clovenhearted Fellow! If this be your Civility, pray Sir, let me partake of
your Morosity.

To render himself as weak in parts, as hypocritical and dissembling in Spirit,
in the same Page he writes thus: -- But if he shall judge according to the
genuine Rules of the MORE PVRER Astrology, etc. Can Mr. Lilly tell (I wonder)
what himself means by the Rules of the MORE PURER Astrology? Had that Person
whom Mr. Lilly so wisely terms Atheist, or Ranting, Impudent Fool, been guilty
of jumbling Comparatives (unlawfully) thus together, we should have heard of
him in some such like Language: -- Behold the ignorance of this impudent
ranting Boy, that cannot write sense! a ridiculous Fool, that has need to go
to School again; and not present himself to the world in print, until he
understand true English! All which Epithets, I shall in modesty spare Mr.
Lilly, because he is, in viridi Senectute, his green old age. Yet nevertheless
I may be bold to tell the world, -- That by this passage of his MORE PURER, it
appears, he understands true English, as much as he does Astrology, and no
more. And so I pass his idle Discourse of Eclipses, and come to his Vernal
Figure. Which he set to 6 h. 9 m. p. m. March 9. but by his own Ephemeris is
conspicuously false. Examine it thus else. -- March 1660. 9. D. 's place. 29 d.
43 m. March 1660. 10. D. 's place. 0 d. 42. m. Difference in Longit. 0. d. 59
m. Distance of from first point of, 17 m.


Wherefore I work by this Rule: -- If 59 m. give 24 h. what shall 17 m. give?
Facit 6 h. 54 m. So that Mr. L. is out no less then 45 m. in time, if we make
his own Book the Judge. But the true time is at 6 h. 51 m. 24 sec. So that had
Mr. L. been true to his own Ephemerides, I should have spared him here. But I
admire how Lilly stumbled so near upon the truth in his Ephemeris, and yet his
Figure so false. Surely he has been pilfering from V. Wing, for reduce
Eichstade he cannot, unless Mr. Sponge help him. But it is no matter, be his
Figures true or false, he proceeds to judgment, -- and tells us, Libra
ascends, and the Significatrix of the people (which must be Venus, if the
Ascendent signify them) is well dignified, and in Aspect of the two Superior
Planets, etc. but Venus Sir, is in detriment; and by your Figure in Octava
Domo, and beholds neither Saturn nor Jupiter; are not you therefore a notorious
Ignorant in Art? Who is the Botcher now? Sure I am, if William Lilly understood
his Tailors Needle no better then his Astrologers Pen, we may justly conclude
him a very botching and bungling Fellow at both. Are not those Kings and States
in a sad condition, that are necessitated to take advice about their most
emergent Affairs, from so indigent a Fellow?

But William Lilly has learned to talk big, and to utter high-swelling words
of vanity, that the common people may believe his head is periwig'd with the
Clouds; and tells us -- That toward the latter end of May, or beginning of June
or July (some time or another, it is no matter when) the Conglomeration of no
less then five Planets in the Sign Scorpio, a fruitful Sign (here Scorpio is
grown into favor again with this two-tongued Idiot) may justly import a
meeting together of many people, etc. But Sir, there is no such Conglomeration
of the Planets in any of the months mentioned, nor in many months after;
(what Conglomeration of Impudence, Ignorance and Folly, etc. there may be in
your brain, I know not;) your Judgment therefore is as idle, as your
insinuation false.

But Lilly fearing some Change of Government, I suppose (for you must know,
that he would have the world believe, that Revolutions as are signally pointed
at by his Pen, as the Vicissitude of the Air is foretold by his rotten Carcass)
begins to tell his Readers -- That as some Pratlers abuse Oliver Protector, --
Thus do other viperous Tongues and Pens deprave even the whole line of the
Stuarts Family, and call it accursed; whilst their own is owned more
abominable. All that I shall return to this passage, is this: -- That if he can
find any man in Europe that has dealt more viperously with that Family then
himself, both in Tongue and Pen, let him bring them within his Lash; if not,
let him pass under his own Censure, for a fellow of a viperous Tongue and Pen,
and consider what he has written in his Monarchy, and his Almanacks for the
years 1649, 1650, 1651, 1652, 1653, 1654. and other his foolish Pamphlets: But
perhaps he thinks, to write against an honorable Family, is not to abuse it.

So from his Vernal, I follow him to his Aestival Ingress; where he asserts
that Sol enters Cancer, June 10 d. 9 h. 12 m. P. M. but this is as true as the
former, as I shall make appear by his own Book. Which (setting aside his
Printers errors) I examine thus.

June 1660. 10 's place. 29 d. 36 m. June 1660. 11 's place. 0. d. 33. m. 's
Diurnal Motion. 0. d. 57. m. His distance from the first point of is 24 m
Then I say, If 57 m. give 24 h. what 24 m? Facit 10 h. 6 m. So that here you
see, he is mistaken no less then 54 m. in time, as his own Book proves against
him. Oh! Monstrum horrendum! An Astrologer, and cannot set a true Figure!

However, Mr. L. adventures upon this Scheme also, to deliver his WEAK
CONCEPTIONS, and says -- The Heavens do not at all smile upon the Actions of
Kings, Princes, Supreme Magistrates and Authorities. For which passage I shall
account with him anon. But although Mr. Lillies Astrology fail him, yet his
good Tutelary or Presidentiary Angels do not sure, whom he says, -- Generated
that very quick Comet in 1652. (not so quick neither as an ignis fatuus; for it
lasted a whole month together) as the Precursor of some eminent Person or
Persons, or their rising unto honor in Europe, etc. Before Mr. Lilly had
adventured to predict ought to depend upon the Influences of Comets, he should
have made his way clear, by removing the stumbling block that lay in it. For I
deny (and so does learned Aristotle, and most Naturalists) that Comets are
generated by his Tutelary or Presidentiary Angels, but are engendered of Ignean
Vapors, consisting of a viscous, sulphurous, and compacted matter, attracted
from the Earth by the Energie of the Celestial Movers, into the highest Region
of the Air, sometimes into the Starry Region, whence it is closely
conglutinated into a great Lump, by reason of the continued supply it has from
below: and being thus compacted, is set on fire in time convenient, by the
excessive heat of the place where it rests, and burns either long, or a little
while, according to the paucity or plenty of the matter of which it consists.
This is the opinion of the learned generally. And surely Mr Lilly, it will be
no ill-concluding Argument, to say -- He that is ignorant in the Generation of
Comets, must be so also in their effects. But Mr L. tattles of Comets, and
Angels, to cover his ignonorance in Astrology only; he poor man! knows no more
of the natures or effects of either, than the silliest Potter that trots about
the Streets of an Errand, or his poor Sister (the Washer-woman) in Milford-Lane.

But whether he understand Comets, etc. or not, he boasts as if he understood
all things; and quackingly tells us, -- The Austrian forces seem to be threatened
near this time, either with the loss of some battle, or town, etc. if any
thing at all he be concerned in war or quarrel with the not conquered Swede,
whose forces now, where in Action, will make it appear they fight for a good
King, and in a good honest cause. And how comes it about that the Austrians
must be thus menaced? Is it merely upon this supposition grounded, if they
fight against the not conquered Swede? But pray Mr Lilly, what Rule in
Astrology have you to predict the Swedish King to be good, and his Cause
honest? Will you never leave your clawing Parasiticall Practices? But a little
further good William! If the King of Swedes be assured victory over the
Austrians, -- How comes it to pass that Lilly predicted that the heavens smile
not upon the Actions of Kings, etc. as before you have heard him? Are Lillies
Angels of no better use to him, than thus to suffer him to run into Errors and
Contradictions? Or, has his good Genius left him? But what will Lilly say, if
the Swedes and Austrians never quarrel? -- If they do not, then creeps he
sneakingly out at his great IF! For his Predictions depend upon ifs and ands,
although the Celestial Edicts do not. All his presages are whimsical Castles
in the air; and If the sky falls, Lilly and his Swedish King may catch Larks
together.

But says Lilly -- The Swedes cannot be made subject to those misfortunes, as
some scribbling Pens would have them. -- If the Comet in 1618. did first appear
in 25. d. of -- Then we find the in that very degree at the King of Swedes
birth, applying to a in M. C. and applying to his. Remove these Configurations
out of the Heavens, and then his enemies may rant and prate, as some very
botchers, not workmen, impertinently have done, etc. But since either he or they
are men of no quality, but Nameless Botchers, he or they are below our Pen to
take a full Cognizance thereof, their prating or persons -- Aquila non capit
Muscas; we should make our self ridiculous to answer a boy, or a
ranting-impudent fool, that dare not own his Name to be G.I. or I.G.

If I do not prove this ambitious Parasite as botching a Fellow, and of as mean
Quality, and a verier Boy in Art, than him whom he scurrilously styles so, yea,
though his Presidentiary Angels should take his part; -- Let William Lilly
again say, he has but a Boy to deal with. First, his citing the Comet 1618. to
favor the King of Swede, is both vain and foolish. And if it signify any
thing (It happening 4 years before he was an Embryo) it must be mischief: Yea,
and such as those ^^^ists (whom this Botcher terms Scriblers) have mentioned.
Aristotle, Pliny, and Cicero say, -- Comets are the Messengers of great
Calamities, and of the death and destruction of Kings, etc. but never of any
good to them. The Noble Historian Suetonius, writing on Claudius, Cap. 26. has
these words -- Presagia mortis ejus precipua fuerunt exortus stellae crinitae,
quam Cometa vocant: The Principal presages of his death were arisings of the
hairy star they call a Comet. But suppose I should (for discourse sake) admit
the Comet in 1618. to signify good to the King of Swede, because his fell to
be in the degree of its first appearance; yet his happening in the opposite
point thereof, if the one portended any good, the other must evil; and William
Lilly still appear a silly-shifting fellow, that would force that to speak for
Kings, that in truth has neither heart or face to do so.

Yea, but says Lilly, the applies ad in M.C. and to his also. -- All which I
grant; and Merlinus Verax has made as much of those things for the Swede, as
Astrologically they will bear. But Lilly, you appear very partial in not
relating the Bad, as well as the Good, as he has done: for to balance those
good Arguments you mention, he tells you that is retrograde in the tenth house,
afflicted by the corporal presence of, and both in, Lady of his Ascendant; and
that the Luminaries are in opposition from cruel and molicious places of the
Heavens; Besides the most pernicious Direction of M. C. ad. which he now groans
and labors under, whose effects are these: -- Maximas indignitates and odia
Principum aut Magnatum judicit; vario quoque malorum genere, dignitates,
officia, honores atque favores subvertit: Negotia cum tarditate natum proficere
facit, facinorosa vero scelere excitat, and nonnunquam mortem lata judicis
sententia portendit. -- But it may be William Lilly boggles thus at the King of
Swedes Fate, hoping to baffle the effects of such a like direction, that will
shortly happen in his own Nativity. But William, I can assure you upon my
honest word, that the M.C.ad and portends more than a fit of the stone; and
this you will shortly find true, unless you can implore the assistance of some
of those Angels you boast of, to remove malignant out of the Heavens. But Lilly
confesses, that others have catechized him for this his folly; but says, they
are Nameless impertinent Botchers, and persons of no quality; and therefore
they are beneath his Pen to take Cognizance of; Aquila non capit Muscas. All
this Sir is but your ipse dixit; for the Fame of those that have dissected your
Ignorance, is every whit as splendid as William Lillies, although they began to
labor in the harvest of Astrology long after him. It is true, they are not (as
I hear of) famous for trepanning Kings; or for Star-gypsies, or
Planet-Quackers, or Angel-Mongers, etc. And that perhaps is the reason why
Lilly terms them persons of no quality. If by men of no quality, Lilly mean in
respect of their birth, or parts; His poor leather-jacqueted Father of
Diseworth, an obscure Village in Leicestershire, were he alive, could not but
shed tears for grief that ever he should breed up a Son to so much Arrogance,
and vainglory; as knowing it impossible for any man to come of a meaner stock
than himself.

But why does Lilly urge the Adage, Aquilo non capit muscas? Does he hope to
excuse his Credit, by insinuating his Antagonist a Fly? O does he suppose
there is as great a difference between the person he calls impudent Boy and
himself, as is between an Eagle and a Fly? Lilly, I know it is above an Eagle
to catch at a Fly! But Bubo! it is not above a Buzzard to answer a Boy! But why
should William esteem himself an Eagle? In knowledge it cannot be, I am sure;
and I have heard some say, not in Estate neither. In the first, he cannot but
see I have proved him an Owl rather, and this all along: and would have him
therefore, if his Almanac go any more to the Press, to correct his Errata, and
remember for Aquila to insert Bubo. In the second, he cannot be an Eagle
neither, if Vox Populi be true; for they say, As he has gotten an Estate like
a K -- he has parted with it like a F -- and is become a poor Tenant for his
life. But why make your self ridiculous to answer a Boy? except you suppose
your self incapable of excusing those errors the Boy charge upon you,
without contracting as many more? That (I readily acknowledge) were the way to
make your self ridiculous indeed! But why must you childishly throw the Boy at
your Adversary? I can tell you Sir! He is no such Boy, but that he is able to
crack your crown, as he has done your credit in Astrology. And perhaps he
would too, were not the Amulet of AGE your protection and security. However, I
shall return you in exchange for your Boy, the Adage, -- (...). But this is the
despite of it, Lilly is such a Boy in Learning, he cannot English it.

But why Ranting-impudent Fool? If Folly be a privation or defect of wisdom,
or ingenuity, Lilly is the absurdest Fool that ever I either read or heard of.
And for the concomitants of his Fool -- Ranting and Impudence; I think it
impossible for any man to surpass him. Well, but says Lilly, -- This Impudent,
Ranting Fool, or Boy, dare not own his Name to be G.I. or I.G. Here, Mr Merlin,
you do homage only to the Father of lies, (whom it may be you are better
acquainted with, than with the Angels you tattle and boast of.) For he has
owned G. I. as the initiall Letters of his Name in the spurious Prognosticator,
to your sorrow: but Lilly has little list to cope with either the Author, or
the Book; the one being so repugnant to his Principles, the other to his skill.
But besides, it is not for fear of Lillies Pen, that the Author forbears to set
his name at length, but for the forementioned Reasons.

Mr. Lilly having fluttered and beat his Eagleship out of breath, in the
Aestival Quarter, is now come to the Autumnal, and says, enters September. 12.
at noon. Yet if you consult his own Ephemeris, you will find Sol's place that
day at noon, in 29 d. 58 m.. Could any Boy of a months reading in Astrology
be guilty of greater Impudence and Ignorance, then this? Or did ever any man
rant so vainly under the Canopy of Astrology, and know so little thereof, as
does this Owl Lilly? No more Eagle Sir! until your skill be mended.

Howbeit says Lilly, -- This Figure and Vernal Scheme agreeing with the King
of Swedes Nativity, -- Let his Majesty's Enemies brag of this ill position of
Heaven, which by Gods blessing may render him victorious in the Acquisition
either of a Battle if he be in Campania; or a City or Town if in the Siege of
one; or if at Sea, a Maritime Victory. If false Figures promise Victory, Lilly
may prove a true Prophet in some of these things: but certainly from false
Figures, fallacious Victories must be presaged. And such will those be, that
the K. of Swede obtains about this time; notwithstanding Lillies Parasitical
Pen. For Saturn is now in Quartile to the place of the dire Direction but
lately mentioned; and to the Cusp of the King of Swedens hopes in his Radix and
Revolution also. But Lilly is to be read backward, as men read Hebrew: when he
promises Victory, let the King of Sweeden be sure to expect loss.

For conclusion, Lilly says, It was his intention, had he not been prevented,
to have delivered somewhat of the Tutelary and Presidentiary Angels. etc. and
boasts of the Expositors that follow the Septuagint, and of the Fathers, viz.
Dionysius, Origin, Basil, Nazianzen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Damascen, Hillary,
etc. But he understands the Doctrine of Angels, and those learned Fathers, both
alike: (i. e.) as much as he does Astrology, viz. only to brag and boast
with, that he may the better pass for a Scholar among the ignorant. And to this
end, steals three or four sayings (which he understands not) out of Dingley of
Angels, (who cites those Authorities he impertinently mentions) and would needs
enforce them upon the world as the fruits of his own Phlegmatic and Drowsy
Contemplation and Studies: and for a farewell, triflingly concludes, -- This
learning will find cold entertainment with Atheists, Ranters and Paddies.
Certainly if Mr. Lilly be the Author of it, 'twill be fit only for the reading
of such kind of Fellows; and those (perhaps) are his principal Acquaintance and
Disciples. But what Mr. Lilly should mean by Paddies, I cannot devise, (for
Rider and Thomas own no such word) unless he mean one that bestrides the King
of Swedes Sumpture Horse; which if he do, now he has cracked his Credit in
Astrology, I would have him become Probationer for the place. So I descend
from his general Prognostications, to his monthly Fictions; which I shall but
lightly examine, and so pass them, until the whole year shall more particularly
inform me of his failings. For I question not, but his Predictions, and those
of Montelion Knight of the Oracle, as they are calculated for one and the same
Meridian of Truth, and have one and the same foundation in Art, so one and the
same success will crown them.

SECT. 3. His Monthly Fictions examined.
IN January Mr. Lilly predicts, -- Notstanding the ranting and ryming Pamphlets
of illiterate Fellows, we hope some considerable victory will be gained by the
Swedes, etc. Indeed Sir, the M. C. ad, comes on too fast for this to be true.
But if the King of Swede had no such Direction operating, what Reason or
Authority has Lilly, to prefer his own ignorant hopes in the room of Art? or
does all his skill in Astrology depend upon hopes and expectations, without
any solid demonstration? Does this ignorant fellow think, that Mars his now
squaring in the King of Swedes Nativity, and at the same time transiting the
tenth house thereof; (together with a Quartile of Sol and Saturn from the third
and fifth Houses both of his Radical and Revolutional Figures) do any way
augment or encourage his hopes? Lilly! these Arguments will prove you an
absolute Liar. I confess, had the Swede only ranting and riming Pamphlets to
oppose him, he might escape the better, although he never consulted Lillies
lying-Almanack.

In March he scramblingly writes, -- If the season permit, the scrambling Pens
of Idiots will prove false Prophets. Did ever any man, that pretended to
understand sense, render himself a more scrambling Idiot than Lilly does here?
Prithee, Mr Lilly, tell me what season that is, which the scrambling Pens of
Idiots (or others) prove Prophets in; let them be either true or false. Is it
Spring, Winter, Summer, Autumn? I protest for this conceit, I could afford to
Chronicle thee, WISE WILLIAM LILLY in the next Impression of Erra Pater; but
that were to abuse thee more than this book is designed to do; for it is the
office and duty of this to speak truth. But (says he) some happy success near
this time is designed for his Majesty of Swede. If any such thing be designed,
it must be either by the energy of the Heavens, or some other power: by the
Heavens there is no such thing designed, but the contrary; as M. C. ad, (nearly
touching now) denotes, it being attended on by an of and, celebrated in the
Twelfth and Sixth Houses of his Radix and Revolution also; presaging much
Treachery and Infortunacie, in the room of the happy success Lilly boasts of.
If it be promised by any other power, Lilly should have told us so: but a
Golden Bribe can bend a Buzzards Pen any way.

In April he rantingly writes -- Let men and devils, or all earthly devils do
their worst, the Noble Swede will now again be successful, according to his
present condition, even by Sea or Land, or near it. This good Christian
Astrologer, complained of Atheists and Ranters, etc. that were his Antagonists;
but could any Atheistical or Ranting Fellow in the world, write more Rantingly
and Atheistically, then himself has here? Let Men and Devils, and all earthly
Devils, etc. Sure this ranting-raving Fellow supposes, that the Swede has, not
men, but devils to encounter with; or else what does he mean, by such ranting
hellist, expressions? But why earthly Devils? Does he believe there are any
Devils in Heaven? But (says he) Let those Devils do their worst, the K. of
Swede will be successful. If the Swedes Enemies, (which this malicious Fellow
terms Devils) do but their worst, the Swede may then be successful, as he
groundlesly writes: But Sir! they are like to do their best, and not their
worst; and so will leave you a devilish Liar to Posterity. But he will be
successful by Sea or Land, or near it; says this Barbarian in Art and
Learning. Certain I am, the of and, and 's transiting the radical place of,
considered, together with his sad Revolutional Figure, denies him success at
Sea or Land. What he may (by Mr. Lillies Ptedictions) expect near it, I know
not: perhaps he dreamed of some airy happiness and success, when he writ this
ventositous Fancy.

In May this Impostor predicts, -- The Heavens show much hope for settlement of
France and Spain, in league and amity. This he perfectly reads in the Heavens
too, (O rare Monthly Observator!) although the peace betwixt those Princes was
concluded six Months before, as the News-Books had acquainted him: for you must
know, he studies them more then he does old Ptolomy.

Lilly skips from April to September without mentioning the least particle o
the Swedish King. And then (too late) tells him -- The Heavens give caution to
him, etc. For then his game (in despite of Lillie's flattery) is near at an
end. This counsel (Lilly) you should have given him at the beginning of the
year, if you had dealt as fairly by him, as he has nobly by you.

In October this pedantick Parasite cants -- That the K. of Swede, in despite
of all opposition, cannot fail of many successes in or near this month: Surely
Sir! spiteful successes, will do the Victor no durable service. But what must
these successes be, I wonder? why says Lilly, Such as his present occasion
requires. Now if the K. of Swede (being a Soldier) should happen (for want of
convenience) to be invaded with a Soldiers Fortune, viz. to be stronger
within, then without; and in this condition obtain the happiness (or success)
of a clean shirt, Lilly shall have the honor of predicting it Astrologically.
But one pretty piece of Policy I meet with in wise Williams Octobers
Observations, that makes me smile at the writing thereof: it is this: It then
being about Almanac time, and Lilly believing that he shall be lashed, as the
last year, (for he knows he has notoriously deserved it) and that you may
think he reads the same in the Heavens, he learnedly (by this his sharp
Praescience) predicts -- Some botching Atheist now bespatters him.

And is there any Delian Wizzard can
In Planet-Quacking match this cunning Man?
In November he again temporizes with the Swede, thus: -- Either with full
peace, or much happiness, the Swedes are blessed according to their present
condition. Prithee, Lilly, tell me, how thou came to be so base a Flatterer?
Do thou see upon the place of, and, and in, and all in to 's Radical place,
in the King of Swedes Geniture? I am persuaded, thou make thy self a Parasite
on purpose, or else thou know not from thy Tailors Bodkin.

But to conclude all his wise work, In Decembers right-hand-page he writes, --
The guilty find friends. And in the left, verifies it in himself, thus -- If
Jupiter were not in Libra, (his Printer has made it June, but I scorn as much
to retort that upon him, as he thinks it beneath him to answer a Boy) Saturn
would afflict poor Anglicus. Providence still provides for him friends. Go on
William! Confess all your sins, and guiltiness of all kinds; and consider that
your end draws on, and the M. C. ad and is coming apace; and flatter not your
self as you have done the King of Swede. You will begin to claim the Title of
an aged Parasite in Astrology: Flatter not your self therefore. For it is not
in that can any way stead you. Is not returned to his own place, and the
opposite place of the Sun? Is not your Revolution notoriously cruel, and
mischievous also? And how should in help you? Does behold either the Ascendant,
or in your Nativity? Is he not in of Luna? Flatter not your self, I say: Learn
Astrology (for once) from a Boy; And if at last in fail you, say you had an
enemy dealt more faithfully with you, without a Gold Chain, than you did with
the King of Sweden for one. So I leave William Lilly in the midst of his
Flatteries and Ignorance, as I found him.

ERRATA.
Page 34. line Antepenult, read 8 digits. P. 37. l. 25. r. Saturni. P. 48. l.
9. r. the arisings. P. 50. l. 25. r. Aquila.

AN ADVERTISEMENT
A Person of Honor, by Name Montelion, or the Knight of the Oracle, having
taken great pains in the calculating diverse Nativities, some of Jury-Packers,
Chalke-Merchants, Wife-Poysonners, Widdow-Undoers, Trepanners, etc. and the
Genitnres of Mrs. P. W. L. Grace L. and I. F. at large; being a true and
perfect Emblem of the cross match mentioned in Dr. Dee's Book of Spirits: it is
therefore desired, that the Learned Minister (Lilly mentions) would insert
these in his intended Book of Nativities, that his Collection may be the more
complete.

FINIS.

