Refreshing Drops, AND SCORCHING VIALS; SEVERALLY Distributed to their proper
Subjects, according to the Wisdom given that precious servant of the Lord,

Mr. CHRISTOPHER GOAD. Sometimes Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, and
Bachelor in Divinity, as men speak: But before his Translation, Become a
Disciple and Learner again, sitting at the feet of Christ and his Spirit, where
he took a higher degree, and now sits with Christ in Heaven.

Eccl. 12. 11. The Words of the wise are as Goads, and as Nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.

London, Printed by R. W. for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the Blackspread
Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1653.

TO THE READER.
Friend,
HE that ministered these ensuing Discourses to us, did withal sow his life;
and in testimony thereof, when he had finished this Ministration, took his
leave of us, calling upon thee and me to follow him: And if his life spring up
in us, it will carry us whither he was continually making, Even without the
Camp.

It was not the least of his services to dye for the flock, which he did daily,
therein following the great shepherd.

Now a Box of precious Ointment is broken, Oh that the whole house of God on
earth may be filled with the savor of it!

He was wont to say of every thing he said or did, how good, righteous, and
excellent soever, and refreshing to others, This is but a vail upon the Lord:
God considered and answered him in the desire of his heart, and has rent the
vail for him.

A witness is gone, but his Testimony remains, and shall remain, while the Sun
and Moon endure. If these Records should be destroyed, yet the truth therein
shall be preserved in the living Records of the breasts of faithful men, and
shall there grow up and be purified, until the Lord come and bring this Author
and all his Saints with him, Zach. 14. 5. Even so make haste, and come Lord
Jesus!

And now let not any man think these Sermons were preached, or are now
published to enrich the world with notions: They are to make us poor in spirit;
to slay ye, to undo ye: he that loves his life, let him not come here: They are
to pull down the flesh, and abase the glory of man, but to lift up the Lord: If
he be your life, here you may hear of him.

There is in the world a great deal of light and knowledge, falsely so called.
Men are very rich in their several Administrations: hence that unbrotherly
walking one toward another, and yet they talk of peace and accommodation, but
it is but talk: Ye will never meet with an expedient for either, until ye dye.

Come, and in the grave of Christ let us reason together and be one. There is
no parling with men, till the Cool of the day, till the Sun of their imaginary
glory be declining.

It is this grave makes all even: there rich and poor, master and servant lie
down together, and are at rest. There the brother of low degree is exalted, and
the rich is made low.

They are enemies to peace, that are enemies to the Cross of Christ. Whosoever
sets up any excellency besides Christ himself, sets up an Occasion of strife
and enmity, a partition wall. The Cross of Christ took away that distance
between the Jews and the Gentiles: and it is the preaching of the Cross, and the
knowing of Christ crucified experimentally, takes it away through all ages. And
it is in vain to send Embassies of peace to men, while their strength is firm
in them: Why then are ye offended at Preachers of the Cross?

But be it known to ye, ye that live, and will not dye, ye are dead while ye
live. To be carnally minded is death; or which is worse, your life is a
continual torment to you.

And be it known to you, there is strength in the grave. The weakness of God is
stronger then Men: if ye will build for continuance, ye must resolve to lay
your foundation in confusion. He lays the beams of his chambers in the
waters. That building that shall stand for ever, must rise up wholly, purely,
out of God himself and his Spirit.

But to you that are dead with Christ, and whose life is buried under the
foundations of this world, and its fleshly frames, Behold I bring you glad
tidings; all things are dissolving, the heavens are passing away with a great
noise (as it is said they should) the elements are melting with the fervent
heat of the Day of the Spirit, and the earth with all the works of men are
burning up by the same fire: Lift up your heads, your Redemption draws nigh.

Friends, I have not of a long time had any power to go forth in this kind: I
mean, to open any thing; Therefore accept the willingness of my mind to have
done some thing by way of Preface: and do ye make the supply by being the
Epistle of Christ, whereby ye shall show the best respect to the labor and
travel of him that is gone: And let all expressions that are here left dark and
homely (through my deficiency to whom chiefly the inspection of the Copies was
committed) be corrected in the pure springings up of the living Truth in your
hearts.

Yours in the Lord, JOSH. SPRIGG.

A Preface to the Reader.
IT is time for us to be looking out of this world which grows old, and is
ready to vanish away; God is by the brightness of his own discoveries, burning
up the works thereof, and stablishing that new heavens, and new earth where
righteousness dwells; the creation has sent up strong groans, and has long
lien under bondage; the redemption thereof now draws nigh.

We are the children of the last times, and upon us are the ends of the world
come; Prophesies, and Promises, which have been bid from ages and generations,
are now enriching us by their revealing, and fulfilling in us: Arise and shine,
for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Isa. 50. 1.
It shall come to pass in the last days, the Mountain of the Lords house shall
be set up above the Mountains, and exalted above the hills. Now begins to be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Behold the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and Isa 2. 2.
he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them and be their God, Rev. 21. 3.

The Church has long lien among the pots: God is giving her the wings of a
Dove covered with silver, and her feathers of yellow gold: she has been
conformed to Christ in his death, and has lain with him in the grave: she that
has thus descended, must also ascend: she that has suffered must reign; since
the mystery of iniquity began first to work, it has wrought most effectually
and prevailed: men and their traditions have been the unquestioned authority;
the light and teaching of the spirit in the Scriptures, has been forgotten,
and stood like a Sparrow upon the house top, desolate and forsaken: we have
said of the Spirit, as once that murmuring people said of Moses, Up, make us
Gods that may go before us; for as for this Moses we know not what is become of
him. And in this mist of darkness, Satan has conveyed himself in all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, and made such a deluge upon the face of the
world, that till of latter years, as it was in Elias his time, the true Church
and Saints of God were not discernable (though doubtless in the darkest times
God reserved a small remnant to himself who bowed not the knee to the Idols of
men's inventions, nor fell down before the Throne of the Beast.)

The reign of Antichrist has been long, and so taking (being beautifyed by the
excellency and glory of flesh) that the whole world wondered after the Beast;
whatever was prone and apt to deceive and bewitch the world, that has he
clothed himself withal, not only learning, wisdom, greatness and power
humane, but whatsoever the Gospel afforded outward, that has been given to him
to carry captive into his own place, to that great City Babylon; there have
Ordinances and the letter of the Scripture been brought into cruel bondage, and
made to fight against the Spirit, and a form of godliness to war against the
power: what God hoth joined, has been there divorced, and put asunder, and the
abomination that makes desolate, set up; the whole world in their Religion,
Worship, and Righteousness, have lien in darkness, and are not aware of it;
they liked not the Faith once given to the Saints, neither contended for it:
they received not the truth in the love of it, and therefore were given up to
strong delusions to believe lies, and by the signs, lying wonders, and cunning
craftiness of this man of sin, whereby he lay in wait to deceive, have been led
about and taken captive by him at his pleasure.

And think not this strange, neither wonder at it. Art thou a stranger in
Israel? Ought not these things so to have come to pass? Ought not our Lord to
be crucified in Sodom and Egypt, before he ascend to his last and most glorious
appearance in the world? is it not necessary the man of sin should first be
revealed, before Christ can come in his brightness; and that the highest glory
should be born out of the womb of the deepest darkness? this was the Let kept
Christ at a distance, seeing by this he was making way for a more glorious and
admirable discovery of himself and the Gospel, then the world yet ever knew. By
this he will commend himself to us in his second appearance, as the Law
commends Grace, and as Pharaoh and the Red Sea commended that deliverance of
old: here is a time for Saints to keep their garments white, and the name of
Christ unblemished, when the world is become Satan's Synagogue: here is a season
beautiful for the Faith, Patience, and Testimony of the Saints to appear: and
for those that call themselves Apostles and are not, to be tried and found
liars. By this good pleasure of God, in so ordering things will be built up an
everlasting Monument of the worlds folly and blindness, in the greatest
exercise of their wisdom and knowledge, who though they had an open faced
discovery of God in the Gospel, 2 Cor 3. 18. and not the writings of Moses
only but of Christ himself left to them, and life and immortality brought
therein to light: yet despising the light and instruction of the spirit herein,
(and causing that to withdraw) and trusting in their own wisdom, and making
flesh their teacher, professing themselves wise, have become fools, and turned
the truth of God into a lie, and by that their wisdom know not God in this
wisdom of God, but heap to themselves brain inventions, and by the Doctrines of
men make void the Counsel of God to their own destruction: and have turned that
which gave in it self a savor of life, into a savor of death unto death.

And now that the fullness of time for those better things kept in store for us,
draws nigh, and that Egyptian darkness and slavery which the world has been
kept under, is nigh to cursing, how has the truth multiplied, how has God
remembered his people, and for some good number of years past been making way
for himself again to be owned, and breaking forth in such measures of light as
the world has been able to bear, and gradually destroying the power of the
beast in his mark, his image and the number of his name, and is still going on
till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth; and in these discoveries also
has Satan of late been putting in for a part, resisting the truth as Jannes
and Iambres withstood Moses, seeking to set up that in form and flesh (and so
preserve his Kingdom) which God is doing in spirit and power: but he shall
proceed no farther, for his folly shall be made manifest to all: and those
precious souls who have in these days stood at a distance from the outward part
of worship because it has been the Court trodden down, and the man of sin has
here so long had his abode, and has so polluted and stained all forms of
Religion, and made that his shelter, and thicket, where he has lain concealed,
shall see him trodden under their feet, and cast, alive (in the midst of these
his deceitful workings) with the false Prophet, into the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone: and whatever has been captived into Babylon, shall be
brought back, and set upon Mount-Sion: the redeemed of the Lord shall return,
and being filled with the Spirit, and restored to their first state, shall
shine in the perfection of beauty and holiness, and then shall all Saints sing
in the unity of the spirit the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song
of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty,
just and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints.

Reader, Amidst the diversity of those gifts and administrations, in dispensing
whereof God has enriched this latter age, there has not a brighter spirit
shone forth, then what dwelt (like a fixed star) in the Author of these
following Discourses, who whilst he lived here, was indeed dead (by the Cross
of our Lord Jesus) and in that voice, being now dead, he yet speaks: what
thou see here of him, thou have upon great disadvantage being imperfectly
taken, and never designed by the Author beyond the private edification of his
Hearers: these things were most pleasantly beheld in his life, where they were
written in a perfect Copy, and from whence all that he taught seemed to be
borrowed and transcribed; his ministration of them also gave not a little more
luster to them, then what they now seem to have: but at best, this heavenly
treasure ran through an earthen vessel and so may perhaps need the laver of
love to wash off what it contracted by that passage. I leave it to thy love who
ever art the Reader, desiring thee to remember that whatsoever is ministered to
us either by men or books, though of the most spiritual subjects, is no better
then the Mantle of Elijah, unless the God of Elijah be there: if the truth
dwell in thee, I am

Thine in the Lord, C. Worsley.

To the memory of Mr. Goad.
PErfections Samplar, draught of spotless life,
Envy of Preachers, and of Hearers strife,
Wrapped up in silence and laid by,
Till death unfold the mystery.
Some Teach, but Live not Truths, usurping part
(Shining not burning) of the Glowworms Art:
But this was only his mistake,
He was much more then what he spoke.
Experience was the mistress of his Art,
He spoke not from the lips, but from the heart;
The rise of many was his fall,
A Form of words Traditional.
Such fallings, Consummations call we may,
So morning twilight falls into the day;
His stars did shrink into their skies,
When Sun in him did once arise.
A State Religion counsels, Synods stamp,
Which yet admits of a far higher vamp;
Riddles! Believe it he that can,
The Word of God made so by man.
Thus bankrupts vouch their credit by Record,
Their obligations pass, but his bare word:
No foreign teacher by him used,
Light not acquired, but infused.
And yet how commonly such borrowed fire,
Obtruded is as of divine inspire?
What He presented to our sight,
Did sparkle from the Fountain light.
The all-inditing Spirit did him fill,
That scorns the Rival of a second quill;
Till grown in Notions pure so ripe,
He did resolve into the Type.
The Road-Religion does it self maintain
By partnership in worldly pomp and gain:
For Rivers can no higher grow
Then to the Fountains whence they flow.
But his Religion was in Mystery,
And in his breast did contradictions lie:
His life was unto Christ to dye,
His Glory flesh to Crucify.
Dullness in him did cut; we did epsy
In his rude plainness a bright majesty:
His spirit pure, his Notions choice,
Judged by matter, not by voice.
How sweetly was he ravished 'bove the life
Of the Scripturian and the Letter strife:
Where Water Baptism that should quench,
Is made the ground of difference?
Fire was his Baptism; and his common food,
Not signs, but very body, very blood;
Thus had in him each Sacrament
Its true and genuine intent.
His middle Doctrine by Gods sacred Clue
Did cut betwixt extremes of either hue;
Legal profession here does stand,
Seraphick looseness on that hand.
This th'high-born spirit labors to depress:
That sets it out in the most careless dress;
'Twixt both Our Watchman did descry
The Spirits Bounds and Liberty.
He steered an even course in numerous throng,
Chaining attentive Hearers to his tongue:
Soft showrs did fall in's dropping words,
Yet quick as lightning: sharp as swords:
His Doctrine so proportioned limb by limb,
Truth was not Thrown in, but Laid up in him:
Yet's Method was the meanest thing;
Matter was Jewel of the Ring.
His soul was lifted up 'bove common track
Of Themes and Systemes; True Religions wrack;
Thus set, he pitties common crew,
Which yet put in for Preachers too.
When grosser bodies judged by bulk, not merit,
Are by skilled hand Alembick'd into spirit;
The dregs and bulk fly not from hence:
It Is but a Dram mounts Quintessence.
This Dram was He, Scruple, Iota tried,
In every Dispensation rarefied:
Till his pure soul did glories vye
With th'oneness of the single eye.
His first fruits did to Law and Sinai tend,
Which to some Preachers is their journeys end:
No marvail he out-did their worth,
He gained half way at setting forth.
His second step more glorious was, and better,
Knowledge of Gospel truths but in the letter:
Yet this gave not a lasting rest,
'Twas Moses veiled with th'name of Christ.
For where the Legal spirit rules in Might,
There Is little difference 'twixt the'xternal rite,
Whether that Baptism does obtain,
Or Circumcision still remain.
In's third appearance and most glorious scene
Were naked glories and perfections seen:
Truths not yet owned to their merit,
Gospel-knowledge in the Spirit.
Who can this blessed state with that compare
Where Sinai's thundrings and Laws threatenings are?
Where Self, and worldly interest
Goes half Religion with the best.
But his pure soul wandering in boundless sense,
Delighted Hearers with rich Eloquence,
Whilst he discovered unto them
The light of new Jerusalem.
Here sublimated souls joined in one,
By Divine Unction mount and grasp the Throne.
Thrice happy soul! for here it finds
What others seek in Marks and Signs.
Yet here short-sighted zeal by illustrious ray
Is struck quite blind, and gropes though at Noonday:
And in its rage at truths, past ken,
Takes men for trees, and trees for men.
Hence 'twas, Goads Doctrines most Seraphical
Mistaken judgments counted notional:
Thus zeal boyld up 'bove due degree,
Proves poison, and not remedy.
But he is translated by discerning Fate,
Beyond the hand of Envy, reach of Hate:
Whence he bequeaths this Legacy to All,
May on their spirits his rich Mantle fall.
Blessed soul! thou'art fixed and at thy rest,
Whilst we with Gog Magog contest:
Yet sweet to us shall Sufferings be,
Since they can but Bring us to Thee.
To the memory of Mr. Goad, on the Publication of his Excellent SERMONS.
THat soul is upward flown, whose rays so bright,
Through a Clay-prison did send forth their light.
The want of such a guide we drooping bear,
Here clouded in a dusky Hemisphere:
For a more ample Orb this Sun required,
Whose heavenly breathings sweetly once inspired
Our lesser fires, and darted forth a flame
From which at once both heat and light there came.
Divine Creator-like, 'twas he that gave
To pictures life; now shadows substance have.
How pure and how refined the spirits were
This Heaven-taught Chemist did extract, when here
Below he wrought? from his full soul there came
Such sweet resultances, so clear a flame
As melted preaching from its grosser Oar:
In place of Form we had the Spirit and Power,
The pith and kernel for the Bark; and we
Into that body of Divinity
(That Is in the world so must discour'st of) find
Infused by him the soul and purer mind.
When on his Sermons we but cast our eye,
And in so plain a dress such beauty spy,
A native splendor, which not tincture'd is
With skill or art, we can experience this,
That treasures in an earthen vessel lie,
And we a burning shining light descrie
In Camels hair attired. How did the fine
And brighter Colors in his preaching shine!
Which were not subt'ly woven with a shade
Of Self-applause, and yet they were not made
All rude and unprepared; for we did find
In that plain garment Majesty inshrin'd.
Such was his Doctrine, such his life, that we
Saw not a loose, but Christian Liberty
In all its parts exactly by the Law
(That Spirit that keeps even Libertines in aw)
Of his own compass steered; for as he taught
The life of God, he up to it was wrought.
Immortal Goad, let this thy Motto be, Thou di'dst both preach and live
Divinity. J. N.

THE Right Spirit of CHRIST, OR, The Son glorifying the Father.
SERMON. I.
JOHN. 5. 30. I can of my own self do nothing; as I hear I judge; and my
judgment is just, because I seek not my own will; but the will of the Father
that has sent me.


CHrist had marvellously cured a Cripple that had been so thirty eight years
(as we may see in the fifth verse of this chapter) and setting him on his feet,
he bids him take up his bed and walk: The Jews that stood by (because it was
the Sabbath day) said, it is not lawful for thee to carry* thy bed: He tells
them, that he that made him whole, bid him take up his bed and walk: by whom
(judge you) should this man be guided? by him that showed power, or them that
talked? The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power: they ask who this man
was that bid him do so, for He is a Sabboth-breaker, and must be stoned.

Doct. 1. See how forms of Religion are set up against power.

Yet here was nothing against form; for what was this carrying his bed, but
preaching the love and power of God? Christ discovers himself to the man cured
of his limbs, to a through cure of him, Sin no more. A cure indeed! the man
tells the Jews who it was that cured him, whereupon Christ reasons with the
Jews, justifying what he had done, verse. 17. My father works, and I work; as if
he had said, in charging me, you charge my Father; his power and presence is
manifested with me if you will see it: They strove so much the more to kill
him, in that he said God was his Father.

Doct. 2. Carnal and formal Religion is bloody; nothing will serve but killing.

Those that are born after the flesh, do not know what it is to be born after
the Spirit. That which is the substance of Christian* Religion, is to them
blasphemy; Christ is pleading with them, and tells them how the Father does
manifest himself by the Son, and only by the Son. He had now manifested
himself in a great work, and they would take no notice of it; they take notice
only of a Sabbothbreaker, and a blasphemer; there shall be such a
manifestation of the Father in the Son, as shall make you marvel; the Father
has given him power to raise the dead and judge the world; and as the Father
has life in himself, so he has given unto the Son to have life in himself,
and he has given him authority to execute judgment. Christ has all that the
Father has, only here is the difference: He has it as gift, it is given him.
Now to prevent that which they might object and say, You take too much upon
you; Christ answers it in verse. 30. I can of my own self do nothing; as I hear
I judge, and my judgment is just, etc. I told you the son has life in
himself, and that he raises the dead: and has power of judgment. But I told
you withal, it was given him, I can of my self do nothing, etc.

My design in presenting you with this Text, is, to show unto those that do
believe in Christ, what they have in Christ, and to show them whence it is, and
whence their witness and testimony is for that they have, whence it is they are
owned in that power and Majesty. The power of the Resurrection is Christ's, and
the power of judgment is Christ's, and Christ witnesses that it is his from
whom he received this power, I can of my own self do nothing, and if I bear
witness of my self, my witness is not true; All that Religion and godliness
that is not in power, and all that power that is earthly, and that testimony
thereunto that is worldly, is worth nothing: Christ undertakes great things, he
challenges power to raise the dead, Authority of judgment, and this is all
given him from the Father, his Record is on high; his witness is the Father.
Here are many testimonies named, but he looks above them all: here is his own
witness. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true; There is man's
witness: I receive not witness from man; there is the witness of the eminent
and excellent among men; but he lays them by, and looks above them all to God.
Here is the witness of John, who was a burning and a shining light. In the 46.
verse, There is an other witness, Moses: If you had believed Moses, you would
have believed me, for he wrote of me. But there is another witness, a greater
then that of John or Moses, ver. 36. The works which the Father has given me
to finish, bear witness of me; Works are an excellent witness: but the works
which the Father has given me, they are excellent indeed, yet are laid by.
These are not sufficient, for they must have a testimony themselves, and
therefore are laid by. Here is the Scripture, verse. 39. Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of
me: He lays by this witness too: ye will not come to me that you might have
life. The Scripture holds forth me, and eternal life in me: but ye will not
come to me: Thus here are several degrees of testimony; one above the other,
but there is but one to be rested in, and that is the testimony that enables
all the other, the testimony of the Father, Ver. 32. There is another that
bears witness of me, and I know the witness that he witnesses of me is true.
Who is that? Verse. 37. The Father himself that has sent me, has born witness
of me.

Is not the Fathers witness in the Scripture, and in Christ's witness, and in
John's witness, and in the Works of Christ? It is: and as the Fathers witness is
there, they are witnesses that have validity; they make an end of the
controversy. The Father not appearing in them, they cannot settle the heart,
nor decide the controversy. It is the Father only that is the sufficient
witness; the Father without these, the Father in these; but these without the
Father are nothing. The truth of these is the Father; the life of these is the
Father; And the world does not know the Father, Verse. 37. Ye have neither heard
his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.

My design in this Scripture, is, to call you up to the Father: And this is the
design of Christ, that he travels with, to bring us unto God: he suffered, the
just for the unjust, to bring us unto God. Here is rest, and nowhere on this
side it; the Scripture in the Father, and the Father in the Scripture; the
Father in the Ministry of man, and the Ministry of man in the Father; the
Father in the works that are done, and the works done in the Father; we must
know the Father, if we will know Christ. It is true, we may know the Father,
and not know that we know the Father: He that has seen me, has seen the
Father, (says Christ) let us look therefore for an express manifestation of
the Father, whose express image the Son is, God in Christ. Now for the works
here.

And first, touching Christ's working and judging, verse. 30. I can of my own
self do nothing; as I hear, so I judge, and my judgment is just, because I
seek not my own will, but the will of the Father which has sent me.

Secondly, of the witness and testimony of Christ; If I bear witness of my
self, my witness is not true; I can do nothing of my own self. The Scripture is
pure contradiction unto a carnal man: and the spiritual man that speaks
according to it, is judged by the world to speak contradiction. The world is
tender to charge the Scripture with it; but is bold to charge them that speak
from the Scripture. I can do nothing of my own self, and yet I can do all
things: Christ has Two selfs: and a Christian has Two selfs, the natural
self, and the spiritual self; There is, my self of Adam, and my self of God: I
can do nothing of my self, of this creaturely self, but of God, and in God, I
can do all things. Isa. 11. 3. It is said, He shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. There is himself of
Adam, and himself of God; according to the former, he judges as he hears:
according to the latter, he judges not by the hearing of the ear: The Spirit
of the Lord makes him of quick understanding: The Lord is my strength and
righteousness, and my self in the Lord judges and does things the world shall
marvel at. I do of my self, and I do not of my self; I do my own will, and I do
not my own will: Thus there are two selfs. It is not I, but Christ that lives
in me, says the Apostle; it is Christ that lives, and not I. I can do nothing
of my self. There is an estate in Christ, in which we neither can nor will
displease God. I can do nothing of my self, I cannot do my own will, but the
will of the Father; such an estate there is in Christ, and we are all called to
the state of Christ; Christ in us, Christ formed in us, risen in us, the glory
of Christ, the glory of the body; Christ and his body are not severed; the same
kingdom and glory is theirs; he has called us into the fellowship of his
kingdom and glory: God in Christ, and Christ in us; as God is in Christ, so
Christ is in believers: That which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man to conceive, has God prepared for them that love
him: because I live, ye shall live also. The Saints life, is the life of
Christ: there is an estate in which we neither can nor will displease the
Father. It is the state of God that cannot deny himself; this is that we are
called to, the life of God, the life of God in Christ: This state is not
manifested, but it is manifesting; we can do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth: we are kept by the power of God through Faith to salvation; God
acting and governing the words that I speak; I speak not of my self; Christ
spoke in God; and it shall be, that all we speak, and all we do, we shall speak
in Christ, and do it all in Christ; as God is in Christ, so Christ is in us,
Joh. 14. 10. The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the
Father that dwells in me, he does the works, And so Christ in us; and when
Christ is grown up in us, and risen in us, and glorified in us, there shall
none be seen nor heard but Christ: There is a state in Adam, wherein we can
will and do good or evil indifferently; there is a corrupt state that neither
can will nor do good: there is an estate in Christ, wherein we cannot, we will
not displease God. This is that we wait for, to have Christ thus brought forth
in us, and we brought forth in him thus perfect: I can of my own self do
nothing.

Secondly, see here how Christ lives out of himself in God the Father; and this
is that which Christians do as they are Christians; they live out of
themselves, and they live in Christ. They neither do nor will, but Christ wills
in them. Its said Christ pleased not himself. He that does all of himself, he
does all to please himself; he in whom God does all, he does all to please God:
he does all in the Lord, and to the Lord; not my will, but thy will be done;
His natural will stood up sometime and would be owned: but it was brought to
submit; Not my will, but thy will be done. And here it appears, who speaks of
himself, and who speaks not of himself: he that seeks himself, speaks of
himself: but he that seeks not his own glory, but the glory of him that sent
him, he speaks not of himself. And take notice of this, that righteousness so
far forth appears in us, as we go out of our selves: as we lay by our own wills
and judgments, so far forth we are righteous and just: My judgment is just,
because I seek not my own will, but the will of him that sent me: we are so far
righteous before God, whose judgment is according to truth, as we go out of
our selves, and out of our own wills: My judgment is just, because I seek not
my own will: He that lays by himself, and seeks not his own honor, he that
goes out of his own Reason, and his own will, he is a righteous man indeed:
Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of God, and in his (even Gods)
wisdom and power he walks and acts; and so far forth as we walk in Christ, who
is the wisdom and power of God, we are owned by God to be just and righteous,
and no further: all our own wisdom is folly to God, and all our own
righteousness is wickedness to God. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God
is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: So far
forth are we righteous, in Gods account, as we lay by our own Reason, and our
own Wills: Christ acts in the wisdom and power of God; so far forth as we act
in Christ, we act in the wisdom and power of God: and so far we are true and
just. There is no righteousness nor wisdom but the Lord: therefore so far forth
as we are found in him, we are wise and righteous; that I may be found in him
(says Paul) His own light led him, till God was pleased to reveal his son in
him, and then he saw there was no wisdom or righteousness but in him: That I
may be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, etc.
That I may know the power of his death, and the fellowship of his sufferings,
if that by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead; man's light
is darkness, and his wisdom is enmity. The great lesson of the Gospel is
self-denial; the state that the Gospel calls us unto, is the state of the
Resurrection: it is a going out of the flesh into the spirit. The business of
the Gospel is, not to save our selves, but to lose our selves: and in losing
our selves, we shall save our selves: This is a riddle and a mystery, and they
that know not a spiritual life, the life of God, know not what to make of it. I
do not my own will, and I know my judgment is just, because I do not my own
will: but the will of him that sent me: Let every one that professes the
Gospel, consider whether he walks by this rule, whether he seeks righteousness
by going out of himself into Christ, or whether he seeks it in himself, whether
he seeks it in a new creature, whether he looks for the new creature that is
born of God, and brought forth in his Image, which is righteousness and true
holiness, and not counterfeit: There is counterfeit holiness, counterfeit
righteousness; the righteousness of man, the holiness of man is abominable and
filthy in the sight of God: I beseech you (says Paul) that ye would not be
conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Romans
12. He that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself: You that seek Christ,
you wait to purpose in the Gospel: and you that have Christ, you have the
Gospel, which is the light and life and glory of God: Do not rest in a bare
profession, nor in man's righteousness: nor in some poor outward reformation: Do
not rest in repairing and beautifying old Adam: Christ came from God and we are
going to God: Let us see our estate in Christ: For we are chosen in him, and we
are of him: And he is made of God our wisdom, etc. It is a vain thing to go
about the work of repairing, to build Jerico: to be patching and peicing an old
garment, to put old wine into new bottels: You will but make rents and
breaches: Adam was only a shadow and type of that which was to come: Look after
the new man, who shall make straight that which is crooked, and supply that
which is wanting; give up your selves to the spiritual man: the second man who
is the Lord from heaven: Be making toward the fellowship of his sufferings,
and labor to attain the Resurrection from the dead: Make to Christ as he is the
Resurrection: He is righteous indeed that is righteous before God; none shall
be owned righteous but he; his name shall be called the Lord our Righteousness.
To walk in our own reason, and our own light, and wisdom: to follow man's will,
and consult with flesh and blood, may be applauded by man: but we shall have
the portion of fools and wicked ones from the Lord: Were it not better to be a
fool and a wonder, and a gazing stock to men, then to be abhorred of God? We
must go forth without the gate, bearing our reproach! How can it be otherwise
but he that has laid by his own Reason and Will, and professes he is born of
God, and that God alone shall be his guide, shall be accounted a fool and a mad
man, and out of his wits? It is very hard to be sober to God, but we must be
mad to men: I come to the witness, the testimony in ver. 31. If I bear witness
of my self, my witness is not true: Here is a witness that is received as
insufficient: There is no witness authentic but the Father: He does not
witness of himself, nor do of himself: and yet he does do of himself: he has
life in himself, and he witnesses of himself, and his witness is true. If this
be a contradiction, it is a Scripture contradiction, See Joh. 8. 14. Will you
say its a Scripture contradiction? The Scripture is a contradiction and
nonsense to those that judge after the flesh: You will not say it of the
Scripture; but you will say it of them that preach Scripture, that they speak
contradiction. ver. 16. Yet if I judge, my judgment is true: Why? For I am not
alone, but I and the Father that sent me are one. If I were alone, my witness
were not true, but the Father and I being one, without contradiction the
judgment is true.

Object. But how can this be, that Christ witnessing of himself, his witness
should not be true? without controversy, man witnessing of himself, his
witness is not true, because he is sinful: But Christ was pure, there was no
guile found in his mouth.

To this I answer: Though he was a pure and a spotless creature, yet he had
weakness in him, and ignorance in him: It is said he grew in stature and
knowledge. Christ never witnessed any thing but what was true, but he never
brought forth the full truth: He was to bring forth himself in his body: in a
higher way, in greater power then he appeared in the flesh. He that believes in
me, greater works shall he do then I do, because I go to the Father. There are
two things required in a witness; faithfullness and knowledge: There wanted
nothing of faithfulness; there wanted of knowledge in Christ: he grew in
knowledge: Christ in us does know all things: Therefore be not cast down though
thou do not yet know all things. Upon this account it is that John takes off
the new man, and the spiritual man from sinking into sorrow, upon the judgment
he passes on himself: He that is in thee, is greater then thy heart, and knows
all things: Judge nothing before the time till the Lord come: and if Christ in
that pure nature was not ripe to pass a judgment, wonder not that we cannot do
it in this corrupt nature: I bear not witness of my self says Christ: I judge
not my own self: he that judges me is the Lord, says Paul: If I bear witness
of my self, my witness is not truth: There is an other that bears witness, and
I know his witness is true; And who is this other? It is the Father ver. 37.
The Father himself that has sent me, he bears witness of me; Christ lays by
all testimony but this. The fathers and all testimony except the Father be in
it, to give us settlement and assurance, fall short: For none knows the Son but
the Father: and he to whom the Father reveals him: Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God. Blessed art thou Simon: flesh and blood has not revealed this
to thee, but my Father. He that establishes you together with us is God: There
are three witnesses: and these are one: the Father and the Son and the Spirit.
And there is nothing more concerns those that profess to know Jesus Christ,
then to examine how they came to know him, whether they have had this knowledge
by the teaching of the Father. The baptism of John, is it from heaven or from
men? So your knowledge, is it from God, or from men? have you received it from
your good Ministers, or from your own reason or light, or from the Spirit of
the Father? It concerns us to consider this: Let the world Jeer and Scoff, and
cry Fancy and Whimsie, and what they will: There is no true knowledge of
Christ, nor of the Scripture, but by revelation. It is that the Apostle prays
for, That God would give unto you the Spirit rf revelation. All the learned in
that only Church of the Jews were all blind, and did not receive Christ: Who
were they that received him? they were born of God. If we speak of Consciences
testimony, let us remember that it is my conscience bearing me witness in the
holyghost: This is the witness of the Father in your consciences: then the
voice of conscience is a glorious voice: This is speaking in Christ; I speak
the truth in Christ, I lie not, says Paul, my conscience bearing me witness;
he speak in the Father: these three are one, and make up one witness that is
true. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, etc. Look now what your
faith stands in: stands it in the wisdom of men or the power of God? Let every
one of us be looking after the power and life of the Father, and of Christ that
we may see the Father: he that has seen me, has seen the Father, says Christ
to Philip. Let us dwell no more in man, nor upon man, but let us look higher.
It is written, all thy sons shall be taught of God: You never come to peace,
nor rest, till you come to God, to the Father. As the Father appears more
clearly to you in Christ: so you come to true peace, stability, and Settlement;
and till ye come to him, ye are like children tossed up and down with every
wind of Doctrine; One Sect of men blows this way, another Sect blows an other
way: and so we are tossed up and down till we come to know the Father by the
Spirit in Christ: We are weary of all Religion, and settle nowhere, till we
come to find the rock, to find God: till we come to hear him speak that has
the words of eternal life, that speaks power and life, and not as the Scribes.
We never come to put off the old man till we come to hear Christ, and the truth
as it is in him. Then we stand firm in all winds that blow and puff: This is to
hear the Father: then we put off the old man: Silly women we are, weak and
foolish creatures till then: He that establishes you is God: when shall we
cease from man? There is another that bears witness of me, and his witness is
true: And when we have his witness, it will satisfy: And we shall know that
his witness is true, but the world does not know him: This is satisfaction to
Christ, that he knows the Father, and the Father knows him, though the world
does not know him: but they shall know him to their destruction and confusion,
when he comes forth to be revealed, and to be glorified in his Saints; I know
his witness is true: I mind not, I esteem not the judgment of the world: Let
the world say and think what they will; My witness is in Heaven, and my Record
is on high: I mind not, I esteem not the judgment of the world; I know my
witness is true: There is the rest of the Saints of God. Men call you before
their judgment seats, and you cannot satisfy them: They cannot be satisfied:
but your satisfaction is in God: And the world cannot see God: yet the Saints
can pity the world in their madness and blindness.

Now he comes to the testimony of John: Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness
of me; but I received not testimony from man.

Christ humbles himself very low to plead John's witness: He alleges John's
testimony against them: They did not own him, but they did own John: They
inquired of John whether he was the Christ: John told them plainly he was not
the Christ, but he pointed them unto Christ: yet they receive not John's
testimony, and so Christ makes it a testimony against them: This is all that
carnal Professors get (that do not love the truth) by searching out the truth:
they meet with a testimony against themselves.

See how low God has put himself; into such a condition that he needs man's
witness: He has withdrawn himself, and set up the world; While God is in this
low state, the world sits in judgment, and the Devil has the power: But there
will be a time when God will come forth without witness: And when he appears he
will say, Bring forth your witnesses and your strong reasons. We look what
witness God has among men. How few and inconsiderable were the witness that
Christ had in respect of the world? He sent to John a man that had nothing to
commend him according to the flesh: Ye have heard of old Simeon, he bare
witness unto Christ: And of Hanna an old woman, she bare witness also; But look
among the Priests and Elders, the Scribes and Pharisees, Famed, Learned and
godly men; and how few were there among them that bare witness unto Christ? How
should we long that the witnesses might finish their testimony, when the Lord
himself will come forth, that every eye may see him, and all people own him!

Christ sent unto John, but received not testimony from man; but these things
(says he) have I spoken unto you, that ye might be saved. Here is a people had
nothing in their hearts but killing, and Christ had nothing in his heart
toward them but saving; And upon this design did Christ travail all the while
he was amongst them: There was wheat among the chaff of the world; and all his
dealing in the world was to gather the Wheat from the chaff.

There is no testimony worth any thing but where God appears. Christ testifies
of John that he was a burning and a shining light: The face of God shining is
day: This day dawned in John: such witnesses we expect, such a Ministry we
expect in whom we may see the light and purity of God consuming sin, burning up
chaff: The Ministry of God in John, the light of God set up in John, was that
which made him a burning and shining light. Do we know such a Ministry or no?
It is this only that is to be desired: The Ministry of the Spirit, of the Holy
Ghost and fire: This is the Ministry we should look after: We have too long
dwelt in men, and languished in men's gifts, and parts, Wisdom and Elocution:
Let us be looking after the light and life of God, after God in Christ
manifested unto us, and in us, by the Spirit.

SERMON III.
JOHN. 5. 30. I can of my self do nothing: as I hear I judge: and my judgment
is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.


TO direct us unto the testimony of Christ that we may rest in, that is the
design of this Scripture. The occasion thereof you have heard before.

Christ had healed a Cripple, and enabled him to carry his bed and walk; and
had commanded him to do so, and he did so: The righteous men are offended at
it; the litteral Jews cannot bear it: Christ is an offense to the religious
Professor that is born after the flesh: they say he has broken the Sabbath,
and is worthy to be stoned: Christ justifies his act, and tells them, that what
he had done was a manifestation of the Father in him; then they say he is also
a blasphemer in saying that God was his father, making himself equal with God:
and seek the more to kill him.

Mark where the litteral Jews and carnal Professors stumble at that which is
our life, because he said God was his Father. To speak of our union with God,
is that which carnal professors cannot bear.

Christ tells them, though now they would take no notice of that power wherein
he appeared, yet they should see that which would make them marvail; for they
should see him raise the dead.

In the words read, he prevents an Objection.

Object. Ye take too much upon you; what will you raise the dead? Who gave you
that power?

Sol. I can of my self do nothing, etc. I seek not mine own will, but the will
of the Father that sent me. Christ does that he does in the Father, he does it
not in that creaturely nature he derived from Adam: he lives and walks out of
his own Reason and Will as he descended from Adam: He lives, and walks, and
acts in the Father; this is that the Gospel calls us to, to live and act in the
power of Christ as he lived and acted in the Father. And if ye will know, in a
word, what the Gospel calls us unto; it is to be mad, to be besides our own
Reason and Will, this is-to be mad to men; but it is to be sober to God. The
Gospel is nothing else but the bringing forth of Christ in us; it calls us from
conformity to the world, and from walking as men, into the life of God. We are
called to be transformed by the renewing of our mind, that God might speak and
act, and work in us; we are called to conformity to Christ; I can of my self do
nothing; as I hear, so I judge, etc.

To be a Christian indeed, is another thing then its ordinarily taken for. Is
it to come into a form? is it to make a fair show in the flesh? No, it is to be
transformed by the renewing of our minds: it is to be brought under the
righteousness of God, to be clothed with it, to be brought under the name of
the Lord our righteousness.

Object. In ver. 31. Christ prevents an other Objection: Thou bear witness
of thy self.

Sol. If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. And here Christ
runs over diverse testimonies, and shows what is the true testimony to be rested
in: He lays aside diverse testimonies, and directs them only to one, the temony
of the Father; If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true: Christ's
testimony as man, though a pure man, yet because he had weakness, is not
sufficient: Christ without the Father was not a sufficient witness; to rest on
the testimony of our consciences, or on men, though the eminentest among men,
yea or on the letter of the Scripture, is not sufficient: Therefore Christ lays
them all by; In ver. 46. he comes to the testimony of Moses: Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me: for he testified of me: There is no testimony
sufficient to settle our hearts that this is he that is Christ, but the
Fathers. All testimonies besides that of the Father, need a testimony to
themselves; It Is neither Moses, nor the Scriptures, nor Christ's works can settle
our hearts, unless the Father be in them, for they need a farther testimony,
even of the Father. We must come to the revelation of the Father by the Spirit,
if ever we will be settled.

Thus far I led you the last time.

Now a little more concerning John's testimony: ver. 33. Ye sent unto John, and
he bare witness of the truth. Joh. 1. The Jews sent Priests and Levites to John
to ask him whether he were the Christ: and John bare witness unto the truth: He
confessed he was not the Christ: but that he was sent to bear witness unto
Christ: Christ he received no testimony from man; This is that which Christ
presses here: Christ in us, or in whomsoever he is, he looks above man, he
looks not for witness from man, nor honor from man: How can ye believe that
seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God alone?
Concerning the testimony Christ gives of John ver. 35. he was a burning and a
shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; I
shall speak something of this.

John bare witness unto Christ, and bare witness by poynting him out: John had
a clearer manifestation of Christ in the flesh then any that went before him:
and so his witness was with more power: He was a burning and a shining light:
John was ( a) light, but he was not ( the) light: John 1. 8. The same came to
bear witness of the light. He was not that light, but he was sent to bear
witness of the light. He was the light, and he was not: So far forth as he was
a witness of it, he was not it: He was of the body of light, of which Christ
was the head: He was not the light, in the clearness and fullness of it, but he
was the light in a degree; It was the true light that shined in him, and in
that light he saw and showed forth, and witnessed it unto others: There is no
discovery or manifestation of Christ, but in Christ. Christ calls his
disciples the light; Ye are the light of the world: So he calls John a light;
but yet the least in the Kingdom of God is greater then John; John Baptist was
the conclusion of that administration that went before Christ in the flesh: He
was a light, a burning and a shining light: He did partake more of the Divine
Nature then those that went before him: He saw Christ at a nearer distance; he
burnt, and shind more, and this burning and shining was nothing else but the
Divine nature: The truth is, there is no true Prophet, no true testimony given
of Christ, but by those that see him: And the nearer to him, the clearer sight
of him, the more clear and powerful is the testimony that is given of him:
That testimony that is given to him by those that do not see him present and
come, is not indeed a testimony to Christ, but to Antichrist: He is such a
Prophet as Balaam was, that had nothing but Notion; He was a lying Prophet that
complied with the world for a reward: And whosoever take upon them to be
Prophets, and do complie with the World, are lying Prophets as he was: All true
Prophets that Prophesied of Christ, saw him, and he was in them: Abraham saw my
day (says Christ;) and it was Christ himself that preached in the days of Noah,
as Peter has it: But John was much above the Prophets, seeing Christ at a
nearer distance then they did: A Prophet (says Christ) Yea, I say unto you,
and more then a Prophet. John made a greater noise, a greater stir and bustle
in the world then the Prophets before. They came forth with power, but they
witnessed in sackloth in comparison of John. The Prophets before John had
nothing like that respect that John had: There went out to him all Judea and
Jerusalem: Yea the Saduces and Pharisees went out to him: and yet see how he
takes them up! O generation of Vipers, who has forwarned you to fly from the
wrath to come? See how he deals with Herod: With what Majesty; that its said
Herod feared him; They were dazzled at his light, and scorcht with his fire: He
was the greatest before Christ: He came in the Spirit and power of Elias.

There are witnesses to Christ in the flesh, and there are witnesses to Christ
in the Spirit. There are witnesses to his first coming in the similitude of
sinful flesh: and there are witnesses to his second coming without sin to
Salvation; And the nearer to him, the clearer sight of him, the more
transformed into his Image, the more powerful will be the witness: He that is
a true Prophet, or a true witness, does not only tell us of truth or of Christ:
but he does appear truth and appear Christ: Here is truth, here is Christ, here
is the Spirit. There is no true Prophet, or witness of Christ, but he sees him
come. But What! is Christ come? He is come, and he is coming; The hour is
coming and now is: He is, and he was, and he is to come: He is come the Lamb
slain: and he is come the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: So far forth aswe are
true witnesses, we see him amongst us, we can point him out, This is He. We see
him in Faith: Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: We see him in hope, Christ
in you the hope of glory: We see him the wisdom of God, and the power of God:
We see him such a one as cares not for man: Master, we know that thou art true,
and carest not for any man's person: We see him one that takes away sin: It is
he that is our righteousness and holiness: It is he that is the true light: It
is his day coming that shall darken the Sun, and the Moon: It is he that makes
the whole Creation to shake; It is he that commands Devils and Hell,
Principalities and Powers: In that degree we see him, and have communion with
him, in that degree we witness to him: He is coming, and he is come without sin
to Salvation: He is amongst us, and in the midst of us; and if you see him not,
if you know him not, it is because you are in darkness.

He is come, and John is come that bears witness of him: Who is John that bears
witness to him? He that calls you from man to that one Master: He that is
decreasing before him, and rejoices in it: He that is dying into him, and
seeking to rise in him, that is sending all Disciples to him, and confessing
him, and professing that all were Thieves and Robbers that went before him,
that had drawn Disciples after them.

That Ministry that is calling us off from man, from the glowworm light of
this Creation, from man's parts and gifts into the Spirit, that's the Ministry we
should look after.

This same John came out of the wilderness: He came not in a fleshly garb. He
came not in that which commends him to man: He feared not man, nor his terror:
He cared neither for Herod's glory, nor the Pharisees applause: He was leading
men above the excellency of this creation, and bidding them look beyond it: He
comes not into the Ministry upon the old account, by the way of Succession or
Election by man's laying on of hands, or call of Churches, but by the Spirit; He
comes of the Priesthood, but not in the ordayning way: When his parents were
old, when their bodies were dead, when his Father was dumb, when man's Ministry
had been tried, then he comes forth, not in the wisdom of man, but in the power
of the Spirit; He comes out of the wilderness in Spirit: So Christ is among us
in the Spirit: These are the mighty witnesses, and this is that which makes
them mighty: Seeing of Christ: This is the Ministry we should look after: Look
after such witnesses, and look to be such witnesses: to be seers indeed, and
not in a bare notion as Balaam was: to see him in us, and our selves in union
with him: to hold him forth, to hold forth the truth, to hold forth
righteousness, and to be able to say, Here it is.

The Ministry of those that profess themselves the Ministers of Christ, and yet
do not see Christ, the world takes hold on it, and runs into it, and so it
comes to nothing.

The Ministry of those that see Christ by the power of Christ, does stop the
mouths of Mockers and Scoffers that say Where is the promise of his coming?
Why, he is come, and he is coming: That is the true Ministry that sees him; and
this is that which will grow exceedingly terrible to the world: This is such a
Ministry as the world is not able to stand before; As Christ comes nearer, so
the Ministry of the Spirit will be more burning and shining; more dazzling and
tormenting to the world; and if any oppose it, O what burning and tormenting
then! Burning and shining is the demonstration of the Spirit and Power: The
Divine nature in us is that fire from the Altar that never goes out: That fire
that shall change our vile bodies, and make them like his glorious body: that
fire that shall put out and darken the glory of the world: And that is the
reason of the Eclipse of the Sun, which Naturalists cannot find out, the
greater light coming: the Lord himself, the Sun of righteousness appearing, the
light of gifts, of parts, and of natural reason presently disappears and
vanishes; They are but as the light of a glowworm to the Sun.

There is a fire of passion kindled by the fire of Hell: The fire that Sampsons
Foxes carried away in their tayls, as its said: Wickedness burns like a fire:
The fire of the Spirit putts out this fire.

A burning and a shining light: The manifestation of God in his servants is
fire and light: its burning and shining; and the nearer God approaches, the
hotter the fire, the more shining the light.

Burning and shining; In burning there is great suffering, there is torment,
there is slaying, and offering up, there is assimilating; In shining there is
light, Quickening, Comforting, Directing; and there is Majesty, and Glory, and
all the burning of the Lord comes forth at last in shining and Glory; There is
no shining without burning: The day of the Lord burns like an Oven: And he
shall sit as a Refiner of Silver: The trial of your faith is much more precious
then Gold: The manifestation of God, the Ministry of the Spirit, is full of
variety of operation; Killing, Saving, Tormenting, Refreshing; We are the
savor of death unto death to some, and the savor of life unto life, to
others: We should look what acquaintance we have with such a Ministry: with
burning and shining light; Whether we have dealt with fire, with burning, and
whether through that we have come to know what belongs to shining: There is the
Divine nature to be brought forth bright and shining: The worlds part is to be
burnt and dazzled; the Christians part is to have flesh consumed, and the Divine
nature to come forth in glory; If any be in the fire, let them hope to shine:
Have ye that in you that will endure the fire? When I am tried I shall come
forth like gold; It Is the righteousness of God only, not of man that will
endure this trial: It Is the Divine nature only that can stand before devouring
fire, and everlasting burnings; When this day breaks forth, all the righteous
Pharisees and Formalists, will be found to be the sinners in Sion that are
afraid.

This manifestation of God is terrible to the world: It is a marvelous light:
He has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light; It is not the light
of this world; It is another Spirit then that of this world. The world marvails
at it, and despises it, because it is death and destruction to them: For a
while they Master it, but at last it prevails against them, and they see there
is no standing before it.

In Low manfestations of God, the people of God appear as Incendiaries, and are
so indeed. This old world is to be purified by fire, as the other was by water;
How was Herod scorcht and dazzled with this fire? The world prevails against it
for a while, and beats it down, and then it rises higher and higher, till it
prevail over the world: Christ appeared in fleshly eyes there, and rises again
in Spirit; and after a long apostasy is rising again the second time. If we be
of God and have the Divine nature in us, we shall rejoice not only in the
light but in the fire: They shall glorify God in the fire.

Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; Let us a little consider
of these words: Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; the light
did in part please you: there is some compliance and closing of carnal hearts
and worshipers, with the spiritual Ministry and true appearance of God. The
world strikes in for some time into the way of Christ, and the appearance of
God; Herod heard John gladly, and reformed many things; he liked the light
well, but he could not endure the fire; there is that which is held forth in
the spirit, that pleases the natural man; salvation, and glory, and eternal
joy; but when they hear of going into the fire, and what they must part withal,
then with the young man, they go away sorrowful: The stony ground sets forth a
sort of people, that hear the word with joy, but because they have not much
root, they are scorcht and burnt up by the Sun of persecution, and wither away;
many take up the profession of Christ, and when they hear of salvation and
glory, its good news to them: but when they hear what it will cost them, that
all must come through sufferings, and offering all to death, that they may
receive all again by a Resurrection, this they like not, and so fall away; for
a little while they can bear God company, but so soon as they see the cross in
the way, they turn aside.

There are some lusts and corruptions that some men are not inclined to; while
the fire of God comes forth against these in others, they are well enough;
while God comes forth against some sort of men, they can bear well enough;
while John came forth against the Sadduces and Pharisees, Herod liked it well:
but when the fire of God breaks forth against their own lusts, as against
Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife, they can bear no
longer.

And there are lusts that fight one against another, for there is enmity in
Hell; when the fire comes forth and fights against a lust in another, we like
it well, but when it strikes at our own lusts, we cannot bear it.

And sometimes we fall out with the world, and are tired in the greatness of
our way; and then we can entertain something of Christ, and of truth.

Worldly men can go along with Christ for worldly designs; but if their design
be spoiled, no longer walking with Christ.

It concerns every one of us that have taken up a profession, that are
complying with such a Ministry as we look upon to be a Ministry of the spirit,
to look inward, and to consider whether we have the love of the truth in our
hearts; whether we are able to bear the charge to the journeys end, and to hold
out in all weathers. There are many builders that lay a foundation, but they
are not able to go through with the charge of finishing. These are foolish
builders, that expose themselves to laughter and scorn.

Ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light, in the manifestation of
God through John, but it was only for a season; here was not the love of the
truth; here was not the divine nature; here was not that which will abide,
therefore it was rejoicing in the light only for a season; how does it concern
us to look whether we have the love of the truth in us? whether we have the
testimony of the Father, that we love the truth? There is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and there is a Jew in the spirit: there was a Jew that was one
outwardly in the flesh: that which is for a season only, is because it wants
root: there is a Christian indeed, and a Christian only in appearance and
show; what a goodly show does the Corn on the stony ground make? but when the
burning comes, it withers away; when the Sun of persecution arises, such shall
be discovered; how hard it is to know a Christian indeed, until the fire comes,
until the salt comes, Every man shall be salted with fire, and every work shall
be tried by the fire; How does it concern us to see that we have our foundation
in God, that we may be able to stand in that day? We may be great and glorious
in man's eye, and yet in the day of the Lord prove no better then chafe or
stubble, that the fire takes hold on and consumes; what discoveries have we
daily of rottenness in professors; and as this day appears more, so there will
be greater discoveries.

You have such and such marks and signs, but they are things that need a
testimony to them; the Apostle John speaks of that testimony, The love of the
brethren: but it comes at length to this: We know that we dwell in him, and he
in us, by the spirit that he has given us.

Ye were willing for a season to rejoice, etc. Willing and rejoicing; how like
is this to the spirit? as if the day of Gods power had been amongst them, to
make them willing; but when that day comes, it will bring us to eternity; how
many be there, that have been willing and rejoicing in Christ, but now their
season is gone? Consider whether we are for a season only, or whether we are
for ever? Whether we are not only for the light, but for the fire? Christ is
yesterday, today, and the same for ever: It is a pitiful thing to be only for
a season: better not to be at all, and never to have known the way of
righteousness, then to be but blazing Stars and Comets, and at last fall to the
earth: with what confusion of face shall they be thrown down, that shall stand
up at the last day, and say, Lord, have we not preached, and prophesyed, and
cast out devils in thy name? when he shall answer them, Depart from me, I know
you not; he that is right in Religion indeed, is growing and increasing; he is
as a Tree planted by the Rivers side, that brings forth fruit, and whose fruit
remains.

If Christ be in us, he grows up in us, and we grow up in him; being rooted and
grounded in love, we grow up into his fullness, till we be filled with all the
fullness of God.

Ye were willing for a season; ye were professors for a season, Christians for
a season, the people of God for a season, and some for one season, and some for
another season; now lifted up to Heaven, and by and by thrown down to Hell*
this is a miserable case; better never to have known the way of righteousness,
better to have continued in our natural estate without making profession at
all, then to shine for a season, and afterward be cast into outward darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The Invalidity of Church Censures, where Christ is not judge.
SERMON. I.
1 COR. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is reported commonly that there is fornication
among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles,
that one should have his fathers wife.

And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that has done this
deed might be taken away from among you.

For I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as
though I were present, concerning him that has so done this deed.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,

To deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the
Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.


HEre is a foul sinner among Saints. And he that is a sinner is also a Saint.
Here is the whole company of Saints leavened, they are sinners by partnership;
All in carnal security, all of them in high conceits of their good estate. Ye
are puffed up (says he) in the second verse.

2. Here is that which Saints should do in such a case; When the corruption
within does break forth in such a manner, what should they do? should they talk
it about? [It is reported commonly.] should they trumpet it out? Or what should
they do? should they rail? should they scorn? should they throw stones? Nay,
but the Apostle tells us here, they should mourn. Ye are puffed up, and have not
rather mourned, that he that has done this deed might be taken away from among
you.

And thirdly, the Apostle is showing them, that by right mourning, there will
be power obtained to get free from this evil. To save our selves, and to save
sinners by destroying of sin. The Apostle, he was a mourner, as it is
plentifully expressed in 2 Cor. 7. And had obtained power of God to come forth
against this corruption and sin that was broken forth, even to cast it out.
This he expresses in the third verse. For I verily as absent in body, but
present in Spirit, have judged already, as though I were present concerning him
that has done this deed. He had gotten a power of judging: It was a power, I
have judged already.

Object. And if that Objection should be made. He was absent and not present;
Absent in body (says he) but present in Spirit. I have judged already.

Sol. The Apostle by the Spirit foreseeing that the Church (the Saints) here
should partake with him of the same power to judge this sinner, by humbling
themselves before the Lord, he summons them unto mourning, then calls them unto
judging, and shows them the assistance they should have* He shows them his
assistance, and shows them the common assistance of him and them: They should
have his Spirit, ver. 4. and he and they should have the power and assistance
of the Lord Jesus; In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered
together, and my Spirit, etc. You see the General scope: Let us now consider
the particulars in the Text. It is commonly reported that there is fornication
amongst them, etc. Sin among the Saints? Fornication, Fleshly uncleanness? this
may seem strange, to find this in a Church, to see this break out in a Saint!
It Is true, a Saint he was, but this was no piece of his Saintship. You may
think it strange, but it is only strange to them that have not seen the whore
that is in their own hearts. Filthy base uncleanness among Saints, what a sight
was this? Such as is not once named among the Gentiles (says the Apostle) not
named in any way of honor: not named in any way of good report: This to be
brought forth in the sight of the Sun! A tent spread in the face of the Sun!
Acts not fit to be named: Such as he is ashamed to speak of.

Many things might be observed from this first verse; As that first of al,
touching common fame: It is reported commonly.

Doct. Those Saints that are wise, will have as little to do in common fame as
may be: And what they receive by common fame, let them bring home to the
parties concerned, as the Apostle does here; It is commonly reported, says he,
The Apostle does not trade in this business; What he meets withal he brings
home to the persons concerned. We have experience enough in these days what
common fame is, what report is: I shall not speak of that.

Touching the sins of Saints, that also might be spoken to.

Doct. 2. That there is the same corruption, the same corrupt nature in a Saint
as in others. It is true, As we are Saints we partake of the Divine nature: but
there is the corrupt nature also. There is the flesh as well as the Spirit. If
the Spirit be asleep, if God give Satan Power, and say to him, as he did once,
Go, and be a lying Spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets. Go, and be an unclean
Spirit in such a ones heart: What mischief may he not do? If God withdraw, and
let Satan out against David; What a condition is David in? what befalls the
poor Corinthian here? he was a Saint indeed, but a Saint besmeared with sin.
God has many glorious designs in such a desertion, in such a temptation.

Reas. For by this he does make Gins, and Nets, and Snares, and stumbling
blocks unto the world, wherein being catched, and broken, they fall, and never
rise again.

Doct. 3. Further we might see here from that first verse how there is a civil
righteousness among the Gentiles: Even Gentiles and Heathens, they do keep
themselves free from gross carnal actings: they are free from gross
defilements, all the filthiness lies within: There it lies hid till
temptation draw it forth.

Doct. 4. And this also is to be taken notice of, that abstaining from outward,
gross, filthy actings, will make us no better then the Gentiles. If our
righteousness be only an abstaining from outward gross acts, it will be no
better a righteousness then the righteousness of the Gentiles, and of the
Heathen. There is all filthiness within, but it is restrained and comes not
forth. Oh, How does it concern us that we be not found worse then the Gentiles!
When that which is within breaks forth in all filthy, and beastly, and
abominable practice, this is to be worse then the Gentiles. We are no better
then the Gentiles if we outwardly abstain; We are worse then the Gentiles if we
let these corruptions break forth. Such Fornication as is not once named among
the Gentiles.

Doct. 5. And here we see how it lies upon Saints to possess their vessels in
sanctification and in honor. It lies upon them, and there is a Law for them as
well as for the World. The difference is, that the world has a Law upon them
from without, an imposition: A Saint, if he be a Saint indeed, has the same
Law within; the Law without only restrains; the Law of the Spirit of life
within it crucifies, it mortifies, it kills the very root of sin.

Object. To those that say they are not fleshly in fleshly lusts;

Answ. We have this to say in way of answer.

1. Some say so and discover the contrary; and some have said so, and have had
a discovery of the contrary in their own hearts.

2. Again we say that we have no experience of any such thing.

3. We say that there is a Spirit that discovers and judges, and therefore let
them that say so look to it: When this same Spirit shall come forth in us, we
shall be able to judge: till then we are silent.

I conceive there be two sorts of Ranters in the world; one that comes forth in
all fleshly beastliness: another that comes forth in scorn, and disdain,
insulting and lifting up themselves upon that occasion. Let us wait upon God to
be delivered from both these. That for the first verse.

What is to be done, when boyles and blaines do break out, when such corruption
and filth is discovered? Lets consider that. What shall we do? Shall we
reproach? Shall we throw stones? Shall we insult? Shall we despise? Shall we
judge? He that has the Spirit, let him judge. As concerning the outward acts,
let the Magistrate do his duty; but he that judges, let him see that the beam
be first pulled out of his own eye: let him see that the whore be judged in his
own heart and burnt there. He that is without sin (says Christ) let him throw
the first stone. What then is to be done? the second verse of the Chapter shows
us: and shows what these Corinthians evilly did. They were puffed up, (says he)
and have not rather mourned, that he that had done this deed might be taken
away from among you. Mourning is the effect which such discoveries should bring
forth in Saints hearts. The sin of this person was a sadding thing, a sad
spectacle; Mourning and confessing the root of that evil in their own Spirits,
all that baseness and abominable filth in their own hearts, should have been
the fruit of this persons fall. I know that in me (says Paul) that is in my
flesh dwells nothing that is good. This is that that is to be done, mourning
and making out for the Power of the Lord Jesus, that this evil may be judged,
and that there may be no more of this abomination committed amongst them.

But you are puffed up, and have not ratherer mourned: You are puffed up. After we
have looked upon this same filthiness that is broken out in one Saint: come and
let us see sin in the power of it, and seizing upon the whole congregation or
Church. There is the Devil among you, and you are proud, high, puffed up. High
conceits you have of your own excellency, of your good estate. We see how
Saints may fall asleep in carnal security, be lifted up in pride, blown up with
vain puffs, and swelled with wind, with conceits of goodness and excellency of
that which is not; made drunk, and intoxicated with high high thoughts of their
excellent condition, when as death and hell are among them in great power: Here
is the filthiness of hell among these Saints, and yet they are puffed up; what a
glorious congregation are they? in what an excellent state are they? Ye are
puffed up. The Apostles is expressing the workings of their hearts in the Chapter
before this, 1 Cor. 4. 8. Now ye are Full, now ye are Rich; Ye have reigned as
Kings without us: Ye are wise, ye are strong, ye are honorable; as it is in ver.
10. These were the conceits they had of themselves. You are puffed up; Carnal
security, pride among Saints; a whole Church, a whole congregation covered over
with it, drunken with it, not one of them awake Not a wise man among them, as
says the Apostle in another case, What is there not a wise man among you? Not
one that has his wits about him? all dead and senseless of Satan's stratagems
that had brought forth such lewdness and wickedness in the midst of them. Thus
you see Carnal security, and pride among Saints. There is a spiritual security,
security in God: and there is a brave highth of mind, boasting of God when it is
in truth: But this same pride is when there is conceit of that that is not. My
soul (says David) shall make her boast of God, and the humble shall hear
thereof and be glad. The new man's security, and the new man's glory! O that is
excellent, that is sweet. But here was fleshly security: flesh exalting it self
in conceits of the Spirit: The Devil transforming himself into an Angel of
light: and in this state and condition what wonder is it if the Devil work at
his pleasure. In such Mists, and Foggs as these, the Devil brings into our
hearts, and Congregations, all manner of filth and baseness that can be expressed
or thought of. Fornication not once named among the Gentiles, brought into a
Christian congregation.

Use. This calls upon us not to trust to our own hearts; He that does so is a
fool, says Solomon. And if we walk in Churches and Congregations, lets not
rest there as many do who look upon themselves, and think now they are safe,
now they are secure, they are in a Church, they have many eyes to watch over
them, they have Shepherds and Overseers. We may be all Overseers, and all
overseen, al asleep. The wise virgins slept. Take heed of carnal security; When
we see no sin, and feel no evil, it is carnal security, it is the Devils peace;
When we see no sin, and are not either complaining of sin, opposing sin,
fighting with sin, or else chasing it, driving it before us, it is carnal
security, it is the Devils Cradle, it is the Devils Bed.

Be not high-minded (says the Apostle) Let him that stands take heed lest he
fall. There be many say we are Kings, and we reign! O how excellent is our
estate: This is the voice that is heard in many Churches, in many
Congregations, when Paul stands by that has the Spirit of God and says, I
would to God it were so: I would to God you did reign indeed, then we should
reign with you. There is a worldly and fleshly walking in Church Fellowship;
The Devil gets into that form, as he has got into all others. We will be wise
to the world, and yet we will be in a Church, as the Apostle has it in ver.
10. of the foregoing Chapter; You are wise in Christ, strong in Christ, you are
honorable. This is that that is too too much seen in Churches and
Congregations. But we (says the Apostle) are fools for Christ's sake, we are
weak, we are despised, and are content to be so: It Is Christ's cross that we
bear, and we can rejoice in nothing but in this, that we are fools, that we are
weak, that we are despised; But we shall appear honorable. When Christ shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory.

Saints may fall asleep, fall into carnal security, be puffed up with pride, and
so be under a great power of the Devil, a great Snare. It may be any Saints
case; it was a whole Churches case here, and a Church that was gathered by the
Apostle: Is there not need that we should watch? Watch and pray that you fall
not into temptation. Is there not need that we should watch one over another?
Therefore it is that Churches and Congregations are gathered, that there may be
watching; that some may be awake while others sleep. But see here what watchmen
are if the Lord do not keep the City. The Congregation of Saints are the City
of God. Here are men, watchmen, and all the City asleep, all intoxicated, all
drunken, and lying in carnal security; the Devil and sin and death are walking
among them, and they are not sensible of it. It Is a sad thing to think of, that
there may be, and are Churches that are gathered together that they may laze
and drowse together, that they may nourish one another in carnal security,
strengthen one another in the world, and in the flesh: that thinks it is enough
there is a form of Godliness, that we are in Churchfellowship; and so lie down
together and sleep, and it is a sad thing. I have no quarrel with Churches, or
any form, but such as have not the Spirit in them. Here all are asleep, asleep
in death: You are puffed up when you should mourn: and here is Paul, he mournes
so that he wakens them all, he obtaines the Spirit of God, comes forth to them
in the Spirit, wakens them, and raises them up in the Spirit, to take
vengeance upon Satan, upon this sin, upon the flesh in this incestuous person:
Deliver him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh.

Ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned. Mark here how the Apostle charges
the whole Church and judges them: and they being judged, he brings them to
judge this incestuous person; And indeed there is no man fit to judge till he
has been under judgment himself. Ye are puffed up. First he arraigns them in
the Spirit, judges them, brings them all to mourning, and then he takes them up
with him into the Judgment Seat; and so they deal with this incestuous person;
they deliver him from Satan by delivering him unto Satan. They deliver him to
Satan for the destruction of the flesh.

Another thing worthy our thoughts is this; That there may be a partnership in
sin: We may be defiled by other men's sins by partnership, by a partaking.
Partake not of other men's sins, says the Apostle to Timothy. There is a
partaking of other men's sins while we see them, and are senseless of them: We
partake in them by any compliance or suting with them. You are puffed up (says
he) and have not rather mourned. (q. d.) There is such a person among you thus
defiled, and you are not ashamed. Here is the Corinthians sin, and whole
Churches sin; as it is laid to the charge of the Princes of Judah, Jer. 36. 24.
that when the King did cut the Roll that Baruch had written from the mouth of
Jeremie (which was the Prophet of the Lord) the Princes they looked on, and
none of them rent their garments; None of them were sensible of that contempt
and rebellion against God. The Apostle to the Ephesians chap. 5. calls upon us,
not to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them Mat. 18. 15. This is that which our Savor expresses when he
speaks of a brother offending.

Quest. If thy brother offend thee (says he) what is the meaning of a brothers
offending? What is it? If he has done thee any hurt, or wronged thee.

Answ. Nay, but this same offense by a brother is a brothers sin: And this does
appear plainly by that that Christ commands; If thou have told thy brother and
reproved him, and so have wrought upon thy brothers conscience that he is
convinced, thou have gained thy brother. So that the sin of a brother is an
offense and a wounding unto all the brethren, if they be awakned, if they live
(at that time) if they be not asleep, as these Corinthians were: If they be not
in carnal security, and intoxicated with pride, they shall feel a wound in his
wound, they shall find a loss in his loss; therefore he says, if he shall hear
thee, thou have gained thy brother. He does not speak of any outward wrong for
which men go to Law to recover them Right: but when there is a sense of the
wound and suffering of him that sins in thee, there is a sword that pierces thy
soul while it enters into his; and so when thou shall in the Spirit of God go
forth to recover him, and shall be successful, thou have gained thy brother,
and have taken off the offense from thy self.

This same offense by another sin: this same sense of another wounding
himself, and hurting himself, is that the Law of love calls for. We are all one
body, all the Saints live one life; and so while one is wounded, all are
wounded, if life be not buried in us. If we do live indeed, we shall find our
life hurt in another hurting himself. It is the life of God that is in the
Saints, and when one suffers all suffer. There is a partnership in others sins
by not taking notice of them, by a senselessness. You are puffed up (says the
Apostle) and have not rather mourned.

And this is that that concerns us to mind; We are for the most part narrowing
sin, making it as strait and as little as we can, to reach as little way as may
be; this is a way flesh has, to wash it self, to clear it self, instead of
fetching the blood of Christ to destroy it; But here we see our own sin may lie
upon us, and another man's sin also; We may partake of sin while that a brother
sins, and we are senseless: while we are puffed up, and do not mourn, while we
are senseless of a sin committed by a brother, it is a sin upon us. You see
then whas it is to have our hearts lifted up in pride and insulting, when we
see a brother sin. There is many a ones Religion is nothing else but insulting
upon others faults. God, I thank thee I am not like other men, nor as this
Publican. Many a man is a brave man when he sees another man base and vile. We
should carry our selves in the flesh as one with all flesh. We should carry our
selves in the Spirit as one in the Spirit with all the Saints. Who is weak
(says the Apostle) and I am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? Look
upon Jesus Christ, let him be our pattern. He bare our infirmities and took our
sickness. Therefore look if you can find Jesus Christ in you, that
compassionate high priest that will not go by the wounded traveller as that
Priest did in the story of the Gospel. Look for Christ in you; Know ye not that
Christ is in you? Prove your selves whether ye be in the Faith. Look for this
love and this compassion; Look for the sufferings of Christ to be made up in
you. We must lay down our lives also for the brethren, as John has it. All
this I do for the Elects sake, says the Apostle. Here is Christ in the
Apostle; I fill up the sufferings of Christ (says he to the Collossians)
wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer; Wherefore I endure all things for the
Elects sake. Be not partakers of other men's sins: There are many ways, and this
is one, while we see sin break forth in our brethren, and do not take notice of
it, are not affected with it, do not mourn; and so we neglect to gain our
brother.

But there is a third thing that I would commend unto you at this time; and
that is, That godly sorrow and humiliation for sin, is that by which spiritual
persons, waiting upon God, do receive power from God, to discharge their own
hearts, and their Congregations ftom sin and Satan. You are puffed up, and have
not rather mourned, that he that has done this deed might be cast out from
among you. It Is mourning that does it. It is not stoutness or resolution, any
thing of man that does it; But it is the power of God which comes into humble
souls. Godly mourning and humiliation is that that does bring forth power to
reform our own hearts, and our congregations. The proof of this was abundantly
seen among the Corinthians, as you shall see in the 2. and 7. chap. of the
second Epistle, where we shall read of the Apostles mourning upon this
occasion; how by him and his Ministry of the Spirit all the whole Church was
brought into mourning; and how by this their mournning the Spirit of God came
forth in them in power and light, and so they did rid themselves of this evil
that was among them: This incestuous person was delivered unto Satan, and
there he left the flesh behind him: he left sin behind him: He left the Devil
with the Devil: He was delivered unto Satan, and so Satan was destroyed in
him. Satan was sent to Satan; the Devil was sent to Hell, and the Spirit came
forth; and the Saint was saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. The light and
power of God was among them, and came up among them, which enabled them to
renounce themselves, their own strength whereby to deliver themselves from that
evil; And so God he owned them. And the Apostle writes to them in the second
chap. of the second Epistle, that they would comfort that person they had
delivered unto Satan. You ought now to comfort him, you ought to restore him:
For by this spiritual humiliation and mourning, they had power from God, both
to deliver up the sinner, and restore the Saint. You ought to comfort him,
least he be swallowed up of to much sorrow.

This same godly sorrow is the travail-sorrow Christ speaks of Ioh. 16. 20. You
shall have sorrow* but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when her
hour comes, is in sorrow, but then she forgets all, because a man child is
born. Thus the man child is born, the Spirit comes forth, and Christ comes
forth in us by Godly sorrow, by humiliation in the Spirit. We see the proof of
this here. And this same sorrow, this spiritual humiliation is nothing else but
the reviving of the holy seed in a Saint: It Is nothing else but the new man's
quickening: nothing else but Christ quickening in us; who being quickened, and
seeing himself to be clothed and compassed with such filth, he cannot bear it,
he cannot endure it; He mournes, he cries under it, he will never be at rest or
quiet until he be delivered* and God is at hand to deliver him and to rescue
him. This same Godly mourning, it is upon the quickening of the new man in us,
of the Spirit in us, which will not suffer nor endure iniquity; it lusts
against the flesh, the Spirit lusts against the flesh.

Quest. You read of the Prodigal how it is said, he came to himself. What was
that, he came to himself?

Answ. This new man, this Divine nature, this holy seed, that was carried away
in flesh, in sin, where 'twas dead (as it were) now is quickened: he comes to
himself, he cannot endure to be in this state any longer; he falls into a deep
mourning, a deep sense how sad his condition is, that here he should serve
swine, serve lusts, that he should be so far from God: He remembers he has a
Father, considers that he has bread enough at home, and here he is in
drudgery, hunger and thirst: have I not a father (says he)? I Will go home to my
Father. He came to himself. This is the quickening and awaking of the Spiritual
Seed, the new man, the new creature in us, that is born of God, knows God, and
can never be at quiet as long as flesh and sin do reign; It lusts against the
flesh. This mourning brings in power from God whereby to discharge it self from
the evil that oppresses it. Godly sorrow (says the Apostle) works repentance
unto Salvation, never to be repented of. In spiritual mourning, there is a kind
of dying of flesh, and denying of flesh, an owning and honoring of God. The
man goes out of himself; I am undone. He goes out to God; Crying, My
destruction is from my self, but in thee is my help. I am not able to deal with
these enemies, with Sin, Hell and Death: Now help me Lord. This is the travail
of the Soul with Christ until he be formed in us. Spititual mourning, Godly
mourning, it is the mourning of the Spirit in us, with sighs and groans not to
be expressed. There is worldly mourning, and there is Godly mourning. There is
fleshes mourning, and Spirits mourning: Fleshes mourning is for Affliction, for
trouble: Take away this plague (says Pharaoh) The Spirits mourning is for sin.
I have done foolishly, take away my sin, says David. Fleshes mourning is sins
mourning, it would be delivered, it would not be plagued: The Spirits mourning
is against sin: take away the plague of the heart: Spiritual mourning is, to
lament after the Lord. It Is said of the children of Israel, They mourned after
the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. toward the end of the chap. This is what the new man does,
the Spiritual man, the heavenly man in us, the new creature when he is
awakened, when he is quickened, which indeed is the conversion of a sinner, the
awakning the new man in him; and this new man being the seed of God, cannot
endure to abide in filth, in the dark, but is making out, making from whence it
came, making to his Father, making unto God in mourning, in a deep sense of its
wretched condition in darkness, in weakness, in the power of lusts. O miserable
man! who shall deliver me from this body of death? I thank God through Jesus
Christ? Here was a mighty proof of the Corinthians delivering their own hearts,
and delivering this person, that the Devil had much power over. I had an intent
to have enlarged this further, but I will rather break off, and may go on at
another time.

SERMON. II.
1 COR. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is reported commonly, etc.


HEre is a great and foul sin, that does veil a dear Saint: a sin not named
amongst the Gentiles; such a sin as the Gentiles are ashamed of, is found in a
Congregation of Saints. It is there, and they do not see it, nor take notice of
it: they are all asleep; the whore has put her cup to their mouths, and they
are all drunken with the world and pride. Ye are puffed up, and have not rather
mourned. That is it we were upon in the morning, That security and spiritual
drunkenness may befall Saints. The devil may get in among them in the basest
practices, and they not take notice of it, but dream of righteousness and glory.

This Church were all asleep: Saint Paul he awakens them, he mourns and awakens
them: he comes to them in the spirit, and sets them a mourning, and so they go
forth together in the power of the Lord Jesus, and quit themselves and this
poor deluded soul among them from the snare of the devil.

The Apostle before he brings them to judge this incestuous person, he judges
the whole Church, and brings them to judge themselves; and that is it that must
be; first we must be judged, before we can sit in judgment. Before we come
forth in the judgment of the Lord against others, we must be brought before
the Tribunal of the Lord. The Apostle charges the whole Church with sin, and
delivers them first to Satan, and then with them, delivers this person from
Satan.

He shows them, that they are in the snare of the devil, This is to be
delivered unto Satan, and this was the delivery of this incestuous person unto
Satan: A spiritual discovery that he was in Satan's hands. He was in Satan's
hands before; but now the spirit of God came forth unto him by Paul and the
Church to discover it to him, and so he was delivered unto Satan, and after he
delivers the whole Church to Satan, and after delivers them from Satan, and
then goes to work with them to deliver up this person to save him. They were
all partakers of his sin, in that they were not sensible of it, but were puffed
up. He tells them what did rather become them, what concerned them, and that
was to mourn; ye have not mourned rather, this is that you should be found in*
spiritual mourning. Through spiritual mourning the power of God comes upon the
Saints, to discharge their own hearts, and their Congregations from sin and
wickedness. This kind (says Christ) goes not forth but by fasting and prayer.
He speaks of a child possessed of the devil. The Disciples could not cast him
out, and they ask Christ the Reason. This kind (says he) goes not forth but
by fasting and prayer. By spiritual mourning, by earnest contending with God,
by the power of the spirit in mourning and wrestling with God as Jacob did, who
had power with God, we shall obtain power against sin. Hos. 12. He wept and he
made supplication, etc. You will never have power against sin, unless you have
power over God. You will never overcome the wicked one, unless you first
overcome God; and God is overcome no way but by his own power, in mourning and
supplication; it is his power made out, when flesh is denied, and he is owned.
It Is by his own power his hands are bound. Let me go, says God; I will not let
thee go, says Jacob, until thou bless me. He wept and he made supplication, as
you may see in that fourth of Hosea. This same mourning, out of which God comes
forth in power against sin, it is the spirits mourning, the spirit in the
Saints, in Sighs and Groans. It is the reviving and quickening of the new man
that lay dead in the flesh; who seeing himself thus besmeared, thus imprisoned,
thus captivated with sin and Satan, he is breaking out of it; he cannot have
rest in that state, he sees he is not at home. Whither am I carried from my
Fathers house? says the Prodigal, when he came to himself. It is the travel of
the spiritual man, as Christ expresses it, Joh. 16. 20. in which the man-child
is brought forth, the spirit, as it was here in Paul and in the Saints, which
being brought forth, was able to deal with Satan and with hell, to send Satan
to Satan, and hell to hell. What does hell do in a Saint? What does hell in a
Church? Deliver him to Satan, let Satan go to destruction, it is his place, it
is his portion.

Thus spiritual mourning, or the spirits mourning, is that which brings forth
the spirits power, and this sets the soul free, and sets a Church free.

Now we should look what we can find of this mourning, this mourning for sin,
this mourning after the Lord. This is not in flesh and blood to do. All the
mourning of flesh and blood is, that sin may be supplied. All the prayers of a
natural man are, that his lusts may be furnished: all his mourning and
complaint is, when sin suffers; when godliness plays upon sin, then he cries,
then he mourns. The spiritual man mourns after the Lord, as it is said of the
children of Israel, they mourned after the Lord.

The natural man mourns for Corn, and Wine, and Oil. The Lord speaks in the
Prophecy of Hosea, of the howling of the people; Did you cry to me, when you
howled for Corn, and Wine, and Oil?

But that which is the main thing to be observed here, is, that no power, or
wisdom of man, or any company of men, any Church, any Rulers, any Elders, can
set a heart free from sin, or can clear their Congregations from sin; it is God
that must do it; and therefore the Apostle says, Ye have not rather mourned
that he that has done this deed, might be taken away from among you. When that
evil is seen in your hearts, and in your Churches, what are you to do? know
that you cannot deliver your selves, you are to mourn until it be done for you:
you are to lament after the Lord. O that the Lord would come, that power would
come, that he that is great, stronger then the strong man, that he would come!
We are to wait for the assistance of Jesus Christ* Here the Apostle speaks of
mourning, You have not mourned as you should do; you should mourn after the
Lord, that he would quit you of this sin, that he would rescue you; in the
fourth verse it is plainly set forth, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ. It is not your power, it is not man's power, that shall rid you of the
wicked one among you, in your hearts, or in your Congregations, but it is the
Lord that must do it, and therefore you must mourn after the Lord. If you be of
God, you will mourn after him; and you will never be quiet until his power do
come down to rescue you, and deliver you. This mourning that you may be eased
of the wicked one, shows that it is not in your power. In the ninth of Mark,
Christ went up into a mountain, where he was transfigured; he took up one or
two of his Disciples with him, and the rest he left below, verse. 14. these
Disciples left below, were set upon by the Pharisees and that Sect, to tempt
them and to try them, that if it might be, they might have a victory over them,
a day of them, now their master was away: They bring to them, a Father with his
child that was possessed with an evil spirit, that used him and handled him
piteously, that threw him sometimes into the fire, and sometimes into the
water; but the Disciples were not able to cast him out; here was great joy and
rejoicing among the Pharisees; the Pharisees thought they had had the day; As
they were exulting, and baffling the Disciples, Christ he comes down from the
Mountain* when he comes down, he is told what the business is, verse. 17. O
faithless generation (says Christ) how low shall I be with you! bring him to
me. and he cast him out. In this story we may see how ridiculous we shall make
ourselves, when we offer to set upon Satan, or deal with sin, when we have not
the Lord Jesus with us: we make but sport for the Devil, and sport for the
world. There is no going forth, but in the power of Christ. Do thou see sin?
Can thou go forth in the power of Christ against it? If thou can not, sit
down and mourn till that spirit come, till that power come.

Sin and Satan are too strong for man, and if we deal with them without God, we
do nothing but endeavor by sin to cast out sin, and by Satan to cast out
Satan. To undertake any thing against sin, and have not the Lord with us, is
altogether in vain; therefore Moses says, Unless thou go forth with us, do not
carry us out hence. To go forth in man's power, in the power of a letter of the
Scripture only, it is not safe. God will not be offended with us, if we will
not go forth without full assurance of his presence with us. If he give us some
assurance, we should desire to have better assurance. It is the power of God in
which we must go out against sin successfully. We shall never have rest from
sin and Satan, till we cease from our own works. There is no going forth
against sin, but in the power of Christ. You ought rather to have mourned, that
he which has done this deed, might be taken away from among you. Look upon
hearts, look upon Churches, they are both the Temple of God, the House of God;
let God rule in his own house, he has the power there. The Reformation of our
own hearts, and of Churches, it is by the power of the spirit of God. It is not
in man to direct his ways. Man is weak, he is corrupt; man and Satan in this
respect are one.

Now the question will be, If there be no going forth against sin, but in the
power of the spirit, where is this power that reforms Congregations? where is
this Ministry of the Spirit? where are these spiritual weapons mighty through
God to cast down high thoughts, and strong imaginations?

The Answer is, It is confessed that the power of the spirit of God has been
and is yet very little abroad; and therefore we see men go forth against sin
and Satan, and effect nothing; they make nothing but sport. There is little
savor of life, or savor of death to be seen in the Ministry of men: little
binding, or loosing; little opening heaven, or shutting heaven; very little
forgiving sins, or retaining sins in men's Consciences, we know very little but
a noise and a form in these things. Most men that take upon them to do this,
they are put to it (because of the weakness of their Ministry, whatever brags
they make) to go to the civil Magistrate to back them. This same power of the
Lord Jesus, whereby sin and Satan are thrown out of men's hearts, is now but in
a very low manifestation, and very rarely appears.

But what is to be done then?

Not that that is usually done; we must not go out as vaunting that we have
that which we have not, as pretending the spirit and the power of Christ with
us, when there is no such thing. We have done so a long time, and the people
have been deceived; we have done it, and have effected nothing; but take heed
of continuing this practice; Remember, when the Spirit was abroad, what befell
them that used this practice. In the nineteenth of the Acts, The Exorcists took
upon them to command the evil spirit in the name of Jesus, We adjure you by
Jesus whom Paul preaches; and the evil Spirit answered and said, Jesus we
know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? And the man in whom the evil spirit
was* leaped on them and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they
fled out of that house naked and wounded. God has winked a great while, but he
will not bear as he has done. When he comes forth again, men shall not take
his name in vain as they have done. That which concerns us to do, is to sit
down in silence, and mourn, as the Apostle has it here; and plainly to confess
and acknowledge, that that power of the spirit that has appeared, does not
appear now. We do not find that able Ministry of the New Testament now, that
has been. We plainly see that Scripture, 2 These. 2. fullfilled of the Spirits
drawing in, that the man of sin might be revealed; and truly, the man of sin
has been so much revealed, and the darkness has been so great, as we have not
seen the darkness; but now that the spirit is returning, we begin to see where
we were; we begin to see what fools and mad men's parts we have acted; how we
have gone forth in the name of spirit, and brought forth nothing; how we have
made our selves ridiculous to those that did observe and mark what the effect
was: but now we see it is the time of the Apostasy indeed, and shall look
forth for that power of the spirit that has been abroad in the Primitive
times, that shall return again, and not only bridle and keep down Antichrist,
but destroy the man of sin; till we shall see this power come forth, let us sit
down in silence; for in all our own acting and talking, we are but Sorcerers
and Enchanters without this power. There is now a low administration of the
spirit, and we wait when the spirit will be more manifest; we are looking after
him when he will come: and this is that that concerns us to do, to sit down in
silence, and mourn. The people of Israel mourned after the Lord when the Ark
was in the Philistines hands: it has been so now for these fifteen hundred
years. When we lament after the Lord, surely then the time is that the Lord is
coming forth again. When we acknowledge what man is, that we have no strength,
Out of weak we shall be made strong, and the Lord whom we look for will
suddenly come into his Temple.

If we were out of our pride, out of our puff, out of our vaunting, and were
come to lie in the dust, to put our mouths there, and say, we have no strength,
God has left us, O Lord, when will thou return again to us? When we are thus
mourning, surely then the time is coming, that this power will come forth
again, and that in a greater manifestation then ever it yet appeared. Out of
weak we shall become strong.

It is not in any man's wisdom or strength to cast sin out of his own heart, or
out of any Church or Congregation. When we see we cannot do it, and sit down
and mourn that the Lord would come, and be present with us as he has been
formerly, surely he will come. This is that we ought to do, Ye ought rather to
mourn. All our teaching, persuading and exhorting, is to be in great humility;
in a sense of our own poorness and weakness, and of Gods long withdrawing,
waiting for any appearance of his, though but a low appearance. God has been
working, and acting all this time of Antichrist, but in great obscurity and
under ground, and now we are looking when he will come forth again: for the
brightness of his coming is that which will destroy that man of sin, 2 These. 2.

You ought rather to have mourned, that he that has done this deed might be
taken away from among you. It Is the Lords work, and not man's. And let us compare
this rule with our practice particularly. Men when they see the devil got into
their hearts, and would be rid of him, what do they do? They fast and pray, and
go forth in the strength of this duty and the other duty. But what is to be
done? Why wait until power come; wait till the Lord come; wait that the evil
one may be cast out, and do not think you can cast him out your selves. And in
Churches, what is done? We look that the Officers and Elders should rid us of
the wicked one, and that the major part of the Church and Assembly, their Vote
should do it; and what the major part of the Church concludes, that we look
upon as the work of the spirit; and so there is sentence past; but where is the
power? Nay, going a long with the sentence, oftentimes you cast out Christ, and
cast out the truth, and so come to another kind of Popery, a new kind of
Popery: while you set up in the place of the spirit, any man, or any Assembly
of men, what ever they be, you set up a Pope. Our work is to mourn if the
spirit be not present; if he be present, to go forth in his power, and in his
might. And then the effect will be, the devil will flee, and sin will flee. O
how glorious things are Churches that hold out the power of the Lord Jesus! O
what prisons are Churches where there is nothing but forms, nothing but lust
and Satan, and the world and flesh, that act and rule under them! O how
glorious things are Churches in whom Christ has a Throne, and where we see
spiritual power! But where do we see it now? Churches that are the light of the
world, and the salt of the earth, where shall we find them? It is not by any
power or wisdom of man, whereby sin is cast out of any particular heart, or out
of a Church or Congregation. You ought rather to have mourned. Paul he had
mourned, and he professes elsewhere in what deep sorrow he wrote unto them, 2
Cor 2. In deep sorrow and abundance of tears he wrote unto them, being sensible
of this condition in which they were; and the spirit of power came forth in his
mourning* to awaken them, to set them a mourning, and to cause them to come
forth in power to save the spirit of this defiled person, by the destroying of
the flesh.

That which is Paul's part follows in the next words, v. 3. For I verily as
absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already as though I were
present, concerning him that has so done this deed.

The Apostle judges, and he judges being absent. First, What had the Apostle to
do to judge? He was neither Officer nor member of that Congregation. To this we
have to say, that the Apostles were members and Officers of every Congregation,
in every Church. The Apostle Paul was the Minister of the Gentiles, the Apostle
of the Gentiles, of the Gentile Church: the Apostle Paul went forth in the
spirit, and the spirit has power in every Church, in every Congregation. The
Apostle went forth in the power of Christ, and every Church shall bow to him:
he is their King, he is their Lord; and all the Churches if they be true
Churches, they are one body, and that Church or Congregation gathered, that
does divide Christ, and shut up it self from other Saints, and from the General
Assembly, is so far forth an Antichristian Church; That particular Assembly,
that does not own the universal Assembly, and the general Assembly (the Apostle
speaks of in Heb. 12.) is so far forth Antichristian. That Church which is
nothing but form, that has no power of God in it (manifested in the Conscience
against spiritual wickedness) that Church which does not own all Saints under
any form, that Church so far forth is not of Christ: the Church of Christ owns
all forms, and all Saints. The Apostle had to do here, for the spirit has to
do every where: the spirit is free; he comes forth in the spirit; to whomsoever
he comes forth, he shall be owned; he comes forth in power, he comes forth
either to life or to death; he comes not forth in vain. This for the Apostles
right, if any say, What had he to do here?

Obj. But the Apostle is absent, how could he judge? he hears a report, It Is
commonly reported; but common report is a horrible liar; the devil is the
Prince of the Air, and he is in it. Every man makes his report according to
his humor; it gathers still, is changed still, is transformed still. We have
experience hereof daily; how then could the Apostle judge? I (says he) have
judged already.

Sol. Why he gives an account of that in these words, absent in body, but
present in spirit. When we are more in the spirit, we shall be better able to
understand and explain what this presence in spirit is. When we are not so much
in the body as we are* when the body is not so much our home, but we are more
in the Lord, and the Lord is more our home, we shall be able to pronounce what
this is, to be present in spirit. But a little now according to that we have
received, present and absent, absent in body, present in spirit. We have the
same speech, 2 Col. 5. Absent in body, present in spirit, joying and beholding
your order, etc. Well, what is it to be present in spirit? A natural man will
interpret it according to his measure and his line, and will not suffer it to
be extended further then this, he thought of them, or he was with them in
thought; he knows no other presence of spirit then this, and will allow no
more. And so we interpret all the matters of God according to our
comprehension; we make that our standard. But the spiritual man goes further.
He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. The Apostle was present with the
Lord, who is everywhere.

In communion with the Lord he was there and did see, and so did judge. As in
that place Elisha says to his servant Gehazi, 2 King. 5. 26. Went not my
spirit with thee, when the man turned back again to thee? He that is joined to
the Lord is one spirit. Elisha he saw in the Lord: it was not only his
thoughts went with Gehazi, but he was present with him in spirit, and saw what
he did, and told him what he did. Went not my heart with thee, when the man
turned to meet thee? (says he) is it a time to receive money, and to receive
garments, and Olive-yards, and Vineyards? I in them, and they in me, says
Christ in John 17. that they may be perfect in One. God takes up his Saints
into his own omnisciencie, and clouds himself in his peoples weakness and
ignorance. There is a Union between God and his people; God in them, and they
in him; through this Union they see as God does, and through this Union God he
sees as they do. Here Paul sees as Elisha does, that which is distant from his
body; his body is absent, but he is present in spirit. There is the spirit that
sees all, knows all; Yet as to the Union which he is in with us, he is
ignorant, and he hears and hearkens, and lisps, and speaks as he is taught.
Joh. 16. 13. When the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth, for he shall not speak of himself. He that is of himself, shall not
speak of himself; the eternal truth, the everlasting God, that is of himself,
shall not speak of himself; Whatever he shall hear, that he shall speak. He
that teaches you, shall hearken in you, learn in you, be as you. Here is the
condiscending of the spirit of truth, so that Scripture is not to be
interpreted or explained but by that mystery of union, which is a mystery the
world does not know, cannot understand. He that knows all things, so
condescends, that in that union with us he knows nothing, and learns with us;
and by that union with him, we are lifted up into his Omnisciency; We in his
light are present in spirit, when we are absent in body. Thus God is in Christ,
and is made sin for us, that we may be made the righteousness of God in him: we
in his strength, he in our weakness. Reject this and reject Scripture. The
Apostle here, he sees and he judges in the Lord; he is absent and yet he
judges. Does the Apostle go upon common fame? He is but a fool that does so;
there is no wise man would do it. But he is present in spirit, and through that
spirit, by which he was present, he had a capacity to judge. Being present in
spirit (says he) I have seen and judged alread. God comes down into our
confinement, and he lifts us up into his enlargement. And take notice of it,
here are some hints of it here in one that had the first fruits of the spirit;
how that God will bring forth his Omnisciency, his wisdom and his power in his
Saints and people. God has chosen his people to his own kingdom and glory. The
glory thou have given me, I have given them, says Christ in the seventeenth of
John. God will bring forth his Omnisciency and his Omnipotency in his people;
in believers. The Apostle describes his coming, 2 These. 1. viz. to be glorified
[in] his Saints, and to be admired [in all] them that do believe. Where do you
look for him? You look up, that he should come in the clouds. He comes in the
clouds indeed; he comes in the flesh of his Saints, a despised people, a
reproached people; he is covered in their weakness, but he will swallow up
their weakness in his glory; and here he will exercise his Omnisciency; here he
will exercise his Omnipotency. Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the
world? says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Reject this, and reject Scripture as I
said before: By this union between God and the Saints, and Gods manifesting
himself in his Saints, exercising his kingdom, exercising his universal
Judicature in them, the Saints shall judge the world; Do ye not know that ye
shall judge the world and judge Angels? There is no right judge but the Lord;
and there is no man that is fit to judge till the Lord be risen in him. The
spiritual man judges all things; so far forth as he is spiritual, he judgeeth
all things; so far forth as he is carnal, he is not fit to judge any thing. The
carnal judgment condemns the Spirit, passes judgment upon God, rejects God.
The Saints are growing up into the Omnisciency, and Omnipotency of God. God is
now despised in them, but God shall be glorified in them. God bears their
weakness, but they shall be clothed upon with his power. Christ is in every
Saint, and the Father has committed all judgment unto him, who does not judge
by the sight of the eye, or the hearing of the ear, Isa. 11. 4. So Paul did not
judge now by the sight of the eye, or hearing of the ear that is bodily; he
neither went by common fame, neither did his bodily presence help him to
discern the business; but he was present in spirit, and in the light of God, in
the wisdom of God, in the power of God he did see and did judge. I already have
judged, though absent in body, yet present in spirit. There is no true
judgment that passes upon men's Consciences but by the spirit. Men that can
only judge by the outward appearance, can never judge righteous judgment; you
cannot judge righteous judgment till you are led within the vail, till you see
principles, till you not only see what is done, but see upon what grounds it
is done, till you see the root of the matter. The Apostle cares not for man's
judgment; He that judges me (says he) is the Lord.

All the people of God, they are Princes, they are Kings: God has called us to
his own kingdom, and to his own glory, as the Apostle has it; And therefore
Rev. 3. 12. it is said, I will write upon them the Name of my God, and the name
of the City of my God, and I will write upon them my new name; so God will
bring forth his glory in his people.

Paul expressing what he has done, he calls unto the whole Church to join with
him, and assures them they shall have his assistance; his assistance and the
power of the Lord Jesus. When you are gathered together, and my spirit with the
power of the Lord Jesus, Do you judge as I have done. The power of the Lord
Jesus will lead you to it, and you shall come forth in that power actually to
deliver him to Satan. You see by the effects, this was not bare words, this was
not a bugbear. But that is it we see in Churches and Congregations among us,
that take upon them this; it has no effect, no power. And therefore if they
have to deal with a Saint, he pities them, is sorry for them, wishes they had
more light; if with one that is not a Saint, he jeers them, he scorns them.

But here is reality; this Incestuous person felt hell in his Conscience, saw
he was in the power of the devil; he was even swallowed up with sorrow.
Therefore the Apostle calls upon them to relieve him, and this is to save him (
q d.) look now if the flesh be destroyed, then bring out the spirit and comfort
him, you ought to relieve him. Here you see the power of the Lord Jesus, he
commands hell and death; he commands Satan, Take that that is thine, and then
give up that thou have nothing to do withal. Destroy the flesh, deliver up the
spirit.

This makes sport for wicked men to come out with thundering and lightning in
the absence of power* This should set us to mourn for the spirit. How little is
the manifestation of the spirit in our own Consciences? How much less can we
manifest it to others? It is then time for us to mourn after the Lord. And if
we were come to mourn after him, we should soon come to rejoice with him, and
make our boast of him.

SERMON III.
1 COR. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is reported commonly, etc.


IN the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, and my
spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ to deliver such a one unto
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus.

In the name of the Lord Jesus, and with the power of our Lord Jesus. This is
no vain or idle repetition; all business of this nature is done only by the
name and the power of Jesus Christ. But if you please to make some difference,
take it thus, In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that is, owning the Lord
Christ, professing him, calling upon him. Wih the pwer of the Lord Jesus
Christ; that is, let not there be a bare mention of him, but let there be the
power: In the power of our Lord Jesus. There is much mention of the name of
Christ among us, taking upon us great things by that name, when it is but
taking it in vain where no power appears.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, and my
spirit. What Is this same spirit of Paul? That by which he was present (as he
said before) I am present with you in spirit: This I look upon as the Divine
nature which Paul did partake of; the spiritual man, born of God, in which God
does act. God guides and acts his people in this spiritual man; flesh is acted
by Satan: there is the power of Satan and Hell; but here is the power of the
Lord Jesus in Spirit. My spirit, that is the seat of God in a Saint; And my
spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto
Satan; there is the Sentence and Judgment. But before we come to that, I shall
observe two or three things.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. First, There is no dealing in the
Consciences of men, neither our own nor others, against sin and Satan, when
they show their power there, in the power and wisdom of man; unless we go forth
in the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is to no purpose; It Is only the power
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that delivers the Consciences and Hearts of men fron
sin and Satan: therefore the Apostle says, Judge nothing before the time till
the Lord come. Saul was not to fight with the Philistims till Samuel came. To
go forth against sin, when the Lord is not with us, it has this issue, nothing
but foiling, nothing but scorning, nothing but reproach and shame. With the
power of the Lord Jesus. To mention the name of the Lord Jesus, and not to have
the power of the Lord Jesus, is nothing but profaning that name, taking it in
vain: It Is nothing but a bugbear. All man's power, it is on the body, it is not
on the Conscience. It is impossible man should deliver himself or his brother
from one error, from one sin: all that he can do, is, to restrain and lock up
sin; all that man can do in matter of error and sin, is, to bring forth
Hypocrisy: It is Gods prerogative to fashion hearts, and to know hearts. Psalm.
13. He fashioneth their hearts alike, and understands all their thoughts. And
this is that God will make all the Churches to know, Rev. 2. the latter end.
All the Churches shall know that I the Lord search the heart and try the
reins. If the Churches go forth with Carnal weapons, to deal with the Devil
and sin in their own power, they shall know that this is the Lords prerogative;
It is only he that searches hearts, and tries reins; They shall find they have
done nothing, whatever they have seemed to themselves to have done; They shall
find they have confirmed and settled the Devil in his habitation, while they
have seemed to throw him out. I have the keys (says Christ) of Hell and of
death: The keys are the power, the power of man is not able to conflict with
Satan and Hell: Christ has received all power in Heaven and Earth: And Christ
manifested in us, we shall go forth against principalities and powers, and
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world: with the power of the Lord
Jesus. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal (says the Apostle) but mighty
through God. The new Testament is the Ministry of the Spirit, and so it is an
able Ministry. God has made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit. Letter and man, and noise of words could never yet
scare the Devil.

This we spoke of before, taking occasion from the Apostle calling the
Corinthians to mourn, which does tell us they had no power of themselves. It Is
a professing they had no power. We cannot rid our Consciences or Congregations
of sin: But if we wait, power will come in; And when we once come out of this
delusion of the Devil, to see we have no power, to see how the Spirit of power
has withdrawn from us, and has been absent a long while, we shall begin to
mourn after him, and he will visit us, and then we shall know what power is
again. We shall know what the Kingdom of God is, that is not in word but in
power; We have hitherto known little of any Kingdom but in word. When once we
are sensible of this want of power, and of this withdrawing of God, that the
man of sin might be revealed, we shall mourn after him, till he turn to us
again. It Is by the power of the Lord Jesus only: This is allowed and granted
everywhere as a principle; but how little do we act according to our
Principles? The Spirit of God only can throw out error and sin; this is
granted; But the will of man, and the actings of man, this shall be called the
Spirit of God. The pride of man comes forth which is nothing but the Devil; the
name of the Lord Jesus that is put upon it. To walk and act according to that
Principle, the Spirit of God; Not we but the grace of God: We live not, but
Christ in us; It Is looked upon as that which tends to confusion: as that which
lays by all man's gifts.

Object. It Is said then, what, will ye throw off your Ministers, your Teachers?

Sol. The Apostle says, We have but one Master, but one teacher, that is
Christ, that is the Spirit. Ye have the anointing that teaches you all things,
and need not any man's teaching. It Is not man's teaching we look after now, if we
understand ourselves, but we look if we can find the name of God, the power of
God, in the speakings of men. God holds forth his anointing in man, gives us a
proof of Christ in man; But take man's Ministry, and all Ordinances, if the
Spirit be not there, if the anointing be not there, they are of man, they are
nothing: So you see it is the power of the Lord Jesus only that rids
Consciences and Congregations from sin.

In the name of the Lord Jesus, when you are gathered together with my spirit
and the power of the Lord Jesus.

In the second place take notice of this, That the Lord Jesus and his power is
in all Saints as well as in Ministers. The Apostles Spirit joins with them
when they are gathered together. The whole Church, men and women, the simplest
as well as the wisest, the weakest as well as the strongest, with the power of
the Lord Jesus. The power of the Lord Jesus goes with you if you censure him,
and therefore my Spirit shall be with you. In the name, etc. So the power of
the Lord Jesus is in every Saint, acts there and manifests it self there, at
the pleasure of the Lord Jesus. It is the Spirit that makes Ministers: and
those Ministers that are made by the Spirit, do minister the Spirit. And that
is ministering the Gospel when we Minister the Spirit. But if we have only the
Letter of the Gospel, we have that that is no better then the Law. If we be
able Ministers of the New Testament, it is in the Spirit. I am a Minister of
the New Testament so far as the Spirit speaks in me, and by me: and I would not
be owned any further; And all my work is to prove if the Spirit of God will go
forth into any heart while I speak. I know that Paul is nothing, and Apollo is
nothing. If we be a sweet Savor of Christ, then we are something. In
whomsoever the spirit stands up and speaks, that person for that time is a
Minister, a true Minister. The Spirit does not regard Sexes, the Spirit regards
not Age, Learned or unlearned: It Is not Age, nor Sex, nor any Major part can
Minister Spirit; but whom the Spirit pleases.

Obj. The Spirit will not teach by a woman. For it is said let not a woman
speak in the Church.

Sol. Where the Spirit does not teach, it is but a woman's teaching. So far as we
speak, and speak not by the Spirit, the woman speaks, who is commanded silence.

And my Spirit, with the power of the Lord Jesus. The Apostles Spirit would own
the meanest of the Saints, and the power of the Lord Jesus in them. There are,
in whom the Spirit acts and Ministers more constantly: and there are, in whom
he does Minister occasionally; there are whom the Spirit of God has made
Overseers. Acts 20. Look to the flock over which the Holyghost has made you
Overseers. Every one of that flock must judge what he hears* Now there is no
judging but by the Spirit. Judge ye what I say. says the Apostle. God makes
all his people Prophets; and pours his Spirit in some degree upon them. Every
one that is a Christian is anointed: his name Christian imports so much; Do
not give the name and deny the thing. He has made us Kings and Priests by his
blood. When Eldad and Medad did Prophecy in the Camp, the Devil starts up in a
good man's heart and says, My Lord Moses, forbid them. But what answers Moses?
I would to God all the Lords people were Prophets. There is a further
manifestation of the Spirit desired, where there is any manifestation already.
I would they were all Prophets, and that God would pour out his Spirit upon
them. We have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ too too much with respect of
persons. The power of the Lord Jesus goes forth with all his Saints, the
meanest of them, and out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings he ordains
strength. Gods people are his Temple, they are his house, they are all living
stones. And its said, Gods train did fill the temple, in that vision, Isa. 6.
Gods people are his body; Now as it is in the natural body, there is not one
member, not the least in which the Soul does not act: so in this spiritual
body, there is not one, not the meanest in which the life of the Spirit is not,
more or less: Though there be some more Principal parts (as in the natural
body) yet God is in all: the life and power of the Lord Jesus is in all: They
live because he lives. And therefore the Apostle in Church meetings (1 Cor.
14.) would have them speak one by one; and in the Jews Synagogue the custom
was to give liberty if any had a word of Exhortation to speak, Acts 13. But now
there is limiting and quenching the Spirit by many; They cry lo here and lo
there, here are Ancient men, learned men, wise men, the major part of the
company, here are the Elders. But let us hear the Spirit, let us hear the Lord:
What says the Lord? the power of the Lord Jesus is in the meanest of Saints.
The world does not know the Spirit; and since the Spirit has drawn in from
open appearance, are there not Christians that do not know whether there be a
Holy Ghost or no? In this time of the withdrawing of the Spirit, the manner
has been to set up such and such men, and upon these to fix the Spirit: to set
up gifts, parts; to set up men so trained up, so taught at the feet of
Gamaliel; as the Scribes and Pharisees they challenged the truth, that they had
it, and none else. When God annoints Jeremie, and sends him to preach among the
People, what say the Priests there? Come, let us devise devices against Jeremy;
the Law shall not perish from the Priests, and words from the wise. So we heap
up teachers to our selves, so qualified, so garbed, and here we fix the Spirit:
Here are the lips that must preserve knowledge; here we must seek the Law. So
when Christ came, the Pharisees they opposed him, and said of his Disciples,
This people that know not the Law are accursed. We have even forgot the
teaching of the Spirit, which is the only gift, and we know nothing but man's
teaching.

For a little while there was the Spirits appearance after Christ's ascension;
and when he began to withdraw, then the world set up a Pope; and this Pope
(forsooth) has the Spirit, and is infallible, and he is the visible Judge, his
determinations they must stand. After the world was weary of this Idol, and saw
what a thing a Pope was, then one sets up one thing, another sets up another:
When Moses is gone into the mount, they must make some Calfe or other to
worship. One sets up this Minister, another sets up that Minister: another sets
up an Assembly of Ministers; and that which most men look at for guidance and
direction in matter of Conscience, is, such men, such a line, such a succession
of men in Orders, trained up at the University, not looking after the power of
the Lord Jesus. Where is there a spirit that joins with mean and simple people,
that know the Lord Jesus, and that look for him? Most Professors, they fetch
their Religion from the Minister that they affect; O he is a godly man. Thus
did Professors among the Jews, they stuck to the Priests, to the Pharisees and
Scribes, and stumbled at Christ. So it is now; the world, they fetch their
Religion from the State; what the State establishes, that they bow down to;
that is the way with the generality of people, and has been for this long
while; we set up Masters and Teachers, and this is nothing else but setting up
Antichrist. Has not this been the main business of Ministers generally to draw
Disciples after them; to bring people into their form, into their cut and garb.
O but where, where is the Spirit? The world does not know the Spirit. Christ,
the Carpenter; and Amos the gatherer of wild Siccamores; and the Apostles,
fishermen that came forth in the power of the Lord Jesus, were not owned in
their time: no more are those owned in whom God comes forth now. But Christ
rejoices in spirit that those things are hid from the wise and prudent, and
revealed to babes. Churches and Congregations, they are Lorded over by their
Ministers: and how few Ministers be there that are examples to the flock; but
set themselves as Lords over Gods heritage. And that which we would have
(however we deny it in the principle, yet we contend for in the practice) is,
that our voice and judgment should be the Key that should open and shut: that
should determine and resolve: the demonstration of the spirit, who looks after
that?

The devil he changes forms continually; and therefore can deceive men, let
them take what form they please, let them have a Pope, or a Minister, or an
Assembly of Ministers, what they will; if they do not like one Pope, let them
take another: this is nothing but setting up Antichrist that man of sin in the
Temple of God, in our hearts and Consciences; that man of sin that is to be
destroyed; whom the Lord shall consume with the brightness of his coming. He
that defiles the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, 2 Cor 3. where the
Apostle is speaking of their admiring of men, One says, I am of Paul; another
says I am of Apollo; a third says, I am of Cephas. Who is Paul? (says he)
and who is Apollo? Are ye not the Temple of God? and he that defiles the Temple
of God, him shall God destroy. He that sets up any man, any parts, any gifts in
the place of God, this is to defile the Temple of God: This is the second point.

There is a third.

Thirdly, When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Wheresoever the power of the Lord Jesus goes, let it be with
babes and sucklings, there shall the Apostles Spirit go; let their appearance
be what it will in the world.

And the power of our Lord Jesus.

The power of the Lord Jesus it is, or it shall be manifested among his people
in their communion, and in their gatherings together.

The power of the Lord Jesus it is, but O how dark is it yet! It shall be
gloriously manifested in the Assemblies of his Saints, in their gatherings
together. When ye are gathered together: The people shall say* Come let us go up
to the house of the Lord; for the Law shall go out of Zion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Isa. 2. 3. What is Zion and Jerusalem, but the Assemblies
of the Saints? And upon all the Assemblies of Mount Zion, there shall be a
pillar of fire, and a pillar of smoke, Isa. 7. Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. What to do, but to bind
and loose, to open and shut, and gather my people together? When the spirit
came down upon the Disciples after Christ's Ascension, it was in their
convening, when they were assembled together; for Christ charged them there to
wait, and they should receive power.

When they are together, they are a body of living stones, built up an holy
Temple: they are members apart: altogether the body and the fullness of Christ:
and all the Saints have one life and one soul; every joint supplieth according
to the effectual working of the measure of every part: as the Apostle has it,
Ephesians. 4. 16.

Q. And what is this gathering together where the power of the Lord Jesus comes
forth?

A. The main is in the spirit; with my spirit, says the Apostle, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, when ye are gathered together and my spirit. The gathering
together of spirits; I do not say without bodies; but this is the main; the
spirit is that which is born of God, that which God acts, [ whom I serve in my
spirit] it is the new man: flesh the devil acts, and corrupt principles the
devil acts: there are gatherings together in that, there are gatherings
together where the power of Satan is; it is a pitiful thing to get into a
Church gathering, and there sit down; now I may be at rest and ease; but this
is a gathering in spirit; in the unity of the spirit* This is a gathering in
him and to him: and in this gathering a waiting for him; no man shall be heard,
no man shall be Lord; there is but one Master, one Lord, one King, one guide,
and here we are together waiting what he will say; it is no matter what this
man says or that man says: Does Christ speak in him?

We look for the demonstration of the spirit: it is no matter what this man
says, or the other man says. We wait for power and evidence for God to go
before us in a pillar of smoke, and in a pillar of fire. It Is a
spirit-gathering, where the power of the Lord Jesus is. There is a
flesh-gathering, a formal-gathering, which is nothing but a cover of Satan, a
cover of the devil. When ye are gathered together, and my spirit with the power
of the Lord Jesus; a gathering together in the unity of the spirit; and this
unity of the spirit does not regard form; it joins with all Saints whatsoever
in spirit, under what form soever; and this is a particular Assembly in
reference to the General Assembly. God is their Judge; it is a gathering
together of those that have made a Covenant by sacrifice, as it is in Psa. 50.
They have given up themselves to the Lord, and they will be only guided by him.
They know what man is; here goes the power of the Lord Jesus with such
gatherings; O that we could find such and see such, we should soon see the
power of the Lord Jesus; If we have fellowship one with another, the blood of
Christ cleanses us. It is this fellowship that has power in it, cleansing in
it; such gatherings as are in the power of God, and such gatherings as wait for
the power of God; such gatherings where man lays himself down; we wait what the
Lord will say; we will not stir without the spirit; It is not a letter shall
guide us, nor a man shall guide us, but the Lord.

SERMON. IV.
1 COR. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. It is reported commonly, etc.


V. 5. TO deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

It is the Apostles direction unto a gathered Church, how to quit themselves of
one that had done a foul fact, of the evil one among them, to deliver
themselves from that evil, and to save the person.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one, etc.

1. It Is only in the power of the Lord Jesus, that any Churches or Consciences
are delivered from guilt; it is not in the power and wisdom of man.

2. And this power Christ will manifest in all believers, in all his people, in
all his Saints; he comes with all his Saints as well as Ministers. The Apostles
spirit joins with them: and my spirit (says he) in the power of the Lord Jesus.

3. And the power of the Lord Jesus whenever it shall be manifested, will be
especially made out in the gatherings of Saints, when they are gathered in
spirit. A fleshgathering is when we have the power of the devil with us.

But to these words in ver. 5.

To deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh. To destroy
the evil principle, and to save the person; here is a way which the world does
not know; when the world sees sin, it thinks of the destroying the person;
therefore it goes forth in the evil principle against the person. Here Is a way
now to destroy the evil, and save the person; the spirit of God only can teach
us this, it is the power of the Lord Jesus.

Here is the means that is to be used, delivering unto Satan; and the end of
that means, that the flesh may be destroyed, and the spirit saved. And here is
that that does destroy flesh and save the spirit, and that is the day of the
Lord Jesus. The manifestation of the Lord Jesus, in the day of his power; by
the power of the Lord Jesus deliver such a one to Satan.

Satan is the enemy of God; he dwells in wrath, he dwells in fire; Deliver him
unto him; Into that wrath, and into that fire; cast him into those flames;
there let him fry. Where Satan is destroying, there let Satan be destroyed that
is in him, and let the Saint come forth.

Deliver him unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh. Here is a piece of
Discipline that is the privilege of a Saint, it looks terribly, but it is for
salvation, that the spirit may be saved. Here is destruction in it, but
destruction is for salvation. There are that are Satan's; let them be delivered
to him; there they abide, they return no more; there is that that returns
again, that the spirit may be saved. The devil takes his own, meddles with
nothing else; the flesh destroyed, the spirit saved.

Deliver him to Satan; how is that? that is, let him see that he is in Satan's
hands: that he is drudging in his work: that he is a vassal of his in this
incest that he has committed; let him see this.

Qu. Why but he was in Satan's hands, under Satan's power in the commission of
this evil; what then is this Delivering to Satan?

Answ. Let him see it, and let him feel it; let him feel hell, and feel wrath;
let him find the flames about him. And so I look upon that Scripture in Joh.
16. 8. to be the interpretation of this Scripture. The Spirit shall convince of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Here is the power of the Lord
Jesus, the spirit of the Lord Jesus, v. 4. by this there is a Delivery unto
Satan, a conviction of sin, that the flesh may be destroyed, and the spirit may
be saved, that righteousness and judgment may come forth. This is convincing
of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Deliver him to Satan, tie him fast
by a spirit of bondage, fill his soul with fear and trembling. Deliver him for
the destruction of the flesh. The destruction of the flesh, that is the
destruction of Satan: Satan's kingdom is in the flesh: Gods rule is in the
spirit; deliver him to Satan, that Satan may be destroyed. Let him see that he
is in the hands of Satan, that the Spirit may make out of his hands: the flesh
is nothing but enmity to God. The devil is the enemy of God, so is flesh; and
if enemy be too little, it is said to be enmity, Romans 8. 7. the wisdom of the
flesh is enmity to God. The wisdom of the flesh, the most glorious piece of
flesh, is enmity to God; the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh. Deliver him unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh;
deliver him to Satan that Satan may be destroyed; they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.

That the spirit may be saved: There is in a Saint two natures, flesh and
spirit; the law of the members, and the law of the mind; there is I and sin: I
and Christ, as the Apostle expresses it. There is flesh, in which Satan rules
and acts; there is spirit, that is the Divine nature that Saints do partake of;
and this same divine seed lies buried in flesh, in weakness, in darkness,
under a law of sin and death, till it be quickened, and when quickened, it stands
up for its liberty, and after quickened it may fall into a swound, and be as it
were dead again, as this Corinthian.

Obs. That the Spirit may be saved: The destruction of flesh is the saving of
Spirit; and it is the day of the Lord that saves the spirit, and burns up flesh.
The Lords appearance is like fire, that goes through the Briars and Thorns, and
burns them together: the manifestation of the Lord, against whatsoever is
against him, consumes it, destroys it. If any will set the briars and thorns
against me in battle, I will go through them and burn them together. The day
of flesh is night and darkness unto the spirit, to that that is born of God.
The day of the Lord is the night of the flesh, and the night of Satan; it is
darkness and not light: and here the spirit comes forth; that that is of God
comes forth, and the flesh is destroyed.

Thus you have a short view of the meaning of the words, and do you judge what
I say.

That which is to be observed here, may be branched out into diverse particulars.

1. First this, That there is mercy, kindness, pity, life, salvation, conveyed
unto Saints by such ways and means where there is nothing visible but evil, and
death, hell, and destruction. Deliver him to Satan, etc. send him to hell that
he may be delivered from hell; by terrible things do thou answer us, O God of
our salvation.

2. Another thing to be observed here is this, That Satan and hell and death in
all the powers thereof, is under the power of the Lord Jesus Christ in his
Saints: When ye are gathered together with the power of the Lord Jesus, deliver
such a one unto Satan. Deliver him for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved. Satan is under the power of the Lord Jesus, in his Saints,
in his people, and he is disposed by them; to take such a one, to destroy his
own power in him, and to send him forth pure: to send back that that is of God.
Deliver him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be
saved. The power of the Lord Jesus shall be manifested in the Saints, to
command and dispose of Satan and the power of hell. This incestuous person was
delivered unto Satan; for what end? That Satan should destroy himself in him:
now by the spirit of the Lord Jesus in the Church, he is restored and received
again. In the second Epistle, the second Chapter, Now (says he) ye ought to
comfort him, ye ought to relieve him; sufficient to such a man is that
punishment* take heed he be not swallowed up of too much sorrow: let him not
lie too long in hell: for we are not ignorant of Satan's devices. So he is put
into Satan's hands, and taken out, by the power of the Lord Jesus in his people.
This is that power that Paul did act in, when he speaks of some that he had
delivered unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20.
Whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.
Strange, that Satan should teach men not to blaspheme; this is the power of the
Lord Jesus in the Saints. We know little of it, or scarce any thing at all in
this time of the Apostasy, and of revealing of the man of sin: but we look for
the coming forth of this power in a more glorious manner then ever it was
abroad yet when shall that be? when by the brightness of his coming he shall
consume that man of sin. The power of the Lord Jesus in his people does command
devils and hell. Do you not know, says the Apostle, that the Saints shall
judge the world? Do you not know that we shall judge Angels? So it follows in
the next chapter to the Text, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. Whose is the power of judgeing
the world and Angels? is it not the Sons? That which is the Sons, is the
Saints. ^he same glory thou have given me, I have given them. All power (says
Christ) is given me both in heaven and in earth. The Father comes forth in
Christ, and Christ comes forth in the Saints. Christ comes forth in the flesh,
lower then the Angels. He makes him lower then the Angels: he comes forth as a
servant: while the son is under age, he is kept as a servant; he is made of a
woman, made under the Law; at last the Father comes to own him as his son: and
Christ owns him as his Father. When the time appointed of the Father comes, he
sends his spirit into our hearts, saying, It Is your Fathers pleasure to give
you a kingdom. Christ has the keys of hell and death, and he exercises these
keys in his Saints. We at present do not know how he exercises these, but we
shall know how, when we feel the want of them, when we see our weakness and
darkness, and mourn after the Lord. God has suffered the devil, hell, and sin,
to be a kind of Cloak and covering upon himself: but when he pleases he will
come forth and command them. The Saints need not the worlds power and force: to
go to the world for power, is to go to the devil for power. The Saints have
power with God; and therefore must needs have power over Satan. And this power
the Saints obtain by mourning, as the Apostle has it in the second verse, Ye
ought rather to have mourned. Jacob wept and made supplication; wrastled with
God and so prevailed. The Saints indeed, they are great persons; but few there
are that know themselves. We are the sons of God, but the world does not know
us. God has brought forth himself, and brought forth Christ in his Saints and
people; but that was but a first fruits, to show what he will do fully. He
shall come to be glorified [in] his Saints, and to be admired [in] them that
believe. The spirit of God was withdrawn, that the man of sin might appear.
This is that believers should do; they should be looking after this power, the
power of the Lord Jesus. What a poor thing it is to spend our time in an
outward powerless profession only! If we are Christians and of Jesus Christ,
we cannot do so: The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Do we profess
Christ? Where is the power of the Lord Jesus? Why do lusts and corruptions
reign in our hearts? Why have Satan and the world such power over us? Where is
the power of the Lord Jesus? Where is the spirit of Eliah? as Elisha said when
he had seen his master taken up into heaven, and had received his mantle, and
had a promise of a doubling of that spirit. Christ is taken up into Heaven. He
has told us, greater works then he did in that flesh, should we do in his
Spirit. Where is that spirit? Where is that power by which devils were made to
tremble and submit to him? It Is time we should begin to know our selves; that
we are of God, that we are the Temple of God, the body of the Lord: that we are
the fullness of Christ, and that in us he will manifest himself, and it is that
we should look for. We should be weary of a formal outward languishing
profession; and so bringing forth the Lord Jesus, we shall make his name known.
O that thou would bow the Heavens, that thou would come down, and make thy
name known; that Hell, and Death, and Satan, and all the powers of darkness
might melt before thee. Resist the devil (says James) and he will fly from
you. What is that power by which the devil is resisted? It Is the power of
Christ; the power of the Lord Jesus is with his people, though not yet
manifested: we should wait for it, and not rest contented with the name, but
look after power to command hell and death, those that have commanded us.

We are comforting our selves that Christ has done this for us. It Is true he
has done this for us; he will do it in us. The Apostle bids us stand to it, in
Ephesians. 6. You wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with principalities and
powers; therefore put on the whole armor of God. If you be true Israel, you
are able to deal with God; and then the devil and the world are not able to
stand against you. Do you believe this? Then wait for it.

The next thing I shall commend unto you is this, That we must be delivered to
Satan, before we can be delivered from Satan. For the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. And if this stick in your
stomachs, and will not go down, let me offer it to you in an old expression of
Divinity, as they call it, that is, That God leads his people to Heaven by
Hell. We must be delivered to Satan, if ever we will be delivered from Satan:
Satan has carried all the seed of God captive, in the flesh; It Is under the
law of sin; sin and death has captivated the whole seed of God; here this seed
lies as it were dead, in a swound; and in this state we dream of nothing but
life and happiness, great enjoyments, when we are captives to Satan at his
pleasure: God he quickens this same seed, this divine nature; and then they see
where they are, see how they were deceived, what a fools Paradise they were in,
then they have no rest till they be delivered. This is to be delivered from
Satan, to see that we are in Satan's power. So it comes to this, That there must
be a discovery of our state under the power of darkness, before we be delivered
from it. Deliver him unto Satan, destroy him, that he may be delivered; destroy
him that he may be saved; kill him that he may be made alive; convince him of
sin, then of righteousness: Deliver him unto Satan, is, quicken him, and
enlighten him, that he may see where he is, in Satan's power.

And whereas before there was peace, when the strong man kept the house, it was
because he did not see Satan; but now he sees him, there is nothing but
trouble, there is no rest till he be delivered. This is nothing but what the
Apostle says, you has he quickened that were dead in trespasses and sins.
Dead in trespasses and sins; here is the seed of God under the power of Satan.
The spirit quickened, sees whereabouts it is: sees that it is in hell, among
devils, lusts, death, and flames, and it cannot abide here. The Prodigal came
to himself; that was the quickening of this divine seed; he was well enough
before, at the swinetrough, till he comes to himself; O then he cannot endure
it, he cannot live here any longer! We must be delivered to Satan, before we
can be delivered from Satan.

And the ground and reason of this lies thus:

God has let all his seed fall under the hands and power of death, and Satan:
and he would never suffer this state, unless he meant they should be sensible
of it, unless he did intend it should be discovered unto them. God he is
pleased that the devil and death should possess our life and carry it away; and
there is no recovering of it but by going into death, and into Hell; God he
goes in there, binds the strong man in his house, and recovers his goods.
There is no delivery from Satan, but by being delivered to Satan, and this
delivery to Satan is conviction of the Spirit; a clear sensible discovery that
we have been in Satan's power.

1. Therefore the use of it is this, to call upon us to entertain convictions
of the spirit, that discover sin, and hell, and death within us. It concerns us
to entertain these, for here is our life, our salvation. We must be delivered
to these, before we can be delivered from them. Be not afraid to go into Egypt
(says God by Jeremy) and serve the King of Babylon, for God has delivered
all-into his hands. God has delivered all flesh into Satan's hand; it is in vain
standing out in thy knowledge, in thy righteousness; thou must let all go: thou
must be content (seeing it is the will of God) to be Satan's and Hells vassal, to
bear thy burden, to endure thy captivity, and hence the Lord will bring thee
forth. I do not speak that any soul should entertain Sin and Satan, and Hell, as
the world does with delight and pleasure: for it is death to him so to do. Hell
is Hell to him, the devil is the devil to him: but yet he sees there is no
withstanding of it; He must come under his power, and feel he is under his
power, and then he shall have deliverance. Therefore, agree with thine
adversary quickly while thou art in the way. If God has delivered thee unto
Satan, into his power, it is but while thou art in the way. Tell the devil and
sin, it is your hour, I am your captive, but I shall have deliverance; and this
discovery that I am your captive, is the way of my deliverance; This is the way
for me to be delivered out of your hands. Do not stand against conviction of
the spirit; do not stand against God when he convinces you that you are sinful;
for you will never make your selves righteous. This it teaches us first:

2. In the next place, This is that should quiet and still the soul in such
discoveries; God discovers Hell, and death, and sin, and the power thereof to
our soul.

Qu. Alas! What shall I do? I shall be damned, the pit will shut her mouth upon
me.

Answ. No: God is now saving, when thou think he is destroying; Psalm. 18.
16. David there tells his experience, and how God had delivered him out of
hell. He sent from above he took me and drew me out of many waters, he
delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me, for they were
too strong for me. But see through what a condition David was brought unto this
salvation, ver. 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly
men made me afraid: the sorrows of hell compassed me about, the snares of death
prevented me, etc. to the 16 ver. It Is a description of those terrible workings
in the spirits and souls of Gods people, which do usher in salvation and life;
He discovers the foundations of the earth, discovers hell there. There is the
Revelation of Jesus Christ (that last book of the new Testament) and that
Revelation of Jesus Christ makes all those terrible discoveries there we read
of. The rising up of Jesus Christ in the soul, this discovers flesh, and hell,
and sin, and so destroys them. This should lift up our heads when darkness
comes; when we think that God is destroying his Saints, he is saving them.

3. And thirdly, it should put us upon this, to consider whether we have ever
been delivered to Satan or no: what discoveries have we had of Satan's power, of
sins power, hells power? it concerns us to look to this. For the way to be
delivered from him, is to be delivered to him. We know the old way of
Ministers, that this discovery must be to such a measure, and for such a time,
we have done with that; God he works how he pleases: he makes deep humiliation
to be the foundation of glorious salvation. From the greatest discoveries of
hell and death, he brings forth the most abundant glory. The most dangerous
estate of the soul is to be in a dead Palsy; The physician coming to one that's
taken with a dead Palsy, he puts him into a Fever to cure him: This way the
spirit of God takes with him that lies dead, God puts him into a fever, sends
fire into his bones, to secure his life, his soul: for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved.

That Is another thing to be taken notice of, that sin, hell and death are
destroyed by a discovery. He was delivered unto Satan, was in his power when he
committed that sin; now let him see where he is, for the destruction of the
flesh: for the destruction of Satan, whose kingdom is in the flesh. Satan,
Hell, and Death, are destroyed in the Saints by a discovery. And the reason why
the discovery destroys them, is, because it is such a discovery as it is; it is a
discovery by quickening. You has he quickened that were dead in trespasses and
sins. This holy seed which is of God cannot endure sin, which is death to it: A
discovery by the spirit is not a notional discovery, as when a man or a letter
shall come and tell us: but such a discovery of sin and hell as makes us feel
it. The spirit once awakened in a Saint, sin can have no entertainment there.

The power of the Lord Jesus delivering us to Satan, that discovery destroys
Satan. Hell, and sin, cannot be entertained but in his own place; and the
spirit once awakened in the Saints, cannot agree with hell: light and darkness,
Christ and Belial cannot agree.

And that is it that concerns every one of us that mind life, and peace, and
salvation in good earnest, to make after light, after knowledge; not
head-knowledge, but heart-knowledge, the light of the spirit: stand up from the
dead and Christ shall give you light. Wait to be renewed in the spirit of your
minds, to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Let us not stint our selves to any measure or degree of knowledge.

Take heed of refusing knowledge because it is new and strange, but examine it.
Entertain strangers kindly, for by it some have entertained Angels unawares:
Wait for the Revelation of the Spirit, the teaching of the Spirit. And take
another thing here, That there is no discovery that destroys flesh, and saves
spirit, but that which is made by the power of the Lord Jesus. It Is not man's
discovery, nor the discovery that our own Reason makes, it is not a letter
discovery, but a a discovery of light and power by the Lord Jesus, that makes
an end of flesh: And it must needs be this, and nothing else: because every
Saint while he lives in the flesh is bewitched. It Is the Scriprure expression,
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? It is a being born again, you
cannot see the kingdom of God, except you be born again.

I conclude with this: See how it concerns us to wait for the Ministry of the
spirit: and that is it we should look for in all these meetings and Assemblies:
Look to meet with the power of the Lord Jesus; Satan would deceive us by the
knowledge of the letter of the creature: we may have a great deal of knowledge,
and be puffed up with pride, and be delivered up to Satan when we have done: We
should admit of that distinction, Letter, and Spirit: Man, and God: not that we
divide between these: but in Man, and in Letter, look for the Spirit and God:
The life was manifested, we saw it, our eyes looked upon it, and our hands
handled it. The discovery of Hell is the destruction of Death and Hell: by the
power of the Lord Jesus deliver such a one to Satan, and c.

A PARAPHRASE upon the seventeenth of the ACTS.
ACTS 17. ver. 1. Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia,
they came to Thessalonica, where was a Synagogue of the Jews.


HEre is the entertainment that the Apostles (being Messengers and Ministers of
the Spirit) had in the world. They came to Thessalonica, they had passed through
some places without making any proffer of the Grace of God: at Thessalonica,
there they tarry; There was a Synagogue of the Jews: The Jews were now
scattered from their own place; and instead of a Temple and other Ordinances,
they were content with a Synagogue. It was very much like our state now under
Antichrist, in the rhyme of the Apostasy. There was a Synagogue of the Jews:
Paul's heart exceedingly went out toward his brethren after the flesh, if he
might save some of them: and yet wheresoever he offered himself to them in that
way, they were seeking his life, and his blood; but still he found a number
that were of the Election of Grace, who did receive Grace, though the rest were
blinded.

Verse 2. And Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath
days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures.

These Jews had Learning and Knowledge in the Scriptures, merely to oppose the
truth, the power and the life of the Scriptures. Here they hold Paul play in
reasoning and disputing: Paul holds up Christ out of the Scriptures; the Jews
they dispute against Christ by the Scriptures; and this is that that all the
learning of man does; all his knowledge in the Scriptures, does but serve him
to oppose the Spirit. The greater knowledge in the Scriptures, and the more
learning (if it be only of man) the greater opposition unto Christ and unto the
Spirit.

Verse 3. Opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen
again from the dead: and that this Jesus whom I preach unto you is Christ.

It is not enough to know that there is a Jesus that has suffered and is
risen, but we must come to this Jesus, we must know him particularly: this is
he, he in whom dwells the fullness of God; he that is the manifestation of God,
the going forth of God, the power and the wisdom of God: have you met with him?
have you seen him-dying, and found him rising in you? Jesus Christ the power of
God, and the wisdom of God, it is him we preach: This is the Jesus whom I
preach unto you, says Paul: we must not only content our selves with generals
and stories, but we must come to particulars: This is he, here he is. Till we
find him in our hearts, we can find nothing of his salvation, nor of his life.

Verse 4. And some of them believed and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of
the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few.

Some of them believed: Paul had a gleaning among his Contrymen; Those that
were ordained to eternal life. Has God cast off his people? (says he) God
forbid.

And consorted with Paul and Silas: This is that the Ministry of the Spirit
does; it is a Fan that severs; it takes out the corn from the chaff: that is
the work of the Ministry, to gather the Saints together, to call up that holy
seed that lies in flesh, and to make them one with another.

And of the devout Greeks a great multitude: Some of the Jews, but of the
devout Greeks a great multitude; more of the Gentiles, then of the Jews.

And of the chief women not a few: Here are Gentiles and women: the Jews stand
out, except a little sprinkling of them; but here are Heathens, the Gentiles
and women, the weaker sort, in these God appears: It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs. Here the Jew, the Professor that is born
after the flesh, the carnal Professor, he stands out; and this we shall see in
our days; Many come from the east, and from the west; but these Children of the
Kingdom, these that are only in an outward profession, they shall be cast out;
the Gentiles come in, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: the wise of
the world shall be laid by; silly and weak women shall be instructed, babes and
sucklings shall be fiill'd with strength, and the mysteries of the Kingdom
shall be hidden from the wise. It follows

Verse 5. But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the
City on an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them
out to the people.

The Jews were such as owned themselves the people of God; they carry the
Scriptures, they dispute out of the Scriptures, and reason with Paul: There is
a form of godliness, but the Devil is in it; they are moved with envy, that is
the Devil: Here is a pretense of zeal, but envy lies at the bottom; this is
that that is the Professors sin. There is Gentile and Heathen sin, that lies
in open profaneness, in drunkenness, in filthiness and uncleanness, in theft
and murder, and the like; but here is the Professors sin, that lies in
spiritual wickedness, as envy, malice, hatred, wrath, evil surmisings, and the
like: Many a man blesses himself in this, I am not thus and thus, no drunkard,
no adulterer, no murderer: but look what thou art in thy heart, is envy there?
then there is murder: Every one that Professes God, let him search his heart,
let him not Pharisaically boast, he is not as this Publican.

They took unto them certain lewd fellows, etc. This is the way of men, when
reason and light are too hard for them, then they make an uproar, a clamor,
they will carry it with a noise: and this is a judgment of God upon carnal
Professors; God leads them forth with evil doers, in just judgment: he leads
them forth to sort and company with men whom they would have been ashamed to
have seen among them formerly: They took unto them of the baser sort lewd
fellows.

Verse 6. And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren
unto the Rulers of the City, crying, these that have turned the world upside
down, are come hither also.

See what a bustle here is about this message of the Gospel, the Gospel of
salvation, the kingdom of God, the proclaiming thereof. The kingdom of God is
at hand, This was the Apostles business, they meddled not with States and
Commonwealths, they meddled not with the Kingdoms of this world: They only held
forth the grace of God, and the power of God to deliver from sin and Satan, and
see what an outcry the devil makes among men: for here is the devil to be seen.

If you would see the devil, look upon envy, look upon wrath, look upon rage,
look upon opposition to the spirit, these that have turned the world upside
down, etc. This is the cry: They did not meddle with the world, but yet this is
true in a sense, which they did not reach. The very truth is, that the business
of the Ministry of the Gospel, which is carried in the spirit, is turning the
world upside down, it is turning that uppermost which is undermost: bringing
God uppermost that lies below, and laying the Devil undermost that lies
above: but there was no such thing as they had in their sense, no disturbing of
common peace, no meddling with civil government. They that go forth in the
spirit meddle not here. They that go forth in man, it is for them to be fishing
here, and meddling here: but they that go forth in the spirit, are to the world
peaceable: they let the world alone, let the world guide themselves, let the
dead bury the dead. That they hold forth, is of another world: the
resurrection, the kingdom of God.

Verse 7. Whom Jason has received; and these all do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying that there is another King, one Jesus.

Here is their charge upon these, they are enemies to Caesar, they do that
which is contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying, There is another King. Yet
this is not against Caesar: this is the King that gives Caesar his Authority,
and this is the wisdom of Kings and Princes, to own Christ in his place, and
not to deal in Consciences, but to subject their own Consciences to Christ, and
Christ and his people they will be all subject to them: their bodies, their
estates shall be subjected to them; but for their Consciences, they must be
excused.

Verse 8. And they troubled the people, and the rulers of the City when they
heard these things.

This is that that is to be seen daily; when the Jews make an outcry against
the Ministers of Christ, against those in whom the spirit of truth appears,
laying heavy things to their charge, the Rulers and the people are troubled.
Why is this? It Is out of ignorance; they know not Jesus; and there is guilt
lies upon them; they are full of unrighteousness, and this makes them fear.
When they heard these things; men are troubled with every noise, till they come
into the spirit; and this noise of Jesus affrights exceedingly: thus the poor
world, that know not God, are troubled.

Verse 9. And when they had taken security of Jason and of the other, they let
them go.

The Saints are ready to give the world security that they will not molest them
or trouble them. Jason had given up the world, his estate and life, and is
ready to give in security that he will never be an occasion of any trouble,
that he will never seek any change. All the change that a Saint looks for, or
that he is given to, is for the Lord to appear in the earth. They gave
security; and this is that we are ready to do, to give security that we will
never be troublesome to the Princes of this world: we will let them have their
time, we will never come against them in any worldly power. We will never come
forth against them, unless against their unrighteousness, and then we will come
forth in the power of God. When we talk of the power of God and of Jesus, the
world scoffs at us: let them do so, he is King, and shall take his kingdom, and
shall destroy all unrighteousness, and them that exercise it: He shall come
forth to be admired in them that believe.

Verse 10. And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto
Berea, who coming thither went into the Synagogue of the Jews.

See here; Ministers of the spirit, in whom God dwelt, and went about the
world, what shifts they are put to, how they sneak, and are conveyed away, as
if they had done a robbery, as if they were traitors, as if they were enemies
to Caesar indeed. This is the condition of Saints here, as deceivers and yet
true, says the Apostle; here was a state of weakness, they sent them away by
night: who coming thither went into the Synagogue of the Jews; Paul is still
among the Jews, there was somewhat to work upon, for they owned the Scripture.

Verse 11. These were more noble then those in Thessalonica, in that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily whither those things were so.

Here are Jews [indeed] among these, Jews inwardly, and these were noble Jews.
Here is the true nobility, the nobility that is coming up, now that the shadowy
nobility is going down; those that are born of God are truly noble. The
nobility, the shadowy nobility of this world, how has it been reckoned and
accounted of! such as have principles of honor and virtue in them, when they
hear of honorable and virtuous actions, cannot but own and honor the persons;
these are the noble, the honorable men; and this is the ground of nobility
here in the world. But now, the true nobility is, to be born of God. And those
that are born of God, do acknowledge that that is truly noble; they have
principles in them of glory and honor: and when God that is the only virtue
and glory appears, they own him, they receve him: that is it that is said of
these Ber^ans, that they received the word with all readiness of mind: what is
the word? the manifestation of God, that is the word. All that are not born of
God, are base born, and they do not know true nobility: when the pearls of God
are brought before them, they know them not, they trample upon them: they are
base bred, they know not noble things. They received the word with readiness of
mind, they knew the Scriptures were of God, for God had witnessed it to them;
they searched the Scriptures, and did see they did agree with that
manifestation they had from Paul and Silas. These were more noble.

Verse 12. Therefore many of them believed, etc.

All Gods elect are honorable and noble; they are Kings, and Queens, and
Princes, and they shall appear so.

Verse 15. And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens, etc.

Athens was an University where were learned men. See the Apostles
entertainment here; wheresoever he came else, his entertainment was
persecution; but here he has little besides scoffs and jeers. He had more to
do here with the wise heathen, then with the professing Jews: and it is
observable, what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1. We preach Christ crucified, to
the Greeks foolishness, to the Jews a stumbling block. The wise Greeks looked
after wisdom, the Jews after a sign; Christ crucified was foolishness to the
Greek, and a stumbling block to the Jew. Here Paul deals with the Greeks which
say, What says this babbler? What strange Doctrine is this?

Verse 16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in
him when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry.

His Spirit was stirred in him. There is body, soul, and spirit, as the Apostle
has it in the Thessalonians. What is this spirit, but the partaking of the
divine nature, as Peter calls it? The new man born of God, in which God does
act: This spirit lies dead and is asleep, further then God does quicken and
act it. This spirit is the seat and Temple of God, where God moves; the devils
business is in the flesh; there he works his work: the spirit is entire unto
God, here God appears sometimes, and sometimes he does not. We cannot do any
handsome work in the Gospel without a stirring in spirit; we cannot sail
without a gale; we cannot stir in a calm. He was stirred in spirit. It is the
spirit of God that stirs the spirit of his people. Sometimes there is a
discovery of Idolatry, and the spirit of the Saints is not stird. Sometimes God
says, as of Ephraim, He follows Idols, let him alone. Here was a whole City
in Idolatry, and Paul's spirit is stirred to deal with them if it may be, to
help some of them out of it; the spirit of God will strive with some, and it
will not strive with others: 'twill give over striving: my spirit shall no
longer strive with man, as it is in Genesis: Here the Lord was pleased to
appear to some of them. When he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. That
which is given to Idols, is given to devils. Here was a City given to the
devil, this learned City, this seeing City, is wholly in the devils hands:
wholly given to Idolatry, given to Satan. He is the God of the world; the
wisdom of the world, and flesh worship him: and Jesus Christ in whom the true
God makes his appearance, is crucified by the world.

Verse 17. Therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the
devout persons, and in the Market daily with them that met with him.

He disputed with them. There are some to be disputed with, and some to be let
alone.

He disputed with the Jews in the Synagogue, and on the Market day. Paul is a
market-man. What does Paul in the Market? Paul in the Market has no worldly
design. Paul is a spiritual man in the Market, as most men are carnal in the
Congregation. Paul's design was Heaven and God in the Market, and many a ones
design is the world and flesh in the Synagogue. The Saints in the world they
are not worldly; carnal men are worldl^ even in the Church. Spiritual men in
their dealing in outward things are spiritual; it is God that they look at, and
it is him that they seek: Carnal men even in prayer and all their worship are
carnal, and make use of God only for the world and flesh.

Verse 18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics
encountered him: and some said, What will this babbler say? Othersome, he seems
to be a setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and
the Resurrection. Certain Philosophers, Students in this University, lovers of
wisdom, some of the Epicureans: those that were taken up in a search after true
pleasure, true contentment, true rest, (we do not look upon that Sect as making
after fleshly or beastly lusts) it was a gallant study. And some of the
Stoics, those that studied the subduing their passions; a brave study! but
both of them fruitless, and nothing but labor in vain without the spirit. Paul
comes to them with that Ministry it had pleased the spirit to communicate to
him. They that are Ministers of the spirit, cannot minister the spirit to whom
they will, but as it pleases the spirit to go forth by them.

These encountered him, and some said, What will this babbler say? This is the
repute that all those have that minister the spirit, and that they must look
for that will hold forth only the learning of the spirit: among the wise of
the world a spiritual man must reckon to be looked upon as a fool, a trifler, a
babbler. Whatever natural wisdom cannot understand and reach, the pride that is
in it, will scoff and jeer at. What will this babbler say? Thus the language
and expression of the spirit is unto the world, the wise of the world, The
wisdom of the world is enmity to God.

Some said, He seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods; Why Gods in the
plural number? Paul held forth one God, and the only God (as he shows
afterward) This God is strange unto wise and learned men, they look upon him as
setting forth strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection. Like enough they looked upon him as holding forth Jesus to be one
God, and the Resurrection another. Carnal men are very apt to have gross
mistakes when they hear of spiritual things.

Jesus and the Resurrection. Mark how these are joined together. I am the
Resurrection and the Life, says Christ. So far as any man does know Jesus, he
lives in the Resurrection. All the knowledge of Jesus that is saving, is above
the world, above the natural man. It is life eternal to know Jesus, and this is
the Resurrection. And this Resurrection is above the reach of all the learned
and wise men of Athens. The natural man comes not into it, it lies within a
veil: therefore he that preaches Jesus indeed, must needs be a Barbarian and a
babbler to a mere natural man. Whosoever does preach Jesus in the spirit, he
must not look nor think to be generally understood. For my part, if all I hold
forth concerning Jesus, should be commonly understood, I had very good ground
to question whether I preach Jesus or no.

Verse 19. And they took him and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we
know what this new Doctrine whereof thou speak is?

Here was some ingenuity, he was not barred up; indeed it was their profession,
their business at Athens, to tell or hear some new thing, as ver. 21. May we
know, etc. Paul might answer them, I cannot tell whether you may or no, unless
the spirit of God declare it to you (let me tell it you a hundred times) you
can never know it. But Paul would try whether they might know it or no: whether
God would let them into the secrets of his kingdom. There is this ingenuity in
them that is not to be found in many Professors; the devil has that power in
their hearts, they must not hear any new thing; for why? they may be misled.
Thus the devil keeps them bound to him, and under pretense of taking heed of
error, keeps them from the truth.

Verse 20. For thou bring certain strange things to our ears; we would know
therefore what these things mean.

If ever we mean to be built up in the knowledge of God, we must look to hear
of new things, but let us not receve them suddenly: yet not throw them out of
doors. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: we know no other guide but the
spirit, there is not any Minister in the world that is our guide, or any
company of Ministers, but the spirit if he speaks in them and by them; we have
but one Master, that is Christ.

Verse 21. For all the Athenians and Strangers which were there, spent their
time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.

This, To tell or to hear some new thing, was not going about and asking, what
news? how is it with the state? but they were searching into the secrets of
nature; every one was improving their studies, and were communicating one to
another what any had found out, and thus they improved their time.

Verse 22, and 23. Then Paul stood in the midst of Marshill, and said, Ye men
of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious; for as I
passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with this inscription, To
the unknown God; whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.

The Apostle does not dispute with them in any point of their Philosophy, but
goes to their devotion, he takes occasion thence to deliver himself concerning
Jesus and the Resurrection, and so he deals with them according to their
principles. When he has to do with the Jews, then he disputes out of the
Scripture; when he has to do with these Greeks that did not own the
Scriptures, he deals with them by principles of their own: first of all he
charges them with superstition; You are led without rule, you can give no
account for what you do: and it appears by your own confession, your own hand;
for as I passed by, etc. See whether the light and learning of these men had
broughr them, even to show that they were at a loss concerning God. Ask
ignorant carnal people, whether they know God or no: they will take upon them
to know him. But here are men improving their light by studying: and it may be
when they first entered upon the search of knowledge, they might think that
they did know God: but after some time spent therein, they saw they did not.
That is it that all our wading in studies does bring us into concerning God, to
discover our ignorance, and I look upon it as a kind of ingenuity to profess
truly as they did here: they did acknowledge a God, but did not know him. I
found an Altar, etc.

There is no man but worships an unknown God, unless Jesus Christ be his Altar.
There is no Altar, but Jesus Christ, can bear this inscription in truth, To the
known God. There is no knowledge of God, but in Jesus Christ. When the Son
declares him, then he is the known God.

Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. So Paul by
degrees brings them unto Jesus Christ.

Verse 24, and 25. God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that
he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands,
neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he
gives to all life and breath, and all things. q. d.

You are mistaken in this God, as if he stood in need of somewhat; therefore
you build Temples to him, and make Offerings to him.

This is that simple people think that God needs them, and is much beholding to
them for the service they do him: what says the Apostle? he gives to all life
and breath, and all things. Therefore he receives nothing from the creature as
of need.

Verse 26. And has made of one blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on all
the face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation.

God, the only wise God, that made all things, has so brought forth all
things, and brought forth man in this Creation, that man should be quickly at
the end of his travel, that so he might begin to seek after God. That Is the
Apostles scope and Argument here. He has made of one blood all Nations, and
determined, etc. That they should seek the Lord, etc. ver. 27. God has made
the earth, and brought forth man: Man, when he comes forth in the earth, makes
after earth: there he is planting, and building and purchasing; but God has
bounded his time, he shall continue so long, and no longer; and God has
bounded his habitation, he shall go so far and no further; and what is the
design of God in this? but that man being at an end here in this Creation,
should look after him that made all things, that he should seek the Lord. This
is that the creature says to man, when he is searching after it greedily,
pursuing it earnestly; Surely thou art out in thy pursuit, thou do not seek
that thou should seek; thou art at an end here, as to thy self. So the very
creature speaks to man to seek the Lord. Thou would have rest here, thou
would have satisfaction here, but thou see how much thou may have: thy
days here will run to an end: that which thou have got, thou know not who
shall gather: and God has bounded thee that thou shall get so much and no
more, that so thou might seek the Lord. So the Apostle here.

Verse 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, though he be not far from every one of us.

Man reaching after these things, at last sees vanity in them. I must seek the
Lord, if happily I may feel after him, in a dark state and condition. Thus God
begins to quicken his people, by showing them an end in the world: then they
begin to feel after God, to grope after him: where is he? who is he? There is
no rest in this Creation.

Verse 28. For in him we live and move, and have our being, as certain also of
your own Poets have said, For we are also his offspring.

For in him, etc. He is about us, he is in us; there is not a finger stirs, but
it is in his power; not a thought moves, but it is in him: in what strange
darkness are we, that we should not see him?

As certain of your own Poets have said, and so he is strikeing them with their
own quils, dealing with them upon that they did own and acknowledge.

All men are the offspring of God. There are two ways of being Gods
Offspring, one by nature, another by the spirit: one only in old Adam,
another in Christ, the living soul, the quickening spirit.

Verse 29. For as much then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like unto Gold or Silver, or stone graven by Art and
men's device.

See the force here of the Apostles Reason. We are his Offspring; this is
professed among you; now we being his Offspring, shall we make God our
Offspring? Shall we make the work of our hands to be God? We are of him, and
shall we maker him to be of us?

Verse 30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands
all men everywhere to repent.

God was pleased that there should be such a time of darkness, that the devil
should have a power and a kingdom; but now that he is coming forth, he will be
owned. Now he commands all men everywhere to repent; he is coming forth now
to show himself, and he comes forth in Christ; so in the next verse.

Verse 31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men in that he has raised him from the dead.

Thus he works and toles them on from their own principles, to believe in
Christ.

He will judge the world in Righteousness, and he will judge the world by a
man: that man whom he has ordained, of whom he has given evidence (that he
will judge the world by him: by that man, who was judged by the world, and
suffered according to the flesh, but is justified in the spirit) in that he is
risen from the dead.

Here is the judgment of God, the Resurrection, this raised state.

This day of the Lord comes forth, when Christ comes forth; when this man is
revealed in us, there this day, this judgment comes forth. As he is revealed,
we are judged.

Verse 32. And when they heard of the Resurrection of the dead, some mocked,
and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter.

Carnal wisdom cannot bear that which is beyond its reach. Christ came into
the world, for judgment, that those that see not, might see; and those that
see, might be made blind.

Verse 33. So Paul departed from among them.

Yet there is some fruit of his preaching, his spirit was not stirred to no
purpose; for

Verse 34. Certain men clave unto him, and believed, etc.

CHRIST the only SACRIFICE and ALTAR.
SERMON I.
HEB. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. We have an Altar whereof they have no right
to eat which serve the Tabernacle.

For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by
the high Priest for sin, are burnt without the Camp.

Wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the gate.

Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach.

For here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name.


Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and for ever; the substance of all, the true
Altar, the true Sacrifice, the true High Priest, the heavenly Sanctuary; let us
by him offer the Sacrifice of praise.

We have an Altar; let every one consider whether they do worship by this
Altar. There is no sanctified gift, but by this Altar: we have no true meat,
but from this Altar; no true Spiritual refreshment but from him. There is
nothing strengthens and establishes the heart, but Christ, nothing but Grace;
he is the Altar, and he is the Sacrifice* So it follows in the 11. Verse, For
the bodies, etc. He is the sin-offering: He is made a curse for us, he became
sin for us, and whosoever is sanctified by him, he is carried forth by him
without the camp, and is content to take up his reproach. True Sanctification
unto God, is to go out of the glory, and rest, and ease of the flesh into the
reproach of the world, where Christ is, and whither he calls us, and through
that willcarry us into spiritual glory, into eternal honor and rest.

Let us go forth* This is to be sanctified by Jesus Christ, this is to be made
peculiar unto the Lord, to leave all and follow the Lord, to take up his Cross,
to deny our selves, to dye and to suffer with Christ, then we shall live and
reign with him. The exchanging life, riches, honors, is that we are called to
by Christ, who that he might sanctify the people, suffered without the gate:
he was made a curse; and those whom he sanctifies, he makes willing to be made
a curse: we come into the blessing of God, by being contented to be made a
curse unto the world: those whom Christ sanctifies, he makes a willing offering.

Let us go forth unto him without the Camp: He lives in them, he carries them
forth; and there appears the same mind in them that was in Christ Jesus: This
is true Sanctification: Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus:
No man takes my life from me (says Christ) but I lay it down of my self.

The reproach of Christ is the way to the glory of Christ. Moses esteemed the
reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. Let us go forth
to him.

But this is a hard saying, and who can bear it?

It Is no hard saying, for we part with nothing but what will away; For we have
here no abiding City, we look for one to come. We are going to a heavenly City
and Country, whiles we are parting with this, so it is no hard saying: Till we
be convinced by the Spirit, of the passing away of this present form of things,
and see a durable state coming, an inheritance immortal and undefiled, we shall
never be content to go out of the City, out of the Camp, and to bear Christ's
reproach: But this is that that is said, every one seems convinced, that here
we have no abiding City, and every one professes, he looks for one to come: if
then we refuse to go forth without the Camp, and to bear Christ's reproach; if
we mock and scorn those that do, we have that within us will rise up in
judgment against us; and our Religion comes all to this, we profess we know
God, but in works we deny him.

By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually: Mark
how those two come together, Let us go forth, etc. and By him let us offer,
etc. There is joy and glory in the reproach of Christ: When ye are reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of glory rests upon you.
There is meat in this Eater, according to Sampsons Riddle.

The sacrifice of praise continually: Take notice here, that the service and
the worship which God expects of his people, is praise and thanksgiving: Thou
would not have sacrifice, else would I give it thee: Offer to God
thanksgiving, as it is in Psalm. 50. 12, 13. Who so offers praise, honors me.
Sacrifice was but an outward sign of praise and thanksgiving. God has made his
people for his praise, Isa. 43. 21. This people I have formed for my self, they
shall show forth my praise: God has but this only design to manifest himself,
to show forth his glory; he will bring forth his glory in the salvation of his
people: he makes a people of those that were no people, that they should show
forth his virtues and his praises; this is the business that a Christian is
called to, to hold forth God: The effect of the Spirit which is poured forth,
is nothing else but praise and thanksgiving: Making melody in your hearts,
singing Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, as it is in the Epistle to the
Ephesians: God will manifest himself to his glory, in his people, in all
blessings in spiritual things. God will be the song and the praise of his
people; then we are right Worshippers, Gospel-Worshippers, when God is our
praise, when God is our song: let us by him therefore offer up unto God the
sacrifice of praise.

And if: this be the worship that God requires of us, then let every one of us
be looking how far we are lead into it, or whether we are at least coming
toward it. There is nothing acceptable to God but this: mourning and prayer is
only acceptable as it makes to this: God is emptying us, and humbling us, that
he may fill us, and his filling us is praise and thanksgiving: Therefore David
when he is mourning says, he shall yet give him thanks. In prayer and
mourning, he is but traveling for praise and thanksgiving: praise is coming
forth, it is breeding: I shall yet give him thanks, says he. So much as we have
attained in praise, so much we have attained in true and spiritual Religion: so
much as we go forth in praise, so much we go forth by Christ: Let us by him
therefore offer the sacrifice of praise. The worship and service of God is a
joyful thing, it is a cheerful thing: we do not know the service of God in truth,
until we know joy in the Holy Ghost: The Kingdom of God is righteousness and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: It is refreshing, it is chearing, it is meat
and drink: In the keeping of thy Commandments there is great reward. Do not
reckon that we are true Worshippers of God, Worshippers in Spirit and Truth,
until we come into the joy of God, until we can offer the sacrifice of praise:
We may be tending to it, and making to it, we may be traveling with it, in
sorrow and in sighs, but when we are brought forth in it, it is in praise. By
him therefore let us offer, etc.

It also sets an end, and determines that controversy between the Law of Works
and the Law of Faith; between the Law of Moses and the Law of Christ; between
man's Righteousness* and the Righteousness of God; between Justification by
works, and Justification by faith: It is praise that God looks for; man's
Righteousness, man's Works, they praise man, and set up man: What is that that
throws down boasting? The Law of Faith: that sets up God. Why do thou boast?
Thou have nothing but what thou have received? This makes us praise.

And it may help us, by way of direction, how to know what is truth, and so
keep us from being carried about by diverse and strange Doctrines. What is it
that leads us to praise? what is it that brings us into rest and joy, the joy
of the Lord? what is it that exalts God? God has nothing to do, nothing to
seek, but his own exaltation, his own praise; that that is from him, that leads
to him; that that sets him up only, shall be exalted in that day* praise is the
sum of that which God requires of us: When we can praise, then we can worship.
By him let us offer the sacrifice of praise.

But what is this praise then? it is worth the knowing what it is to praise him.

Consider here, what a Title the Text gives it, it is a sacrifice. By him
therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise. In a Sacrifice there is
offering up, there is an Altar, there is Fire, there is a Priest, there is
somewhat to to be carried forth, there is somewhat to eat, there is somewhat
for refreshment. So it is here in praise; true acceptable praise is a sacrifice,
it is the fruit of our lips, as the Apostle calls it here. By him therefore let
us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his name. The fruit of our lips, is this all? no, this
is but a part, it is the calves of our lips, as the Prophet Hosea calls it. By
the lips the heart comes forth, and the abundance of it, but the sacrifice is
our selves; praise is the offering up our selves. I beseech you (says the
Apostle in Romans 12.) that you offer up your bodies (not your lips only, but
your bodies) a living and acceptable sacrifice; every member a weapon and
instrument of righteousness: this is praise. Your bodies and your spirits they
are the Lords. To praise him, is to offer up both unto him. In this sacrifice
here is somewhat to be killed; that is, lust, fleshly lusts, worldly lusts; and
here is somewhat that is to live, somewhat that is to be offered up a living
sacrifice: here is somewhat that is to be devoured in the fire; and somewhat
that lives in the fire, that glorifies God in the fire: there is that that
lives in God, who is a devouring fire, and everlasting burnings: all that is
spiritual, all that is the new creature, that is it is offered up a living
sacrifice; there it has its life: it comes from God, and it lives in God: so
it is a sacrifice of praise. It is the giving up, the resigning up of our
selves to be disposed of by the Lord. The offering up of the Gentiles that the
Apostle speaks of in Romans 15. 16. sanctified by the Holy Ghost. To offer the
sacrifice of praise, is to make our selves an offering unto God, as Jesus
Christ did: Here I am to do thy will (says he) thou would not have
sacrifice: Here I am, dispose of me: It Is written that I should do thy will,
therefore I am no more my own, but thine: This is to offer the sacrifice of
praise, this is to give thanks to his name. The love of Christ constrains us:
we must no more live unto our selves, but unto him: This is the sacrifice of
praise; here is thanksgiving indeed, praise indeed, which is that that is held
forth in Psalm. 116. Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from
tears, and my feet from falling. I Will walk before the Lord in the land of the
living. Here is the sacrifice of praise, I Will walk before the Lord: I Will walk in
the Spirit, and no more in the flesh. In the 12 Verse it follows, What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. Here is the sacrifice of praise:
here is dying, dying to the world, dying to the flesh: Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of his Saints. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, and the
son of thy handmaid, thou have loosed my bonds: I will offer to thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving. What shall I render unto God? It Is said of Hezekiah,
that he rendered not unto the Lord according to the benefits he received from
him: This is that God enables his people to do; to render to him according to
what they have received: God enables his people even to recompense him, to
requite him. Do you thus requite the Lord? The Lord enables his people to
requite him, and to requite him fully: for as he is our fullness, so we are his
fullness; as he gives himself to us, so he enables us to give our selves to him,
and so we return himself unto himself: Of thy own we have given thee: Thus only
a Saint can praise that has the Spirit, that has received God; for nothing is
acceptable to God, but himself: Nothing comes to God, but what comes from God.
There is no sacrifice indeed but Jesus Christ; By him let us offer up the
sacrifice of praise unto God.

The people of God do make a Covenant with God by sacrifice, Psalm. 50. There is
a sacrifice of praise (praise is a sacrifice) and a sacrifice of our selves:
it is Christ that is the sacrifice, and it is by Christ that we become a sacrifice
acceptable, a sacrifice of a sweet savor unto God: For I do not live (says
the Apostle) but Christ lives in me: And as by him we are a sacrifice, so by
him we are Priests, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice
acceptable to God: as it is in 1 Pet. 2. 5. There is the fire of this sacrifice,
the Eternal Spirit: Through the Eternal Spirit he offered up himself without
spot* and that that is our praise, is the meat and drink upon this Altar, the
refreshing and the wine: In keeping of them (of thy Commandments, says David)
there is great reward. There is somewhat to be carried forth in this sacrifice,
and that is iniquity and sin, that cleaves unto our holy things. Praise and
thanksgiving is the sum of the Worship of God and Jesus Christ: and this praise
and thanksgiving is a sacrifice, and such a sacrifice as you have heard.

Use. This may make a discovery unto us, that praise and thanksgiving is little
known among us, we are very little acquainted with it: we have heard of the
name, but know not the thing. The common praise and thanksgiving stands in some
expression of words; sometimes there is a day set apart, sometimes good words
spoken of God; at such a time there are some Ceremonies used, and it may be a
great deal of sacrifice done to the flesh; there is a seeming offering somewhat
to God, but none of the best; And cursed is the deceiver, that has in his
flock a male, and offers to God a corrupt thing: The true praising and
acceptable thanksgiving is, offering up of our selves, our selves sanctified
(that the offering up of the Gentiles might be sanctified by the Holy Ghost)
and our selves a living sacrifice: There is no man can glorify God, but he
that is glorified of God; according to that prayer of Christ in Joh. 17.
Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify thee.

If this that has been said in this point, cause us to look into our hearts
and consider what we have done, and how we have been in this service of praise,
it is that I intended in it. When we shall look into the nature of Praise and
Thanksgiving, and shall look with a right eye, we shall see that there has
been nothing, or little else besides the name of Praise amongst us: it has
been but a form of Godliness, having in it scarce any thing of the power.

By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually.

By him let us do it. That is the next thing to be considered here, That by
Jesus Christ, in the name of Jesus Christ, in the power, in the light, in the
love, in the spirit of Jesus Christ must our praise go up to God; and all that
is acceptable does go up so. By him let us offer, etc.

All that comes to God, that is acceptable sacrifice, it comes by him; it comes
in his name, it goes up in his grace, it goes up in his love, in his light, in
his power: this is by Jesus Christ. There is no Sacrifice acceptable, but that
which is sanctified by the Holy Ghost, as in Romans 15. 16. That the offering up
of the Gentiles might be acceptable to God, sanctified by the Holy Ghost. There
is nothing that comes acceptable unto God, that God owns, that he receives, or
where he smells a savor of rest, but that which comes up in the spirit of
Christ, by Christ, by him, in his name. There is nothing holy, but what is by
the Holy Ghost. It is he that sanctifies the people by his blood, as it is said
here before. Let us go forth to him, and by him let us offer the sacrifice of
praise.

He is the Mediator between God and man; he is our peace, our wisdom, our
righteousness, our sanctification. If he be our sanctification, God will own
us; there is nothing that God can own, but what comes by him. We are all an
unclean thing; there is nothing comes from us but pollution, but only as we
come forth by Christ and in Christ. Else all our sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving are nothing but a form, a show of holiness. It is a fair show
toward God, but tends only to the flesh, and to the world. Our mind and
Conscience is defiled till it be taken into the Holy Ghost, till Christ be
brought forth in us. In Christ we come forth a new creation. All this same old
creation is lost and fallen into Satan; in the new Creation Satan has nothing
to do, the prince of this world comes and has nothing in me. By him. All
acceptable service goes to God by Christ: In him are all the promises, yea and
Amen. The promises (says the Apostle) they are to the seed: he does not say to
Seeds, as to many, but as to one, and that is Christ. Gal. 3. 12. Coming, and
not coming by Christ, we have no* promise of acceptance: Christ is the heir of
all: God has given all to him; we can have nothing but by him: and in him we
are coheirs, as the Apostle has it in Romans 8. God has chosen us in him, has
blessed us in him: by him let us offer the sacrifice of praise. Christ is
Temple, he is Altar, he is Priest, he is all, the whole body of our sacrifice:
by him let us offer the sacrifice of praise. No acceptable sacrifice but by him.

Every one then that deals by sacrifice, that deals in praise and thanksgiving,
or supposes that he does so, let him consider by whom he comes. Do you come by
a Mediator or no? If you come by a Mediator, do you come by him that is gone
without the gate, and sits in the reproach of the world? if you come not by
him, all that you do (whatever fair show it has to men) is but abomination in
the sight of God. There is nothing acceptable to God but in him. All the
Incense you offer up, it stinks unless there be the sweet odor of him. How is
it then you bring your praise, you bring your thanks? by whom do you come? does
Christ lead you in? do you do it by him? We use his name, we come with words
and letters, and syllables; we say, Lord, we come to thee by Jesus Christ, we
come in his name: when we say so, let us consider what Commission we have.
Remember what the evil spirit said to them that conjured them in the name of
Jesus whom Paul preached, Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? and
that of the Psalmist, Why do thou take my name into thy mouth when thou
hate to be Reformed? Is the name of Jesus in thy mouth? Yes: but consider, is
the love of Jesus, and the Faith of Jesus in thy heart? If we come by him, let
us see that he is with us: let us look for his mind in us, for his spirit in
us. Are we spiritually minded or carnally minded? Are we his reproach? or is he
precious unto us? he must needs be so if we come by him unto God, and know him
the only way and the truth, and the life. Are we let unto God by his spirit?
To come by Jesus, is to come in the light and power and grace, and life of
Jesus. To come in our own names, what can we expect? to come by our own works,
by our own righteousness, this is to make another Jesus, another Mediator. To
use only the name, what an abominable mockery is this? and how has Satan and
sin and all wickedness been brought forth under the Names and Titles of Jesus
Christ? The devil has brought forth all sacrifices to himself, under the name
of Jesus Christ, and under such Titles.

By him. Let every one of us look (if we be in praise and Thanksgiving unto
God) whether we come by him. To come by him is to come with him. Know ye not
that Christ is in you? If any have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his. We are branches of his root, members of his body, and so we are to grow
up (if we be planted in the house of God) through the sap and fatness that we
have in him. We have great things to do, which cannot be done but by him. We
have principalities and powers, death and hell to wrestle withal; how shall we
do it but by him? we have God himself to overcome, and how shall this be done
but by his son? Consider what a promise there is, whatsoever you shall ask in
his name, it shall be given you. We have heaven to open and shut, we have Satan
to bind and loose, and how shall this be done without him?

But you will say, where is he that does go forth by him? where is this power?
where is this light? and where is this grace?

O 'twere well if all our hearts were stirred up to look after it, where it is?
O that we were awakened to look for it: that we were roused up out of spiritual
security and stumbling, out of that form of Religion we walk in, to look after
power and life and spirit. Where is it? Surely when we begin to look after it,
we shall find it is not far from us. But the truth is, it has been a long
time absent, a long time withdrawn, in respect of the manifestation of it. God
has been pleased that there should be an hour of darkness, and a time of
temptation: God is pleased there should be a time of Apostasy, that the man of
sin should be revealed; and that he himself during this time should be hid.
Christ himself did not always go forth manifestly in the name of God, for that
thirty years from his birth; it is true, he did all by the Father, but how
little manifestation was there of the Father in that time? his working by the
Father, in the name of the Father, was manifested in him by degrees. And he
tells his Disciples, that they should go forth mightier then ever he went forth
himself, Joh. 14. He that believes in me, greater works shall he do then those
that I do. When Christ came to suffer, and to be a reproach, he went to it by
the Father, he went to all by the Father, and we go to all by him: and the
Father did not presently manifest himself, or lead him out to a willing and a
joyful suffering, but comes to him by degrees; after begging and entreating,
and earnest Prayers, with strong cries and tears, if it be possible, let this
cup pass away. The Father comes in at last, takes him by the hand, and then he
goes on cheerfully, and for the joy that was set before him, he endured the
cross, and despised the shame. The manifestation of Christ with his people, to
lead them to God, has been low and dark; but it shall be clear, it shall be
bright, it shall be powerful. We have been in an exceeding puzzeled lost
condition, and still are, that we scarce know when we go by Christ, and when we
go alone: but he shall come forth clearly and manifestly, to lead his people,
and we shall see that he has us by the right hand. He will come forth in his
brightness to destroy the man of sin, after the time that he is fully revealed;
and by him the Saints shall go into greater glory then ever they have yet seen;
we shall judge the world, and we shall judge Angels. How is it to be wished
that we were sensible of that confusion and darkness that lies upon us, that
we have seen and do see very little of Christ our way? I am the way, the truth,
and the life. When the time comes that Christ shall manifest himself unto his
people, to lead them unto God, to be their light and their direction and their
life, he will make us sensible of our darkness, of our weakness, at what a loss
we have been, and we shall begin to cry as the Prophet Elisha did, when his
Master was taken up, where is the spirit of Eliah? There is the promise of a
double spirit, greater things shall they do that believe in me. Where is this
double spirit? surely God is awaking us to be looking after it. We have heard
of Christians of a tall stature, that have been giants to us, and we like
Pygmies unto them: and we have precious promises that hold forth a more
glorious manifestation of God, a full and everlasting presence of God: let us
be looking out of our darkness and weakness unto this. Let us not be content
that Paul should be able to do all things through Christ that strengthens him,
and we able to do nothing: Let it trouble us, that Paul should not be under the
power of any thing, and we under the power of so many things; let it stir us,
that Paul should triumph over principalities and powers, and see himself more
then a Conqueror; and we lie grovelling under a spirit of fear. When God has
once discovered to us how low his appearing is in us, and how little we go
forth by him, we shall be stirred up to look for a higher appearance, and when
we shall hear and read what the men of God have said, The light was manifest,
we have seen it, we have handled it with our hands, our eyes have looked upon
it; surely our hearts will burn within us, we shall have no rest till he come
forth in us. Our fouls will breath nothing else but this, O that thou would
bow the Heavens and come down! O that thou would make thy way known to thy
adversaries! We shall be weary of walking in a weak dull Religion: we shall se
what a reproach we are that bear the name of Christ, and can show forth nothing
of the power of Christ. Carnal profession in Religion, seeks ways to make out
it self by helping Christ to worldly strength, and worldly honor, and worldly
wisdom; but they that are Christ's indeed, will take heed of this Antichrist.

Be sensible that Christ is a child in us, and weak in us, can hardly speak in
us, can hardly stir in us; that we lie in the dust, till he be grown up in us;
that we sit in darkness till the Lord be our light. We know that there is a
Ministry will come forth that will have no need of such weapons: therefore we
will never seek to honor Christ and set up Christ, with the civil Magistrates
sword: we will never seek to put the civil sword into his hand: we will never
seek to dress him forth with man's wisdom: we will lie in the dust till he comes
forth in us in his own power, and wisdom and glory.

We should then mourn after the Lord. When once the people did mourn after the
Lord, the Lord was presently with them. The Lord tells his people by Jeremy,
that the time of their captivity should be in Babylon seventy years, and then
says he, you shall praise me, then you shall seek my face. We have been in
Babylon, and are in Babylon, mourning after the Lord, and begin to feel our
captivity, and are sensible of our weakness: is not the man of sin revealed?
now let the Lord be revealed to consume this man of sin; to consume him
inwardly, to consume him in all the world. Come and take thy kingdom, and take
thy power. Where will God appear and set up his glory? is it not in his Saints,
he will be glorious in his Saints, he will be admired in all them that believe.
Awake and rise up you that sit in the dust. Let Us not be contented with forms
and professions, and names and Titles; let us look after power, let us go forth
by Christ indeed; let us be looking where the power of Christ is, and where the
grace of Christ is; Christ has said, Whatever you ask in my name, it shall be
given you. How many things do we ask, and they are not given us? how do we ask
in the name of Christ then? If we consider our selves in all we have yet
attained, we shall scarce see any thing we can call Prayer; we never knew how
to pray yet. When did we go forth by Jesus Christ? By him let us offer the
sacrifice of Praise to God, and by him we shall do it continually.

SERMON II.
HEB. 13. 15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name.


BY him: By whom? by Jesus; who that he might sanctify the people with his own
blood, suffered without the camp: Let us go forth to him without the Camp,
bearing his reproach; And by him let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually. Our Sanctification by Christ, is our giving up our selves a
sacrifice to God: It is our going out of the glory of the world, out of the
honor, the reputation, and all the accommodations of the world unto Christ, who
who is gone before us out of all. To be a Christian is (at least) to be brought
to this in full purpose of heart: Abraham was the father of the faithful, who
because he trusted in God, forsook his Country, Kindred and Fathers house: He
that will be my Disciple (says Christ) let him take up his cross* else he is
unworthy of me. This is to be sanctified unto God, to be no more the worlds,
nor the fleshes, nor our own, but the Lords. You must be a curse to the world,
if you will be a blessing to God: We have not rightly understood Christ's being
made a curse for us; we have thought we might be excused from the curse, but we
must be made a curse with him: and by going into this curse, we remove from
that curse we are under as unto God. Let us go forth unto him bearing his
reproach: And you shall lose nothing by it; You have here no continuing City,
you are making unto a continuing City through reproach: You must go out of the
Camp, out of the City, if you will find a continuing City: you shall not go
out in haste, or in fear, you shall not go out sorrowing, or mourning: you
shall not go forth looking back, O what a City have I left? what goods, what
name have I left? If Christ lead you forth, you shall go forth with praise and
thanksgiving. When Christ went forth, he had joy set before him, and for that
he endured the cross, and despised the shame. Let us by him offer the sacrifice
of praise to God. The Altar of God (which is Jesus Christ) unto the true
Worshippers, gives them the fat, it gives them the sweet, that they rejoice
before the Lord, they bless the Lord, they are filled with his loving
kindeness, they are filled with his goodness, they eat and drink that meat the
world does not know, they praise him.

And Christian praise is not a word-business, God I thank thee, etc. as the
Pharisee said: it is a giving up our selves. I beseech you, by the mercies of
God, that ye offer up your bodies a living sacrifice; A sacrifice, wherein is
somewhat killed, somewhat burnt and consumed, and that is the world and lust;
and somewhat which is offered up to God, that lives in God, that lives in the
fire; and that is the spiritual part, Christ in us. It is a sacrifice, and it
is offered up by the fire of the Spirit, sanctified by the Holy Ghost.

The world does not know praise; yea, there may be many true Saints that yet do
not know that which is their life; for this same life of the Divine Nature does
not presently discover it self: We grow up in this spiritual life by degrees,
as we do in the natural life. It Is impossible to offer this sacrifice but in the
Spirit, but by Jesus Christ. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of
praise to God continually. There is no man can praise God but by Jesus Christ:
To offer by Jesus Christ, is to offer in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, in the
power of Jesus Christ, in the life of Jesus Christ, in the light of Jesus
Christ: and when we shall see and understand what it is to praise, that it is an
offering up of our selves unto God, a freewil offering, then we shall easily
grant that this cannot be but by Jesus Christ. There is nothing in us but
enmity unto God; we have no sacrifice but for the Devil and for hell. It Is by
Jesus Christ that we offer unto God: let us look whether our praise and
thanksgiving do come by Jesus Christ or no: if we cannot see Jesus Christ with
us, and his Spirit leading us, let us be sensible of it, and abhor our selves
in all we do; and let us wait when he will come forth and lead us into the
presence of God, when his power shall be manifested in us, when we shall see
and know that we walk in the light as God is in the light. It Is time to be
looking after power and life: we have been long in a languishing Religion: the
workings of the heart, the prayers, the sighs and groans of the Saints after
Jesus Christ, tell us he is at the door. It Is time we should be weary of a
profession and of a Religion which we cannot make forth to the world, and
sometimes cannot make forth to our selves: Shall we not wait for the time when
we may make it out that we are of God, and walk with God, by showing forth the
light of God, the life of God, the power of God, the praises of God, and the
wonders of God? surely we are called to show forth his praises. Now is Christ
buried in us, he is covered in us, he walks in our rags and dirt, and filthy
garments; how should we wait till that voice comes forth, Take away his filthy
garments from him. By him let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God
continually.

And that is the next thing we are to take notice of Continually: God will
bring his sanctified ones by Jesus Christ into a continual thanksgiving and
praise to his name.

There is a continual offering up of the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving
unto God by real Saints, by true born Christians: It is a continual work,
though they are not always sensible of it; the new man is always in it, he is
of God, and he is only for God. Every true Saint shall do it manifestly, shall
do it sensibly. Continual praise and thanksgiving unto God, this is that that
we are sanctified unto by Jesus Christ; he has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, Priests to offer up spiritual sacrifice. The sacrifices and offerings in
the Temple were continual; the Priests did stand and watch by night in the
house of the Lord: you that by night stand in the house of the Lord. By him let
us offer to God the sacrifice of praise continually. There is nothing is called
for in the new Testament, but it is done; all his Commandments are Promises: It
is the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, this is the new Testament.
The higher and greater the commands are, the better it is, for it tells us what
God has done for us, and what he will bring forth in us. There is that in us,
in a seed, which he is calling up. It Is a pitiful thing for a spiritual man to
complain of the height and weight of any Commandment; for God enjoins us
nothing but what he will bring us up to, for he shall work all our works in us,
and so ordain peace for us. All the Commandments and Exhortations of the Gospel
are the Saints glory, for God will bring us up to every one of them. By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually: Flesh and
Blood will say, a heavy task, a hard saying: the Spiritual man he says, Let us
go up at once, God will do it, as Caleb says. Thou have the words of eternal
life, says Peter, whither shall we go? Thou will bring forth all in us. Let us
offer up the sacrifice of praise continually.

A Saints work is continual offering up himself to God. It is the work of the
new man, of the spiritual man: Behold I am thy servant: it is the work of
Christ in us, the breathing of his soul to God: It is written in the volumn of
the book, Lo I come to do thy will: Sanctification by Jesus Christ, is that we
should be holy, and always the Lords: This is the sacrifice of praise, continual
self-denial, continual dependence upon God* continual readiness to suffer and
do his will, continual acknowledgement of his love, continual setting forth his
praise and glory, continual holding forth his virtues and his praises. A true
Saint, a true born Christian, is a house of prayer: You also as lively stones
are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice acceptable to God* etc. 1 Pet. 2.

Now some weak Christians that do not know their own estate, that do not know
that seed that is in them, will be making objections against this, How can this
be, as Nicodemus said, when Christ told him of a man's being born again: So in
like manner, when they are called upon to be in continual thanksgiving and
praise; as here its said, By him let us offer the sacrifice of praise
continually: How can this be? says a worldly man* how can this be? says a
weak Christian, who is in great part worldly and carnal: What, continual
praising? and what, in all estates? in all conditions? and what, shall I never
pray? must I always praise? when shall I pray? Why, he that bids thee praise
continually, bids thee also pray continually. The Apostle decides this
Controversy in the fourth of the Philippians, Let your requests be made known
unto God with thanksgiving: pray continually, and praise continually. What
shall we never read? shall we never hear? shall we never work, sleep, eat,
drink? yes, but all with thanksgiving: Whether you eat, or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God: If you know not how this can be the Spirit
teaches those that are born of him, how it can and may be: They that are born
of him, if they do not understand, they shall understand, God will reveal the
same to them.

When God is all in all to us, and we see God in all, his love in all, his
power in all, then we shall praise him in all, we shall give thanks in all, we
shall do all we do to the Lord, we shall dye to the Lord, and live to the Lord;
Whether we live or dye we are the Lords: we shall work to the Lord, we shall
sleep to the Lord, we shall awake to the Lord: Holiness will be written upon
the bells of the horses, upon all our employments; all will be a sacrifice of
praise, in all we shall give up our selves to the Lord. This is that the
Apostle says elsewhere, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, in
all things give thanks: In all things, what in affliction, in troubles, in
sufferings, in reproaches? why, what says the Text, Let us go forth to him
without the gate, bearing his reproach, and by him let us offer the sacrifice
of praise to God continually.

Count it all joy (says James) when you fall into diverse temptations: but what
will you make of us (you will say) should we be stocks and stones? would not
you have us sensible of afflictions and temptations, of burdens and reproaches
that lie upon us? see what the Apostle says to this, As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing: The spiritual man has a sense of afflictions and reproaches, and a
deep sense too; he sees all that is in the cup, but he sees through it, he sees
joy surpassing all sorrow. Christ he saw through the cup; he saw the shame, and
was sensible of it; but there was joy that was set before him, there was that
that swallowed up all, that that lifted him up above all; there was a cup of
wine that made him forget his sorrow: Give wine to him that is sad in heart.
When our hearts are full of sorrow, God comes in with a cup of wine: God sheds
abroad his love in our hearts, and we joy in tribulation, as says the Apostle:
so here is the sacrifice of praise in affliction, in trouble, in necessity, in
reproaches; being persecuted we suffer patiently, being defamed, we bless, and
a spirit of glory rests upon us: We see God in all, we see a good hand in all:
God will do me good for his cursing, says David. The flesh cannot praise at
all, no not in all peace, in all abundance; all its sacrifice is to its own
net: but the Spirit praises in the midst of tribulation: Paul and Silas sing in
the Prison; the Apostle commends to the Collos^ians long-suffering with
joyfulness, and he tells the Corinthians, that as afflictions do abound for
Christ, so consolations do abound through Christ. God comes in to his people in
the saddest afflictions, and tells them, these are yours, all is yours, things
present* and things to come: life is yours, death is yours, afflictions are
yours, they are all your servants: he shows us that we are Lords, and Masters,
and Conquerors: he sets us above these. Christ triumphed in the Cross, as the
Apostle says; and here is the triumph of a Christian over necessities,
afflictions, reproaches, yea over death it self, not to be delivered from
death, but to be set above death, to be conquerours of death; We are more then
Conquerors through him that loved us. It Is a poor expectation from Christ, to
expect by Christ to be delivered and defended from reproach, from afflictions,
from necessities, from sufferings: Christ came to call us into these, to set us
above these, and make us more then Conquerors over these: He that will be my
disciple (says he) let him take up his cross and follow me. Let us go forth to
him without the gate, and by him let us offer, etc.

It Is a strange thing, this, to praise in afflictions, to be in continual
praise; but this is by him. When we know the fellowship of his sufferings, the
virtue and power of his Resurrection, this will be no strange thing to us; and
then we shall go forth willingly without the gate, we shall go to his reproach
cheerfully.

Let us by him, etc. There is that in every Saint, that seed of God, that that
is born of God, that same holy one, that is in continual praises. The noise of
flesh oftentimes, and for a long time drowns this voice: but it shall be heard
when flesh shall be put to silence: When the Lord arises into his holy
habitation, you that see him sometimes, and feel him sometimes, shall see and
feel him always; and you shall say with the Apostle, the life was manifest, we
have seen it, we have handled it, and our eyes have looked upon it. You that
say you live because he lives, must needs see you live for ever, for he never
dies, and you shall never dye; you have a life that shall never be taken away:
I am the Resurrection, and the life, and he that believes in me shall never
dye: and this life is nothing but praise, nothing but thanksgiving: he is all
in all, does all in us and for us, works all our works; and so far forth as we
see him doing all (as we shall see him perfectly, when we walk in the light as
he is in the light) then we shall praise him in all: it is his faith, his sap,
his virtue, his life, his power, to him be glory: when he acts us, and leads us
by his Spirit, whither can we go from him? we must needs go to him, we must go
to praise, we must go to glory: he destroys the works of the Devil in us, he
destroys all that goes forth to the world, to the creature* at last he will
destroy all: there shall be no going forth but to him, nothing but praise; it is
he that delivers us from other Lords: Other Lords have had rule over us* etc.
we have been praising the creature, our own wisdom, our own righteousness; we
have been offering up to our lusts: Other Lords have had dominion over us; now
by thee only we will make mention of thy name: you that mention the Lord, keep
not silence.

God does bring, and will manifestly bring all his true born people, his own
begotten children in Jesus Christ, I say, he will bring them into continual
praise: Some of these it may be do not know yet what it means, the world shall
never know it. It may be yet we know no other praise but an expression of
words; we shall know, that praise is giving up our selves to God: We do not
know that we pray, but only when we set our selves apart, and make this
Preface, Come let us pray, perhaps twice or thrice a day, etc. It Is far from me
to condemn any one that is in the use of these hours and forms; let them be in
God in the Spirit, and he will be with them; but take notice that there is
continual prayer; therefore thou that have thy times, and thy hours, and thy
forms, begin to look higher, and be at it continually. By him let us offer the
sacrifice of Praise to God continually. And it is no more then what is held
forth to us in the Prophecy of Isa. the last chap. ver. 23. And it shall come
to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another,
shall all flesh come to worship before me says the Lord. You that do not know
continual Praise, if you do praise God in the spirit, if you are sincere and
true in your makings unto God, you shall know what it is.

They that are strong should bear with the infirmities of the weak; and they
that are weak should not judge the strong; thou that do not know what
continual praise is, judge not those that do: thou that do know it, do not
despise those that do not; but go down to them, to fetch them out of their
weakness, for Christ is come down to fetch thee up, and let brotherly love
continue.

Continually. It Is that we are designed to by Jesus Christ, to be ever with the
Lord; Let us be making to it, let us be looking after the price of the high
calling of God in Jesus Christ. Let us all know and acknowledge we are making
forward, not yet perfect. By him let us offer, etc. That is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his Name.

That is, the fruit of our lips, Here take notice, how the tongue and the lips,
and the fruit thereof is sanctified by Jesus Christ, and consecrated to God.
And this, in all those that are sanctified by Jesus Christ. The fruit of the
lips is a sacrifice acceptable by Christ. And therefore the Prophet Hosea, Hos.
14. 2. Calls the fruit of the lips, the Calves of the lips. The fruit of our
lips by the sanctification of Jesus Christ, is made a sacrifice acceptable unto
God, and not only the fruit of our lips, but the fruit of our hands, the fruit
of our feet, the fruit of all our members. The fruit of the earth, as it is said
in Isa. 4. 1, 2. (where the Prophet speaks of the manifestation of Christ in
the spirit) In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious,
and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are
escaped; That is, for the spiritual seed, the remnant that are taken out of the
corruption of the world; when he shall come who is the desire of all Nations,
seven women shall lay hold of him; all shall make to him and own him, and be
one with him; then the fruit of the earth shall be glorious; then we shall eat
our own bread, and wear our own apparel: we shall no more wear sins, nor the
devils robes: we shall not borrow of sin, we shall no more eat of his bread,
but of our own, that which is in our Fathers house, and that is Christ. And in
that day the fruit of the earth, every part of us, the whole body, even the
lips that have been full of poison; the tongue that has had the fire of hell
in it, shall be filled with the fire of Heaven: That that has been darts and
arrows, and swords and venom, and the sting of Aspes and Dragons, even that
shall be healing: It shall be refreshing and delighting: this is by Jesus
Christ.

Christ shall come forth even in our tongues, and season them with grace, and
make them to be a tree of life; they shall minister Grace unto the hearers.
Christ does recover all that the devil has carried away (as Abraham all that
the King of Sodom carried away) He recovers it, he takes it out of pollution,
and out of filth. There is a dumb Devil, a beastly Devil, a blasphemous Devil,
an accusing Devil, a prattling and busy body Devil, as Peter speaks of such.
Why Christ shall cast out every one of these Devils: all the fruit of the lips
shall be a sacrifice of praise: there shall be no more of these: no backbiting,
no slandering, no going up and down to tell one another faults: nothing but
love and Praise, and Thanksgiving. Every member shall be restored, and the
tongue shall be restored. I beseech you (says the Apostle) as you have yielded
your members servants of iniquity unto iniquity, so yield them servants of
righteousness unto holiness. This is by Christ, and this is the effect of the
spirit when he is poured forth, making melody in your hearts; which breaths
forth nothing to God but love, nothing to man but love, nothing but praise,
nothing but joy. Christ is a through Redeemer, a through Restorer; and therefore
body and soul, and every member of the body shall be Redeemed. The spirit of
him that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies.
Christ gains the heart to God, and out of the abundance of that the mouth
speaks. He makes the heart a treasury of good things, and then comes forth
nothing but good at the door of the lips.

The tongue and the lips are either the great instruments of the Devil or of
God; of Heaven or of Hell; the fire of Heaven and the fire of hell is in the
tongue. Acts of life and death are in the power of the tongue. Here is blessing
and here is cursing. God promises in the prophecy of Zachary, to restore unto
his people a pure lip or language: and what is this pure language but Praise
and Thanksgiving? what is it but love, but grace, but edification? they shall
call upon the Name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent; a pure language
is not in words and syllables, but Christ fills the heart, thence the mouth is
filled, as it is in Psalm. 37. 30, 31. He speaks there of the Righteous man, His
mouth speaks of wisdom, and his tongue of understanding, and the Law of God is
in his heart. This is that which is the New Testament, the Law in our heart:
and when the Law is in our heart, then it will be in our tongue. The old
administration began in the tongue, thou shall speak of it at all times: the
New Testament begins at the heart, Thou shall write it in the heart; and then
the tongue will speak nothing else.

The fruit of our lips. There is a fruit of our lips that is seeming praise,
which coming not from the abundance of the heart, is the greatest abomination
unto God. A flattering and deceitful tongue* the Lord shall cut it out. There
is more of the fire of hell in a tongue that speaks to God, and not from the
heart, then in a tongue openly blaspheming. Therefore the Apostle Paul could
not bear the devil, that cried, These are the servants of the most high God,
that show unto us the way of salvation. But Christ in the heart, the fire of
Heaven in the heart, the Altar in the heart, and there flaming out at the
mouth, O it is sweet, here is a sacrifice indeed, be filled with the spirit,
singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord. That same Praise and
fruit of the lips that has not a root in the heart, continues not; but what
says the Text, Let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually. There
is a seed in the stony ground that comes up fast. There are that speak good
words, and goodly words, Let the Lord be glorified, Your brethren that hate
you, said, let the Lord be glorified, yet no continual sacrifice; this fruit
will be quickly blasted. He that is a Liar wants a good Memory. Nothing that is
violent is perpetual. No worship of God continues, but that which is made
natural to us. We may come forth and act parts, but there will be discovery of
what is in the bottom; and though we hold forth God sometimes to others, the
devil will show his head. James met with such, Can a fountain send forth sweet
water and bitter? Can a fig tree bear figs and thorns? Can there be blessing
and cursing?

Every one that pretends to Christ, let them look what they have by Christ. By
him let us offer, etc. If you are sanctified by him, you are made willing to go
forth to him in his reproach. If you are made willing to go forth to him in his
reproach, you will be no reproachers. If you be made willing to bear the strife
of tongues, and filth of tongues, and dirt of tongues, you will keep your
tongues from casting dirt or filth on any. When the Grace of Christ is
manifested to a soul, there is a discovery of all the filth it lay in, and out
of which it is recovered. And there is a sense of it goes along with it; such a
one was I, foolish, disobedient. Now I Will speak evil of no man.

There is nothing these times call for more, in way of admonition, then that
which concerns the tongue. Look to your tongues, they are slippery members in
slippery places, and he is a perfect man that does not offend in his tongue. If
we will judge of our selves, there is as much evidence will come in by the
tongue, as by any thing. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. Look how we carry our tongues. If the Law of God be in
our hearts, there will be wisdom in our tongues. Nothing will bewray us and
discover us like our speech. There is nothing that we need to be warned of, and
called out of, more then strife of tongues. If our tongues were set to love, as
they are to foment hatred and division, we should have more peace then we have.
Who is it that looks upon himself as called to inherit a blessing? Refrain thy
tongue from evil, says Peter. Therefore when you are reproached, reproach not
again; when you are defamed, do you bless: this is the Law of God. If you will
profess Christ, hold forth the Law of Christ, and wait for this Law in the
spirit of life. Wait for Christ to come forth in your tongues, to be the salt
to season your hearts, and so from your hearts to season every part of you, to
make your tongue the glory of God. To make it your Lute and Harp to set forth
his praises. Look when God will restore a pure language: O that God would set
our hearts to learn a pure language! How shall we learn a pure language? Come
into love, come into Christ, and be learning to bear evil language,
whisperings, and backbitings, and surmisings, and evil reports, and
defamations, and take up all the dirt and filth that men will throw upon you,
and do not thou throw any spot upon any, but bless and love, and overcome evil
with good, and heap coals of fire upon their heads. This is the spirit of the
Gospel; And let us at last begin to live Gospel. We have talked of Gospel a
long while; let us once see it, where is it? let us labor to bring it forth,
to be as Christ: he made no noise, his voice was not heard, he went about doing
good, saving, healing, with humble comforting words, Doing good. Let us learn
this, let us wait for his spirit, the spirit of the Gospel, and that is the
spirit of light.

The Gospell-Believers motion from Mount SINAI, to Mount SION.
HEB. 12. 18. to the end of the chapter. For ye are not come unto the Mount
that might be touched, and that which burned with fire, nor unto blackness and
darkness, and tempest,

And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of a word, which they that heard,
entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more.

But ye are come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,

To the general Assembly, and the Church of the firstborn, which are written
in Heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect,

And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that of Abel.

See that ye refuse not him that speaks, etc.


THe Apostle in this Epistle, shows that all Legal administrations were but a
passage; things that God did lead his people through, and which they shall
leave behind them, being but shadows of good things to come, and not the very
image: And then he shows where these things do land us; whether they do deliver
us up; where we set foot when we are passed through them; We are come unto
Mount-Sion.

For we are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, and that burned with
fire, nor unto blackness and darkness, but ye are come to Mount-Sion, etc. The
former administration has brought us hither: It was a Schoolmaster unto
Christ. Now, we by the spirit do wait for the hope of righteousness by Faith.

In ver. 12. The Apostle is calling Christians unto cheerfulness. ( Lift up the
hands that hang down, and the feeble knees) by showing that we are not under a
weak administration, but under one that is strong and mighty: Ye are no more
servants, but sons; Ye are come to Mount-Sion, to the City of the living God,
to the joy and strength of God; The joy of the Lord shall be your strength;
therefore, lift up the hands that hang down; No more weakness now, ye are come
to a kingdom that cannot be moved: So this piece of Scripture sets before us a
true Gospel-state; would you know a true Gospel-state, what it is? why here it
is set down negatively, and affirmatively: It is not that, but it is this.

1. First, its set down Negatively, ver. 18. Ye are not come to the Mount that
might be touched: This is not the Gospel-state: this administration is terror,
fear, and bondage.

2 Secondly, its set down affirmatively, ver. 28. But ye are come to
Mount-Sion; Not to that, but to this: Not to Mount-Sinai, but to Mount-Sion;
But ye are come to Mount-Sion, to the City of the living God, to an innumerable
company of Angels, etc. Here is the Gospel-state, here is the glory of Jesus
Christ, the glory of God that the Gospel brings us to, brings forth in us: Are
we come hither or no? There are some come to it, that do not know it. There are
many of us heirs, but we live in bondage, we live like servants, we know no
better portion then Mount-Sinai, though of right our portion be Mount-Sion. Let
us wait till the spirit of God, show unto us the things that are freely given
to us of God: This glorious state is nothing else but the state of the spirit,
which we are waiting for.

We are come unto Mount-Sion, the City of the living God; Christ's work is to
bring us to God, and so we are no more strangers, but fellow-Citizens with the
Saints: we are set down with Christ in heavenly places: we are set down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; We are set down in the same
glory that the Apostles and Prophets are set down in: we are fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and with the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn:
See your glory Christians, if you be Christians indeed. If you be in the
spirit, and not in the letter only; If you be freeborn, if you be born after
the spirit, and not after the flesh; see your glory.

In the words read you may see a Doctrine, and a Use.

1 A Doctrine propounded, which holds forth the glorious state of Believers: It
is that which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive what it is, but God has revealed the same to us
by his spirit. It is in the letter, and now our business is, that it may be
revealed to us by the spirit: It may be the fathers good pleasure, and his time
now to bring forth the inheritance to some that hear me this day, that hitherto
have been kept under Tutors and Governors, little better then servants: This
we are to try now, how God will be with us to take away the vail, and reveal
our inheritance to us.

The Doctrine begins at the 18 ver. and reaches to the 25 ver. At the 25 ver.
there begins the Use, the Application, which is an exhortation.

2. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, etc. Do not turn away from him
that speaks life and glory. Turn not away from him that calls you to sit
down in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

The Apostle uses diverse Arguments to enforce the exhortation; First, He that
speaks, does not speak from earth, but from heaven.

Secondly, from the danger of refusing to hear; If they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven.

Thirdly, the Apostle shows the effect of this voice, ver. 26. Whose voice then
shook the earth, but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake not
only the earth, but also heaven. And the evidence the Apostle brings for this,
is from a Scripture taken out of the prophecy of Haggai, Hag. 1. 6, 7. The
word that was spoken on earth shook the earth: The word that is spoken from
heaven, shakes earth and heaven also: Then the Apostle interprets this word,
yet once more, ver. 27. It signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. In ver. 28. he further enforces his exhortation, from the
advantage that the Saints have by this change, Wherefore we receiving a kingdom
which cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence, and godly fear.

In the former administration there was not grace to serve God acceptably in
this there is; that was leading to bondage, this to a kingdom; The Apostle
concludes with this Argument, For our God is a consuming fire; of which more
hereafter.

I shall speak of these particulars as time shall give leave.

Here you see a Gospel state, what it is: it is a strong state, a glorious
state, a state that cannot be moved, a kingdom that cannot be shaken* it is
strong, and it is sweet: There was a weak state, and that was full of terror:
The Law was weak through the flesh. It was a weak state, a shaking Mountain, a
Mountain not to be touched* If so much as a beast touch the Mountain, it was to
be stoned, or thrust through with a dart.

That was weak and terrible; but ye are come to that which is strong and
gracious; Ye are come to Mount-Sion, to the City of the living God. The
glorious state of believers is held forth here from the 18 verse to the 25.

Our business will be to run over the particulars, with some short explication,
and to set before you one or two parallel Scriptures that hold forth the same
things, though not so fully and particularly.

The first Scripture is Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. But God who is rich in mercy, for his
great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) and has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

And ver. 17, and 18. of that chapter, And came and preached peace to you which
were afar of, and to them that were nigh, ver. 19, 20, 21, 22. Now therefore ye
are no more strangers, and foreigners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints,
and of the household of God: And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles,
etc.

Ye that are Believers, are come to Mount-Sion, and ye are built up a spiritual
house, fitly framed together, an holy Temple in the Lord: In whom ye also are
builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit.

The other Scripture is 2 Timothy 1. 7. For God has not given us a spirit of
fear, but of power, of love, and of a sound mind. We are not come to the Mount
that might not be touched, and to blackness and darkness. No, God has poured
out another spirit upon us, of power, of love, and a sound mind. Ye are come to
the City of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to God the judge of
all.

Now let us briefly run over the words, as they lie before us.

Ye are not come to the Mount that might not be touched: It might be touched,
and it might not be touched. It might be touched, but not without danger of
death; It might not be touched; There was such a terrible manifestation, that
there was no coming to it. It was an administration of distance from God. It
had a spirit of fear that gendred unto bondage. There was a terrible
manifestation; There was blackness, and darkness, and tempest, the sound of a
trumpet, and the voice of a word. Nothing but an outward command, a word that
could not be obeyed: and when the people undertook to obey it, the Lord pitied
them, O that there were such an heart in this people, that they would obey me!
It was a manifestation to discover sinfulness and weakness, death and the
curse; and so to usher in a manifestation of life and power.

But now ye are come to the Gospel state, ye are come to Mount-Sion, ye are
come where God dwells, ye are come into a comforting and chearing presence: ye
are come to the Mount that may be touched without fear or terror. It may be
touched; There are spiritual senses: as 1 John 1. 1. That which we have heard,
which we hame seen, which our hands have handled of the word of life; that
declare we unto you, that you may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ; and so its the
Mount that may be touched.

We are come to the City of the living God. We are come where God dwells, we
are come to communion with God, and one with another in the spirit; we are come
where God is in the midst of his people: He has quickened us who were dead in
sins, and set us down in heavenly places, in the heavenly Jerusalem; If we are
come to the heavenly Jerusalem, we are past the wilderness, we are come to our
rest. There remains a rest to the people of God, and that is the heavenly
Jerusalem, of which the earthly Jerusalem and Canaan were but a Type: This
heavenly Jerusalem is the mother of us all.

And to an innumerable company of Angels: Not only to be administered unto by
Angels, as under the legal dispensation, but to administer unto Angels; for to
them is made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God.

And to the general Assembly, and the Church of the firstborn.

We are come to the General Assembly, we are above particular Churches: though
we walk in them, yet we are not bound to them, nor bound in them.

We are come to the Church of the firstborn, who are written in Heaven.

We are come to those that are in Christ, that partake of the divine nature, in
which God lives, and acts, and whom God fills, who are born of the spirit, who
are sons and heirs together with Christ.

Who are written in Heaven.

There was a firstborn written in earth in the letter, in flesh; Let Israel my
son go, for he is my firstborn, said God to Pharaoh, but this was after the
flesh.

We are come to God the Judge of all.

We have boldness toward God. We are above the judgment of men, yea, above
the judgment of our own Consciences. It is a very small thing to me (says the
Apostle to the Corinthians) to be judged by you, or of man's judgment* yea, I
judge not mine own self, 1 Cor. 4. 3. We are passed from death to life, and we
are come to God the Judge of all, we can stand before God the Judge of all.

We are come to the spirits of just men made perfect.

We are come to see and to acknowledge the spiritual and divine nature,
whereof, through exceeding great and precious promises, we are made partakers;
we are come to see, and to be the spiritual man, the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness: we are come to the holy one,
born of the Holy Ghost, to Christ formed in us, who is not tainted with any
pollution, who sins not, nor can he commit sin: Though he dwell among devils
and death, yet he partakes not of their filth and guilt, but shall overcome and
destroy them all.

And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant.

We are come to Jesus, to the truth as it is in Jesus, to the power and wisdom
of God, which is Jesus, we have the Law written in our hearts. We are come to
Jesus instead of Moses, who is the Mediator of a better Covenant. If we be
Christians indeed, we are not come to a Law that has only a sound of words,
written on stone, but we are come to a Law written in our hearts; we are come
to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant: We are come to the efficacy of his
mediation.

And to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.

The blood of sprinkling, It is an allusion taken from those sprinklings under
the Law, all which pointed to this. We are not come ^^ corruptible blood, we
are come to the blood of sprinkling, that is incorruptible.

That speaks better things, etc.

It speaks* and what does it say? It makes intercession for us; it makes
intercession in us; and the Lord he is with us, by a word of power, speaking
and commanding sin and death, Satan and Hell out of our souls.

This is the Doctrine: The glorious state, which is the true Gospel state, it
is the state of every true Believer, though it may be many do not know it; it
is a state in the spirit, and it is revealed by the spirit: This is the Gospel
state; and therefore if you profess the Gospel, do not sit down below it: Let
us all be making to it, let us not stay at Mount-Sinai, but let us pass on to
Mount Sion.

Let every one of us look whereabouts we are, whether we be under a spirit of
fear; if we be, this is Mount-Sinai; or whether we be under a spirit of love,
of power, and of a sound mind; if we be, this is Mount-Sion; Are we in
earthly, or in heavenly places?

Take notice that there are three states.

1. One is in Egypt, under the bondage of sin, Satan, death and hell.

2. Another is leading out of Egypt, in the wilderness, at Mount-Sinai, leading
up to Adams perfection, to a perfection in nature; but there is no resting
here: This is but a shadow: Christ in the flesh, came in this natural
perfection, but he dyed to it, and in it, and rose again to the life of God.

3. A third state is, the spirits of just men made perfect; Here is rest, and
stability; Here is the kingdom of God; do not sit down below this; for if you
do, you sit down at best in natural Reason, in a shadow, in a lie.

Some sit down in the filth of nature; but do not ye sit down, no not in the
excellency and perfection of nature; Look to the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, unto which ye are called.

But I pass over from the Doctrine, and come to the Use which the Apostle makes
in ver. 25.

See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not; who refused
him that spoke on earth: much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven.

God speaks once, and twice, and we hear him not; God is continually speaking.
He speaks in every creature, he speaks in every providence, he speaks in every
administration, do you know his voice? He speaks on earth, and he speaks from
heaven; See that ye refuse not him that speaks; God speaks from earth; if I
have told you earthly things, and ye believe not (says Christ) how will ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things? There are higher, and there are lower
administrations wherein God appears: Are we acquainted with them? Do we know
them? God speaks on earth from Mount-Sinai, and he speaks from heaven at
Mount-Sion; he spoke from Mount-Sinai, and he was refused, yet there was a show
of entertaining; All that the Lord says unto us, will we do; but O, said the
Lord, that there were such an heart in this people, that they would obey my
voice! They said they would obey, but their hearts turned back again to Egypt.

God speaks on earth; and who does hear? who does not refuse? he speaks with a
loud voice on earth: he manifests his glory, and every one seems to hear, seems
to stoop and bow before him, but they are all liars: God speaks from heaven, he
speaks in the spirit, he speaks in a low and still voice, as it were afar off,
in a far Country, and from this far Country he sends to his Subjects to see if
they will own him; but they say, We will not have this man to reign over us:
God comes in a full manifestation of himself, and then every knee stoops and
bows to him; some sincerely, others feignedly and lyingly, as it is said, Thine
enemies shall be found liars.

When God shall make us Mount-Sion, when he shall awaken the spiritual man,
when he shall quicken the new man, that lies (as it were) dead in us, then we
shall hear, then we shall obey.

There is nothing so much concerns us, as to know the voice of God, to hear him
speak, My sheep hear my voice, and the voice of a stranger they will not hear,
John 10.

God speaks, and God gives an ear to hear him speak; He that has an ear to
hear let him hear: Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire; mine ears have
thou opened: then said I, Lo I come, in the volumn of the book it is written of
me: I delight to do thy will, Psalm. 40. 6, 7. God is speaking, and the Devil is
speaking; happy are they whose ears God has opened, that can distinguish, that
know the voice of God from the voice of a stranger.

See that ye refuse not him that speaks: There is nothing in man but what
refuses to hear God speak, but what refuses God himself; whether he speaks
from earth, or from heaven. That man does hear God speak, that does know the
voice of God, it is the spiritual man, the new* man that is born of the Spirit.
The carnal man, the natural man cannot possibly hear God speak, he refuses
God; The wisdom that is in him, is enmity to God: He is not subject to the Law
of God, nor indeed can be: But they that will not know his voice, they shall
know it: They that will not yield to it, shall be broken by it; it is a
terrible voice: When he shall come, and speak from heaven, those whose hearts
are not brought to a compliance with him, shall be destroyed by his presence:
He will come in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that obey not the
Gospel.

Next we may take notice of the effects of this voice: whose voice then shook
the earth, but he has promised saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth
only, but heaven also.

When you meet with shakings, and violent motions, then know what the matter
is; Why, the Lord is speaking; Heaven and earth are shaking at this time: Do we
see the Lord, and hear the Lord? We are fallen into shaking times: His voice
once shook the earth, but now it shakes not only earth, but heaven. Haggai 2.
This Scripture shows what is to be expected; the shaking of heaven and earth,
and then the desire of all nations: What is that? Why, it is Christ: he is
called the desire of all nations: All nations desire him, though they do not
know him; and when he is come, he shall fill Sion and Jerusalem; he shall fill
his Saints and people; the City and the house built of living stones, shall be
filled with Glory: he will fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10.

When Christ came forth in flesh, there were shakings in heaven and earth: When
Christ came forth in Spirit upon the Apostles and primitive Christians, what a
shaking was there then of heaven and earth? What strange workings were there in
the hearts of men, through the light, and evidence, and demonstration of spirit
that went abroad? That was the beginning of this last shaking; after that God
was pleased to draw in, and to retire, that the wicked one might return again
to show what he was, that Antichrist might appear, and set up his trade under
the name of the Spirit: and when the man of sin is fully revealed, then the
Lord will come forth again, and by the Spirit of his mouth, and the brightness
of his coming, will he utterly destroy him, and that will be a terrible shaking
indeed: Yet once more I shake not earth only, but heaven. This shaking is
begun: Are we sensible of it? What wars and rumors of wars are there? What
overturnings? Let us see whether we be not under the appearance of this
shaking? shaking of earth, shaking of heaven, shaking of Forms, of Religion, of
Churches: All that is earthly shall be shaken, that the earthliness being
removed, the true body may be brought forth anew in the Spirit.

How many in these times hove lost their wisdom, and their righteousness that
they looked upon as great gain? was ever such confusion as there is at this day?

Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but heaven: It is certain we are
come to it, but are we sensible of it? God is shaking us out of fleshly and
formal Religion, out of man's Religion, and man's Righteousness; he is destroying
the old man, and bringing forth the new man: he is destroying the old earth and
heaven, and bringing forth a new earth and heaven, wherein righteousness shall
dwell.

He has promised, saying, yet once more: This terrible shaking comes forth in
a promise: It is a mercy, a blessing, a deliverance: It is the Redemption of
the people of God: Lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. When
Paul and Silas were in Prison, and in the Stocks at Midnight, there was an
earthquake that shook the foundations of the prison, and that became their
deliverance. How many of the Saints will lie in Prison, and in the Stocks at
midnight, till this earthquake come and shake them out? Then shall come the
desire of all nations; By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us,
O God of our salvation: How will God answer us? Why, says he, I must remove
all this corruptible frame; I must create a new heaven and a new earth: I must
shake the Civil Estate, and the Religious Estate: I must shake off old Adam, I
must shake out Antichrist: Christ must go away in his appearance in flesh, that
he may return again in the Spirit: That which is earthly and carnal must be
shaken and removed, that that Kingdom which cannot be moved may remain.

We wonder what God means when he is pulling down and destroying: Why, he
means to plant and to build: and when we see his design, we sit down and are
still.

It is a sad thing to a child to hear that the time shall come when all his
Rattles shall be taken from him. What a sad thing is it while we are childish
Christians, to have our Religion as it is of man shaken! It has a great
excellency and glory in it, but it is to be shaken, that that which is
excellent indeed may come in its place.

To know the state of Christ risen from the dead, was that which Paul was
making after: The Resurrection of the dead. Before we can come to this, the
Cross of Christ must crucify all the glory of flesh.

And that is to be taken notice of, That the last shaking shall be the most
terrible shaking. God will shake all nations; no nation shall escape, nor man
in it, shake them in their earth, shake them in their heaven: God need to shake
but once, and shake all to pieces; certainly he will shake once more: and we
may think after this shaking to settle again, but all that is shaken shall be
done away; that which is natural shall be done away, that that which is
spiritual may take place. Are we sensible of these shakings? it is only the
spiritual man that is sensible of it: the carnal and natural man eats and
drinks till the flood comes and sweeps all away.

The Apostle expounds those words, Yet once more.

And this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, as of things that are made.

All fleshly forms of Religion, all man's Righteousness, all this outward frame
of things, are things that are made, and therefore must be done away, that
those things which cannot be shaken may remain. It Is true, the spiritual man is
made, but as he is taken into God, and in union with God, he is not made, the
new creature is not made. It Is one thing to make, another thing to create. Its
said, the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us; that is, the Word was (for
a while) veiled or covered with flesh: he took flesh upon him; Forasmuch as the
children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same, Heb. 2. 14. but the spiritual man in union with God, is taken into
God, and carried into Mount Sion.

The Apostles inference or conclusion is, Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom that
cannot be moved: Let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
reverence and godly fear.

When we come to the Kingdom, to that Kingdom, that is spiritual, Let us have
grace: We are come to grace, let us make use of it, to serve God with reverence
and godly fear. Here is freewil, the right freewil, freewil in Christ and in
the Spirit: This new man sits at the fountain, and draws water out of the wells
of Salvation; this new man has freedom to work out his salvation; he has
grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: Do ye see what the
Kingdom is that cannot be moved? Why, it is to serve God: Here is the Kingdom;
a natural, free complying with God: When we shall have the mind of Christ, it
shall be our joy and delight to serve God: and this service shall be with
reverence and godly fear. The nearer we come to God, the more awe, the more
fear; but it is a fear with love and joy, with reverence and godly fear; For
our God is a consuming fire.

The Saints do glorify God in the fire, in the flames, which consumes all
flesh: God is a consuming fire, that consumes death and hell to the new man,
that is one with him, that knows him, and therefore rejoices in those flames,
glorifies him in the fire: and when his bones are burnt, then he walks with the
son of God, as the three young men in the fiery furnace.

We are saved, yet so as by fire: God is dealing with the people that are his,
burning up their hay and stubble, their dross and tin, and changing them into
his image daily. And if our God be a consuming fire, then here is safety in
God; there need no carnal weapons to keep those safe that dwell in God: For our
God is a consuming fire.

This Scripture that has been opened to you, is a Glass that God holds out to
us, and sets before us; Let us look there, and see our faces; and the Lord set
upon our hearts those discoveries that he makes of himself to us, that he makes
of himself in us, that so they may abide, that we may not go away, and forget
what manner of faces we have: That being doers of the Law, as well as hearers
of it; that the Law being written in our hearts, and we dwelling in God, and
God in us, may be changed into the same image, from Glory, to Glory, even as by
the spirit of the Lord.

The Mother of Mischief, or the Original of all Wars and Fightings.
JAMES 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. From whence come wars and fightings among you? come
they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members?

Ye lust and have not, ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight
and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your
lusts.

Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God: whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God, etc.


THis Epistle is written to the scattered Jews, which had scattered their
Religion: There is a carnal profession of Religion, which after a while is
scattered and comes to nothing. James in this Epistle shows what lusts and
evils did lift up their heads, and bear sway among this scattered people, who
notwithstanding that they were under great pressures, yet did not amend, nor
take up as to those evil courses: But scattered and afflicted they were;
therefore James begins to instruct them as touching Afflictions and
Temptations; My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, in the second Verse of the first Chapter; then he comes to
discover and reason against many evils which were found amongst them, as you
may see if you shall peruse the Epistle from the beginning unto this fourth
Chapter; here he tells them of their brawlings and quarrellings, their
contentions and fightings one with another. The Jews were in Affliction, and
James he is discovering their sin, contention and brawling; that is one he
mentions here; and he is turning their eyes to look into the spring of this;
From whence comes wars? Ver. 1. Here Is wars and fightings, brawlings and
quarrellings; from whence comes these? he shows them whence, even from within,
from your lusts; and then he discovers the pitiful condition that the power of
these lusts puts them into; it makes them war, and fight, and kill, and yet
they cannot be satisfied: Ye lust, in the second Verse, and have not; ye kill
and desire to have, yet cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not,
because ye ask not. And so here Lust puts them upon trial of every thing to
satisfy it self; it will try heaven, and try hell, it will pray, and it will
fight, and it will kill, and gets as much by fighting and killing, as by
praying, and as much by praying as by the other; for lust shall never attain
any thing by prayer. Ye ask and ye receive not, in the third verse, because ye
ask amiss, to consume it upon your lusts; and then he shows what these lusts
are in the fourth Verse, Worldliness, earnest going forth after the creature:
we must have this, and we must have that; Give me children (says Rachel) or
else I dye. Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of
the world is enmity with God? where he discovers what these lusts are, and what
this lust makes them, Enemies to God, Adulterers and Adulteresses, pretending
Religion and Friendship with God, yet look to the world, make after the things
thereof: and then he minds them of the Scripture that discovers these evils in
all men's hearts, in the fifth verse, Do you think that the Scripture says in
vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? All this rashness comes
from your lusts, and the Scripture has told us that there is this evil in our
hearts: when he has discovered the evil, then he is giving direction what to
do in the sixth verse, and so on: there is the power whereby to act, He gives
more grace: the Scripture says, The spirit lusts to envy: we are all carried
to envy: Then to what purpose is it to endeavor any thing that is good (might
some say) Why, he gives more grace; and therefore what is to be done? submit
your selves to God, and leave lusting; leave desiring, put your selves into the
dispose of God; say, Here we are, do with us what thou will, make us rich, or
make us poor, teach us to be hungry, and teach us to be full. Do thou feed us
with food convenient, we will not be our own carvers: Submit your selves to
God; he will be careful of us, when we submit our selves to him; Resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you. The Devil is in Lust, and so long as you
serve lust, you serve the Devil; submit your selves to God, and then God will
be for you, and you shall have power over the Devil: you shall be no more
captives to him. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: So long as
lust preys, and strives for its own satisfaction, here is no comfort to you,
all that is the friendship of lust; but draw near to God, bring clean hands and
pure hearts. Now ye are double-eyed, you look to God, and you look to the
world; you make a fair show to God, but your hearts are set upon the creature:
purify your hearts, and purify your hands: this is James' plain dealing with
his own kindred the Jews: We will run over some of these particulars as the
time shall give leave, and as we shall conceive to be most profitable.

Ver. 1. Wars, fightings, contentions, brawling, quarrelling: This was a piece
of the evil that did work among the Jews: the Jews were scattered, afflicted,
yet so many as lived together, could not live in peace. All the world was
against them, and their own hands were against one another; Their afflictions
could not reconcile them one to another, nor make them friends; oft-times an
enemy abroad makes peace at home; and we then fall to quarrels and divisions
among our selves, when we are secured from abroad: But we see outward
affliction does nothing upon a man, but discover and bring forth what is
within; even as a Tempest at sea, it discovers what is at the bottom; there is
mud and filth, and then the sea foams it up. If there be good in the heart,
affliction brings it up; if there be evil, it draws out that: afflictions and
troubles in carnal hearts, work nothing but baseness, and make discoveries of
what evil is within, working murmuring, quarrelling in bitter spirits: When we
are wroth and angry, then we fall one upon another, and he that is weakest, he
shall bear most. This same people of the Jews were the people of Gods curse;
there was but a little remnant that should be saved, but a remnant that were
spiritual: The Apostle in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. thus describes them; they neither
pleased God, and they were contrary to all men: It Is James his work here, as it
was Paul's, if it were possible, to save some of them, and to pull them out of
the fire: wars and fightings, quarrellings among brethren, and that under
strangers and enemies oppressing them; and they professed servants of God; and
owning the royal Law of Love, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and thy
neighbor as thy self: this was very foul. The design of God in that people,
choosing them, and dealing with them, heaping blessings upon them, chastening
them with afflictions, instructing them from heaven: his special design was
(besides gathering out his Elect from among them) to show the nature of man,
how stubborn, how rebellious, how incorrigible; his neck like an iron sinew,
his brow of brass, altogether irreconcilable, carrying Leopards spots that
will not be washed off; the Blackamoors tan, that will not be scoured. God he
suffered them till there was no remedy; as you see 2 Chro. latter end. In Isa.
5. he asks, What he should do, or what he could do more to his vineyard, that
he had not done? His design therefore was to discover unto us, what our nature
is; to discover that evil spirit, that the Scripture says is in every man, that
the Scripture may not say it in vain, as else it should: And therefore let none
of us boast against the branches, as the Apostle has it: There is the same
envy in us, the same evil, the same rebellion, though it may not be altogether
so discovered: If there be any good in any of us, it comes from God. Every good
and perfect gift is from above: that that is truly good, it comes by our being
born of him, by partaking of the sap, and the fatness of Christ.

Wars and fightings: Quarrellings they do not become Saints, professed Saints;
they do not become those that own the Spirit of God: The Spirit is unity; The
unity of the Spirit, says the Apostle Ephesians. 3. 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit. There is one Lord, one Faith, and this Spirit it keeps us in
unity, though it trains us up in different Administrations; it keeps us in
unity, by causing us to do that is set down in Ephesians. 2. 4. With all lowliness,
meekness and long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, condescending one
to another, bearing one with another, by humble mindedness, and meekness: Every
one is for unity, and every one stands that he would rule, and he would set
down what should be done; and he complains of dissentions, and want of peace,
because all will not come unto him, when we should condescend one to another,
and submit one to another with all lowliness of mind. Quarrellings and
contentions they are very unbecoming Saints, contentions about outward things:
Why do ye not suffer wrong? says the Apostle. Controversies in matters of
Religion, and Differences in Judgment, these differences should be soberly
carried: there is but one Umpire, but one Judge, and that's the Spirit of God:
So though thou and I differ, who shall resolve? the Resolution is the Lords,
why therefore wait quietly till God reveal, and God will reveal the same to
him, says the Apostle, Phil. 3. 16. Is there any that fear God? you shall all
grow up to a perfect man; What God has revealed to one, he will reveal to the
other.

Wars: Contentions, quarrellings, brawlings, they become not Saints: If any
seem to be contentious, says the Apostle, we have no such Custom; and they
that live in the Spirit, will own no such Custom: All differences they are
commended to the Spirit, commended to God: and so when we differ, we sit down
waiting until God shall teach us, till the Messiah come.

From whence come Wars and contentions among you? It Is good to enquire and
examine into the root of all manner of evil that is amongst us: From whence
comes this, and from whence comes that? here is this evil, here is the other
evil: it is good to look into the root and spring whence every one comes. We
shall have a better sight of things, when we see their original, and when we
see their principle. It Is the evil principle that makes a thing evil; it is a good
principle that makes a thing good; every thing is good and evil, as the
principle is good or evil: God is the good principle, and Satan is the evil
principle; as God has a hand in all, all is good; and to the pure all things
are pure; says the Apostle: to him that is defiled, nothing is pure, and we
are not able to judge of any thing, whether it be good or evil, till we know
the principle: The same thing that is good in one, is evil in another, because
it comes from a good principle in one, and from an evil principle in another.

From whence come wars and contentions? It concerns us to look to the root and
spring of evil, to see the evil, and from whence it comes. Again, we had need
to have our eyes turned unto the root of evils, and to see that they have their
root within us, and their cause within us.

Come they not hence, even from our lusts? Because we have a trick of shifting
off things, translating them, we can hide our sins like Adam: The woman thou
gave me, says he: The Serpent beguiled me, says she: We cry out, such
occasions, such company, such evil times, Satan, nay God himself: But let no
man when he is tempted, say, I am tempted of God, for God tempts no man to
evil; every man when he is tempted is drawn aside of his own lust: Whence then
comes evil? Whence comes wars and contentions? come they not hence, even from
your lusts?

They come from your lusts: Men do get children, and lay them at other men's
doors; men bind heavy burdens, and lay them on other men's shoulders: the
Apostle here would have every man take up his own burden; and we shall never
be eased of our own burdens, till we first take them on our own shoulders; and
then Christ will say, Come to me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I Will
refresh you, and ease you: he will first have us feel the weight of our own
burdens, and then he will ease us, and take them off. The Apostle James here
shows the cause of all trouble that is in us: when we are in quarrels and
contentions, we lose our peace: And whence is this? thank your selves, says
he, it is your lust: Do not say that such a one is contentious, look into your
own hearts: All the trouble that is upon us, we are the Authors of, it has its
root in us, we may thank our selves for it: Thy destruction is of thy self,
says the Lord: God, though he does appoint every thing, and order every thing,
his providence is in every thing, yet that that man does, he does freely, and
he is drawn aside by his lust, and therefore there is no shifting it of. When
the Apostle is mentioning Gods taking whom he will, he brings in an Objecting,
Then why does he find fault? Why, here is the reason why he finds fault;
though he hardens Pharoahs heart, yet Pharaoh does harden his own heart, and is
carried to do that he does by his own lust, and enticed: We must see in our
selves the fountain of all evil, and then if we be of God, we shall also see in
our selves the fountain of all good. There is that that is born of the flesh,
that has all evil in it; there is this nature that comes of God, that has all
good, and no evil in it: From whence come wars and contentions? come they not
hence, even from your lusts? Yea, hence they spring, and here is the root of
all: Your lusts which war in your members.

Your lusts: What Is lust? earnest going forth of your hearts after the creature;
and here is the work of lust, which is to war, and here is the place where this
warring is, In your members, your lusts which war in your members: What are
these members in which lust does war? There is a natural body which has
members, and there is a spiritual body which has also members: of these
spiritual bodies there are two sorts, There is a spiritual body, the body of
Christ; there is a spiritual body, the body of Satan: there is the man Christ,
and there is the man of sin. These same members in which lusts war, are the
members of a spiritual body; which Paul expresses in Romans 7. 23. he speaks of
the Law of his members, which did war against the Law of his mind; he
complains in the next verse of the body of death, of the body of sin; Who shall
deliver me from this body of sin! for its a spiritual body, and these members
are members of that body: And the Apostle mentions these in the Epistle to the
Colossians, Col. 3. 5. Mortify your earthly members, fornication, uncleanness,
covetousness. The members of the natural body are these, hands, feet, eyes; the
members of a spiritual body, the body of sin, the body of death, Satan's body,
are fornication, uncleanness, covetousness; here lust wars; and this is that
body the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 9. 37. when he says, I beat down my body, I
keep it in subjection: Papists look upon him as intending this natural body, so
they betake themselves to fasting, whipping themselves, such bitter doings; but
its the body of sin, and the body of death where lust does war. War, against
whom? Against the soul, says Peter; I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts
which war against the soul; war against the Spirit; the flesh lusts against
the spirit, Gal. 5. as the spirit lusts against the flesh: They war against
God, and the Spirit, and God against them; there is Satan, death and sin in
these lusts; the wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, the friendship of the
world is enmity to God, it wars against God. This is that James says in Verse
4. from this Text, Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity to
God, etc. These lusts do war against God, they are the briars and thorns that
are set in battle against God, as it is in Isa. 27. 4. Who will set the briars
and thorns against me in battle? I Will go through them; and burn them together.
Lusts they war against God, God comes forth in his appearances, these oppose
him; God appears in a Law; why Lust stands up in a Law, I must have this, I
must have that says Lust: God he calls, he would have the heart, and he would
have love, and he would have righteousness: Lust says, I must have it. It wars
against God; and think you what Lust shall get by this warfare against the
great God.

That you shall see here in the second ver. Ye lust and have not, ye kill and
desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have not. And so
Lust is miserably disappointed. Lust wars and fights, and kills, and it does
not only war and fight and kill, but it preys too: Lust will be Religious,
Lust will murder and devour, and commit all outrages, and it will be as civil
and as Religious as any in the outward show. Ye ask too, and yet ye have not;
and so here is nothing but disappointment in Lust, in going out to the world: ye
fight and war, and ye have not: Ye have not what ye would have, ye have not
enough. Disappointment in respect of Satisfaction and Rest, that is the lot of
Lust, of all desires going out from God, going out to the creature; go out to
any thing but God, ye shall never have it. Ye shall have this thing, ye shall
have the other thing, but ye shall never be happy: and the thing ye seek is
happiness; Every man seeks it. Lust calls for this thing, and the other thing:
ye may have the thing, but ye shall never be happy. He sends leanness into your
souls, he gave them their desires, and sent leanness withal into their souls.
There are two things that cause the disappointment of worldly and fleshly Lust.
The one is, that it wars with God, which is Omnipotent; Lust crucifies him. The
other is, because it seeks satisfaction and rest in those things that cannot
afford it, and so it is like the grave and hell, still it cries, give, give. It
desires shadows, it clasps about them, it cannot desire God. It desires nothing
but to kill him. It would kill him that is only desirable, that is only life,
and only happiness. How happy are they in whom God is killing Lust? How
miserable are they that are serving their Lusts? when will be an end of this
drudgery? While ye are walking on in your Lusts, you will set upon any thing. If
you cannot move heaven, you will see if you can move hell. You Will try if you can get
it by Prayer; if you cannot, you will get it by fighting; but you shall have it
neither way. You do but kill your selves all the while. You war against the
soul, you war against God and man, and must needs war against your soul. While
that Lust lives, it brings nothing but torment; Its a very hell unto a man; Its
the very devil: therefore when James prescribes the remedy, he says, Resist the
devil, and he will fly from you. Serving lust is serving the devil: Its
drudging in hell. You Will ever be poor, you will never be rich, you will be drudges
while you live, or else be thieves and murderers, you will fight and war, ye kill
and yet ye have not. God says that he will famish all the Gods of the Heathen;
this Lust is the great God; famish this, and they are all famished; and God
will famish this, and what will you be famished with it! O awake rather, that
it may be slain; you will suffer continually while you live in it, whiles you
are led by it; it will be with you as with a man that has a dogs stomach, it
will never be satisfied, like one who has a wolf in his body, it will eat him
and devour him, there is no satisfying him. Who is it that would live in peace,
and not in torment? if you will live in peace, give up your lusts, submit your
selves to God, let him dispose of you, as James expresses in that which
follows, Turn to God, and desire nothing but him; all desires and prayings,
which are not after God, they are only stretchings out, and inlargings of
heart, and there is nothing but filling with wind, nothing but emptying it
self. O that God would come in and destroy all these hungry dogs, and all these
greedy hell hounds, these same lusts and devils; You lust and have not, you
kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye war, and fight, and have not:
Here Is the progress of your lust, it comes to fighting. The devil is a
murderer, lust is angry even unto death; if it cannot have what it would have,
it throws firebrands and arrows; it is hungry, and it breaks stone walls, much
more through flesh walls. Ye lust, and ye kill: whom does it kill? why it kills
man, 'twill make you kill your neighbors. Ahab for the liking he took to
Naboths vineyard, must have the vineyard; he is sick, he could not live without
it; here was the lust of Covetousness* David must not live, because he was
better then Saul, here is the lust of envy, Saul he will kill him; Vriah must not
live, because he had an handsome wife; here is lust in David; Mordecai must not
live, because he will not stand up to Haman, a pair of gallows is built for
him; here is the lust of pride; it hunts for the precious life of his neighbor;
ye kill one another, and ye kill your selves; O I pity you; Lust wars against
the soul, it sucks the very blood of body and soul, it blinds men's eyes that
they do not see it: and these Lusts they kill one another, squable one with
another: there is contention among Lusts, which should have the mastery: and as
fishes in the Sea, the greater devour the smaller; so it is here, and many a
man blesses himself in a fools Paradise, is overcome while he thinks he is
Conqueror; Ye kill; But whom do these Lusts kill? They kill the Lord of life,
they crucify the Lord of glory: it was Lust in Pilate, in Herod, in the Jews,
in the Gentiles, that crucified the Lord of glory: upon whom shall the blood
that was shed from Abel, to Zacharias, the blood of all the witnesses of God,
of whom shall it be required but of this same Lust? This is the whore that is
in Scarlet, dyed with blood, eats up Gods people like Bread: there is not any
appearance God has come forth in, but Lust has fallen upon it under pretense
it is the Devil and Heresy.

Paul and Silas came to preach Christ at Philippi: Lust stands up, here are men
come* (say they) will turn the world upside down: The business was, they had
cast out a devil, and they heard they brought in great revenue to some of them.

And in all that Lust does, is disappointment, it has not what it seeks. It
kills the Lord, he rises again, and he rises so at last, it shall never kill
him any more: and so in all Lusts labors, and in all its adventures, in all
its hazards, is certain destruction, destruction to the person himself, he is
empty and hungry. Ye lust and have not, ye kill and yet ye have not; It Is the
very devil, the very grave and hell, there is not a worse torment. You fight
and war, and you have not: and yet Lust is not satisfied, but must go to fight,
and warring again: and 'twill be fighting, till it be slain it self, 'twill not
leave any blood unshed; all the blood in the world will never satisfy it: you
kill and yet ye have not, and yet ye fight and war. Take this observation by
the way, That in worldly Lusts, in fleshly Lusts, there is murder: Ye lust, ye
kill: Lust is that, that when it goes forth would murder every thing stands in
its way. It is the root of all evil, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. The love of
money (or the creature) is the root of all evil. How many are there be ready to
wash their hands, that they have not committed murder? is there not Lust in
you to the world? here is the root of murder: you war, and ye kill. Kill men
and kill God, that is, fight against the appearances of him: Ye kill and and
yet ye have not because ye ask not: I, but you ask too: O Lust will be
Religious, Lust will put on a form of godliness, the devil transformed into an
Angel of light: Lust will pray, and Lust will read the Scriptures, Lust will
Sacrifice, Lust will worship; You ask and yet you have not. Lusts askings will
never get any thing; this we shall speak of by and by: but you have not because
ye ask not: Take notice of this, that there is no success nor satisfaction in
any prosecution without prayer. You lust, you kill, you fight, you war, you
have not, because you ask not. Let men use wisdom, and strength, and labor,
and diligence, it shall never be successful, unless they pray: it is God that
orders all; you shall not attain any thing from God; God is stronger then we:
fight and kill, you shall reap nothing but wind, or the whirlwind; whatsoever
you get, you shall put it into a bag with holes; whatsoever you get, it shall
be but to choke you. Let Us pray; that attains, asking, praying, seeking, woing
God. God is love, and he loves man; God says he will be enquired of, he will be
sought unto; Jacobs wrestling with God, it was by prayer and supplication; God
is not prevailed with but by his own power; Let him take hold of my strength,
says God to him, Isa. 27. 5. The power of God is put forth in prayer; Ask and
ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
The fool, Psalm. 14. says in his heart there is no God, and it follows, there is
no fear of God before his eyes: What does he eat up my people like Bread, and
calls not upon God? what success has he? he was in great fear, where no fear
was: nothing but trouble, nothing but disappointment: Then the way to be truly
successful, is prayer; but Lusts prayer shall never get any thing; Lust goes
forth to killing, and the same goes forth to praying: and so it is when it goes
forth to praying, as if it did go to fighting, Isa. 66. He that offers an Ox,
is as if he did kill a man: he that offers a sheep, had as good cut off a dogs
neck: Prayer we are for, but for right Prayer; not Lusts Prayer, but Faiths
Prayer, Spirits Prayer, Christ's Prayer, For you ask and receive not, because
you ask amiss. Lust cannot ask aright: and here first of all, take notice of
this, that every truth has its counterfeit; every thing both earthly and
spiritual: there is a truth and the counterfeit: there is true Religion, and
there is false Religion; there is right Prayer, and there is praying amiss:
there is right hearing, and hearing amiss: take heed how you hear; there is
hearing mixed with Faith, and hearing that is not mixed with Faith: There is
drawing near to God with the lips, when the heart is far from him; there is
Jezabels fast, and there is Iehosaphats fast; there is nothing the Saints do,
but the world will counterfeit; there is nothing that Moses did, but the
Magicians did likewise: the devils Ministers are transformed into the Ministers
of righteousness: good and evil, it lies within, it lies in the principle, as I
showed before. Man thinks to mock God; indeed he may mock himself, and deceive
himself, and that he does: true worship, is only where the truth is: God is a
Spirit, and he will be worshipped in spirit and truth: That Is truth that is in
the spirit, the spirit is truth: what we do in God is rightly done, prayer in
God, reading in God, giving in God: he that come to the light, he comes to it
because his works are wrought in God, Ioh. 3. 21. There is asking amiss, and
hearing amiss: and let us take notice of this, if any among us only look that
this and the other thing be done, and never consider how it is done, it is to
no purpose what we do. Why do thou take my name into thy mouth, when thou
hate to be reformed? says he: Taking Gods name in vain, is in swearing; it is
also in praying; it is taken notice of in swearing, but not in praying: but it is
in the one as well as the other. You ask amiss: there be many amisses in
Prayer, in asking many amisses: when we only use gifts and parts, that's amiss,
either our own or other men's: some use other men's, this is amiss: again, when
we do not ask in Faith: but we will look to that in the Text: You ask amiss:
what is that amiss? That you might consume it upon your Lusts. And here take
notice of two things, the first is this, That not asking, and asking amiss,
have the same success. As good do nothing, as not do it well, or as it should
be; You ask not, and therefore ye have not; you ask amiss, and therefore have
it not; as good not ask, as ask amiss. Another thing is this, That the main
amisness in Prayer, is, when our Lusts are regarded, when we ask to gratify
our Lusts.

This is a thing of special consideration, and will come near to every one of
us: it is a great abuse of God to go to him, and desire this or that of him* to
consume it upon our Lusts: what is our Lust? it is an enemy to him, it is a
strange God, it is an Idol, it is another Lover: we go to God, and would have
more love, that he would thus and thus furnish us to commit Adultery, that the
Lord would give us to serve his enemies: we go to God to serve us in the
creature, we have a burning Lust after this, after the other, he must satisfy
us: that is to serve his enemies, that is to maintain us in opposing him, in
scorning him: and mark where God is set when I sue to him for such a thing, to
satisfy my Lust: where is God put? under my Lust, and he is made use of to
serve my Lusts: if my lust be served, I care not a rush for him; I would never
seek him, but for my lusts; I want this and the other thing, therefore I pray,
I do not want him, I care not at all for him: God makes his very enemies stoop
to him, and acknowledge him: Lust and the devil can do nothing, unless he give
to them: you ask for your devil and lust: you ask of God that you may play the
whore; you Adulterers and Adulteresses, says James, a strange word! and yet in
such praying we think we have performed excellent worship and service to God,
when we do put God in the very place of the veriest drudge and scullion: there
is not a worser place we can put him in, then to seek of him to serve our
Lusts. This is a drudging to his enemies, it is a main amiss in Prayer: and so
he reckons it, and therefore he says, Ye did not cry to me, when ye howled on
your beds for corn and wine and oil. To ask to satisfy your Lusts, is to go to
the devil: And therefore as we are to consider what we do, so we are to
consider how we do it: and as in every thing else, so in Prayer: and as we are
to look into many amisses and miscarriages, and faults there, so especially to
this; this is a main one, to ask to consume upon our Lusts; why it may be you
will say, we do not know for what end to ask else; why it is good to be
ingenuous, it may be you do not: but I hope better things of you: but I know a
carnal heart can have no other end, a carnal heart cannot seek God: and this is
the right asking, this is the asking is not amiss, when we ask God, give me thy
self, and when in asking for other things we submit to God, as the Apostle has
it here: Submit your selves to God, put all into his hands, let him dispose it,
be you satisfied with his love: do you desire that he would show himself; show
us the Father, and it suffices; and for other things, commend them to him with
submission, as he pleases; he knows what is good, what is convenient: Father,
says Christ, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, but thy will be
done: this is the right asking, to ask God, let God be the boon you ask, Labor
not for the meat which perishes, but labor for that bread which endures to
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 26. What Is the bread endures to eternal life? It is
God manifesting himself; communion with God; seek this, ask this, and all
things will come in with this; Seek the Kingdom of God, and other things shall
be added unto you: put your selves into Gods hand and dispose, he is all your
exceeding great reward. You ask amiss when you ask any thing but God: Let this
cup pass away, but if it be possible; but Father, says he, glorify thy Name:
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and who is there on earth but thee? I have none
to look at besides thee; glorify thy self: this is right asking, and this is
an asking that flesh can never attain to, this is beyond flesh and blood: who
is there can beg this of God, but God himself? flesh and blood has not taught
thee, but my Father, as Christ said to Peter: If you seek any thing, and do not
seek God, you make use of God to serve your Lusts, and you subject God to the
devil* and there is as much setting up the devil, and vilifying God in that
that is called Prayer, and worship, as in any thing whatsoever. You ask amiss,
because you ask to consume it upon your Lusts.

And now it follows in the fourth verse, what kind of Lusts these are: what
are these Lusts? they are lustings after the creature, they are no worse. You
Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity unto God?

The friendship of the world. We love the world, we run after the creature with
violence, you must have it; cannot get it, pray for it; cannot get it, fight
for it, kill for it. Here is Murder and Adultery in going forth unto the world,
the Apostle James here reproves in the spirit, and he is bold, Ye Adulterers
and Adulteresses, and he takes in both Sexes, men and women, and he would let
them know, he deals with them upon a known principle, do ye not know the
friendship of the world is enmity to God? It is written in every one of your
hearts, that to go out unto the creature, is to go from God; and if you do not
know it, it shall be made appear to you that you do it. You do know it, and
your Consciences will tell you when its awakened: Know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity to God? And then he makes this conclusion,
Whosoever is a friend of the world, is an enemy to God. I Will point at two or
three things. Observe here first, that according to the tenure of the
Scripture, to embrace the world, to go out after the creature, is to commit
Adultery; to go out in earnest desire after the creature, to make the creature
a chief or a main thing that our hearts go out after, is Adultery. Ye
Adulterers and Adulteresses: I had not known sin, says the Apostle, unless the
Law had said thou shall not Lust: Whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after
her, says Christ, he has committed Adultery in his heart: whosoever looks
after any creature to lust after it, he has committed Adultery too: our
Ministers it may be do not teach so: but we see what the Scripture holds forth:
you have heard how it has been said of old, says Christ; but I say unto you;
we count it not evil after man's reckoning, but it is accounted so with God:
it is heart-Adultery to go out after any creature: to go out after any creature
but in God, is Adultery; and if this be Adultery, every one, if we should look
into our own hearts, will be careful, and afraid to throw stones at an
Adulteress; you know the story in the Gospel; whosoever he be that fears God,
he hates and detests all evil, yet he sees it in his heart: and though he be
free from gross acts, yet he will be far from insulting over any that are left
to defile themselves with gross acts. The desire of any creature, it is
Adultery. Flesh can do nothing but commit Adultery. All Flesh has corrupted
their way; but it does not break out alike, but all are alike in the root; to
make out after any creature is Adultery. And again, The friendship of the world
is enmity unto God. Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity to
God? and he that is a friend to the world, is an enemy to God: This is that
other Scriptures hold forth, The love of money is the root of all evil: Love not
the world nor the things thereof; whosoever loves the world, the love of God is
not in him, 1 John 2. 15. They are enemies to the Cross of Christ, that mind
earthly things, Phil. 3. about the end; enemies to the Cross of Christ: what is
the business of the Cross of Christ? to crucify us to the world, and the world
to us: you admire outward things, and love outward things, you have friendship
with them, you are enemies to the cross of Christ; and therefore ungodliness
and worldly lusts are joined together, Tit. 2. The grace of God that brings
salvation unto all men, has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, etc. We cannot serve God and Mammon: friendship of the world is
enmity to God: and therefore let every one consider what his heart most ayms
at: and what his Prudence, and Wisdom* and Providence is: what that is that the
world does so admire and extol: Is it friendship with the world or no? So long
as thou do well to thy self, men will speak well of thee: but thou do well:
to thy self indeed, when thou seek after the Lord, thirstest after him, and
lustest after him, and desire him; and in all desires in which thou art
carried out toward any thing but him, thou expressest enmity to him, thou
love not him. There is no going from God but to the creature: thou art the
creatures, if thou have left God: he that is a friend to the world, is an enemy
unto God. What is friendship with the world? when that we seek the creature for
it self, we are in love with it; we do not seek God, but seek it, when we put
our rest in it, cannot be without it, must have it, put it in Gods place; we
must have such a thing, and the other thing, we cannot be without it; A pitiful
thing to live in enmity to God. O when God comes forth, how shall we be
devoured and destroyed before him? But there are that will be friends with God
and the world too: let them look to it how they make it out; the friendship of
the world is enmity to God. And now the Apostle is showing here how the
Scripture discovers this same evil that is in our hearts.

Verse. 5. Do you think the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that dwells in
us lusts to envy. Does the Scripture say in vain? the Scripture says nothing
in vain: but the Scripture speaks much in vain to us, while that we do not mark
it, nor attend it. We all speak for the Scripture, how the Scripture is of God,
the Scripture is Truth, and the Word of Truth: we speak well of it, but the
Scripture does not speak well of you: It says, The spirit that is in you lusts
to envy. There is nothing but evil in our hearts. We shall never understand the
Scripture, till that we understand it in our own hearts. Do you think that the
Scripture says in vain, The spirit in you lusts to envy. Where does the
Scripture say this? It says, Every thought of man's heart is only evil, and
that continually: The Scripture; it tells you the evil is in your hearts: and
there is no good in your flesh; and let it not be in vain the Scripture tells
you: if it be in vain now, and you do not entertain it, and hear, God will
come, and you will find it so. How many carry the Scripture a witness and
testimony against them? Does the Scripture say in vain there is evil in you:
and the spirit in you lusts to envy? The devil is in your hearts, and he
reigns there.

Does the Scripture say this in vain? You will not hear it now to heed it, and
believe it; you shall feel it one day, that the Scripture does not speak in
vain. The greatest contenders for the Scripture, and the Authority thereof, are
the greatest despisers of the Scriptures, for they make the Scriptures speak as
Ahab would make Michaiah speak well of him: speak nothing but good, and will
not observe that the Scripture speaks in discovery of our evil: but this is to
reject the Scripture, to catch here and there a piece to serve our turn, and
abuse them, and wrest them as the devil did; so the devil in us does; Do you
think the Scripture says in vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to
envy. But the Scriptue tells us not so: I but the Spirit of God tells us in the
Scripture. In the Scripture there is a clear discovery of evil in our hearts.

Verse. 6. But he gives more grace. To finish in a word: What is the meaning of
that? Why I conceive it is to prevent an Objection which might arise from the
foregoing words. For if the spirit that be in us lust to envy, and if that be
to serve the devil, and that is all in our wars, contendings and fightings,
what shall we do? it is in vain to speak; Nay, for he gives more grace. There
is more grace then there is sin. And where sin has abounded, Grace shall
abound much more: there is one greater in you, then he that is in the world; He
gives more grace. Why, God he comes forth in his people, and he makes them able
to deny themselves, and this wicked one that lusts to envy. He gives more
grace. Wherefore he says, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble.

Here is Pride seen in contention and war; and when we submit to God and depend
upon him, we are well. Submit your selves therefore to God. He gives more grace
to the humble. And he gives thee grace to be humble. If any man be humble, it
is his Grace: and what is that Humility and Grace? Submit your selves to God,
be at his dispose, let him measure out that he knows convenient for you, and do
not you lust after this thing* and the other thing, but let God come out to
you: Feed me with food convenient; give me that is good for me; do thou dispose
of me: Seek nothing but God, Submit your selves to him. And resist the devil:
The devil is in Lust; we look for the Devil without us, and look for Christ
without us; whosoever has Christ, he has him within; and the devil is within:
he is the God of this world, he is served in the lusts of the world; he is the
enemy of God; and you cannot be a friend to the world, and not an enemy to God;
therefore Resist the devil, set against these Lusts. How shall we set against
them? He gives more Grace. It is the natural bent of my spirit to go another
course, The spirit in me lusts this way. He gives more grace. God is stronger
then the Devil. Wait on him, and submit to him.

And he will flee from you. You have fled from him it may be: He shall flee
from you. When we know Grace, and know God, we shall make the Devil fly. That
which we call fleeing from the Devil, is for the most part flying from God, and
flying from Grace; we know Grace is to resist the Devil. And he will flee from
you.

Verse. 8. And draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, etc. You ask and
you have not, because you ask amiss, to consume on your Lusts. You draw near to
Lust, when you seem to draw nigh to God. Now draw nigh to God, and wash your
hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double-minded. Be not for God and
the world, there is no juggling with God, and mocking God. God is not mocked,
and see this evil of your hearts, and be humbled for it, and be afflicted and
mourn and weep, as it follows: But its time to have done.

THE Secret and Safe CHAMBERS.
ISAIAH 26. 20, 21. Come my People, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast.

For behold the Lord comes out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the
earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no
more cover her slain.


IN the Verses before the Text, the People of God are complaining how they have
in sad distress waited upon God for deliverance, and been as a woman with
child, and have brought forth nothing but wind, in the 17 and 18 Verses: they
have a word of comfort in the 19 Verse, Thy dead men shall live: awake and sing
ye that dwell in the dust. The question then that the Saints may put, is, When
shall this be? What shall we do in the mean time? Here is an answer to this in
the words read; Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers: here is a hiding
place for you in them: Enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee, and hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be overpast. For behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her
blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

Thus we see how the words lie. I shall endeavor to present you with the
substance of these words in sundry particulars which I shall offer to you.

Come my people, enter into thy Chambers.

The first thing that offers it self to us, is, That God has a People, a
peculiar People, as it is in Titus 2. A People that are born of him. All are
his People; but there is a peculiar People that are born of him, that partake
of his Divine nature, as Peter has it. A People which were not a People; that
is, not manifested a People: There is the seed of God lies in flesh, and in
flesh here rules Satan, and here the seed lies dead a long time: You has he
quickened (says the Apostle) that were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.
And that is conversion, the quickening of a dead seed that lies in flesh, that
lies in the world: and so, you are a People that were no People; but you are
manifested, in whom nothing was to be seen of God; but yet there was a seed in
you: You are a people to show forth his virtues and his praises: as it is in 1
Pet. 2. 9. This is that God does in his People, he makes this use of them, he
appears in them, to show forth his Virtues and his Praises; they are the Throne
of his glory, and here will he come forth in all his excellencies: Blessed is
this People. The world is divided into two sorts, the seed of the Serpent, and
the seed of God.

Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, shut thy doors about thee, hide thy
self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

God has a People that are born of him, dear to him, and yet this People are
under indignation; till the indignation be overpast. They feel wrath, they feel
anger, they feel indignation; their complaints of it are full in the Register
of the Scripture. All thy waves and storms are gone over me. Gods fire is in
Zion, and his furnace is in Jerusalem. Judgment begins at the house of God
(says Peter) And it is no wonder, when we look into the grounds of it: when
that this People of God is a seed of his, that lies a long time dead and
buried in flesh and world, here is that that opposes God; now when this same
seed is quickened, this wrath and indignation it is upon flesh, this corruption
in which it lies, in which it is imprisoned; this wrath and indignation, it is
the deliverer and setter free of that that is of God, that same holy one. But
the wrath is not upon that that is born of God. He that is born of God sins
not, and there is no wrath upon him; but his present state being in flesh,
where there is opposition unto God, here is wrath; The manifestation of God is
fire: the manifestation of God, it is fire to all that does oppose it: Fury is
not in me (says God) in the next Chapter to the Text, Chap. 27. 4. Fury is
not in me: Fury is not in God, there is nothing but Rest, and Peace, and quiet
in God: What is this Fury, and this Wrath and Indignation then, that is so
complained of; thy Fury, and thy Wrath, and thy Indignation? It is nothing but
the manifestation of God upon flesh. Our God is a consuming fire, and here are
Briars and Thorns set against him in battle; as it is in that Verse, Fury is
not in me; who would set the Briars and Thorns against me in battle? I would go
through them, and burn them together. The manifestation of God is wrath and
indignation, so long as there is any thing to oppose it; and this is that the
Saints shall rejoice in, when they come to know and understand themselves, that
our God is a consuming fire, and by this wrath, and this indignation are we
saved. We shall be saved (says the Apostle) but so as by fire.

And this, it cannot but be some ease and refreshment unto those that have
their present state in wrath, in indignation; they have their hearts making out
to God, and they cannot think of him but they are troubled. I thought of God
and was troubled. Saints have their purgation here, their dross is burnt off
here in this fire; and when that is burnt, the Briars and Thorns when they are
consumed, no more indignation. Hide thy self till the indignation be overpast.
So God has a People of his Love, and this People they feel indignation and
wrath: Whom he loves he chastens, and he corrects every Son whom he receives.

Again, take notice here, how that God does express himself most kindly and
lovingly unto his People in the times of their sufferings; Times of indignation
and wrath, they usher in the sweetest discoveries of love and grace. Come my
People: What a sweet entertainment is here? Come my people, enter into thy
Chambers, enter into thy Chambers: My beloved is one, and all the People of God
are one, they have one life; Come my people, enter into thy Chambers:
Indignation and wrath to souls that love God and thirst after him, they do
usher in the sweetest communion with him. Is Ephraim my dear son? says God in
Jer. 31. Is Ephraim my dear son? In what a condition was Ephraim when the Lord
speaks this? he was in deep affliction, Jer. 31. 18. I have surely heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn me and I shall be turned: Then in ver.
20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for
him. The Church here is complaining, we have been with child, and in pain, and
have brought forth nothing but wind; why come my people (says God) lift up the
weak hands and the feeble knees. I Will take her into the wilderness, and there
I Will speak to her heart: The Apostle he speaks of his afflictions, as the season
of his consolations, 2 Cor. 1. Come my people: This should somewhat reconcile
us unto afflictions, to wait till meat comes out of the eater. It should settle
our hearts while we hear thunder, and lightning, and fire, and feel
earthquakes; there will a still voice come at last: after a while that you have
suffered, comfort will come in; you shall find a Chamber and a Bed: Come my
people, enter into thy Chamber. A Chamber and a Bed, and a Knee and a Bosom.
God does all in love; even afflictions they are in love; and this love it shall
be manifested, it shall break out and be discovered the more sweetly, the
longer it is hid. Joseph will take off his disguise, and cry, I am Joseph your
brother. God who was looked upon as an enemy, will come forth with this, Come
my people, enter into thy Chambers. That Is a 3. particular.

Enter thou into thy Chambers. The People of God, they have a retiring place, a
resting place, a hiding place in trouble and affliction. A Chamber, it is a
retiring place, a resting place, a hiding place. And what is this same Chamber
of the People of God, but God? Return to thy rest O my soul, for God has been
good unto thee: it is the 116 Psalm. ver. 11. The Lord has been good unto thee:
This is the Chamber. Elsewhere God is presented a Rock, a Castle, Thou have been
the dwelling place of thy people from one generation to another: as it is in
the Psalms. Thou will keep them in perfect peace, whose mind is staid on thee;
as it is in ver. 3. of this Chapter. The People of God have a Refuge, a Rest, a
Shelter in all troubles: Trouble and distress is the portion of the wicked; but
the Saints have a retiring place, and afterward deliverance: this is that that
the world cannot find. God is the retiring and hiding place of his People; and
he cannot forsake his People, he cannot but tend them; in their greatest
sufferings he will see they shall suffer no more then they are able to bear,
and he will give them a good issue.

Let us ask our souls whether we know trouble, and whether we know rest in
trouble, and whether we know this rest a better rest then this world. And this
answers that objection the world makes against the Saints waiting upon God. We
call the proud happy (say they) and they that tempt God are delivered: here is
nothing but trouble and affliction. No? nothing else? Surely here is rest too.
Here is rest in trouble, and then there is deliverance.

Hide thy self for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast: enter
into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee.

Here is this also to be observed: How that in time of ease and rest in the
flesh, in the world, the People of God are very apt to be straggling abroad, to
be running out into the lusts of the world and flesh, running out of their
rest: And when we run into the world, and into the flesh, and into these lusts,
we go out of our rest, out of our peace. This is employed here; when there is a
call to come in, indignation is abroad, come in, enter into thy Chamber. It is
going out from God that brings us into trouble; now return, come in again. When
there is peace and quiet in the flesh, the flesh it is carried forth, there are
baits and temptations, it sees its Lovers, and it makes after them, then God
sets up a hedge of Thorns, as it is in Hos. 2. 8. I will hedge up thy way with
thorns, she shall not find her Lovers; then shall she say, I will return to my
first husband, for then it was better with me then now. And this is that God
calls to here, Come my people, enter into thy Chambers; thou have lain abroad,
and been at forage in the world, where thou have left thy life behind thee,
now seek it here: Enter into thy Chambers.

These Chambers which are the rest of the Saints, are a prison unto the flesh;
and a Saint being flesh as well as spirit, the spirit is asleep sometimes, and
the flesh is awake and alive, and that goes after its Lovers; and then trouble
comes, and distress comes, and there is no getting out but by making in again;
making in unto God. Enter into thy Chambers.

Again, see here is Gods call, Come my people, enter in: And there is no coming
into the rest of God, but for those whom the Lord calls: and when he calls too,
it is not when we will, it is not when man will, it is not when the Minister will,
but it is when the Spirit will; Come my people: The voice of God in our hearts,
is that that gives his beloved rest. So he gives his beloved rest: How? He calls
by his Spirit, Come my people, enter into thy Chambers. There is indignation
everywhere but in God. Fury is not in me (says God) And God manifested, this
indignation will appear and be felt. There is no rest but in the Lord; and
there is no entertainment in the Lord, but to those whom he calls in; to whom he
opens the gate, the everlasting ganes: Who shall ascend into the Hill of the
Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? Who shall lie down in that
Chamber? And who shall meet with that repose that is in him? He whom he calls in
by his Spirit. It was death to enter in before Ahasuerus, unless he held forth
his golden Scepter: There is nothing but indignation from the presence of God
upon every soul, but that soul that is called in by God. Come my people.

There is a People that look to enter into rest, and the Gospel is preached to
them, and rest is preached unto them; but the Apostle tells us in Heb. 4. at the
beginning, They entered not in because of unbelief. What is this unbelief? God
was not in their hearts, they had not this inward call, there was not the life
of God within them, nor the rest of God within them; Gods voice is not known
without, unless he dwell within: They entered not in because of unbelief. Christ
is entertained nowhere, in no soul, wherever he comes and knocks, he is
received nowhere but where he himself dwells, and opens the door. It is the
voice of God in our Spirits, the Spirit saying to our spirits, Ye are the
children of God, the People of God, God is your rest. Come, enter in, sit ye
down.

There are dreams of Rest, and when we awake there is nothing but trouble:
There are that cry Lord, Lord; and when he comes, he says, I know you not,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity. We must look for a better call then a
Letter call, or a Ministers call: We must look for the call of God in our
hearts, and a particular call: As they said to the blind man, be of good
comfort, he speaks to thee, he calls thee. Say to my soul (says David) I am
thy salvation. All your rest is fancy, unless God has led you into it: So far
forth as you see him, you see truth.

Come my people. To call our selves the People of God, unless God calls us so,
what a poor thing is this? To fancy our selves in the Chamber and Rest of God,
alas, how sadly shall we awake!

Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: shut
thy self in close. When we are shut into God from the world, and are at home in
the Lord, taken up in him, so far forth we are safe; there is no trouble, no
indignation, no fury, Fury is not in me. We stand in God, and have our
enjoyments in him, are only taken up with him: but while we stand there, and
are gazing upon the world, our eyes and hearts are drawn forth after this, and
after the other, then comes trouble. We do not see enough in God; if we did, he
would be a covering to our eyes, and a husband to us indeed; as he said, He
shall be a covering to thine eyes. When we look after any thing but him, we
look after trouble; wrath will come in; therefore shut the doors upon you:
Enter into thy Chambers, and shut the doors upon thee, and hide thy self. God
is our rest from trouble, God is our peace, God is our life; do but look from
him, you look into death, you look into trouble. You that dwell in God, shut up
your selves in him, shut the doors upon you.

And hide thy self. Hide thy self; there is no hiding from God, but in God.
Hide thy self in Gods Rest, in Gods Love, in Gods Power: this is a mystery and
riddle unto the world. Old Adam flies from God, the presence of God is
indignation. Old Adam is Briars and Thorns set in battle against him, Gods
appearance makes him run: But whither shall we go from thy presence? There is
no hiding from God, but in God. While I hid my sins (says David) my bones
consumed away, through my daily complaint; thy hand was heavy upon me. He had
no rest till he made back again unto God.

Enter into thy Chambers, and hide thy self. Hide thy self; and that is the
Saints condition here in this world, to be hidden ones. The world does not know
us, says John, 1 John 3. at the beginning; We are the sons of God, but the
world does not know us. You are dead (says the Apostle Col. 3. at the
beginning) and your life is hid. Hide thy self. Where are they hid? Why they
are hid in God. Our life is hid with Christ in God. That that appears now is
the world, and Satan, and Death, and Hell. Hide thy self for a moment. Hide thy
self, the Saints life is not seen nor known. God is the Saints life when he is
hidden. And this is our comfort, that when we are hidden, he is hidden; and
when he shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory, as it is in that same
third of the Colossians. Hide thy self. God will have us content to be hidden
for a while: and truly this makes us content to be hidden, that he is hidden.
He is our life; he comes not forth till we come forth; he is not in glory till
we are in glory; he is dead while we are dead. Yet awhile, and the earth shall
discover her dead, and shall no more hide her slain, as it follows in the Text.
Hide thy self. Saints are Gods hidden ones.

Hide thy self for a moment. All the sadness and darkness of the Saints is but
momentanie: Do thou love God? Does thy soul make to him? And know thou no
rest but him? Thou art troubled, and troubled when thou think of God; Hide
thy self for a moment. Here is repose for thee, and this indignation, this
storm will over. Sometimes it is expressed for a little moment, in this
Prophecy of Isaiah, For a little moment have I hid my face from thee: It seems
long to us, and we cry how long? It is but a moment in respect of Eternity.

And this is another word of ease to an afflicted soul; the affliction is
strong, but it shall not last: Hide thy self for a moment, until the
indignation be overpast. It is a cloud that will blow over, this indignation
will have an end, and then comes eternal Rest, eternal Joy. And as the trouble
of the Saints is but for a moment, so the joy of the world, it is no longer;
and the moment of the Saints trouble, is the moment of the worlds rejoicing:
and the indignation that lies upon the Saints, shall be taken off from them,
and fall upon the world: and that is it that is expressed in the next Verse.

VER. 21. For behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants
of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and
shall no more cover her slain.

THose that dwell in the earth, that have their life in the world and flesh,
have all their rest and contentment here in the creature; they have left the
Creator, and are turned to the creature, They have forsaken the fountain of
living water, etc. The Lord comes out of his place to punish them. The Lords
coming out of his place, his appearance is destruction to all them that run a
whoring from him.

After indignation has been upon the Saints, then it comes upon the world.
Judgment begins at the house of God. Well, what shall the end of the^ be that
obey not the Gospel? The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked
comes in his place: (says Solomon) Behold the Lord comes out of his place to
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. Assyria, and Egypt,
and Babylon are the scourge of God upon his people: When his people are
chastised, then he throws his rods into the fire. I will punish the stout heart
of the King of Assyria: Isa. 10. And it is a righteous thing with God (says
the Apostle 2 These. 1.) to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and
to you that are troubled rest with us. It is the glory of God, after he has
lent his power to his enemies, to take it into his own hands, and to plague
them, to bring them under his feet. While the world is rejoicing, indignation
shall pass from the people of God, upon the world.

The world I count all earthly minded people, that have their joy in the
creatures; The friendship of the world is enmity to God. If their eyes were
open, they would little rejoice, considering what would be the end of this; the
end of this mirth would be heaviness. God comes forth, and all their Candles go
out; no more the voice of the Bridegroom in thee: every one that has his life
in the earth, and in the creature, is treasuring up wrath to himself against
the day of wrath; and so much Joy and Glory as they have had, so much sorrow
and torment shall seize upon them. The Lord is come out of his place to punish
the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: The Lord shall turn his hand
upon the world after he has purged his people.

And this is also to be taken notice of here, That there is hope unto the
people of God, that the bitter cup is passed from them, and the indignation is
going off them, when God begins to take the world in hand, when indignation
begins to seize upon them. Hide thy self for a moment, till the indignation be
overpast; for behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants
of the earth. It will not last long when God has the world in hand; he is come
out of his place to punish them, therefore lift up your heads.

You that wait for God, and have your hope in him, lift up your weak hands, and
your feeble knees; when God begins to afflict the world, he is drawing it off
from his people; their yoke is breaking, when the worlds neck is going into it;
when God begins with Egypt, then Isreal's warfare is accomplished; when the
rods are throwing into the fire, then the childrens chastisement is at an end.
And according unto this truth, the Saints have a pleasant prospect upon the
world in all the trouble and distress of it. In Famines, Earthquakes,
Pestilences, Wars, in all the confusions and distresses thereof, then they that
wait for God, that love him, and his appearance, are called upon to lift up
their heads, for their redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. And here is the
ground of it in the Text, God is come forth to punish the inhabitants of the
earth for their iniquity. The indignation will soon be over, Hide thy self for
a moment. A moment, and all thy trouble will be at an end, all thy deaths will
be dead: the worlds death is coming now, and deaths death is coming now. The
Lord is come out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth.

Out of his place. That expression calls for our observation; and it has a word
before it, Behold the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of
the earth. And this is that is held forth to us here, That while the
inhabitants of the earth do live in jollity and prosperity, God is as it were
withdrawn out of the earth, gone into his place. God is everywhere: and what is
Gods place? He is everywhere: but now he is pleased not to manifest himself
here in the earth, in the world: It is a kind of withdrawing into a place,
going into a hole, hiding himself, and as it were leaving things in men's hands
to rule by Satan, leaving the earth and men to do their will, and their
pleasure. There is the same expression in other Scriptures beside this; Micah
1. 3. Behold the Lord comes out of his place, and will come down and tread upon
the high places of the earth. The Lord is in a retiring place as it were: it is
a Metaphorical speech: he is everywhere, he does not appear: that that we see
is man, and here is the Devil in them, and lust in them, and violence in them:
a time of great jollity, great rejoicing, great prosperity to the inhabitants
of the earth: What is this time? God is gone into his place, he hides himself,
he is retired. He says, I will go down and see if it be so in Sodom, according
to the cry of it. He went down, and by his appearance set Sodom on fire: he
retires, is not seen, and the fool says there is no God. The heart of worldly
men says, God sees not, neither does he regard. God is gone into his place,
lets the Devil and sin range everywhere, and do what they will. There is that
expression in the Gospel: The Kingdom of heaven is like a certain Nobleman, who
went into a far Country to receive a Kingdom, and return: So God is as it were
gone into a far Country to receive a Kingdom: and who has the Kingdom now?
Satan has the Kingdom, man has the Kingdom, and death has the Kingdom, sin
has the Kingdom; there is little to be seen in the world but these. The Spirit
of God was abroad mightily in the Apostles time, after Christ's Ascension, and
then he was pleased to draw in again, that the man of sin might come forth, and
show himself, as the Apostle has it, 2 These. 2. He that lets will let, till it
be taken out of the way: That was that glorious manifestation of light and
power in some of the people of God in those times, and that did let, and the
man of sin could not come forth; but that shall be taken out of the way, and
then he should come forth; and this same taking out of the way, was as much as
Gods going into his place. And so much does that expression hold forth of Gods
being in heaven, according to that of the Apostle, The wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against all the unrighteousness of men, Romans 1. 17. The wrath of
God is as it were in its place now, kept up. The wrath of God is nothing else
but the manifestation of God. God manifested to them that walk contrary to him,
his manifestation is wrath. God manifested to Briars and Thorns set in battle
against him, is consuming fire. Now this wrath of God seems to be shut up in a
secret place; it shall be revealed from heaven, it shall come forth out of its
place: All the glory, rejoicing, and prosperity of earthly men. Earthly minded
men in the creature, you have your life in the earth, your joy in the creature,
and your rest here; you have this only while God is in his place, while he is
withdrawn: but when he comes forth, indignation comes upon you, wrath comes
upon you like Sorrow upon a woman in travail, and you shall not escape. Now you
slight God, care not for him, say he sees you not, say in you heart there is no
God; he will be upon you on a sudden: and when he does appear, every knee shall
bow to him, and his enemies shall be found liars. And God does appear
purposely, that it might appear what man is: if the Majesty of God did appear,
no man would blaspheme him, no man would slight him: but now he is in a kind of
absence and withdrawment, he is in his place: Now the world appears in riot,
and the evil servant drinks with the drunkard, and beats his fellowservants,
and says, My master will not yet come. When he comes forth, who shall stand
before him? Who shall stand before devouring fire? Who shall stand before
everlasting burnings? All earthly-minded people, they will vanish away, they
will come to nothing. Even as darkness stands by the absence of light, and when
light comes it is destroyed: so the darkness of this world, and the joy of the
wicked, it has its place while God is withdrawn: when he appears and is
manifested, when he takes off his Vail that is upon him, they consume out of
their dwelling. Let God arise, and his enemies shall be scattered. Set the
Briars and Thorns against me (says God) who will do it? I will burn them
together, I will go through them and burn them: and it is but going through
them, and they are burnt, There is everlasting destruction from his presence.
Darkness, wickedness, sin, cannot stand but in Gods withdrawing: and this is
the reason of sin and hels rage: God is gone into his place, when he comes
forth again, these are like dust before him.

There are that have their time only in Gods absence: and who are these? They
that live upon the world, they that are satisfying their lusts, they that have
nothing but that which is seen, that put their trust in it, have all their life
in the creature: these have all their joy here in Gods absence, and are just
like the wild beasts, as we have a description of them in the Psalms: Man goes
forth unto his labor till the evening, and the evening comes, and the beasts
go abroad after their prey. And this is the time of men's satisfying their
lusts, while God is in his place, while God is not manifested: My master defers
his coming, says the evil servant. And here is the reason of the dreadfulness
of the mention of the day of Judgment unto an earthly heart, a carnal heart: O
how terrible is it! The thought of Doomesday, the Judgment day, the Throne
set, the Books opened; The reason why this is so dreadful, is, because that
then all their sport is at an end, all their joy is done: they had it in the
flesh, but there shall no flesh glory in his presence. All the glory that is in
flesh, shall dis-appear when the glory of God appears. The day of the Lord is
darkness, and not light, unto all that live in the world. This is man's day:
Man's day, which is Gods night: and Gods day is the worlds night. If you have
your life in the earth, when God comes forth, there is an end of your life. The
Saints are dead till the Lord comes forth: this is the reason why they wait for
this day. O that the Lord would come! They love his appearance, they long for
his appearance, they wait for his Kingdom. Thus the Spirit of God in Scripture
does decipher out Saints and Disciples unto us, They waited for the Kingdom of
God: They love and long for his appearance: As he appears, down goes sin: his
appearance sets a flame unto sin, even the sin and lust that is in us, and when
that is burnt up, there is nothing but glory; nothing but glory that remains.
He is come out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth, that is,
those that have their life and rest in the earth: They have this life, and
rest, and joy, only while God does not appear; when he appears and comes forth,
nothing but blackness and darkness, nothing but destruction from his presence:
as it is in 2 These. 1. Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in them* that believe. Now he is dishonored and reproached; then
he shall be glorified.

The Lord is come out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for
their iniquity: The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more
cover her slain.

The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

When the Lord is discovered, when he discovers himself, there is a discovery
of every thing, there shall be no longer hiding: The earth is disclosed: God is
light, and there is an end of darkness when light comes forth.

The earth shall disclose her blood, and shall no longer hide her slain.

What is this blood, and this slain which the earth hides and covers for the
time, and which it shall disclose? It is the Lords blood. Do we not read in
Scripture of the Lords blood? Acts 20. The Church he has redeemed by his own
blood. The blood of the Lamb, the Lamb slain.

There are two things to be observed here: First this, That the Lord of life
lies slain and buried in the earth: and this is his place spoken of before.
When he comes out of his place, the earth discloses her blood, and discovers
her slain: The Lord lies slain and buried in the earth.

Another thing is, That the Lord by his own power will rise up, and discover,
and manifest himself, and say, I am he that was dead, but am alive, and I live
for evermore; and I have the keys of hell and death. The Lord lies slain and
buried in the earth: the earth is the grave of the Lord: this Creation is the
Lords Sepulcher, it is the Lords Monument, and it has this inscription written
upon it [ Behold the place where the Lord lies] the Lord lies slain in the
earth, and this is his place where he is hidden: he is everywhere, but he is as
it were dead and slain, Rev. 5. John saw the Lamb as it had been slain: he is
as it were slain, but he lives all this while, and he raigns and rules, but
there is nothing seen but the Kingdom of Men, of Devils, of Death, of Hell.

The Lord he is slain: he comes forth at times, and makes appearances, and as
he looks up, still he is knocked down, and the world cries Devil and Blasphemy:
In all the appearances that hitherto he has made, he has been slain: the
Devil has possessed all the Mountains that ever he raised up: the seven
Mountains the Whore sits upon them. That the Apostle has Heb. 6. They crucify
afresh the son of God, and put him to open shame. God makes his appearance, and
still he is crucified, still he is slain: whilst he rises in flesh, still he
is killed.

If you ask who it is that kills him? His enemies kill him, sin and hell: his
friends kill him, therefore Christ says, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do. These are the wounds I have received in the house of my friends.
He kills himself, he gives up his life: for that which Pilat and Herod did, they
did by the determinate Counsel of God. Awake O sword against the shepherd that
is my fellow. I lay down my life of my self, and no man takes it from me (says
Christ) he gives up himself. It is the blood of God in us that redeems this
earth: Thou have redeemed us by thy blood. There is no man shall live, but he
in whom God is dead: in whom he lies slain for a while, or as it were slain:
and by this God comes forth in a more glorious Kingdom. His Kingdom is more
glorious, when he comes out of death into it; comes upon Death, comes upon
Hell, and all the powers of it.

God is pleased to make himself enemies, that he may appear to be above them.
God is slain, his blood is shed in Christ, and Christ in the Saints, he suffers
still. I fill up the sufferings of Christ, says the Apostle: Here he dies, and
here he rises.

And this, it may give us some light and instruction touching sin: in the
knowledge whereof we are exceeding defective. All have sinned: that the Apostle
says; and sinned the utmost of sin, Slain and murdered the Lord of life. And
think of it what you will, you never see sin in a true light, till you see your
selves murderers and betrayers of the Lord of glory; the Spirit convincing of
sin, it convinces of this: and this is that that earthly-mindedness does; the
earth in us, this love of the earth, this love of the creature, it kills the
Lord, and buries the Lord, it keeps down the Lord. Do you not know (says
James) that the friendship of the world is enmity unto God?

And you that know God, and love God, mind what you do whilst you go out after
the earth: Here is killing the Lord, and burying him, keeping him down: Either
we are crucifying God, or else we are crucifying the world, and the world is
crucified unto us, one of these two. We are crucifying God, while we do not
look and long for his appearance: all living in the earth, being at home in the
body, is crucifying the Lord. The Devil is the god of this world, he is a
murderer: and so are all those that serve this world, murderers and betrayers
of the Lord of life. The earth buries him, the earth covers him, the Princes of
this world crucify the Lord of glory.

You that profess to know the Lord of glory, see what you do whilst you are
climbing up in the world, making after the greatness and the glory thereof: the
earth hides his blood, and covers him, here he is buried: worldly lusts,
fleshly lusts, these kill and flay, and bury God in you, keep down Christ in
you.

This is the reason why the world makes so little account of God, and makes no
more of God then a fancy; they have slain him, and they have buried him, and
they reign: but he will rise, and then woe to the inhabitants of the earth. The
Devil is come among you, and then you shall see the Devil: the Devil is among
you, but you do not see him, then you shall be delivered up to him.

It is a comfort to them that they cannot see God, that their souls long after
him, and they love him, but they cannot see him. Why? He is not discovered:
where he is, he lies dead a great while: He lies dead in the hearts and souls
of his People.

And it should make us beware of passing judgment upon any, That they are not
the Lords, and the Lord is not in them, because he is not at present
manifested: he lies dead, there is his blood, and it may quicken, though it be
now as dead.

And it should make us very wary of judging any persons, those that walk in the
greatest opposition unto God; God may lie dead in them, and when he rises in
them, that shall suffer for him that did before persecute him: and whosoever he
be that lives, he has seen God dead in him, and now he is raised. This is
indeed the conversion of a sinner, it is the quickening of Christ in the heart.

He is dead in the earth, here is his blood, and he will rise up, the earth
shall discover her blood, shall no longer hide her slain: he will come out of
his place, he has come forth in many appearances, and has been killed again:
but he will come forth in his own body, and he will stand in the earth: and
rising from the dead, he dies no more, death has no more dominion over him:
and he coming out of the grave, will bring forth all his with him: of which we
had a type in the coming of the people of God out of Egypt, and out of
Babylon: they brought forth all the riches out of Egypt, returned with all the
vessels out of Babylon: When God brings us forth out of death and hell, he will
bring us forth with all the goods, and all the riches that death and hell have
robbed us of.

The earth shall no longer cover his blood. And it cannot be, it is impossible
he should see corruption: it is his blood, and therefore must recover: it is
the Lamb, but as it were slain: he rules still, he rules amidst his enemies: he
rules in death, in hell, but is covered, is not seen. He shall live, and his
people shall live with him.

And look we into our hearts, what we find of the death of Christ, of the
resurrection of Christ, of fellowship with him in his sufferings, and the power
of his resurrection. This is that Paul's heart did beat upon, Phil. 3. 10. We
know him, and the power of his death, and fellowship of his sufferings. Look
what we know of him, and look for his revealing in us. When it pleased God to
reveal his Son in me. Know ye not that Christ is in you? Prove your selves,
whether you be in the faith. Christ in you: Christ in you dead, Christ in you
alive. He is alive that was dead, then you live. Because I live, ye shall live
also: Look if ye know this life. You are in him that is true, and he in you
that is true: he is risen, and you risen with him, ascended with him, and set
down with him in heavenly places.

FINIS.
THE MAJESTY of GRACE, OR, The Sovereignty of SALVATION.
SERMON I.
TITUS 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared
to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, etc.

VER. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority: Let no
man despise thee.


IN the beginning of this Chapter the Apostle is directing Titus how to carry
himself in his Doctrine toward all Sexes and Ages of men. But speak thou the
things that become sound doctrine: That the aged men be sober, grave,
temperate, sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience: The aged women likewise,
that they be in behavior as becomes holiness* etc. Young men exhort to be
sober-minded: Exhort Servants to be obedient to their Masters, etc.

And here he lays the ground and foundation of it, which is an encouragement
to Titus to set upon this preaching, it should not be in vain: For the grace of
God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, etc.

The grace of God shall teach with thee: therefore be thou a Minister of the
grace of God, be thou bringing forth this grace of God which has appeared,
that has appeared in us, and has appeared in thee. Thou have a Ministry of
the Spirit; go thou forth in that, and bring up men from the grave of
ungodliness, to the grace of God: do thou bring forth that redemption which is
come forth in Jesus Christ: do thou bring forth Jesus Christ in those to whom
thou preachest. And what do we, unless this grace go with us? The grace of God,
which is also The God of grace, unless God be in grace, it is such a grace as
may be received in vain: I labored more abundantly then they all (says the
Apostle) yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, and in me.

The grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, has appeared: Therefore
exhort all men, and teach all men, and make a proof where this grace of God
will further appear: it has appeared teaching us: see whom it will teach
besides?

I shall speak to the words as they lie in order, and as I shall conceive may
be most profitable for us.

The grace of God. The kindness of God, the favor of God, as it is called in
the next Chapter, After the loving kindness of God appeared, etc. The grace of
God, or the God of grace: Grace without God will be abused: but grace from God,
and with God, is Salvation. The grace of God, is God in Christ. The Scripture
that tells us in one place of the grace of God, tells us in another place of the
God of grace: and the grace of God does give God himself unto his People: I am
thy exceeding great reward.

The grace of God that brings salvation. There is Grace, and there is
Salvation the Scripture speaks of, but grace is not all, nor salvation is not
all. Salvation will not satisfy him that has the God of grace, but he must
have glory as well as salvation: it will not satisfy an heir of heaven to be
safe only, but he must have a Kingdom: It is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you a Kingdom. We must take the Scriptures in their extent: There is one place
speaks only of grace, there is another tells us of God: One place speaks only of
salvation, another tells us of glory* God will give grace and glory. Each single
Scripture does not express the whole mind of God. They that will take the
Scriptures by pieces, and not the whole Scriptures, must make account to be
deceived.

The grace of God that brings salvation. God in grace brings salvation, and is
salvation: and there is no salvation but where the God of grace is come: Gods
appearing in his love, owning us, and manifesting himself to be our portion,
this is salvation. In his favor is life: Whosoever does not believe, the wrath
of God abides upon him: His anger and absence is death and destruction: every
man is under destruction and death till the grace of God come to him, till that
appear.

If you look for salvation, where is the grace of God, or the God of grace
appearing? The grace of God is salvation, and salvation is the grace of God, or
the God of grace. The grace of God that brings salvation. There is grace that
does not bring salvation: there is the grace of God in these outward things,
there is the grace of God in gifts, this grace bids us look after salvation,
this grace leads unto repentance: but here is the grace of God that brings
salvation, and that is salvation it self. Here is God in grace come to us, here
is the grace that turns the heart from the world, and sin, and hell: This is
salvation.

The grace of God that brings salvation. There is no salvation by Works, there
is no salvation by the Law; salvation is by the grace of God: by that grace
that makes us to do the works of God, by Gods working in us, by Gods taking us
into himself: All our works are wrought in God: It is the Scripture expression.

The grace of God that brings salvation unto all men. The Apostle spoke before
of aged and young, male and female, of Servants and Governors, teach them all;
for the grace of God has appeared to all, and for all. It is come to every
man's door, brings salvation to all, to all that God does make any reckoning or
account of, the holy seed. Of others it is said, Thou put away the wicked
like dross, Psalm. 119. There is a generation of men that are in no better
esteem with God, then those creatures begotten of corruption: Thou put them
away like dross: These are the seed of the Serpent: You are of your father the
Devil, and his works will you do. It is a poor languishing controversy, that
in which so many are exercised, about Universal Redemption: Let every man look
whether salvation be come to him, and whether he has entertained it, and
embraced it, and if so, let him rejoice: Let every man make his Calling and
Election sure: and let him be a good Minister of this grace of God to others;
leave disputing and jangling, and begin to live, By denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, live soberly and righteously, and godly in this present world;
And be a pattern and example, Make thy self a pattern of good works: Let thy
light shine before men, that they may see thy good works, and glorify thy
Father which is in heaven.

Salvation to all has appeared. Grace ever was, but it appears in time. There
is nothing that is, but it has been. Grace coming forth is nothing but the
Childrens coming out of their minority from under tutors and governors. The
Saints coming from under the Law, and out of the flesh. There is a time
appointed of the Father for this; this is the time of grace; grace has
appeared, and we receive the adoption of sons. God tells us we are his begotten,
his inheritance, and he is ours. Grace comes forth and appears by degrees; and
there was never but some appearances of grace. But a low appearance of grace is
counted as no appearance in respect of a higher. That appearance before Christ
in the flesh, is counted no appearance in respect of that which came forth with
Christ in flesh. That appearance with Christ in flesh is not appearance in
respect of that which comes forth with Christ in the Spirit: When he shall
appear the second time without sin unto salvation, to them that wait for him.

He appears now to salvation, but now he appears in sin and weakness; and this
is not appearing in respect of that which shall be; the glory is no glory in
respect of that which is coming, that is at the door. God brings forth himself
out of the dark; he has put himself into the dark, and he comes up by degrees;
he lies under vails and coverings, and hides his face. There is everlasting
mercies, but they are hidden: Your life is hid with Christ in God, and God
reveals this by degrees: There is grace not appearing, and salvation not
appearing where it is. And there is wrath and destruction not appearing also
where it is; they will both come forth: And till these do come forth, it is
very irrational for any to judge that that which now does not appear, is not
there, and will never appear. It is the comfort of them that wait for grace,
and cannot see it. I know thy poverty (says Christ to one of the Churches in
the Revelations) but thou art rich, Rev. 2. 9.

There is nothing to be done for our salvation and glory, but the bringing it
forth, the making it to appear. We have a life, but it is hid and veiled, and so
we are said to be dead, as it is in Col. 3. 1. Ye are dead, and your life is hid
with Christ in God: When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we
appear with him in glory.

Grace has appeared, teaching us. It Is a blessed thing to know the teaching of
grace: There is the Laws teaching, and Graces teaching; there is a Letter
teaching, and the Spirits teaching. In the first teaching we are ever learning,
but never able to come to the Knowledge of the truth, but are still led about
with lusts: Here is only a profession, and nothing but a form: but there is
the teaching of grace, which is the writing the Law in our minds, and putting
them in our hearts. Here is the Covenant of grace, the Law of grace, when we
are delivered up into the Doctrine, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 6. 17.
the form of Doctrine into which you were delivered, as it is in the Margent. We
are delivered up into the Doctrine; we are formed, and fashioned, and molded
into it.

There is an appearance of God in Majesty in Mount Sinai, that makes servants,
and slaves, and bondmen; that says, Do or you dye; Do or you are cursed. And
there is an appearance of God from Mount Sion in love and grace: The God of
grace, or the grace of God has appeared; and he teaches us his ways, and he
makes us sons, and he brings forth his own nature in us: It Is our life, our
meat and drink to do his will, and finish his work. The everlasting Covenant in
blood comes forth, and makes us perfect to do his will. Here is the Law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus, that frees us from the Law of sin and death.
It Is a sad thing to be only under a Letter and under a Voice: to have nothing
but a Letter, and a Hearsay: Nothing but a voice and direction without, here is
nothing but enmity within. But the word is nigh thee in thy heart, when we come
to this teaching, this inward teaching, this Law of the Spirit; All other
teaching without this inward teaching, does but put us into a Dream, into
Fancies; and we think and seem that we eat and drink, but when we awake we
shall find our souls hungry and thirsty. But this grace of God that teaches
effectually, delivers us up into the Doctrine, moulds us into the form of that
which is taught. The God of grace appearing to us, we are turned into his Image
from glory to glory by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. latter end. Let Us all look after
this teaching, this inward teaching; They shall be all taught of God. Let us
look after the teaching of Christ who spoke with authority, and not as the
Scribes. Let us look for power and life, and light from God; And let us deal
with man for nothing else but that we may hear God by him, and see God in him,
and be able to say God is in you of a truth.

The grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared, teaching us; grace and
favor it is exceeding winning. God does overcome all our evil by good; Love is
mightily constraining. She had much forgiven her, she loved much. Let favor be
showed to the wicked, he will not learn righteousness, in the land of
uprightness will he deal unjustly; as it is in Isa. 26. 10. Thou after thy
impenitent heart treasurest up wrath, and dispisest the goodness of God that
leads thee to repentance. Bounty is leading to repentance, but the God of
grace, and the grace of God, it sets up repentance in us. Let us go forth then
in grace, and in love; And so let us be winning and working upon others.
Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
etc.

Many men will say, if I deny my lusts, all the lusts of the world, here is an
end of my life, What shall I do? How shall I live? Thou shall live the life of
God; It brings death upon this life, this Worldly life, and brings us to live
in hope. Looking for that blessed hope.

It is a foolish thing to a carnal heart to think of suffering it self to
betaken* off from the present enjoyment of the world, the satisfying his lusts,
to live upon hope: But the hope that is in God is firm and sure, and surerer
then the World. The World passes away and the lusts thereof; and they that
have their life in these things find nothing but shame and Death; but this hope
never makes men ashamed. Which hope we have as an anchor of the Soul, both sure
and steadfast, and which enters into that within the vail.

And here lets take notice of this; That the grace of God that brings Salvation
is made out in teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; Every one of
us talk of grace and Salvation; If we be partakers of grace and Salvation
indeed, then we are delivered from worldly Lusts in some degree. We are taught
by it to deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts. We are taught by it likeness to
God, and not to be fashioned to this world. To deny ungodliness, is to deny
every thing that is not like God. Not to walk like men; the Apostle condemns
the Corinthians that they walked like men. It may be it is a strange thing to
hear we should not walk like men. Like whom should we walk? Like the Devil?
Like beasts? So some do. No, you should walk like God. The grace that brings
Salvation, It does not bring you to satisfy sensuality, to satisfy Lusts, nor
to follow the creature, but it brings in power, it brings in and raises up the
life of God, whereby we deny these Lusts, whereby we famish these Gods of the
Earth. God says he will famish all the Idols; And this God does, when he
rises up in us, he famisheth in us the Love of the World, the love of flesh;
This grave and hell, he starves them both.

This grace of God that brings Salvation leads up into Heaven, into God, into
the Spirit, and satisfies and fills us in the other World. And we deny our
Lusts after this. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the
affections and Lusts. They have done it, and they are doing it; it is as good as
already done; for there is that power in them, which will do it; a greater
power then is in the World. It Is the Circumcision in heart by the Circumcision
of Christ; It Is dying with Christ and being buried with Christ; It Is dying to
this fleshly State, to this glory and these contentments; It is the
consecrating us to God, so that he becomes our delight, he is our Joy, he is
our riches; We sought them in the flesh, we sought them in the World; Then we
sought Corn and Wine and Oil; now nothing but the light of Gods countenance;
this is grace, and this is Salvation. And the world and the flesh which is
generally sought after by us, it is a vail of death: It is a vail upon Christ,
a covering upon the life of God; It is the grave and the prison of the Saints;
it is Babylon and the Northcountry into which we are carried. The
North-country, far from the Sun, far from light, far from life. When we come
into flesh we are buried, here we are estranged from our own life, which is the
life of God. And the grace of God appearing, that is as it were the Sun drawing
nigh. When the Sun comes in the Spring and Summer, the face of the Earth is
renewed. We come into the nature of wrath; but as grace returns again, so this
life appears and comes forth; this Sepulcher is opened, and this vail is rent,
and the Earth gives up her dead, and no longer covers her slain. The flesh and
World and glory thereof, riches and contentment, are a vail and covering upon
the life of the Saints. For God is life and Salvation; union with him, that is
life indeed; and the appearing of this union, is life manifested. That which
the World and natural men do call death, is indeed the swallowing up of death;
as it is called Isa. 25. He shall take away the vail and the covering that is
upon the face of all People. He shall wipe off all tears, and shall swallow up
death in Victory. The World and flesh is a Vail, and is a Vail of tears; when
this Vail is rent, by the coming of that which is called death, then
life-comes indeed, and death is swallowed up in it; God who is our life
appears: Grace and Salvation is not leading us into contentments of the flesh,
into the abundance of the riches of the Earth: It Is not satisfying of lusts,
but the killing of lusts; it is bringing forth the Spirit, bringing forth the
life of God. Godly in this present World.

By this will appear how far Salvation is from most men. Salvation is far from
the wicked (as David has it) because they keep not thy Statutes. Little do
wicked men think there is no Salvation but in keeping Gods Statutes; but that
is the truth of it; Salvation is conformity to God, to be made like to God, to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; and the love of the World is enmity to
God.

This is Salvation, and the same is destruction to wicked men; Worldly men,
they have their life in the Vail, their life is in the World and in the flesh;
When God appears and throws off the Vail, there is nothing to be seen by them
but death and destruction; And what is the second death, that the Scripture
speaks of, but the appearance of God? The manifestation of God, it is the second
death, it is everlasting destruction to them that know him not, that have no
life but in the flesh and in the world. When God appears, here ends their life,
and here begins destruction, they are destroyed from his presence. That which
is life and Salvation indeed, is death, hell and destruction to a worldly man;
and if he speak his heart, he will say, if this be salvation, let me have none
of it, I know not what it means, I know no other life but this in the flesh.

What says the Apostle? The life I live, I live by the faith of the Son of
God; *it is not I live, but Christ that lives in me: though I live in the flesh,
yet I do not War after the flesh: though I live in the World, I am not
conformed to the World, but transformed. On the other hand, the life of the
World is, give me Corn, Wine and Oil, ease in the flesh, honor in the World:
the life of the Saints is, lift up the light of thy countenance, make me after
thine own heart, form me according to thine own Image, fashion me to thy Will,
teach me to deny my self. It is feeding hell and destruction to satisfy
worldly lusts; it is life and salvation to deny these, to crucify these:
therefore lets be acquainted with grace and salvation what it is.

Lets not deceive our selves with names of things; lets not call evil good, and
good evil; put light for darkness, and darkness for light. Lets not call wrath
and destruction grace and salvation: Whoever thou art that only looks to the
world, and flesh, and outward things, thou dwell in wrath and destruction.
Thou have vexation here, and the Gospel makes thee mad; for it pulls thee from
these things, and with the more power it comes forth, the more hell works
within thee. Now begin to learn what is salvation, it is to have power to deny
these lusts, to crucify the flesh, to be taken out of sensuality, to be
redeemed from among men: (Is this a strange thing to you? then salvation is
strange, and grace is strange.) It Is to be conformed to God, to know what his
good and acceptable will is: If grace and salvation be reckoned by us, to be
safe in sin, and safe in the world, and in the flesh, we are in the Devils
deceit, in the deceivableness of unrighteousness among them that perish. If you
will have this made out to you by Scripture (the Saints of God know this in
their hearts and souls, but will you have it in the Scripture?) His name shall
be called Jesus a Savior, Mat. 1. Why? because he shall save his people from
their sins, Here is salvation, to be saved from sin: What is sin? It Is
opposition unto God* breaking his Laws; to be saved from falling out with God,
this is salvation: And to be saved from sin is to be saved from wrath; there is
wrath and hell in sin, though it be not yet come forth* but it will come forth.
When sin has conceived, it brings forth death; if you have a Savior he saves
you from your sins. Another place is Acts 3. 26. God sent Christ to bless us,
to turn every one of us from our iniquities: You look upon your selves as
blessed by Christ; if you be blessed, this is the blessing, Turning you from
your iniquities, enabling you to deny ungodlines, and worldly lusts. You may
add a third place, Acts 5. 31. Whom God has made a Prince and a Savior (he
speaks of Christ there) to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.
You like forgiveness of sins well; how like you Repentance? where God gives one
he gives the other: where Christ is our Righteousness he is our Sanctification,
where he is both these, he is our wisdom, he gives us a new mind, and a new
heart, writes his Law in our minds; this is life, this is salvation: here is
grace and salvation, teaching us to deny ungodliness; it is a work supernatural
as to old Adam, the corrupt Man; it is only in those that spring from the
Spiritual man Jesus Christ, they rise up in a new life and walk in it; if ye
walk in the spirit, fulfill not the lusts of the flesh: It Is the Divine Nature
springing up in us that does not live the life of the flesh; if a man has no
life but in the flesh, that which is indeed salvation and grace, is destruction
and wrath to him.

Teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, etc.

What is this denying ungodliness and worldly lusts? It Is that which is called
in other Scriptures self-denying; we have a self that is nothing but
ungodliness. If we be Saints indeed, we have two selves, a divine self, a
spiritual and heavenly self, the new Creature, the Heavenly man, the Divine
Nature; and there is a carnal self, an earthly self, a self that is sin, in
which dwells nothing that is good. There is another self contra-distinct to
sin, it is not I, but sin in me: there is a self that is Christ, and a self that
is corrupt Adam; I do not live (I of corrupt Adam) but Christ lives in me. Here
is one self never to be denied; one self that is godliness, heavenly lust and
heavenly desire makes after God only; this self is to be pleased; happy is he
that pleases this self, and knows this self. But there is carnal self, the Law
of the Members, this is ungodliness, this carries wholly from God to the World;
wholly to that which is not of the Father; this is to be denied. And this is
beating down the body, that the Apostle speaks of, I beat down my body: What Is
that? is it as the Papists do, to whip themselves, to pine their bodies? no,
there is a body of death, a body of sin, this corruption in me, this self I
beat down: there is the old man, that is to be destroyed: The grace of God that
brings Salvation, teaches us to deny this self, this ungodly self, this
worldly self, this self that is of the Devil.

And it is by bringing forth another self, that this self is denied, if it be
truly denied: for there is self denying self, sin denying sin, lust denying
lust; a master lust that starves other lusts: this is not the denying that the
grace of God teaches. There is a lust that is kept in with bit and bridle,
like a horse and mule; there is denying ungodliness by the power of the Law,
but here it is grace that teaches us to deny ungodliness, grace that brings
salvation. Corrupt self, denies it self but in some things; the Law enables us
to deny our selves but in some things, some ungodliness: and indeed it is not
the denying of ungodliness; the denying ungodliness only by a carnal man, it is
ungodliness. It Is the new man that is brought forth in true righteousness and
holiness. There is nothing but a show of righteousness and holiness till this
new man be brought forth after the Image of God. The Law it teaches us to deny
this piece of ungodliness, or to seem to deny it at least; to deny the gross
act of it, but to deny it in the root of it, it can never do it. But the grace
of God teaches us to deny all ungodliness, to come out of all that is not of
God, all that is not like God. This life of God it purges out all filth; He
that has this hope purifies himself, as he is pure; this life it rises out of
its vail, and grave, and covering of worldly lusts, yea it rises from under
the Law. This grace of God appearing is the time appointed of the Father, when
we shall be no more under Tutors and Governors, in the condition of Servants,
but Sons, Heirs, and Freeborn.

SERMON II.
TITUS 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to
all men, teaching us, etc.


TEaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts. Denying implies
soliciting: ungodliness and worldly lusts will be soliciting, even in those to
whom the grace of God, that brings salvation has appeared. After grace has
effectually appeared, there will be solicitations, temptations and motions to
sin, ungodliness and worldly lusts, soliciting and tempting to return again
unto them, but the grace of God that brings salvation teaches us to deny them.
There is sin in our Members still, there is soliciting, and there is very far
prevailing: The grace of God that brings salvation, sprouting forth, is often
struck back into a seed, into the root again. There may be a bewitching of the
Spiritual man, as the Apostle writes to the Galatians, O foolish Galatians, who
has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? There is many a blast
that comes upon the Oaks and the tall Trees, and there may be withering in the
branches, while the substance, the holy seed abides in the root. There are
solicitations of death, after grace and Salvation has appeared; and sometimes
exceeding violent; In so much that Paul cries out, I am carried captive! O
miserable man! Who shall deliver me? Romans 7. The reason of this is, because
ungodlines and worldly lusts are not quite destroyed at once; But the work is
carried on by degrees; Christ he is formed in us, but he comes forth as a
child, and weak at first. The Lord he comes and takes possession, sits in the
throne, and throws Satan and sin down; but then they are striving to recover
themselves again, to come into their command and rule again; The flesh lusts
against the Spirit, says the Apostle, Gal. 5. So that you cannot do the things
that you would: Every thing would live, flesh would live; When God comes to
destroy it, it strives and strugles as long as it can.

God will keep his people in exercise, through weakness he will bring them into
strength, and so his strength shall be perfected. And through many foiles, and
many times being overcome, he will bring them at last into a complete and
glorious victory: They shall try all the Powers of Hell and Satan, and so see
That greater is he that is in them, then he that is in the World; they shall
see themselves (though often foiled) more then Conquerors through him that
loves them; They shall not go forth in haste, as the Lord promises in bringing
his People out of Babylon, and is made true in their bringing forth out of
Spiritual Babylon; they shall not sneak out, or steal out, but shall go forth
at last as Conquerors, and the more foyles they have had, the oftener overcome,
the more glorious will be their conquest; Therefore fight the good fight of
Faith; O ye men of God, fight the good fight of Faith; You that are quickened
with Christ and raised up to fear God, be not discouraged at those motions that
you find in you, endeavoring to hale and draw you back to ungodliness and
worldly lusts again, though they should come with violencc to draw you to that
Prison and darkness again; And you may wonder a while, and say, Why am I thus?
as Rebeccah did when twins were in her womb. For it is the same case here, the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; As you grow
up into the light and knowledge of God, you will be above fears in this matter;
'twill not at all move you, discourage you, or dis-hearten you. We do not feel
death but as life comes in; So long as thou stand'st thy ground, and wilt not
comply, though thou dealest with an enemy, and there be force upon thee; Yet
there is no cause why thou should be discouraged.

Here is ungodliness, and here are worldly lusts, but here is grace to deny
them; Here is the flesh that lusts against the Spirit, but here is the Spirit
also that lusts against the flesh.

When Moses comes, the burdens of the Israelites are doubled; So when the
Spirit comes, when righteousness comes, when wisdom and Sanctification comes,
there is a fuller discovery, and more busling of Satan and Hell then ever was
before: Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts. They have their motions, they do
solicit, where the grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared; But
resist them, Whom resist ye steadfast in the Faith, etc.

Teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts.

Quest. What is ungodliness that grace teaches us to deny?

Sol. Ungodliness is whatever is not of God, whatever is not of the Father, the
lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life: This is not of
the Father, this is ungodliness; Godliness is likness unto God; it is bringing
forth the Divine nature in us, By precious promises (says Peter) he has made
us partakers of the Divine nature. The new man grows up in this sunshine; the
Spiritual, the Heavenly man, made after the Image of God in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 21. God calls us to be holy, as he himself is holy, this
is godliness. God has predestined us to be conformable to the Image of his
Son; He has given him to us an example that we should follow his steps. Christ
is the express Image of his fathers person; And the design of the Gospel is to
bring forth Christ in us, My little children of whom I travail in birth till
Christ be formed in you; This is godliness, to bring forth Christ in us, God in
us. We shall be like him, says John, 1 John 3. at the beginning; We shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is: The grace of God that brings
Salvation, brings us to be acquainted with God. It is the revealing of God in
us. It is Gods manifesting himself to us with open face, So that we are changed
into his Image from glory to glory by the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3. 18. It is Gods
becoming our wisdom, and righteousness, and Sanctification, and redemption. 1
Cor. 1. ult.

But observe the manner of the Scriptures speaking in this particular. To be
led by the Spirit of God; So are his Sons. Romans 8. To have our works wrought in
God, John 3. He comes to the light, that his works may be manifested, that they
are wrought in God: to cease from our own works as God did from his, Heb. 4.
Christ brought forth in us; he speaks not of himself, he works not of himself;
the Father speaks, and the Father does the works, Joh. 1. 4. 10. Godliness is
Godlikeness, and when once we are taught Godliness, we are taught not to walk
as men, as the Apostle has it to the Corinthians, Ye are carnal (says he) and
walk as men; We walk in another light, in another wisdom, in another power, in
another life, when once we are taught Godliness: Christ died for us, the just
for the unjust, to bring us unto God: as Peter has it, The grace of God
teaches us to deny ungodliness, carries us into the life of God, into the
power of God, into the light of the God, into glory of God, into the Kingdom of
God; Does not the Scripture say as much?

It were grace and Salvation to restore us unto that perfect Image in which
Adam was brought forth in flesh: But God has more grace for us, and greater
Salvation, even to bring forth his own life in us, to make us Children of the
Resurrection. The life of Adam, as it was in innocence, it was a glorious life,
but it was weak and fading, as we see; But this life is a life that can never
fade, it is strong, it is everlasting, ' it is an inheritance immortal, undefiled,
that fades not away: that sin and death can never conquer. ( Christ rising
from the dead he dies no more.) It Is the life of God the Scripture speaks of, I
in them and they in me, that they may be perfect in one. Because I live you
shall live also. It Is not the Image of the earthly man, but the Image of the
Heavenly man, that the grace of God restores us to. We come short of the Gospel
if we sit down and rest our selves in the righteousness of man, it is the
righteousnesness of God, which is the mark that is set before us; he has
called us into his own Kingdom and glory; The grace of God brings us into the
Spirit, and now our way is above all the righteousness of man, above all the
wisdom of man, above all the contentments of the flesh.

Ungodliness and Worldly lusts. Here take notice of this, that ungodliness
lies in worldly lusts; Godliness is being like unto God; Ungodliness is
fashioning our selves to the World.

Ungodliness and worldly lusts are one; So far as we are in worldly lusts, we
are in ungodliness; You cannot serve God and Mammon. The Apostle calls the love
of Money the root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6. 10. Money stands for any thing of this
World, of this life; the love of that, the lust after that is the root of all
evil. The same that James tell us, Jam. 4. 4. The friendship of the world is
enmity unto God; and those that love the World, and go after the things
thereof, he calls Adulterers and adulteresses; Love not the world nor the
things of the world, says John, For if ye love the World, the love of the
Father is not in you, 1 John 2. 15. The Lord complains Jer. 2. 13. My people
have committed two great evils, for which be astonished you Heavens, and
horribly afraid; And what are those two great evils? They have forsaken me the
fountain of living water, and have hewn unto themselves broken Cisterns that
will hold no water. They run from the Creator to the Creature; They have turned
the glory of the invisible God into an Image made like to corruptible man, and
to birds and four-footed beasts: They have set up the creature in my place, and
made it their fear and their joy, and their delight, and their love; And so the
Apostle in Phil. 3. Speaks of those, Whose God is their belly, whose glory is
their shame, who mind earthly things. They that mind earthly things are
ungodly, in the Scripture sense. God that made Heaven and Earth is not their
God, but the things that are made; Their belly is their God: all they seek is
for their belly, who craves it of them.

All ungodliness lies in worldly lusts; Fashioning our selves unto the World,
is the defacing of the Image of God; It is a turning away from the good and
holy and acceptable will of God, as it is in Romans 12.

And the ground of this is plain and obvious to every one that will see it;
Whither can a man go forth from God, unless it be to the creature? there is the
Creator and the Creature* he that goes from God, must go to the creature;
Whither can he go else? Ye have forsaken me, and dug to your selves broken
Cisterns. There is no going from God and godliness but to worldly lusts. There
is no stirring anywhere else; All ungodliness lies in worldly lusts, worldly
desires, going out to the Creature. All going forth to these, is going forth to
the Devil, who is the Prince of this World, as Christ calls him. The Prince of
this World comes, says Christ; All that sue to the World sue to him, worship
him. The Devil is served in every desire that goes forth from God; In all
opposition to God the Devll is set up. We use to reckon of three enemies to
God, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil; The going out to the World is for the
flesh; the serving the flesh and the World, is serving the Devil. What is
offered in sacrifice to Idols, is sacrificed to Devils; and the Apostle calling
us to the mortifying of fleshly and worldly lusts, mentions Covetousness among
them, which he calls Idolatry, and Covetousness which is Idolatry* Ungodliness
lies in worldly lusts; that is, in loving the world and desiring the things of
the World; Love not the World, nor the things of the World.

Quest. But you will say, Is every desire of any worldly thing ungodly?

Answ. If you will hear the Scripture, and let that be judge, harken while I
propound some Scriptures unto you, which shall show you what lusts they are;
What desires after the World they are in which ungodliness lies: Consider that
in Heb. 13. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. Desiring any thing more then you have, is covetousness and worldly lusts,
and is a denying of Godliness. If you be not content with that you have, you
are covetous, and there is ungodliness. God is rich in himself, content in
himself, full in himself, and if you partake of the Divine nature, you shall
have riches and fullness in him. I am God Alsufficient says he to Abraham, I am
thy exceeding great reward; walk before me and be perfect; q. d. thou have
nothing to do, but to approve thy self to me: whatever thou want, here it
is. I am God alsufficient; Looking after any thing but me is looking from me,
and is ungodliness. Again, consider that Scripture in Mat. 5. Take no thought
what you shall eat, or what you shall drink, or what you shall put on; after
these things do the Gentiles seek; All this is ungodliness, it is ungodliness to
take thought what you shall eat, what you shall drink, or what you shall put
on. Now what is godliness? Seek first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof Here you shall have supply: So far forth as you look from God, his
Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, you are of the world, you are ungodly,
it is your little Faith! O ye of little faith, why do ye take care? Seek nothing
but the Kingdom of God; if there be any thing else, it shall come into you with
it; It Is godliness to seek God, it is failing of godliness when you seek any
thing else but God, when you turn to any broken Cistern whatsoever, when you
see not God before you, there turn away, or else you turn from God. Love the
Lord your God withal your heart withal your Soul, with all your strength. Let
nothing of the world have any place in you; Let God fill your hearts; his train
filled the Temple. What concord is there between Christ and Belial, between God
and Mammon? I have learned to abound and to want, to be full and to be hungry.
Phil. 4. In every state I am instructed, I know what to do, and I am content;
godliness is contentment, and that is Great gain. We have content in God, and
nowhere else; If we seek anywhere else, we seek trouble and vexation and
disappointment; Man does not live by bread, but by every word of God. What a
foolish thing it is for man to seek life frombread! let him seek God, everyword
of God. So Christ put off the Devil, when he bid him of stones to make bread;
he tells him man could not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Consider that Scripture, man's life does not consist in the aabundance of those
things he possesses; or that Scripture, All things are lawful, but I will not
be brought under the power of any thing; I Will be under the power of none but
God, I want none but God, I Will seek to none but God. Consider that of the
Apostle in 1 Cor. 7. Let them that are married be as if they were not married;
and they that use the world, as if they used it not; All going forth to the
creature, to the world, to any piece of it, it is ungodliness, it is going from
God. If you cannot be content with God alone, it is ungodliness: You deny his
alsufficiency, it is little Faith: this is want of godliness; Your Father knows
what you have need of: you have nothing to do but to please your Father, he
will supply these things; Seek his kingdom, these things shall be sent into you.

So, All going forth unto any part of this Creation, is ungodliness, it is
going from God. Here is the root of all ungodliness discovered, going from God
to the creature. You will be rich, and you must have this, and you must have
that: there is but one thing necessary, and if you think any thing else
necessary, it is denial of God, it is ungodliness.

You will say this is a hard saying, and who can bear it.

When Christ had told his disciples that it was easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, who then can be saved? say they: Surely not one that trusts in riches,
for that is a denying of God. Who shall be saved then? who is there shall take
off his desire from every creature, that shall take off his heart, and make it
over wholly unto the Lord, that shall desire nothing but the Lord, and say, I
have none in Heaven but thee, nor in earth but thee? mark what Christ answers
there, to men this is impossible: but with God all things are possible. That
which is called for of us is impossible to man; but to God all things are
possible, even this is possible.

The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus will free us from the Law of sin
and death; God calls us to that which is above man's strength to yield to: His
belly cleaves to the ground, and dust is his meat, being beguiled by the
Serpent* and his looking toward God is merely Hypocritical; But God brings
forth Christ in him, raises up that substance, that holy seed, and that seeks
him alone. Unless you be born again* you cannot see the Kingdom of God. So that
it is impossible to please God, except you know a better Righteousness then
man's Righteousness, Unless your righteousness exceeed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Man will not
see the extent of sin, because he will not see his own condemnation in it; but
that man that is of God, he sees that the power of God is his, and the holiness
of God is his; And he has a nature that shall rise up out of the creature, and
throw off all its dust and earth that is upon it, and cleave perfectly to God.

And he delights in the greatness of the commands that God gives. Look how
great the command is, so great is his inheritance; there is nothing God
commands but what he has promised; His Law he writes in the heart; Whatever
God commands, he gives; the higher God commands* the Spiritual Man likes them
the better. God will work all this in me, to this shall I rise in and through
God. Christ in me is able to do this. It is God works in me to will and to do
of his own good pleasure; I Will work out my Salvation: Man dealing with the
Scripture is lessening sin as much as may be, by saying this is not sin, and
that is not sin; May not I do this, and may I not do that? may I not take care
how I shall live? And then he comes to his distinctions of a tormenting care,
and a necessary care: there must be a providence. This is true providence, to
seek God; You are to know your Father, to please him, and to deal in outward
things as he leads you, and no farther. If you want, it shall be good for you:
he will teach you to want, and to abound, to be hungry, and to be full;
Godliness is beyond man's reach* and he cannot comprehend it, it is beyond what he
can attain unto by nature: and if you will have a right scantling of sin, look
upon it as the Apostle sets it out, All have sinned and come short of the glory
of God, All falling short of the glory of God is sin; We shall be brought in
Christ into the glory of God, and then we shall be brought quite out of sin.

Use. For the Applying of this: Let this direct us in our account of sin and of
ungodliness. Let us reckon according unto this rule, all worldly lusts, all
going forth from God to the world, is ungodliness. Where is the godly man?
There is no flesh can stand before God. There is the man that is born of God,
though he lies in flesh, he will come forth, and will be able to stand before
God, when fearfulness surpriseth the Hypocrite. There is the new man that is
created in true holiness shall stand. There is an Hypocritical holiness, an
Hypocritical godliness that runs to the world, and runs to the flesh; making
their belly their God, they mind earthly things, and yet they hold forth
themselves high in godliness: But the Scripture holds forth all going forth to
the creature, but in the Lord, to be ungodliness. It must needs be ungodliness
to go out from God; and it must needs be a denying God and his allsufficiency,
to go out to anything but him; Therefore let this teach us to mend our account,
and to correct our reckoning in matter of sin, and matter of ungodliness. If we
be free from Cheats, and Robberies, and gross defraudings, we lick our selves
whole, we wipe our mouth, we are of the godly party; so long as thou do well
for thy self, men will speak well of thee: when as there is raking after the
world, scraping riches and wealth together, and we are ready to die for this
thing and the other thing, adding house to house, and land to land; I know not
how to live without this; Thus hell and the grave in us will never be
satisfied, always craving. And this is wisdom, Prudence, Providence; This is to
be a wise man in the account of men; Men cry up this. But do thou acknowledge
the Scripture, then consider how that censures it. Why do you take care? Why do
you look after any thing but God? is not he alsufficient? does he not know what
you need? have you any thing to do but to look after his Kingdom? Cannot you
trust him, O ye of little Faith? is unbelieving godliness with you? is not
denying God ungodliness? Therefore, Lets look into our own hearts, and learn
what to count ungodliness.

Sin lurks and is loath to be discovered: the discovery of it is the death of
it; and if we be nothing but sin, then it is our death; How many be there whose
life is death, and their Covenant and agreement with Hell is all their
stability? And when we come to think of ungodliness, wickedness, departing from
God, one man propounds this to himself, another that; to be a profane swearer,
this is a course of ungodliness; to be a beastly drunkard, this is ungodliness;
to be a filthy unclean person, this is ugodliness. It Is true, all this is
ungodliness, this is base, this is filthy; but is here all? No all worldly
lusts, all going out in desire after any piece of this Creation, is
ungodliness. There is a Civil ungodliness, that is modest and handsome unto the
world, and that is it they call providence and prudence, which is nothing else
but base distrust and denying God: it is nothing but Idolatry, as the Apostle
calls it, nothing but adultery: Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not
that the friendship of the world is enmity to God? and then there is base and
deboist ungodliness that breaks out in drunkness and whoredom, and fraud, and
rapine, and theft: Nothing but the breaking forth into scabbs and boiles, and
blanes, and botches; But there is that poison within, which we see not: There
is the Itch as well as the Scab, and Boil; Itching after the world, and the
things thereof is ungodliness. After the worlds account only, what is hurtful
to the society of men is reputed ungodliness; what sinks men in their peace, in
their wealth, in their estate, in their credit: So the world looks upon sin as
to such and such evil fruits as are hurtful to this present state of flesh: It
does not look to the offense of God, to the going out from God, to the leaving
God; It does not know the life of God, it knows only sin as it is any way
prejudicial to the life of sense: It does not know sin in the root of it: Let
us learn so to know sin, even in the root of it, and that is worldly lusts:
hence it proceeds.

This is ungodliness, leaving the Creator and settling our selves in the
creature: and setting up the creature in the place of God.

How many be there, that are condemning uncivil courses (as they are to be
condemned) but condemning them so as they justify themselves, as the Pharisee
does? God, I thank thee, I am not thus and thus, I am not like this Publican,
this harlot, this drunkard. Look into thy heart what thou art before God: Make
inquisition after worldly lusts there, the root of all ungodliness, the root of
that thou condemnest in the Publican, in the Harlot, in the Drunkard. This love
of the World and turning from God to the world, this breaks out in him; look
how it works in thee: Perhaps thou art more civil, more modest, thou carriest
thy self so that thou art not so unmanly. (For there are worldly lusts that do
unman a man, and make him like a beast, and there are worldly lusts that are
very glorious things with men.) But thy heart and inside are as bad as this,
and as great an abhorring in the sight of God. God has chosen to himself the
man that is godly. The Godly man is he that cleaves to God, rests in God,
trusts God, believes in God, that has all in God: This is godliness: let us
receive this truth which is acccording unto godliness.

SERMON III.
TITUS 2. 11, 12. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared
to all men:

Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed
hope, etc.


THe last thing we spoke to was from the consideration that ungodliness and
worldly lusts, are joined together; whence it was observed that all ungodliness
lies in worldly lusts; Ungodliness is going from God, and going to the
creature: the friendship of the World is enmity to God, is Adultery, Idolatry:
the Devil is the God of this World: going out after these things is going out
after sin and ungodliness. Lying thus, it is impossible for a man, for a son, a
mere son of Adam, to escape ungodliness; only he that is born of God, only
Christ that came from heaven, and we through him do it.

Now as grace teaches what us to avoid and shun, what to go from; so it teaches
us what to make to. We should live soberly, godlily, and righteously in this
present World; to these words now.

Here is the lesson that grace teaches us, that brings Salvation; To live
soberly, righteously, and godlily; here is the place and time when it teaches
us this lesson; where? in this present world. It teaches us to live, soberly,
righteously and godlily. There is no sober man, that is not a righteous and a
godly man. There is no righteous man that is not a sober and a godly man. It
teaches us to live soberly, righteously and godlily. And there is no sober man
but he whom the grace of God that brings Salvation, has taught to be sober;
and there is no righteous man, but he whom the grace of God that brings
Salvation, has taught to be so. And there is no godly man, but he whom the
grace of God that brings Salvation, has taught to be so; Now a little to
Dilate upon these three.

1. That the sober man is only he whom the grace of God that brings Salvation,
has taught to be so; We know not how to live soberly, till the grace of God
that brought Salvation has taught us. What is sobriety? what is it to live
soberly? Sobriety is opposed to two things; to Madness, and to Drunkenness;
Madness is Drunkenness, and Drunkenness is Madness; There Is Drunkenness by
drink, by Wine: and Drunkenness by passion and pride: there is drunkenness by
cares of the world, and drunkenness by heaviness; There Is fury, and wrath, and
there is joy too in making over much; and sometimes this same drunkenness by
fury, and wrath, and by joy, do usher the grace of God that brings Salvation.
The grace of God, it must bring us into sobriety through distempers;
discovering our weakness, and our distempers together with the curing of them.
This same Drunkenness that is opposite to sobriety, (take it in the lump all
together) it is our state in the flesh with the Devil: We come out of the life
of God into the flesh: come into the dark, into a distempered state: It is a
bewitching drunkenness that is upon us: There is a pure state of flesh that is
not without distemper in comparison to the life of God: There is a corrupt
state of flesh that is pure distemper: Our true life (if we be of God,) is the
life of God, and the glory of God; and all that comes short of the glory of God
is distemper: All have sinned and come short of the glory of God. And so
Madness has seized upon all, and all are under distemper, till the grace of
God that brings Salvation appears, which returns the life of God in you,
revives us according to the Divine nature. It is the grace of God that brings
Salvation, that only cures us of distemper, and makes us perfect men in Jesus
Christ: It is Jesus Christ is the only perfect and sound man, the wisdom of
God: and we are sound when he is formed in our hearts, brought forth and raised
up in us: The Apostle attributes this sound mind to the grace of God: God has
not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, but of God and of a sound mind,
The Spirit of Jesus Christ is a spirit of a sound mind: While we have not the
spirit, we are under a cloud, we are in a distemper, and in weakness, even in
the purest state of flesh: God finds weakness and folly in his Angels, he has
not put trust in them: There is no sound and perfect state but the state of
God: all that are born of God are born into that state, and he is their wisdom:
Jesus Christ the wisdom of God, and is made so to us of God.

Of the Prodigal it is said, when he came to himself he remembered his fathers
house: Paul says that he was mad against the Church, 1 Timothy I was exceedingly
mad: how came he changed? the grace of God was exceeding abundant toward him
which is in Christ Jesus: This revived his soul. The grace of God that brings
Salvation, teaches us to live soberly. It makes us sober indeed, it makes us
mad in appearance. Paul says he was mad before the grace of God appeared:
Festus told him he was mad after the grace of God had appeared; There is a
seeming madness, and a seeming sobriety; Sobriety is madness unto mad people;
Man's sobriety is madness unto God, and Gods wisdom is folly and madness unto
men. The spirit of God coming upon the Disciples, there is a multitude that cry
these men are full of new Wine, they are drunk; they spoke truer then they were
aware of; 'Twas new Wine indeed they had drank, but such wine as they knew not
of; and that which they looked upon as Drunkenness was true sobriety, and they
but then came into their wits, to a sound mind; There was a Spirit of Power and
Glory then came upon them, and the Spirit of fear it was vanishing away; When
Christ began to manifest himself, his kindred said he was mad; They went forth
to lay hands on him, and said he was mad. As the grace of God does appear in us
and to us, it makes us signs and wonders in Israel: It is from the Lord of
hosts: It takes us off from following our own reason, and it leads us in a way
that men do not walk in; The way of the Spirit, is not the way of men; it
transforms us out of the World, and changes us by the renewing of our mind. The
mad world thinks us mad when we begin to be sober; There Is Gods wisdom and man's
wisdom: man's wisdom is foolishness to God, and Gods wisdom is foolishness to
man; Solomon says of man, that folly and madness is in his heart; till the
wisdom of God come in, there is nothing else: and he that is in the height of
madness, his madness is not seen to himself; madness is continually there; here
is madness that he stumbles at God. There is no such madness as is discovered
by the wise and prudent man, when he discourses in matters of Religion. There
was not such a mad and frantic man, to throw fire and arrows of death, as
Paul, when only humane learning led him in the practice of Religion. The
madness of men appears in calling evil good, and good evil, in running after
shadows and leaving the substance, in walking against the very light of their
consciences to run into the world, when they know the world is but a vain
shadow; in tempting God, when they know he is stronger then they; The grace of
God makes a man sober: And there is this ground for it.

Reas. Because God is the only wise God; To the only wise God: If God be only
wise, then every man must be a fool: but man will be wise, says Job, though he
be born like a wild asses colt: and here he discovers greatest folly; Whosoever
yields God that title The only wise God, he does deny it to himself, unless it
be in Christ, unless it be by grace: if the grace of God has entered, it
teaches us to live soberly; God has let Satan enter upon this Creation, that
mad Spirit that carries us to destruction, setting up himself in it, and
striving with God, though he shall never prevail: as God breaks in and throws
out Satan, wisdom comes, and madness goes: and therefore every one that looks
upon himself as sober, and would be counted so, let him consider whence this
sobriety comes; has the grace of God appeared that brings Salvation? Is it
from God? or from man? There is not such a mad man as a worldly wise man
dealing in Religion. The foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness
of God is stronger then men: and the wisdom and excellency of men is
foolishness to God; He takes the wise in their craftiness: their light is
nothing but darkness: whosoever they be that have not the madness of man and
flesh discovered to them, do not yet know sobriety; All that the world calls
sobriety and wisdom, it will appear but madness in the day of the Lord; The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God: what folly is this? what do you get by
enmity to God? Flesh is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be;
If you be truly wise and sober, it is by the grace of God appearing, that has
brought Salvation; And whosoever is indeed made wise and sober, by this grace
of God appearing, he must look to be accounted mad and foolish: True sobriety
must needs be accounted madness of those that have it not; I and the sons whom
thou have given me are for signs: A man instructed by God, by a strong hand,
Noah was looked on for a mad man, and condemned by the world: and he that is
made sober by God, he knows what the sobriety of the world is; the world does
not know what his sobriety is: and he can carry himself boldly before the world
in that it counts madness and folly, knowing that it will justify it self, and
bring confusion on all their wisdom; That Is the first, The grace of God that
brings Salvation appearing, is that only that teaches sobriety.

Secondly, The grace of God that brings Salvation, appearing, is that only that
teaches true Righteousness: It teaches us to live soberly and righteously; Till
the grace of God that brings Salvation appears, we do not know true
righteousness: all the righteousness that we practice before, is but the show
of righteousness: Till the new man be brought forth, there is no true holiness,
but he is created after the Image of God in righteousness and true holiness,
Ephesians. 4. 24. Paul was a wise man and a righteous man in his own opinion, and
the opinion of the great and learned professors of his time: but when the grace
of God appeared to him, he saw he was a mad man, and a wicked man: he saw he
was a blasphemer and a persecutor: and he throws away all, he accounts it as
dung: I accounted all dung for Christ, that I might be found in him, not having
my own righteousness that is by the Law, but the righteousness of God in
Christ; the righteousness which is by faith, the Lord our righteousness, the
righteousness of God; When that righteousness comes forth, all our
righteousness that is by the Law, appears as an unclean thing, as a menstruous
cloth, in Isa. 64. all our righteousness is as menstruous cloths. There Is no
true righteousness, but what the grace of God bringing Salvation must help us
to: There is no man righteous before God: in his sight shall no flesh living be
justified; There Is none justified but Christ, none blessed but Christ. If
Abraham were justified by works, he had whereof to glory, but not before God;
There Is no glorying of man in his own righteousness: No flesh shall glory in
his presence; only he that is of God, to whom Jesus Christ is made wisdom and
righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, he can glory in the Lord; I
know that in me (says Paul) that is in my flesh, dwells nothing that is good.
It is in vain for God to be our righteousness, if the righteousness of man
would serve the turn: where any man stands up in his own righteousness, Christ
has nothing to do with him; The whole have no need of the Physician, but the
sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: In all man's
righteousness, there is nothing but man, there is nothing but self: the things of
man end in man, it comes to nothing, it reaches not to God. There is nothing
reaches to God, but that that comes from god. The righteousness of man how
glorious a show soever it makes, is only in worldly and earthly designs. That Is
evil with him, that does any way oppose him in his peace, in his quiet, in his
rest in the flesh; The righteousness of man, let it come to the highest, it is
but passive, and it is very fickle and inconstant; It is a proud righteousness
that makes a man swell against God; As there is no wisdom but God, so there is
no righteousness but God; he is the only wise, he is the only holy God, and he
is the only righteous God. The grace of God appearing bringing Salvation, that
teaches us to live righteously; and so Salvation is not for righteousness, but
Salvation is righteousness, and righteousness is Salvation. And every one that
pretends to righteousness, should look whether he has seen that righteousness
of God, or whether he has met with the discovery of his own righteousness, of
the righteousness of man, the deceivableness of unrighteousness. Till the true
and perfect righteousness comes in, there is no discovery of the deceivableness
of unrighteousness; Iniquity walks in a Mystery; and till the Mystery of God
be opened, the Mystery of iniquity does not appear. There is a golden cup of
Fornication the Whore carries in her hand. It is not enough to be delivered
from that which man calls evil, but from that also man calls righteousness.
There is as great abomination in that man calls and counts righteousness, as
there is in any thing he counts evil; there is that makes man a fair show, and
is glorious to men, which is abomination in the sight of God; The Jews followed
after righteousness, but obtained it not, because they sought it as it were by
the works of the Law; We by the Spirit, says the Apostle, wait for the hope of
righteousness by Faith: You that look for righteousness, look out for true
righteousness; Take heed of the deceivableness of unrighteousness; man will
call evil good, and good evil, call Satan Christ, and Christ Satan. If you look
for righteousness, look for the righteousness of the Spirit, look for the
righteousness of God; Men they call this and that righteousness, and look not
what is the will of God; righteousness is nothing but conformity unto God, and
to that will of God that is revealed within; Christ within, is guiding and
leading by the Spirit, and not only by a Letter; not that we should throw away
Letter: but what is Letter without the Spirit? A man watching in man's
righteousness, may make a very fair show to the eye, even dazel men's eyes; but
there is no righteousness before God, but the righteousness that is of God, the
righteousness that is of him. A man walking in his own righteousness, may be
very acceptable with men: but a man brought out of that into this, and walking
in the righteousness of the Spirit, is looked on as frantic and fantastical
with men: For when he walks in Gods righteousness, he does not walk by his own
will and reason, he does not act himself: the Lord must act him, and guide him;
And there is nothing so disfigures a man's face to the World, as being acted and
guided by the Spirit of God: the Spirit of God is wisdom it self, yet counted
folly with men: It leads us in many ways men call folly and madness; I and the
children whom thou have given me, are for signs and wonders from the Lord of
Hosts; Abraham could be counted no less then a mad man, and Noah no less then
an old doting fellow, to build a ship in the midst of the land, and be
knocking 120. years together: what do you think this man endured all that
while? The righteousness of God is conformity to God: this Christ is made unto
us: the grace of God that brings Salvation.

Thirdly, And he is made unto us godliness. There is no true Godliness, till
this grace of God comes that brings Salvation; There is a form of Godliness
before, but where is the power of it: when the grace of God comes bringing
Salvation, the power of it comes: godliness is like God: godliness is partaking
of the Divine nature, (as we showed you in the morning) godliness is being
guided by the Spirit of God. Godliness is working our works in God; godliness
is God speaking in us, and acting in us, and we ceasing from our own works;
There is no man knows godliness, but he that is born again of the Spirit, and
no man that knows godliness that walks only by the outward commandment and
Letter, and has it not also by the Spirit; There is a worldly sanctuary, and
there is a house not of that building. There is a Law of the Spirit of life
that is never without godliness; there is Redemption from all iniquity, as it
follows here in the text; Grace and Salvation is all, grace brings Salvation;
and it brings Salvation in bringing Sobriety, and Righteousness and Godliness:
it is grace that does all; and here is Salvation, Righteousness, Sobriety and
Godliness. There Is the life of man, and the life of beasts, and the life of
Devils: and there is the life of God, when the grace of God that brings
Salvation appears. And now for the time and place where this lesson is taught,
and where this Sobriety, and righteousness, and godliness is brought forth: in
this present World; a little of the time, and I have done; In this present
World; In this place, in this time; the World, the present World, the mad
World, the unrighteous World, the ungodly World, the World that lies in the
wicked one, in the power of the wicked one: in this time of darkness, and hour
of temptation, in this Kingdom of the World, and Kingdom of Satan; God he has
let Satan possess himself of this World, and of this Creation; and God is here
trampled upon, and oppressed by Satan and his Instruments, and he lies under
foot as madness and unrighteousness, as filthiness: and the Devil, and the
World, they stand up and boast of sobriety and godliness, they stand in the
power of the Creature: and the glory of God is shut up in his Servants;
Notwithstanding all this power and rage, he appears in his servants in this
present World. He teaches us to oppose, and confront, and adjudge the World,
and the wickedness of it: I have made thee a fenced City, and a wall of brass,
says God, against the princes of Judah; The grace of God enables a man where it
appears: he fears not faces, he fears not Hell: he sees him that is invisible;
Moses feared not Pharaoh. It sets us above all scorn and all reproaches in this
present World; We must needs be signs and wonders, signs to be spoken against;
we are contented to be so, we can bear it; The grace of God that brings
Salvation teaches us so: Persecution comes, and troubles come, we can take up
our Cross, and we can follow Christ. This sobriety which the grace of God
teaches, and this godliness and righteousness exceedingly enables a man to be
contented to be scornd and spit on: My life is not dear to me, says the
Apostle, that I may finish my course with joy, and the Ministry I have
received. Endure the afflictions of the World, says Paul to Timothy, by the
power of God; And when the grace of God has broken forth, and I have seen him
that is invisible, what is this World? when God has set it up only to make a
fool of it: God uses the Devil, and wicked men, and enemies to make fools of
them: and we see God standing behind: then what cause is there to fear, in this
present world, under their very nose, to their face, to their teeth? The grace
of God teaches us to live soberly, righteously and godlily: God out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings ordains strength: God suffers himself to be
brought into a very seed, by the Devil and the World, and thence he rises up:
and the lower he suffers himself to be brought, the more glorious is he in the
Conquest; The Kingdom of heaven comes to be like a grain of mustardseed: it is
a very little seed, and it is hid in the earth: a little leaven is hid in three
measures of meal, that nothing is seen, but the power of darkness, the Kingdom
of Satan, and sin: this little grain of mustardseed springs up: and though all
the power of the World rise against it, it prevails and is glorious. Here Is two
or three things I would but hint at by way of application.

Use 1. The grace of God teaches us to live soberly, righteously and godlily in
this World; First of all, this shows how much out they are that think to carry
Religion so that they will sleep in a whole skin; will carry it like a Talent
bound in a napkin. The grace of God teaches us to live soberly in this present
World; It Is as possible to carry fire about us and not to be burnt; If it be
true Religion, it will be burning; Is that Religion that lies under fleshly
lusts, and worldly lusts? From the Devil it came, and to him it must go, it
has his life in it; God is not in it; but one that is truly Religious, he may
for a time think of hiding and concealing himsel, as Nicodemus came to Jesus by
night: but where godliness is in truth, it will he like new wine, that will
vent or break the vessel; God has not given light to put under a bushel, but
to set on a candlestick.

2. Again, There are many professing Religion that excuse themselves, that the
times are evil, and therefore they cannot do this or that; If the grace of God
has taught thee, it shall teach thee in evil times to appear soberly and
righteously; There is a love grows cold as iniquity abounds: this is not the
love of God: that like fire grows hotter in the coldest weather; God had Saints
in Nero's house, he had them in Sodom, and they shined there, and appeared
there, and opposed this world, this present World.

3. And again, Some are putting off this day; This is for heaven, say they,
this is not for the present; It seems grace and Salvation is not come to such:
they that are not here in heaven, will never be in heaven; One Scripture that
may conclude us in this, is, No man ascended into heaven, but he that came down
from heaven; If ye are not in heaven while ye are in the world, you will never be
in heaven; The grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared; Heaven has
appeared to you, and heaven is in you, you are in heaven, and that same heaven
shall be interpreted into you, and an entrance shall be given more abundantly.
If you say, this is a hard Saying, to live soberly, righteously, and godlily:
to convince the world, to challenge the world, to dare the world, what a life
must we live? what suffering must we meet with? You are appointed thereunto:
God has given us another hope, a blessed hope, that is that follows, Looking
for that blessed hope, at the appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. The grace of God that brings Salvation, it will be a strong help to you
even in persecution; for the joy that is set before us, we shall bear up
against all the persecutions we meet with in the world, under all reproaches,
all burdens, under all scoffs and sufferings. The grace of God brings
Salvation. Let the world do what they can do: let hell do what it can do, I Will
be a sanctuary to them, says God: The grace of God teaches us to live soberly
and righteously in this present world, even in the midst of enemies: It lifts
up our heads even here before men, and enables us to judge the world, and
condemn the world, and so shall all do that are heirs of that righteousness
which is by faith: And thus much for this time.

FINIS.
The Authors last Testimony.
The brief heads of a Sermon Preached by Mr. Goad, at Mr. Wallis his Funeral at
Soper-lane, with which he finished his Testimony.
THe occasion of this meeting I need not to mention: We may make it an occasion
to speak and hear something, which may hold forth our life, and his life that
is dead; for he is but dead to the world; and that he was whilst he lived. It
is not amiss if we look at somewhat else then burying the dead, which is to
bury death. Let the dead bury the dead. If you be dead, and have not a seed of
life in you, I have nothing to say to you: Whilst we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord: Whilst our life is only in the body and in bodily
things, we are dead, and the seed of God lies buried in us. Now to quicken that
seed is the work of a true spiritual Ministry: Let us see if we can quicken
the dead: so says Peter, The Gospel was preached to those that were dead: and
Paul to the same purpose, you has he quickened who were dead in sins and
trespasses: Christ may lie dead amongst us, and the glory of the Father may
appear here to raise him up. That is our business (if we preach the Gospel) to
preach Christ who is the Resurrection and the Life. Where Christ is not in any,
as good preach to the Corpse that lies in the grave, as preach to them: If there
be any children of the Resurrection here, either manifested, or not manifested,
to them we speak; for the hour is coming, and now is that the dead shall hear
the voice of the son of God and live. Joh. 5. 25. Do we know no grave but such
as we have put a Corpse in? To be at home in the body is to be in a grave,
absent from the Lord who is our life. But to such as have life or a seed of
life in them, do I address my self, and therefore you may please to look upon
that Scripture.

ISAI. 25. 6, 7, 8. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hoasts make unto all
people a feast of fat things, a feast of Wine on the Lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wine on the Lees well refined.

And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the vail that is spread over all Nations.

He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears
from all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all
the earth: for the Lord has spoken it.

ANd in this mountain] The Lord is this mountain: that appears in the first
verse of the chapter, Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee.] A Mountain is a
thing exalted, and we exalt God when we bring him forth in power: He lies hid
in our weakness, we shall bring him forth in his power. You are dead, and your
life lies hid with Christ in God; when Christ who is our life shall appear,
then shall we appear with him in glory. When he lies no longer hid in our
weakness and darkness, but comes forth in his own life, righteousness, and
strength, then he is our Mountain: There is an expression to the same purpose,
Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my Rock, my Fortress, my Strength, my high Tower, etc.
There are many Mountains, many appearances of God in flesh; wheresoever God
appears in flesh, that is a Mountain: When he is pleased to withdraw, and give
way to the devil, then the whore comes and sits upon the seven Mountains; Not
that I exclude the common interpretation of the seven Hills, but take in this
with it. But though Satan has possessed all other Mountains, this he shall
never possess: this is like Mount-Sion that shall never be removed: Mount-Sion
indeed is but a shadow of this Mountain.

The woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. propounds a question to Christ, whether they
were to worship in the Samaritan Mountain, or at Mount-Sion; but she was
content to wait for the resolution till the Messiah come: Sion is the true
figure, but Christ that reveals the Father, is the true Mountain.

God speaks in figures and parables very much:

This Mountain.] That is it that all other Mountans are but Types and Figures
of. All this world is a Figure, and some special parts and pieces thereof are
more instituted figures, more eminently so: where God appears to his people,
that is a Mountain.

A Mountain is an exalted thing, a great thing, and strong thing; A Mountain
stands in a good Air: The Mountain of Spices; a Mountain gives a pleasant
prospect; these are the properties of Mountains. God will appear in his people
in his greatness, pleasantness, height, strength, eternity.

In this mountain shall the Lord make a Feast.] There is a Mountain that is not
to be touched, Heb. 12. But ye are come to the Mountain that may be touched: Ye
shall feast in this Mountain. The world shall see the Feast, not touch it.

The natural man knows no Mountain but what is visible, This Mountain is to
flesh invisible. Whilst the Saints do boast of God, and have outward helps to
lean upon, the world looks upon them as such as have some cause why they should
boast: but when their fleshly helps fail, the world jeers them. Now flee to the
mountain like a bird. The eleventh Psalm is an answer to the Worlds jeer. I
trust in the Lord; how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird to your mountain? When
outward props are removed from the Saints, Now (says the world) where is your
Mountain? Answ. Our Mountain (say they) stands firm: The Lord is in his Holy
Temple: The Lord is our Mountain. He is all in all to us: Whom (says David)
have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none in earth I desire but thee? The
Lord in his people, and the Lords people in him; this is their Mountain. The
Church is called a City on a hill or Mountain, which is founded in God. We are
not come to the mount that may not be touched.

The Lord is the Mountain and the feast too: The Lord the Mountain, and the
Lord the Feast. Nicodemus will say, how can this be? This is Nonsense. To them
that are without, we speak parables: To you (says Christ) it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom, but to others in parables, that seeing, they
might see, and not understand. There is a vail upon all faces: If this will not
go down easily with you, the Lord is the Mountain, and the Lord is the Feast;
consider, it comes but to this, to make the Lord all, all in all, and the world
a shadow of him, a vail upon him: it is no dishonor to the Lord, to make him
all: if it be a dishonor to the world to make it a shadow, to make it nothing,
let it be so: if you cannot bear the worlds dishonor, we must take that
boldness to give you offense.

The Mountain and the feast too: How so? There is bread and there is wine in
this feast; Christ, the true bread, Joh. 6. Christ the true vine, Joh. 15. But
will you have flesh too? Here is fat things, and marrow; My flesh (says
Christ) is meat indeed, and my bl^od is drink indeed. That is, my life, not
only my natural life, but my life which I had with the Father, slain and
buried, is meat indeed; the words that I speak are spirit and life (says
Christ) where spirit and life is not, this is not received.

What is this flesh and blood, but the divine nature dwelling in you? for a
while, as it were, dead and buried in flesh; afterward raised and quickened in
flesh; and you has he quickened: as it is, Ephesians. 2. 1. This discovery of our
true life, and this life brought forth in us, is the true meat, the true drink,
the true flesh, the true blood; and this same flesh and blood of Adam, is meat
and drink too: for that being slain, the grave is opened where the true life
lies.

Obj. You say, God is the feast, Christ is the feast, and that the Lod will [
make] the Feast: That the Lord shall make the feast, and that the Lord shall be
the feast, how can this be?

Sol. His manifestation, his bringing forth himself, is making the feast: his
Death and Resurrection brought forth in us, is making the Feast: then we feed
on his flesh, and on his blood, as the Scripture speaks. This is a feast, and
this feast has fatness and sweetness in it to a spiritual man; and the rich
man's table, and the delicacies are but crusts, and scraps, and parings to this
Feast. The Feast lies in Abraham's bosom, the common life of all Saints, one
with Abraham, gathered into the bosom of Abraham, the same life that Abraham
lived: He that eats of this bread, shall hunger no more; he that drinks of this
water, shall thirst no more: There is music and dancing in this feast also, as
we may see in the Prodigals entertainment upon his return to his fathers house;
but the elder brother did not understand it, Luke 15.

The Lord is this feast, and wheresoever the Lord is not, after a little while
there shall be nothing but hunger and thirst: where the Lord is not, there are
but dreams. The hungry man dreams that he eats and drinks, and when he awakes
his soul is empty, as it is in Isaiah. He that has not entertainment with the
Lord: He that dwells not in Abraham's bosom, shall hunger and thirst, and
languish, and fade away to nothing. Mark that Scripture in Isa. 65. 11, 12, 13.
Ye are they that forsake the Lord, and forget my holy mountain, that prepare a
table for that troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that number:
Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold my servant shall eat, but ye shall be
hungry; behold, my servant shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold my
servant shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: ye worship many Gods, ye shall
have many troubles.

The mountain is, and is not; the Feast is, and is not; it is set out, but not
fully; the hour comes and now is already; we are the Lords Feast, and he is
ours: everywhere but in the Lord, shall be hunger and thirst, dearth and
barrenness: he that can receive it, let him receive it.

There are that have devoted themselves to the Law, and the letter of
Scripture: there are others that have all their life in the creature: God will
shortly draw all life into himself: and all they that run after other Gods,
shall starve and famish; they and their Gods.

Obj. But you will say, There is something in the Text that seems to contradict
this; for it is not said, He shall make unto [all people] a feast.

Sol. To all people: that is, to all sorts of people.

In the spiritual Feast, there is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither male, nor
female, but all are one in Christ Jesus.

Here is a repetition of the provision in this Feast.

A Feast of fat things, a Feast of Wine on the Lees; of fat things full of
Marrow, of Wine on the Lees well refined: the Lord is a Feast, a continual
feast: when you have feasted never so well, ye shall find him to set forth
himself a better feast, a richer feast: for there is infinite variety in God:
the Lords death is the Feast, his Resurrection the life that comes by it.

It follows in the seventh verse.

And he will destroy in this Mountain the face of the covering, and the vail
that is spread over all Nations.

The Lord, in this Mountain, in his appearing, will destroy the face of the
covering. In the Mountain a Feast, in the Mountain the face of the covering
destroyed. The carnal Jew looks for the fullfilling of the letter: the
spiritual Jew looks for the spirit: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, sought a
Country; not an earthly one, but a heavenly: we pitch upon figures and vails:
and enter not within the vail. These outward things are a vail, a Table made a
snare: but when we are turned to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away. All
man's teaching, wisdom, etc. makes the veil the thicker: those that feed only
upon the vail, upon outward things, in which God appears, their life shall be
destroyed, when others are fed and feasted.

Here take notice of diverse particulars:

I shall only give you some hints, do you judge of them.

First of all this:

Observe. 1.
That all the Worlds feastings are with a vail, and their faces covered: The
spiritual man so far forth as he feasts, it is with open face, though yet but
as in a glass; 2 Cor. 3. whilst we have any joy, but in the Lord, it is in the
vail: We eat death in all our feasts, we swallow it down, but we do it not in
victory; that oppresses us oftentimes.

Observe. 2.
This outward appearance is the face of the covering* There is no man sees my
substance; but that face that he sees is the face of the covering: Cease from
man, and you cease from the face of the covering; and so it will follow, that
there is no judging by outward appearance: while you judge by outward
appearance, you do not judge righteous judgment.

Observe. 3.
When the Lord comes forth to feast, to feed, to refresh his people, he comes
forth even in that to destroy: He shall make a feast of fat things, and he
shall destroy, and all in the mountain: There is no feast without death; The
Saints salvation comes out of destruction: He kills and makes alive; By
terrible things will thou answer us, O God of our salvation: He that will lose
his life shall save it, and he that will save his life shall lose it: Christ is
perfected through sufferings: No man shall see God and live: Our God is a
consuming fire: out of the Cross of Christ comes our joy, whereby the world is
crucified unto us, and we unto the world: If this be a parable unto you, is it
not because you lie under the vail? because you are without? God chooses his
people in the fire of affliction.

Observe. 4.
Fourthly, observe, that the Lords sweetness and life lies now under a vail and
covering: that is the reason it is so little owned in the world: A feast, but
not seen; he that will see the Lord, he that will feed at this feast, must not
look at the things that are seen, but at things not seen, which lie within the
vail.

Obser. 5.
Again, Fifthly, take notice, that there is no destroying the vail, but by the
Lords coming forth; until the substance come forth, the shadows are substances:
No perfect destroying the vail, until the Lord be fully come forth: All the
Ministers in the world cannot do it.

Observe. 6.
Sixthly, Observe this, That all people have a vail, or a covering cast over
them, not one excepted: He will destroy the vail of the Covering cast upon All
people, spread upon All Nations: Though the Lord be not far from every one of
us, yet the Vail keeps us from seeing him: and whilst we lie under the vail, we
grope and feel after him: Till God destroy this vail, we have foolish fancies,
and false apprehensions of God: What wonder, seeing All nations are under the
vail! All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23. God
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways: They that remain under the
vail, judge their brethren that see further then themselves of Error and
Heresy; but they that have the vail destroyed by the Lord, will not be harsh
to their brethren that lie under the vail; although, whilst the vail and the
face of the Covering was spread upon them, they were so grossly ignorant, as to
cry out against others, Error, Heresy, Blaspemy!

Observe. 7.
Seventhly, Observe the twofold expression in the Text, The vail, and the face
of the covering: And it is not only [ Cast,] but [ Spred] also: There is
exactness in it.

Quest. If you demand what this vail is that the Lord will destroy.

I Answer, This Creation in its purity and perfection.

You will say, The Creation declares the glory of God, Psalm. 19. The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the earth shows forth his handy work.

Sol. True, but in a vail: Christ's flesh was a vail, Heb. 10. 20. This Creation
in its purity and perfection is a vail, but when Satan, the world, sin and
death have gotten root in it, then its a thick, a dark vail, or a shadow of
death: To those that sat in darkness, and the shadow of death, is this light
come: All Gods manifestations in it, are vails till he get above it, and cover
it, which he will do; He is sunk into it as a seed: as he rises up in it, it
is in a vail.

Quest. But how comes this vail? Who casts this vail?

Answ. 1. The Lord: He makes darkness and light; he makes vails and open
Manifestations.

2. Satan has cast and spread this vail.

3. We have every one of us cast it and spread it; and we are shrowding our
selves under it as God appears, and God is righteous and holy in it; and we and
Satan are in the same sin: We are all running into the vail, as much as we can:
But God will destroy the vail; and then every eye shall see him: Behold, he
comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him: He is not seen now, but he
shall be seen; his manifestation is life, and death: Life to those that are of
him, who feel themselves under the vail; death to those that rest and have
their life in the vail: There Is everlasting destruction from his presence; and
from the glory of his power: We are a sweet Savor of Christ, to God, in those
that perish: To some we are a savor of life, to others a savor of death: That
is the Ministry of the Spirit.

It follows in Verse 8. He will swallow up death in victory.

Observe. 1.
Destroy the vail; and destroy death: The taking away of the vail, is the
taking away of Death. Death is dead: Death upon a true account is nothing but a
vail upon God, who is our true life: We live, because he lives. You heard
before what this is, even all this Creation in its purity and perfection; but
much more a vail, a thicker and darker vail, when sin, and death, and devil are
gotten into it: The Scripture expression is elsewhere, The vail of the shadow
of death: Darkness and Death, Light and Life are the same; even Christ's flesh
was a vail, Ordinances are vails: No disparagement to Ordinances: If God appear
in them, it is well: Man's ministry is a vail; if we see God in it, it is but
darkly: If we be refreshed, it is but in part. This life and body is a vail,
while we are at home in it, till it be changed, and made spiritual: till we be
clothed upon with our true life which is from heaven: The Apostle says, While
we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: While we are absent
from the Lord, we are absent from our life, for our life is to be with him: We
are not perfectly quickened, perfectly alive, till we be clothed upon with our
life* which is from Heaven: Therefore take notice, that the pulling down of
this body, is not properly death to the Saints, but the destroying of death: He
will destroy the vail, and swallow up death in victory. So then that which we
call life, is not so indeed, but death: This body, this present appearance is
but the face of the covering; and the rending of it, is the swallowing up of
death. Let us mend our account if we can: We have judged things by the outward
appearance, by the face of the covering, by the vail; now let us judge
righteous judgment. The flesh judges that to be life which the Spirit knows
to be death: Our friend is not dead, but gone out of death into life.

Those that know not God, but have all their life in the flesh, in present
appearances, they live not indeed: They that live in pleasure, are dead whilst
they live: If God be our life, then the less we are in these things, the more
we are in life: If our life be in the vail, when this vail is destroyed, our
life is swallowed up of deaths victory, and the second death seizes on us.
Refer this to the feast that the Lord makes: it is himself that is the feast,
it is himself that makes the feast: he dies into our weakness, and when through
his death his life is manifested in us, in a spirit of Love, of power, and of a
sound mind, then death is swallowed up in victory; It goes into the draught,
we hear of it no more: The Lords life manifested, swallows up death in victory.
Death is sorrow and tears: See if you can embrace this account of death; He
that has ears to hear, let him hear: He that has not, it may be, will cry,
whimsey, fancy, and turning the Scripture into an Allegory.

Further its said,

And the Rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth.

All the Saints Rebuke is whilst they are under the vail. They are judged by
the vail, the world knows them not: We live in the vail, whilst we are in
sorrow and tears; whilst God, who is our life, is hid, we are under the worlds
Rebuke: In the mean time, we wait till God appear; and whilst God appears not,
the world jears us, saying, Flee to your mountain, Psalm. 11. 1. All the worlds
joy is in the vail; when the vail is rent, then comes the second death: then
that is made good, Son remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and Lazarus his evil: but now thou art tormented, and he is comforted.

And now, have I walked in a vail, and in a cloud unto you? Do you not
understand? The time was when my self did not; and it may be my weakness in
expressing, as well as yours in hearing: It is my weakness that cannot put the
vail from off your eyes. Consider what has been spoken, that you may
understand it rightly: If it please God to bring it home as a seed sown to any
of you, I shall rejoice. I leave it to the blessing of God.

FINIS.

