An earnest EXHORTATION For the public reading of COMMONPRAYER.

OR, The excellency of Divine Service proved by Scripture.

In which is contained, strong and undeniable arguments, out of the Old and New
Testaments, for the commendation of Common Prayer.

Showing that the Church Militant here upon earth, does by it most imitate the
Church triumphant in Heaven.

Written by a well wisher to King and Kingdom. T. H.

Quati's, Divine Fa^. lib. 2. Fa^. 81. The Book of Common Prayer excels the
rest;
For Prayers that are most Common are the best.
Printed and published according to Order.

London, Printed for H. T. Anno Domi^^. 1647.

AN EXHORTATION For public PRAYER.
WHen as I call to mind the times past when Common and public Prayer was used
on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday, in this Land, how merciful GOD was unto us,
in hearing our Prayers, and blessing our Land with peace and plenty. Very
comely it was to see, rich and poor, old and young, to join together in Gods
true public worship and service: and well for us it was when we could imitate
the Angels in heaven, for they perform public worship and praise in heaven,
as you may read, Revel. 5. 11. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many
Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts and Elders, and the number of
them was ten thousand times ten thousand: And after this I beheld, and lo a
great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations and Kindred, and
people and Tongues stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with
white robes, and palms in their hands, and cried with a loud voice, saying,
Salvation unto our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, and
all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders, and the
four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God,
saying. Amen: blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor,
and power, and might, be given unto God, for ever, and ever, Amen, Revel. 9.
10, 11, 12.

But in hell is quite contrary, malice and cursing is the^e: Then let the
Church Militant pray and give thanks in the great congregation, Let us kneel
before the Lord our Maker, and come before his presence with praise. Let the
people praise thee, o God, let all the people praise thee, call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. Genesis 4. ult. In the gener ation of
Seth, men began to call upon the name of the Lord. My house is called the house
of prayer, says our Savior. Now Peter and John went up together into the
Temple at the hour of prayer, Acts 3. 3. By which it appears there was a set
hour appointed for prayer.

And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Ruler of the Synagogue
sent unto them saying, ye men and brethren, If you have a word of exhortation
for the people, say on, Act. 13. 15. And again says Paul, exhort therefore
that first of all Supplication and Prayer, Intercession and giving of thanks be
made for all men, for Kings and for all that are in authority, that we may live
a godly and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 2 Timothy 1, 2, 3. Verses.

This Scripture will reach to public Prayer, and be acceptable unto God when
it is performed in the name of Jesus Christ our Savior, for we must needs
judge that there is many of Gods dear children in a public Congregation, as
well as the Minister, whom the Lord delights in, and will be by his
omni-presence* in the midst of them, and accept of their prayer in mercy, and
will increase their faith and knowledge by it, as well as by preaching: For the
light of the Holy Ghost comes by Prayer, as our Savior says, your heavenly
Father will give the Holy Ghost to them that earnestly ask him.

But some precise man will say, there is wicked men there which turn away
their ears and their heart from hearing the Law, and therefore their Prayer is
abominable.

I answer, Our Savior says, the Sheep and goats are together, the tares and
the wheat must grow together unto the time of harvest.

And I answer also, that the Lord does hear the Prayers of ungodly men, and
does sometimes send earthly blessings, and sometimes remove earthly punishments.

The Lord saw the humiliations of Ahab, and therefore staid the judgment for a
time. The Lord saw the repentance of the men, women, and children of Nineveh,
and their earnest Prayers, and removed the judgment. The Lord heard the cry of
Ismael and sent sent water, and blessed him with earthly blessings.

Then let us pray in our Churches, and confess our sins upon our knees, and
hope for mercy in Christ Jesus, and then let us give thanks unto God Almighty,
It is right and meet so to do: Like as the heart desires after the water
brooks, so longs my soul after thee, o God, my soul is athirst for God yea
even for the living God. When shall I come to appear before the presence of
God? my tears have been my meat day and night, while they daily say unto me,
where is now thy God? Now when I think thereupon, I pour out my heartby my
self: For I went with the multitude, and brought them forth into the house of
God, in the voice of praise and thanksgiving.

Among such as keep holyday, Gentlemen and Brethren, I pray consider this
Scripture, the two and fortieth Psalm, which you have read already. What
lamentable moan King David makes all this Psalm over: because he is forced by
his enemies from the public place of Gods worship before ever the Temple was
built, this man was a man after Gods own heart, he was one of the thankfullest
men that ever lived upon the earth, and God Almighty did hear his private
prayers, restored him to be King, and he and his son to budd that famous
Temple of Jerasalem, for Gods true public worship and service, which lasted in
that place first and last above a thousand years. And it is well known unto the
learned, that public and common Prayer has been used in all ages since
Christ was upon the earth, but at the last was abused by the Papists by an
humble and refined Idolatry, in mediating to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints
departed, which was against Gods commandments, though the Heathen Idolatry
seemed more rude when they worshipped Diana and Jupiter. But in King Edward the
Sixth's time public prayer was reformed, and Christ Jesus was set up, the only
Mediator between God and man, until the hatred of the Papists took it away
in Queen Mary's days. Then after five years God Almighty raised Queen Elizabeth
to set up Gods public worship arightagain, which brought great joy and honor
unto this Land: but now (alas) our sins has caused God Almighty to suffer it
to be taken away: the Lord forgive the blind zeal of them that took it away.
Can any understanding men deny these lines to be truth, grounded upon Gods
word, both by the old and new Testaments. Therefore my desire is, that no man
esteem this book as a Pamphlet, but the words of truth and soberness. And my
desire is first to God Almighty, that some godly form of Prayer may be restored
into our Churches again, that rich and poor, old and young may publicly and
earnestly call upon God in the name of Christ Jesus, and not leave all to their
Ministers, and be careless or sleep the while, as many do now adays, for every
man must be saved by his own faith. And for my part, I have found my heavy
spirit much enlarged by the voice of the multitude, and the fitter for private
Prayer and Thanksgiving: therefore I humbly desire, and my petition is, if
accidentally this book shall come into the hands of any Member of the
Honorable Houses, that they will speak for so good a work, and your Petitioner
shall thank God for it.

FINIS.

