A MACHAVILLIAN PLOT, OR, A Caution for ENGLAND, PRESENTED In a time when
Princes were so Pious, and Judges durst be Valiant to declare against Dishonest
Slaverie.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1642.

Lunae 16 Die Novembris 1629. Anno 5. Caroli Regis. Robert Heath. Richard
Shelton. Thomas Crew. Humphrey Davenport. Richard Barkley. Heneage Finch.

Sir Robert HeathKnight your Majesty's Attorney General, humbly informs your
most excellent Majesty,
THat whereas your Sacred Majesty, ever since your happy Access to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, has governed your People with so much Justice
and moderation that all your good Subjects do bear that Reverence and love
unto your Sacred Person, as is justly do to so gracious a Sovereign; And your
Majesty next to the Service of Almighty-God, and the maintenance of his true
Religion, has preserved and maintained the ancient and a Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom without Innovation.

Yet so it is, may it please your most Excellent Majesty, that some malicious
Persons (who are as yet unknown to your said Attorney) being ill-affected to
your Majesty, and to your happy Government, and intending to raise false,
scandalous, and seditious Rumors against your Majesty, and your gracious
Govenment, have of late wickedly and seditiously framed; contrived and written
a false, seditious, and pestilent Discourse in these words following;

The Propositions for your Majesty's service contains two parts; The one to
secure your state, and to bridle the Pertinacy of Parliaments.

The other to increase your Revennue much more then it is.

Touching the first, having considered diverse, means, I find none so important
to strengthen your Majesty's Regal Authority against all oppositions or
practices of troublesome spirits, and to bridle them, then to Fortify your
Kingdom by having a Fortress in every chief Town and important place
thereof, furnished with Ordnance, Munition, and faithful men as they ought to
be, with all other circumstances fit to be digested in a business of this
nature, ordering withal the Trained Bands of the County to be united in one
Dependancie with the said Forts, as well to secure their beginning as to
succor them in occasion of suspect, and also to retain and keep their Arms
for more security, where by the Countries are no less to be brought into
subjection then the Cities themselves, and consequently the whole Kingdom:
Your Majesty having by this course the power thereof in your own hands.

The reasons of these suggests are these. 1. That in Policy it is a greater Tie
of the People by force and necessity, then merely by Law and Affection; For
by the one, the Government rests always sure, but by the other no longer
then the People are well contented. 2. It forces obstinate Subjects to be no
more presumptuous then it pleases your Majesty to permit them. 3. That to
leave: a State unfurnished, is to give the bridle thereof to the Subject, when
by the contrary it rests only in the Princes hands. 4. That modern
fortresses take long time in winning with such Charge and Difficulty, as no
Subjects in these times have means probable to attempt them. 5. That it is a
sure remedy against rebellious and popular Mutinies, or against Foreign
powers, because they cannot well succeed, when by this Course, the Apparent
means is taken away to force the King and State upon a doubtful fortune of a
set Battle, as was the cause that moved the pretended Invasion against the
Land attempted by the King of Spain in the year, 1588. 6. That your Majesty's
Government is the more secure by the Peoples more subjection, and by their
subjection the Gentry or Parliaments must be forced to alter their style, and
to be conformable to your will and pleasure; for their words and opposition
imports nothing where the Power is in your Majesty's own hands, to do with
them what you please, being indeed the chief purpose of this Discourse, and
the secret intent thereof, fit to be concealed from any English at all either
Counselor of State, or other; For these and diverse other weighty Reasons.


It may be considered in this place to make your Majesty more powerful and
strong some Orders to be observed, that are used in Fortified Countries. The
government whereof imports as much as the States themselves. I m^^ne in times
of doubt or suspect, Which are these; 1. Inprimis, That none wear Arms or
weapons at all either in City or Country, but such as your Majesty may think
fit to privilege, and they to be enrolled. 2. That as many Highways as
conveniently may be done, be made passable through those Cities and Towns
fortified to constrain the passengers to Travel through them. 3. That the
Soldiers of Fortresses are sometimes chosen out of another Nation (if subjects
to the same Prince) but howsoever not to be borne in the same Province, or
within 40. or 50. miles of the Fortresses, and not to have friends or
correspondency near it. 5. That at the Gates of each walled Town be appointed
Officers, not to suffer any unknown Passenger to pass without a Ticket
showing from whence he came, and whither to go, and that the Gates of each
City be shut all night, and the Keys kept by the Major or Governor; Also the
Inne-keepers to deliver the names of all unknown Passengers that lodge in
their Houses and if they stay suspitiously at any time to present them to the
Governors, whereby dangerous persons, seeing these strict courses will be more
wary of their Actions, and thereby mischievous attempts will be prevented.


All which being referred to your Majesty's wise consideration. It is meet for
me withal, to give you some satisfaction of the charge and time to perform
what is proposed, that you may not de discouraged in the difficulty of the one,
or the prolongation of the other; Both which doubts are resolved in one, and
the same Reason, in respect that in England. each chief Town commonly has a
ruinated Castle well seated for strength whose Foundation and Stones remaining
may be both quickly repaired for this use, and with little charge, and made
strong enough; I hope for this purpose within the space of one year, by adding
withal Bulwarks and Rampires for the Ordnance, according to the Rules of
Fortification: The Ordnance for these Forts may be of Iron, not to dis-furnish
your Majesty's Navy, or to be at a greater charge then is needful; To
maintain yearly these Forts, I make account in ordinary pay 3000 men will be
sufficient, and will require 40000 pounds charge per annum, or thereabouts
being an expense that inferior Princes do unde go for their necessary
safety. All which pretention added to the invincible Seas-force your Majesty
has already and may have, will make you the most powerful and obeyed King of
the world, which I could likewise confirm by many examples, but I omit them
for brevitie; and not to confuse your Majesty with too much matter your Majesty
may find by the scope of this discourse the means showed in general to bridle
your Subjects, that may be either discontent or obstinate; So am I likewise to
conclude the same intent particularly against the perverseness of your
Parliaments as well to suppress that pernicious humor, as to avoid their
oppositions against your profit, being the second part to be discoursed on; And
therefore have first thought fit for better prevention thereof, to make known
to your Majesty the purport of a general oath your subjects may take for sure
avoiding of all rubbes that may hinder the conclusion of these businesses; It
is further mean, that no Subject upon pain of high Treason may refuse the
same Oath, containing only matter of Allegiance, and not scruples of points of
conscience, that may give pretense to be denied.

The effect of the Oath is this. England; Scotland, France, and Ireland and
your Heirs for ever and so resumed not only of your Subjects, but also of the
whole world; How necessary the dangerous Supremacy of Parliaments usurpation
is to be prevented. The Example of Lewis the Eleventh King of France does
manifest, who found the lik opposition, as your Majesty does, and by his
wisdom suppressed it, and that to the purpose here intended, which is not to
put down altogether Parliaments and their Authority, being in many cases very
necessary and fit, but to abridge them as far as they seek to derogate from
your Majesty's Regal Authority, or advancement of your Greatness; The
Caution in offering the aforesaid Oath may require some policy for the easier
passage at first, either by singular or particular Tractation and that so near
about one time over the Land, as one government may not know what the other
intends, so it may pass the easier, by having no time of Combination or
Opposition; There is another course also more certain then this to bring to
pass this Oath easily, as also your profit, and what else is pretended, which
here I omit for brevity, requiring a long discourse by it self and have set it
down in particular Instructions to inform your Majesty.

The second part of this Discourse is touching your Majesty's Profit after your
state is secured, wherein I shall observe both some reasonable content to the
people, as also consider the great expenses that Princes have now a days more
then in times past to mayntaine their own greatness and safety of their
Subjects, who if they have not wit and will to consider their own Interest so
much indifferently, your Majesty must repair their defects, and force them to
it by Compulsion; but I hope there shall be no such cause in points so
reasonable to increase your Majesty's Revenues; Wherein I set down diverse
means for your gracious Self to make choice of, either All or Part at your
pleasure, and to put it in execution by such degrees, and Cautions, as your
great wisdom shall think fit, in a business of this nature.

Imprimis, The first means and course intended to increase your Majesty's
revenues or profit withal is of greatest consequence, and I call it a Decima,
being so termed in Italy, where in some parts it is in use, importing the tenth
part of all Subjects estates to be paid as a yearly Rent to the Prince; and as
well monied men in Towns, as landed in the Countries, their values and Estates
esteemed justly as it is to the true value, (yet with reason) to pay it, and
this is paid yearly in money: Which course applied in England for your
Majesty's service, may serve in stead of Subsidies, Fifteenes, and such like,
which in this case are fit to be released, for the Subjects benefit and
content, in recompense of the said Decima: which will yield your Majesty more
in certainty then they do casually by 500000. pound per annum at the least.

2. That when your Majesty has gotten money into your hands by some courses to
be set down, it would be a profitable course to increase your Entrato, to buy
out all Estates and Leases upon your own Lands, in such sort as they be made
no losers; whereby having your lands free, and renting them out to the true
value as it is most in use, and not employed as heretofore, at an old Rent and
small Fines, you may then rent it out for at least four or five times more
money then the old Rents comes unto: So as if your Majesty's Lands be already
but 60000. pounds per annum, by this means it will be augmented at least
200000. pounds per annum: and to buy out the Tenants estates will come to a
small matter, by the course to make them no losers, considering the gain they
have already made upon the Land. And this is the rather to be done, and the
present course changed, because it has been a custom used merely to cozen the
King.

3. Item, Whereas most Princes do receive the benefit of Salt, in their own
hands, as a matter of great profit, because they receive it at the lowest price
possible, and vent it, does gain double yearly: The same course used by your
Majesty were worth at least 150000 pounds per annum.

4. It is likewise in other parts, that all Weights and Measures, either in
private Houses, Shops, or public Markets shoul'd be viewed to be just, and
sealed once a year, paying to the Prince for it: which in England applied to
your Majesty, with order to pay six pence for sealing each weight or measure
would yield near 60000 pounds per annum.

5. Item, Though all Countries pay a Gabella for transportation, and so
likewise in England, yet in Spain there is impost upon the Woolls; which in
England is so great a wealth and benefit to the Sheep masters, as they may well
pay you five pound per cent. of the true value at the sheering, which I
conceive may be worth 140000. pound per annum.

6. Whereas the Lawyers fees and gains in England are excessive, to your
Subjects prejudice, it were better for your Majesty to make use thereof, and
impose on all causes sentenced with the party to pay five pound per cent. of
the true value that the cause has gained him; and for recompense thereof, to
limit all Lawyer. Fees and Gettings, whereby the Subjects shall save more in
Fees and Charges, than they give your Majesty in the Gabella: which I believe
may be worth one year with another 50000. pound.

7. Whereas the innes and Victualling-Houses are more chargable to the
Travelers then in other Countries, it were good for your Majesty to limit them
to certain Ordinaries, and raise besides a large Imposition; as is used in
Tuscany and other parts: That is, a prohibiting of all Innes and
Victualing-Houses, but such as shall pay it; and to impose upon the chief
Innes and Taverns ten pound a year to your Majesty, the worst five pound per
annum, and all the Alehouses 20 shillings per annum, more or less as they be
in custom, of all sorts, there are so many in England, that this Impost may
well yield 100000. pound per annum to your Majesty.

8. Item, In Tuscany and other parts there is a Gabella of all Cattle, or
Flesh and Horses sold in Markers, paying 3. or 4. per Cent. of what they are
sold for; which by conjecture, may be worth in England 200000 pound per annum,
using the like Custom upon Fish, and other Victual (Bread excepted;) and for
this cause all Flesh and Fish and Victuals in the Market to be prised, and sold
by weight, whereby the Subject says more in not being cozened, then the
imposition imports them.

9. Item, In Tuscany is used a Taxation of 7. per Cent. upon all Alienation of
Lands to the true value; and also 7 per Cent upon all Dowries and
Marriage-monies; the like if it were used in England were worth at least
100000. pound per annum; with many other Taxations upon Meal, and other
Merchandises, in all Towns as well as Port Towns, which here I omit, with
diverse others, as not so fit for England. And in satisfaction of the Subject
for these Taxes, your Majesty may be pleased to release them of Ward-ships, and
to enjoy all their estates at eighteen years old, and in the mean time their
profits to be preserved for their own benefit. And also in forfeitures of
Estates by condemnation, your Majesty may release the Subject; as not to take
the forfeitures of their Lands, but their Goods, High Treason only excepted;
and to allow the counsel of Lawyers in case of life and death; as also not to
be condemned without two witnesses; with such like benefits, which import much
more their good, then all the Taxations named can prejudice them.

10. Item, That some of the former Taxations used in Ireland and Scotland, as
may easily be brought about by the first example thereof used in England, may
very well be made to increase your revenue there more than it is now by 200000.
pound per annum.

11. Item, All Offices in the Land, great and small, in your Majesty's grant,
may be granted with condition, to pay your Majesty a part yearly, according to
the value; this in time may be worth (as I conceive) 100000. pound per annum;
adding also Notaries, Atturnies, and such like, to pay some proportions yearly
toward it, for being allowed by your Majesty to practice, and prohibiting else
any to practice in such places.

12. Item, to reduce your Majesty's household to bord-wages, as most other
places do, reserving some few Tables: this will save your Majesty 60000 l per
annum, and ease greatly the Subject besides, both in carriages and Provision,
which is good reason that your Majesty in honor might do it.

13. Item, I know an assured course in your Majesty's Navy, which may save at
least 50000 l per annum, which requiring a whole discourse by it self, I omit;
only do promise to do it whenever you command.

14. Item, whereas you Majesty's Laws do command the strict keeping of
Fasting days, you may also prohibit those days to eat Eggs, Cheese, or
white-meates, only to such as are contented to pay eighteen pence a year for
the liberty to eat them, and the better sort ten shillings; the employment of
this may be for the defense of the Land, in maintaining of the Navy,
Garrisons, and such like, much after the fashion of the Crusado in Spain, as
your Majesty knows being first begun there under the pretense to defend the
Land against the Moors, and the same used in England, may very well yield one
year with another 100000 l without any disgust to any, because it is at every
ones choice to give it or no.

15. Lastly, I have a course upon the Catholics, and very safe for your
Majesty, being with their good liking, as it may be wrought, to yield you
presently at least 200000 l per annum, by raising a certain value upon their
lands, and some other Impositions, which requiring a long discourse by it
self, I will omit here setting it down in my Instructions.

It will save your Majesty 100000 l per annum, to make it pain of death, and
confiscation of Goods and Lands, for any of the Officers to cozen you, which
now is much to be feared they do, else they could not be so rich; and herein to
allow a fourth part of the benefit to him that shall find out the cozenage;
here is not meant Officers of State, as the Lord Treasurer, etc. being Officers
of the Crown.

The sum of all this Account amounts to 2200000 l per annum, suppose it be
but one Million and a half, as assuredly your Majesty may make by these
courses set down, yet it is much more than I promised in my letter for your
Majesty's service, besides some sums of money in the present by the courses
following:

Imprimis, By the Prince his Marriage, to make all the Earls in England
Grandes, (as in Spain) and Principi, with such like Privileges, and to pay
20000. pound a piece for it.

2. As also if you make them Feodataries of the Towns belonging to their
Earldomes if they will pay for it besides as they do to the King of Spain in
the Kingdom of Naples.

3. And so likewise Barons to be made Earls and Peers to pay ten thousand
pound a piece, I think this might yield 500000 l, and oblige them sure to your
Majesty.

4. To make choice of 200 of the richest men of England of estate, that be not
Noblemen, and make them Titulati, as is used in Naples; And paying for it, that
is, a Duke 30000 l, a Marquess 15000 l, an Earl 10000 l, a Baron or Viscount
5000 l. It is to be understood, That the ancient Nobility of Barons made Earls
are to precede these as Peers, though these be made Marquesses or Dukes: This
may raise a million of pounds, or more unto your Majesty. To make Gentlemen of
low quality, and Francklins, and Farmours, Esquires to precede them, would also
yield your Majesty a great sum of money in present. I have another course to
yield your Majesty at least 300000 l in money, which as yet the time serves
not to discover, until your Majesty be resolved to proceed in some of the
former courses, which till then I omit. Other courses also that may make
present money, I shall study for your Majesty's service, and as I find them
out, acquaint you withal.

Lastly, To conclude all this discourse, by the application of this course used
for your profit, It is not only to make you the richest King that ever England
had, but also the safety augmented thereby to be most secure; besides what is
showed in the first part of this discourse, I mean by the occasion of these
Taxations and raising of moneys, your Majesty shall have cause and means to
employ in all places of the Land, so many Offices and Ministers, to be
obliged to you for their own good and Interest, as nothing can be attempted
against your Person or Royal Estate over Land, but some of these shall in all
probability have means to find it out and hinder it: Besides, this course
will repress many disorders and abuses in the public Government, which were
hard to be discovered by men indifferent. To prohibit gorgious and costly
Apparel to be worn, but by Persons of good quality, shall save the Gentry of
the Kingdom much more money than they shall be Taxed to pay to your Majesty.

Thus with all humility I take my leave, and kiss your gracious hand, desiring
Pardon for my Error I may commit herein.

The which false, seditious, and malicious Discourse and writing, so framed,
contrived and written, as aforesaid, the Authors thereof intended should be
divulged and dispersed, as if the same had been entertained by your Majesty,
with purpose to be put in execution, thereby to raise fears and jealousies in
the minds of your good Subjects, that your sacred Majesty had a purpose to
alter and innovate the ancient Laws of this Kingdom, and the ancient manner
and Form of the Government thereof, and to draw all things to be disposed of
at your Majesty's absolute will and pleasure, and to command and dispose of
estates, goods, and revenews of your Subjects, or such part or Portion thereof
as your self pleased without the consent of your Subjects, and to make and
repeal Laws and Statutes, by your Majesty's Proclamations only, without
consent of Parliament, and that to overawe and oppress your subjects you
purposed to place and maintain Garrisons, and Fortified Castles and Places in
a Warre-like manner in all the Principal Cities and Towns in this your
Kingdom.

Which if it should be believed by your People, could not but raise infinite
discontents amongst them, the consequences whereof might be extreme, and almost
of inevitable danger to your Majesty's Person and State, and to the whole Frame
of this Kingdom, and to the great dishonor of your Majesty, which all and
every your good and loyal Subjects are in their duty and allegiance to your
Majesty bound to prevent, to the uttermost of their Powers, and to discover to
your Majesty, or some of your Privie-Councell, or other Magistrate, all such
false and seditious discourses and writings whenever they shall come to their
hands or knowledge.

Nevertheless, some forgetting that duty which they owe to your gracious
Majesty their liege Lord, and intending to further and cherish those false,
scandalous, and seditious rumors, whereby matter of discord and slander might
grow between your Majesty, the great men of this Kingdom and your People;
and not regarding the great dangers and evil consequences thereof, having
gotten the said Discourse or Writing, or some Copy or Copies thereof into
their hands, at several times within the space of eight months now last past,
did make or write, or caused to be made or written, several copies thereof,
and amongst themselves, and also to and amongst many others, have published,
divulged, and dispersed the same, to the great and insufferable scandal and
dishonor of your Majesty, and of your most just and gracious Government; and
none of them before such publication thereof did make the same known to your
Majesty, or any of your Privy Council, or any other lawful Magistrate, as in
duty they and every of them ought to have done.

In consideration of all which premises, for as much as the said spreading
publishing, and divulging of all such scandalous and malicious tales, news,
and rumors, and not making the same known to your Majesty or your Privy
Council, or other Magistrate, is contrary to the good Laws and Statutes of
this your Realm, and contrary to the duty and Allegiance that they owe to your
Majesty; and for that the venom thereof may by this undue means be dispersed
and infused in and unto many others, in and through whose hands, those false,
seditious, and malicious Papers and Writings have or may come: and for that the
danger thereof is exceeding great, and may be of infinite ill consequence, if
in time the same be not prevented, and for example and terror to all others be
not severely punished:

May it thereof please your most excellent Majesty to grant unto your said
Attorney your Majesty's most gracious Writs of Subpoena, to be directed to such
as have divulged it; commanding them at a certain day, and under a certain
Pain therein to be contained, personally to be and appear before your
Majesty, and the right Honorable the Lords and others of your Highness most
Honorable Privy Council, in your Highness Court of Star Chamber, then and
there to answer to the premises, and to stand to and abide such order,
direction, sentence, and decree therein, as to your Majesty, and the said Lords
and others shall be thought most meet and agreeable to Justice.

And your said Attorney shall over pray, etc.
FINIS.

