THIS LAST AGES LOOKING-GLASS: OR ENGLANDS SAD ELLIGIE.

By S. H.

Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus,
Aspiciunt occulis superi mortalia Justis.


Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642. With License.

COURTEOUS READER.
IF thou look for a large Epistle to this little Pamphlet, thy expectation is
Frustrate; for I am afraid to fall into the Citizens of MINDAS disease, that
my Book should run out at the Portall. If thou find any thing Worth thy
Reading, make Use of it; Look not at the rudeness either of the Phrase or the
Verse, but the well-meaning of the Author. Look not for Polished Lines, but
Matter pointing at the Times. It is the first Born, if it miscarry or prove
Abortive it will be an obstruction to the Second Birth, to hinder the bringing
forth; But however, if thou Like it, take it; if not, leave it and begone; So
Farewell.

Thine as Thou Use Him, S. H.

Seeing.
WHat Age is this that we behold?
Where war is bought, and peace is sold
When we look each one at his own,
Reaping the seeds others have sown:
O how we make our Crystal Eyes!
Of Villainies vile to be the Spies:
We see the Moate, but not the Beam,
Other faults great, ours small we deem.
As the Eagle we are quick of sight,
Bringing another deeds to light;
But as blind beetles we cannot see,
Our own sad woeful misery.
We wail the Judgment, and the Rod,
But not our sins offending God;
We as the Dog, look at the stone,
But at our sins, few or none
Will once look back, and see the thing
That does Gods vengeance swiftly bring.
We see, neither cause, nor sender,
But vengeance for wrath we render,
We see all things but what we should,
Lord cast us in a better mould,
And grant mine Eyes may see the thing,
That may please God and eeke my King.
Hearing.
WHat Age is this wherein I Hear?
Such sound of Treason in mine Ear,
Such contumelies, and such Lies,
As deafs mine Ears and blinds mine Eyes.
Of stern War such dreadful rumors,
But to satiate some men's humors;
Whose sole delight is only blood,
That they may bathe in Crimson flood.
If they laugh, who weep they care not,
Yea, to ruin all they spare not.
Is It Religion, or Reason?
That keeps no Time, Tune, or Season;
What Blasphemies do some relate?
Against Our God, our King, and State;
Some cry out of Church Government,
Some to ruin the Temple are bent,
And some cannot endure to Hear
The Sound of the Organ in their Ear,
Nor yet our Churches Bells sweet sound,
They do their fiery zeal confound.
The Charmers Voice they will not Hear,
His Tongue not chained to their Ear:
But God grant I may Hear the thing,
That Sound may well to God and King*
Smelling.
WHat Age is this wherein I Smell?
Such noisome stench from hateful Hell;
Such unsavory poisoned Weeds,
That in this Land Infection breeds;
Infecting so the healthful Air,
Raising stern Storms for Weather fair.
Are these the Nosegaies of Delight?
Please they the Sense, the Nose, or Sight,
Me thinks the stench ascends the Brain,
Poisoning the Stomach and each Vain*
Diffusing venom through the Joints,
And at Destruction only points;
Putting the Body out of frame,
Making all things seem not the same.
Oh! how it poisoned has my Nose,
To Smell the Hemlock for the Rose,
For odoriferous Sents most Sweet,
To Smell the Channel in the Street.
For Practice, I have found but show;
Mark how this newfound Age does grow:
Me thinks now here I smell a Knave,
That speaks this thing, and that would have;
But Lord grant me my Smelling well,
That I with God and King may dwell.
Tasting.
WHat Age is this wherein I rest?
To Taste things baske for what are best,
Sour things for pleasant do not well,
For vain shaddows the substance sell;
This bargain is a bad exchange,
Good soiles leaving, on Heathes to range:
To drink puddle in stead of Meed,
May danger in the body breed.
It cannot well my Tasting relish,
The Dish of Treason it is Hellish;
Has no Savor to good Pallats,
Resembling right to weedy Sallats
That have a rank and noisome Taste,
Most fit on Dunghill to be cast,
That neither relish well, nor feed,
Let us detest this fruitless seed:
Oh how I have my Coin laid out
For fruitless food (I fear, I doubt)
My Mouth it is clean out of season,
To see Men live so void of Reason;
To Taste all things they do refrain,
But what are tempered in their Brain.
But God grant I may Taste the thing,
That relish may my God and King.
Touching.
WHat Age is this wherein I stand?
That I should now lift up a Hand
Against Him, whom God did sole Anoint,
I Will racked be from joint to joint,
And each Limb be pulled asunder,
Before I make the World wonder
At such vile traiterous Acts of mine,
My thoughts and deeds I will refine,
And in that mould my Actions frame,
That may me spotless leave to Fame.
Oh let that Hand for ever rot,
That against my Liege does Act a Plot
That may his patient Spirit move,
Or any way estrange his Love;
Nor in the Land let any Live,
That would His Grace ill Council give.
Shall any harp upon that string?
To take up Arms against their King,
The Lords Anointed for to touch,
A wicked Heart I have none such.
I hate the ways of such a wight,
they are not pleasing in Gods sight.
God grant I may touch on that string,
That may please God and eeke my King.
Common Senses.
WHat Age is this, say Common Sense?
Worse cannot be by consequence;
I see few Men that look at Peace,
or strive to make the Wars to cease:
they do pretend Peace in their Words,
Whilst they are brandishing their Swords:
I Hear no tidings of Concord,
Look down upon us now O Lord;
Each Day brings forth more cruel things.
In each Ear woeful tidings Rings.
I Smell nothing that pleasant is,
Sorrow is near, but far is Bliss;
For beauty burning, for sweet smells stink,
For pleasant Wine, we Worm wood Drink.
I Taste nothing that gives content,
Our sweet meats now we must Repent,
We had the Dainty fare of Peace,
But now we must forgo our ease.
My Touch and Feeling I have lost,
These things too dearly have me cost,
I Touch nothing but am defiled,
With Chafe for Corn, I am beguiled.
Will Common Sense nothing avail?
Will not the naked Truth prevail?
These things are strange, and very rare,
Lord free this Land of broken ware;
O smite these Rebels in the Head,
And with dread Thunder, strike them Dead,
That all may See, Touch, Taste, and Hear,
And Learn our God to dread and Fear,
That I and All, may quickly Smell,
That God and King them all will quell.
Stay, Let me wonder once again,
What Floods of Tears run down amain?
What woeful shreeks, what trembling Hands?
What Fear to lose, Lives, Goods, and Lands?
Oh how we Weep, we Mourn, and Wail,
Thongh it do us but small avail,
To See the Times thus distracted,
To hear Laws, that are inacted,
Against Subjects Liberties and Rights:
Alas poor Souls, Oh woeful wights,
That once so fairly flourished,
Are now quite Dead and Perished.
What Age is this wherein we live?
All takes away, and none will give,
Takes what our chiefest Joys increase,
Our choicest Jem, our Jewel Peace,
This Nations chiefest Ornament,
Yet none do Sorrow or Repent.
(...) Some muddie makes the Crystal stream,
Others of better times do dream.
But as for me i will serve and fear,
The Lord my God, and King most dear.
O woeful age that ere was seen,
How near to falling have we been?
Sometimes by sword of Foreign foe,
Sometimes home broils, Domesticke woe,
We have been scourged with famine great,
The poor have di'd for want of meat.
Yea further Gods most heavy hand,
With Pestilence has plagued this land.
But still in safety we have slept,
For sinful crimes we have not wept:
But to our selves have cried peace,
Living securely* and at ease:
When as our sins are as the sand,
Against God himself we warlike stand.
But mark we now, how times do turn;
In staed of mirth we now must mourn.
One grief another up does call,
Our drink is tears mingled with gall,
Sorrow we do, we cannot speak,
Our hearts with grief are like to break
Some are possessed with Jealous fears,
drunk with worm wood tearse.
But I Am resolved firmly still,
To keep Gods and my Sovereigns will.
Yea stranger still does seem this Age,
The poor oppressed, the wicked rage,
With Murders, Rapines, and with Theft,
This Land is poll'd, and nothing left.
No man living scarcely can say,
This is mine own, for it I did pay,
He that has felt the smart can tell
That strongest bears away the Bell:
Yet some fatted to the slaughter
Spend their time in Mirth and Langhter,
Merrily quaffing off their Wine,
Vainly spending precious Time;
Though Sword be drawn and Bow be bent,
And all the wicked must be shent,
How idly still their days are spent.
Their hearts are heard, they will not relent;
But putting off the evil day,
To turn from sin they do delay,
In sinful crimes, they live and dye,
Which in their bosoms hidden lie:
Gods word by them is set by light,
Those sacred Lines do dim their sight.
But firm and constant I will prove,
My God to fear, my King to love.
Was ever Age in such a case?
To bring forth such a Rebels Race,
To sheathe his Sword in's Fellows side,
To Lie, Dissemble, and cog beside,
Judas-like each other betray,
For Peace few Preach, for Love few Pray,
We, are taught a quite contrary way,
None caring what they speak or say.
It Is as common to vent Treason,
As it is to speak sense and Reason.
Ye flintie stones? what? not relent?
To see this sadd, and dire Event
Of times wicked inclination,
Which threats ruin to this Nation.
Our Sins the Skies have Ascended,
Yet our lives are not Amended,
Still drawing down Gods irefull rod,
Procureing emnitie with God,
without whose freindship there is no peace,
Nor hope of (Judgments great) release.
But a fearful expectation,
Of destruction, to this Nation.
But Lord thy favor let me find,
That God and King may have my mind.
Alas pore age, what is the cause?
Force guides thee now, and not the laws,
That formerly have ruled this Land,
All gvided were by their command,
But how are they infringed now?
Old statuts to the new must bow,
Surely there was no wisdom then,
This Age has got far wiser men,
True it is, but is it not most strange?
That these times should so quickly change,
And be as though they ne'rc had been:
The oldest man this true has seen.
Sins are the sole procureing things,
That alterations always bringes,
Yet this full little is regarded,
Though sin's never unrewarded:
Yet till we feel the woeful smart,
We will not lay our sins to heart.
We put our trust in horses strength,
Measuring God by our own length,
To our Nets thus Sacrificing,
Not regarding evils rising.
Lord grant on thee I may depend,
And serve my god and King to the end.
Did ever age know such a thing?
For Songs of Joy, we Sorrow sing;
Our joyful notes are changed quite,
And mournful tunes we Sing each night,
With frights and fears we stand aghast,
To see these times, and what is Past:
But when we think of times to come
We stricken speachles are and dumb;
Our peace is turned into war,
We one with other seek to jarre,
Envy has up her Kingdom set,
Hatred this Nation has beset,
Divisions great from Sects do spring,
Which have divided People and King,
All truly are at variance;
Oh sad estate, oh woeful chance,
And silence up our mouths have shut,
Pride and arrogance bravely strut:
Yea beggars ride, Kings go on foot,
Swollen ambition rules, look to it.
Each one dare not trust another,
Brother persecutes the brother:
But I detest such tunes to sing,
I Will love my God and my good King.
An age indeed to see the times,
Bespread with ribauldries, and rimes:
Striking at scepters, yea Kings wounding,
Royal Monarchy confounding:
Seeking to eclipse his name,
Whose worth shall outlive time and fame.
Yea flourish still and fairly shine,
Amongst men on earth ane Saints divine:
His peaceful reign begot a story,
To Crown his years with lasting glory.
Which evil tongues can never blast,
But shall all Ages far out last.
Nay here their malice does not bound,
What Sacred things have they left sound?
With strange Sects we are divided,
Law and Gospel are derided;
Decent order is neglected,
Church government disrespected,
All ceremonies now must down,
They with Garlands their actions Crown.
Great distractions full this Land,
Tell me then? Can this Kingdom stand?
I Am dumb Lord teach me what to say,
That I to God for King may pray.
Now having taken this short view,
Of things not good, yet too too true:
Of things not heard in times before,
Which ages now may well deplore;
No Age that is past can parallel
These times wherein we live and dwell;
Yea after Ages shall admire,
Flourishing England now on fire.
Let us now look another way,
And unto God Almighty pray.
Lord look down from Heaven and see,
This Nations woeful misery:
Behold our languishing Estate,
Let not our sorrow come too late.
We are at the pit ready to fall,
From sinking, Lord do us recall:
Make up the breaches, You Are the Man
Of the distressed Physician.
If thou hold off, what are we then?
Most miserable of all Men.
O succor Lord, and help us send,
Thou art our God, be thou our friend.
That I in heart and voice may sing,
To God be praise, and to my King.
Help Lord for thou art only he,
Or else we never shall agree,
We are arrived at that height,
That thou alone can make us straight;
O we are rent and wounded sore,
Our wounds increase still more and more;
Each one seeking to have his will,
But few the Law for to fulfill;
It is a curb that keeps us in,
We strive to free us from this gin,
Lord cut off those rotten Members,
That of these broiles are the senders,
That in this Land run to and froe,
To hatch the Eggs of wretched woe,
Whose hearts and minds are wholly bent,
To cause this Land sadly lament,
Sowing seditious wicked seed,
Thou Lord root out that sinful Breed;
And let the World see and wonder,
At them struck dead, with thy Thunder.
But let them live in Joys increase,
That love the Olive branch of Peace,
Who Joy to hear of Sions Joy,
Let no dire mischief them anoy,
But let them live and flourish still,
And guard them strongly from all ill.
Lord teach my heart to praise thy name,
Let tongue and voice eeke do the same,
Let Charles glory through England ring,
Let Subjects say, God Save the King.
FINIS.

