THE LAST NEVVES FROM YORK AND HVLL.

OR A true Relation of all the passages and other Occurrences that has
happened in and about the City of York, and the Town of Hull from the twenty
sixth of June, to the third of July. Being the Copy of a Letter sent from a
Merchant of York, to a private friend in London, the fourth of July. 1642.

AS ALSO The execution of a Jesuit at York, by the Kings Command. And the
Copy of a Letter sent to Master William Crofts at the Hague, intercepted by a
Ship in Service under His Majesty.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl.

London, Printed for M.T. July 7. 1642.

THE LAST NEWS FROM YORK and HVLL, July the first, 1642.
Worthy Sir
ACcording to my engagements, and promise to you last in London, I have sent
you the latest Occurrences and most Remarkable passages that has happened in
the North, since my comeing thither, which was upon Friday, June 24. whereof, I
shall impart to you, nothing but what I have had from good Information and
intelligence; And likewise what J was an eye witness of.

Upon SATTERDAY, June 25. I did accommodate one Captain Forster a Scotch-man
(with whom I was very conversant) in one days Iourny to Hull, who was to see
some goods and other Marchandizes (which he brought out of the west Indies to
London, and from thence was transported by Shipping to Hull) to be Conveyed to
York: But when we came at the gates of Hull, Sir John Hotham and Sir John
Meldrone, and Captain Moyer, Captain of the Hercules, one of the Ships which
rides before Hull, and now in the Kings service, examined us, but would not
give us admittance into the Town; Whereupon we walked about the Walls to veiw
the situation thereof, which was all the benefit, and courtisie we received;
And when we came to the Harbor, upon the north side of the Town, where all
their Shipping lies, there was above 200. Soldiers at work, casting up of
Earth, and making Batteries on both sides the Harbor; Upon which was placed
4 pieces of Ordinance, for the defense of the Town, we making some small stay
before that place, one Sergeant Major Gifford, with 20. Musketeers, came with a
command to see us depart away.

Upon Saturday, June 25. we met a Post within two Miles of Hull, with 3
Proclamations from the King, to be Proclaimed at the Gates of Hull; But he was
opposed by Sir John Hotham, and not suffered to publish them, whereupon the
Messenger left them at the Gattes of Hull, and so departed.

Monday, the 27. of June, we returned again to YORK, and that Morning the
Lord Marquess Hamilton took his Journey toward Scotland; The same day was a
Jesuit executed, and his Quarters set upon the Gattes of the City; This day
also was a great combustion at the Court Gate, betwixt 5. Soldiers, and 2.
Cavalyers, in which one of the Soldiers had his hand cut off, and yet these
Cavaliers escaped without any interruption.

Tuesday, 28. of June, News came to York, that my Lord of Newcastle, and
Captain Leg, was received into Newcastle, and my Lord was made Governor of
it. Likewise a report came to the King from Leecester, That the Major of the
Town refused to obey the Lord Stamford, who came with and Order from the
Parliament, to put that County into a Posture of defense, but admitted of one
Master Hastings, who came with a command from his Majesty.

This day a command was sent from the King and Council to the Sheriff of this
County, for raising of 3 Troops of Horse, besides what they was formerly to
raise.

Wednesday being the Fast day, was but slenderly kept in this City, for markets
was kept, as at other times, neither was there above 4. Sermons by report
Preached that day in the City, and one of them was at the Minster, where my
Lord Keepers Chaplain did preach, the King, Prince, and Palsgraue, with the
Nobility being present, came in great State that day to the Sermon there.

This night was a great hubbub in the City by the Soldiers, who was removed
from their Quarter, to be Billetted in another part of the City, which the
Citizens r^fused to entertain; Whereupon the Lord Major went to the King about
it, yet Nevertheless the Soldiers was not received by them, but was sent
back to their old Quarters again.

Thursday, June 30, about eight of the clock in the morning, I met one Master
Murrey, a Kinseman to that Murry of the bed Chamber, walkeing in Sir Arthur
Ingrams Garden, at whose House, his Majesty keeps his Court; after our walking
a quarter of an hour together, the King came into the Garden, and my Lord
Faulkland with him, where the King and my Lord, walked together above half an
hour; At his return to dinner, news was brought that a Letter was come to
his Majesty from the Parliament, wherein was specified the desires that they
would have granted, and what they would grant to him; Whereupon a Gentleman
made a Speech to his Majesty, wishing him not to trust them; what was his name
I cannot learn yet.

Hear is a great concourse of people, both Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen;
There was in the Kings presence this day walkeing in the Gardens above 300.
Courtiers, most of them Cavaliers, besides here is a great number of Soldiers
in all parts of this City, and maintained at the charge, who belch out sc^n
^al^us words against the Parliament, and stick not to say, they hope shortly
to imbrue their hands in the blood of all those that favors the Parliament.

Friday morning being the first of July, News was brought to York, that my
Lord Fairefax had ^a^l^n of his Horse, and is dangerously hurt. This day the
Kings answer to the 19 Propositions of both Houses of P^rliam^nt, came out in
print, The King has made some Propositions to the Parliament, to adiourne it
to York, Winchester, Bristol, Nottingham, Oxford, Cov^ntry, or any other
pl^ce, but he will not come at London the troubles and fears of this City and
County is very great. I pray God in his good time remove. And let it be the
prayers of all good People, that ther^ may be a happy Unity betwixt the King
and Parliament; And that the distractions of this Kingdom may end in Peace.

Thus much have I satisfied you, of what has passed in all these parts, and
till the next oppertunity, I rest.

Your Assured Friend T. H.
York the first of July, 1642.
A COPY OF MASTER HENRY Wilmots Letter to Mr. William Crofts at the Hague,
intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships in His Majesty's service; and sent up to
the Lord Admiral, and was delivered to the Commons by the Lords at a
conference of both Houses.
AMongst other Evidences of the disposition and designs of those in credit
about the King and Queen, a letter was intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships
now in his Majesty's service, and sent up to the Lord Admiral, was delivered
to the Commons, by the Lords, at a Conference of both Houses, which was dated
the two and twentieth of June, from York, written by Mr. Henry Wilmot, one of
those who were privy to the Conspiracy of Mr. Iermin and others, about
bringing up the Army the last year: and directed to Mr. William Crofts a
servant of the Queens. By this Letter it appears, that they have had often
conferences of dividing the estates of the Parliament men, and that this is the
use they intend to make of the Forces raised by his Majesty: And that they are
grown so bold upon His Protection, as to vilify and deride the Parliament, and
not only to contemn their s^^mons, but shamefully to abuse then Messenger with
violence and scorn. Which Lett^r follows in these words.

For Mr. Crofts at the Hague.
Dear Will.
BY these last Letters to the Queen, you will find a great alteration of
business h^re: the King that very lately appeared almost abandoned by all his
Subjects, is now become the Favorite of the Kingdom: yet I bele^ve his
Enemie^ are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose Him:
and indeed h^re lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to
forfe^t their Estates, which I have heard you often s^^, were better bestowed
on some of us. Yesterday there came a Messenger from the Hou^e, who had Order,
and d^d raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartly, Ashburnham, and my
self, to come to speak to the House: but the King gave the Messenger a short
Answer, and an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgel, so he is returned to
London (a fine Gentleman) with his Arm in a Scar^e* De^re Will, preserve me in
your good opinion, for I assure you I am.

June 22. York 1642. Your affectionate humble servant, H. Wilmot.
Pray if M. Iermin be with you, present my most humble service to him.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. de Com.





