The GROUNDS of the LAWS OF ENGLAND; Extracted from the Fountains of all
other Learning: And digested Methodically into CASES, for the Use and Benefit
of all PRACTICERS, and STVDENTS.

With a Commixtion of diverse scattered Grounds concerning the reasonable
Construction of the LAW.

Major haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a jure and legibus, quam ab iis, a
quibus illa bona relicta sunt: Nam ut perveniat ad nos fundus, testamento
alicujus fieri potest: ut retineamus quod nostrum factum est, sine jure civili
fieri non potest. Cicero pro Cetinna. The Common Law is the best, and common
Birthright that the Subject has, for the safeguard and defense, not only of
Goods, Lands, and Revenews, but of his Wife and Children, his body, fame, and
life also, Coke Com. f. 142. By M. H. of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring, Jo. Place, and W. Place, and are to
be sold at their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, at the George in
Fleetstreet, at Furnivals, and Grayes-Inne Gates in Holborn, 1657.

Magno, magnae BRITANNIAE, and HIBERNIAE, etc. Principi, Patri Patriae, and
semper AVGVSTO.
Illustrissime princeps,
QUI and Hispanorum, and papicolarum es Horror, sicut and piorum principum, and
protestantium amor: Cujus solum nomen alteros (uti de Caesaris hostibus olim
dictum) somnum capere non sinit; Alii vero vestra open, and authoritatis scuto
tecti, and muniti, aut victores, aut incolumes plerumque evadunt, Macte virtute
esto, sententia dia Catonis. Accedit etiam praeclara vestra prudentia in
administratione turbulentae hujus reipublicae: Ex quo enim gubernacula imperii
and fraena reipublicae in te suscepisti, Britannia sub vestro principatu hoc
didicit, quantum refert, gravissimis, and difficillimis temporibus aliquem
reipublicae praeesse. Qui sic suo fungitur officio, ut bonorum hominum non
solum expectationi, sed votis satisfacere sciret.

Cui adjicienda est vestra frugalis aulae vestrae domesticae cura, quae non uti
Craesi regia magnifice, and sumptuose est exornata, sed sicut platonis domus
mundo nitore splendida: Cujusque mensa non saliaribus dapibus, aut Vitellii
patinis est referta, sed satis liberalis, and been necessariis quidem rebus
instructa: Ita ut lauta sit, and sobria, omnisque luxus expers, and vacua,
nullaque sit familia melius morata, aut sanctius instituta quam aula vestra.

Quid autem memorem Justitiae vestrae solemnia exemplaria, quae per totum
nostrum orbem diffusa, in propatulo sunt, and sub omnium oculorum ictu. Nequeo
tamen silentio praeterire, gratissimum vestrum nobis opus, quod leges nostras
antiquas, patrias, and haereditarias, Invitis, and reluctantibus nonnullis
innovatoribus, stabilire, and Juramento vestro confirmare dignatus es: Ita quod
recte appelleris legum nostrarum fulcrum, and columna: In eo aequans
Themistoclem in acie, qui fortissimus, and Aristidem in pace, qui Justissimus
erat: unde saniorum omnium sententia constat, summum pro merito vestro imperium
vestrae Celsitudini Jure deberi: Nam naturae lex est omnibus Communis, ut
deterioribus imperent meliores. Dyonis. Halicarnassaeus. Hor.
Sum superbiam
Quaesitam meritis.
Haecque omnia (...) and sine fuco profiteri non erubesco, nec pertimesco, quia
non est adulatio, vel supparasitatio, vera asseverare and praedicare, sed
potius pusillanimitas, and immodesta modestia, veritatem tacere, and celare.
Licetque summa petit livor, and eminentia invidia non Carent, sit tamen
Celsitudini vestrae, erectus, and undique quadratus animus uti semper, qui
instar cubi, nullis fortunae ventis, and procellis divelli, aut prosterni
poterit. Quod ut faxit summus ille Jupiter Stator, and Jehova noster.

Orat and obsecrat vester observantissimus and fidissimus subditus, Mich. Hawke.

To the Candid and Courteous Gentlemen and Students of the Colleges and
Seminaries of the LAWS, Originally styled the INNES of COURT and CHANCERY.
IT is the Theoreme of the Prince of Philosophers, That every Discourse, or
Speech stands and depends upon these three Pillars, Qui, de quo, ad quem
loquitur, The Author, the Subject, and the Auditor. And a Compendious Page of
every one of them may not be distasteful, nor incongruous to the intended scope
of this Codicill. In the handling of which, the Author deemeth it not
inconducent to invert the Order, Homeri more (...), and to take his Exordium
from the subject, or matter it self, as the more worthy, and to place the
person of the Author in the arrear, as the less worthy; for the matter it self
is more certain and evident, Et res ipsa loquitur, is the the firmest Argument,
and far surmounting validity of Authority; As Test me ipso, or ipse dixit: For
all Authors do often seem to strive and contend for supremacy, Patric. l. 2. de
princ. unius f. 65.
and sometimes accuse one another of falsity: as Caustrius and Lysymachus
accused Ephorus: Apollonius and Nicagoras, Theopompus: Phylostratus Sophocles,
and Pollio Herodotus; Neither have some abstained from Plato, whom Aristole
though his Scholar perstringeth in many passages, whom therefore Plato wittily
called (...), a mad Colt for kicking against his Damme and Master: Nay
Aristotle himself, who for his natural Reasons is of greatest authority, was
taunted and opposed by Vives, and Charronius, Ramus, and Mirandulanus, and in
this latter age by Paradoxicall Gassendus.

First therefore of the Subject, or the Matter subjected, which the
Philosophers part into the thing considered, or the matter handled, which they
call subjectum materiale, or the manner of considering the matter, which they
call subjectum formale, of both which the subject is constituted, which is
called Adaequatum. Now to apply this to our present purpose, The matter
considered in this Treatise is the grounds of the Laws of England, which in
the Volumnes of our Reports, and other writings have diverse names, Et primo de
nomine conveniat, quia res quidem verbis natura priores, sed disceptatione
posteriores: And first let us agree about the name, because things by nature
are before words, but hy desceptation and discourse words are before them.

Sometimes they are called Principles, as 8 H. 7. 4. It is a Principle, An
Estate of Frank tenement does not pass without Livery, but this name
Originally comes from the Grecians, and in this sense was used by Aristotle in
the first of his Physics, Contra negantem principia non est amplius
disputandum.

And sometimes they are called Maxims, as 34 H. 16. 33. It is a Maxim in our
Law, that in every action personal, the Non-suite of one, shall be the
Nonsuit of both; but this name is borrowed of the Latins, and is so used by
Boethus in his Logic, Boeth. Dialect. Sce. in Ar. Top. f. 3.
and is all one as Sceglius says, with a Topicall Axiom; for which reason Sir
Edward Coke gives it this latin Etymoligy, that they are called Maxims, Quia
maxima est eorum dignitas, Coke com.
and certissima authoritas, atque quod maxim omnibus probetur.

They are also sometimes called Eruditions, as by Dyer f. 66. It is a common
erudition, that in that County where the wrong is commenced, the Action shall
be brought; which name also received its Origin from the Romans.

But they are many times called grounds, as Dyer f. 30. There is another ground
of Tenure in chief, that it ought to be immediately from the King, and ought to
begin and take his Original creation by the King himself, and by none of his
Subjects, with infinite others, which name only has the sound and sense of an
English Notation, and therefore is this name prefixed to the Title of the
Author, most proper to our Law and Language: For a ground is a foundation in
Law, upon whose reason the structure of many particular Cases does stand. But
now the Name, or Shell is cracked and opened, the Kernel and nature of the
thing may more clearly be discovered, And this also must be by distinction,
which is the prime way of instruction: for qui been distinguit been docet, and
therefore premise that there are grounds and principles of essence and being
from which things have their beginning and constitution: and so are all causes
the grounds and principles of their effects, and there are grounds and
principles of knowledge, which are universal propositions, by which as the
more worthy and better known, other things are conceived, which are the
material subject of ^hi^ Treatise.

Arist. 1. post.
And these are either (...), or (...), natural, or positive, as the Philosopher
distinguishes them, natural grounds and principles are those, to which the
humane intellect by its native propensity does assent without any
ratiocination, and are either speculative, or practick, speculative are those
which immediately appertain to contemplation, as impossible est idem esse, and
non esse, it is impossible for the same thing to be, and not to be, and totum
majus est sua part, the whole is greater then the part, and practical are
those which reflect on the honesty and manners of men, as parents sunt
colendi, Parents are to be honored, and non est faciendum alteri, quod tibi non
vis, you ought not to do that to another you would not have done to your
self: So vim virepellere licet, it is lawful to repel force by force; both
which are called (...), common notions, and these, says the Philosopher, are
called prime principles, quia non ab alijs, sed a seipsis fidem habent, because
they have not their credit and authority from others, but from themselves, and
of these especially is the rule cited by Sir Edward Coke, to be understood,
principia probant, non probantur, Coke com. 343.
because the proof ought to be from an higher cause, and there is nothing more
supreme then a principle, yet if any be so absurd to deny them, they may be
proved a posteriori, or by induction, as if one should deny, totum esse majus
sua part, it may be proved by the examination, and proportion of every
particular part, and if any one should deny the fire to be hot, let his hand be
put to it, and it is proof sufficient.

Thetick and positive grounds and principles are those, which are placed in
Arts and Sciences to manifest, and prove their propositions and conclusions,
and are drawn from the secondary Law of nature and reason, Dod. Eng. Lawy. 208.
and therefore by Cicero are called, consequentia naturae, as the others prima
naturae, and by Sir John Doderidge, primary, and secondary propositions,
primary which are known notions, whose clearness, and evidence causes every
one to yield to their consent; and secondary, which are descended and derived
from the branches as from a root, or rivers from a Fountain, as sublata causa
tollitur effectus, the cause being taken away, the effect also cease, and qui
tacet, consentire videtur, he which is silent seems to consent.

And these general grounds and propositions, are the foundations of all Arts
and Sciences, for the course and proceeding in every one of them is deduced
from general grounds and precepts, which are so necessary, that without them
we cannot attain to the knowledge of the Species, Dod. Eng. Law. f.
and individualls, for the Physician when he undertaketh the cure of a malady
in some singular person, he effects it not by sense and Symptoms, but by
reason and Aphorisms, and so also does the Legist, who though he exercises
his practice on particular men's cases, yet does he judge of the right by
universal grounds and maxims, Coke com. f. 11.
which therefore by Sir Edward Coke are called the grounds of Art and
conclusions of reason, Ployd. f. 29.
and by Mr. Ploydon, the foundation of the Laws, Fortesc. de Leg. Ang. f. 21.
and conclusions of reason; so also says Sir John Fortescue, that the
principles, and efficient causes of our Laws are certain universalls, which
the learned in the Laws of England call grounds and maxims.

Yet is not the Art and Science of the Law of the like certainty with other
Arts and Sciences, by reason of the variable condition of the subject whereupon
it is employed, consisting only upon a man's changeable, and inconstant
conversation, from whence the grounds and knowledge of all Laws are in
generality derived, and upon which they are commonly exercised, and therefore
to that purpose says the Philosopher, Arist. 1. Eth. c. 3
that (...), honest and just things of which the politic, and civil Science
considers, contain in them, so great differences, and errors as they seem
only to consist by Law, and opinion, and not by nature, whereupon Sir John
Doderidge judiciously collecteth, that it is almost impossible to make any
secondary ground of Law, but that it will fail in some particular case, whence
springs this often used assertion, non est regula quin fallit, there is no
rule but fails, and therefore the ordainers, Dod. 3. L. f. 209.
and interpreters of Laws, respect rather those things which may often happen
and not every particular circumstance, for which, though they would, they
should not be able by any positive Law to make provision.

By reason whereof they do permit, the Grounds and Maxims of the common Law,
upon argument and disputation of reason to be restrained by exceptions.

Yet does not the exception so framed upon any ground or rule to which it is
annexed, impeach the credit of the said ground, but as Sir Edward Coke, and Sir
John Doderidge, firmat regulam in omnibus casibus non exceptis, Coke com. Dod.
E. Laws f. 210.
corroborateth the rule in all cases which are not excepted.

Melancton in his Logic adds another ground and principle which exceeds
the Philosophers apprehension, to wit, principium patefactionis divinae, the
principle of divine revelation, which our Law also holds to be the prime
principle, and ground of all the rest, for as Prisot a principal Justice of the
common Pleas says, 24. H. 8. 46. 1.
we ought to give credit to all such Laws as are taken out of the holy
Scriptures, for that it is the common Law upon which all Laws are founded, and
from which all other Laws do proceed, and therefore may be called divine
Laws as they are conjoined with the moral Law, and have divine authority, as
also humane Laws as men by their knowledge do judge all humane affairs.

It follows that we now inquire, of the manner of considering the grounds and
rules of our Laws, which is by the extraction of them out of the root, and
fountain of other Acts, and Sciences, for as reason is the mother of the
rules, and grounds of all Acts, and Sciences, so are they by the same reason
united, and cemented together, as that the grounds and rules of one Science are
adjuvant, and auxiliary to another, which the Author has fully and expressly
demonstrated in the preamble, and frontispice of the first Book of this
treatise, to which he refers the Reader; And to which may be annexed the
method which also may be called a manner, and form of considering, concerning
which the Judges and Sages of our Laws do dissent and vary, whether any, or
what manner of method is to be used in the sustemes and digests of our Laws,
for the antique, and neoterique reporters and writers of our Laws respect more
the matter then the method; And Sir Edward Coke, being advised by King James at
some opportune time to reduce the common law into a more commodious method,
Coke l. 4. Ep. ad lectorem.
did much doubt of the fruits of his labor, if he should undertake it, and so
does Sir Francis Bacon freely profess, that though he could have digested the
rules of our Laws into a certain method, and order, yet does he of purpose
avoid so to do, but Sir Henry Finch has endeavored, In his preface to his
rules and maxims of the Law.
and fairly proceeded in reducing not only the body of our Laws into a
compendious method, but also the grounds and rules of the same into an
Academicall order, for which rarity he has merited this Elogy, rara avis in
lege rubicula.

Haecque alter cantipotior sententia visa est, Order being the ornament of all
things, and method the best art of memory to which purpose Sir John Doderidge
asserteth, that if there be any way extant, Dod. E. Law. 253.
to purge the English Laws, from the great confusions of tedious, and
superfluous reiterations; wherewith the reports are infested, it may be brought
to pass by the way of grounds and rules, or by none, for by rules and
exceptions, all Sciences are, and have been published, put down and delivered,
and whereas Galene proposes three ways, reasons, and methods of teaching and
learning, the one way by composing, and proceeding from the parts to the whole,
and the other by resolving the whole into parts, and the third by defining,
which by explication of the nature of the whole, examineth every particular
appertaining to the whole. This third and latter may aptly be applied to the
grounds and rules of Sciences; as in Physic, to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates,
and more especially to the grounds and rules of the Law, which by the newer
Civilians is taken for a definition, who accordingly do define a rule to be a
short definition, or a sentence, whenas indeed many like cases are concluded in
a short delivery, not by the expression of the particular cases, but by the
assignation of the same reason, and is nothing else but a compendious oration,
Br. in regulas juris, f. f. 15. and 346.
wherein many things are briefly and absolutely delivered and declared, and so
do the Greek interpreters call a definition (...), which also may be orderly
disposed into a Methodicall, and an Alphabeticall Table, fit and convenient
both for the speedy finding of that we would seek, and wish for which the
Author in the Table of this treatise has accurately observed.

And besides has been diligent to reduce them into a more artificial order,
by drawing the grounds and rules of our free and Municipall Laws, from the
Springs and Heads of the liberal Arts and Sciences, and by that means has
brought them into a more convenient form, and method, which he ingenuously
acknowledges to have borrowed of Sir Henry Finch, and Mr. Noy, quia ingenuum
duxi, profiteri per quos profecissem, and to which according to his slender
skill he has added, a copious amplification, seriously upon mature,
deliberation, conceiving that all the Grounds, and Principles of our Laws may
be placed, disposed, and contained under some of those Heads; and consequently
every particular case under the general, and several grounds in every one of
them, for as Sir Edward Coke, principium est quasi primum caput, Coke com. f.
345. a.
a principle is the prime Head, from the which many cases have their beginning,
and original, and therefore has the Author disposed as many particular and
several cases under every general and several Heads, as he could
conveniently collect, and accumulate having learned of the said Author, that
there is no particular case in the Law so sterill, but that the Student at one
time, or another may make use of it, for the defect of which Sir Francis Bacon
taxes the Civilians in his preface to his Maxims, which though the Author
has not completed, yet has he endeavored so to do, and made way for others
to effect it, Et sit nobis voluisse fat.

But now Gentlemen the Author turns his style toward you who are the
coronides of his labors, and lucubrations, and to whom they are devoted, and
directed; for ye are legum nostrarum alumni, fed and nourished with the teates
and tra^^ates of the Law, and therefore (...), as proper and idoneous auditors
of the Grounds and Principles thereof, and did forbear to commend them to the
Rabbis, and Papinians of our ^awes for that were to instruct Minerua, or to
submit them to the Judgment of illiterate Lozels, for they would contemn what
they did not conceive, so as he may say of these writings, as Caius Lucilius
did of his quod ea que scriberet, neque ab indoctissimis, Cicer. de oratore l.
2.
neque a doctissimis legi velle, quod alteri nihil intelligerent, alteri plus
fortasse quam ipse de se, that those things, which he should write, would not
be read of those were most learned, nor of those were not learned at all,
because these understood nothing, and the others perhaps more then himself,
and sic, Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libellis,

To your therefore indifferent and debonaire Judgments has the Author
destinated this discourse, as the immediate, and adequate object of the same,
it neither transcending, or surmounting your capacities, nor being inferior, or
subordinate to your conditions, or proficiencies whence he is used to presume
on your affable and gracious acceptance, because by nature all men are rapaces
similium, and covetous of those things are conformable to their conceptions and
conditions, and for this reason confidently assumeth to himself, that the
consideration of these grounds and principles will be consonant and pleasing to
your affections, especially when you shall perceive the great and various
utility, which from the election of them may proceed, for as in natural
operations, the necessity, and utility of the thing is predominant, so in
moral and civil affairs, the use and commodity is prevalent, and as Galen in
all things, Vincat utilitas,

The prime use therefore which accrueth from the collection of these Grounds
and Principles, is the confirmation of our memory, which is the treasury and
perfection of all learning and erudition, for whereas our annalls, and reports
do consist of particular cases, and every particular case has his several
circumstance, and circumstances are singular, and in regard of us infinite, and
therefore hardly, if not impossible to be retained in memory, according to the
dictate of Bracton, omnia in memoria tenere divinum est potius quam humanum,
yet by these Grounds and Principles, is this oblivious defect salved and
re-remedied, for by the observation of these grounds, he will be instructed to
remember the reason of them, by which he shall resolve all doubts of like
degree, as if he had remembered the express cases from which the same reason
and ground is reduced; so as by their brevity they strengthen us, and
coroborate the memory: Quintil. l. 2.
For as Quintilian, sententiae feriunt animum, and uno ictu frequenter
impellunt, and ipsa brevitate magis haerent, Sentences strike the mind and with
one blow, commonly conquer it, and by their brevity stick more firmly, that,
is in the memory: And therefore did Pythagoras, and the ancient Philosophers
deliver their moral and civil Discipline by Aphoristicall Precepts, and
Laconicque sentences, that they might more easily apprehend and retain them in
memory, which also may appear by the Proverbs of Solomon, and by the Aphorisms
of Hyppocratis, and the Precepts of Theognis, Bacon in his Preface to his Rules
and Maxims.
and Phocilides, but chiefly as Sir Francis Bacon observes by the Praecedents
of the Roman Civil Law, who have taken the same course with their Rules: Dod.
E. l. f. 56.
From whence as Sir John Dodridge collecteth that many Axioms and Rules are
borrowed and usually frequented in our Law, which do more aptly and fitly
express the same reason in shortness of speech: which by Mr. Ployden are
sometimes cited and called the Text of the civil Law, Ployd. f. 368.
and by Sir Ed. Coke oftener, but for the most part by him concealed, in
sometimes altered, which may be observed or the passages of the Author, who
commonly conjoyneth the Civil Rule, with our Common Law ground.

Besides, it is not unknown almost to every Puny, what a laudable and difficult
task it is to argue a case accurately upon a Quaere, or Demurrer in Law,
wherein by the election of Grounds and Maxims, the Lawyer is taught to abound
in matter fit for Argument; For as Mr. Ployden, Ployd. f. 27. b.
there are two principal things upon which Arguments may be made, to wit,
Maxims and reason the Mother of all Laws: and Maxims, says he, are the
foundations of Laws, and conclusions of reason; whereby is manifested the help
and assistance, that Grounds and Maxims do yield in the discussing of such
Arguments, which consist in the apt application of the said Grounds and
Maxims, unto such particular Cases falling in debate.

To which the Author will only add one Use more, least he should exceed the
limits of a better, which according to Cicero's example, ought to be short and
pithy, and that is the accumulation of the Grounds and Maixms, into a breviary,
and compendium collected out of the classick and authentic Authors of our
Laws, which as Politian eligantly, Laboriosius ille fuit qua^ sibillae folia
colligere, was more laborious to him, then to collect the scattered leaves of
the Sibils: and in framing of which he may say with the witty Poet, Saepe caput
scaberet and vivos roderet ungues. And of which he may not unfitly say with
Lucretius, Floriferis ut apes in saltibus omnia libant,
Omnia nos itidem depascimur aurea dicta,
Aurea perpetua semper dignissima vita.


All which though through the brevity of time and importunity of the Press, he
could not compose into a compendious lump, yet has he gathered together the
chiefest and choicest of them, and more then any other Collector before him, to
the number two a hundred.

All which comprised, Tanquam in pala annuli, into a little compass the Author
affectionately presents to your benign animadversion, which you have here,
Ad manum, prepared to your hand, to make use of them upon any fit and opportune
occasion.

But now is it high time for the Author to appear on the Stage, who though in
the flower of his age was initiated into the honorable house of the Middle
Temple, and for the space of these twenty Summers, has principally devoted his
studies to the knowledge and pract^ce of our Laws: Et sic tractent fabrilia
fabri: yet does he modestly acknowledge, that the theme of this Tractate, is an
Obje^ too high for his inferior flight, and not to be reached by a Musket, or a
Sparrow-Hawk, but by an Eagle, or Birds of a more soaring, or surmounting
flight. Howsoever proposing unto himself the Pattern and Protestation of
Cicero, Quod omnes ii sumus, Cic. l. 2. de Orat.
ut sine studiis nullam vitam esse dicamus, That we are all of that opinion,
that without study and labor there is no life: And the advice of Sir Edward
Coke, Omnes debere jurisprudentiae libris componedis animum adjicere, That all
men ought to addict their minds to the composing of Books of the Law. He did
rather choose to incur the censure of temerity and audacity, then to undergo
the ignominy of oscitation and idleness, of which, as Cato says, Every one
ought to give a reasoable account, especially those who are stepped into years,
in whom nothing is more dishonorable, and ignominious, according to the
sentence of Sedulous Seneca, Cricitas de hon. dis. l. 1. c. 8.
Nihil est turpius, quam grandis natu senex, qui nullum habet vitae suae
argumentum, quo diu se vixisse dicat, praeter aetatem, There is nothing more
foul and filthy then a very aged man, who has no other argument of his life,
by which he may signify he has lived, beside his old age. And though it is
the observation of the Philosopher, (...). All men love their own Works, Arist.
4. Eth. c. 1.
as Parents and Poets do: yet does the Author acknowledge with Cicero, Quod
nihil meorum magnopere miror, That he never admired any of his own works, but
says with Ovid, Ipse mihi nunquam Judice me placui. That he could never as yet
by his own Judgment please himself, though it always has been his ambition to
please others, according to the option of the Consular Poet, Optabam ut
placeam, sin minus ut taceam. And this modest lesson has the Author learned of
the great Legist Sir Edw. Coke, Nulla scientia, Coke com. f. 494.
nulla virtus locum suum, and dignitatem conservare potest sine modestia, no
science, nor virtue can preserve its place, and dignity without modesty, and
accordingly does he close up his discourse with the conclusion of Bracton,
postulans a Lectore, Brac. l. 1. f. 1.
ut siquid superfluum, vel perperam positum in hoc opere invenerit, illud
corrigat, vel emendet, vel connuiventibus oculis pertranseat, requesting this
of the Reader, that if he shall find any thing superfluous or placed amiss in
this work, that he will either correct or amend it, or with conniving eyes
pass it by.

Or rather with our great Master Littleton.

Si componere magnis, Ovid.

Parva mihi fas sit.
That he would not have you believe, that all that he has said in this Book
is Law, for he will not presume to take that upon him, but of such things,
which are not Law enquire, and learn of his Sage Masters learned in the Law.

THE GROUNDS OF THE LAWS OF ENGLAND. Extracted out of the Root and Fountain
of other ARTS and SCIENCES. LIB. I.
SECT. I.
IT is the observation of Cicero who excelled in the knowledge of all humane
Arts and Sciences, Cic. 3. de. orot.
Omnes a^tes quae ad humanitatem pertinent habent commune quoddam vinculum and
quasi cognatione quadam inter se continentur. All Arts and Sciences which
appertain unto humanity, have a certain common bond and tie, and are as it
were contained by a certain alliance and affinity amongst themselves, and
truly, for they are the issue of one Womb descending from the same intellect,
and are by nature so linked and chained together, that those principles which
are true in one Art and science are reciprocally true in the other, for truth,
absolutely and materially is one and the same, though formally or relatively,
either in respect of the Artists or the diverse objects of Sciences, it be
severed, which proceeds from the various mode of the application and
consideration of it. Neither is Theological and Philosophical truth opposite
but subordinate, and Theology is not against Philosophy but above it, neither
do the principles of one science supplant the principles of another science,
but mutually aid and assist each other with their principles in searching and
sifting out of the truth, which is practically app^rent in the art and
discipline of the Law, Nomot. f. 6.
which borrows most of her principles from other sciences; in so much, as Sir
Henry Finch elegantly, The sparks of all Sciences are raked up in the ashes of
the Law, for which reason Sir Edward Coke aptly styles it scientia socialis,
L. 5. ^8.
a sociable science because it agrees with other excellent sciences both
divine and humane, and therefore the Author deemeth it operae p ecium, a work
worth the labor, to demonstrate as it were in a mirror and blazon the affinity
and aliance that the gr^unds of the Laws of Eng^and have with the principles
of other arts and sciences, who by an intellectual chain are divinely linked
and conjoined: and because Theology is the prime and divine Metaphysics, ars
^rtium, and scientia scientiarum, and the cynosure of all laws, for as
Augustine, in illa temporali l^ge nihil est justum ac legitimum, quod non ex
hac aete^na homines derivaverint, in this temporal Law nothing is just and
lawful, that men have not derived from the law eternal, and therefore does
the Author deduce his exordium from it, because as Sir Edwa d ^oke, it is causa
causarum, and that the common law is grounded on the Law of God, and as the
mirror of justice, the common Law is nothing else but ancient usages warranted
by Scriptures, from hence are drawn these grounds and maxims.

1. Summa ratio est quae p^o religione facit, Reg. l. c. Coke l. 5. f. 18, a.
it is the chiefest reason which makes for religion, as in many cases the King
is bound by Act of Parliament, though he be not named in it, nor bound by
express words. And therefore all Statutes which are made for suppressing of
wrong or to prevent the decay of religion, shall bind the King though he be not
named, lor religion and justice are the sure supporters of the Crown, and
diadem of Kings. So the act of 1 Eliz. which restrains ecclesiastical
persons from spoiling and wasting their possessions, which were given to
maintain the service of God, shall bind the King unless that special
provision had been made to the contrary by the said Act

2. Coke l. 11. f. 70. a. b. Magdalens College Case, the Master and fellows
of Magdalens College by Indenture inrowlled, did grant to the Queen an house
paying fifteen pounds rent yearly, etc. and it was resolved by all the Judges
that the Act of the 13. Eliz. did extend to restrain them to convey the said
house (parcel of the said college) to the Queen, though she was not in that
expressly named, because it was for the advancement of Religion etc. for out of
those Colleges the Church was furnished with grave and reverend Divines, for
the instruction of Christians in the true Religion, which is a maine Pillar of
the Crown, and if the King should be exempted out of it, the utter
impoverishment of the successors, and by consequence, the decay of Religion
would ensue, vide.

3. Coke l. 2. f. 44. b. A lay man concerning payment of Tithes, may prescribe
in modo decimandi, but not in non decimando, because he is not but in special
cases capable of Tithes by the common Law, and therefore without special
matter showed, he shall not be intended to have a legal discharge: And
therefore in favor of religion and the Church, though he may have a legal
beginning, yet the law will not suffer such a prescription in this case, nor
put it upon the trial of the lay people, who will rather strain their
consciences for their own private gain and benefit, then give the Church its
due: And the Law has great policy in it, for the decay of the Revenues of the
Church in the end will be the subversion of Religion and the service of God,
etc. vide.

4 Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris, meliorem facere potest conditionem,
deteriorem nequaquam, Cok. Com. 141. a. The Church exercises the Office of a
minor and can make its condition better but not worse, for it is the chiefest
reason which makes for Religion: And therefore in all cases a Parson or Vicar
of the Church for the benefit of the Church has a qualified fee, but in many
cases to do any thing to the prejudice of the Church he has in effect but an
estate for life.

As a Parson, Vicar, etc. may have an action of Waste, and in the Writ it shall
be said, ad exheredationem Ecclesiae. So the Parson that makes a Lease for
Life shall have a consimili casu during the life of the Leasee, and a Writ of
Entry ad communem legem after, or a Writ ad terminum qui preterijt, or a quod
permittat in the debet, which no man can maintain but Tenant in Fee-simple or
Fee-tayle, vide.

But a Parson cannot make a discontinuance, for that should be to the prejudice
of his Successor to take away his Entry and drive him to a real action, but if
he dye, the Successor may enter notwithstanding the discontinuance. And if a
Parson make a Lease for years reserving rent and dies, the Lease is
determined, neither will the acceptance of the Successor make it good, vide.

5. Prelatus Ecclesiae suae conditionem meliorem facore potest sine consensu,
deteriorem vero nequaquam sine consensu, Coke Com. fol. 103. a. As neither
Bishop nor Parson cannot disclaim or divest any fee is invested in his house or
Church. But an Abbot or a Prior with his Covent, or a Bishop with his Chapter,
or a Parson with his Patron and Ordinary, may pass away any Inheritance, for
the wisdom of the Law would not trust one with the Inheritance of the Church;
which always makes for religion and the good of the Church.

6. Dies dominicus non est dies juridicus, Ployd. 265. The Sabbath day is no
day for Law: As upon a Fine levied by Proclamations according to the Statute of
4. H. 7. C. 24. If any of the Proclamations be made on the Sabbath day, all the
Proclamations be erroneous, for the Justices must not sit upon that day, but it
is a day exempted from such Businesses by the Common Law, for the Solempnity of
it; to the intent that the people may apply themselves that day to the service
of God.

No Plea shall be holden Quindena Pasche, because it is always the Sabbath,
but shall be Crastino quindenae Pasch. Fit. Not. fo. 17. f.

Upon a Scire facias out of the Common Bench, an Error was assigned because the
Test of the Scire facias was upon a Sunday: And it was adjudged Error, because
it was not Dies Ju^idicus, Dyer 168.

No sale upon a Sunday shall be said to be sale in a Market overt to alter the
property, 12 E. 4 8.

Although Sunday is not Dies Ju idicus, and that no judicial Act ought to be
acted on that day, yet ministerial Acts, as to arrest or serve Process are
allowed, for otherwise peradventure they should never be executed, and God
forbid that things of necessity should not be done on that day, for bonum est
been facere die Sabathi, but this distinction and exception is taken away by a
late Act made in the long Parliament of England, yet did that Parliament in
case of necessity once sit upon the Lords day, which is the high Court of
Justice, and from which there is no appeal.

By the Statute of Magna Charta, Cap. 14. no spiritual Parson shall be amerced
according to his spiritual benefice but according to his Lay fee, Fitz. Not.
br. f. 76. b. And that in favor of Religion.

7. Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt deod inda, Coke l. 5. fol. 110. b. any
unreasonable thing killing a man by misadventure is forfeited to the King, and
every thing moveing with it is forfeited also to the King: As if a man being
upon a Cart carrying Faggots, and as he is in binding them together falls
down by the motion of one of his Horses in the Cart and dies of that, both
that and all the Horses in the Cart, and the Cart it self are forfeited, 8. E.
2. 307. A man falls from a stack of Corn and dies, it is forfeited, 2. E. 3
140.

If any Horse strike one and I ^lien my Horse, and he dies, my Horse is
forfeited, because the forfeiture shall have relation to the stroke given,
Ployd. 260. b. K^llaway, 68. b. but it is not forfeited until the matter be
found on record, and therefore it cannot be by prescription, and the Jurors that
find the death must also find and apprize the goods, Coke l. 5. fol. 11. b.

And therefore are they called Deodands, quasi deodanda, that is, El^emosynas
eroganda, to be disposed in Alms and works of Charity, 17. E 4. 2. and for
that reason does the King grant them to his Almoner, to the intent they should
be disposed of by him accordingly.

Actus dei nemini facit inju^iam, Cok. Com fol. 148 So much is the reason of
the Law ruled by Religion, as it will not permit the Act of God to prejudice
any one, as if Tenant for another man's life grants a Rentcharge to one for
one and twenty years cesty que vie dies, the Rentcharge is determined, and
yet the Grantee during the years may have a Writ of Annuity for the Arrearages
incurred after the death of cesty que vie, because it determined by the Act of
God.

Cok. l^b 8. fol. 72. Hales Case. An Office is found that the Heir is in ward,
who after he was of full age tendreth his Livery, and was admitted to it, the
Heir within three months, which is the usual time to sue out his Livery,
bargaineth part of his Lands by Deed enrolled, and within the three months
dies, the bargain was adjudged good, and that the Heir should have no
prejudice, because the suing of his homage, and suing out of his Livery,
without default in him was become impossible by the Act of God, and Impotentia
excusat l^gem; and is all one as if the King had taken the Homage of the Heir,
when the Heir made his tender, vide ibidem p^u^a.

Coke lib. 8. fo. 63 a. If an House fall by tempest or other Act of G^d, the
Lessee for life or years has a special interest to take Timber for the
buil^ing of the house again, if he will, for his habitation, but if he pull
down the house he shall not have Timber to build it, because it is his own
Act, and the Lessor shall have an Action of Waste.

Coke lib. 1. 98. a. If a Lessee Covenanteth to leave the Wood in as good
plight as it was at the time of the Lease, and after the Trees are subverted by
Tempest, he is dischar ed of his Covenant, causa qua supra, Cok. l. 5. fol. 86.
a. B^unfeilds Case. If the Defendant in debt, dies in Execution, the Plaintiff
shall have a new Execution, by Elegit or Fieri facias, because the death of the
Defendant is the Act of God, which prejudiceth no man.

Nunquam prospere succedunt res huma^ae ubi negliguntur res divinae, Cok. Com.
fo. 54 b. humane affairs never succeed well where divine rites are neglected.
And therefore does that great Legist prescribe these Rules, to the Students of
the Law for their daily practice.

Sex horas somno, totidem des legibus aequis,
Quatuor orabis, des epulisque ^uas,
Quod super est ultra sacris largire Camaenis.
To sleep six hours allot, to the Laws twice three,
Four to your prayers, two to your Feasts may be,
And what remains, give to the Muse Divine.
Sect. 2.
IN the next place the art of Grammar is to be ranked, which amongst the
Liberal Siences has the Precedence, for it is Janua omnium artium, the
portall by which we enter into the knowledge of all Arts, and by which we
communicate our selves and studies to others; hence proceed these rules and
maxims.

Ignoratis terminis ignoratur ars, Cok. Com. 177. a. As in School Divinity,
Civil Law, Logic, and other Arts, there are words of Art, which are more
significant, then Grammatical, so are there in our Law terms drawn from the
Legal French, which are more apt and significant to express the sense of our
Laws then any other. Which words of Art being not conceived, that Art cannot
be comprehended. Whence he infers that the significations of words in all
Arts and Sciences are necessary, which Mr. Littleton in his Tenures ordinarily
observes, for certainly names which are instituted and imposed according to
the rational Analogy with things by wise and understanding men are as Plato
calls them (...) instructive instruments by which we are guided and directed
to the knowledge of the thing: And therefore in our discourse and disputation
this ever is to be observed, principium in omni re, and disputatione est nomen,
the words are first to be considered, Cok. Com. 68. a.

2. Loquendum ut vulgus, Coke l. 4. fo. 46. a. words shall be taken according
to their vulgar and ordinary construction, as though a person attainted be a
person convict and more.

Yet in the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2. It is said that an attaint by virdict is
taken as convict by virdict, so also it is taken, 3. H. 7. c. 1. and oftentimes
in common speech, the person convict is termed Attaint, for we are to speak as
the people use to speak; a grant of one hundred Acres of Land in such a Field,
and sixty in such a Field, and twenty Acres of meadow in such a Meadow, the
Acres shall be taken as they are known by estimation. But if I have a Close by
estimation twenty Acres, and by the Statute eighteen, if I grant ten of these
Acres, he shall have them according to the measure of the Statute, Popham fol.
191. And therefore says Ployd. fo. 169. It is the part of Judges to know the
common Language of the people, and to adjudge of those only according to the
common course. For he that takes a Lease for Lands in the North Country called
a tack, and in Lancashire it is called a firme-holte, and in Essex a Week, and
if he have taken it by these words used in that Country, there is no reason
that he should loose his Farm because he has used no other Language then is
used in his own Country: But the Judge ought to search and know the sense of
these words, and shall judge them according to the common usage, otherwise he
shall make great disturbance and confusion in the Common Wealth, ib. for verba
valent usu sicut nummi, and Cok. l. 6. fol. 64. b. concludes that it is well
said in Hills and Granges Case 170. It is the office of Judges to take and
expound the words which the common people use to express their intent,
according to their intent and not according to the true definition, vide ibidem
plura, Sr. Moyle Finches Case, and so Coke lib. 7. fol. 11. b. Calvin's Case,
whereas diverse books and acts speak of the Leagiance of England, all these
and others speaking breefly in a vulgar manner and not pleading are to be
understood of the Legiance due from the people of England to the King; and
therefore loquendum ut vulgus sed sentiendum ut docti for no man will affirm
that England it self taking it for the continent thereof does owe any legiance
and faith, or that any allegiance, or faith should be due to that: But it
manifestly appears that the Legiance and faith of the Subject is proprium
quarto modo, to the King, ibidem.

3. Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio, Dyer fo. 14. b. It is a rule in the
Grammar, that when a thing is dubious and may be referred to a double intent,
let the relation be to the next Antecedent: As the Condition of the Obligation
for marriage money, was: That if the wife dye before Michaelmas, without Issue
dyed, adjudged the Obligation was void, for then living relates to the first
Antecedent that is Michaelmas, and not to the death of the woman, ibidem.

Dyer fo. 46 b. A man was endicted of Felony per nom^n I. S. de in C m. pre.
serviens W. B. in eodem Com. Yeoman, and for defect of a sufficient addition to
I.S. he was discharged upon the Enditement, for Yeoman ought to be referred to
the master as the next Antecedent, and not to I.S. and servant is not a
sufficient addition 9. E. 4. So one Sibylla Batersby nuper de T. in Comitatu
Ebor. uxor Johanis Batersby nuper Spinster was endited of Felony and murder,
and for defect of the addition, she was discharged, for Spinster being an
indifferent addition for man or woman (for in Norfolk there are diverse men
which are worsted spinsters) must be referred to Johanis Batersby the next
Antecedent.

Tenant for life, the Remaind^r to B. in Tail, the Remainder to C. in eadem
forma, this is a good estate Tail, for idem refertur proximo antecedenti, Cok.
Com. fo. 20. b.

Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio nisi impediatur sententia, Cok. l. 2. fol.
71 a. Sr. Cromwells, Case and Dyer. fo. 13 b. although the rule be true, that
the relation for the most part ought to be ad proximum antecedens, yet many
times if it be hindered by the sense and meaning it is otherwise, for sensus est
anima legis. Cok l. 5. f 2 sense is the soul of the Law, and has a special
sway and rule in all Cases, so a man is bound to abide the award of I. S. and
he awards that the one party shall pay before such a feast ten pound to
another, and that then he shall make him a release, Tunc shall not be referred
to the Feast but to the time of the payments clearly.

So I.S. bargaineth and sells his Land to I N. for ten pound and predictus
Johanes Covenanteth to deliver the Evidences of the Land, it shall be
understood of the first Iohanes S. the vendor, who by common intendment has
the Evidences, so a man grants to one a pention, that I. B. had donec sibi
provisum fuerit de competenti beneficio: this word sibi shall be referred to
the grantee, and not to I. B. so in a cui vita, brought by a Feme, the Writ is
cui ipsa in vita contradicere non potest, the word shall not be referred to the
next antecedent ipsa but to the husband, otherwise the sense should be
imperfect, Dyer, Ibidem f. 15. b.

So Dyer f. 46. b. I. G. was indicted before the Coronor of the death of Emelin
Gager his wife, and the Indictment was that the said Emelin was in pace domini
regis, quousque ante dictus Iohanes Gager vir prefate Emelin Gager de Hambridge
predicta in commitatu predicto, Yeoman, and the Indictment was held good, and
that there was no defect in the addition, for the word Yeoman could not be
addition to the Feme, though the next antecedent, but must necessarily be
referred to the husband, according to the sense and meaning

A Writ brought of rescuing goods, and denying to pay towle contra pacem, shall
be referred to the rescouse and not to the towle 30. E. 3. 15. because in it
consisted the breach of the peace.

Coke l. 8. f. 119. Adam de Clidrow brought a precipe against John de Clidrow,
and the Writ was quod just etc. reddat manerium de Wincomb and duas carrucatas
terre cum pertinentiis in Clidrow, in this case the Village of Clidrow shall
not relate to the Manor, because it wants not it, for a Manor may be
demanded without mention made, that it lies in any Village, but cum
pertinentiis though it come after the Village relates to the Manor, because
it wants it, Quia verba posteriora propter certitudinem addita ad priora quae
certitudine indigent sunt referenda, 6. E. 3. 12.

Impersonalitas non concludit nec ligat, Cok. com. 352. b impersonals do not
conclude or bind, and therefore every estopple ought to be a precise
affirmation of that which makes the estopple and not to be spoken
impersonally, as if it be said ut dicitur because impersonality does not
conclude any man; for impersonalitas dicitur quasi sine parsona, ibidem.

Negatio destruit negationem and ambo faciunt affirmationem, Coke Com. f. 146.
b. according to Grammatical construction a double negative makes an
affirmative, a distress was pro infecto servicio, the Defendant says, quod
non fuit infectum, and ruled as good as if he had said it was done, but
Grammatical curiosity shall not prevail in like cases, to avoid a Grant, as
upon a Rent charge issuing out of Land, the Proviso was, quod non presens
scriptum nec aliquid in eo specificatum non aliqualiter se extendat ad
onerandam personam meam. Nec non, in Grammatical construction does make an
affirmation, but the Law that principally respects the substance does judge
the Proviso to be a negative according to the intent of the parties, so as the
sense of those words according to the construction of the Law is, provided that
this present writing nor any thing therein specified shall any way extend to
charge my person, Coke Com. f. 146. a. b. so ibidem f. 223. b. If Lands be
given in tail, sub condition quod ipse nec heredes sui non alienarent, that
he nor his heirs shall not alien, in legal construction shall be taken
negatively, notwithstanding the double negative.

In disjunctivis sufficit alterum esse verum, Coke lib. 10. f. 59. a. The
Bishop of Sarums case, whereas the avowant did avow that the Office
supervisoris omnium maneriorum suorum, had been granted to such person or
persons as it pleased the Bishop, and the Defendant pleaded in the negative,
that the said office had not been granted, but for the life of one; that
exception was not allowed, because in that the advowant did not alledg that the
said office had been granted to diverse, but only to such person or persons,
and in disjunctives it is sufficient that one of them be true, ibidem.

So Coke Com. f. 225. a If the condition be in the disjunctive it is
sufficient to obey either of them, according to the rule Si plures conditiones
ascriptae fu^rint donationi divisim cuilibet, vel alteri eorum satis est
obtemperare and in disjunctivis sufficit alterum esse verum. If many coditions
be annexed to a gift severally or disjunctively it is sufficient to obey
every one or any one; and in disjunctives, it is sufficient if either of them
be true.

Si plures conditiones ascriptae sunt donationi conjunctim, omnibus est
parendum, and ad veritatem copulati^vam requiritur quod utraque pars sit vera,
Bracton lib. 2 f. 19 Coke com. f. 225. a. If many conditions be jointly annexed
to a gift, all of them must be obeyed, and to a copulative truth, it is
required that every part be true, and in a condition consisting of diverse
parts, in the conjunctive both parts must be performed, as if a man give Lands
in tail upon condition that if Tenant in Tail, or his heirs, alien in fee or
in tail etc. and also if all the issues coming of tenant in tail be dead
without issue, that then it shall be lawful for the Donor and his heirs to
enter, if tenant in tail in this case, or his heirs make any discontinuance,
he in the reversion and his heirs may enter after the estate tail is
determined for want of issue, for the reason abovesaid.

But if the condition or limitation be both in the conjunctive and
disjunctive, what then? as a Lease to the husband and wife for 21 years, if
the husband, wife, or any child between them shall so long live, and the wife
dies without issue, the Lease shall continue during the life of the husband,
for the disjunctive refers to the whole, and disjoyneth not only the latter
part as to the child but also to the Baron and feme.

And so it is that if an use be limited to certain persons until A. shall
come from beyond the Seas, and attain to his full age, or die, if he do come
from beyond the Seas, or attain to his full age, the use does cease, Coke
ibidem f. 225. e.

Grammatica falsa non vitiat instrumentum, Reg. I.C. decius, 3. f. 10. mala
grammatica non vitiat cartam, and sensus abreviationis accipiendus est, ut
concessio non sit inanis Coke l. 9. f. 48. a. false latin does not destroy a
Deed, or a Charter, and the sense of dashes, or abreviations is so to be
taken, that the grant be not void, as if the King grant tat. il. mannur. of C.
and D. and in truth there is but one Manor, then those abreviations shall be
taken in the singular number, totum illud manerium, and if there be two
distinct Manors, then shall they be taken in the plural number, tota illa
maneria, that the grant be not void, and 32. E. 3. A Fine was levied de
maneriis B. and H. and the conclusion was quare praedictum manerium B. and H.
ingressus est, and good by averment, that B. and H. were but one Manor, and
though a Writ shall abate for false Latin, because any one may purchase a new
Writ at his pleasure, yet in a grant it shall not, because he cannot purchase
a new grant at his pleasure.

As 4. H. 6 f. 16. the Writ was Henricus dei gratia Rex Angliae and Dus
Heberniae, whereas it should have been Dns and for it in congruity the Writ
did abate, but in a Deed that should have been good enough, and so in a fine
9. E. 3. warranty was made in a fine eidem galfrido and uxori suae, where that
should have been iisdem, and yet good, vide ibidem plura, and Co. l. 11. f. 3.
and Coke com. f. 146. ab. but because such exceptions do properly appertain
to Writs, Deeds, and Fines, which have heretofore been composed and levied in
the Latin tongue, and that by the Act of 9. April. 1651. it is enacted that
all Patents, commissions, and all proceedings whatsoever, in any Courts of
Justice within the Commonwealth of England, and which concern the Law and
administration of Justice, be made, and framed into the english tongue. I will
cease to heap more cases upon this rule they being chiefly in use, for
preterite Deeds, conveyances, and proceedings, though not altogether useless
in our English language, for it also has its grammatical constructions, and
sometimes abreviations, and therefore it is also in the above said Act enacted,
that mistranslations or variation in form by reason of Translation or part of
proceedings already begun being in Latin, or part in English, shall be no
error or avoid any proceedings by reason thereof.

Sect. 3.
THe Law has little relat ionto Rhetoric, and is too strict an argumentative
for that copious, various, and tropicall art.

Ornari res ipsa negat contenta doceri. Doctum genus in doctorum hominum ad
doceberniam vix docti.
But like ruggid and knotty timber rejects the rhetorical plain and outward
ornament, which moved the critticke Erasmus to deride it, and the civilian
Hottaman to despise it, not apprehending the depth and profundity of it, for
the Law as Sir Edward Coke is a deep well, out of which every one draws
according to the strength of his understanding, Cok. com. f. 7.1 a..
he which reaches deepest sees the admirable secrets of the Law, which though
in the beginning it seems difficult, yet when the student diveth to the
depth, it is delightful, and therefore as the same Author in another place
says, The generous student, Cok. com. f. 5. a.
ought not to be discouraged when he meets with knotty cases, nescit enim
generosa men's ignorantiam pati, but will proceed on his reading with alacrity,
to know how to work into with delight, those ruff Mines of hidden Treasure,
Coke com. f. 235.
to which work as he also says, the knowledge of the liberal arts is
requisite, especially the art of Logic to labor in that various and intricate
Labyrinth, for it teaches a man not only by just argument to conclude the
matter in question, but to discover between truth and falsehood, and to use a
good method, and reasonably to speak to any question, for it is nothing else
but ars rationandi, the act of reasoning, Coke com. f. 344. h.
and then we are said to know the law when we apprehend the reason of the
law, from whence arise these grounds and maxims, and first from notations which
by the consent of all Writers appertain to Logic.

Notationes sunt quasi verae rerum notae Fons. log. and Bracton L. 4. c. 20.
Ideo imposita sunt nomina ut demonstrent voluntatem dicentis, and utimur notis
vocis ministerio, notations are as it were the true notes of things, sor
therefore were they imposed that they might demonstrate the will of the
speaker, and we use them as notes in the ministry of our Language, as Socage
is servitium socae i.e. carucae, the service of the Plow, because that the word
soca was used for the Plow and the name of the court of Pypowders was derived
from the dusty feet of the comers, markets and faires being most frequented in
Summer, Lam. Arch. so religious houses were called monasteria, of the solitary
life therein led, which in latter days was nothing less, quia, as one,
pleraque monasteria nihil minus sunt quam solitudines, Dod. so the feudists in
the civil law deduce homagium from hominium, for by that name he does
profess himself his man and Client.

And such notations and etymologies are not to be wrested, but must be
answerable to the sound of the words, and applied to the sense, of which it is
said by Coke com. f. 68. b. that the right interpretations and etymologies of
words are necessary, which not only demonstrate their native conceptions, but
from them often produced arguments, which are frequent among the Civilians, as
well as by the common Lawyers, as Cicero arguing for Opimius, then Consul,
uses this notation, si Consul est qui consulit patria, quid alius est Opimius,
and Ployden 343 b. Testamentum est testatio mentis, for of those two words is
it compounded, and there is no other testation of the Testators mind here, but
for the twelve Acres, in Rigdens case, So Cok l. 8. 37. a. a Barrator is
derived of two legal words, bar which signifies the bar in Court where causes
are debated, and retium which signifies a crime and offense, because a common
barrator is chiefly an offender, in moving and maintaining of quarrels at
bars in Courts, and Coke l. 10. f. 128. a. reditus dicitur a reddendo quia
retro it, to wit to the Lessor or Donor, and that is the reason, that the Rent
so reserved is not due before the day of payment, because it is to be rendered
and restored of the issues and profits, vide.

Yet as Doderidge, such arguments are not to be used at all times, and
occasions, but when necessity requires the same, or apt consequence does offer
a fit occasion, or rather as Coke l. 7. f. 27. b. Calvin's Case. Arguments drawn
from Etymologys are too weak, or too light for Judges to build there Judgments
on, yet when they agree with the Judgment of the Law, Judges may use them for
Ornaments.

From the Predicable.
GEnerale nihil ponit, generale nihil certum implicat, Cok. l. 2. f. 33.34. in
Doddingtons Case, a generality determines nothing, and a generality implies
no certainty, as if a common person be bound to devise, or grant all his Lands
which he has within the tenure of I. B. in W. the Obligor may say that he has
no Land there, for general words imply no certainty: and with that accords
21. E. 4. If a man be bound to be nonsued in all Actions, that he has against
him in the Common Bench, he may say that he has no action therein, otherwise
if the condition be particular to wit that he shall be non-sued in a Formedon,
etc. so as that it appears, that general words imply no certainty, neither
do they conclude any person to say that he has nothing there, vide ibidem
plura.

Cok. lib. 8.78. a. Bospols Case. In an arbitrament when the submission is
general of all Actions and Demands, etc. that may well stand with the
generality of the words, that there was but one cause depending in controversy
between them. For general speeches imply no certainty, and the awa^d for one
is good, notwithstanding the generality of the words, for though there were
many matters in controversy, yet if one only was made known to the Arbitrator,
he may make an award of it: For the Arbitrator is in place of a Judge, and his
office is to determine secundum alligata, and probata, and the duty of the
parties which are greived, and know their particular greifes is to make known
the causes of controversy to the Arbitrator, for they are privy to them, and
the Arbitrator is a stranger, and every one is to do that which lies in his
knowledge, but when the condition is in special, and with a proviso and
condition that an award shall be made of the premises, or words which amount to
so much, there the Arbitrator ought to make Arbitrament of all, or else the
award is void.

Generalibus semper specialia derogant, Reg. f. c. Derg. 180. Quando charta
continet generalem clausulam, posteaque descen^it ad verba specialia, quae
clausulae generali sunt consentanea, interpretanda est charta secundum verba
specialia. f. 134. b. in Edward Althams Case. Which rule is almost word for
word put, and agreed of by both parties, In. 7. E. 3. f. 10. Margery Mortimers
Case, to wit, where a Deed speaks by general words, and then descends to
special words if the words special agree with the words general, the deed shall
be understood according to the words special: As if a man grant a rent in the
manor of P. to be taken in an hundred Acres of Land parcel of that Manor,
with a clause of distress in those hundred Acres, the Rent shall issue out of
the hundred Acres only, and the general words shall be construed according to
the words special, so if a man grant a Rent and go no further, those general
words shall create an estate for life, but if the Hab^ndum be for years, that
shall qualify the words general, 7. E. 3. So if a man give Lands to one and
his Heirs Habendum to him, and the Heirs of his body: He shall have only an
estate tail, and no fee expectant, for the Habendum qualifieth the general
words precedent, Ployd. f. 541. a. A man makes a Feoffment by Deed to one to
have, and to hold to him and his Heirs, and if it happen that the feoffee dies
without heir of his body, that then the Land shall revert: The generality of
that gift to him, and his Heirs shall be corrected by the special branch
after, so as the Donee shall have but an estate tail, 13. R. 2. in Formedon.

Dyer 261. b. A man seized in fee devises all his Lands in one village, and in
one of the two Hamlets by name, and there were two Hamlets in the said Village.
The opinion of diverse Justices was, that none of the Lands in the other Hamlet
should pass, for it is intendable that the intent, and meaning of the devisor
was, that nothing more should pass, then what he had expressed.

A. acknowledges a fine of the manor of P. with an advowson, and regrants the
manor with the Appurtenances, the advowson shall not pass, Temp. E. 1. F.
title grants.

Ployd. 173. b. If I give or lease all my Lands to one and stay there, he shall
have all my Lands in England, but if I say further, in the manner of Dale there
it is now restrained, but if the specialty limiteth a thing which is void, and
so appears, it is otherwise, as if I lease to one all my Lands in Dale, which
I have by descent of the part of my mother, and in truth I have no Lands in
Dale, which I have by descent of the part of my mother, if the Lessor have
other Lands in Dale he shall not have those.

Ployd. 160. a. A man gives Lands to two, Habendum to one for life, and after
his decease to the other and his Heirs, the one shall have the entierly for his
life only, notwithstanding the Jointure given in the Premises, by the better
opinion in term M. 8. E 3.427.

Generalibus semp^r specialia insunt, Reg. f. c. Specialls are always
contained in the generals, and the universalls always comprehend the
particular^, Ployd. f. 68. a. The plural number contains the singular and
more, and therefore was it resolved by all the Judges: That a pretensed right
and title was within the penalty of the Statute of 32. H. 8. for the buying of
pretensed rights, and titles, for pretensed rights and titles in the plural
number did contain a pretensed right and title in the singular number. And
whereas the Statute of 5 R. 2. c. 5. forbids that none make entry into any
Lands, or Tenements unless in case where entry is given by the Law, yet if one
enter into a Tenement he shall be punished, though the Statute speaks in the
plural number, and likewise whereas the Statute of 1. H. 5. speaks of false
Deeds in the plural number, yet if one bring but one false Deed he shall be
punished by the Statute as it is holden in many Books.

Ployd. f. 467. b. The Statute of Gloucester gives an Action of Waste against
him which holds for years, which is spoken in the plural number, yet may it
be taken for him which holds for a year, or half a year, vide ibidem plura.
Generalis clausula non porrigitur ad ea, quae sunt specialiter comprehenfa,
Coke l. 8. 118. b. It is a ground and maxim in the Law, that a general clause
is not extended to those things, which are specially comprehended, Doctor
Bonhams Case, by the Statutes of 10 and 14. H. 8. it was enactd, that no man
should exercise the faculty of Physike within the City of London, or within
seven miles of the said City unless he be admitted thereunto by the President,
and College of the faculty of Physike, and there is another special clause
contained in the said Acts, that any who evilly and not well exercise the said
faculty, etc. shall be punished by Fine and imprisonment, etc. and it was
adjudged that the said general clause, that none should exercise the said
faculty of Physike, unless he be admitted, etc shall not be extended to the
special clause for the punishment of fine and imprisonment, etc. but that it
specially shall be limited to such only as did offend only in not well
executing and using the said faculty of Physike, for a general cl^^^^ is not
to be extended to those things are specially comprehended, so 34. Eliz. f.
120. ubi A. seized of the manor of Stable in O. in the county of S in fee, and
also of other lands in the said O. in fee, suffers a common recovery of all,
and declares the uses by Indenture, that the recoveror shall stand seized of
all the lands and tenements in O. to the use of him and his wife, and the
heirs of his body, and dies, and after his death the wife enters into the
said Manor, by form of the said general words, but it was adjudged that
those general word^ did not extend to the Manor which was specially named.

Coke l. 4. f. 8^. b. Nokes case, clausula generalis non refertur ad expressa,
a general clause is not referred to those things are expressed, as where the
Assignee of a Lease shall have a Writ of Covenant upon those words demise, and
grant, yet if there be an express covenant that the Lessee shall enjoy it
without eviction of the Lessor, or any claiming under him, this express
Covenant qualifieth the generallity of the covenant in Law, and restrains it
by mutual consent of both parties that it shall not extend to the assignee.

Clausula generalis non porrigitur ad ea quae antea sunt specialiter
comprehensa, Coke, l. 4 131. l. 4. when the deed at the first contains
special words, and then concludes in words general, both the words as well
general as special shall stand, as Lands given to one and the heirs of his
body, Habendum to him and his heirs, he has an estate tail, and a fee
simple expectant, for as Dier. f. 56. b A deed by words subsequent may be
qualified and abridged, but not destroyed.

Dolosus versatur in universalibus and generalibus. Coke l. 3. f. 8. a. Twins
case, it is one of the Ensigns of fraud in a Deed of gift, if the gift is
general without the exceptions of his apparel or any thing of necessity, for
it is commonly said that the fraudulent is conversant in generals.

Coke l. 3. f. 57. b. Specots case, A Bishop ought not to show a general cause
for the refusal of a Clark, as that he is criminosus, or non idoneus, for they
are too general, and the fraudulent is exercised in generals, and therefore
so incertaine that no issue can be taken of them, as 2. E. 3. f. 6. The heir
ought to allege some certain cause of refusal, whence issue may be taken.

Generalia sunt praeponenda singularibus, it is a rule in the Register, that in
a Writ the general shall be put in demand, or plaint before the special, as
the Mesuage before lands, the Land before Meadow, Meadow before Pasture, and
Pasture before Wood, and Wood before Juncary, F. a. b. f. 2. E.

Ex verbo generali aliquid excipitur, Coke com. f. 47. a. An exception is part
of the thing granted, and in esse as exceptis, salvo, praeter, and out of a
general, a part may be excepted, as out of a Manor an acre, but not a part
out of a certainty, as out of 20, Acres one, Ployd. f. 361. a. A Lease of all
my Lands in D. except white acre, is void for white acre, and a gift of all my
horses except my black horse is void for my black horse.

Coke l. 10. f. 101. b. quando verba statuti sunt specialia ratio autem
generalis, generaliter flatutum est intelligendum, where the words of a statute
are special and the reason general, the statute is generally to be
understood; as the reason of the statute of 23 H. 6. whereby it was ordained
that no Sheriff should take any obligation by color of their office, but only
to themselves, and upon condition that the Prisoners appear at the day
contained in the writ, was for the avoiding of extortion and oppression, and
therefore is to receive a benign and favorable construction, and that in
equity not only a bond but an assumpsit is within the reason of that statute;
and so was it adjudged 27. Eliz. Trin. in the Kings Bench between Danhigh and
Hothcot, that if a Sheriff or Jailer for ease, or enlargement of any who is in
his custody, does take a promise of him to save him harmless, that though the
statute does only speak of an obligation, yet it is in equal mischief,
otherwise as Wray chief Justice said, the statute should serve for little or
nothing.

Multa transeunt cum universitate, quae per se non transeunt, Coke com. f. 142.
a. If a man seized of land as heir of the part of his mother, make a gift in
tail, or a Lease for life reserving a rent, the heir of the part of the
Mother shall have the reversion, and the rent also as incident thereunto, for
many things pass with the generallity which by themselves do not pass, so if
a man has a rent-seck of the part of his mother, and the Tenant of the Land
grant a distress to him and his heirs, and the Grantee dies, the distress
shall go with the rent to the heir of part of the Mother, as incident and
appertenant to the rent, for now is the rent-seck become a rent charge.

Singular distributive sumptum e aquat plurali, Dier. 328.. b. a singular
distributively taken, equalleth a plural, as in an assise, the Plaint is of
two Acres of Land, the Tenant pleads two bars several for the two Acres at
large, and the Plaintiff makes two several titles at large, to wit for every
acre one, the Tenant pleades, let the assise come upon the title in the
singular number, and the assise found one title for the Plaintiff and the other
for the Defendant against the Plaintiff, and judgment was given that the
Plaintiff should recover for one Acre, and be barred for the other.

Coke l. 10. Br. Lifiels case, A Lease is for one year, and that if they
agree, the Lessee shall have the Land for three years, rendering, during the
said term ten pounds yearly, this reservation goes to both terms.

Propria res est, quae solius est, sive uni soli convenit, Tholoss. Syntag.
lib. 5. c. 1. A propriety is that which is one man's only, and appertains
only to one man, Ploid. f. 308. b God made man the Sovereign over all living
creatures, and gave the rule of them all to man, Terram d^dit filiis hominum,
and so men by the endowment of God were made Lords of the earth and possessors
of all things in the earth, but how much land or things upon the earth one man
shall have and how much another, God has leased to man by laws by them to be
made and provided, and by such laws in every Realm and Country they are
provided and divided, and every man holds his Lands and things by the Laws
of the Land wherein he lives, and this commonly called the law of proeprty.

Nihil dat quod non habet, Arist. nemo potest plus juris in alium transfer
quam ipse habet, Coke com. f. 309. b it is a common erudition in the Law, that
no man can grant that he has not, Perkins f 15. for that is requisite that he
who by his contract shall make another possessor of any thing, should be the
pro^rietor of the thing it self, otherwise his contract is void, Ployd. f. 432
b. as if I possessed of an horse, sell the Horse upon condition to another,
that he pay to me at the feast of Christmas forty shillings for it, and before
the said feast I sell the horse to another, and after the feast, the first
Vendee fails of payment, by which I reseise the horse, the second Vendee shall
not have the horse, for at the time of the second contract I had neither
interest nor property nor possession of the horse, but only a condition which
is not sufficient to make me able to contract for the property and possession,
therefore it is merely void, Ployden.

So if a man grant a rent charge out of the Manor of Dale, and in truth he
has nothing in the Manor of Dale, and after purchases the Manor of Dale,
yet he shall hold it discharged, Perkins H. 15. So if one not seized of Lands,
makes a Lease to another, it is a good Plea for the Lessee to say that the
Lessor had nothing in the Tenements at the time of the Lease Litt. and the
reason of this is for that in every contract there must be, quid pro quo, for
contractus est quasi actus contra actum, and therefore if the Lessor had
nothing in the land, the Lessee has not quid pro quo, nor any thing for which
he should pay his Rent, and in that case he may plead that the Lessor non
dimisit, Coke Com. ibidem f. 41. b. vide ibidem plura.

If the Conusee of a Fine, before any Attornement, bargaineth and sells the
Signiory to another, the Bargainee shall not distraine, because the Grantor
could not distrain, for no man can transfer more right to another then he
himself has, Coke Com. 309. b.

Coke l. 6. f. 57. b. He that has no seisin in the Land charged cannot give
seisin of Rent, vide plura Bredimans; for no man can give that he has not.

The King pardons one for making a bridge, this is only good for the fine,
and he must make up the Bridge, because the Kings Subjects have interest in it,
37. H. 8.4.

Da tua dum tua sunt, post mortem tunc tua non sunt, Ployd. 280. a. when one
has property in goods, the property cannot be in him no longer then he lives,
for after his death the goods belong unto another.

Nemo videtur rem amittere cujus propria non fuit Reg. I. C. no man can loose
that of which he has no property, and therefore in a Replevin if the Defendant
claim property, the Sheriff cannot proceed, for it is a rule in Law, the
property ought to be tried by writ, and therefore in this case where the trial
is by plaint the Plaintiff may have a writ de proprietate probanda directed to
the Sheriff to try the property, and if thereupon it be found for the
Plaintiff, the Sheriff shall make deliverance, Coke Com. f. 145. b. F. n. b. f.
77. If A. endict B. for stealing of Horses, or other goods he must say de
bonis, and catallis cujusdam, A. For if there were no property there could be
no stealing, or injury, for nemini vim facere videtur, qui suo, and non alieno
utitur, Reg. I. c.

Nemo reditum invito domino percipere, and possidere potest, Coke Com. 303. b.
no man can receive, or possess another man's Rents against the will of the
Lord, as if one hold of me by Rent, which is service ingrosse, and another
which has no right, claims the rent, and receives it of my Tenant by
coertion of distress, or otherwise, yet by the payment of my Rent to a
stranger, I cannot be disseised, or ousted without my will or election, but
that I may distrain my Tenant for the Rent, or have an assize against the
^ernor, Lit. for a man cannot be disseised of a a Rent-service in gross,
Rentcharge, or Rent-seck, by Attornment or payment of Rent to a stranger, but
at his election, for the rule of the Law is, no man can receive, or possess an
other man's rent against his will, Coke ibidem.

Quod meum est id amplius meum esse non potest. Coke Com. f. 49. b. And
therefore if lessee for years, enter, he is in actual possession and then
Livery cannot e made to him, that is in actual possession, whereby the
Franke-Tenement or fee may inure to him in the remainder, for that which is
once mine cannot be more mine, ibidem.

Thirdly, From the Anteprecedents. Aequivocum and Univocum.
AEQuivocum denotes words of ambiguous, and many significations, which as
Boethius, signifies nothing, nisi ad quasque res secundum voluntatem
significantis applicetur, unless they be applied to the thing according to the
will of him that declares, or expounds them, of which the Law takes notice,
and gives these grounds, and maxims,

Nobiliores, and benigniores presumptiones in dubijs, sunt praeferendae, Reg.
P. C. And Coke l. 4. f. 13. b. Benignior sententia in rebus generalibus, and
dubijs est praeferenda. In doubtful speeches, and sentences, the more
favorable presumption, and opinion is to be perferred. As if one does charge
another that he has forsworn himself, by the Law it is not actionable, for
it may be he has forsworn himself in usual conversation, but an action is
only maintainable against him that has forsworn himself in Court of Record,
so ibidem f. 21. An Action upon the case was brought for these words, for my
Lands in Dallinson they seek my life, adjudged not actionable because he may
seek his life upon just cause, which are the more favorable constructions.

So verba accipienda sunt in meliori sensu. Hub. f. 106. Coke l. 4. f. 13.
Words are to be taken at the best for the speaker, though some of them cannot
stand with that construction. As, thou art a Thief, and have stolen a Tree, it
shall be adjudged of a Tree standing, not felled which is not actionable.

But as it is said, there in Hubberd 106. This rule holds not in Deeds, and
Pleas, for in those words are taken more strongly against the speaker, of which
this reason may be given, because commonly words in common language proceed of
a sudden from choler and heat, whereas words in Deeds and Pleas are grounded
upon mature deliberation, and consideration, and therefore in Deeds this is a
general ground. Ambiguum pactum contra venditorem interpretandum est, Reg. I.
C. and Ambigua verba contra proferentem accipienda sunt, Bacon Eliz. f. 11. As
if I demise omnes boscos meos in villa de Dale for years, this passes the
soil, 14. H. 8.28. H. 8. Dyer 17.

And if I sow my Land with Corn, and let it for for years, the Corn passes
to my Lessee.

And if I grant ten pounds rent to Baron and Feme, and if the Baron dye the
Feme shall have three pounds rent, because these words rest ambiguous, whether
I intend three pounds by way of addition, or three pounds by way of deduction
out of the rent of ten pounds, it shall be taken strongest against me, that it
is three pounds addition to the ten pound; of which more hereafter.

So Coke fol. 303. b. Ambiguum placitum interpretari debet contra proferentem.
An ambiguous Plea shall be taken strongest against the pleader, for every one
is presumed to make the best of his own Case, and Coke l. 10. f. 50. Ambigua
responfio contra proferentem est accipienda, the Bishop of Sarums Case, vide
ibidem.

In obscuris secundum magis similius est judicandum, vel quod plerumque inspici
solet. Regula. I. C. and Coke l. 4.13. and 14. Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi
accipiendus est, and sermones semper accipiendi secundum subjectam materiam. In
obscure and dark sayings we are to judge according to that which is most
likely, and which is wont to be, and the sense of the words is to be collected
from the cause of the speech, and to be taken according to the subject of the
matter. which rule seems to qualify, and moderate the other two, vide ibidem.
S. Cromwells Case, as first in words, the Plaintiff brings an action upon the
case for calling of him Murderer, to which the Defendant said that as he was
speaking with the Plaintiff concerning unlawful hunting, the Plaintiff
confessed that he had killed diverse Hares with Engines, to which the Defendant
answered that he was a murderer, innuendo a murderer of Hares, and it was
resolved that the justification was good, for upon an action of slander the
likeliest sense of words is to be taken, and collected out of the occasion of
the speech, Coke ibidem.

And so in Deeds, as if I have a free Warren in my land, and let my Land for
life, not mentioning the Warren, yet the Lessee by implication shall have the
Warren, 32. H. 6. which is the more likely meaning, for otherwise the Lessor
would have excepted the Warren.

Vnivocum denotes words of a certain and distinct signification and
expresses the thing clearly without any obscurity, or Ambiguity of which the
Law takes especial notice, for that certainty in all contracts, and
conveyances is the cause of quiet and setlement of estates, but incertainty is
the author of variance, and dissension, from whence we have these notable
grounds and maxims.

Misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum, Coke l. 5. f. 42. a. God forbid that
the inheritances of men should depend upon incertaines, and it is a miserable
servitude where the Law is wavering, and therefore Ployd. f. 28. a. In every
Commonwealth it is necessary and requisite that things should be certainly
conveyed, for certainty engenders repose, and incertainty contention. The
occasions of which contention, our Law foreseeing has prevented, and therefore
ordained that certain ceremonies should be used in the transmutation of things
from one man to another, and namely of Frank-tenements which are of greatest
estimation in our laws, to know the certain times, when things do pass, and
therefore in every Feoffment, the Law ordeineth that livery and seisin shall
be made, and in every grant of a reversion or rents that attornement should be
made, which are points certain containing time, wherefore it is well observed
by Sir Edward Coke in his Preface to the second part of his Reports, that in
all his time there have not been moved in the Courts of Justice of England,
two questions touching the rights of descent, escheats, or the like
fundamental points of the Common Law, so certain, sure and without question
are the principles and grounds thereof. That as Sir John Davis in his preface,
there is no art nor science which stands upon discourse and reason, which
has her Rules and Maxims so certain and infallible, and so little subject to
diverse interpretations as the common Law of England. Whence Sir Edw. Coke is
bold to pronounce that the Common Law of England is not incertaine in the
abstract, but in the concrete, and that the incertainty thereof is hominis
vitium non professionis, the imperfection of man and not of the profession, and
lib. 6. f. 43. a. in particular blames he the subtle inventions,
imaginations of men in the practice of uses, which have introduced many
mischiefs and inconveniences, contrary to the ancient common law, which has
certain rules to direct the estates and inheritances of men, and therefore is
it without comparison better to have Estates and Inheritances directed by the
certain rule of the common Law, which harh been the ancient, true and
faithful servant to this Commonwealth, then by incertaine imaginations and
conjectures of any of those new inventors of uses without any approved ground
of law or reason, Coke l. 6. f. 43. a.

And therefore in all cases law and equity will that incertainty be avoided,
as the author of contention, and that there be an end of all controversies
according to equity and right, which is the final intention of all Laws, Coke
l. 8. 53.

And Coke l. 1. f. 85. a. The Judges ought to know the intention of the parties
by certain and sensible words which are agreeable and consonant to the rules
of Law, as if Land be given by deed to two, to have and to hold to them and
haeredibus, it is void for the insensibility and incertainty, and though it
has a clause of warranty to them and their heirs, that shall not make the
first words which are incertaine and insensible to be of force and effect in
Law, although his intent appears, but his intent ought to be declared by
words certain and consonant to Law.

So Coke comment. f. 20. b. If a man lets Lands to A. for life, the
remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to C. in forma praedicta, the remainder
is void for the incertainty.

And therefore Ployd f. 272. a. gives this ground, that every contract
sufficient to make a Lease for years, ought to have certainty in three
limitations, in the beginning of the term, in the continuance, and in the end
of the same, all which ought to be known at the beginning of the Lease, and the
Lease that wants them, Mr. Brown, said is but bibble babble, vide ibidem
Fullers case, and Coke l. 6. f. 35. the Bishop of Bathes case.

Ployd. f. 14. a. If I give all my money in my purse to I. S. he cannot have an
action for it, unless he allege the certainty of it, so as without
certainety the action is not maintainable according to the rule given by
Bracton, incertae rei nulla est donatio, l. 5. c. 4. Ployd. f. 273. b. If a
Lease be made until I. S. who has execution of a Statute Merchant, is
satisfied of the duty for which he has sued execution, this is not a good
Lease and shall not be called a term for years, for it is not certain how
long the Lease shall endure, either for six years or for twelve years, so
there is an incertainty of time at the end of the Lease, for a term contains
certainty.

So if a Lease be made from three years to three years, and so from three
years to three years duering the life of I. S. it shall be but a Lease for
six years, for for six years there is certainty, and when he says, and so
from three years to three years it is all one as if he had said the first
three years, during the other three years, which contains certainty, but
when he goes further and says, and so from three years to three years, for
the life of I. S. that contains no certainty in it, for it is incertaine how
many three years I. S. shall live, so that in the beginning the end is not
known of the number of years intended, which is contrary to the nature of a
Lease for years, Coke comm. f. 45. b. and Brown, and Dier said it had been
so adjudged, vid. ibid. Ployd. says, and Fullers case. So if a parson makes a
lease of his glebe for so many years as he shall be parson there, this cannot
be made certain by any means, for nothing is more uncertain then the time of
his death, terminus vitae incertus est, and quanquam nihil est certius ipsa
morte, nihil tamen incertius est hora mortis, Coke com. 45. b.

A grant to I. S or I. N is void for the incertainty, and if it be delivered
to I. S. the delivery of the deed will not make a void grant good. 11. H. 7.
13. Noy. Max. f. 67.

Coke com. f. 310. b. If a reversion be granted for life, and after it is
granted to the same grantee for years, a^^ ^he Lessee attorne to both grants,
they are void for the incertainty. So if the Lord by Deed grants his signiory
to I. Bishop of London, and his heirs, and by another Deed to I. Bishop of
London, and his Successors, and the Tenant attorneth to both grants, the
attornment is void for both grants, for albeit the grant be but to one, yet
he has several capatities, and the grants are several, and the attornment
is not according to either of the grants, ibidem.

A gift made to one of the Infants of I. S. is void for the incertainty 11. E.
41. and Dier. f. 91. A grant is made for so many trees as may be reasonably
spared, it is void for the incertainty, for who shall be judge of the sparing,
the Vendor or the Vendee, and it seems that neither of them, yet by common
intendment, the Vendor has most knowledge which may be spared. So if I
bargain with you that I give you for your Land so much as it is reasonably
worth, it is void for default of certainty.

So a grant seniori and dignissimo filio is void for the incertainty, for some
will say that he who is most learned and knowing is the most worthy man, and
some will say the most valiant man, and some the most liberal man, and so the
multitude can never agree.

Scinditur incertum studia, ^^ontraria vulgus. And by that the most potent man
was always preferred which is contrary to all Laws, inde datae leges ne
fortior omnia possit, Dav. l. 33.36. case of Tanistry vide.

Coke com. So a release does not discharge Bail before judgment because it is
contingent, and incertaine.

Coke l. 5. Samons case. B. in consideration of six l. assumes to pay twenty
pound to A. If he do not perform the award of I. S. which was that he
should enter in obligation to A. that A. and his wife should enjoy the Lands
were in controversy between them. B. would not enter into obligation, and it
was adjudged the award was void, for the incertainty because it does not
appear of what sum the obligation should be, for the Arbitrators are Judges,
and their award must be certain to decide the controversy.

Certum est quod certum reddi potest, Coke com. f. 43. b.

Though it be Bractons rule Terminus annorum debet esse certus and
determinatus, as in every lease for years the term must have a certain
beginning and a certain ending, yet allbeit there appear no certainty of
years in the Lease, if by reference to a certainty, it may be made certain,
it suffices, for that is certain which may be made certain. As if A. leaseth
his Lands to B. for so many years as B. has in the Manor of Dale, and B.
has then in the said Manor a term for ten years, this is a good Lease to B.
for ten years.

If a man make a Lease to I. N. for so many years as I. N. shall name, this at
the beginning is incertaine, but when I. N. has named years then is it a good
Lease for so many years Ployd. f. 273. b.

For it is my demise and my contentment that he name the years, which by my
reference to his nomination, is as much as if I my self had named. But if a
Lease be made for so many years as my Executors shall name, and then I die,
and my Ex^^^^s name the years, the Lease shall not be good, because they
neither did nor could name the years during my life ibidem.

So if I make a Lease until I. S. who is in Prison for hunting, shall be in
Prison for it by order of Law, that is all one as if he had made the Lease for
two years, for by the statute of W. 1. c. 10. he shall be imprisoned so
long, so if I make a Lease for years, rendering five pound rent by the year,
and then I grant the rent and reversion to another until he has received of
the rent twenty pound, that is all one as if I had granted the reversion for
four years, and therefore the Lease contains such certainty of time by the
reference. So if a Lease be made during the nonage of I. S. who is of the age
of fifteen years, it is a Lease for six years, if I. S. live so long, for the
reference to the time certain, is as much as if he had expressed the
nomination of the time contained in the reference. So if I make a Lease for ten
years, and so from ten years to ten years, during a 100. years it is a good
Lease, Ployd. ib. E. Coke l. 6. f. 20. The Bishop of Bathes case. So a Lease
for years after the Lessee shall make such an act is good, so a Lease for
twenty years if the coverture between I. S. and his wife continue so long,
although in one case, it was incertaine when the Lessee would do the act to
make the Lease to begin, and in the other it was incertaine when the coverture
would be dissolved, for a lease certainly lymited might begin, and determine
upon uncertainety well enough, Ployd. ib.

If a man makes a Lease for twenty one years, if I. S. live so long, this is
a good Lease, if I. S. so long live, yet it is certain in incertainty, for the
life of I. S. is incertaine, Coke com. f. 25. b.

It is a Maxim in the Law, that no distresses can be taken that are not put
into certainty, nor can be reduced to any certainty, for, id certum est, quod
certum reddi potest, as the Lord cannot distraine them which hold their
Tenements in Frankalmoine, if they will not do such divine service, because it
is not put in certain what service they shall do, neither can it be reduced
to a certainty, for upon an avowry damages cannot be recovered, for that which
neither has certainty, neither can be reduced to any certainty, and yet in
some cases there may be a certainty in uncertainty. As a man may hold of his
Lord to sheare all the sheep depasturing in his Manor, although the Lord has
sometimes a greater number and sometimes a lesser number, yet this is certain
enough, the incertainty being referred to the Manor which is certain, and the
Lord may distraine for this incertainty, Coke com. f. 96. a.

Incertainty may be reduced to a certainty by matter, ex post facto, Ployd. f.
6. a. b. Raingers case. As a Lease for years rendering for every acre twelve
pence, though the number of Acres be not certain by the Lease, yet by
admeasurement or other trial may the rent reserved be certainly known, by
which he may bring his action of debt.

So if one gives two Acres to one Habendum, one for life, and the other in fee,
it is incertaine, in which he shall have the fee, and which for life, yet if
after he make Feoffement of one acre, it shall be said to have fee, in the
other ab initio, so if one sell W. Acre, and B. Acre for life, the remainder of
one of them in fee, it is incertaine which Acre he in the remainder shall
have, but if he license the Tenant for life to cut down the trees in white
Acre, then he shall be adjudged to have the remainder of that Acre ab initio.
So 14. H. 8. f. 17. A grant of a term upon condition that the Grantee shall
obtain the favor of the Lessor, and pay so much as I. S. should arbitrate,
was good when the condition was performed, and the second grant adjudged void.
So 17 E. 4. f 1. in trespass for corn taken, there the Defendant and the
Plaintiff had bargained, and agreed that the Defendant should go to the place
where it grew and see the corn, and if it pleased him upon the sight, that
then he might take it, paying to the Plaintiff forty pound for every Acre, and
it was holden a good contract notwithstanding the incertainty and quantity of
the Corn, and of the gross sum shall be paid for it, because upon the
circumstance the certainty might appear, Ployd. ibidem.

Dyer. f 91. b. If I bargain with you that I will give you for your Land as
much as it is reasonably worth, and it is referred to the judgment of a third
person, he shall ajudge it and then it is good, so if I sell trees which then
may easily be spared, and refer the judgment of the sparing to a third person,
if he give judgment of it, it is good enough, because by him it is reduced to
a certainty with the Vendors consent.

In our law the time, the estate, the thing, and the person not being
sufficiently expressed, by necessary coherence and relation to matter
precedent, they are sometimes made certain enough, first for the time, if I.
S. is bound to me in twenty pound upon condition that I infeoffe him of B.
Acre, that then he will pay me ten pound, if I infeoffe him presently after,
he ought to pay the ten pound notwithstanding there is no time limited when it
should be paid, for Perkins puts the rule, if a condition has a relation to
the Act precedent, and no time is limited when it shall be done, it ought to
be done, when the Act precedent is done.

Secondy for the thing, though it be put incertainly, yet the communication
precedent makes it certain, Dier. 42. a. where one was bound to warrant I. G.
and does not show what thing he should warrant, the Law shall make
construction that he should warrant the land of which communication was made.

Thirdly, for the estate though it be uncertain, yet sometimes it is made
certain by the matter precedent, as steward-ship was granted for life, and
afterward an annuity was granted for the exercise of that office, without
declaring what estate he should have in the annuitie, and resolved that he
should have the annuity for life, because he had the Office for life, Coke l. 8.

Fourthly, for the person, the consideration sometimes ascertaines the person,
and therefore if lands be given to one by deed, Habendum sibi una cum filia
donatoris, in frank marriage, this shall enure to both, because the feme is
causa donationis, and by devorse she shall have the whole Land, and shall be
given together to the man for the advancement of the woman, Dier. 126. a. A man
by intendment of Law the Land and the woman devises that his lands shall be
sold for the payment of his debts, and does not say by whom, they shall be sold
by his Executors, because they are liable for the payment of his debts.

Licet id certum est, quod certum reddipotest id tamen magis certum est quod de
semetipso est certum. Coke l. 9. 47. a. The Patents of the King ought to be
extended certainly to the thing of which the Patentee will take advantage, as
2 R. 3. 7. If the King grant to me that I shall not be High Sheriff without
showing of what County, it is void for the incertainty. Quia concessio per
Regem oportet fieri de certitudine, but if the grant was that he should not be
Sheriff of such a County, there such a grant is good.

Ployd. f. 395. a. If a Lease be of the manor of Sale in Dale, which he had by
descent of the mother, and he had the manor of Sale by purchase and not by
descent of his mother, in this case the Lessee shall have it, because the
manor of Sale in Dale is enough without further certainty expressed, and his
saying that he had by descent is not requisite, in that it was sufficiently
certain before, for it is rather super-abundance, then certainty, so M. 2. E.
4. f. 27. If one release all his right in white Acre in Dale that he had by
descent, but had it by purchase there he shall not avoid the release by saying
that he had not white Acre by descent, but had it by purchase, for the relation
to the descent was in vain, in that certainty appeared before ibidem, vide
Coke l. 3. Doughtys case, f. 18.

Oportet quod certae personae, certae terrae, and certi status comprehendantur
in declaratione usuum, Coke l. 9. f. 9. a. Every declaration of uses upon
Recoveries, Fines, etc. of Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments ought to be
certain, for otherwise there shall be no certainty of inheritances, and that
certainty ought to be principally in three things, in persons to whom, in
Lands, etc. of whom, and in estate by whom uses shall be limited, and declared,
and if certainty fail in any of them, the declaration is insufficient.

Certa debet esse intentio, and narratio, Bractton, lib. 2. All declarations
ought to be certain, so as the Defendant may know to what thing he ought to
answer, Ployd. 84. a. As 3. E. 4. f. 21. A man retained in husbandry brings an
action of debt against a Prioresse for his salary, and declares that he was
retained with her Predecessor, and does not show what person retained him, and
by the better opinion the count shall abate for the incertainty, for that it
might be that one that had no Warrant retained him. And so is it in a Writ,
Ployd. ib. vi. a. 22. E. 4. f. 47. It was granted by Parliament that Ashby
should have a writ with Proclamations out of the Chancery against one Griffeth
to answer for diverse Trespasses which were contained in the Act of Parliament,
and the Writ by award was abated because he made no mention of the Trespasses
in certain, and there it varied from the Act, but that was a private Act, and
therefore the non-recitall of it makes the Writ naught, and so should the
mis-recitall, but the recital of a general act, or the mis-recitall of a
general Act is not material, but the Judges are bound to take notice of it
without the monstrance of the party.

Oportet ut res certa deducatur in judicium, Coke l. 5. f. 321. a. Playters
Case, P. brought an action of Trespass against W. Quare clausum suum fregit,
and pisces suos cepit, without showing the number or nature of the Fishes, and
it was resolved that the count should have comprehended the Fishes in certain,
that the Defendant might have a certain answer, and upon which a certain
judgment might be given, as 4. H. 6. n. the writ was quare piscem cepit, and
counts of so many Pikes in certain, and though the writ was piscem in the
singular number, yet good because per se est nomen collectivum, in which the
plural number is comprehended, and great inconvenience otherwise would ensue,
for unless the issue has certainty with which the Jury may be charged: upon
such a general incertainty, if they give a false verdict, they may be charged
in attaint, and f. 38. a. Teyes case, In a fine the same thing was granted and
surrendered to several persons, and of several estates, and so repugnant and
erroneous, for a fine is like unto a Judgment, for a Scire facias lies to
execute it as of a Judgment, and oportet, as Bracton says, quod certa res
deducatur in Judicium.

Ployd. Manhells Case, f. 10. b. If three issues bring three several
Formedon^, he whose writ is first returned shall have the Land, for by it he
has first attached the possession in the hands of the tenant, and the writ is
not of Record before the return, but if all the three Writs be returned on the
same day, they shall all abate, because it is uncertain by the count, if the
Tenant confess the actions, to whom they shall award seisin, because all their
titles are alike, and all returned on the same day, and for that incertainty
the writs shall abate, as 21. R. 2. Fit. avowry p. l. 262. In a Replegiare
against two, the one avows for Damage-feasant, and the other avows that he had
common in the Land, and took the beasts as a commoner Damage-feasant, and by
the award of the Court both the avowrie was abated, and the Plaintiff recovered
damages against them, because every of them could not have the return, and who
should be preferred, and who rejected would be incertaine to the Court, vide.

Ployd. f. 84. a. b. Partridges case, In some cases the count and the writ may
be general without certainty as in assizes, but there the certainty must be
shown by the replication, and in some cases the writ, the count, and the
replication also may be incertaine, but the certainty shall appear by verdict.
As in a Quare impedit the value of the Church does not appear in the count,
nor in the replication but it shall appear by verdict, for they shall assess
double damages, or damages for half a year according to the value of the
Church as the case requires, so in a writ of Ward, the Jury shall find if the
heir be married or not, and shall assesse da^^ges for it, and yet in the count,
and replication, no such matter appears. So in a detinue the value of the
goods appears by verdict, and in many other cases. So as the certainty
always must appear to the Court, and if it be requisite to be shown in the
count; then it ought not to be left out, or omitted in the count, as Ployd. f.
85. a. In decies tantum he must show the certainty of the sum received, because
he shall recover ten times more, and that he cannot unless he show how much it
is.

And in Trespass if the Defendant plead that it is his Frank-tenement, and
the Plaintiff intitles himself by a lease for years made by him, and if the
Defendant will show that he made a Feoffment, and that he entered for the
forfeiture, he must show the name of the Feoffees, and certainty of the
Feoffment, for in all cases the privy ought to show the certainty, and in case
of forfeiture, the Lessor in the reversion is privy to it.

So if the heir will plead in bar in a writ of Dower, the detainer of
evidences, he must show the certainty of the evidencies, for he is privy to
them in that he affirms that they appertain to him, but if he say a bag
ensealed with Charters, that is good without showing the certainty of them, 18.
H. 8. f. 1. B. Dower.

And if one be bound in an obligation to serve I. S. for seven years in
mandatis omnibus suis licitis, he shall pretend that he did serve him lawfully,
without showing in what service, or in what commandment, for no servant can
remember all, 20. E. 4.13.

So a man may aver a thing to be done by Covin without showing how the Covin
was, for Covin is a secret thing contrived between two or three to the
prejudice of another, 4. E. 6. 46.

And a man may plead that he was chosen Knight for the Shrie, by the greatest
number without showing the number, for the election may be by voices, or hands,
or in oth^^ sort, and it is hard to discern the certain number, and yet easy
to see who had the greatest number, 2. M. 128. vide Ployd. f. 121. b.

Coke Com. f. 303. c. Every Plea must be direct and not by way of argument or
rehersall, and an argumentative Plea is not good, Ployd. f. 122. a. b. for
there is a ground in the Law, that in declarations certainty ought to be
alleged by apt words of affirmation, otherwise the declaration is not good. As
in debt upon an obligation I declare that it appears by the obligation that the
Defendant is bound to me in twenty pound, the declaration is not good, because
it was alleged in matter of fact quod tenebatur mihi in twenty pound, for bond
is alleged for recital only. So 11. H. 6. In an action of debt against a
jailer, who had let one at large who was in execution under guarde for the sum
in demand, and declares that he let him at large by which the Plaintiff
exclusus fuit de debito suo, and the declaration not good, because he did not
say that he was not satisfied when he let him at large, which is the cause of
the action, which he has not alleged but by implication, for by implication
it is alleged, for if he let him go at large by which he is barred of his debt
against the prisoner, by it is employed, that the debt was not then paid, but
the count was not good, because it was not affirmed by precise words, and 38.
H. 6. f. 14. The Plaintiff in an action of debt counts that the Defendant
retained him in his service for eight years, to serve him in all occupations,
taking for every year 20 s. and the Defendant gageth his Law, and though the
Plaintiff was retained in husbandry, and the service of husbandry was employed
in the words all occupations, yet the Defendant was received to his Law,
because it was not fully expressed that he was retained in husbandry, but only
by implication, which would not suffice, So Ployd. f. 143. b. The Covenant in
the Indenture was, if one moiety of the Rent was behind and unpaid after two
months since the Feast, etc. that then, etc. and in the rejoinder it was
alleged that one moiety was behind per duos menses, by the space of two
months, which was no answer, because the Indenture is if it be behind after
two months post duos menses, and he said it was behind per duos menses which
is no affirmation that it was behind after two months, but by implication,
and argumentation, and not otherwise, and therefore not good.

Every Recovery had in our Law must be pleaded certainly to every intent,
Ployd. 65. a. as in 22. E. 4. f. 8. in a Scire facias to have execution of two
hundred Acres of Land, the Tenant pleaded that since the Scire facias sued that
I. B. brought a Formedon of one hundred Acres inter alia, and recovered and had
execution, judgment of the brief for parcel, and there the opinion was, the
Plea was not good, for every Recovery ought to be pleaded certianly to every
intent, and those words inter alia are certain to no intent, and it is good
reason, for every Recovery is entire, and there is one original, and one
judgment upon it, and so the judgment is one and entire, and therefore to say
that inter alia he did recover is not good, but ought to plead certainly.

If a Bar has matter of substance, and is good to a common intent, it shall
suffice, although it be not good to every special intent, Ployd. Colthersts
Case, f. 26. a. and as Coke Com. 303. There are three sorts of certainties,
first to a certain intent in general as in counts, replications, and other
pleadings of the Plaintiff, 2. A certain intent to every particular as in
Estopples, 3. A certainty to a common intent, and this is sufficient in a Bar
which is to defend the party, and to excuse him; and of this certainty it is
said the Bar shall be good, if it be good to a common intent, Ployd. f. 31. a.
but this common intent is not such an intent, which may be indifferent, but
such an intent that has more vehement presumption in intendement, then any
other intent has, as fully to administer all the goods which were to the
testator the day of his death, is a good Bar, yet it may be he had other goods
which were never in the hands of the Testator, which are Assets, as debts paid
after, or goods which come in liew, etc. but that is not the most common
intent, but the more common intendement is, that he had not any other goods but
those which were the Testators; So in a Formedon in descender, ne donna pass is
a good Bar, yet it may be he has recovered in value, in which case other
Lands were given, and yet the Formedon lies, but that shall not be intended,
but the common intendement is to express the plain gift by livery, but if I
plead in Bar a lease for another life, there the Bar is not good without
averring the life of cefis que vie, for it was indifferent whether he was in
life or no, and has no more strong intendement the one way then the other,
and therefore his life must be averred by express words, so in debt upon an
obligation, if the Defendant plead in Bar a release, bearing date since the
obligation made, that Bar is not good, if he does not show by express words
that it was delivered since the obligation made, for prima facie one will
presume that it was delivered when it bore date, but of the other part it shall
be presumed also, that the other would not bring an action of debt, if the
release was delivered since, and so one way it has as vehement presumption as
another, and for that the intendement is indifferent, it is not good unless it
be shown by the Plea that it was delivered since the obligation made, Ployd.
ibidem vide plura f. 26.

Grounds and Maxims proceeding from the Predicaments.
From the Predicament of substance.
SVbstantia prior and dignor est accidente, Arist. 2. de anima, the substance
is more worthy, and before the accident, and therefore does the Law prefer
matters of substance before form and circumstance, as 21. H. 7. 24. b. Pleas
in Bar, and replications, though the Plaintiff be afterward nonsuit, make an
Estopple, for they are express allegations, and substantial, as in debt upon
an obligation if the Defendant plead in Bar, an acquittance made at D. or if
the Defendant plead an acquittance, and the Plaintiff replyeth that it was
made by duress of imprisonment at D. now in another action, neither the
Defendant shall plead that the acquittance, nor the Plaintiff that the duress
was at another place because they were material. But the matter in the writ,
and the count makes no Estopple, for they are but supposalls. As in a
Pormedon, one claims by descent from I. S. or a Mortdancester as son, and
Heir of I. S. yet in another Formedon, he may claim from I. D. and shall not
be estopped.

No more shall a recital make an Estopple, for they are not material, as 33.
H. 6. 10. b. where A. reciting that he is seized in fee of the Manner of D.
grants a rent out of it to B. this shall not estoppe A. to say that he had
nothing in that Manor, Finch, nomotec. f. 32.

Neither shall counts and declarations abate, so long as the matter of Action,
is fully showed in the Declaration, and the writ, as by the Statute of 36. E.
3. c. 15. it is provided.

And therefore in Demurrers it is alleged that the matter contained in the
count, is insufficient in Law, and so of a plea, and accordingly in the reign
of Queen Eliz. provision is made, that after demurrers the Judges shall give
Judgment according to the right of the cause, and matter in Law, without
regarding any imperfection, defect, or want of form in any Writ, Return,
Plaint, Declaration, or other pleadings, or course of proceedings whatsoever,
which Sir Edward Coke styles an excellent, and profitable Law, Coke Com. 304.
b. All which are more fully contained in the late Act of 11. Mar. 1649. by
which it is enacted, that no judgment shall at any time or times be arrested
or stayed in any Court of Record for want of any matter of form, or defect
whatsoever except only for matter of substance which shall be found or showed
pulickly to the Jude or Judges sitting in the said Courts of Record, to be in
the declaration, Plea, replication or other proceedings after appearance.

And besides in common recoveries no formal errors shall be allowed to reverse
them unless they be substantial and material, as by the statute of 23. Eliz
c. 4. it is provided that for the avoiding of the danger of assurance of Land,
and for the advancement of common recoveryes, that not any common recovery
shall be avoided for any want of form in words and not in matter of
substance, so much does the Law respect matter of substance, before matter of
form and circumstance, Coke c. f. 40.2.

From the predicaments of action and passion.
Idem non potest esse agens and paciens. 14 H. 8. 31. b. nihil agit in seipsum.
Arist. 1. de gener. no man can do an act to himself.

No man can sue himself, and therefore when a man having right to Land has the
freehold cast upon him by a latter title, he shall be said to be in of his
ancient title, because there is no body against whom he may sue but himself,
and he cannot sue himself, Lit.

A man cannot present himself to a benefice, or make himself an Officer, 13.
H. 8. 32. No man can summon himsele, 8 H. 6.29. And therefore if a Sheriff
suffer a common recovery, it is error, because he cannot summon himself, Dier.
188. But when two Sheriffs are, the one may summon the other with special
direction in the Writ, that the other shall summon him, 14 and 15. Eliz. If a
Sheriff be Conusee of a Statute he cannot execute a liberate himself, 9 E. 4.
33.

Plaintiff and Defendant, Exception.
and Actor and Reus are relative opposites, and cannot be properly in one, and
the self same action, except in some special cases, as in a writ of detinue
where garnishment is required, there the Defendant is to become actor against
the garnishee, 3 H. 6. 18. so in a quare im^edit where the Defendant makes
title to have a Writ to the Bishop, the defendant is become actor, 20 H. 6. 29.

In a Replevin upon an avowry made, the avowant is become actor, 3 H. 6. 19. a.
23. H. 6. 45. a. 12. E. 4. 10. a.

So in a Quod deforceat the demandant or Plaintiff shall defend his estate
against such recovery as shall be pleaded against him and become defendant, and
may vouch ac si tenens esset in priori brevi, by the statute of W. 1.

A Sheriff who is demandant, may execute all process till it come to the
Venire facias, otherwise if he be Tenant 20. E. 4. 7.

A Sheriff is Plaintiff, for he may take pledges himself and execute a
Replevin against himself, 5. H. 7. 2.

The Sheriff is in seisin of a Baly-wick of a liberty, he shall command
himself as Bailiff of that liberty to execute that process, 8 E. 3. 21. F. B.
N. f. 4. E. There is a Writ of prohibition in the Register directed to the
Sheriff to inhibit himself that he hold not plea in the county upon a sorreine
Plea pleaded, or the Mise joined to be tried by grand assise.

Actori incumbit onus probandi and stabilitur praesumptio donec probetur in
contrarium, the burden of proving lies on the Plaintiff, and the presumption
is confirmed until it be proved to the contrary, Cok. l. 4. f. 70. There is a
bargainor and a bargaince, if this bargainor contend to avoid the bargain by
reason of the non enrolement within six months, he must make manifest proof
thereof, or else it will be presumed that it was inroled within the six months,
omnia praesumantur legitime facta, donec probentur in contrarium, Coke com. f.
233. b. As whereas the feoffee gives or grants to the feoffor the deed pol,
such grant is good, and the property of the deed shall appertain to the
Feoffor, and when the feoffor has the deed in his hands and pleads it in
Court, it shall be rather intended that the feoffor comes unto it by lawful
means then by a tortious mean. For all things are presumed to be lawfully
done until they may be proved to the contrary. A. and B. Tenants in common of
a Manor, A. purchases a frank tenement mixed with the demesne Lands, which
were not certainly known. B. brings a writ de partitione facienda of the
Manor only, and judgment given, that partitio fieret and a Writ to the
Sheriff accordingly. It is held by the Justices that A. must show the bounds of
the franktenement purchased, for the Jury shall be discharged, if in conscience
they make partition de tanto quanto praesumitur and dignoscitur per
praesumptiones and verisimilia of so much as shall be presumed and known by
presumptions and likelihoods, Dier. f. 266.

Pendente lite nihil innovetur, Let nothing be innovated hanging the suit, Coke
com. 344. b. if hanging the quare impedit against the Ordinary for refusing his
Clark, and before the Church was full, the Plaintiff brought a quare impedit
against the Bishop, and hanging the suit, the Bishop admitted and instituted a
Clark at the presentation of another, if judgment be given for the patron
against the Bishop, the patron shall have a writ to the Bishop, and remove the
incumbent that came in pendente lite by usurpation, for hanging the suit
nothing is to be innovated.

Qui semel actionem renunciaverit amplius repetere non potest, n. f. 139. a. As
a Retraxit is a bar of all other actions of the like or inferior nature, for he
which once renounceth his action can no more renew it. It is a general rule
that non-suite before appearance is not peremptory in any case, for that a
stranger may purchase a writ in the name of him who has cause of action, and
regularly a non suit after appearance is not peremptory, but that he may
commence an action of like nature again, for it may be he has mistaken
something in that action, or was not provided of his proofs or mistaken the
day or the like. But yet for some special reasons nonsuit in some actions is
peremptory, as in a quare impedit, if the Plaintiff be nonsuit after
appearance, the Defendant shall make a title and have a Writ to the Bishop, and
this is peremptory to the Plaintiff and is a good bar in another quare impedit,
and the reason is, because the Defendant had by the judgment of the Court, a
writ to the Bishop and the incumbent which comes in by that writ shall never
be removed, which is a flat bar as to that presentation, and for the same law
and upon the same reason, so it is in the case upon a discontinuance, Coke com.
f. 139. a. vide ibidem plura.

Actio personalis moritur cum persona, a personal action dies with the
person, Went. off. of executors f. 1. 97.

As if a keeper of a Prison, suffers one in execution to escape and dies, no
action lies against his Executors.

If Lessee for years does wast, and dies, an Action of wast lies not against
his Executor or Administrator for wast done before that time, Coke com. f. 53.
b. so if the tenant does wast, and he in the reversion dies, the heir shall
not have an Action of wast, for the wast done in the life of his Ancestor, nor
the master of an Hospital, or a parson for w^st done in the life of the
predecessor. ibidem.

The Lessor covenants to pay quit rent during the term, and dies, his
Executors shall not pay it, because it is a personal covenant in the Lessor
only, Dier. 114.

Yet if there be three copartners, and they Lease the land, and one of them
die, and has issue, and the Lessee commit wast and one of them die and has
issue, the Aunt and the issue shall join in an Action of wast, and the issue
shall recover one moiety of the Land wasted and the Aunt the other,
notwithstanding that actio injuriarum moritur cum persona. But in favorabilibus
magis attenditur quod prodest quam quod nocet, in indifferent and favorable
things, that which profits is more respected then that which hurts.

Relatio tunc fieri non debet si per eam actus destruatur, Reg. I. c. Decius.
363.

Quando dispositio referri potest ad duas res, ita quod secundum relatione^ una
vitiatur and secundu^ alia^ utilis sit, tunc facienda est relatio ad illam ut
valeatdispositio, and semper ita fiat relatio ut valeat dispositio, C. l. 6. f.
76. b. a.

A relation then ought not to be when by it an Act is destroyed. As in the
statutes of 32. and 34. H. 8. concerning Wills, whereof is provided that every
person having any Manors, Lands, etc. holden in capite shall have full power
etc. to dispose by his last will in writing, or otherwise by any Act or Acts
lawfully executed in his life, two parts of the same Manor, etc. for the
advancement of his wife, preferment of his children, and payment of his debt,
or otherwise, at his will and pleasure any Law statute etc. those words or
otherwise at his will and pleasure have reference and relation only to the last
will and not to the acts executed, for otherwise none might have devised two
parts but only for the advancement of his wife and preferment of his children,
or payment of his debts, which is not the intention of the Act, but that he may
devise two parts to whom he will, so that the third descend, and it was in
vain to refer those words, or otherwise at his will and pleasure to Acts
executed, for he can do that without any authority given to him by that act.
And therefore when the disposition may be referred to two things, so as
according to the relation one of them may be destroyed, and according to the
other shall be commodious, then the relation is to be made to that, that the
disposition may be of force, and always the relation is so to be that the
disposition may avail in Sir. G. Cursons case.

So Coke l. 3. f. 28. b. Butler and Bakers case, relation is a fiction in law
to make a nullity of a thing from the beginning to a certain intent which in
truth had being, and the rather for necessities sake, ut res magis valeat quam
pareat. As if a man make a gift in tail to Baron and feme, and afterward
grants the reversion of those Lands, and since the Baron dies, and the feme to
have her dower, waiveth and disagreeth to the estate tail, now in regard of
her, it is a nullity of the estate from the beginning, and to such an intent
the Law faineth that the estate was only made to the baron, but as to the
grant of the reversion, that is a collateral Act, and her refusal shall not
have such relation, for she may be endowed though that estate stand, and so no
necessity, and therefore without necessity, ut res magis valeat, the Law will
not feign any nullity, but in a destruction of a loyal estate vested, the law
will never make any fiction, vide ibidem plura.

So relation shall make things have been, as if as if they never had been, 1.
H. 7. 16 The husband disagreeth to a Feoffement made by his wife, it is void
from the beginning, so that he may plead ne infeosse pas so 14. H. 8. 10. A
devise is that the Executors may sell land etc. when they sell, all mean
charges made by the heir in the interim shall be avoided by relation, to the
time of the death of the Testator, so 14. H. 8 18.

I disseise A. to the use of B. the dissiesee releaseth to me, and then B.
agrees with the disseisee, this agreement by relation shall be as if he had
agreed before the release, and so shall defeat it.

Jurors alien their Lands away between the test of the Writ of attaint and
judgment, yet they shall be charged to the King for the estreptment by
relation, 22. E. 3. 16. Caufe of Assise brought for rescuing a distress taken
for rent, and then an Office is found which entitleth the King, who seiseth the
Land, and then an Ouster le maine is sued, the Assise is gone for ever, because
the King shall be said to be in possession at the time of the rescous, upon
whose possession no distress could be made, 31. Ass. 1.

Ployd. 281. a b. If one takes letters of administration of the Ordinary, of
the goods of one which died intestate, and after the Metropolitan commits
the administration to another, because the intestate had goods to the value of
ten pound in diverse Diocese, there it disproveth the authority of the first
administrator, and shall make the second Administrator to avoid the act of the
first Admistrator, for the relation after the probat takes away all
imperfection that before may be alleged, and shall overreach the
administration and the authority of the Administrator, as the Lord Dier terms
it, and Keble said in this case W in H. 7. that the second Administrator shall
have an Action of trespass against the first Administrator, for taking of the
first goods, for the first Ordinary which committed the administration had not
authority to do it, when the intestate had goods to the value of ten pound in
diverse Diocese, but the administration and all dependence upon it were utterly
disproved by the commission of the second administration, vide ibidem plura, in
Greisbrookes case.

So 38. H. 6. 7, Goods taken out of the possession of an Executor which
refuses, and an administration is committed to I. S. I. S. may have an action
of trespass supposing they were taken out of his possession, for he by
relation shall be said to be an administrator from the very time of the death of
the testaor.

Relation is a fiction in Law, and a fiction in Law is a fained construction,
when in a similitudinary sort the Law construeth a thing otherwise then it is
in truth Finch nomot. f. 66. and is of the person or the thing.

Of the person.
QVi facit per alium per se ipsum facere videtur, Coke com. f. 258. a. He that
does any thing by another seems to do it by himself, As the servant by
command of the Master may make claim from the Land for his Master, if the
servant does all that which he was commanded, and which his Master ought to
do, there it is as sufficient as if his master did it himself. And if the
disseisor levy a fine according to the statute, with proclamations, and a
stranger without any command precedent, enter in the name of the disseisee to
avoid the fine, if the disseisee after assent to the said entry of the sad
stranger, it shall be as sufficient as a command, for omnis ratihabitio retro
trahitur and mandato aequiparatur, Reg. 1. C.

Every ratification or approving of any thing looks back, and is all one as
if a man had give commandment at the first.

Ployd. f. 290. a. Chapmans case. If I will by my last will that I. S. alien my
Land, and he does so, it is my alienation by him, and if I give authority to my
Bailiff to sell my sheep or other cattle, and he does so, it is my sale by him,
and Ployd. 475. b. In Sanders case.

If I command one to beat another, and he beats him so as he dies of it, I
shall be accessory to the murder, for my commandment was the foundation of
it, and my commandment outreacheth to all that which follows the fact. So if
I command one to burn an house feloniously in the night, and he does so, and
the fire thereof burns another house, I shall be accessory to the burning of
the other house, and if I have a pardon for the one, I shall be hanged for the
other, but if I command one to burn such an house which he well knows, and
he burns, another I shall not be accessory, or if I commanded him to rob a
Goldsmith, going to Sturbridge fair, and he breaks open his house in
Cheapeside and steals his Plate, I shall not be accessory to that burglary,
because there is no affinity between the fact and my command, but if I command
one to kill him with poison and he kills him with a Sword, or to kill one in
the field, and he kills him in the city, or to kill him such a day and he
kills him another day, it is murder in me, because the death is the
principal matter that has ensued upon my commandment, and the place, the
instrument, and the time, and such like are nothing, but the manner, and form,
how he should be slain, and not the substance of the matter, and the variance
in manner and form shall not discharge him from being an accessory, ibidem.

So an accessory before the fact is subject to all the contingencies pregnant
of the fact, if they be pursuances of the same fact, as if a man command, or
council a man to rob another, or beat him grieveously, and murder ensues, in
either case he is accessory to the murder, quia in criminalibus praestant
accidentia, 18. E. 175.

If I command one to do a trespass, I shall be a trespassor, or if I consent,
for there are no accessaries in trespasses, N. Max. f. 99. In trespass against
A. the indenture is that B. did strike me by A. invitation, and well, 39. H. 5.
42.

If a man have a Baylife or servant, who is known for his servant, and he send
him to faires and markets to buy, to sell, or do any thing marketable, his
Master shall be charged with the payment, if the thing which is Merchandised
comes to his use, and so if a man send his boy to Market, consideratis
considerandis, 2. R. 2. det. 3. per curiam. And if a man makes another his
factor to buy things for him, if he buy Marchandises of any, the master shall
be charged by this contract, though the goods come not to his possession,
because he gave him such power. 4. E 2. det. 168. by Pigot.

If a servant borrow or receive money in his masters name, the master shall not
be charged, unless it be done by his masters commandment or come to his use
by his consent, and it is a rule in the civil Law, quod jussu alterius
solvitur pro eo est, quasi ipfi solutum sit, Noy, Max. f. 99.

A promise made to the wise in consideration of a thing to be performed by the
husband, if the husband agree and perform the consideration in an action of
the case, etc. he shall declare the assumption made to him, Ib. f. 19.

An annuity is granted to one until he be promoted to a benefice by the
grantor and his heirs, in a Writ of annuity he shows that the Plaintiff was
promoted by his brother at his request, and well, 35. E. 3. 51. Dier. 241. It
is no good return for the Sheriff, Mandavit baliivo Itineranti, who answers,
that he is arrested and made a rescous, for it is the arrest of the Sheriff
himself, and if it were a capias ad satisfaciendum, or a capeas utlegatum
after judgment, the Sheriff himself shall be charged with the escape, unless
it were by the enemies of the King, and he shall have his remedy over against
him who made the rescous by action of the case, but if he had been a Bailiff of
a Liberty it had been a good return.

The Prior of St. Joanes had a privilege from Rome, that he shall pay no
Tithes for any Land, quae propriis manibus aut sumptibus excolitur, which is
tilled with his own hands or at his own charge.

The Prior makes a Lease for years before the dissolution, the King after the
dissolution grants the reversion, it was holden that after the term expired
the Patentee should hold it discharged, si propriis manibus aut sumptibus
excolitur, if it be tilled by him or his servants, but if he make a Lease to a
farmer he shall pay tithes by the Stat. of 31. H. 8. c. 13. Dier. Entry with my
beast is my entry, and so the Plaintiff shall declare upon a clausum fregit,
15. E. 4. 29. 1. E. 4. 15.

If a man's servant sells to me cloth, and warranteth it to be of a certain
length, the action will lie against the master only and not against the
servant, and if A do assume to cure B. of a wound, and he sends his servant
to B. to lay medicines to the wound whereby he is hurt, and emparied, B. shall
have an action against the Master and not against the servant, Fulb. l. 1. f.
4. 11. E. 4. 6. By Choke and Brian. The Chancellor of the Augmentation Court,
delivered an obligation made to Queen Mary, to his Servant to deliver to the
Clerks of the Augmentation; The Obligor, and his servant conspire together, and
cancel the obligation, the Master was held in this case to be chargeable, Dyer
161. If a receiver, or Bailiff make a deputy, the Writ of account shall be
brought against the Bailey only, because the money was received to his use, 18.
H. 8. 2. Fulb. l. 2. f. 43.

A lease for years is made, and a letter of Attorney, to deliver possession to
the Lessee, if the Attorney deliver possession to the Attorney of the Lessee, it
is a good possession, and pursuing his authority, 25. Eliz. The Earl of
Leisters Case.

Yet many personal things cannot be done by another, as Suit real at the
Leete, Exception.
or the Sheriffs turn cannot be done by another, Fu^b. l. 25 2.

A man cannot excuse himself by an Attorney for contempt, as for not serving
the Kings Process, but in proper person, 22. E. 4. 34.

An action of debt upon an obligation, the Defendant confessed the Deed, and
said that he had paid the sum to one C. the general receiver of the
Plaintiff, who said he was ready to receive the money, and showed to the Court
the acquittance, but because he showed no warrant of the Plaintiff to pay the
money to C. the acquittance that was showed could not be the Deed of the
Plaintiff, and therefore the Plaintiff recovered his debt and damages, 5. E. 3.
63. Fulb. l. 1. f. 4.

Quod per me non possum, nec per alium, Coke l 4. 24. b. What I cannot do by
my self, I cannot do by another, Custom has so established, and fixed the
estate of the Copyholder, as by the severance of the inheritance, the
Copyholder of the Manor is not distroyed, for in that the Lord himself cannot
oust the Copyhold, no more can any one claiming under him do it, for what I
cannot do by my self I can do by another, vide ibidem, the case between
Marrell and Smith.

Coke l. 11. f. 87. a. In the case of Monopolies, A patent was granted by the
King unto Edward Darcy for the sole making of Cards, who had made a deputy,
but it was held void to both, for in that it was void to the Grantee because
he was inexpert, and the grant made void to him, he could not make any expert
deputy to supply his place, for what I cannot do by my self I cannot do by
another.

Accessorium non ducit, sed sequitur suum principale. An accessory does not
lead, but follows the principal, Co. Com. 152: a. The incident shall pass
by the grant of the principal, but not the principal by the grant of the
incident. As a lease for term of life rendering rent, the Lessor grants a
reversion to another, the tenant aturneth, all the rents and services shall
pass by the word reversion, but if he grant the rent to another, the Reversion
shall not pass by it, Littleton ibidem, a Lease of a Manor wherein is a
Park, and Fish Ponds, excepting the game, and after the Lessor grants the
reversion, the Deeres and Fish shall pass as incidents with the reversion.

A Statute new made gives an action where none lay before, the same Process,
Judgment and Execution shall be in the same action as was in other cases at
the common Law, though the Statute say no such thing, 10. H. 7. 10.

Coke l. 5. f. 21. b. A Parson is bound to a Prior in one hundred pound, upon
condition that he resign his Church within a certain time to the Prior for a
certain pension, as they should agree, etc. and afterward the Prior, and the
Parson agreed of a pension of an hundred shillings, and yet the Parson refused
to resign, and by the whole Court it was holden that he needs not to resign
until he was sure of his pension by Deed.

Ployd. 235. a. When a man has a thing by reason of another, the thing which
comes by reason of the other shall be said to be had in the same capacity as
the other was which was the cause of it, as 41. E. 3. f. 21. If a Bishop having
a villain in right of his Church, enter into the Land purchased by the villain,
he shall retain it as in right of his Church. So if the King have a signiory
in right of the Crown, and the Tenant seize, and disclaim, by which the King
recovereth the tenancy, he shall hold it in right of the Crown, because in
that right he held the signiory which was the occasion of the Recovery, ibidem,
Williams case.

Noxa caput sequitur, and accessorium sequitur suum principale, Reg. I. C. The
offense looks on the head, and the accessory follows the principal. Coke
l. 4. f. 44. b. Every Felon is either a principal or an accessory, and if
there be no principal, there cannot be any accessory, because the accessory
follows the principal, and therefore was Vaux held by the Court to be a
principal murderer, although he was not present at the time of the receipt of
the poison, and if any other had procured Vaux to do it, he had been accessory,
vide ibidem plura, Vaux Case.

Coke Com. 57. a. b. In the highest and lowest offenses, there are no
accessories but all principalls, as in Riots, Routs, and forcible Entries, and
in other transgressions vi and armis, So in the highest offense as crimine
laesae Majestatis, there are no accessories.

And by our Law in murder all that be present, aiding, abetting, or comforting
him does the murder, are principal offenders though they give no stroke, for
the stroke of him that wounds is the wounding of all the others in Law, 4. H.
7. 18. Ployd. 100. a.

Facinus quos inquinat aequat. An offense equalleth those are tainted with it.
If one receives the goods and not the felon, he is accessory to the Felony, if
he knows the goods to be stolen.

If a man receive a man is attainted of Felony by Outlawry in the same County,
though he be ignorant of it, yet is he accessory to the Felony, because the
Outlawry is a matter of Record of which every one ought to take notice.

A Servant procures another to kill his Master, this is no pety Treason in the
Servant, because it is but Felony in the other which is the principal, 40.
Ass. Pl. 25. For things accessory are of the nature of the principal.
Principio dato sequantur c^^comitantia, Reg. I. C.

A Parson grants an Annuity with a nomine poenae, the Successor shall be
charged with a nomin poenae, due in his Predecessors life, and not his
Executors, 7. H. 6. 190.

The profits of the office of Filizer cannot be put in Execution upon a
Recognizance, or Statute, because the office it self being an office of trust
cannot, 26. H. 1. Dyer. 7. b.

Tithe is not payable of Oaks, Ash, and Elm, usually lopped, and topped,
though it be every seven or eight years, for the br^nches are of the nature of
the principal, for which no tithes are to be paid, if they be of twenty years
standing, according to the Statute of 5. E. 3 c. 3. Ployd. f. 470. b. Molins
Case.

Ployd. 381. a. If one grant estovers to another to be burnt in such an house,
it is appurtenant to the house, so if common be granted in such a place to one
for his beasts levant and couchant in his Farm of Dale, the common is
appurtenant to it, so as he who has the house after, by what title soever he
comes to it, shall have the estovers, and he that afterward comes to the
Farm shall have the common, and they shall not be severed unless by
extinguishment, vide ibidem plura, 12. Eliz. 381. 5. H. 7. 7. 26. H. 8. 4.
common.

Lord and Tenant by fealty, and homage, the Lord releaseth his fealty, this is
void, for fealty is incident to homage, 7. E. 4. 11.

Court Baron is incident to a Manor, Court of Pypowders to a Fair, therefore
one cannot grant the Manor or Fair reserving those Courts, 19 H. 8. Bro.
Incidents.

Coke Com. f. 3 49. b. If a man be remitted to the principal, he shall be
remitted to the appendant and accessory, as if Tenant in tail of a Manor
whereunto an advowson is appendant be disseised, and the disseisor suffers an
usurpation, if the disseisee enter into the manor, he is also remitted to the
advowson, vide ibidem plura.

Quod non valebit in principali, in accessorio and consequenti, non valebit,
what does not avail in the principal, shall not avail in the consequent, and
accessory, Coke l. 8. f. 78. b. As tenant in tail, the Remainder in fee, and
the Tenant in tail suffers a common Recovery: The reason of the Bar for the
estate of him in the Remainder who is an estranger to the Recovery, is by
consequence, because a common Recovery barreth the Estate of Tenant in tail
who is a party to the Recovery, and by consequent all the Reversions, and
Remainders of common persons expectant upon it: But when the Act of 34. H. 8.
provides, that no common Recovery had against Tenant in tail, who is party to
the Recovery shall not bar his Issues when the King is in Reversion, by it it
is included that the Act preserves the reversion, and remalnder in tail of
the grant of the King, for they cannot be barred, but when the estate tail
upon which they depend is barred; for that which not avails in the principal
will not avail in the accessory, and consequent, vide.

Ployd. f. 38. c. b. The office of the King of Heralds was granted to Garter,
cum feodis, and proficuis ab antiquo, and etiam concessit illi 10 l. pro
officio illo, and the question, was whether if the office be gone, the Annuity
was expired, and it was affirmed by all the Justices that it was gone, and is
determinable by the office determined. And Choke said that he was of Council
with one I. who had an Annuity granted unto him by the King in these words, to
I. Clerico coronae pro termino vitae, and after he was discharged of the
office, and the opinion of all the Justices was that the Annuity was
determined, for it shall be intended that the Annuity was granted by reason of
the office, and so it appears in these cases, that a fee, though newly
granted is annexed to the office, and determinable with the office, and shall
continue with the office as an incident inseparable, for the principal failing
the accessory also fails.

Agentes, and consentientes pari paena plectuntur, Coke l. 5. f. 80. a. b. As
Tenant for life, the Remainder to his Son and Heir apparent in tail by Covin
and agreement between him, A. and B. makes a Lease for years to A. who makes
a Feoffment in fee to B. to whom the Father Tenant for life releaseth with
warranty, and after the Father dies, and the Warranty descended on the Son,
and it was resolved that the Warranty did not bar the Son, for the Feoffment of
the Lessee for years was a disseisin, and that though the disseisin was to the
Father himself, who made the release, yet in that the Father agreed, and
consented to the disseisin, it shall not hinder, but that the Warranty shall
begin by disseisin, vide ibidem, Fitzherberts Case. A. maimeth B. by the
consent of C. An appeal lies against A. and C. and Damages equally against
both, 22. Ass. Pl. 82.

From the Post-praedicaments, or as Keker-man, from such terms as are series
of the Predicaments, and yet conduce to the fuller understanding of them.
AND first from the principle, and then from the cause, for every cause is a
principle, but eevery principle is not a cause, as punctum is the beginning of
a line, but not the cause of the line. As Aquinas in his Sam. part 1. q. 33. a.
1. Omnis causa est principium, sed omne principium non est causa, ut pater in
divinis est principium filij, sed non causa, and omnis causa importat
diversitaem substantiae and dependentiam unius ab altero, sed nomine principij
ordinem solum significamus, and every cause imports a diversity of substance,
and a dependency of one thing from the other, but by the name of the principle,
we signify only the order, as the Father in the Deity is the principle, or
beginning of the Son, but not the cause.

Cujus que rei potissima pars principium est, Coke l. 10. f. 49. a. The
beginning is the principal part upon which all others are founded, and quando
diversi desiderantur actus ad aliquem statum perficiendum, plus respicit lex
actum originalem, when to the perfection of an estate or interest, diverse Acts
or things are required, the Law has more regard to the original Act, vide
ibidem, Lamperts Case.

When a man seized of Lands in Fee-simple or Fee-taile general, takes a Wife,
to the perfection of her Dower two things are requisite, lawful matrimony, and
the death of her husband, and if baron and feme levy a fine, the feme is barred
of her Dower, because that the intermarriage, and seisin are the fundamental
causes of Dower, and the death of the baron only the execution of it, for the
beginning is the principal part upon which all others are founded, and therefore
in such case if baron and feme grant a rent by fine out of the Land, or make a
lease for years rendering rent to the baron and his heirs, and then the feme
recovereth Dower, she shall hold that charge with the rent, and with the
term, and the opinion of Ployden in Stowells case, 373. is not holden for Law,
as appears by Dyer f: 72. and in Damports case, Dyer 224. it was adjudged to
the contrary, 2. H. 4. and now common experience without contradiction is
against it, and so Littleton in his Chapters of conditions f. 83. holds, that
if the Feoffee upon condition takes a wife, the Feoffee may enter for the
condition broken, and the reason is for that the Law has a principal regard
to the original, and fundamental cause, and yet it may be said that the title
of dower is not consummate until the death of the husband, and peradventure
the feme might die before the Baron, vide ibidem plura.

So things are construed according to that which was the beginning thereof, as
one makes me swear to bring him money to such a place or else he will kill me,
and I bring it him accordingly, this is felony in him, 44. E. 3. 14. b. So if
he make me swear to surrender my estate unto him, and I do so afterward,
this is a disseisin to me, 14. Ass. Pl. 20.

One imprisoned till he be content to make an obligation at onother place, and
afterward he does so being at large, yet he shall avoid it by duresse of
imprisonment, 21. E. 4. 68. b.

Outlawry in trespass is no forfeiture of Land, as outlawry of felony is, for
though the not appearing is the cause of the outlawry in both, yet the force of
the outlawry shall be esteemed according to the heinousness of the offense
which is the principal cause and foundation of the process, 3. E. 3. 84.

A man and feme sole have a villain, and afterward enter-marry, and the
villain purchases Land, they shall not have lands by intierties, but by
moieties jointly, or in common, as they had the villain in the beginning. Coke
l. 5. f. 47. a. In Littletons case, upon the general pardon of 35. Eliz.
Whether upon a bill exhibited in the Star Chamber, before the Parliament, and
process awarded returnable after the Parliament, the suit shall be said to be
hanging by bill, before the return or serving of the process, and it was
resolved that it was, because the bill is origo and caput sectae, the bill is
the beginning and head of the suit.

Cujusque rei potissima pars principium est, and origo rei inspici debet, Coke
com. f. 298. b. whereof he says you shall make great use in the reading of our
books, A disseisor has issue, and enters into religion, by force of which
the tenements descend to the issue, in this case the disseisee may enter upon
the issue, because the descent of the issue was by the Act of the father and
not by the act of God, and the Law respects the original Act, which is his
entry into religion, whereas a descent does not take away entry unless it
comes by death, Littleton ibidem. An escrowe is delivered by a feme sole; if
she marry or die, yet by relation to the beginning it shall be good, 14. 4. H.
2.

Lessee for years is bound to I. S. to make him the best estate he can, and
afterward the reversion falls to him, the Lessee shall be discharged of the
Bond, if he grantteh the estate he had at the bond making, 12. H 8. 5.

A stranger abateth after the death of the father, the son dies, his wife
shall not have dower, for this abatement shall relate to the death of the
father, 21. E. 4. 60.

An attainder by Act of Parliament has relation to the first day of the
Sessions, 35. H. 8. b.

Presentment, tempore belli, is not good to gain possession from the right
patron, though the induction was tempore pacis, Coke l. 2. Binghams case, and
l. 11. f. 99. b. And such an usurpation shall be construed to be in time of War.

A blow given by one at the time of non sanae memoriae, though the party die,
when he is fanae memoriae, it is not capital, Ployd. D. Hales case.

So if a man of non sanae memoriae gives himself a mortal wound, and
becomes sanae memoriae, and dies, he shall not be felo de se, Coke l. 1.
Shellies case, f. 99. b.

A man buyeth certain beasts in Market, which were stolen, and sells them
out of the market, and the Vendee gives him a Crown in earnest, and
afterward they are brought into the Market, and agrees to his bargain and
pays all his money, and also pays toll for the beasts, the property is not
changed, for the bargain shall have relation to the first communication, Dier.
f. 99. b.

Tenant for life upon condition that if the Lessor die without issue the Lessee
shall have see, the Lessee enters into religion, and the Lessor dies without
issue, the Lessee is dereyned, he shall never have fee because at the time of
the performance of the condition the fee could not vest in him, Ployd. f 489. a.

In case of attainder by verdict for felony, it shall have relation to the time
of the fact done, 30. H. 6. 5. Lands given in franke-marriage, reserving a
rent, the reservation is void until the fifth degree is passed. 26. Ass. Pl. 66.

One has a Rent charge going out of his wifes Land, the grantee leaseth to the
husband and his heirs, the husband shall not have it, but it shall inure to
him by way of extinguishment only as seized in right of his wife. 14. H. 8. 6.

The wife endowed by the heir is said to be immediately in by the husband, and
if the husband were a disseisor and the heir in by dissent, yet the disseisee
may enter upon the wife, Littleton.

The executor refuses; the Administrator may have an action of trespass for
the goods taken out of the possession of the Executor, supposing they were
taken out of his possession, 38. H. 6. 7.

A Recovery without an original is void, and judgment given in Chancery
without original is void, and an outlawry without an original is void, Kel.
f. 19. b.

A remainder is limited to the King, and before the inrolement of the deed, the
King grants it over, and then the deed is enrolled, this will not make the
grant good, Coke l. 3. f. 29.

An executor assigns auditors to one who was accountant to the testator, and
his auditors find him in arrearages, the Action of debt shall be brought in the
Detinet only, and has respect to the beginning, 11. H. 6.

If I have a villain for years as executor, and the villain purchases land,
the executor enters, the land shall be to the use of the testator, and assets
in his hands, because the villain which was the cause of it was to such use,
Ployd. f. 292. a. Chap-mans case.

Causa and origo est materia negotii, Cok l. 1. Shellies case f. 99. b. vide.
As if a servant has an intent to kill his Master, and before the execution of
his intent departs out of his service, and being out of his service executes
his intent, and kills him which was his Master, it is petit treason, for the
execution respects the original cause, which was the malice conceived when he
was his servant, vide ibidem plura.

I. S. builds a shop on the wast of a Manor of which the Queen was seized,
the Queen grants the Manor to the Earl of Leicester, and he never enters
nor takes rent, I. S. dies and his son enters, there is no descent against
the patentee, because there was no disseisin against the Queen, Dyer. 266. b.

Yet when the law gives power and authority to do any thing, Exception.
the law adjudgeth of the thing by the act subsequent not precedent, Coke l. 8.
f. 146. b. As the law gives me power or license to enter into a common
Hostlery or Tavern, or to the Lord to distraine, or to the owner of the soil
to distrain, for damage feasant, or to him in the reversion to view if wast be
made, and to the commoner to enter into the land to see his beasts, but if he
that enters into the Hostlery or Tavern makes trespass, or if the Lord that
distraineth for rent, or damage fesant, beat or slay the distress, or if he
that enters to see wast, breaks the house, or remains there an whole
night, or the commoner cut down trees, in these cases the Law shall judge by
act subsequent, that they entered to that purpose, and shall be trespassors from
the beginning, for acta exteriora indicant intoriora secreta, the outward acts
show the inward secrets, and with what mind, and with what intent he did
enter. So if a purveyor take my beasts for the hostle of the King by force of
his commission, it is legal, but if he sell them in Market, then the first
taking is injurious.

Coke l. 9. f. 11. a. Tenant in tail has issue two daughters and dies, and
the elder enters into the whole, and after entry makes a feoffment with
warranty, which is a lineall warranty for the one and collateral for the
other; the law judges by the act subsequent that the entry was not general
for them both, but that it was only for her self, and that it shall be a
warranty to commence by disseisin for the one moiety.

Quod initio vitiosum est, tractu temporis non convalescet, Reg. I. Civ.

Quod initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescet, Coke com. f. 35. a.

That which in the beginning is vicious or invalid, cannot by tract of time be
made good, or valid, as tenant for life of a carve of land, the reversion to
the father in fee, the son and heir apparent endoweth his wife of this carve
by the assent of the father, tenant for life dies, the husband dies, this is
no good endowment, ex assensu patris, because the father at the time of the
assent had but a reversion expectant upon a freehold, whereof he could not
have endowed his own wife.

Ployd. f. 432. b. A. possessed of an horse, sells the horse, upon condition
that he shall pay him at Christmas forty shillings for it, and before the said
feast he sells the horse to another, and at the feast the first buyer fails
of payment, whereupon A. reseiseth the horse, yet the second buyer shall not
have him, because at the time of the second contract A. had no interest nor
property, nor possession of the horse, but only a condition which was not
sufficient to make the contract good.

A. seized of Lands in see makes a lease for twenty years, rendering rent, to
begin presently, and the same day he makes a Lease to another for the same
term, the second lease is utterly void, so as if the first Lessee surrendreth
his term to the Lessor, or loses the same by breach of condition, or
forfeiteth it by making a feoffment upon entry of the Lessor, the second Lessee
shall not have his term, because the Lessor at the making of the second lease
had nothing in him but the reversion, ibidem.

A feoffement to the use of the husband for life, the remainder to I. S. the
remainder to the wife for her jointure, this is not a jointure to bar dower,
because it did not take effect immediately after the death of her husband, Hut.
Rep. f. 50.

An infant or a married woman makes a will, and publishes the same, and
afterward dies being of full age or sole, notwithstanding this both Wills are
void, 10. Eliz. 344. Noy. Max. f. 4.

A lease for life the remainder to the Major and commonalty of B. whereas there
is no such, it is void, though the King does create such a corporation during
the particular estate, so a remainder limited to John the son of I. S. having
no such, son, and afterward a son is borne to him whose name is John during
the particular estate, it is void Doder.

Que malo inchoata sunt principio, vix bono peraguntur fine. Those things which
have a bad beginning can hardly have a good end. Coke. l. 11. f. 78. As a man
seized of Lands in fee by deed, upon good consideration grants the Land after
his death to the Queen, her heirs and successors, such grant is not made good
by the general words of the act of 18. Eliz. because it was void in the
beginning, and with it accords 38. H. 6. f. 33.

The Abbeffe of Sions case, and the Earl of Leicesters case, Ployd. f. 4000. a
stronger case then it, vide ibidem plura, Magdalen Colleges case, Coke l. 4.
f. 90. a. If a son and heir apparent of a Baron reteyne a Chaplain, and gives
to him his letters under sign and seal, and after his father dies, and this
Chaplain purchases a dispensation, this retainer and those letters will not
serve him, in that they were not availeable at the beginning, vide ibid.
D^uries case.

Coke c^m. f. 352 b. If a fine be levied without any original it is voidable
but not void, but if an original be brought and a retraxii entered, and after
that a concord is made, or a fine levied, this is void in respect the verity
appears on record, for where the verity is apparent in the record, the
adverse party shall not be estopped to take advantage of the truth, for he
cannot be estopped to allege the truth: an impropriation is made after the
death of the Incumbent to a Bishop and his successors, the Bishop by indenture
demiseth the parsonage for forty years to begin after the death of the
incumbent, the Deane and Chapter confirms it, the incumbent dies, this
demise shall not conclude, because it appears that he had nothing in the
appropriation till after the death of the incumbent, ibid.

Coke l. 10 f. 62. a. If a Bishop makes a Lease of Lands for four lives and
one of them dies in his life, so as now there be but three, and after he
dies; yet it shall not bind the successor, for those things which have a bad
beginning can scarcely be brought to a good end.

Ployd. f. 344. a. If a Feme covert gives Lands devisable by the common law by
will, and publish it, and after the Baron dies, and after the wife dies, the
devise is void, because the foundation is founded on the first parts, to wit,
the making and publi^hing which are void, though at the time of her death she
was discovert, but the death without a good beginning gives no effect; so if
an infant makes a Will and publish it, and after is at full age, it is not of
effect, causa qua supra ibidem.

Ployd. f. 344. a. If one disseise one of two acres in Dale, and the disseisee
releaseth to the disseisor all his right he ha^h in all the lands in Dale, and
delivers the release as an escrowl to be delivered to the disseisor as his
deed the last day of May, and before that time the disseisor diseiseth him of
another acre in D. and after the deed is delivered to the disseisor the last
day of May the right which he has in the third acre shall not pass, for the
beginning, and the intent is to be respected in all acts. So if one have a
reversion in fee of two acres which I. S. holds for life, and grants to
another the reversion of all the acres that I. S. holds for life, and then
the grantor purchases the reversion of another acre, I. S. holds for life,
and after I. S. attorneth to the grantee for all the three acres, the third
acre shall not pass for the reason abovesaid.

If a man devise the manner of Dale or white acre, Excepton.
and have nothing in it at the time of making the Will, and after purchases
it, there it shall pass to the devisee, for it shall be taken that his intent
was to purchase it, Ployd. f. 344. a.

If I let B. acre by deed indented, in which I have nothing, and I purchase it
afterward, it is a good Lease 8. f. 3. 24. F. n. b. f. 73. c. If a man be
distrained in any liberty, and he sue a replevin there by plaint or by Writ,
and after hanging the plaint in the Liberty, he be distrained again for the
same cause, by the same person who distrained, he shall not have a Writ of
recaption, because the plaint is not holden before the Sheriff, etc. nor before
the Justices, but if the plaint be removed by pone, and out of the Liberty
before the Justices, there the party shall have a Writ of recaption as well for
the reprisall before the Writ as for the reprisall after, whereas otherwise
before the removal a recaption did not lie upon the reprisall of a distress in
case a replevin was sued in a Manor or Liberty, and not in the County.

Coke l. 8. f. 78. a. Tenant in tail is, the remainder in tail of the grant
of the King, if tenant in tail acknowledges a fine or suffers a common
recovery, it shall not bar the issues because the reversion was in the King,
but if after the reversion be granted and put out of the crown, the fine shall
bar the issues.

Coke com. f. 14. a. Quod prius est, dignius est, and qui p^ior est tempore
potior est jure, Eract. l. 2. c. 10. and therefore among the males the eldest
brother and his posterity descending from him shall inherit before any younger
brother, because Littleton says, he is most worthy of blood: and Bracton,
Siquis plures filios habuerit, jus proprietatis primo descendit ad
primogenitum, eo quod inventus est primo in rerum natura, whosoever has many
sons the right of propriety shall descend to the first borne, in that he first
is found in the nature of things: and in King Alfreds time Knights fees
descended to the eldest son; Glanvill. l. 7. c. 3. vide ibidem plura.

Coke l. 4. Druties case, f. 90. a. Though a Countess may have as many
^haplaines as she will by the Common Law, yet by the statute can she have but
two, capable of dispensation, and reason requires, that he that has served
longest should be first preferred, for he that is the former in time, is the
more worthy in Law.

Ployd. f. 259. a. D. Hales case, Baron and Feme are joyntenants of a Lease for
two years, there are no moieties between them, but every of them has the
whole, and if the husband charge the Land, she after her death shall avoid it,
7. H. 6. f. 1. for she is remitted to the term, and is in upon a title
parameunt the grant. So if a man alien trees growing upon the ground entailed,
or in land which he has in right of his wife, and dies before they are cut
down, the alienee shall not fell them, because the issue in tail is in upon a
title paramount the alien^tion, P. 18. E. 4. f. 5.

14. H. 4. f. 32. The Lord may take his Ward which is an apprentice out of the
possession of his master, because his title to his body accrueth in respect of
his signiory, which is more ancient than his apprentiship, Ployd. ibidem.

When one has a presentment to a Church two turns, and another a third turn,
if he that has the third turn bring a ^uare impedit, he shall not begin with
his own turn first, but with the other two turns.

Vnumquodque principior um est sibimetipsi fides, and cum ea negantibus non est
disputandum, quia ad principia non est ratio. Fortescue de laudibus legum Angl.
f. 11. Dyer 271. a.

There are principles of being, so all causes are the principles of their
effects, and there are principles of knowledge, so a proposition by which as
the more known, another is conceived, is a principle, and of this principle it
is said, That every principle is of credit to it self, and that we ought not
to dispute against denyers of principles.

As arrearages of Rentcharge being due to a woman sole, and after she takes
an husband, and then another day of payment incurreth, for which day the
husband makes an acquittance supposing the receipt of the rent for the said
year last past, and notwithstanding that acquittance, his servant distraineth
for the rent of half a year of the first year being behind, but though the
last arrearages before the last term were due to the feme dum sola fuit, yet
Harper and Dyer were of opinion that all the arrearages were discharged by the
acquittance of the last term, because it is an ancient principle, That all the
arrearages are discharged by the acquittance of the last term, and we ought
not to deny principles.

Coke l. 10. f. 40. a. No man ought to dispute against recoveries, the legal
pillars of common assurances, because we are not to dispute against principles,
and which St. Germins Doctor and Student, c. 26. approves to bind both in Law
and conscience, and by the Statute of 23. Eliz. C. 4. That for the avoiding of
the dangers of assurances of Lands, and the advancement of common recoveries,
it is provided that any common recovery shall not be avoided for any want of
form in words, and not in matter of substance. And Sir James Dyer then chief
Justice did with great gravity, and some bitterness reprove an utter
Barrister, who rashly inveyed against common recoveries, not knowing the reason
and foundation of them, and said that he was not worthy to be of the profession
of the Law, who durst speak against common recoveries, which were the sinews
of assurances, and inheritances, and founded upon great reason and authority,
Mary Portingtons Case, vide ibidem ^lura.

Coke Com. f. 343. a. Principium est quasi primum caput, a principle is as it
were the first head, from which many cases have their beginning, which is so
strong as it suffers no contradiction, and therefore is it said in our Books,
that ancient principles of the Law ought not to be disputed, 11. H. 4. 9. 2. As
that of every Land there is a fee-simple, and that every Land in fee-simple may
be charged in fee by one way or other, Littleton ibidem.

Cessante statu primitivo cessat derivativus, Coke l. 8. f. 34. a. The
primitive state ceasing, the derivative does cease. As if Tenant in tail
makes a lease for lives, according to the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 28. and then
dies without issue, the lease being derived out of the Estate tail shall not
continue longer than the Estate tail, against the opinion in 33. H. 8. 48.
Dyer, which was granted by the whole Court.

Derivativa potestas, non potest esse major primitiva. Noy. max. f 4. A
derivative power cannot be greater than it from which it is derived. As the
Attorney of one that is disseised cannot make claim of the Land, it the
disseisee durst have gone to the Land, Littleton. The Bailiff of a disseisor
shall not say that the Plaintiff never had any thing in the Land, for the
Master himself shall not have that Plea, because he is not Tenant of the
Freehold, 28. Ass. Pl. 4.

The Servant shall be estopped to say the Freehold is his Masters, by recovery
against his Master, though the servant himself be a stranger to it, for he
shall not be in better condition t^an he whose right he claims, 2. E. 4. 16.

He that gains a thing on high, shall neither have gain nor loss thereby,
Noy. Max. f. 11. As if one Joyn-tenant makes a lease of his Joyntee, and
dies, the heir which surviveth shall have the reversion of his Jointure, but
not the rent, because he comes in by the first Feoffor, and not under his
companion, Dyer 187.

So when the Husband is Lessee for years in the right of his wife reserving a
rent, if he dies the wife shall have the residue of the term, but not of the
rent, ibidem.

An executor recovereth, and dies intestate: Administration of the goods of
the Testator is committed to I. S. I. S. shall not sue execution upon this
recovery.

Dower cannot be assigned reserving a rent, or with a remainder over, for she
is in from the husband, and not from him who assigns Dower Finch, f. 13.

Quod dignius est, prius est minus digno. The Law prefers every thing
according to its worthiness, Ployd. f. 169. a. and therefore is every thing
placed in Writs by the rule of the Register according to its dignity, as the
Message is placed before Lands, the Land before Meadow, and the Meadow before
Pasture, and the like, and this dignity is taken from necessity, for to have an
house to inhabit, and to defend his body from tempest and violence of weather,
is more necessary than to have Land to plow it for bread, and also to have Land
for bread is more necessary, than to have Meadow for Hay to feed Cattle, and
likewise to have Meadow for Hay, which will serve all the year, is more
necessary than Pasture, etc. ibidem. And so in the Register the entire thing
which is more worthy shall be demanded before the moiety, part, or parts: As in
a Replevin, if it be of two beasts, the one quick and the other dead, the
living thing shall first be demanded, Register.

Quod prius est, verius est, and quod prius jure est, potius est tempore, Coke
Com. f. 347. b. As in a remitter the Law prefers the first and ancient right
before the latter, and a sure right though it be little before a great estate
by wrong, which jumpeth with the rule of the Civil Law; Quoties duplici jure
defertur alicui successio, repudiato novo jure quod ante defertur, superest
vetus, Paulus 17. quest. As if Tenant in tail discontinueth the tail, and
after disseiseth the discontinuee, and so dies seized; This is a remitter to
the tenant in tail, because the Law shall put and adjudge him to be in by
force of the tail, which is his ancient title, for if he should be in by force
of the descent, then the discontinuee may have a writ of Entry sur disseissin
in the per against him, and recover the tenement, and his damages, but being in
by force of the tail, the title of the discontinuee is quite nullified.

Qualis causa talis effectus, Ployd. f. 292. a. Things are construed according
to that which is the cause thereof, as if an Executor assign Auditors to one,
who was accountant to the Testator, and the Auditors find him in arrearages,
the Action of debt, which the Executors shall have, shall be in the detinet
only, for the debt shall be in them as Executors and have respect to the
foundation and cause, 11. H. 6. f. 16. by Paston and Newton. So if one have a
villain for years as Executor, if the villain purchase Land, and the
Executors enter, the Land shall be to the use of the Testator, and it shall be
assets in his hands, because the villain, who was the cause of it, was to that
use, Ibidem, Pas. 32. H. 8. E. villenage 146.

Ployd. f. 524. and 525. b. a. If Tenant for years of Land grants a
rentcharge to another for the life of the grantee, the grantee shall not have
an estate of Frank-tenement in the rent, in that he cannot have an estate of
Frank-tenement derived out of the Chattell real, but he shall have the rent
during all the years, though the Lessee had forty years in the Land, for term
of life is greater then years, and therefore the Grantee shall have all the
rent for all the years, if he shall live so long.

And f. 525. b. An Executor cannot devise a term to another, which he has as
Executor, for so soon as the Executor is dead, the term is to the use of the
first Testator, and his Executors have it as Executors to the first Testator,
and to his use, and not as Executors of the last Testator, nor to his use, for
the Executors have them by relation as immediate Executors to the first
Testator.

A. Covenanteth with B. and his Executors, to make a lease of white acre before
Michaelwas, and the Covenantee dies before, and A. makes a lease to his
Executor, the lease shall be to the use of the Testator, and assets in the
Executor, for the Covenant, which was the cause of the Lease, came to the
Executor in right of the Testator, and to the same use shall the lease be,
Ployd. f. 292. a. Chap-mans case.

Cessante causa cessat effectus, Ployd. 268. Sir John Radcliffs case, the cause
ceasing the effect also cease. An office was found that after the decease of
Robert Earl of Sussex, and Mary the Countess his mother, certain Lands did
descend to Sir John Radcliff Knight as Son and Heir male of the body of the
said Robert engendered, and the body of the said Mary, and Sir John Radcliff
Knight was then of the age of eighteen years before the finding of the office,
and the Lands were holden of the King, and Queen by the tenth part of a fee of
Knights service in Capite: And when Sir John Radcliff became of full age, he
prayed his livery, but the Court of wards required of him for the Queen, the
value of his marriage; but it was alleged that because he was made Knight
before the title of the Wardship accrewed, and the Wardship was due to the Lord
in respect of his imbecility to do the service of a Knight, and that the
making him a Knight, did admit him able to do the service of a Knight, his
body ought not to be in ward for defect of such ability, for the cause ceasing,
the effect also cease, and that if his person was not in Wardship, no
marriage, nor value for it shall be due to the guardian, and so was it adjudged
by the Court contrary to Magna Charta c. 4. which was said to be made for the
advantage of the Lords, vide ibidem plura.

Coke Com. 312. a. Cessante causa, vel ratione legis, cessat lex. The cause and
reason of the Law ceasing the Law also cease; as at the common Law no aid was
grantable of a stranger to an avowry because the avowry was made of a certain
person, and now the avowry being made by the Statute of 21. H. 8. upon no
person, therefore the reason of the Law being changed, the Law it self is also
changed, and consequently in an avowry according to that act, aid shall be
granted to any man, vide ibidem plura.

Coke Com. f. 76. a. Cessante causa cessat causatum. As if the Lord after he
has the Wardship of the body, and the Lord does release to the infant his
right in the signiory, or the signiory descends to the infant, he shall be out
of ward both for the body and the Land, for he was in ward in respect he was
not able to do those services which he ought to do to his Lord, which now are
extinct, for the cause ceasing the thing caused cease, and there must be a
tenure continuing or no Wardship.

So if the Conusee in a Statute merchant be in execution, and his Land also,
and the Conusee release to him all debts, this shall discharge the executi^n,
for the debt was the cause of the execution, and of the continuance of it
until the debt be satisfied, therefore the discharge of the debt, which was
the cause, discharged the execution which was the effect, Coke Com. f. 76. a.

So if the heir female within the age of fourteen years be in ward and after
the age of fourteen years expired, the Lord by the Statute of W. 1. c. 22. has
two years more to tender her a convenable marriage, but if the Lord marry her
within the two years her husband and she shall prefently enter into the Lands,
for the cause ceasing the effect also cease, Coke ibidem, 7 5. b.

The King grants an office to one at will, and ten pound fee during life pro
officio illo, now if the King put him from his office, the fee shall cease, 5.
E. 4. 8. b.

The executor, or husband after the death of the wife guardian in socage shall
not retain the Wardship, for the guardian has it not to his own use, but to
the benefit of the heir, and the executor or husband has not that affection
which the testator, or wife had, which was the cause that the Law gives them
the Wardship, 7. Eliz. 293. b.

If a stroke be given the first day of May, and the King pardon him the second
day of May for all felonies, and misdemeanors, the party smitten dies the
third day of May, so as this is no felony till after the pardon, yet the felony
is pardoned, for the misdemeanor is pardoned, and therefore all things pursuing
are also pardoned, 13. E. 401.

If two coparceners make a lease reserving a rent, they shall have this rent in
common, as they have the reversion, but if afterward they grant the reversion,
excepting the rent, then they shall be Joyntenants of the rent, Finch mono. f.
9. It is no principal challenge to a Juror, that he has married the parties
mother, if she be dead without issue, for the cause of favor is removed, 14.
H. 7. 2.

The King disparking the Park, the office of the keeper is determined, and all
such offices as are presumed in Law to be for the commodity of the King as
well as the Patentee, and if one grants a Stewardship of a manor, and
dismembreth that manor, the office is determined; if a corporation grants
the office of a towne-clark, and surrendreth their patent to be renewed, all
their offices are determined, Huttons Reports.

Upon a divorce, the woman shall have the goods given in marriage not being
spent, for the goods were given in advancement of the woman, and therefore it
is reasonable that she should have them, in that the cause and consideration
of that gift is now defeated; for the cause ceasing the effect also cease,
Dyer f. 13. p. 61.

Coke l. 5. f. 59. b. Vaughans case, The original cause of the amercement
being pardoned the amercement is pardoned, vide ibidem.

The husband and wife make a lease by Deed, the husband dies, the wife
accepts the rent, if the Lessee lose the Deed of the Lease, the wife shall
avoid it, 15. E. 4. 17.

Coke l. 1. f. 2. Buchu^sts case. If the Feoffor make a Feoffment with
warranty, the Feoffee shall not have the Charters, unless by express grant,
but the Feoffor shall have all the Charters, and Evidences which are material
for the maintenance of the title of the Land, and upon which he may maintain
his warranty paramount, but if the warranty be determined he shall have them no
longer.

Ployd. f. 382. a. Nevills case. The King grants to two for their lives, and
the life of the survivor of them, the Sheriff-wike of Chester, and one of them
was attainted of high Treason, all the Office was forfeited, because the Office
was entire, and could not be severed, ibidem.

The King grants the Office of the keeper of a Park to two, and the one
fails in discharge of his duty, the whole fee shall determine; so it is if an
annuity be granted to two for Counsel, and one of them refuse, because the
Office and Grant is entire, and cannot be severed, and the cause ceasing but in
one, the whole annuity shall cease.

Exception.
Dyer. 320. Pl. 13. An Arbitrament was between two of diverse things, and among
others, there was one article that one party should have yearly for the space
of six years twenty shillings toward the keeping and honest education of A. B.
and A. B. dies before the fourth year of the sixth year, yet the payment of
the 20 s. shall not cease during the six years, which is a certain term, and
is a duty to the party himself toward the finding of A. B.

Dier 141. Pl. 44. King Ed. 6. grants to the Lady Mary his Sister the Manor
of D. for term of her life, according to the Tenor and effect of the last Will
of H. 8. which was that she should have it so long as she was unmarried,
afterward she granted a rent charge out of that Manor, after which grant K.
E. dies, by whose death the reversion came to her being Queen, and afterward
she married Philip King, etc. and it was doubted whether the rent charge
should remain or no.

Davis 3. a. b. In ancient times a great part of tenements were holden of their
Lords by Socage, which was that the Tenants ought to come with their sokes by
certain days by the year to plow, and sow the demesne of the Lords, and
because such works were made for the livelihood and sustenance of their Lords,
they were quitted of all other services: and after such services were changed
into moneys by consent of the Lords, though the Lords did alien their demesnes
and had no lands to plow or sow, yet paid they their rents yearly to the
Lords: so the Church and religious houses after the procuration of Victuals
was reduced to a certain sum, did pay it to the Ordinary yearly, though he
made no visitation, so as the rule, The cause ceasing the effect also ceased,
held not in those cases.

So Coke l. 4. in Capels case, it was resolved that where a man held certain
land by rent for Castle-guard, though the Castle was ruined or decayed, yet the
rent remained, and pro does not import a condition, as in the case of an
annuity granted pro consilio impendendo, but a full and perpetual recompense
and satisfaction, Vide Davis plura ibidem.

In jure non remota, sed proxima causa spectatur, Bacon Max. f. 1. 2.

In the Law the next and not the remote cause is respected.

For it were infinite for the law to judge of the cause of causes, and
therefore judges of acts by the immediate and next cause, as Bar. Empsons case
f. 2. An annuity is granted pro consitio seu impendendo, and the grantee
commits treason whereby he is imprisoned, that the grantor cannot come unto
him for counsel, yet the annuity is not determined, by this non fesans; for
the law looks not on the remote cause, to wit, the grantors offense which was
the cause of the imprisonment but excuses it, because his not giving of
counsel was compulsory, and not voluntary in regard of the imprisonment which
was the immediate cause.

So if a parson makes a Lease, and be deprived, or resigneth, the successors
shall avoid the Lease, for the law regards not the cause of the deprivation,
or the resignation, which is the act of the party but the act of the Ordinary
in the admission of the new incumbent, 2. H. 4. 3. 26. H. 8. 2.

A foeffment in fee upon condition that the Feoffee shall enfeoff over, and if
the feoffee be disseised, and a dissent case, and then the feoffee binds
himself in a statute, which statute is discharged before the recovery of the
Land, this is no breach of the condition, because the land was never liable to
the statute, and the possibility which was the remote cause that it should be
liable upon the recovery, the law does not respect.

Coke l. 2. Winningtons case, This rule fails in covenous act, where the law
takes heed to the corrupt beginning and also in criminal acts, where the law
principally regards the first motive, vide ibidem plura.

Nihil magis consentaneum est, us iisdem modis res dissolvatur quibus
constituitur. Reg. I.C. and Bracton, Nihil tam conveniens est naturali
aequitati unumquodque dissalvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est, Cok. l. 2. f. 53. a.

There is nothing more agreeing to natural equity then that every thing should
be dissolved by the same means it was bound.

As no estate can be vested in the King without matter of record: so no estate
can be divested out of him without matter of record, Ployd. f. 553. Walsinghams
case, and 180. Nevils case, 12. H. 7. and many other books, for nothing is so
convenient to natural equity then that every thing should be dissolved by the
same band it was tied, and Coke l. 4. f. 57. b. In case of attainder and
office, the King is entitled by double matter of record, and therefore the
party grieved ought to avoid it by double matter of record, and not by single
travers or Monstrans de droit but is driven to his petition, vide ibidem. plura.

But when a man avoideth the Kings title by as high a matter of record as the
King claims, though the King be entitled by double matter of Record, he may
have it by way of Plea, as one is attainted of treason by Parliament, an office
finds his lands by which the King seiseth them, the party may allege
restitution by Parliament, and a repeal of the former Act, 4. H. 7. 7. b.
Finch Nomot. 12.

Coke l. 5. f. 26. a. Indentures being made for declaring of the uses of a
subsequent fine, recovery, or other assurance to certain persons, and within a
certain time, and to certain uses, are but a directory and do not bind the
estate or interest of the land, yet if the fine or recovery or other assurance
be pursued according to the Indentures, there cannot be any bare averment
against the Indentures to be taken in such case, that after the making of the
Indentures or before the assurance by mutual agreement of parts was concluded,
and agreed that the assurance shall be to other uses, but if other agreement
or limitation of uses be made by writing or by other matter so high or more
high: then the last agreement shall stand, for every contract and agreement
must be dissolved by a matter of as high a nature as the other was, vide ibidem
plura, in the Earl of Rutlands case.

Coke l. 6. f. 43. b. Blakes case, A writ of Covenant, and the breach was for
not reparing of the house: and the Defendant pleaded accord between him and
the Plaintiff with satisfaction, and though it be regularly true that
arbitrament or accord with satisfaction is no plea where the action is founded
upon a deed, for every thing is to be discharged by a matter of as high a
nature as it is obliged, yet there is a diversity where the duty accrueth by
the deed in certainty, tempore confectionis, as by covenant, bill, or
obligation to pay a sum of money, there it is a certain, duty and ought to be
discharged by a matter of as high a nature, but where there is no certain duty
accrueth by deed, but only a wrong or default subsequent together with the
Deed, which only gives an Action to recover damages; as for default of
reparations, there an accord with satisfaction is a good Plea, because the end
of the action is only to have damages in the personalty, for the action is not
merely grounded on the deed, but also from the deed and the wrong subsequent
and generally in all Actions where damages are only to be recovered,
arbitrament or accord with satisfaction is a good plea, vide ibidem plura.

Vnum quod que dissolvitur eo modo quo constituitur, Nay. Max. f. 4.

As an obligation or matter in writing cannot be discharged by an agreement by
word but by writing, and though in abatement as a receipt of part upon a deed,
it shall not be admitted without a deed of it, 19. E. 4. 1. b.

In an annuity growing by prescription, rien arreare is a good plea, for a
prescription is no matter in deed, but in an annuity by deed, it is no good
plea without showing an acquittance, 3 H. 7. 33.

An Act of Parliament cannot be avoid but by Parliament.

The submission of an arbitrament by deed, must be countermanded by deed.

Things may be avoided, and determined by the ceremonies and Acts, like unto
those by which they were created, Bacon uses etc. as Livery and Seisin by
entry, a grant by claim and charge by discharge, and an use which is raised by
declaration and limitation, may cease by words of declaration and limitation.

Non impedit clausula derogatoria sine clausula de non obstan^e de futuro quo
minus ab cadem potestateres dissolvantur a quibus constituuntur, Bacon, Max f.
67. Acts which are in their nature revocable, cannot by strength of words be
fixed or perpetuated, the law judges it to be idle, and of no force, to
deprive men of that which is most incident to humane condition, and that is
alteration and repentance.

As if I make my will, and in the end thereof add this clause: Also my will
is, if I shall revoke this present will, or declare any new will, unless it be
in writing, subscribed with the hands of two witnesses etc. that such
revoration shall he void, any such pretended will to the contrary
notwithstanding, yet may I by paroll without any writing repeal the same and
make a new one. So if a statute be made that no sheriff shall continue in his
office above a year; and if any patent be made to the contrary though it be
with a clausula de non obstante, it shall be void, yet notwithstanding such a
Patent of the Sheriffs Office made by the King with a non obstante, will be
good in law, because it is an inseparable prerogative of the Crown to dispense
with politic statutes, and of that kind notwithstanding any derogatory clause,
28. E. 3. c. 7. 24. E. 3. c. 9. 2 H. 7. 6.

If the Parliament should enact, that there should be no Parliament, but that
the King should have the authority of Parliament, and rule by the ancient lege
regia, it were good in Law, quia potestas suprema seipsum dissolvere potest,
because the highest power may dissolve it self, Bacon.

From the matter.
DEbile fundamentum fallit opus, Noy. Max. f. 5. when the foundation fails
all goes to the ground. As when an estate to which a warranty is annexed, is
defeated, the warranty also is defeated, as if Tenant in tail discontinue, and
the discontinuee is diseised, or makes a Feoffment upon condition, in whose
possession a collateral ancestor of the issue in tail releaseth and dies,
the issue is barred: but if the discontinuee enter upon the disseisor or upon
the Feoffor for the condition broken, the issue is restored to his formedon,
Lit.

Coke l. 6. f. 14. a. Burton was deprived for adultery, and afterward by a
general pardon adultery was pardoned, and though the deprivation was in force,
and that he that after the deprivation was admitted, instituted and inducted,
remained Parson, yet by force of the said pardon is he become Parson again
without any sentence declaring the deprivation to be void, for by the pardon
the adultery which was the foundation of the deprivation was discharged, and by
consequence all that was depending on the said foundation is discharged, for
sublato fundamento corruit opus.

So if an execution be sued upon a statute: and then the connusee makes a
defeasance upon the statute upon the payment of twenty pound, if the twenty
pound be paid the execution shall be defeated as well as the statute, 20.
Assize Pl. 7.

If there be a disseisor of Lands in ancient demesne, and the Lord confirms
to him to hold at the common Law, the disseisee reentreth: now the land shall
be ancient demesne again, for the estate whereupon the confirmation should enure
is defeated, 49 E. 3. 8.

A Church appropriated to a spiritual corporation becomes disappropriate if
the corporation be dissolved 3. E. 3. 74. b.

Licet tenenti vetus opus reficere non novum facere Febl. 2. f. 51. A Tenant
may repair an old work, but not make a new one. As by our law the Tenant may
cut down trees for the amendment of houses or reparation of them, 44. E. 3.
21. and 44. 11. H. 4, 32. But if the necessity of a new house comes in
question, as to build a Stable, or no house be built upon the Land at the time
of the Lease, the Lessee may not cut down trees to make a house. 11. H 4. 32.

From the Form.
MVtata forma prope interimitur substantia rei, Ulpian reg. I. C. Doderidge f.
132. 133. The English Lawyer. The form being changed, the substance and
essence of the thing is destroyed. If a man take my Barley and make Malt
thereof, it cannot be seized by the former owner, and yet neither quantity nor
outward form is lost, but it is become a thing of another nature and use,
because the inward form upon which depended the use is changed.

So if a man, of any piece of cloth which he had to keep, containing twenty
yeards in one whole piece, will cut the same into twenty several yeards and
pieces, the matter nor the quantity is not changed, and yet if he will restore
the same pieces, I am not bound to receive them.

So if a man possessed of twenty packs of Wool, by his last will, devises all
the said Wool to I. S. and after the Testator converteth all the said Wool
into cloth, and dies possessed of the same cloth, I. S. the devisee shall not
have by law the cloth made of that Wool, for that the form of the Wool is
changed, though the matter remain and is turned to a thing of another nature,
and the turning it into cloth is a Countermand of the Testators Will.

So if a man have a dwelling house, whereunto there is a Common of Estovers
belonging, if this house by casualty of fire, or tempest be burnt, or blown
down, or taken down, and a new be built in another place near, or in another
form, the Common of Estovers is lost, and not to be used in this new house,
but if the first house were not wholly pulled down but repaired, or another new
house be built upon the same foundation, and in the same form with the former,
the Common of Estovers remains with the new house, for that in Judgment of
Law is the same house, for the building on the same foundation is but a
reparation, ibidem.

So 22. H. 6. 28 It is not sufficient in a bar of a Writ of Wast of an house,
to say that, the Defendant has built a new house in liew of that which is
fallen, but the Defendant must say that, it is as much in length and as much in
latitude as the other was, or at the least he must say, that it is as
profitable, but when an house is ruinous at the making of the lease, and after
falls, and the Defendant builds a new, it is not necessary that he make
another house of equal longitude or latitude, Fulb. l. 2. f. 51.

From the end.
SApiens incipit a fine, Coke l. 10 f. 25. b. Et quod primum est in intention,
ultimum est in executione, Suttons Hospital case. A wise man begins from
the end, and that which is first in intentions is last in Execution. The pious
and charitable end of Sutton was the grand motive to the King to give to him
means by creation of a capeable body politic by way of incorporation, to have
a perpetual succession, to perfect, and perpetuate so pious and charitable a
work, Ibidem.

Finis rei attendendus est, and fines mandatorum domini regis per rescripta sua
deligenter sunt observandi, for the end in all humane actions is of singular
regard, for that all things attempted by wise men have their end, and the
virtue of the thing is measured by the end, Doder. Coke l. 5. f. 87. a. In
Blunfeilds case. The end and fruit of a suit is satisfaction, but the
execution of the body is no satisfaction, but a gage for the debt, 4. H. 7. 8.
33. H. 6. 47. And therefore after his death he shall resort to another
execution, for it should be mischeivous to the Plaintiff to lose his debt
without any default in him, neither is the execution of the body a valuable
execution, and therefore after his death he shall have a new execution, until
he has had a valueable execution out of his Lands and Goods, which in Law and
Equity ought to be subject to the payment of his debts, but where no other
satisfaction is to be had thereby: Qui non habet in aere luat in corpore, ne
quid peccetur impune, Hob. Rep. f. 133. He who has no money, let him be
punished in body, least he should offend without punishment, vide ibidem.

Exitus acta probat, finis, non pugna, coronat, Dod. E. Law^. f. 143. Coke l.
9. f. 82. b. Finis coronat opus, the Law favors the consummation and
prefection of things, for the end crowns the work, and does all: as the end
of an Attornment is to perfect a grant, which the Law therefore favors,
according to the resolution of the Books, 12. E. 4. 3. and 4. where it is
holden that Tenant in tail, Infant, or Feme-covert may be bound by an
Attornment gratis in pais: and in 18. H. 8. Fortescue holds, that if one
grants the service of his Tenant which is within age, who within age
attorneth, shall he after in an avowry be admitted to say that he was within
age at the time of the Attornement? I say no, for he did nothing but that which
he ought to do, Ibidem.

Ployd. f. 18 a. The scope and end of every matter is principally to be
considered in all things, and when the scope and end of the matter is
satisfied, then the end of the matter is accomplished, as here in Renigers
case, as the end of the Statute of 7. E. 6. c. 2. is, that the King shall have
his subsidy, and if the agreement be here sufficient to give him the subsidy
and to assure the King of it, then the end of the Statute is performed, and so
here it is, for the agreement authoriseth the King to weigh the Woad by his
collector at what time he shall please, and when that is done the King has
title to action, and so is in surety.

So 33. E. 3. Joynder in aid 10. Vouchee comes into the Coutt to be viewed,
and being viewed is awarded of full age, yet he shall not be driven to answer
till he come in to the same intent by another Process, So 19. E. 4 3. The
Vouchee upon a Grand Cape ad valentiam, shall not lose the Land, though he
cannot save his default, for the Process is only to this end to have him to
appear.

So 51. Ass. Pl. 2. A man is warned by writ to answer to a matter, he shall not
be driven to answer to any other matter then is contained in that writ, though
the King be a party. As if by office it be found that Lands in chief descended
to I. S. a fool natural, and that A. occupies them, whereby a Scire facias
goes out against A. to answer why the Lands should not be seized into the
Kings hands for the ideacy of I. S. A comes in and pleads that I. S. when he
was of perfect memory made a release to one B. who infeoffed A. this is good
enough, without showing any license of alienation, to discharge himself for
the purchase of those Lands.

Exitus acta probat, and acta exteriora indicant in teriora animi secreta, Coke
l. 8. f. 146. b. when entry, authority, or license is given any one by the Law,
and he does amiss, he shall be a trespassor from the beginning, as the Law
gives authority to any one to enter into a common Hostlary or Tavern, to the
Lord to distraine, to the owner of the soil to distraine for Damage-feasant,
to him in the reversion to view whether wast be made, to the commoner to enter
into Land to see his Cattle; but if he which enters into a Tavern does
trespass, as if he import any thing, or if the Lord who does distraine for
rent, or the owner for Damage-feasant work or kill the distress, or he who
enters to see wast does break the house, or remain in it one whole night,
or if the Commoner cut down a tree, in these cases the Law shall adjudge him
to enter to that intent and purpose, and because the act which demonstrated it
is a Trespass he shall be accounted a Trespassor from the beginning, so if a
purveyor take my Cattle by force of commission for the hostle of the King, it
is lawful; but if he sell them in Market the first taking is tortious, 18. H.
6. 19. b.

Coke l. 9 f. 59. Lambs case. Any one shall be convict of a publication of a
Libell, if he knowing it to be a Libell, write but a copy of it, unless
afterward he can prove that he delivered it to a Magistrate to examine it.

Coke Com. f. 100. a. The mesne is to acquit the Tenant of any manner of
services, that any Lord paramount will have or demand of the Tenant, and if the
Tenant be distrained without default of the mesne, yet if the mesne does not
afterward put his own beasts into the pound instead of the beasts of the
Tenant, the distress shall be said to be in his default, and the Tenant shall
recover his damages, and costs, vide ibidem plura.

Destinata tantum pro factis non habentur, Dod. E. Lawyer f. 143. Things
destinated to an end, not being applied thereunto, alter their nature and
become of another consideration, as if a man cut down my Timber Tree, and
square it of purpose to make a Beam for an house, I who am the true owner may
seize the same, but if it be laid in the building it may not be seized by the
owner, although the building be not perfected, for now it becomes parcel of
the house or building, but if a man prepare all materials for building upon
his Land, and is ready to build therewith, but dies before it be erected,
those materials shall go unto the Executor, or Administrtaor, and not unto the
Heir, who should have had them had they been layen in the buildings, and it
may not be seized by the owner although the building be not perfected, for now
it becomes parcel of the house or building; but if a man prepare all materials
for building upon his Land, and is ready to build therewith, but dies before
it is erected, those materials shall go unto the Executor or Administrator, and
not unto the Heir, who should have had them had they been layen in the
building, because they were destinata tantum quae profactis non habentur,
intended only, which are not taken for acts.

Qui adimit medium dirimit finem, Coke Com. f. 161. a. Sometimes the Law
respects the beginning, and sometimes the end, and sometimes the means to the
attaining it. As to turn a stream is running to a Mill, is a disseisin to the
Mill it self, and to disturb one from entering and manuring his Land, is a
disseisin of the Land it self, so rescous and replevin is a disseisin to the
Lord, because by them the Lord is disturbed from coming to his Rent, and so
also is enclosure, because the Lord cannot break down Gates, or break down
the enclosures to take a distress, and all these are disseisins after an
actual seisin had, and when the rent is behind; otherwise not any of them.

Finis sinem litibus imponit, Ployd. f. 357 a. Many times in our Law, the name
and denomination of a thing is drawn from the final cause, as a Fine used for
the assurance of Land, dicitur finis quia finem litibus imponit, because it
puts a period and end to suits, Dod. E. Lawyer. f. 143. and therefore as
Ployd. f. 357. a. Fines have been of very long antiquity, and as Long as any
Court of Record has been, and were at the common Law the more stronger
assurance, because they carry in themselves the end of the Law, which is
repose, for the Law has no other end but repose, for it was ordained to cease
contention, and to make peace, as the Statute of 17. E. 1. shows that
therefore they were called Fines, quia finem litibus debent imponere and
imponunt, and therefore in the commencement of a Fine, there is concord and
peace, haec est finalis concordia, and the chief cause is by which it makes
peace, because it binds all strangers unless it be those which have defect,
if they enter not their claim within a year and a day, and Brown said, that a
Fine for its haughtiness, and for the peace and repose that it brings, it
may be termed finis Legis, fructus Legis, exitus Legis, and effectus Legis, the
end of the Law, the fruit of the Law, and the effect of the Law; and after the
Plea of non-claime of Fines was made no bar, by the Statute of 34. E. 3. c. 16.
because the people in those troublesome times of Wars, could not attend to
know the Fines, and make their claims, Fines did lose their force, and were in
effect, but Feoffments of Record, which was the occasion of great contention
among the Subjects of the Realm; whereupon the Statute of 4. H. 7. was enacted
to reform them, as by the preamble appears, by which five years after
Proclamations made upon the Fine, are given to him that right has to make his
claim or pursue his action, whereas the common Law gave him but a year and a
day, and also if a Fine be levied without Proclamations, or without so many as
the Statute requires, then the Statute of non-claime does extend to such a
Fine, Coke Com. 262. a. by which Statute the ancient strength of Fines is
renewed, and made to be as they were heretofore; the final end and conclusion
of all strifes and debates, as the Statute phraseth it.

From the effests.
EVentus est, qui ex causa sequitur, and dicitur eventus quia ex causa evenit,
the event of a thing is that which follows the cause, and it is called an
event because it comes from the cause.

Coke l. 9. f. 81. b. Agnes Gores case. Who did secretly put poison into an
electuary, which one Martine the Apothecary had made, with an intent to kill
her hushand, part of which her husband and her Father having eaten were
greivously sick; whereof her Father complaining to the said Martin, Martin
stirring the electuary did eat part of it the one and twentieth of May, and
dyed the 22th. of May, and it was resolved that Agnes was guilty of the Murder
of the said Martin, for the Law conjoyneth the murtherous intention of Agnes in
putting poison into the electuary to kill her husband, with the event that
followed upon it, to wit the death of the said Martin, for the putting of
poison in the electuary was the cause of the poisoning, and death of the said
Martin was the event, for that is the event which follows the cause, and are
called events because they come from the cause, and the stirring of the
electuary by Martin without putting in the poison by Agnes could not have been
the cause of his death, ibidem.

Frustra expectatur eventus, cujus effectus nullus sequitur, it is in vain to
expect the event, where no effect follows, Coke l. 5 f. 15. b. Cawdrys case.
As if an excommunication under the Popes bull is not of force to disable any
man in England, and that if it, being the extreme and final end of any suite
in the Court of Rome, be not to be allowed in England, it consequently
follows, that by the ancient common Law of England, no suite for any cause,
though it be spiritual arising within this Realm, ought to be determined in
the Court of Rome, for in vain an event is to be expected of which no effect
follows, and that the Bishops of England are the immediate Officers, and
Ministers to the Kings Courts, ibidem.

Plus virium habent argumenta ex effectis, Fons. Log. Arguments from the
effects are of greater force, and therefore does the Law commonly conster
things according to the effects.

As if a Deed be delivered by an infant, it cannot be delivered again at his
full age, for it took some effect before, and was but voydable, 1. H. 6. 4.

But a deed delivered by a Feme-covert, or a release delivered to one, who had
nothing in the Land may be delivered again, to wit, when she comes to be
sole, or the party to have somewhat in the Land, for the first delivery was
merely void and of no effect at all.

From the whole, and the part.
TOtum praefertur unicuique parti, the whole is preferred before either part,
Coke l. 3. f. 41. in Ratcliffs case. As the blood which is between every Heir
and his Ancester makes him Heir, for without blood none can inherit, and
therefore it is great reason, that he who has the whole, and entire blood
shall inherit before him who has but part of the blood of his Ancester,
because by the order of nature the whole is to be preferred before the part.
And therefore says Bracton, Propt^r jus sanguinis duplicatum dicitur haeires
tam ex part matris quam ex part patris propinquior soror, quum frater de alia
uxore, that from the double right of blood, as well from the part of the
father, as from the part of the Mother, the Sister is said to be the nearer
heir, then the brother of the other wife, and Britton says, that the right of
blood in this case makes the Female to exclude the male, ibidem.

And therefore by the common Law of England, if a common person have issue a
Son, and a Daughter by one venture, and a Son by another venture, and dies
seized of Lands in Fee-simple, and the eldest Son enters into the Land, and
dies without issue, the Sister of the whole blood shall inherit to him, and
not the brother of the half blood, Coke ibidem, 40. b.

Vbi major pars ibi totum, where the major part is there is the whole, 21. E.
4. 27. and 14. H. 8. 27. The Deane and major part of the Chapter makes the
Croporation, and their act is the act of the Corporation, though the others do
not agree, which accords with the rule of the Canon Law, authoritas, and
potestas capituli consistit in majore pare ejus, and sani^ri and sic totum
capitulum facere dicitur quod facit major, and sanior pars, Panor^^tanus. The
authority and power of a Chapter consists in the greater, and sounder part,
and so the whole Chapter is said to do what the major and sounder part does.

But here this difference is to be taken, that in Colleges and Corporations
the major part of the Members ought to give their voices in a distinct number,
and not in a confused, and incertaine number, as in the election of the Knights
of Parliament, or the Coronors, or Virderors in the County Court, the greater
voice and acclamation is sufficient to show the ass^nt of the greater part of
the Freeholders, who make the election, Ployd. 126. a.

So as the major part of the Chapter does consent in making this confirmation,
and this consent ought to be expressed by the fixing of the Seal, 14. H. 6.
17. So ought they to sit in one place and at one time, for otherwise it may be
called an assent, and not a consent, where the lease ought to be confirmed by
the assent and consent of the Deane and Chapter; for as the body natural
cannot make any perfect act if it be dismembered, no more can a body politic,
but the persons which are members of it ought to be capitulariter congregati,
in a certain place, otherwise if they be scattered, or dispersed in several
places, that which they do shall not be said to be the Act of the Corporation,
but factum singulorum, as 15. E. 4. 2. a. where the major part of the Monks
had subscribed their hands to a deed of the Abbot, but it was not expressed,
that it was done with the assent and consent of the Covent, it was said to be
done by those particular persons which had subscribed, and not by the
Corporation, and such a deed shall not bind the house, yet the Deane and
Chapter are not confined to their Chapter House, but they may meet to and make
their Acts elsewhere; and therefore it is holden, 21. E. 4. 26 That where a
Deed did bear date in dom^ capituli, averrement might be, that the deed was
delivered at another place, yet the major part ought to be present in the same
place, and therefore the election of Coroners ought to be in pleno comitatu, as
appears by the Writ de coronatore eligendo.

So the consent of the major part of the Chapter, ought to be at the same time,
simul and semel, and not scatteringly and upon several days, for it is not a
consent unless it be simul, for consensus est voluntas multo^um ad ques res
pertinet simul juncta, for consent is the will of many joined together,
concerning those things which appertain unto them, Davis f. 48. vide ibidem
plura.

Turp^s est pars quae cum suo toto non convenit. It is a foul and deformed
part which agrees not with the whole, Ployd. f. 161. a.

And therefore every part of a deed ought to be conferred with the other, and
one entire sense thereupon to be made, as if I release all actions and stay
there, all actions are gone, but if I say further, which I have as Executor to
I. S. there the generality is restrained. So 17. E. 4. f. 22. The King grants
to Garter King of Heralds ten pounds for the term of his life, if he had
stayed there, he had had it absolutely for term of his life, but where he
faith further, by reason of his Office, by it he has restrained the
generality, vide ibidem plura, in Throgmortons case, so as if he be removed
from his Office he shall lose his annuity.

Part quacumque sublata integrante, sive necessaria tollitur totum, the
substantial or necessary part of any thing being taken away, the whole is
destroyed, Coke l. 3. f 41. in Ratcliffs case, As none can be procreated but of
the father and the mother, and ought to have in him their two bloods: which
bloods commixed in him by lawful marriage constitutes and makes him heir, so
none can be heir to any unless he has in him both the bloods to whom he
shall be made heir, and therefore the heir of the half blood shall not
inherit, because he wants one of the bloods which make him inheritable, for
the blood of the father and mother are but one blood inheritable, and both are
necessary to the procreation of an heir, and therefore if there be Baron and
Feme, Donees in special tail, and the Baron is attainted of treason and
executed having issue, and the Feme die, the issue shall not have the Land
because the father is attainted, for he ought in his lineall conveyance to make
himself heir as well of the part of his father as of the part of his mother,
Dier, f. 332. b. And that bar and forfeiture is made by the Statute of 26. H.
8. c. 13. which provideth that every offender convict of high treason shall
forfeit to the King etc. All his Lands, etc. saving to every person all his
right, title, interest etc. so as the issues in tail are barred by that
statute, because the heir is disabled, and cannot make himself heir in his
lineall conv^yance, as well to the father as mother, Coke l. 9 f. 140. a. upon
which reason Britton says, that if one be attainted of felony by judgment,
the heirs engendered after the attainder shall be excluded of all manner of
succession of inheritance, as well of the part of the father as of the part of
the mother, because at the time of the generation of him, the fathers blood was
corrupted, et ex leproso parente leprosus generatur filius, Coke l. 3. f. 41.
vide plura.

From the circumstances of time and place.
MOmentum and instans est unum indivisibile in tempore, quod non est tempus
neque pars temporis, ad quod tamen parts temporis copulantur, Ployd. 110. b.
The distinction of a moment cannot be discerned or observed in the actions of
men, who cannot do any thing without the space of time; yet as Ployd. f. 258.
b. in Madam Hales case, in things of instant there is a priority of time in the
consideration of the Law, as in a felon of himself, the forfeiture shall have
no relation but to the time of his death, and the death precedeth the
forfeiture, and notwithstanding the forfeiture comes at the same instant when
he dies, yet in consideration of Law one shall be said to precede the other,
though both shall be said to come at an instant, for every instant has the end
of one time, and the commencement of another, and so in the death of a Felon of
himself, the death and the forfeiture comes together and at the same time,
and yet there is priority, to wit, the end of his life is the beginning of the
forfeiture, and yet the forfeiture is so near the death that there is no mean
time between them, but are conjoined, for a moment or instant is one
indivisible thing in time, which is not time, nor part of time, to which
notwithstanding the parts of time are conjoined, vide ibidem plura, and in the
case between Fulmasten and Steward, fo. 110.

So Fulbeck in his Pandects, L. 1. f. 9. b. The existence of a moment cannot
possibly be discerned, and therefore is not so much as the twinkling of an
eye, yet the Law does operate without compass of time in an instant, but man
never, for every act of man must have space longer or shorter, but the nature
of such instants as the law does imagine, is such and so sudden, that as the
Civilians, omnom respuunt mo^am, and the reason is, because in the operation of
the law that which is imagined to be done is dicto citius, presently done, and
whereas the act of man is mixed with the act of Law, though in regard of the
same thing the act of Law is momentary, yet the act of man must needs bear
some delay, as those things by the civil law which are taken from the enemies
do incontinently become his, who does seize and take them, the law does give
them unto him presently, yet there must be a time to take them, that the Law
may give them. So if a Lease be made to A. for the life of B. and A. dies, C.
enters into the Land and enjoys it as occupant, the Law because it will not
have the freehold in suspense, does imagine that it was presently and
immediately in him after the death of A. and that he entered presently: but if
we respect the entry as the Act of man, we must needs conceive that he had some
time to enter into the Land, and by his entry which is an act of motion to
gain the free hold, ibidem.

Quae incontinenti fiunt in esse videntur, Coke l. 8. f. 77. a. Those things
which are done in an instant seem to be in esse, or in being, in Staffords
case, as a particular estate, and the increase of a particular estate ought to
take effect by the same deed or grant or ^y two deeds delivery at the same
time, which is all one in effect, for those things which are done in an instant
and at the same time, seem to be in being. And the particular estate and the
increase of the estate upon it, is but one grant to take effect out of the same
root, and though that it vesteth at several times, yet when it vesteth it has
the vigor and force of the same grant, 27. H. 6. f. 7.

So l. 2. f. 71. a. A condition cannot precede an estate, but ought to be in
the said conveyance, or comprised in another deed, delivered at one and the
same time, as the books are agreed in 17. Ass. 2. and 34. Assise, for the above
said reason, vide ibidem S. Cromwels case.

But Coke com. f. 236. puts a difference between inheritances executed, and
inheritances executory: as if Lands be executed by livery, they cannot by
Indenture of defeasance be defeated afterward, or if the disseisee release to a
disseisor, it cannot be defeated by Indentute of defeasance afterward, but at
the time of the release or feoffment the same may be defeated by Indentures of
defeasance: for it is a Maxim in law, quae inconunenti fiunt in esse videntur.

But Rents, Annuities, Conditions, Warranties, and such like, that be
inheritances executory may be defeated by defeasances made either at that time
or at any time after, and so is the law of statutes, recognisances, and
obligations, and other things executory, ib.

Agreeable to this rule is the reason of the case put by Bro. judgment 148.
That if a Feme suffer a recovery of her jointure against the statute of 11 H.
7. without the assent of him in the reversion, and after he in the reversion
releaseth to the recoveror by Fine, that assent comes too late, and cannot
make the recovery good was once void, and for the same reason the consent of
the major part of a Chapter must be done at one time simul, and semel, and not
scatteringly or at several days, vide Davis Rep. f. 48. b. So Pl. f. 135. a.
b. A Lease by deed for 11. years, and in security of the term, the Lessor
made a Charter upon condition, that if he was disturbed of his term he should
have fee, and livery and seisin was made, as well upon the one Charter as the
other, and then the Lessee was disturbed, and it was adjudged that he should
have fee, because the Charters were delivered at one and the same time, T. 10.
E. 3. f. 521.

Tempus est mensura motus secundum prius, and posterius, A^ist. 4. Phys. Time
is the measure of motion according to priority and posteriority, for as the
motion does measure the place, so does time the motion, as a days journey is
measured of a day, and an hours of an hour, and because all contracts and
matters of intercourse do fall within the lists and precincts of time,
therefore the moments and measures of time should be publicly and familiarly
known to popular conceits. For tempus est mensura rerum, time is the measure
of all things, and as Ployd. f. 555. b. the diversity of estates proceeds from
the diversity of time, for the estate in Land is the time in Land, for he that
has a fee-simple in Land has time in the Land without fine, or the Land for
time without end, so he that has land in tail has time in it, or the land
for time, so long as he has issue of his body, and he which has an estate in
Land for life, has time no longer then that he shall live, and so for another
man's life or years.

And as the time measures things, so does the law measure time, as by the true
computation the lesser year consists of 865. days, and six hours, whereby
in every fourth year there is die excrescens, which makes that year to have
366. days, which is called the greater year, yet by legal computation, a
quarter of a year contains 91. days, and half a year contains 162. days
for the od hours in legal computation are rejected: And in the statute de
annob. Sextil. it is provided, Quod computetur dies ille excrescens, and dies
proxime praecedens pro uno die, that the day excrescent and the day precedent
shall be computed for one day, so as in computation the day excrescent is not
accounted, so a month is regularly accounted in law for twenty eight days, and
not according to the Solar month, nor according to the Calendar, unless it be
for the account of the Lapse in a Quare impedit or the right of the Patron.

Coke com. f. 135. b. And Kellaway 21. H. 7. f. 75. A feast in our law
begins in the morning and ends at the night, and the natural day
begins ad ortum solis, and ends ad occasum solis, and so is it taken and
adjudged in our Law. But the feast by the law of the Church begins at noone
in the Vigil, and lasts until the midnight of the next day, and the night
which makes burglary, begins ad occasum solis, and lasts until the
rising of the Sun, for where a man has broken an house after the setting of
the Sun, it has been adjudged burglary, for if the night should begin so
soon as the day is ended, and last until the morning of the next day, it
would be too hard a thing to try etc. ibidem.

In omnibus stipulationibus id tempus spectatur, a quo contrabimus, Reg. I.C.
Paulus 62. ad edictum, in all assumpsits and contracts, that time is respected
from which we contract, as a man seized in fee, makes a lease for ten years,
and after sells the land and takes it back again to him and his wife: and
then the husband and wife lets it for twenty years, reserving a rent, the
husband dies, the wife accepts the rent for the first ten years, by this
the second lease is not affirmed, for the acceptance of the rent before the
lease begins, and is not due, is no acceptance, 1. E. 6. 37.

Coke l. 5. f. 1. a. b. in Claytons case, From henceforth in a Lease shall be
accounted from the delivery of the Indentures, and not from the computation of
the date, for from henceforth is all one to say as from the making of the
Lease. Et traditio loqui facit chartam, delivery makes the deed to speak;
where a Lease is to begin from the making of a Lease, there the day of the
delivery shall be taken inclusive, and the day it self is parcel of the
demise, but if it be made to begin from the day of the making or the day of the
date, then the day it self shall be taken exclusive, and excluded.

And whereas the statute of 27. H. 8. Of enrolement, says, That all such
writings shall be enrolled within six months after the date of the same
writings indented, if the writings have date, they shall be accounted from the
date, but if the date be wanting, the six months shall be accounted from the
delivery, vide ibidem plura.

In obligationibus in quibus dies non ponitur presenti die debetur Pomponius,
and nulla temporis designatio praesens denotat, Reg. I. C. And it is a ground
in our Law, that when a man's bound in twenty pound to pay ten pound, and no
day of payment is limited, the lesser sum is due presently, and ought
presently to be tendered, 20. E. 4. 8. 21. E. 4. 8. In the case of the Mayor of
Exeter by all the Sergeants and of some of the Justices, yet by the opinion of
Starky the discretion of the Justice shall limit a time, having regard to the
distance of the place, and to the space of time wherein such a thing may be
performed, for the Obligor is not compellable to pay the money within an hour,
neither may he defer the payment for seven years, but the time must be
adjudged by law, Ib. So if I prescribe to have common by vi^inage in such a
village, namely every year after the Corn is severed and carried away to put
my beasts into the field, and all the terr tenants of the village have carried
away their corn and hay except one man only, the law shall adjudge whether he
had sufficient time to carry away his corn and hay, when his neighbors did
carry it away, Ibidem by Starky and Fairfax, and so in the case before, the
discretion of the Judges ought to measure the time, and surely his opinion
seems reasonable unto me, though I dare not affirm it to be Law, for every
man's business ought to be rated by a convenient time, Fulb. l. 1. f 14. a.

So Coke l. 3. f. 28. b. Whereas by the statute of 34. and 35. H. 8. of wills,
and the statute of 32. H 8. of wills shall be expounded, that the King shall
take for his full part etc. of all such Manors and Lands, as shall by any
means descend or come by descent etc. immediately after the decease of the
same devisor etc. It was said that the word immediately shall not have a strict
construction, that i^ ought to be done in ipso articulo temporis, in the same
instant of time, but shall be satisfied if it be done in convenient time, as
in 18. E. 4. 22. If a man be bound to make an obligation immediately, yet he
shall have convenient time to make it, Ibidem.

And by the civil law when no day of payment is limited, when the Ven^ee is
to pay his money, etc. the law does limit a time, and assign to the p^rty
charged with the payment the space of threescore days, Fulb. f. 14. l. 1. a.

Quam longum debet esse rationabile tempus non definitur in jure, sed pendet ex
discretione justiciorum, Coke came. f. 56. b. A reasonable time shall be
adjudged by the discretion of the Judges, before whom the cause depends. As
if a man be seized of a Mesuage in fee simple, fee tail, or for term of life,
who has certain goods within the same house, and makes his Executors, and
dies, yet the executors shall have free entry, egresse and regresse to carry
out of the same house, the goods of their testator by a reasonable time, which
reasonable time shall be adjudged by the discretion of the Judges. And so it is
if the Lessoroust his Tenant at will, he shall have free entry, egresse and
regress into the said house by reasonable time to carry away his goods and
Vtensils.

So also is it of reasonble fines, customs, and services upon the true estate
of the cause depending before them, for reasonableness in these cases
belongs to the knowledge of the law, and therefore to be decided by the
Justices, and this being said of time, the like may be said of things
incertaine, which ought to be reasonable; for nothing that is contrary to
reason is consonant to law, ibidem.

Proprietas temporis fingenda est secundum subjectam materiam, Reg. I. C. The
propriety of time is to be feined or fitted according to the subject of the
matter. As if one devises, by will in writing, land to one and his heirs, and
after in another clause, he devises out of that Land a rent charge to one and
his heirs, that shall be good, and the rent in construction of law shall be
taken to be first devised, though it be last in words, Ployd. f. 541. a.

So if one devises a term for years to his son, and that the wife shall have
it during the sons minority, this is first a devisere the wife, and afterward
to the son when he comes of full age, vide ibidem plura.

Qui male agit, odit lucem, Coke l. 7. f. 66. a. and therefore it was resolved
by all the Justices, and Barons of the Exchequer, that an arrest in the night
was lawful, as well at the suite of the Subject, as the suite of the King, for
the Officer and Minister of Justice ought to arrest him when he can find him,
for otherwise peradventure he shall never find him, for he that does evil
hates the light; and if the Officer does not arrest him when he finds him,
and may arrest him, the Plaintiff shall have an action upon the case, and shall
recover all his loss and damages, and it is like unto the case for
Damagefeasant, and therefore one may distraine in the night, or otherwise
peradventure he shall not distraine, vide ibidem, in Mackallyes case.

He that does evil hates the light, quia nocte latent mendae because offenses
are hidden in the night, and therefore as the Civilians, fur diurnus differt a
nocturno, a nocturnall theife differs from a diurnall, and receives a
different and more grievous punishment, with which the common Law accords,
for he that breaks a dwelling house in the night, although he carries away
nothing, commits felony and burglary, and by the Law is deprived of Clergy,
and suffers death without mercy, whereas if it had been committed in the day,
he had been capeable of mercy, and clergy.

Qui male agit, odit lucam and omnia delicta in aperto leviora funt, Coke l. 8.
f. 127. a. He that does evil hates the light, and all open offenses are the
more lightly to be punished, as a Forrainer who keeps an inward shop, is a
greater offender then he that keeps an open Shop, for hidden places and
corners are more dangerous and offensive, for there they may use deceit, and
not be subject to the search, and therefore if a forrainer which has an open
Shop shall forfeit forty shillings, he that is a Forrainer and offender in
secret places is worthy to forfeit five pound, for it is the rule of Law and
reason, quod clam del^nquens magis punitur qu^m pa^am, he that privately
offended shall be more punished then he that offends openly.

Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis, Coke l. 6. f. 78. Times and
seasons are changed, and so in them are we, as at the first the Leases were
distributed in decurias or decennas, and therefore were called decennarij, and
out of every ten one of them was called capitalis plegius, the Chief pledge,
and every of them were pledges for another, and at this day in some places, is
called the Tithingman, and in Yorke-shire Tenmantale in respect of the other
inferior pledges, so as the return of the Constable, or the presentment of the
Jury does not make a man a chief pledge, but the times are changed, and the
true institution of this Court is vanished, vide ibidem, Bullens case.

At the common Law upon a Fine, the party had a year and a day to make his
claim, but now by the Statute he has five years, and if the disseisor had
continued a year and day in possession, by the ancient Law the entry of the
disseisor for his negligence had bee^ taken away, which now is only by
descent, many a^^ continual are the mutations of the Law, according to the
changes of the time. For the rule and ground holds, quod perpetua lex est
nullam begem humanam, ac positivam esse perpetuam, that it is a perpetual Law,
that no humane, or positive Law is perpetual. Bac. Max. f. 70.

Tempus edax rerum, Coke l. 3. f. 21. A. makes a lease for years to B. and
when the Term is ended the remainder to C. the reversion is good, for it is
certain enough that every term shall end, for time is the consumer and
divourer of things.

Distingue tempora, and concordabis leges, the times being distinguished, the
Law will be reconciled, Coke l. 9. f. 16. b. The King by the Statute de
bigammis, 4. E. 1. when the heir was of full age, had nothing but primam
seisinam capiendo exitum, the profits of the Land in effect for one year, but
could not endow the Feme, because after the Heir was of age, he was not
guardian, and for that reason he could not endow the Feme at the common Law, no
more then guardian in chivalry might, who though after the Heir was of full age
did hold the Land further for the value of the marriage, no Writ of dower did
lie against him, because he was not guardian, yet afterward by the Statute de
praerogativa regis 17. E. 2. the King had power to endow the Feme, although the
Heir were of full age, si vidua illae voluerint, so as the Statute leaves it
to the election of the Feme, whether she will be endowed in the Chancery, or
at the common Law, so as by distinguishing the times, the difference of those
Laws are apparently agreed and reconciled.

Omnia tempus habent, and haben^ sua tempora tempus, Coke l. 10. f. 82. a. All
things are subject to time, and time it self has also its times: as by the
Statute of 34 H. 8. three several Times ought to concur in a devise, whereby
the King may have the value of the third part, the first is tempus habendi,
every person having; the 2d. is tempus tenendi, holding of the King; the third
is tempus disponendi, may ^ive and dispose, as if a man be seized of one acro^
^f Land in fee in chief by Knights service and of two other acres in fee
holden in socage, and the Tenant infeoffe his youngest Son of the acre holden
in chief, and of one of the other acres, to have to him, and his heirs, and
afterward purchases Lands holden in socage, he may devise all his Lands newly
purchased holden in sooage, because he had no Lands holden of Knights service
in Capite at the time of the devise, for the acts have made a conjunction of
the Lands which the Tenant holds in socage with the Land which he holds of
the King by Knights service in Capite, so as when the Tenant has conveyed the
Land holden in Capite to his youngest Son, now when he made his Will of the
Lands so newly purchased, he had no Lands holden of the King in Capite at the
time of the devise, and the Statute restrains only those Lands in socage,
which he had at the time of having of the Lands holden in Capite, vide ibidem
plura, in Loveys case. For Judicis officium est ut res, ita tempora rerum
Quaerere, quaesit^ tempore tutus eris.
A Judges part it is to ponder things with time,
And by the square of time sure Judgment so to find.


Coke Com. f. 202. a. If a rent be granted payable at a certain day, and if it
be behind, and demanded, that the Grantee shall distraine for it, in this case
the Grantee needs not to demand it at the day, but if he demand it at any
time after the day, he shall distraine for it, for the Grantee has election in
this case to demand it when he will, to enable him to distraine.

But upon a Lease for years, reserving a rent, upon condition that if the rent
be not paid at Michaelmas, or within one and twenty days after, that then he
may re-enter, the tenant is not bound to pay the rent, or tender the money
before the last instant of the last day, but if he do not, then the Lessor may
re-enter and have the Land and the rent also, but if the Lessor be not at the
time there to receive the rent, he cannot re-enter though he demand the rent
before, Brook. Intender 41. unless before the Lessee meets the Lessor upon the
Land, and tender the Rent on the same day, Coke Com. f. 22. a. Ployd. f. 392.
and 393. a. Where a thing is referred to a time, which declares certainly, if
it be mistaken all shall be void, as Trin. 7. E. 3. 26. One brings a Writ and
recites that it is contained in the Articles made in the time of Edward the
second, and declared further according to the statute, and the writ was abated
by award, for that those Articles articuli super chartas, C. 9. were made in
the time of Edward the first. So Tr. 18. E. 3. f. 25. A statute Merchant was
made to be paid in the sixteenth year of E. 3. and the party sued execution,
and the Writ supposed the sum to be paid in the fourteenth year of E. 3. and
by the suit the Feoffee was outed, whereupon he sued a Writ of error in the
Kings Bench, and the writ was abated, and it was said, that the time declared
certainty, for it might be that there were two statutes payable at diverse
several days, and therefore the day of payment was material, ibidem.

So if a defeasance be made of a statute which recites it to be made the tenth
day of May, where it bears date the first day of May, the defeasance is void
for the misprision of the time, for the law says, that it may be that there
was two statutes, the one bearing date the first day, and the other the tenth
day, vide ibidem plura, in the Earl of Leicesters case.

A loco, from the place.
LOcus pro solutione reditus aut pecuniae secundum conditionem dimissionis aut
obligationis est stricte observandus, Coke l. 4. f. 73. a. in Burchers case.
The place for the payment of money or rent, according to the condition of a
Lease or obligation, is strictly to be observed. As if a common person makes a
Lease of Lands in R. reserving a rent to be generally paid at such a feast,
upon condition of re-entry if it be not then paid, the demand must be upon the
land, for the land is the debtor, and therefore that is the place of demand
appointed by the law: and if there be an house upon the land, he must demand
the rent at the house, and not at the back door but at the fore door, because
the demand must be made at the most notorious place, and it is not material
whether any person be there or not, and if one place be as notorious as
another, the Lessor has election to demand it at which he will, and if the
Lessor demand it at a place which is not notorious, or at the back door of the
house, and in pleading allege a demand of the rent generally at the house, the
Lessee may traverse the demand, and upon the evidence it shall be found for
him, for that it was a void demand, Ibidem; and Coke com. 201. and 202. b. a.

But if a rent be reserved upon the demise, to be payable at a place out of the
land, he that shall take advantage for non-payment of the rent ought to demand
the rent at the place where it is limited to be paid, and therefore the
opinion in Kelwellies case, Ployd. f. 70. that he in the reversion may enter
for the non payment of such rent without any demand made, was utterly denied by
the whole Court, Ididem, and Coke, com. 202. a.

But if there be no place appointed where the rent is to be paid, there the
rent is to be tendered on the Land, Coke 210. a. b. Because it issues out of
the Land, but otherwise it is in such a case of a Feoffment or Mortgage, for it
is not sufficient for the feoffor to be upon the land, there ready to pay the
money to the feoffee at the day set, but he must seek the feoffee if he be then
in another place within the Realm of England: and so it is if a man be bound
in an obligation of twenty pound, upon condition that he pay to the obligee at
such a day 10. l. that then etc. The obligor ought to seek the obligee if he be
in England, and at the day appointed tender the ten pound, otherwise he shall
forfeit the twenty pound, Coke com. ibidem, and therefore as he advises, it
shall be good and a sure way upon such a feoffment or mortgage to appoint a
special place where the money shall be paid, and the more especial it is the
more better it is, Coke com. f. 211. b. And so is it also upon an obligation.

Ployd. f. 71. a. and b. If the obligee be in his own house, and the obligor
come to him there, and tender the money, he shall not be a trespassor for his
coming there, for in that by the taking of the obligation, the obligee was
assenting that the obligor should pay him the ten pound, by necessity of reason
he ought to be assenting to come to him to offer unto him the 10. l. for to
come to his person precedeth the offer which he was assenting to; and therefore
ex consequenti, he shall not punish him for that thing to which himself was
agreeing. But if he had entered into the house of another man, there he shall be
a trespassor to the said man, if the same man will take him so, vide plura
ibid. Kedwellies case.

Exception.
Though a common person in reversion cannot enter for non-payment of rent
without demand, yet if the King make such a Lease for years, rendering rent
with such a condition ut supra, the King shall take advantage of the condition
without any demand, because the law, which always observes decorum, and
convenience, appoints the subject to attend upon his sovereign, and in such
case to make the first act though it be in case of condition, which trencheth
upon the destruction of his estate.

But if the King grants the reversion over, his grantee shall not take
advantage of the condition without demand, for it is a personal prerogative
annexed to the person of the King, and not in respect of the nature and quality
of the land, Coke l. 4. f. 23. A

So the King makes a Lease for years, rendering a rent, payable at his receipt
of Westminster, and after the King grants the reversion to another and his
heirs, the grantee shall demand the rent on the Land, and not at the Kings
receipt at Westminster, for though the law without express words does appoint
the Lessee in the Kings case to pay it at the Kings receipt, yet in case of a
subject the law appoints the demand to be on the land, Coke com. f. 201. b.
and Coke l. 4. f. 72. 73. Buroughs case, vide ibidem plura.

Circumstantia loci est testis veritatis, and certitudinis, Ployd. 393. a. The
place is material and is a circumstance and witness of truth and certainty:
As if a man will plead the Letters Patents of the King, bearing date at
Westminster, and indeed they did bear date at another place: it seems in 38.
H. 6. by Choke, f. 34. by Littleton f. 36. and by Redsham, Moile and Prisot f.
37. That for the variance of the place it failed, and the Plea shall be
adjudged against him. So if the King give authority to one to arraigne one upon
indictment taken against him at Dale in such a County, when indeed the
indictment was taken at another place in the same County, he cannot arraigne
him, for the place declares the certainty what indictment the King intended,
for it may be there were two indictments of the same matter, and thing, and the
one of them taken in one Village, and the other in another, and by it the
expresment of the Village declared the certainty of it.

Dier 105. a. An outlawry was reversed because it was ad comitat. Lancaster
ibidem tent. and did not say at Lancaster or such certain place, to which
ibidem might be referred.

Ployd. f. 191. a. The place must be shown by the Plaintiff where the things
were done, because the visne should come thence, if the things be traversed, as
H. 6. E. 4. 11. Brook lieu 55. The place ought to be shown in the count in
debt upon an obligation, where the obligation was made, and M. 39. H. 6. 32.
Brook lieu 45.

If an attornement be alleged, the place ought to be pleaded where it was
made, and in such like things of effect, that may be traversed, the place ought
to be shown where the thing was done for the certainty of the trial, and f.
149. b. the place ought to be shown where the attornement was made, if the
attornement be pleaded, 15. H. 7. 24.

Coke l. 6. f. 47. Dowdales case, when the place is material, as when it is
parcel of the issue, there the Jurors cannot find the point in issue in any
other place, for by especial pleading the point in issue is restrained to a
certain place, but when the place is named only for conformity and necessity,
and when it is parcel of the issue, as in the case of 10. Eliz. 271. in debt
against the heir, he pleaded rie^ by descent generally, in that case the
Plaintiff cannot reply in such general manner, for then no trial can be had
of it, but in case for conformity and necessity of a trial, he ought to name a
certain place, as there he did in the Parish and Ward within Land. but God
forbid but that the Jurors may find assets by descent in any other county
within England, for the Law is, that the Plaintiff in such case shall have
execution of all the Lands the heir had, and peradventure he might have Lands
in diverse counties: and therefore though a place be named for necessity sake,
yet the Jurors may find all that which by law may be chargeable in such a case,
in whatsoever City and County it lies; and so was the principal case resolved
after in 10. Eliz. though it be not reported there, and with it agreeeth 10. H.
6. 13. And the conceit of Brook. 2. Mar. Attaint 104. that the jurors of one
county are not compellable to find transitory things in another county, was
altogether denied by the whole Court, for they are bound under the pain of
attaint to find assets in any other county whatsoever, for it may be that the
executors have goods of the Testators in diverse several counties, and that in
none of those counties had by him there is assets, vide ibidem plura: And if
the Excutors have any goods of the Testators in any part of the world, he shall
be charged in respect of them, or if Merchants and others which have goods of
great value beyond the Seas, be indebted in England, if those goods should not
be liable to their debts, it would be a great defect in Law, Ib.

Coke com. f. 282. a. It is an ancient principle of the Law, that for
transitory actions the Plaintiff may allege the same in what place or county
he will, and the Jurors upon not guilty pleaded are to be made to find for the
Plaintiff, neither can the assault, battery, or finding of goods etc. alleged
in another county be traversed without special cause of justification, which
extends to some special place, as if a Constable of a town in another
County arresteth the body of a man that breaks the peace, there he may
traverse the County, but he must not rest there, but all other places saving in
the town where he is Constable, vide ibidem plura.

But in the case of felony the trial shall be by the common Law in the same
place where the offense was, and shall not be supposed in any other place, for
in criminal causes the rule holds, Ubi quis deliquit ibi punietur, Coke l.
6. f. 47. b. where one offends there he shall be punished, yet this rule
fails in treason, to adhere to the enemy of the King without the Realm,
which is declared to be treason by the common Law, by the statute of 25. E. 3.
de proditionibus, for least there should be a want of trial in matter of such
consequence, the adherence without the Realm must be alleged in some place
within England: and if upon the indictment they shall find any adherences out
of the realm they shall find the Delinquent guilty, 5. R. 2. trial 24 but
commonly they did indite him in that county where his Lands did lie, which were
to be forfeited, and so it is declared by the statute of 35. H. 8. c. 2 vide
Coke com. 261. f. b.

Saepe locus in delcto auget vel minuit culpam Reg. I. C. The place does often
augment or diminish the offense, as he who strikes a man in Westmin. Hall,
shall have his right hand cut off and his Lands and Chattels forfeited, so if
he strike a Juror; and besides shall be committed to perpetual Prison. Finch
N^mot. f. 25.

If men tilt or turney in the presence of the King, and if two masters of
defense play their prizes on the stage, and kill one another, it is not felony,
Heb. Rep. f. 89.

So the felonious taking of goods out of any Church or Chapel is sacrilege,
and a felony more heinous then ordinary, and therefore more severely punished.
It was King Alureds Law, Qui in templo quid clepscrit, valorem solvito,
mulctampretio rei congruam pendito, and manum quacumque furatus est praecidito
nec redimere manum potest nisi propria capitis aestimatione, whosoever shall
steal any thing in a Church, let him restore the value, let him pay a fine
answerable to the worth of the thing, let that hand with which he did steal be
cut off, neither could he redeem his hand but with the price of his life, which
in those ancient times wherein offenses were not so frequent, was a grievous
punishment, wherein their was chiefly censured with satisfaction, but in the
succeeding worser times by the statute of 23. H. 8. It was made capital
without the benefit of Clergy.

So to kill the Kings Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices in Air, and Assise of
Oyer and Terminer being in his place, and doing his Office is high treason
Dalt. 226.

Si desit obedientia non adjuvat locus, Coke l. 7. f. 24. b In Calvin's case, If
obedience be wanting the place furthereth not.

Samaria in Syria was the chief City of the ten Tribes, but being conquered by
the King of Syria, and the Jews taken Prisoners, and carried away into
captivity, was after inhabited by the Paynims, yet because the people of
Samaria were not under actual obedience by the judgment of the chief Justice
of the whole world, they were adjudged alienigenae, Aliens, Luke c. 17. Where
one of them who was cleansed of his Leprosy by our Savior, being a Samaritan,
returned, and gave praise to God, and is by our Savior called an alien, that
is, a stranger borne, because he had the place but wanted the obedience, and
where obedience is wanting, the place helps not. And this agrees with the
divine saying, Si locus salvare potuisset, Satan de coelo pro sua inobedientia
non cecidisset, Adam in Paradiso non cecidisset, Lot in Monte non cecidisset,
sed potius in Sodom. If the place could save one, Satan for his disobedience
had not fallen from heaven, Adam had not fallen in Paradise, and Lot in the
Mountain had not fallen, but rather in Sodom.

A Paribus, from equals.
PArium eadem est ratio, things are to be construed according to equality of
reason, Coke l. 3. f. 12. b. As upon a recognisance acknowledged by the
Ancestor, or in a judgment upon an action of debt given against him: if he
dies s^ised of two Acres, whereof one is holden in Borough english, or having
issue two daughters which make partition, in this case if one be only charged
the other shall have contribution, because they are in aequali jure in equal
right. So if a man be bound in a statute or recognisance, and after his death
some of the land descends to the heir of the part of the father, and some to
the heir of the part of the mother, in this case one only shall not be
charged, and if he be, he shall have contribution against the other.

So in dower if the tenant vouch the heir in three several wards, every one
shall be equally charged, as it is agreed, 11. H 7. 22. Ibidem f. 13. a.

If two, four, or more men being severally seized of land, join in a
recognizance, all their lands must be equally extended, because they are in an
equal condition and case, 26 Assi. Pl. 37.

Now custom has created inheretances in copy-holds, and that the lands shall
be descendable, the law does direct the descent according to the Maxims and
rules of the common law, as incident to every estate descendable, Coke l. 4. f.
22. So now uses have the reputation of inheritances descendable, the common law
shall direct the descent of those; and that there shall be possessio fratris of
an use as of other inheritances at the common law, 5. E. 4. 7. And of lands in
Borough English, the use shall descend to the puisne, and now also these uses
being turned into estates shall be determined in all respects as estates in
possession, 23. H. 8. Finch. Nomot.

But this difference is put between inheritances in copy hold lands and
inheritances in uses, in that such c^stomary inheritaners shall not have by the
Law any other collateral quallities which concern not the descent of
inheritance, which uses and other inheritances at the common law have, as
tenancy by courtesy, or asse^s to charge the heir in an Action of debt upon
an obligation made by his Ancestor for him and his heirs, Coke l. 4. f. 22. a.
or descent to take away entry; as if a copyholder in right of his wife
surrender it to the use of another in see, and dies, that shall not be any
discontinuance to the feme, but that she and her heirs may enter, Ib. f. 23.
Neither shall the feme of customary tenant be endowed, unless it be by special
custom, Ib. f. 30. b. and generally copyhold estates shall not have such
qualities which estates at the common Law have, without special custom, Ib.
f. 23. a.

A Simili, from the like.
NVllum simile currit quatuor pedibus, Coke. l. 7 f. 34 no like thing runs upon
four feet, and Coke l. 4. f. 18. b.

Nullum simile est idem, nothing that is like is the same, Sir Gilbert Gerrards
case, upon an action of slander, the Plaintiff counts, that he was seized of
a Manor etc. in fee, and that he was in communication to demise the said land
to R. E. and that the Defendant not ignorant thereof said, I have a Lease of
the said Manor for ninety years, and that by reason of the said words the
said R. E. did not accept of the said Lease, to the damage etc. The Defendant
pleaded, that t^lis indentura qualis in the Count was alleged, came to the
hands of the Defendant by finding: and it was resolved that that manner of
pleading was not a direct answer to the indenture mentioned in the Count, for
talis indentura, is not eadem indentura, for no like is the same.

Eadem and simili ratione suadente, idem jus statuendum est, Reg. I. C. Vbi
eadem est ratio ib^ est idemjus, Coke com. f. 191. a.

It is one of the Maxims of the common Law cited by Littleton, that in all
cases where there is the like reason there is the like law, for reason is the
soul of the law, and ratio potest allegari deficiente lege, and reason may be
alleged where the Law is wanting, and then as B^act^n De similibus ad similia
eadem ratione p^o^^dendum est. From the like unto the like by the same reason
we are to proceed, and so argumentum a simili i^ good in law, Et quod in uno
similium valet valebit in altero, what avails in one of the likes shall
avail in the other; as one shall recover in value against the heir upon the
Ancestors warranty, Lands which the heir took in exchange for Lands
descended, 1^. H. 3. rec. va. 26. for the similitude of the same reason.

A Manor is given by Fine, A Sc^^e facias lies of a tenancy that after
escheated to the said Manor, 48. E. 3. 11.

If a Manor descend to an heir within age, and after a tenancy escheateth, he
shall have his age of it in a praecipe of the manor, it shall be assets by
descent, and he may vouch of this tenancy, by reason of a warranty made of the
Manor, for the same reason. 6. H. 4 1.

And for the same reason a Lease for a thousand days is a Lease for years,
14. H. 8. 13. And a Lease for years, and a release amounts to a feoffment
Brook.

The Maxim of a Bastard is eigne, that the mulier puisne must make an entry
upon him, or else he gains the right, yet a continual claim made by the
mulier puisne destroys his right, for it is all one as if he had entered, 14.
H. 4. 9.

If a man licenceth one to occupy his Land for a year, this is a Lease for a
year, 5. H. 7. 1. And, this is also according to the rule of the civil law,
ubi est eadem ratio and eadem equitas ibi debet esse eadem juris dispositio,
where there is the same reason and the same equity, there ought to be the same
disposition of right, Coke com. f. 10. a. As in Feoffments, and grants, the
word heirs makes an inheritance, so does it in exchanges, releases, and
confirmations, which enure by way of enlargement of an estate, as also in
warranties bargain, and sales by deed indented and enrolled, and the like, in
which the word heirs is also necessary, because they stand upon the same
reason, that feoffements and grants do, for where there is the same reason,
there is the same law.

Coke com. f. 55. 56. If Lessee at will sows the Land, and the Lessor after
it is sown and before the corn is ripe put him out, yet the Lessee shall have
the corn, and shall have ingresse, egresse, and regresse to cut and carry away
the Corn, and if the corn be ripe and ready to cut down, and the Lessor
before the Lessee reapeth it, enter and puts out the Lessee, without all
question the Lessee shall have the corn, for by the same reason that he shall
have it where he is put out before it is ripe, he shall have it where he is put
out after it is ripe, for where there is the same reason there is the same law.

A majori and minori, From the greater and the Lesser.
IN eo quod plus est, semper inest minus, Reg. I. C. Omne majus continet in se
minus, Coke l. 4. f. 46. a. The greater always contains in it the less, as
whereas by the statute of 3. H. 7. c. 1. It is provided, that if Murderers and
accessaries or any of them be acquitted upon indictment, or the principal is
attainted etc. the wife or heir to him slain may have their appeal against
the persons so ac^uitted or against the principal so attainted, and that the
benefit of his Clergy thereof before be not had: It was resolved, that the word
Attaint of murder in that act shall not be intended only of a person who has
judgment of life, but also shall be extended to a person convict by confession
or verdict, for a person attainted is a person convict, and more and every
greater contains the lesser.

Coke l. 5. f. 115. a. It was resolved in Woods case, that if a man tendreth
more then he ought to pay, it is good enough, for every greater contains in
it self the lesser, and the other ought to accept so much of it, as is due unto
him, Quando plus fit quam fieri debet, v^detur etiam illud fieri quod faciendum
est, and in m^j^ri summa continetur minor, when more is done then ought to be
done, that seems to be done which was to be done, and the lesser sum is
contained in the greater.

Ployd. f 349. b. The disseisor makes a Lease for life, and the Disseisee
confirms the estate of the Disseisor, the Disseisee cannot enter upon the
tenant for life, for his right was to all the estate of the Land, and if he be
barred of the Fee simple he is barred from the estate for life, for every
greater contains in it self the lesser.

An action of battery is brought, and the evidence proves it a maime, and
well, because it is battery, and more, 31. Ass. pl. 1.

Omne majus continet in se suum minus. 28. H. 8. b. By a pardon of Murder,
Manslaughter is pardoned, and and an attaint supposing a verdict to have passed
between two Justices, whereas it passed before three good enough.

A recovery pleaded of three acres, where it was of six, is good enough, Finch.
Nomot. f. 31.

Where the Custom is, that a man shall not devise his Lands for any higher
estate then for life, yet if the devise be in fee, and the Devisee claims but
for life, the devise is good.

Dyer 150. b. Vpton by his last will in writing devises an entire manor
holden by Knights service in fee, and it was adjudged a good will for two parts
and not void for all.

A Qu^re impedit in the Register is praesentare ad Ecclesiam, by this he may
count pro tertia part, Coke l. 10. f. 136. b. in Richard Smiths case.

A Procedendo supposes an Assize before Stouse and Burton Justices, and it was
also before Shard, and good, because three contains two, Ployd.

Where, by the Custom of a manor a man may demise for life, he also may
demise to his Wife durante viduitate, because the greater contains the
lesser, Coke l. 4.

Non debet cui plus licet, quod minus est non licere, Regula I. C.

Cui licet quod majus, non debet quod minus est non licere, Coke l. 4. f 23. a.
To whom it is lawful to do the greater thing, to him it is not unlawful to
do the lesser. As where the Custom of the manor is, that Copyhold Lands may
be granted to any one in Fee-simple, there the grant to one and his Heirs of
his body is within the Custom: for he that may lawfully do the greater, it
ought not to be unlawful but that he may do the lesser.

Coke l. 9. f. 48. b. There is a great diversity between an Assignee and a
Deputy of an Office, the Assignee has an interest in the Office, and makes
all things in his own name, and for whom his Grantor shall not answer, unless
it be in some special cases; but a Deputy has no interest in the Office but
is but a shadow of an Officer, and does all things in the name of the Officer,
and for whom his Grantor shall answer, and when an Officer has power to make
Assigns, he may implicitly make a Deputy, for to whom that which is greater
is lawful, to him that which is less is not unlawful, and by consequence,
when an office is granted to him and his Heirs, by it he may make an assignee,
and by consequence a Deputy.

Sicut beatius ita majus est dare, quam accipere, Coke l. ^. f. 57. b. There is
a manifest diversity between a receiver, and giver of seisin, for he that has
a term for years, may receive seisin to the benefit of him which has the
Frank-tenement, and all our Books are, that the possession of a Lessee for
years, or guardian is a sufficient seisin for him in the reversion, but he that
gives seisin is tenant of the Frank-tenement, and therefore greater then
Tenant for years that receives, for it is a greater thing to give then to
receive, and therefore Tenant for years by his payment cannot give seisin to
bind him, which has the Franke-tenement, vide ibidem plura, in Bredimans case.

Omne magis dignum trahit ad se minus dignum, Coke Com. f. 44. a. b. The more
worthier thing draw^th unto it the less worthy, the Charter granted by H. 3.
in the ninth year of his reign was of force and validity, notwithstanding his
nonage, for that in judgment of Law, the King, as a King, cannot be said to be
a minor, for when the royal politic body of the King does meet with the
natural capacity in one person, the whole body shall have the capacity of the
royal politic, which is the greater, and the more worthy, and wherein there is
no minority, for the more worthier thing draws unto it the less worthy, vid.
Coke l. 2. f. 68. in Tooker's case, ibidem f. 285 a. Three Joynt-tenants are
disseised, and they arraigne an assize, and one of them releaseth to the
disseisor all actions personal, this shall bar him, but not the other, for
having regard to him, the realty as the more worthy shall be preferred, and the
greater worthy draws to it the less worthy, and ibidem 355. b. It was said
that upon a recovery had by default in an action of Wast against Tenant in
Dower, a quod ei de forceat did not lie, because in an action of Wast, Damages
were the principal, as most ancient, and that therefore clearly no quod ei
deforceat did lie, but it was answered, that the place wasted was the worthier
being in the realty, then Damages that be in the personalty, though more
ancient, and omne magis dignum trahit ad se minus dignum, quanquam minus dignum
sit antiquius, and a digniori debet fieri denominatio, and every more worthy
draws unto it the less worthy, though the less worthy is more ancient, and
a denomination ought to be from the more worthy, vide ibidem plura.

Coke l. 6. f. 43 b When an action is in the realty, or mixed with the realty,
accord with satisfaction is no Plea, for accord with satisfaction is a bar for
the personalty, but not for the realty, and when the personal is mixed with
the realty it is no bar for the personalty, for always the greater draws
unto it the less, vide ibidem plura. in Bl^kes case.

Charters are put into a box, this alters the nature of the box from being a
Chattel, and shall go to the heir, and as the writings are so is the chests and
the box they are in, because the Charters and Writings are the more worthy, Noy
Max. f. 7. 11. H. 4. 30. If one be instituted and inducted, the trial shall be
by the Jury by reason of the induction, because the realty as the more worthy
is to be preferred, 22. H. 8. 27. 43. E. 3 13.

A Lease is of a Chamber, and a Bed, rendering rent, in debt for the rent, the
Defendant shall not wage Law for the rent, because the Chamber is magis dignum,
21. E. 4. 3.

An adulterer takes away a man's wife, and puts her into new clothes, the
husband may take the wife with her clothes, 11. H. 4. 31.

A base mine where there is royal ore shall be the Kings, for the worthiness
of the ore, Ployd. 318.

A villain shall make free Land to be villain Land, but villain Land shall
not make a Freeman to be a villain, for the body of a man is more worthy then
Land, and therefore the Land shall follow the nature of the person, 3. Eli. 238.

So the Kings Land which he has in his natural capacity, shall be demeaned
according to the privilege, and prerogative of his body royal.

If a man be condemned in trespass, or re-disseisin, and is in execution for
the fine of the King, or if he be outlawed of Felony, his body shall not be in
prison at the suite of the party, for that the King has an interest in his
body, who is magis dignus.

A majori, and digniori fieri debet denominatio, Coke Com. f. 355. b. As
Husband and wife are joint Executors, the Writ shall be executoribus, and non
executricibus, 22. H. 6. 30.

A convenient proportion of Gold, and Silver, ore shall give the name to be a
Mine royal, Ployd. f. 323.

The grant of the Office of the Kings Tennis-Court, the Play of the House is
included in the grant, because that only gives the name, Coke l. 8. f. 45. in
Woods case.

Dyer 314. Where speech is of a will, it shall be intended of the last will,
for the will and the last will are taken for all one

Quod in minori valet, valebit in majori, what is of force in the lesser, shall
be of force in the greater, Coke com. f. 260 a. As if a man in prison shall not
be bound by a Recovery by default, for want of answer in Court of Record in a
real action, which is matter of Record, a multo fortiori, a descent in the
Country, which is matter of deed, shall not for want of claim bind him that
is in prison: specially seeing he could not go out of prison to make his
continual claim, and the argument a minori ad majus does ever hold
affirmatively, and the argument a majori ad minus does ever hold negatively,
for it is also a rule quod in majori non valet non valebit in minori, what is
not of force in the greater shall not be of force in the lesser.

Magis, and minus non diversificant, speciem Arist. 2. Top. the greater and
lesser does not make the species and essence of things to differ, the reason
why great woods of the age of twenty one years are exempted from the payment of
tithes, is not because they are part of the freehold, or inheritance, and that
men use not to pay their tithes out of their freehold, but out of those things
which spring out of their freehold, as out of corn, grass, fruit, and the
like; for the greatest Tree is no more part of the freehold, then the lowest
bramble, and are both equal part of the ground wherein they grow, and do take a
like sustenance and nourishment from the same, neither do they differ as they
are Trees one from the other secundu^ magis and minus, but that the one Tree is
a great Tree, and the other a small shrub, for the greater and the lesser do
not diversify the species. But the cause of the provision in England by the
Stat. of 45 E. 3. Ployd. f. 470. b.
why great Trees of the age of twenty one years do not pay tithes is, for that
the one yields more profit to the common wealth, and are Timber, and serve
for any use for building, and therefore the cutting down of them is made more
penal then the other, as in the like case by the Civil Law, whosoever privily
cutteth down, or barketh a Vine, an Olive or a Figtree, and does any other
unlawful act, whereby any fruitful tree, or any Timber tree does perish and
decay, it is theft, and is punished in the double value of the hurt which is
done, and if he be tenant of the ground, who has done it, he loses his hold,
because the Law respects the necessary use of them, Ridleys view of the Law,
f. 207.

Actus repugnans non potest in esse produci, Reg. I. C. A repugnant act cannot
be brought into being, Ployd. f. 355. a. Any man who is a legal owner of Land
may give it unto any person, in what manner, and at what time he pleases, so
that his gift be not contrary to Law, or repugnant. As if an entaile be made
upon condition, that if the Donee alien, that then it shall remain unto
another, that is repugnant, and therefore void, for when he has aliened it to
a stranger, then it is contrary to the alienation of a remainder over by it.

Coke l. 1. f. 84. a. Corbets case, upon an estate, the proviso was that if
tenant in tail, etc. be resolved, etc, to procure, or attempt any act by which
the estate tail may be barred, and determined that then the uses and estates
to him limited, in respect of such person so attempting shall cease as if he
were naturally dead, the said proviso was adjudged repugnant, and contrary to
Law, for the death of the tenant in tail is not the ceasing of the estate
tail, but the death of the tenant in tail that has no issue of his body,
vide ibidem plura.

A Feoffment in fee of two acres unto two men, Habendum one acre to one, and
the other to the other, this Habendum is void for the contrariety; for the
Premises give him an interest in both acres, and the Habendum e^cludeth him
from one, 2. P.M. 153. In a trespass de domo fracta, and muris ejusdem domus
fractis, the Defendant cannot plead guilty to the breaking of the house, and
justify the breaking of the Walls, for the house and the walls are all one, and
cannot of the same thing both justify, and plead not guilty, for the one is
contrary, to the other and according to the rule, cantraria alleg^ns non est
audiendus, 21. H. 7. 21. He is not to be heard, who alleges contrarieties; an
obligation is made, solvendum nunquam, this Solvendum is void for the
contrariety, and the thing presently due, 21. E. 4. 36.

A. is bound to B. Solvendum eidem A. the Solvendum is void for the
contrariety, and the obligation is good, and the Obligee may declare upon a
Solvendum to himself, 4. E. 4. 29. for contraria non possunt simul esse in
eodem subjecto, Arist. 5. Phys. contraries cannot be together in the same
subject.

Omnis privatio presupponit habitum, every privation presupposes an habit,
Coke com. f. 341. b. and l. ^0. f. 86. b. To many purposes a Parson has in
effect, but an estate for life, and to many a qualified fee, but the entire fee
and right is not in him, and that is the reason that he cannot discontinue the
Fee-simple that he has not, nor ever had, for every privation presupposes an
habit.

From authority and example.
ARgumentum ab authoritate firmissimum est in lege, an argument from authority
is the strongest in Law Coke com. 254. a. our Book cases are the best proofs
what the Law is, and after the example of Littleton, Book cases are
principally to be cited for deciding the cases in question, and not any privat^
opinion, according to the rule, Nulla hominis authoritas tantum apud nos valere
debet, ut meliora non sequeremur si quis attulerit, no man's authority ought to
prevail so much with us, as that we may not follow the better whosoever shall
allege it, as Littleton here rejects the opinion of Newton, and follows
the better authorities in Law, Coke com. f. 383. a. And whereas by the Civil
Law, as Sir John Davis observes, every Doctors opinion is vouched, and cited
of them as good authority, it must needs breed distractions of opinions, and
variations, according to which sense the logical axiom, is to be taken locus
ab authoritate est infirmissimus, Boethius. An argument from authority is most
weak, and prevails little or nothing in resolving the question, as the Poet
pressely Nil agit exemplum, litem quod lite resolvat, to clear a quaere,
example stands for nothing, whereas our Law arguments are deduced from the
strength of cases apt to the purpose, and presidents of former times founded on
the discourse of reason, and consideration of the wisest and sagest Judges, and
are no inartificiall arguments, as ipse dixit, or test me ipso, but are drawn
out of the terms, and bowels of the issue by arguments, and conclusions of
reason.

Nullum exemplum est idem omnibus, Coke com. 212. a. and 317. b. No example is
the same to all, and therefore it is the best means in all assurances to take
counsel of learned and well experienced men, and not only to trust without
advise to presidents for as the Aphorism holds in the state of a man's body,
nullum medicamentum est idem omnibus, no salve is the same to all: so does the
rule in the estates and assurances of Lands, no example or president is the
same to all.

Periculosum existimo, quod virorum bonorum non comprobatur exemplo, Coke. com.
f. 81. b. I deem it dangerous that is not approved by the president of good
men, and therefore it appears how safe it is to be guided by judicial
presidents.

Littera scripta manet, Coke com. f. 115. a. A written word remains, and
therefore a record or sufficient matter in writing is a good memorial, whence
it is said, when we will by any record or writing, commit the memory of any
thing to posterity, tradere memoriae, and for this reason it is that regularly
a man cannot prescribe a custom against a statute, because it is matter of
record, and is the highest proof and matter of record in Law, yet a man may
prescribe against an Act of Parliament, when by prescription and custom it is
saved by an other Act of Parliament.

Nihil in lege intolerabilius est eandem rem diverso jure teneri, Coke l. 4. f.
93, in Slades case. There is nothing more intolerable in law, then that the
latter judgment should contradict the former, and therefore 37. H. 6. f. 22.
Ask said, such Charters have been allowed in the time of our Predecessors,
who were as sage and learned as we, and Markham, 5. E. 4. f. 41. It is good
for us to do as it has been used in former times, and not to keep one way
one day for one party, and another day the contrary for another party. The
former presidednts are enough for us to follow.

So 11. E 3. Title Formedon, 22. It was holden that ancient forms and manner
of presidents are to be maintained and observed, and 34. Ass. Pl. 7. That which
has not been according to usage shall not be permitted, and in 2. E. 3. 29.
The ancient form and order is to be observed, and 39. H. 6. 30. The opinion of
Pris^t and all the Court was, that they would not change their use,
notwithstanding that their opinion was to the contrary, and 4. E. 4. 44. All
the Justices said, we cannot change the course has been before, for it should
be inconvenient, and it is said 3. E. 4. 1. That the course of Courts makes a
law. And therefore all the Justices in ancient times, and from time to time,
being as well in matters of form as in deciding of doubts, and questions, and
as well at the common law as in construction of Acts of Parliament, have given
great regard to the ancient presidents and judgments of the preceding judges,
as Ployd. f. 99. b. It was advised by the Court according to the book of 7. H.
4. That an accessory shall not be arraigned as an accessory to one principal
until the other principals may be attainted, because it did seem the better
way to the Court to pursue the same order that the Sages before had used. And
so here in Slades case in respect of the infinite presidents which the
Secondary of the Prothonotaries of the Kings Bench did show to the Court, it
was resolved before all the Judges of England in the Exchequer chamber, that
though an action of debt lies upon a contract, yet the Bargainer may have an
Action of the case or an Action of debt at his election, Coke ibidem.

Mos retinendus fidelissimae vetustatis and quae praeter consuetudinem, and
morem majorum fiunt neque placent neque recta videntur, and frequentia actus
multum operatur. The ancient manner of the most faithful antiquity is to be
retained and what are contrary to the custom and use of the Elders do neither
please nor seem right, and the frequency of acts works much, Coke l. 4 f. 74.
and therefore it was there resolved by the chief justices Popham, Anderson, and
by Pyriam chief Baron, and other justices, that the ancient and usual
elections of Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. by a certain selected company of the
principals of the commonalty and Burgesses, commonly called the common council
etc. were good and well warranted by their Charters and by their laws also.

Multa ignoramus quae nobis non laterent si veterum lectio nobis fuit
f^miliaris, Coke l. 10. 73. We are ignorant of many things which would not be
hidden to us if the reading of the ancients were more familiar to us. As though
one peradventure may know the Law upon the ancient statutes, yet will he never
know the true reason of the interpretation of them, if he know not what was the
law before the making of them.

Majorum precepta justa vel injusta non sunt contemnenda, Reg. I. C. And Coke
l. 7. f. 3. Calvin's case. Interroga pristinam generationem, The precepts of the
elders, be they just or unjust, are not to be contemned, and enquire of the
former age, for out of the old fields must come the new Corn, for we are but
as yesterday, and therefore had need of the wisdom of those which were before
us, and we had been ignorant if we had not received light and knowledge from
our forefathers, and our days upon the earth are but a shadow, in respect of
the ancient days and times past, wherein the laws have been by the wisdom
of the most excellent men in many succession of ages, by long and continual
experience fined and refined, which by no man being of so short a time,
although he had in his head the wisdom of all the men in the world, in any one
age could ever be effected and attained unto, and therefore it is the best
rule, then which there is not one more true and firm, Neminem oportet esse
sapientiorem legibus, no man ought to take upon him to be wiser then the laws,
vide ibidem ^lura.

Monumenta quae nos Recorda vocamus sunt veritatis and vet^statis vestigia.
Cok. com. f. 117. A record and inrolement are the footsteps of antiquity and
truth, and is a memorial and monument of so high a nature, as it imports in
it self such absolute verity, that if it be pleaded, There be no such record,
it shall not receive any trial by witness by Jury, or otherwise but only by
it self. And every Court of record is the Kings Court, though another may have
the profit, in which if the judges do err, a Writ of error lies, but the
county Court, the Hundred Court, and the Court Baron, and the like, are no
Courts of record, and therefore the proceedings there may be denied and r^ied
by Jury, and upon a judgment a writ of error lies not, but a writ of false
judgment, because they are no Court of record, for that they can hold no plea
of debt or trespass, if the d^bt or damage amounts to 40. s or of any
trespass vi and armis.

Coke l. 4. f. 71. in Hindes case, Records contain in themselves truth, and do
conclude all men to deny any apparent thing in the record as antedate, etc. 37.
H. 6. f. 21. but to take averrment of that which stands with the record, and
that does not impugn any thing apparent in the record, the law well admits
and allows.

As against a fine upon release, to say, that the Connusee had nothing at the
time of the fine levied, 16 H. 7. So against letters Patents of the King under
the great Seal showed in Court, none can them deny, but non concessit per
predictas literas patentes, he has not granted by the said Letters Patents, is
a good Plea, for though there be such Letters Patents, yet peradventure nothing
may pass by them, and so by consequence he has not granted, and though an
inrolement or matter of record shall not be tried by the country, yet the time
when the inrolement was made shall be tried by the country, but the inrolement
it self shall not be drawn in question, but only the time of it, as when one
pleads a grant of the King by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, and
the other pleads non concessit, by the same his Letters Patents, the Letters
Parents are confessed, but the effect and operation of them is denied, and
therefore the trial shall not be where the Letters Patents bear date, but
where the land lies, as it was adjudged, Coke l. 6. 15. b. So if profession be
denied it shall be tried by Court Christian, but if the time of his profession
be in issue, it shall be tried by the Country, 9. H. 7. f. 2. ibidem.

Multitudo errantium non pa^it errori patrocinium, Coke l. f. 94. a. The
multitude of them who err does not produce a Patronage to the error. As
returns and presidents, which peradventure pass without challenge of the
parties or debate of the Judges, thou^h they be many, if the Court adjudge them
contrary to reason, they shall be amended, and in this case according to 5. E.
4. f. 112. presidents and course do not rule the law, but the law shall rule
them, and therefore it was there said, That an Outlawry was reversed because
that it was ad com. Lancast. ibid. tent, and does not say, at Lancaster, or
such place certain, to which ibid. might be referred, and though there were
100. presidents of such returns, yet notwithstanding it was reversed. A
fortiori, if there be but one or two presidents, for una hi^undo non facit ver,
Dier. 105. a. but otherwise it is when presidents are judicial, and Justices
by diverse successions of ages have given judgments in Actions brought there,
for it shall be intended that some of the counsel with the Defendant, or some
of the Justices before whom the action was tried and the record read, would
have excepted against it; but returns of Sheriffs in case of Outlawries or
entries of Clerks, the records pass in silence without exception of parties,
and therefore are not so authentical as judgments upon demurrers or verdicts,
Coke l. 4. f. 94. a.

And whereas the latter judgments do many times cross and contradict the
former, there are very few presidents of such contrary judgments, scarce two
in an age: But yet if the reasons of the latter judgment did appear upon
record, we should find them grounded upon mischiefs and inconveniences arising
since the former judgments or other weighty considerations, respecting the
good of the Commonweal in general, Sir John Davis in his Preface.

From Propositions.
A Proposition is an oration affirming or denying aliquid de aliquo something
of something, and is called of the Philosopher (...) a pronouncing speech,
showing the thing either to be true or false.

Negativum nihil implicat, 11. H. 7. 23. Dod. E. L, f. 111. There are
propositions negative which imply an affirmation, and those we call negative
pregnants, which we do refuse in all issues of trialls by Jurors, except in
some cases, where the necessity of the cause does require the same, and there
are also propositions merely negative which are mere negations, of which we
commonly say, negativum nihil implicat, a negative implies nothing.

As the Tenant wageth law of non Summons, this does not imply that he was
tenant, neither shall conclude him, 22. H. 6. 41. One pleads ne Chasa pas he
did not hunt in the free Chase of the Plaintiff, this is no granting that the
Plaintiff had a free Chase, but he must prove it, 10. E. 3. 20.

Affirmativum negativum implicat Ployd. f. 206. b. An affirmative includes a
negative, for every statute limiting any thing to be in one form, although it
be spoken in the affirmative, yet it includes in it self a negative, as the
statute of W. 2. c. 4. Of a quod ei deforceat gives that the demandant shall
vouch, ac si tenens esset in priori b^eve, includes a negative to wit and not
otherwise, for it has been taken since it, that if the first writ was a Sci^e
facias and the tenant in the Quod ei de forceat mainteineth the title of it the
demandant shall not vouch, for he shall vouch ac si tenens esset in priori
breve which is as much as to say, that he shall vouch ac si tenens esset in
priore breve, and in no other manner, and then in the first writ it being a
Scire facias he cannot vouch no more then now.

So the statute of W. 2. c. 11. Provideth that upon an account ended before
auditors assigned, and arrearages found upon the accountants, they have power
to send and deliver their bodies to the next Goal of the Lord the King in
those parts, and upon it is taken 27. H. 6. f. 8. That the auditor ought to
commit him to the next Goal though it be in another County, for they cannot
vary from the place limited by the statute, and is as much as if be had said,
and in no other Goal. So the statute of W. 2. c. 3. gives a Writ of second
deliverance out of the Court where the first replevin was granted, and a man
cannot have it any where else, for where the statute appoints the place,
order and, form of suits, then they cannot sue in any other place or any other
form, if they should, it shall be contrary to the purview of the statute. So
if tenant in tail make a feoffment to himself for life, and after to the use
of his issue in tail, and dies since the statute of 27. H. 8. The issue in
tail shall not be remitted, for the statute executed the possession in the
same manner and form as he had the use, which is all one, as if he should say
and in no other manner and form, and he had the use as a Purchaser, and so he
shall have the land here, and not be remitted. 2. M. 1. ante 114. vide ibidem
plura.

From Division.
DIvisio est oration qua totum in parts distingui^ur, a division is an oration
by which the whole is divided into parts.

Argumentum a divisione est fortissimum. Coke l. 6. f. 60. a. An Argument
drawn from division is most strong, as there are four sorts of commons, common
appendant, common appurtenant, in gross, and by reason of Vicinage, but common
residentiae and commorationis of residence and dwelling is none of them,
therefore no common.

Res per divisionem melius aperiuntur, Eract. And the Civilians, per divisionem
melius materia intelligit, by division things are more clearly opened, and by
it the matter is the, better undestood, and therefore says Plato speaking in
the person of Socrates: Si nactus fuisset autem qui been partiri sciat se
i^sias tanquam Dei vestigia cons^cuturum esse, if he had obtained a leader who
knew well to divide, he had followed him as the footsteps of God, for by
division the Clouds of confusion are cleared, and the distinct and true nature
of the thing manifested; and as Lodovicus, all falsehood proceeds from
conformation, when through rudeness we know not how to discern confused
things, so as we are deceived with the like or things near unto them. Quae in
parts dividi nequeunt solida a singulis praestant, Coke l 6. f. 1. Those
things which cannot be divided into parts ought wholly to be performed of every
one. As Lord and Tenant of three Acres of Lands by homage fealty and annual
service of a Spurrier and suit of Court, if the Lord makes a Feoffment in fee
or one Acre, the feoffee shall hold by homage fealty, a spurrier and suit of
Court by the common Law, for those things which cannot be divided shall
entirely be per^ormed by every single person, vide ibidem plura, of which
nevertheless some certain ones are appointed by the statute to avoid trouble
to be performed by the eldest coheire, for ^h^ rest as homage, Dod. 104. En.
L. If an Ox be devised to one, and the Ox dies without any default of the
Executor, whether is the Skin o^ Hide of the Ox due to the Executor or the
Devisee, by the common Law, the Devisee shall have the hide, for it is parcel
of the Ox, and the Ox was an entire thing and cannot be divided, but by the
civil law the executor shall have it, because the Ox did perish and was no Ox
before the Skin was taken off, but the skin was taken off from the Carcass,
Fulb. 1. f. 45. b.

Frustra sit per plura quod fieri potest per pauci^ro, 9. H. 7. 24. Coke l. 8.
f. 167. a. Division is a resolution of the whole into parts and ought to
consist of as few parts as may be, for it is vain to do that by more, may be
effected by fewer; and therefore the Peripatericks approve a dicotomy or a two
fold division non (...), not that we should be restrained to make a division
always of two parts, but that we may divide it into as many as the nature of
the thing r^quireth; As Littleton divided rents into rent charge, rent-service,
and rent-seck, and very well, because it was according to the several nature
of rents, and so also did he divide warranties into lineal, collateral, and
comminenting by disse^sin, so are actions divided into real, personal, and
mixed, and also the division of fewer parts or more is to be admitted, if the
nature of the thing so divided does requi^e it and therefore were the Ramists so
curious in their strict observing of a Dicotomy. Coke l. 6. 167. a. If the King
by his Patent reciting the estate tail, does grant the reversion, and further
grants the lands in possession, those several grants in one Patent are as
good and strong in law as if the King by one patent had recited the estate
tail, and granted the reversion, and by another Patent had granted the Lands
inpossession, for vainly that is done by more which may be done by fewer.
Plo^d. f. 191. b. If I release all the right I have in all my Lands in Dale,
which I have by descent of part of my father, and I have no Lands die descent of
part of my father, the release is void, for he must aver that I had such Lands
in Dale by descent of the part of my father: But if the release had been in
white Acre of D. which I had by descent of part of my father, and I haee no
lands by descent of part of my father but o^herwise the release is good without
any averrment, for the thing was certainly expressed by the first wo^ds, in
which case other words were needless and superfluous, and in vain were it to
express that by more words which may be expressed by fewer, and 30. Ass. Pl.
8. Lands given to two, and uni eorum diutius viventi and to the longer liver of
them, they make partition, and one of them dies, the Lessor shall have again
the moiety of him that dyed, for uni eorum diutius viventi, are but idle words.

Omnis propositio est aut verae, aut falsa, every proposition is either true,
or false, truth as it is a congruity of an entity with the intellect,
instrumentally appertains to Logic, because it directs the mind to
apprehend the truth of things, and is opposite to falsity contradictorie,
especially in propositions, for all propositions are either true, or false,
Quae ad idem, secundum idem similiter and eodem tempore nunquam possun^ simul
esse verae, which to the same, according to the same, after the same manner,
and in the same time, never can be both true.

Fucatus erro^ ^uda veritate in multis est prohabilior, and sepenumero multis
rationibus vertiatem vincit, Arist. Coke l. 2. f. 72. Painted error in many
things seems more probable then truth, and oftentimes with many reasons
overcomes the truth, therefore has the Law a great re^pect to verity and
requires that it be acknowledged and confessed in all actions, under the
penalty of a mercement, and accordingly if the tenant does not render the Land
to the demandant, as he was commanded by the Writ, but persist^th in defense of
it till judgment be given against him, by the Law he is to be amerced, Coke.
l. 5. f. 49. Va g^ans case.

And therefore one of the chiefest things which the Law requires in counts, is
verity, and if it appear to the Court, that falsity is uttered in lieu of
verity, the party which shows it, has annoyed and confounded himself,
Ployd. f. 84. b. And therefore if a man bring an Action of debt for two
payments at two days, where one of them is not come, by the showing of the
Plaintiff himself he has by it abated his own writ, because that he has shown
a falsity, T. 9. H. 7. 3. And so in our case he has grounded his matter upon a
Statute by him recited, where it appears judicially, that there was no such
Statute made at that time, and so he has abated his count by his own showing,
ibidem, Partridges case, and s^. p. 20. H. 6. f. 30. A writ of Champerty was
brought, which was not warranted by any Statute, and there Newton said, that if
the party cannot show unto them any Statute, by which it was warranted, that
they will award that the writ shall abate.

And therefore abundance and reciting more then needs, shall many times hurt
the party, as T. 20. H. 6. f. 42. A man brought a writ for forging of false
deeds, and the writ was diversa facta, and munimenta, and he counted but for
one only and by the assent of all the Justices, it was awarded that the writ
shall abate, because the writ was for diverse Deeds, and he counted but for
one, vide ibidem.

If the Writ vary from the Obligation, or other specialty in name, or sur-name
or such like, the Writ shall abate, 11. E. 4. 2. As in an action of debt for
twenty pound, and he declares but for ten pound, both shall abate, 8. E. 4. 2.

An Essoine or protection, varying from the original Writ in the quantity of
the tenancy, or the name of the party, shall be quashed, 4. Ass. pl. 1. 2. H.
6. 3.

A Chancellors servant bringing a Writ of privilege varying from the original
Writ, as if the original be a Writ of Trespass, and the privilege in a Plea
of debt, or the original be in an action of debt of 44 l. and the Writ in a
Plea of debt 42 l. it shall be disallowed, 7. H. 6. 22.

Lex non requirit verificari, quod apparet curiae, Coke l. 9. f. 54. b. The Law
does not require that to be verified which appears to the Court, though the
Law of England be more precise in the form of pleading then any other foreign
Law, as well in counts, as bars, wherein averrements and offers of proofs are
commonly concluded, as in counts the course of declaration is, in the beginning
of every action to offer their witnesses, and therefore the conclusion is
always, and inde producit sectam, which secta or suite in Law language is
nothing but witnesses, to prove his action, as Mr. Seldom upon Fortescue
accurately observes, c. 21. f. 23. And so also in bars the Law does also
require, that all affirmative pleadings in defense (to the intent the issue,
and point which comes to be tried might be evident, and clear to the Jury)
should be averred, that is, an off^r made of proofs. Yet,

Q^od constat clare non debet verificari, that which plainly appears ought
not to be verified, Coke l. 9. f. 54. b. in Batens case. As if an infant bring
an assize of Mortdancester, it is needless to aver that he is within the time
of limitation, for it appears by the infancy of the Plaintiff, and 46. E. 3.
In Trespass of taking moneys, it is needless to show the value, because it
appears, vide ibidem plura.

Floyd f. 87. b. It is pleaded that the Lessee did surrender to the Grantee of
the reversion, it is needless to plead an atturnement, for a surrender is an
atturnement, and more, H. 13. H. 7. 11. by Keble, vide ibidem plura, in
Partridges case.

Et manifesta probatione non indigent, Coke l. 7. f. 40. a. b. M nifest things
need no proof, as if the Father, tenant by Knights service, enfeoff his Son,
and Heir apparent within age, it needs not to aver it to be collusion, for
it is apparent, Wimbich case, Ployd. and 27. H 8. Dacres case. So if I covenant
to stand seized to my Wife, Son, or Cousin, it is good to raise an use without
express words of consideration, for sufficient consideration, and his Fatherly
love appears, vide ibidem plura.

Non refert quid ex aequipollentibus si^t, it is a rule of Law and reason, It
mattereth not what is done by equipollent, or words which amount to such a
value, Coke l. 5. 122 a Longs case. It was an exception taken to an enditement
in that case, that they gave him unum vulnus mortale, one mortal wound, whereas
it should have been plagam, one mortal stroke but it was disallowed by the
whole Court, and said, that these words were Synonimas, and signified the same,
though that plaga is the most usual word in an Enditement, f. 121. vide ibidem
plura, and Coke l. 5. f. 89 a Frostes case. A Capias Vtlegatum was brought to
the Sheriffs of the city of London against B. who was in custody of Laborne in
his house, being one of the Seriants of the City of London, Frost comes to
Laborne with a Warrant from the Sheriffs to arrest the said ^. upon the Capias
Utlegatum, which he utterly refuses, but suffers him to go at large upon an
action of the case brought against the Sheriffs, supposing that the Sheriffs
arrested him, and suffered him to go at large, the Defendants pleaded that
they did not suffer him to go at large, and judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, and the verdict warranted well the count, for in judgment of Law
the Sheriff, and his Sergeants are words equipollent, and amount to so much,
and is all one as if the Sheriffs had arrested the said B. vide ibidem plura.

A Writ is to the Sheriff, and he returns virtute praecepti, he has done
well, for it is equipollent virtute brevis, 11. H 6. 16. In a Writ it is said
quam clamat esse jus, this equipolleth with a Fee-simple, and therefore in the
subsequent part of the Writ if he instanceth in a lesser estate, as ex dono for
life, the Writ shall abare, 39. H. 5. 38.

Upon an Enditement for celebrating Mass, contra formam Statuti, 1. El I was
holden that under this term Minister, a Priest was included, because a Priest
is bound to celebrate and minister the holy communion, etc. and also it was
holden by all, that the term Clerk is sufficient to prove him a Priest, or a
Minister, Dyer f. 203. b.

Coke l. 5. f. 4. b. Verus, and antiquus redituus, the true and ancient rent is
not to be understood of the quality incident to it, but of the quantity of the
rent, for that is the effect, and substance of the thing reserved, as if the
ancient reservation was of rent to be paid in Gold, and the novell reservation
was to be paid in Silver, or if a quarter of Corn was anciently reserved, and
now the lease is made, rendering eight bushells of Corn, it is all one, for the
Law respects not the forms of words, or their quality, but the substance,
and effect of the matter and parum differunt, qui re concordant and they differ
little, which agree and equipoll in substance.

If one makes his Will, and commits the Administration to one, by it he
shall be Executor, because it is all one in substance, 3. H. 6. so by the grant
of a Church the advowson shall pass, 7. E. 3. 15.

One grants the nomination of an Advowson, Habendum the advowson, the
Habendum is good, for it is the same thing, so one grants the remainder
whereas he had a reversion, it is good enough to make the thing pass, 6. E. 6.
Ante 134. vide Ployd. 157. b.

If a man lease to one an acre of Land for life, reserving to himself the
herbage, the reservation is void, because he has leased the same thing in
substance, and the profits of the Land, and the Land it self, are all one, 38.
H 6. 34.

Words of substance, and not usual, are equivalent to words of substance, and
usual, Ployd. 140. b. As if tenant for life, and his Lessor make a Feoffment
in fee, it is the Feoffment of the Lessee for life, and the confirmation of the
Lessor, though there be not a word of a confirmation in it, and if tenant for
years, and the Lessor make a Feoffment in fee, it shall be the livery, and
Feoffment of the Lessor, and the surrender of the Lessee, and yet there was not
one word of surrender; And if a commoner makes a deed to the tenant of the
Land, by which he renounceth the common unto him, it shall enure as a release,
because the words are equivalent to a release. So if Land be leased by
Indenture for years, and Covenants made to render and pay for the tenements
such a sum, it is all one as a reservation of a rent, and if the Lessor say I
will have twenty pound rent, and the Lessee agree, or if the Lessee say, I will
give twenty shillings rent, and the Lessor agree, it is a good reservation of a
rent, so if a man be bound by Obligation to en feoffe I. S. and he makes a
lease for years, and a release in fee, he has performed the condition, because
they are all one, vide ibidem.

Yet words of art may not be supplied by equivalent and equipollent words,
though they bear the same sense and substance, as in an Enditement of murder,
voluntary and ex mulitia praecogitata interfecit, is not sufficient, but the
word murder avit must be, so in an Enditement, quod quoddam tormentum in H. L.
exoneravit dans eidem, H.L. cum pelletto plumbeo predicto vulnus mortale. Dans
ei vulnus mortale, etc. is not sufficient but it should have been percussit
which is the word of art, Coke l. 5. f. 222. b. Longes case. And the reason of
this is given by Coke in his Preface to Littleton, that words of art are so apt
and significant to express the true sense of the Laws, and so woven into the
Laws themselves, as it is in a manner impossible to change them, neither ought
legal terms to be changed.

SECT. 4.
From natural Philosophy.
NExt to Logic by whose principles as by many hands, we are conducted to the
knowledge of the Laws and other Sciences, natural philosophy is to be placed,
which is the prime and principal part of other Sciences, for by the knowledge
of natural things we are instructed to observe the diversity of the actions
and manners of men, according to the difference of climats and various
conditions of them, of which any one ignorant will be altogether unable to judge
of civil, and aeconomicall affairs, and therefore as Mr Ployden, Have the
Philosophers searched so deeply into the law of nature, in their laws and
writings, and for the government of the people by them, given precepts to
follow the rule of nature, and have taken nature to be, as it were, a
foundation to all laws? Neither have the Founders of our laws been remiss in
searching out the law of nature, neither were they void of the understanding of
it, for their laws argue the contrary, and show, that those who made them,
were of more great and profound judgment, and as well learned in the law of
nature as in all reason, and in the Law of God also, for nothing in our Law is
ordained contrary to nature, or contrary to reason, or contrary to the Law of
God, but according to them all, Ployd. 304. a. and b.

And according to it has the law established diverse grounds and maxims.

1. Quae rerum natura prohibentur nulla lege confirmata sunt, Reg. I. C.
Marcellus. Laws which are contrary to the Law of nature lose their force and
are no laws at all, Finch. Nom. f. 75. Such was that of the Egyptians to turn
women to Merchandise, and Common wealth affairs, and men to keep within
doors, and of the Thracians, who counted idleness an honest thing, and
stealing very commendable, Ibidem.

Naturae vis maxima, and Catiline said, Natura bis maxima. The force of nature
is very great or more then superlatively great, Ployd. 309. b. and therefore
all things proceeding from nature are not only respected in Philosophy but
also in our law, and are of efficacy in our law, and taken for a consideration
sufficient, Ployd. 305. and accordingly in Sharingtons case, f. 309.

It was adjudged that the affection of Andrew Bainton for the provision to his
heirs males, which he had engendered, and the affection that he had, that the
land should remain in his blood, and name of Bainton, and the brotherly love
that he bore to his brothers, were causes sufficient to make uses in the land,
vide ib them.

So consideration of marriage and brotherly love are greater then many or
matter of recompense to raise an use without transmutation of possession,
because every one of them is merely founded on the law of nature, ibidem 3 9.
a.

If a man seized in fee of Lands holden of I. S. by fealty and ten pounds of
rent, and he gives it in frank marriage to one with his daughter, the father
shall pay the ten pound yearly until the fourth degree is passed, and shall
have nothing of the Donees for it, because it was given to his daughter in
marriage for her advancement, and for that reason the charge is translated from
the daughter to the father, and the consideration of it is nature, Ib. f. 305.
a.

If I make a contract with another, that if he will take my daughter to wife,
that I will give him twenty pound, if he take her to wife, he shall have action
of debt for the twenty pound in our Law 22. E. 3. Ass. P. 70. and yet I have
nothing by it, and if a man has not regard to nature, it shall be nudum
pactum, Ibid. Yet the Law has such respect to nature and conjunction of blood,
as in diverse cases it matcheth necessity of blood with the consideration of
profit, as the son may maintain his father, and one brother another, 19. E.
4. 5. and Brothers and Cosins shall not wage Battle in a Writ of Right. The
statute which makes it felony to receive or give meat to one which commits
felony, he knowing it, extends not to a woman that receives and gives meat
and drink to her husband in such case, Ployd.

Dyer. f. 300. A feoffment to the use of himself, and after his decease to the
use of Alice which he intended to marry, until the issue which he does beget
of her shall be of the age of 21. years, and after the son comes to such an
age, then to the use of his wife during her widow hood, the husband dies
without issue, it was adjudged the wife shall hold the fee, it being by way of
use, otherwise it had been by estate executed. If my brother has a suit
against my Cousin and Nephew I may maintain the cause of my Cousin though my
brother be nearer 4. H. 6. 17. 14. H. 7. 2.

If a man menace me that he will imprison or hurt my father or child, if I make
him not such an obligation, and I make it, I shall avoid this by duresse as if
he had menaced me, 15. H. 6. 17. and 21. E. 4. 13.

Exception.
Yet a consideration of blood in a personal contract, as to give money, is not
good.

Lex respicit naturae ordinem, Coke com. 197. a. b. The law will not suffer any
one to demand any thing contrary to nature and reason. As a tenant in common
may have an assise for the moiety of twenty shillings, and the moiety of a
pound of Pepper, but for a Hawk and an Horse, albeit they be tenants in common
they shall join in an assise, for the law will not permit any one to make his
plaint in an assise contrary to the order of nature, and which by nature he
cannot recover as the moiety of an horse, or any other entire thing, for that
were a vain thing, and lex neminem cogit ad vana and inutilia, and the Law
compels none to vain and unprofitable things.

Coke com. f. 9. 2. a. The law respects the order and course of nature, as if
the tenant hold by a rose or a Bushel of Roses to pay at the feast of Saint
John Baptist, because they are flowers not to be kept, therefore are they to be
delivered at the time of growing, and the Lord may demur to distraine till that
time: neither is the tenant driven by law artificially to preserve Roses, for
the law in these cases respects nature and the course of the year. For as
Littleton here says ars imitatur naturam, art does imitate nature, Ployd. f.
540. b. when diverse things are done at one and the same instant, and the one
cannot take effect without the other, the common law shall adjudge it to
precede, and it to follow which aptly ought to precede or follow, as if a
disseisor makes a Lease for years, and then he and the disseisee release by
deed to tenant for years, there the law shall adjudge the release of the
disseisee first to take effect, and then the release of the disseisor, for
there is no privity or estate in the Lessee upon which the release of the
disseisor may enure, if the release of the disseisee does not first inure. So
if tenant for life makes a Lease for years, and he and the other in the
reversion in fee confirms the estate of tenant for years, to have and to hold
to him and his heirs the estate of him for life shall pass first, and then he
in the remainder, vide ibidem Paramors case.

Sicut natura in suis operationibus non facit saltum ita nec lex Arist. 9. de
motu animalium, Coke com. 238. b. as nature in her operations makes no skips
so also does not the law, as the writ de ingressu super discesinam, is upon a
disseisin made to the demandant or some of his Ancestors, of which there are
four kinds, the first is against the disseisor upon a disseisin done to
himself, and this is called a writ of entry, of the nature of an assise sur
disseisin en le p^r, when the heir by descent is in the per by his Ancestor,
or when the disseisor makes a Feoffment in fee, gift in tail, or lease for
life: the third is entry, su^ disseisin en le per and cui, as where A. being
the feoffee of D. the disseisor makes a feoffment over to B. there the
disseisee shall have a Writ of entry sur disseisin of lands etc. in which ^.
had no entry but by A. to whom D. demised the same, who unjustly and without
judgment disseised them. These are degrees which are to be observed, or else
the writ is abateable, for as nature, so the law does nothing by skips, but by
degrees. The fourth is the entry sur disseisin in the post, which lies, when
after the disseisin the law is removed from land to land beyond these degrees,
which writ is given by the statute of Marlebridge, c. 18. though before at the
common law in respect of such long possession, the demandant was driven to his
writ of right, vide ibidem plura.

Vis unita fortior, Ployd. f. 307. a. united force is more strong, as in
Sharingtons case. There are three causes premised to make and raise uses in
lands, the first is his affection for the provision of his males, the second is
his affection that the lands he had should remain in his blood, the third is
his Brotherly love he bore to his brother, whereas every one of them had been
sufficient to raise uses, yet when all are put together, they are of the
greater force, for forces united are more strong.

Conjunctio maris and feminae est de jure naturae, Coke l. 7. f. 13. Arist. 1.
Polit. Nuptias non concubitus sed consensus facit. Vlpian, and consensus non
concubitus facit matrimonium, Coke com. f. 33. a. In matrimony there is a
conjunction both of the bodies and the minds, and in contracting matrimony,
the consent of the mind obtains the chief and substantial parts, and
corporal copulation the second, and therefore is it said, that the consent and
not the copulation makes the marriage, for every denomination is from the
greater, and a woman by the common law cannot consent before she is of the age
of twelve years, nor a Man until the age of fourteen years, and these are
called annos nubiles, because at that age, either of them may disagree from a
former marriage, Coke ibidem, for a marriage infra annos nubiles, underneath
the marriageable years, is inchoate and imperfect to all purposes, except her
dower, and accordingly was it resolved in Ambrosa Gorges case, Coke l. 6. f.
40. a. Who being married, and her husband dying before she was of the age of
ten years, was notwithstanding the former marriage adjudged to be in ward to
the Queen, because the former marriage was no marriage before consent, and they
could not consent, ante annos nubiles, for the consent and not the copulation
makes the marriage. And therefore is matrimony defined by Britton to be
assemblee del home, and feme alieur deux volunts, a conjunction of a man and
woman according to both their wills, f. 246. And which as Bracton says, l. 1.
c. 5. fit per mutuam voluntatem, for their mutual consent is the efficient and
necessary cause of marriage, and therefore a marriage enforced, contrary to the
will of either party, is unnatural and illegal, as Kelway 19. H. 7. 52. b.
Where the case is, that Margaret the now wife of Keble brought an action of
trespass against Vernon, to which the defendant said, that he heretofore at
the Church of S. in the said county took the Plaintiff to wife, and there were
married according to the laws of the Church, and demanded judgment if action:
to which the Plaintiff said, that those espousalls were made by menaces and
duresse of imprisonment, and against the will of the said Plaintiff in another
county, and prayed her damages, and after great debate whether the espousalls
were avoidable by duresse or no, Frowick said, that he had seen the books, and
that it seemed clearly that the espousals were well avoided by duresse, and
the replication, vide ibidem plura: And which also seems to be the resolve
and determination of all nations, for for it Romulus himself was upbraided, to
wit, for forcing the Sabine Virgins against their wills to marry the Romans, and
was declared by his successors the Roman Authors, to be a barbarous act, and a
crime equivalent to a rape, as Propertius l. 2. El. 6.

Tu criminis author,
Nutritus duro Romule lacte lupae,
Tu rapere intactas docuisti impune Sabinas.
Thou hardy Romulus nursed by brutish care,
And Wolvish milk, was so fierce to dare
To snatch the Sabine Virgins from their Sires,
And force them to the nuptial of their friends desires.
A Savage crime unpunisht.
And by Virgill more fully, Raptas sine more Sabinas, That is, ravished
contrary to the custom of all nations, for in that age when Rome most
flourished, the customs of the Romans were the laws of all nations, as
Claudian l. 4. Still.

Armorum legumque parens quae fundit in omnes
Imperium, primique dedit cunabula juris.
Rome by the power of Arms and laws does sway
The spacious universe, and did wisely lay
The Plat-forme and the grounds of law and right.
And therefore not long after by the Roman civil law, the consent of the
espoused parties was ratified by an oath, which being but a contract, was
called sponsalia de futuro, which also in our law at this day is of great
force, for by it a precontract is a sufficient cause of divorce, a vinculo
matrimonii, Coke com. f. 285. a.

Vir and uxor sunt quasi unica persona quia caro una and sanguis unus, Cok com.
f. 187. b. The husband and wire are but one person in law, Littleton. because
they are one flesh and one blood, as the Scripture says, and as the
Philosopher, are by nature conjoined.

As if a joint estate be made to the husband and wife and to a third person,
the husband and wife shall have one moiety, and the third person the other
moiety, because the husband and wife are but one person in law, so if an estate
be made to the husband and wife and to two others, the husband and wife shall
have but the third part, Lit.

If an estate be made to a villain and his wife, being free, and to their
heirs, they have several capacities, the villain to purchase for the benefit
of the Lord and the wife for her own, yet if the Lord of the Villain enter
and the wife survive, she shall have the whole land, because there was no
moieties between them, 40. Ass. Pl. 7.

If a woman marry with her obligor, the debt is extinct, and she shall never
have action against the Obligor, because the suit against her husband by inter
marriage was suspended, and therefore being a personal action and suspended
against one it is discharged against both, 21. H. 7. 29. h. So is it If a feme
sole bail goods to one, and marry with the bailee, they are the bailees good,
so it is if the wife buy goods of one 33. E. 3. If husband and wife purchase
lands to them and their heirs and the hsband alien the land etc. she shall
recover the whole in a cui in vita, after his death, and the warranty of one of
them, or his Ancestors, is a bar of the whole against them both, 39. H. 6. 45.
21. R. 2. Judge. 63.

And for the same reason the husband cannnot enfeoff the wife, but upon a
feoffment made unto her by a stranger, he may deliver seisin unto her by a
letter of attorney, for thereby he gives nothing himself, Perk. 40.

If a feoffment be made to a man and a woman, and their heirs with warranty,
and they inter marry, and after are impleaded and recover in value, moyeties
shall not be between them, for though they were sole when the warranty was
made, yet at the time when they recovered and had execution they were husband
and wife, at which time they cannot take by moyeties Ployd. 483. Nichols case.

So if a reversion be granted to a man and a woman and their heirs, and before
attornement they inter-marry, and then attornement is made, they in this case
shall have no moieties. No more if a Charter of feoffment be made to a man and
a woman with a letter of Attorney to make livery, and they inter-marry, and
then the livery is made secundum formam chartae, they shall have no moiety,
Coke com. f. 187. a.

Although at the common law, a man during the coverture could neither in
possession, reversion, or remainder, limit an estate to his wife, yet a man now
may by the statute o 27. H. 8 Covenant with others to stand seized to the use
of his wife, or make a feoffment or other conveyance to the use of his wife,
for by it the estate is executed to such uses, for an use is but a trust and
confidence, which by such a mean may be limited by the husband to the wife,
but a man cannot covenant with his wife to stand seized to her use, because
they are one person in Law.

And if cesty que vie does devise that his wife shall sell his land, and make
her Executrix and dies, and she take another husband, she may sell the land to
her husband, for she does it in anter droit, and her husband shall be in by the
devisor, Coke com. f. 112. a.

If a free man marry a woman which is a neife, she shall be free for ever,
although the husband dies and she surviveth because they are but one person in
law, unless there be some special Act made by the wife afterward, as devorce
or cognizance in Court of record F. N. B. f. 78. g.

If an english man marry an alien borne, she shall be a Denizen for the same
reason, Abri. of Ass. by Brook, Demzen.

I^ the husband and wife ^aile goods to one, they shall not join in an Action
of Detinue, for it is the bailement of the husband only, and void as to her.

The husband may have an Action of trespass for taking away his wife, F. n. b.
f. 53. b.

A man may have an Action at the common law, de muliere abducta cum bonis viri,
if she has attained to the age of consent, and has actually consented to the
marriage, because it is not properly a marriage till she does consent, 13. E.
1. c. 35. Yet Brook 4. 47. E. 3. trespass f. 420. rather thinks that it
shall be intended a good marriage till she does dis^ssent, but where the
marriage is complete, though the wife is dead or divorced at the time of the
Action brought, the action is maintainable, but the word rapuit must be in the
writ as well as abduxit, 43. E. 3. and therefore it will not lie against a
woman, because one woman cannot ravish another, 43. E. 3. 23. Fulb. l. 1. f. 79.

Hereupon it is that the wife can never answer in any Action without her
husband, and if upon an Action of trespass the wife comes in upon a cepi
corpus, and the husband does not appear, she must be set at large without any
mainprise, till her husband does appear, but he appearing may answer without
her, and therefore a protection cast by the husband serves for the wife also,
Finch. Nomot. f. 41.

If tenant in tail enfeoff a woman and die, and his issue within age takes
her to wife, he shall be remitted, for he cannot sue a Formedon in this case,
unless he will sue against his wife, because by the enter-marriage he is
seized in her right, ibid.

Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili desinit esse nobilis, Coke l. 6. f. 53. b.
and l. 4. f. 118. b. If a noble woman marry an ignoble man, she cease to be
noble, as when a Barronesse marries under the degree of a Baron, by such
marriage her dignity is determined, but that is to be understood of a woman
has attained her nobility by marriage of a Duke, Countess or Baron, and if
such an one marry with one is ignoble, she loses her dignity to which she
has attained by the marriage with one of nobility, but if a woman be noble by
descent, as a Duchess etc. though she marry one under the degree of nobility,
yet her birthright shall remain, for it is annexed to her blood, and it is a
Character indelebilis, ibidem. And if a Duchess marry with a Baron of the
Realm, she remains a Duchess, and loses not her name, Coke com. f. 16. b.

Vir est caput mulieris, Bracton. Coke com. 1 2. a. The husband is the head of
the wife, for God, says Ployd. f. 305. has divided reasonable creatures into
two sexes, male and female, and the male is more sovereign, and the female more
base, as Aristotle l. 1. Polit. Mas est praestantior, deterior vero faemina and
therefore does the female change her sir name into the name of her husband, and
also men for the greater part are more reasonable then women, and have more
discretion to guide things, then women have, and therefore Aristotle in the
same place says mas ad principatum aptior est natura, quam faemina, the man is
more apt by nature to rule then the woman, and as the woman is not so apt to
govern in high matters, so is she not in things of a lower degree, and
therefore says Bracton, l. 2. c. 15. Omnia quae sunt uxoris sunt ipsius viri,
non habet uxor potestatem sui sed vir, all things which are the wifes are the
husbands and the wife has not power of her self, but her husband, for all
personal things she has are merely his, and at his disposing; and as the
office of an executor f 210. are so settled in the husband upon the marriage as
any other that were his own before, so as if goods be given to a Feme-covert,
and another the jointure is severed, and the husband, and the other are tenants
in common, and the executor of the husband shall have all the goods that were
given to the wife, 21. H. 7. 29.

All the real Chattells of the wife, are also the husbands, for as Hoberd f.
4. Radfords case, though the lease were at the first the wifes, and that the
husband was possessed in her right, so as though he had purchased the
Fee-simple, the Lease had not been extinct, yet by the inter-marriage he had
full power to alien it, and if he survive the wif^, he is to enjoy it against
her Executors or Administrators, vide Ployd. 191.

But where the wife has a term for years, the husband cannot devise it to
another by his Will, or grant a rentcharge out of it (for she has an estate
in it before, and at the time of his death, which shall prevent the Devisee)
and she surviving is remitted to the term, and therefore shall avoid the
rentcharge, 14. Eliz. Ployd. 418 b. If Lessee for years grants his term to
a Feme-covert, and another, or if a feme-sole, and another are Joyn-tenants for
years, and she takes an husband, the Jointure is not dissolved but
continues, and the Survivor of the feme, or the stranger shall have all the
term, because the term is a Chattell real, and the marriage of the feme
shall not divest the term out of the feme, but she had an estate in it, as
she had before, so that if an estranger oust them, the feme ought to join
with the baron in the suite of ejectione firm, and the feme shall have
judgment as well as the baron, Ployd. ibidem.

So in an action of debt upon arrearages of account against one who was
receivor to the feme whilst she was sole, they both must join, though the
Auditors were assigned during the coverture, for the very cause of action, that
is the receipt, was in her right, 16. E. 4. 8.

The husband has power also to dispose of things in action, and his release of
an obligation made to the feme, or where goods were taken from her whilst she
was sole, shall be good against the wife, and he dye, 87. H. 8. 1.

But if he dye without making such a release, the Wife shall have an Action
upon the Obligation, and not the Executors of the husband, likewise the wife,
or her Executor if she dye shall have those things in action, and not the
husband, but she may make her husband her Executor, and then he shall recover
them to her use, 39. H. 6. 27.

The wife is unable to contract with any, without the consent of her husband,
and upon a Feoffment to a feme covert, she takes nothing unless her husband
will agree, and where one is bound to enfeoff the husband and wife, the
husbands refusal is the refusal of them both, Finch. Nomot. f. 44.

And where the husband and wife are joint Purchasers, the husband may make a
Feoffment and livery upon the Land, which shall work a discontinuance, though
the wife be in presence upon the Land, and will not agree.

But if the husband and wife bargain and sell the wives Lands by Indenture,
and the Vendee grant unto them for the same a yearly rent, her acceptance of
this rent after her husbands death does not bar her of the Land, although the
acceptance be an agreement to the bargain, but the bargain being but a
contract is the bargain of the husband only, and not of the wife, for a wife
is sub potestate viri cui invita contradicere non potest, and therefore is the
Writ cui invita given to the wife by Law, for the recovery of her Land after
her husbands death, being aliened by him, and therefore it is that Judges, when
a woman is to acknowledge any fine of any Lands, do examine her apart from her
husband, to know whether she be willing or come to do it by compulsion of the
husband. Offi of Ex. f. 210.

And upon a joint purchase of the husband and wife during coverture, if the
husband alien, she shall recover the whole after her husbands decease, unless
she acknowledge a Fine, and a cui invita is given to the feme by the Statute
of Westminster 2. c. 3. upon a recovery by default against baron and feme, and
by the equity of it a feme divorced shall have a cui ante divortium to recover
the Land lost by baron and feme by default before the divorce, Ployd. f. 58. a.
And if Lands be given in Frank-marriage, and a divorce had afterward, the feme
shall have all the Land, ibidem. and the reason that he there gives, is
because the marriages of women, and their advancement by it are much favored
in Law, as if a woman give Lands to a man causa matrimonij praelocuti, and he
will not marry her, she shall have a Writ to recover the Land, ibidem, and
Dyer f. 13. A man gives certain goods to his Daughter in marriage, upon a
divorce the feme shall have all the goods so given that are not spent, because
they were given for her advancement, so as it is regularly true. In omnibus
fere uxori sub potestate viri succurritur, Coke l. 9. f. 84. b. In all things
almost the Law helps the wife, because she is under the power of her
husband, as if baron and feme, as in right of the wife, have right to enter
into Lands, and the Tenant dies seized, the entry of the husband is taken away
upon the heir which is in by descent, but if the husband dye, the wife or her
heirs may well enter upon the issue, for the laches of her husband shall not
turn to the prejudice of the wife, or her heirs, Littl. but otherwise it is
if the wrong was done to the feme sole before she took husband, Coke Com. f.
24. a. vide ibidem plura, and unless it be for the performance of a condition
annexed to the estate of Land, as if a feme be infeoffed either before or after
marriage, reserving a rent, and for default of non-payment a re-entry, in that
case the laches of the baron shall dis-inherit the wife for ever, ibidem b.

Ubi nullam matrimonium ibi nulla dos, Bracton Coke com. f. 32. a. where there
is no marriage there is no dower, Ployd. f. 375. a.
for the marriage of the woman is the principal cause of her dower, and though
the seisin of the baron, and death of the husband are causes, sine qua non,
without which a dower cannot be had, yet the procatartique and impulsive cause
of the dower of the woman, is the pains and burden she endures under the
power, and yoke of matrimony, for as Tholosanus, Tholosanus Synt. L. 9. c. 11.
matrimonium is quasi matris munus and a matre potius, quam a patre dictum,
because she bears the burden in her womb, and with painful labor
delivers it, and is very indulgent to nourish it, and for those reasons as
Bracton says, dowers were instituted for a competent livelihood for the wife
during her life, to wit, propter onus matrimonij, and ad sustentationem uxoris,
and ad educationem liberorum si vir premoriatur, for the burden of matrimony
and sustentation of the wife, and education of the children if the husband die
before, l. 5. c. 22. which Ockam expresses in a more affectionate term, and
calls her dower praemium pudoris the reward of her chastity, and love, f. 40.
And therefore though it be not necessary, that the seisin of the land shall
continue during the coverture, for notwithstanding the alienation of the
husband, the wife shall be endowed, yet is it necessary the marriage shall
continue, for if that be dissolved, the dower cease, where the husband and
wife are divorced a vinculo matrimonij, as causa precontractus causa metus,
causa impotentiae, seu frigiditatis, causa affinitatis, causa consanguinitatis,
and William Chadweth was divorced, for that he did carnally know the Daughter
before the marriage of the mother, All these are causes of divorce preceding
the marriage and dissolve the dower, Coke Com. f. 32. a. and 235. a. Yet it is
said that if the assignement of dower ad ostium ecclesiae be specified, to wit,
that notwithstanding any divorce shall happen, yet that she shall hold it for
life, that this is good, ibidem but divorce a mensa and thoro does not dissolve
the matrimony nor bar the feme of her dower, Coke l. 7. f. 43. b. As it was
adjudged, T. 2. Jac. 18. 5. C. 23. S so well, and Wilby, dower Coke com. f. 33.
b. Yet if the wife elope from her husband and leave him, and goes away with
the adulterer, she shall lose her dower, until her husband willingly without
coertion ecclesiastical be reconciled unto her, and permit her to cohabite
with him according to the vulgar verses, Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and
adultera facta
Dote sua careat, nisi sponsi sponte retracta.
And this is true although she remains not continually with the adulterer,
or if she tarrieth with him against her will, or he turn her away, or
co-habiteth with her husband by censure of the Church, in all these cases she
loses her Dower, Coke ibidem, 32. b. yet though she be barred of her dower,
she may have an appeal, and the reason is because the Statute of W. 2. c. 34.
barreth her of her dower, but not of her appeal, Coke com. f. 33. b.

And for the abovesaid reasons, dower is one of the three things are
principally favored in our Law, and the Law by that name does give her many
freedoms, for the very name Dos does give her a freedom, as according to the
custom of the Kingdom, mulieres viduae debem esse quietae de tallagijs,
Regist. 142. 143. and tenant in dower shall not be distrained for the debt due
to the King by the husband in his life time, for the Lands, which she holds
in dower, of which Ockam yields this reason: Doti ejus parcatur, quia
praemium pudoris est, let her dower be spared, because it is a reward of her
chastity, Coke com. f. 31. a.

By the Statutes of 1. E. 5. c. 2. and 5. E. 6. c. 31. A wife shall not lose
any title of dower, which to her was accrued, by the attainder of her husband
by misprision of treason, or any manner of murder, or felony whatsoever, but if
the husband be attainted of high treason or petit treason she shall be barred
of her dower, at this day so long as the attainder stands in force, which is
more favorable to the woman then the common Law was, Coke com. f. 392. b. vide
ibidem plura.

And a woman shall be endowed of a seisin in Law, as where Lands, or Tenements
descend to the husband, before entry he has but a seisin in Law, and yet the
wife shall be endowed, albeit it be not reduced to an actual possession, for
it lies not in the power of the wife to bring it to an actual possession, as
the husband may do of his wifes Land when he is to be tenant by courtesy, Coke
com. f. 31. a.

If a man takes a wife of the age of seven years and alieneth his Land, and
after she attaineth to the age of nine years, the husband dies, the wife
shall be endowed, for albeit she was not absolutely dowable at the time of her
marriage, yet was she conditionably dowable, to wit, if she attained to the age
of nine years before the death of her husband, ibidem, f. 33. a.

An husband seized in fee of Lands, gives it in exchange, and takes others in
exchange, so as he was seized of both, the wife shall not be endowed of both,
but she may take her election to be endowed of which she will, Coke ibidem, 31.

If the wife be of the age of nine years, and her husband dies, she shall be
endowed, though her husband be but four years old, ibidem, or of what age
soever the husband be, quia non obstabit mulieri petenti dotem minor aetus
viri, because the inferior and lesser age of the man shall hinder the woman
from demanding her dower, and that albeit consensus non concubitus facit
matrimonium, and that a woman cannot consent before twelve, nor a man before
fourteen, yet this inchoate, and imperfect marriage, from the which either of
the parties at the age of consent may disagree; after the death of the husband
shall give dower to the wife; and is accounted in Law legitimum matrimonium quo
ad dotem, a lawful marriage in respect of her dower, Coke com. f. 33. a.

If the husband alien his land, and then the wife is attainted of felony, now
is she disabled, but if she be pardoned before the death of her husband she
shall be endowed, ibidem.

Dos de dote peti non debet, Coke com. f. 32. Dower ought not to be demanded of
Dower, as if there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Grandfather is of
three acres of Land in fee, and takes wife, and dies, this Land descends to
the Father who dies, the wife of the Grandfather is endowed of one acre and
dies, the wife of the Father shall only be endowed of two acres, for dower
must not be demanded of dower, but otherwise it had been, if the father had
come to the Land by Feoffment from the Grandfather, or by gift in tail, the
wife of the Father, after the decease of the Grandfathers wife should have been
endowed of that part assigned to the Grandmother, for that the seisin that
descended after the decease of the Grandfather is avoided by the indowment of
the Grandmother, whose title was consummated by the death of the Grandfather.

Non debent mulieribus assignari castra in dotem, quae fuerunt virorum suorum,
and quae de guerra existant, Coke com. f. 31. a. Castles ought not to be
assigned to women for their dower, which appertained to their husbands, and
which are for war, and therefore of a Castle which is maintained for the
necessary defense of the Realm, a woman shall not be endowed, because it ought
not to be divided, and the public shall be preferred before the private, but
of a Castle which is only for the use, and private habitation of the owner, a
woman shall be endowed, and that in the 7 th. of Magna charta, nisi domas illa
sit castrum, is taken for a Castle of public defense.

De nullo quod est sua natura in divisibile, and divisionem non patitur, nullam
partem, habebit uxor pro dote sua, sed satisfaciat ei ad valentiam, Bracton
Coke com. f. 32. Albeit of many Inheritances which be entire, and whereof no
division can be made by metes and bounds, a woman cannot be endowed of the
thing it self, yet the woman shall be endowed thereof in a special, and
certain manner, whereby she may have satisfaction, as of a Mill a woman shall
not be endowed by metes and bounds, nor in common with the heir, but either
she may be endowed of the third tole-dish, or of the whole Mill by every third
month, and so of a villain, either the third days work, or every third
week, or month.

So a man shall be endowed of the third part of the profits of stallage, of the
third part of the profits of a Fair, or of the third part of the profits of
the Marshalsey, of the third part of the profits of keeping of a Park, of the
third part of the profits of a Dovehouse, and likewise of a third part of a
Piscary, by the third Fish, or the third cast of the Net, or the third
Presentation to an advowson, and a Writ of Dower lies for the third part of
the profits issuing out of the custody of a Goal, of the third part of the
profits of Courts, Fines, and Heriots, and a woman shall be endowed of tithes,
and the surest endowment of tithes is of the third sheafe, for what Land shall
be sown, is uncertain.

Exception.
But in some cases of Lands and Tenements which are divisible and which the
heir of the husband shall inherit, the wife shall not be endowed, as if the
husband makes a Lease for life of certain Lands, reserving a rent to him and
his heirs, and after takes a wife, and dies, the wife shall not be endowed
neither of the reversion, because there was no seisin in Deed or in Law of the
freehold, or the rent, because the husband had but a particular estate
therein, and no Fee-simple, Coke com. f. 32. a. vide ibidem plura.

Impossible est unum corpus in duobus locis esse simul. it is impossible for
one body to be at two places at one and the same time, Pop. Rep. 58. 3. and 4.
Eliz. As if a man make a lease of two Barnes rendering rent, and for default of
payment a re-entry, if the tenant be at one of the Barnes to pay the rent, and
the Lessor at the other to demand the rent, and no body be there to pay it, yet
the Lessor cannot enter for the condition broken, because there was no default
of the tenant, he being at one Barn, for it was not possible for him to be in
two places together, and Popbam, Walmest^, and Fenner said that also perhaps
that the tenant had not money sufficient to pay it at either of the places, but
it is sufficient for him to have and provide one rent, which cannot be at two
places together, ibidem.

Jura naturalia sunt immutabilia, Bracton l. 9. c. 23. Coke l. 7. f. 15. b. The
Laws of nature are unalterable, as if a man have a ward by reason of a Signiory
a signiory and is outlawed, he forfeiteth his wardship to the King, but if a
man have the ward-ship of his own son or daughter which is heir apparent, and
is outlawed, he does not forfeit this ward-ship, for nature has annexed it to
the person of the father, 33. H. 6. 55.

In the same manner, maris and faminae conjunctio est de jure naturae the
conjunction of a man and a woman is of the law of nature as Bract. l. 1. c. 33.
Dr. and Student, c. 31. do hold; now if he that is attainted of felony or
treason, is slain by one who has no authority, or executed by him who has
authority, but pursues not his warrant, in this case his eldest son can have
no appeal, for he must bring his appeal as heir, which being ex provisione
hominis, he loses it by the attainder of his father, but his wife, if any he
have, shall have an appeal, because she is to have her appeal as his wife,
which she retains, notwithstanding the attainder, because the conjunction of
man and woman is by the law of nature, and therefore it being to be intended of
true and right matrimony is indissoluble, and this is proved by the book 33. H.
6. f. 57.

So if there be mother and daughter, and the daughter is attainted of felony,
now cannot she be heir to her mother for the cause aforesaid: yet after her
attainder if she kills her mother, this is parricide and petit treason, for
yet she remains her daughter, for that is of nature.

All which accord with the rule of the civil law, jura sanguinis nullo modo
dirimi possunt, the laws of consanguinity and the laws of blood can no way be
broken, and therefore the corruption of blood takes away the privity of the
heir, which is nomen juris, and not the privity of the son, which is nomen
naturae, as if an attainted person be killed by his son, this is petty treason,
for the privity of the son still remains, but if a man attainted be murdered
by a stranger, the eldest son shall not have the appeal, because the appeal
is given to the heir for the youngest sons shall not have it, 36. H. 6. 57.
58. 21. E. 3. 17.

If the son be attainted and the father covenanteth in consideration of
natural love to stand seized of Land to his use, this is a good consideration
to raise an use, because the privity of natural affection remains. So if a
man attainted have a Charter of pardon, and be returned on a jury between his
son and I. S. the challenge remains, for he may maintain any suit of his son
though the blood be corrupted.

If a villain be attainted, yet the Lord shall have the issues of the villain
borne before or after the attainder, for the Lord has them jure naturae, as
the increase of a flock, Bacons Maxims f. 49. and 50. vide ibidem plura.

If the father be slain, the son shall have an appeal of it, for it is a loss
to the son to lose the father, and the common law gives the appeal to the son
before any other, for the earnest intent of revenge, which the law supposes to
be in him against the offender for the killing of him, and that the son by
presumption had the more great love and affection Ployd. ibid. f. 304. b.

And from thence Bromly said, that it was an ancient usage when a felon was
found guilty in an appeal of murder, that all those of the blood of him was
murdered, should draw the felon with a long cord to execution, which was
grounded upon the loss, that all the blood had, by the murder of one of them
Ployd. 406. b.

Ed. 6. 3. The father being impleaded made a feoffment to his eldest son and
heir apparent hanging the suit, and the King brought a writ of Champerty
against the father and son, and by the opinion of most, the action was not
maintainable, because by any law the son is to aid the father, and yet it is
in danger of the words of the Act.

In an appeal brought by the wife of the death of her husband, the son being
an abettor shall not render damages but shall avowe the abettment, as near in
blood.

Cuique natu^ale est id quo'd procreavit tueri, Ployd. 304. a. As matrimony is
necessary between man and woman, and that there is a natural desire in them
and all other living creatures to procreate and relinquish a thing like unto
themselves, and id non animi judicio, not by the arbitrament of the mind nor as
a thing indifferent, which a man may do or not do, but is a natural
appetite, to which nature urges us, so has nature instilled love in the
procreator to the thing procreated, which urges him to have a care to the
education of the thing procreated, to provide for him all things necessary, and
to defend him against all perils, and therefore has the common law given to
the father, the custody and education of his son, and if any one take him from
him he shall have the writ against him Quare filium and heredem suum rapuit, and
that law is in satisfaction of nature, but in his writ he must say Cujus
maritagium ad se pertinet, because the marriage of his son and heir and of his
daughter and heir appertains to him, who being once married, he cannot have
this Writ, 11. H. 4. 23. M. 33. H. 6. 55. Fulb. l. 1. 80. And if a man takes
way another man's son and heir apparent, and bestows upon him good aparrell,
and the father seiseth his son, he shall not be impeached for taking of the
apparel, for in that he may make a good justification for the taking of the
body, it must needs extend to the apparel of the body, because the law
considers not bare and elementall bodies, but bodies apparrelled, 12. H. 4.
16. 8. E. 2. Trus. 31. 32. E. 3. Guard. 32. Ibidem.

Amor descendit, Ployd. 293. b. Osbornes case, it is an old saying that love
descends, which by experience is found to be more true then to ascend, and
for that reason the law which greatly tendreth the preservation of infants,
has appropriated the custody of them and their lands in Soccage to their
parents, because they love their children best, and in default of them, to
their other Ancestors more near in blood and in natural affection to them,
and that is for the profit of the infant: for the guardian must keep the infant
with the land, and of the rest of the profits give an account to the infant,
and if the guardian die, the executors shall not have the guard of the infant,
because they are void of such natural affection, but the nearer Ancestor
shall have it.

Quaelibet haereditas naturaliter quidem ad haeredes descendit, nunquam autem
naturaliter ascendit, Glan. l. 7. c. 1. Every inheritance does naturally
descend to the heirs, but never naturally ascends, Coke l. 3. f. 4. in
Ratcliffs ease, of which Bracton gives this reason, quod quasi ponderosum
quiddam jure naturae descendit, nam omne grave fertur deorsum, that as a
certain ponderous thing, it by the law of nature descends, for every heavy
thing descends downwards, to which this reason may be added, that as the
affection of love so does the effects of love descend; for as Aristotle, the
reason why parents love is so fervent and permanent to their issues, is,
because love does descend, and their descending love appears, in that they
make provision for the present sustenance of them, and future maintenance and
continuance of their name, and therefore as Mr. Ployden says, it is a great
blessing of God upon Parents to have issue male, to whom they may leave the
fruits of their labors, and establish their estates and inheritances in their
names, Ployd. 305. b. to which by love and natural instinct they are incited.

But on the contrary, as the love and provision of children, toward their
Parents does not naturally ascend for the thing procreated, does not actually
provide for the procreator where it is sui juris, so there estates and
inheritances should not ascend, and therefore, as Mr. Littleton, it is a maxim
in our law, that inheritance can lineally descend, but not lineally ascend,
wherein the civil law unnaturally differs from the common law, for the
civil law allows lineall ascension as well as lineall descent, lineall and
collateral descent, but not lineal ascension of inheritances as it does,
which, as Coke, is one of the causes of such diversities of opinions in cases
of descents in the civil law, and the contrary is one of the causes of the
certainty of the rules of the common law in cases of descent and inheritance.
Coke l. 3. f 49. b.

If there be father, Uncle, and son, and the son dies, the Uncle shall be
heir to the son, because inheritance cannot lineally ascend; for by this
maxim only lineall ascension in the right line is prohibited, and not in the
collateral, Coke ib. and com. f. 11. b. but otherwise it is in case of
purchase, as if a lease be made to the son, the remainder to the next of
blood, the father in this case shall have the remainder, because he is next of
blood, and so administration may be granted of the goods of the son or daughter
to the father and mother, as next of kin, 5. E. 6. Coke ibidem.

Haeres est alter ipse and filius est pars patris, Arist. Coke l. 3. f. 12. The
heir is another son, and the son is a part of the father, and for that reason
if a man be seized of three Acres of Land, and acknowledges a recognisance or
a statute etc. and enfeoffeth A. of one Acre, B. of another, and the third
descend to the heir, in this case if execution be sued only against the
heir, he shall not have contribution, for the heir sits in the seat of his
Ancestor, and though the father be dead, yet is he as it were not dead, because
he has left his like, and the heir is a second same, and the son is part of
the father, and therefore the heir shall not have contribution against any
Purchasor, though in truth the purchasor came to the land without any valluable
consideration, for the consideration of purchase is not material in this case,
and though in the case of a recognisance, statute or judgment, the heir is
charged as terre-tenant, and not as heir, 27. H. 6. Execu. 135. because in
either of them the heir is not bound, yet he shall not have contribution
against the purchasor, contrary to the opinion of Finchden in 48. E. 3. f. 5.
b. for the reason abovesaid, yet is the heir not charged merely as
terretenant, for he shall have contribution against those who are heirs, as
himself, Popham, f. 171.

And for the like reason, if a man binds him and his heirs, to pay a
certain sum at a day, and dies, it is at the election of the obligee to sue
the heir, Executors or Administrators of the obligor, and if the executors
have assets in their hands, yet the obligee may sue the heir if he will,
because he has bound the heir as well as himself, neither can the heir
plead that there is assets in the hands of the executors, day of the writ
purchased as heretofore in some ancient books it has been done, but he must
plead rien by descent, 10. H. 7. f. 8. Ployd. f. 440. Davis case, For now the
law is changed, and it is accounted his own debt, and debt will lie against
the heir of the heir to many generations, as Dier affirms f. 868. albeit of
this Mr. Ployden makes a doubt, but his plea, that he had nothing at the day
of the writ purchased, nor ever after, is good, for if he before aliened the
assets he is discharged of the debt, Popham. f. 151.

But if the heir does not confess the Action, and show the certainty of the
assets, but pleads rien by descent, is condemned by default of answer, the
Plaintiff shall have execution of his other Land, or of his goods, or of his
body by capias ad satisfaciendum, as he might have had for the debt of the
heir himself, if he had made the obligation, vide 21. E. 3. f. 9. and ibidem
plura, and Coke l. 3. Sir William Herberts case, where the case is upon a Scire
facias against the heir. But otherwise if the executor in debt pleads rien
enter mains etc. and is found against him, nothing shall be put in execution,
but the goods of the dead, because the debt is not the debt of the executor,
but of the testator, and is charged in another right, and has the goods in
another right, whereas when the heir denies assets etc. and it is found that
he has assets, the debt of his Ancestor is become his debt, in respect of the
assets which he has in his own right, and so the property which he has in
his own right of the land, makes the debt his own proper debt, and for that
reason the writ shall be in the debet and detinet, and the Plaintiff may have
execution by elegit of the moiety of all his Lands, as a fieri facias of his
goods, Ployd. ibidem f. 441. But in Popham f. 151. it is said by Jones and Crew
that a general judgment shall be given against the heir, if he does plead
falsely, that he has no assets, and not upon a nihil dicit.

Haeres non tenetur in Anglia ad debita antecessoris reddenda, nisi per
antecessorem ad hoc fuerit obligatus praeter quam d ebita regis tantum, Flet a.
l. 2. c 55. An heir is not bound in England to pay the debt of his Ancestor,
unless it be the debts of the King, Coke com. f. 386. a As if a man bind
himself by warranty, and binds not his heir, they are not bound, for he
must say, Ego and hae^edes mei warrantiabimus, I and my heirs will warrant,
ibidem.

Coke com. 144 b. If a rent charge be granted to one and his heirs, he shall
not have a writ of Annuity against the heir of the grantor, albeit he has
assets, unless the grant be for him and his heirs.

And the heir by the grant of an Annuity by the Ancestor, shall not be bound,
unless he have assets

And it is a Maxim at the common law, that the heir shall never be bound to
any express warranty, but where the Ancestor was bound by the same warranty,
for if the Ancestor be not bound, it cannot descend upon the heir, as if a man
makes a feoffement in fee, and binds his heirs to warranty, this is a void
warranty, because the Ancestor himself was not bound, as also if a man bind
his heirs to pay a sum of money, this is void, Coke com. f. 386. a.

Exception.
Customary inheritances shall not be assets to charge the heir in an Action of
debt upon an obligation made by his Ancestors, although he bind him and his
heirs.

And for the same reason issue in tail shall never avoid things done by his
Ancestor, but such things which are, or may be to his disadvantage, and not for
the benefit of the issue, as T 44. E. 5. f. 21. Where tenant in tail was upon
a defeasible title, and to have a release of right of him that had right, he
granted to him a Rentcharge of twenty pound, and that the charge should be
levied upon the issue in tail, and because the rent was for the release of
right, and the issue had benefit by it, it was adjudged that the issue shall
not avoid the grant, and 46. E. 3. f. 4. If Lands be given in tail, so as the
Donee may alien for the profit of his issue, that is a good condition or power
limited to him; And so if tenant in tail suffer a common recovery, in which he
is vouched, and has recompense, the issue shall be bound, and so if he alien
with warranty, and leaves assets to his issue, the issue shall not avoid the
warranty, because it is not to his disadvantage, Ployd. f. 437. b. in Smiths
case, vide.

Semper praesumitur pro legitimatione purorum, and filiatio non potest probari,
Coke l. 5. f. 98. b. Burys case. Legitimation of Children is always presumed,
and begetting of Children cannot be proved, Bury was divorced from his first
wife, a vincul^ matrimon^j, causa frigiditatis, and as he lawfully might
married a second wife and had issue by her, and it was adjudged that the issue
of the second wife was legitimate, for notwithstanding his natural imbecility
deposed before the divorce, it was said, that a man might be habilis and
inhabilis diversis temporibus, and that though the second marriage was, yet it
remains a marriage until it is dissolved, and by consequence the issue which
was had during the coverture if no divorce was had in the life of the parties
is lawful, for lawfulness of Children is always presumed, and filiation
cannot be proved, Ibidem.

Coke Com. 126. a. A man leaves his wife enseint with child, issue shall not
be taken that she was not enseint by her husband, for filiatio non potest
probari, but the issue must be, whether she were ensciut at the day of her
death, and ibidem. f. 244. If the husband be within the four Seas, that is,
within the jurisdiction of the King of England, if the wife has issue, no
proof is admitted to prove the child a bastard, for filiatio non potest
probari, unless the husband has an apparent impossibility of procreation, as
if the husband be but eight years old, or under the age of pro-creation, such
issue is a bastard, albeit he be born within marriage.

The Law supposes that to be true, which is false, because it may be true, as
a man marrying a woman that was with-child before marriage, the Law supposes
the child to be the husbands, because it is possible for the husband to have
got it, and whose soever the Cow is, his is the Calfe also, Swinwood f. 18. And
if the issue be borne within a month or day after marriage between parties of a
full lawful age, the child is legitimate, Coke Com. f. 244. a. And in the
legal understanding of the common Law, he is said to be haeres, who is ex
justis nuptijs procreatus, borne of lawful matrimony; and haeres legitimus est
quem nuptiae demonstrant, and he is a lawful heir, whom marriage demonstrated
so to be, Coke ibidem. f. 7. b. Coke l. 7. f. 44. a. One who is engendered in
avowtry during the coverture, is a mulier by the temporal and common Law,
though a bastard by the spiritual Law.

Jus sanguinis, quod in legitimis successionibus spectatur, ipso nativitatis
tempore quaesitum est, Reg. I. C. The right of blood which is regarded in
lawful successions or inheritances, is found in the very time of the nativity,
and therefore, jus primogeniturae, the tight of the elder Brother-ship in the
cause of inheritance is principally to be respected, because it is in the
eldest Son and his issue, per modum substantiae, and that which is in any
person per modum substantiae, is inseparable from him, and cannot be extended
to any other, besides it is against the Laws of proximity of degrees, that
those which are in a remote degree should be preferred before those of the next
degree, and therefore in all commonweals for the most part proximity of blood
has been preferred, of which we have a notable example confirmed by the act of
Lycurgus the judicious Lawgiver, as when Eunonus King of the Lacedaenonians
had two Sons, Polydectes the elder, and Lycurgus the younger, and Polydectes
deceased leaving no Son living, at the time of his death, the Scepter of the
Kingdom was seated in the hands of Lycurgus, afterward when Polydectes Widow
had brought forth a Son, Lycurgus did willingly and peaceably yield to him the
Scepter, which act of Lycurgus agrees fully with our Laws, whereby it is
ruled, that if a man have a Son and Daughter, and the Son purchases Land, and
dies, the Daughter enters, and after the Father begets another Son of the
same Wife, this Son shall have the Land, 19. H. 6. b, and is also ratified by
diverse examples in the successions of our Kings, I will instance only in one
and the most illustrious one, King Edward the third, being deceased, Richard
the second the Son of his eldest Son obtained the Kingdom, and was preferred
before John, Edmund, and Thomas the sons of the same King, whereas any of them
was more worthy and fit for the Scepter, yet is it granted, that in succession
of regal dignity, jus primogeniturae is not constantly observed, because in
that case the good of the commonweal, and commodity of the people is
politically to be respected, and as the Civilians, the good estate of the
Kingdom and Subjects is more to be heeded, quam sangninis series, then the
pedigree of blood, and so Solomon the younger Brother was advanced before the
elder by the hand of David his Father, and Roboam preferred Abias his younger
Son yet this must be done cautiously, and with a good conscience and intention,
and probably for the utility of the State, otherwise it will neither please God
nor man, yet in the disposing of private estates, the Law of Primogeniture is
more strictly to be observed, because by it confusion and dissension is
avoided, which from the contrary does proceed, as is intimated by Coke l. 3. f.
40. b. Wherein our Law excels, which prefers the elder Brother and his
issue before the younger Brother and his issue in case of descent, and that
jure sanguinis, by his birth right, as he is most worthy of blood, and
therefore as Coke in his com. f. 14. a. The male and all descendant from him
shall inherit before the female, and among the males, the eldest Brother and
his posterity shall inherit Lands in Fee-simple as heir, before any younger
Brother, or any descending from him, whereas by the Civil Law the inheritance
is divided among the males, Lutleton. l. 1. c. 1. There be three Brothers, and
the middle Brother purchases Lands in Fee simple, and dies without issue, the
elder Brother shall have the Land by descent, so also it is if the youngest
purchases Lands in Fee, and dies without issue the eldest shall have it jure
sanguinis, because he is the worthiest of blood, Little.

So if a man enfeoffe another upon condition, and the condition is broken, and
then the Feoffor dies without issue, his wife privement ensaint, and the
Brother of the Feoffor enter for the condition broken, and after a Son is
borne, he shall avoid the possession of the Uncle, and may lawfully claim the
inheritance, 9. H. 7. 25.

And 9. H. 8. 23. It is said, that after two, or more descents the heir
afterward born claiming by descent, may enter into Land, but he shall not have
a Writ of account for the mean profits.

And though Littleton in defense of the custom of Gavelkind, by which the
issues may equally inherit, alleges the reason, that every Son is as great a
Gentleman as the eldest Son is, yet as Sr. Edward Coke, com. a. f. 14. says,
Gentry and arms does not descend to all the brethren alike, for the eldest,
jure primogeniturae, shall bear, as a badg of his birthright, his Fathers
arms without any difference, because he is more worthy of blood, but all the
younger brethren shall give several differences, and additio probat
minoritatem, and the addition demonstrateth and proves the minority of the
issue, but by the Statute of 31. H. 8. A great part of Rent is made descendible
to the eldest Son, according to the course of the common Law, for that by the
means of that custom diverse ancient and great families, after a few descents
came to very little or nothing, according to the simile of the Poet, In plures
quoties rivos deducitur amnis,
Fit minor, ac unda deficiente perit.
A Flood deduced into little streams
Coke ibid.
Soon grows less and falls by that means.


But in cases of purchase it is otherwise a. 15. E. 4. If a man devise land to
a man and his heir, and the devisee dies having issue a daughter, his wife
privement enseint with a son, who is afterward borne, the daughter shall enjoy
the Land in perpetuum.

And 9. H. 6. 23. It is said, that if the remainder cannot vest at any time
when it falls, it shall not vest in him is borne afterward, where another
has entered before, 2. Eliz. 190. Pl. 18.

If a lease for life be made, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. and I.
S. is then alive, the inheritance passes presently out of the Lessor, but
cannot vest in the heir of I. S. for then living his father, he is not in
rerum natura, for non est haeres viventis, and the remainder is only good upon
this contingent, if I. S. dies during the life of the lessor, Coke com. f.
378. a.

But if lands be given to A. and B. so long as they jointly together live, the
remainder to the right heirs of him which dies first, and warranteth the land
in forma praedicta, A. dies, his heir shall have the warranty, and yet the
remainder vested not during the life of A. for the death of A. must precede the
remainder, and yet shall the heir of A. have the land by descent, vide ibidem,
378. b.

Justum non est aliquem ante natum, mortuum facere Bastardum, qui toto tempore
suo pro legitimo habebatur, Coke l. 8. f. 101. a. b. It is not just to make any
one a Bastard, borne before marriage, being dead, who all his life time was
accounted legitimate. For by the law of England, if such a Bastard which the
law terms Bastard eigne, does continue possession in peace, (that is, if the
mulier make no entry for the Bastard eigne, or continual claim) and so dies
in peace, his issue is become right heir and will bar the mulier, because he
was legitimate by the laws of the holy Church. For though the subsequent
marriage does not make a Bastard legitimate, quoad consuetudinem regni, as
^ract. phraseth it, in regard of the custom of the Realm, yet quoad
sacerdotium in respect of the Canon law it does, and in this case of
legitimation, which in law is so precious, and of so great estimation, the law
respects neither infancy or other defects in the mulier, but prefers
legitimation of blood before any benefit of temporal inheritance, and therefore
the law says, that by the death of Bastard eigne in peace, his issue is become
right heir, and by consequence the mulier is barred, and the descent does not
only take away the entry but the right also, and therefore descent in this
case shall be a bar to right, as descent of services, rents, reversions
expectant upon an estate tail, shall bar the right of the mulier, 14. E. 2.
Bastardy 26. but not the entry or claim of the disseisee.

But if a Bastard eigne dies without issue, so as the land does descend, the
mulier shall have it, ibidem, and if the Lord by escheat enters, this shall
not bar the mulier, because no descent, Coke com. 244.

If there be Bastard eigne and mulier puisne, and the father makes lease for
life, reserving rent, and the bastard eigne receives the rent and dies having
issue; this shall bar the mulier, Coke com. f. 15. a.

If a man has issue a son being a Bastard eigne, and a daughter, and the
daughter is married, the father dies, and the son enters and dies seized,
this shall bar the feme covert, and the descent in this case of services,
rents, reversions, expectant upon estate, or for life, whereupon rents are
reserved etc. shall bind the right of the mulier, but the descent of these
shall not bind them that right have to an Action, Coke com. f. 244. a.

So if the Bastard dies seized, and his issue endoweth the wife of the
Bastard, the mulier cannot enter upon tenant in dower, for his right was barred
by the descent, ibidem.

If the Bastard eigne enters into land, and has issue, and enters into
religion, this descent shall bar the right of the mulier, ibidem.

If a man has issue two daughters, the eldest being Bastard eigne, and they
enter and occupy peaceably as heirs, the law shall not adjudge the whole
possession in the mulier, so as if the Bastard had issue and died, her issue
shall inherit, and if they make partition, that partition shall bind the issue
for ever, Coke com. 244. a. b.

And such a Bastard being impleaded or vouched shall have his age. If a man
has issue a Bastard eigne, or mulier puisne, and the Bastard in the life of
the father has issue and dies, and then the father dies seized, and the son
of the Bastard enters as heir to his Grandfather, and dies seized, this
descent shall bind the mulier, ibidem b.

If the Bastard enter, and the mulier dies, his wife being privement with a
Son, and the Bastard has issue, and dies seized, the Son is borne, his right
is bound for ever, but if the Bastard dies seized his wife enseint with a Son,
the mulier enters, and the Son is borne, the issue of the Bastard is barred,
ibidem. 244. a.

If the bastard eigne enters, and the King seiseth the Land for some contempt
committed by the Bastard, for which the King receives the profits of the Land,
and the Bastard dies, and his issue upon petition is restored to the
possession, the mulier barred for ever. But when the King seiseth for a
contempt of the Father, etc. if the issue of the Bastard eigne upon petition be
restored, for that the seizure was without cause, the mulier is not barred, for
the Bastard could never enter, but the possession of the King in that case,
shall be adjudged in the right of the mulier, Coke ibidem f. 245. b.

Bastardus nullius est filius, Littleton. Coke com. f. 203. a. aut filius
populi, Coke l. 6. f. 6. A bastard is the Son of none, or the Son of the
people, according to the common report, Cui pater est populus, pater est fibi
nullus, and omnis.
Cui pater est populus, non habet ille patrem,
To whom the people Father is, to him is Father none, and all.
To whom the people Father is, well Fatherless, we may him call.


For as the civilians, pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant, he is a Father, whom
the espousalls, and nuptials show so to be.

And therefore if a wife have a bastard it shall not be a villain, or if a
villain have a bastard, by a woman, and marries her, the bastard is no
villain, because he is nullius filius, though some hold the contrary, as
Bracton, and Britton, for in both cases the issue at the common Law is a
bastard, and quasi nullius filius, Coke com. f. 123. a.

And though a bastard be a reputed Son, yet is he not such a Son, in
consideration whereof an use may be raised, because in judgment of Law he is
nullius filius, Dyer 374.

And for the same reason, where the Statute of 32. H. 8. of wills speaks of
children, bastard children are not within that statute, and a bastard of a
woman is no child within that Statute, where the mother conveyeth Lands unto
him, Dyer 313.

Qui ex damnato coitu oriuntur inter filios non computantur, Coke com f. 3. b.
Who are borne of condemned, or unlawful copulation, are not to be reckoned
among children, as a man makes a lease to B. for life, the remainder to the
issue male of B. and the heirs males of his body, B. has issue a bastard Son,
he shall not take the remainder, because in Law he is no issue, for he that is
born of unlawful copulation, is not to be accounted among children, so it is if
a man make a lease for life to B. the remainder to the eldest issue male of B.
to be begotten of Jane S. whether the same be legitimate or not legitimate, B.
has issue a bastard on the body of Jane S. this Son or issue shall not take
the remainder, because he is no issue, ibidem, and for the same cause if after
the birth of the issue, B. had married I. S. so as he became bastard eigne, and
had a possibility to inherit, yet he shall not take the Remainder. Ibidem.

And though a bastard having gotten a name by reputation, may purchase by his
reputed and known name, to him and his heirs, yet he can have no heir but of
his body, and if he has no issue, the Land shall escheate, if he purchase any,
Finch Nomot. f. 130.

The Pope, Emperor, and Prince himself, cannot legitimate a bastard to enjoy
any benefit of our Law, the Parliament has only that power, Com. of England,
f. 242. And it is related by Bodin, l. 2. de repub. That one Ieane Navarre
calling himself Count Palatine, by virtue of the power he said he had of the
Pope made many bastards of France legitimate, for which he was condemned by
arrest of Parliament as laesae majestatis reus, wherein their Law seems to
accord with ours, for it is only in the power of the King and Parliament to
make a bastard legitimate, but the King may dispense with a bastard to be a
Priest, Davis Reports f. 37. a.

The civil Law depriveth the adulterous issue of all benefit, the
Ecclesiastical Law allows things needful for sustentation, but by the Laws
of this Realm one may give or devise all to a bastard. Swinborne testaments,
f. 230.

And by our Law if a grant be made to a bastard by the name of him who is
supposed to engender him, it is good if he be known by that name, so if a
remainder be limited to Richard the Son of Richard Marwood, it is good,
although he be a bastard, so in case of purchase, a bastard eigne in respect of
the subsequent marriage is capable of his reputed Fathers gifts, for though by
the civil Law his right of Primogeniture is remitted by the subsequent
marriage, according to the rule subsequens matrimonium tollit peccatum
praecedens, yet by the common Law he is in it rejected, and he made incapable
of any inheritance by descent, though in case of purchase it may be sufficient,
as 39 E. 3. Richard Thompson having issue by one Ioane before marriage one
Agnes, and after inter-married with Ioane, and made a Feoffment in fee, and
re-taked the estate unto himself for life, the remainder to Agnes the Daughter
of the said Richard and Ioane, and agreed that it was a good remainder without
any averrement that she was known to be their Daughter, but it was there
objected, that a bastard is not their Daughter in Law, and therefore the
remainder void; but Finch den gave the rule, and said it is found that the
Daughter was borne before the espousalls, so that by their espousalls after
she is their Daughter, so as though by the common Law she was not their
Daughter, yet in so much that she has color by the Ecclesiastical Law, which
says, that subsequens matrimonium tollit peccatum praecedena, it is sufficient
in case of conveyance to make the remainder good, Coke l. 6. f. 65. a. vide
ibidem plura.

Dominum a possessione cepissi dicitur, Reg. I. C. paulus, Dominion is said to
have his beginning from possession, and that jure naturali, for we gain
Dominion of some things by the Law of nature, that is, as Cicero has it,
veteri occupatione, ut qui quondam in vacua venerunt, by long occupation and
possession of those things into which being void we have entered, which no man
can take from us but by injury, and therefore do the Civilians derive
possession, a pedum possessione, from the fixing our feet upon any particular
thing, and by long possession is turned into right, longa enim possessio est
pacis jus, Bracton, f. 50. Long possession is the right of peace. And therefore
in the case of a Charter of Feoffment, if all the witnesses to the Deed be dead
(as no man can keep his witnesses alive, and time wears all things) then
violent presumption, which stands for a truth, is continual, and quiet
possession; for ex d uturnitate temporis omnia praesumantur solenmiter esse
acta, Glanvill, for by long continuance of time all things are presumed to be
solemnly acted, Coke com. f. 6. b. And thereupon Bracton gives the rule,
Longum tempus and longus usus, quiexcedit memoriam hominum sufficit pro jure.
Long possession, and long occupation, which does exceed the memory of man,
suffices for a right, l. 4. f. 230. But what measure of time makes such a
right, by which a Fee-simple may be attainted diverse have differed in
opinions, some judging the same to be according to the computation of years
from the time of King Henry the first, to the Statute of Merton, which
amounts to seventy six years, and others have limited it to an hundred
years, which according to the civil law is longissimum vitae hominum tempus,
the longest time of the life of men, but the true measure of it according to
Mr. Littleton, is, where things have been used so long as the memory of man
cannot remember the contrary, that is, either by the knowledge, and memory of
proof, or by record, or sufficient matter in writing, so as if there be any
sufficient proof of record or writing to the contrary, albeit it exceeds the
memory, or knowledge of any man living, yet is it within the memory of man,
Coke com. 115. a.

And as by the course of nature, time is the measure, and consumer of all
things.

Nullaque res, majus tempore rebor habet,
There nothing is which has more strength then time.
So does Art and Law imitate nature, which gives unto it such power and
authority, as to change, to raise, to alter, and to establish titles, wherein
the Civil, and the common Law do square, for by the civil Law there is
required a just title bona fides, and continual possession, to make a title of
prescription, but the common Law only requires, continual possession, and
that naturalis possessio ad praescriptionem sufficit, natural possession
suffices for a prescription. As if a man prescribe to have a rent, and
likewise to distraine for the same, it cannot be avoided by pleading, that the
rent has always been paid by coertion, or that it began by wrong, Coke com.
114. a. So Jeptha pleaded prescription against the Ammonites, these Lands,
says he, have we possessed these 700. years.

And the reason why this long usage and prescription was brought in to be of
the force and strength to make a right, and a Law, was, that thereby there
might be certainty of titles, and a peaceable possession without contradiction,
and as a Civilian says, ut sit finis litium, that there might be an end of
suits, and therefore were the Statutes of limitation made, within which the
demandant that brings the action must prove himself, or some of his
Ancestors to be seized, and in ancient time the limitation in a Writ of right
was from the time of H. 1. after that by the Statute of Merton the limitation
was from the time of Henry the second, and by the Statute of Westminster the
first, the limitation was from the time of Richard the first, but because that
limitation of the writ of right was for so long time passed, the limitation of
a writ of right was changed by the Statute of 32. H. 8. and reduced to
threescore years next before the Test of the Writ, and so of other actions,
Coke com. f. 115. a. vide ibidem plura. And afterward another Act was made,
21. Jacob. that for the avoiding of suits, all writs of Formedon in Descender,
Formedon in Remainder, and Formedon in Reverter for any Manors, etc. shall be
sued and taken within twenty years, and that after the twenty years expired
none such, or any of their heirs shall have any such writ, and that no person
that has right or title of entry into any Manors, etc. shall thereunto enter
but within twenty years, vide ibidem, cap. 6. plura

But it is to be observed that time of limitation is twofold, first in writs
that is by diverse acts of Parliament, the second is to make a title of
inheritance, and that is as has been said, to plead a prescription, de
tempore cujus contrarium memoria hominum non existit, Coke com. f. 14. and 15.
which is by the common Law.

And this also accords with the rule of Bracton, Longa possessio sicut jus
parit jus possidendi, and tollit actionem a vero domino, l. 2. f. 52. Long
possession, as right begets a right, and takes away an action from the true
Lord and owner.

And so in ancient times, if the disseisor had been long in possession, the
Disseisee could not have entered upon him, neither could the Disseisee have
entered upon the Feoffee of the Disseisor, if he had continued a year and a day
in quiet possession, and though the Law be now changed, yet at this day the
Disseisor dying seized, being an act in Law, barreth the disseisee of his
entrance upon the heir, and for that many advantages follow the possession and
tenant, the law takes away the entry of him that would not enter upon the
Ancestor, who is presumed to know his title, and drives him to his Action
against the heir that may be ignorant thereof, Coke com. f. 237. b.

And for the above said reason the law yields diverse utilities and
advantages to the possessor, for it is better to be a possessor, then to
complain of others who are possessors, because it imposes the burden of
proving on the Plaintiff, so as if he can prove nothing, he which possesses
shall be acquitted, neither can possession be avoided but by possession, Ployd.
137, b. As if I make a lease for years of the lands of my wife and die, the
lease is not void before entry made by the wife, for possession must be avoided
by possession, and such possession must be gained by entry.

But if my father die, and his land descend to me, a Lease for years made
before my entry is good, because I have possession in law, and none has
possession in deed, but if a stranger abate, a lease made by me after is void,
for the stranger has possession indeed before my entry upon him, Ployd ibid.

If an Executor bring an Action of trespass for goods taken out of his
possession, it is not needful to show the Testament, but if he not ever was
possessed of them, but does demand the thing, then he ought to have shown the
testament, Ployd. f. 46. a.

And regularly it holds true, that when the naked right of Land is released
to one that has jus possessionis, and the other by a mean title recovereth
the land from him, the right in possession shall draw the naked right with it,
and shall not leave a right in him to whom the release is made, as if the heir
of the disseisor being in by descent is disseised by A. and the disseisee
release to A. now has A. the mere right to the land, but if the heir of the
disseisor enter into the Land, and regaineth possession, that shall draw with
it the mere right to the land, and shall not regaine the possession only, and
leave the mere right in A. but the recontinuance of the possession, the mere
right is therewith vested in the heir of the disseisor, Coke com. 266. a.

If a woman possessed of a term for years take an husband and the wife dies,
though during the life of the wife, the term was not divested out of the wife,
yet by her death it is vested in the husband, and it is given to him by Act in
law, because it is a thing in possession and not in Action, Pl f. 192. b.

In pari causa possessor potior haberi debet. Reg. I. C.

In aequali jure ^elior est conditio possidentis Coke l. 4. f. 90. a As the
Lord who is allowed but three Chaplains, retains six by his letters
testimonial at one and the same time, and all the six are prefe^red to six
several plurallities, the three which are first promoted are warranted by the
statutes, and yet the retainer was not according to the statute, for in aequali
jure melior est conditio possidentis, In equal right better is the condition
of him who is in possession, ibidem.

If a man purchases several lands at one time which are holden of several
Lords by Knights service and dies, the Lord who first seiseth the ward shall
have him, because they are in aequali jure, and there is no priority between
them, which if there were, the elder Lord shall have him, Perk. f. 6.

If ten Manors be conveyed to two several persons by one deed, which of them
happens to get the Deed first may detain it, Two Attorneys are retained
conjunctim and divisim, jointly and severally, the plea of him that first
pleads shall stand, because they are in aequali jure to plead.

If there be two joynt-tenants, and one of them takes all the profits of the
land, or all the rent, the other has no remedy, Coke l. 2. f. 68. a. So the
release of all Actions personal by one, barreth the other, but otherwise it is
if the personalty be mixed with the realty: and if there be two joynt-tenants
Lords, and the tenant holds by Knights service, and the tenant dies his
heir within age, and one Lord seiseth the Ward, and the other distraineth for
the services, he that first seiseth or distraineth shall bind the other. And if
an Action of wast be brought by two joynt-tenants, the release of one shall bar
the other, as it is holden, 9. H. 5. f. 15. by the Court, for in wast the
personalty is the principal; and though one joynt-tenant cannot prejudice the
other in regard of the matter of inheritance or frank tenement, yet in regard
of the profits of the frank-tenement they may, vide ib. plura.

If husband and wife purchase socage lands to them and their heirs of their
bodies, and they having issue within fourteen years of age do die, in this
case if the grandmother of the part of the mother of the issue, first seize the
Ward, she shall have the Wardship, and not the grandfather of the part of the
father of the issue, 8. Eliz. 296. b. because they are in aequali jure, and
where the right is equal the condition of the possessor is the better. To
which obiter may be annexed the sage judgment of Augustus, who after the
civil wars, being molested with the complaints of diverse who demanded many
places of ambiguous right, from the possessors, because they severally were
given by the Senate, Pompey, Caesar, Lepidus, or Augustus to the Soldiers,
gave sentence for the possessors.

Duo non possunt unam rem in solido possidere, R g. I. C. Vlpiamus, and Coke
com. f. 368. a. Two cannot possess one and the same thing fully and wholly, for
dominion had its beginning from possession, and as there cannot be two Lords
and Masters of one and the same thing fully and wholly, so cannot two fully and
wholly possess one and the same thing.

As if A. of B. be seized of a Mese, and F. of G. that has no right to enter
into the same Mese claiming the said Mese to hold to him and his heirs,
enters into the said Mese, but A. of B. is continually abiding in the same
Mese. In this case the possession of the frank-tenement shall always be
adjudged in A. of B. and not in F. of G. because where two be in one house or
other tenements, and the one claims by one title, and the other by another
title, the law shall judge him in possession that right has, for two cannot
possess one and the same thing fully and wholly. But if a man has issue two
daughters, Bastard eigne and mulier puisne, and dies seized, and they both
enter generally, the sole possession shall not be adjudged only in the puisne,
because they claim by one and the same title. Coke ibidem.

Yet though the possession of one thing cannot be fully and wholly but in one,
yet the property may be in two, as Ployd. f. 5. 24. Manwood said, it is not
strange in our law that two should have a several interest in one and the same
term, and two properties in it, for if lessee for years grant over his term
to another by deed indented rendting rent, and that for default of payment,
that he shall enter and retain till the grantee has paid to him the rent, if
he do enter for default of payment and retain, he has one property and the
grantee also has another property, for his interest is not gone; but has a
property tell quel, such as it is, and may have all the property upon payment of
the arreares.

So if one has a term for years, and is bound in a recognisance or statute
staple, and execution for non pay-ment is sued against him, and the term is
extended, and a certain annual value delivered to the Connusee, as it well
may be (for it may be sold outright, or extended to an annual value) there
the connusee has one property for the payment of his debt, and the lessee
another property, and upon the payment of the debt shall have the term again.

A woman made a lease for years of mills in Kent, with exception that she
should have the profits, and there was a great debate, whether the exception
were good or no, because the profits of the mills was all the benefit, and in
effect the mills themselves, but at the last the exception was judged good in
law, and that the woman should have the profits. There if she enter to have
the profits she has one property, and the lessee another property, and it is
incertaine how many years the property of the woman will continue. So if one
Lease sheep for a time to manure his land, or pawn his dog, as the case was in
5. H. 7. The owner has some property, and he to whom the Sheep is leased or
the dog pawned, another, Ployd. ibid.

Possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem, The
possession of the brother of a fee simple makes the sister to be heir,
Littleton. Coke com. f. 14. b. As if one has issue a son and a daughter by one
venture, and a son by another venture, and dies seized of Lands in fee-simple,
and the eldest son enters into the land, and dies without issue, the Sister
shall have the land, and not the younger son, though the younger son be heir
to the father, for the possession of the brother of the fee-simple makes the
sister to be heir, but the brother must be in Actual possession, and there
must be pedis positio, a corporal fixing of his foot, and entry upon the land;
and there must be some Act done to make her heir, for she is but haeres factus
by the actual possession of her brother, for the younger son is, haeres natus
to the father, and if the eldest son had died before he had taken actual
possession, the younger son might have entered and had the land as heir to the
father, but by the possession of the brother, she being of the whole blood, is
made heir.

But in dignities where no possession can be had, but such as descends to a
man and his heirs, as in Dukes, Earls, Barons, etc. there can be no
possession of the brother to make the sister inherit, but the younger brother
being heir to the father shall inherit the dignity inherent to the blood as
heir to him was first created noble, Coke ibid.

And as Ploydon says, there is a great difference between lands in fee-simple
and lands tailed, in regard of possession, for the possession of a brother of
an estate tail as heir to his father, shall not make the sister to be heir,
but it shall descend to the younger son of the half venture, for he ought to
have it, per formam doni, Ployd. f. 57. a.

And if a Bastard eigne abare in fee-simple land after the death of the father,
and dies seized without interruption, and his issue enter, he shall hold it,
and the right of the mulier puisne and his heirs, are bound for ever, Ployd.
ibidem.

So if a woman seized in fee, consent to a ravishor, and the daughter which is
proxima de sanguine next of blood does enter, there the son after borne shall
not take away the title and possession of the daughter. So where a remainder is
appointed in fee to the right heirs of I. S. who dies having a daughter which
enters after the death of tenant for life, there the son after borne shall not
recover the lands before vested in the daughter as purchased; for thereit is a
fee simple to which the son after born has no right, for the lands were in
none of his Ancestors before.

But where the estate is an estate tail, the son ought to have it per formam
doni: As if a feme which suffers a recovery by covin, contrary to the Statute
of 11. H. 7. is defeated by entry of the daughter tenant in tail, the son
borne may enter and oust the daughter, for that the title in tail is in him,
because the statute says, he shall enjoy it according to the title, which is
in tail, and therein the common proverb is verified, One shall beat the bush,
and the other have the bird. As if a man has land by descent of the part of
the mother, and makes a feoffment on condition, and dies without issue, and
the heir of the part of the father enters, the heir of the part of the
mother may oust him, Ployd. 56. b. and 57. a. In Wimbish case, quod vide.

Infinitum injure reprebatur, Coke l. 6. f. 45. What is infinite is reproved
and rejected in law. As if a man have a debt by simple contract, and takes an
obligation for the same debt or any part of it, the contract is determined, 3.
H. 4. 17. 11. H. 4. 9. and 9. E. 4. 50. 51. So if a man have a debt upon an
obligation, and by course of law has a judgment upon it, the contract by
specialty is changed into a thing of record, for if he that recovereth should
have a new Action or a new judgment, he may have infinite Actions and infinite
judgments, to the perpetual charge and vexation of the defendant, and he
shall not have a new Action or a new judgment, for what is infinite is
rejected in law. So upon every judgment the defendant shall be amerced, and if
he be a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or Baron, he shall be amerced 100 l.
and so the defendant should be infinitely amerced upon an obligation, which
shall be mischievous, Ibid.

And lib. 7. f. 45. b. It was resolved in the Court of Wards, by the greater
part, that a Bill of reviver upon a bill of reviver shall not be admitted, by
reason of the infiniteness, which is rejected in law.

And lib. 8. f. 16. b. When the first office is found against the King, and the
melius inquirendum also, the King is bound nor to have any melius inquirendum
for the same matter, because there should be no end of it, and that such writs
might issue infinitely, and infinity is condemned in law.

Nihil tam conveniens naturali aequitati quam voluntatem domini volentis suam
rem in aliam transfer ratam haberi, Bracton f. 18. God has given to man all
the land, terram dedit filiis bominum, So men by Gods endowment are made Lords
of the land, and what property a man has in lands by law, by the law of God
also he has dominion of it, and therefore every man who is the lawful owner
of land, may grant to what person, in what manner, and for what time it
pleases him, for if the land be subject to man, then is it subject to his
will, for the will comes from the mind, which is the principal part of man,
because it directs the body and all things he has, and if his land be
subject to his will this his will is a sufficient consideration, by which his
land may pass as his will is, and there is no greater consideration then the
will, Ployd. f. 308. b. And nothing is more agreeable to natural equity then
to ratify the will of the Lord, willing to transferr his substance and estate
over to another.

And therefore at the common law the intention and will of the parties was the
direction of uses, for they were only determinable and to be adjudged by the
Chancellor, which is the Court of conscience and equity, and there is nothing
more agreeable to equity, then that the will of the Lord or owner, and the
meaning of the parties should direct the uses, 31. H. 16. Tit. subpaena Fitz.
23. A man being ceste que use and having one sole daughter, declared his intent
and meaning to the Feoffees, that after his decease, his daughter should have
his land, and for it question was made in the Chancery, whether the limitation
of that use made to the daughter might be revoked, and in reasoning of that
case Fortescue held opinion, that if ceste que use had issue a daughter, and
being sick declared his intention to his feoffee, that his daughter shall have
his land after his decease, and after he recovered his health, he had issue a
son, now says he it is good conscience the son should have the Subpaena
because he is heir, for conscientia dicitur a conset scio and quasi simul
scire cum Deo, that is to know the will of God so near as reason will, and the
intention of the parties, is to direct the uses according to a conscionable and
benign construction, Coke l. 1. f. 100. a. b. vide ibidem plura.

As a gift in tail may be made upon condition, that tenant in tail may alien
for the profits of his issue and good, and he may alien, notwithstanding the
Statute of W. 2. because in that case voluntas donatoris observatur, The will
of the Donor is observed. Coke com. 224. b. If Lands be given to B. and his
heirs, Habendum to him and the heirs of his body, or if given to him and the
heirs of his body, Habendum to him and his heirs, he has estate tail, and a
fee expectant, but if Lands be given to B. and his heirs; if B. have heirs
of his body, and if he die without heirs of his body, that it shall revert to
the Donor, it is an estate tail, and the reversion in the Donor, for voluntas
donatoris in charta doni sui manifest expressa est observanda, The will of the
Donor manifestly expressed in the Charter of the gift is to be observed, Coke
com. f. 21. a.

If a common person does without consideration give to I. S. his goods
indefinitely, all his goods do pass, 21. E. 4. 25. Alba of Waltams case, by
Brown and Genny.

If the King do grant to one lands ex mero motu and though his Highness does
rehearse some consideration in the patent of his grant which is not true, as if
the consideration be, that whereas the Grantee has done his Majesty good
service on the Sea or beyond the Sea, or in his Wars, though the consideration
be merely supposed, and therefore no good consideration in Law, yet the words
ex mero motu do make the Grant good, 26, H. 8. 1. by Fitz.

And if a common person do by deed enrolled enfeoff the King without any
consideration, the King shall be seized to his own use, as having such
prerogative in his person, that he shall not be seized to the use of any other,
28. H. 8. 7. Dier, Bokenghams case by Knightley.

Cok l. 2. f. 71. b. It is not unjust but equal, that the bargain or shall
annex such a condition to the State of the land as he pleases, for cujus est
dare ejus est disponere, he that has power to give has power to dispose,
ibidem.

Coke l. 7. f. 6. Calvin's case. The King by his letters patents, or the
Parliament by their votes may grant denizations without limitations or
restraint, or else limited denizations, as to an alien and the heirs males of
his body, 9. E. 4. f. 7. in Bagots case, or to an alien for term of life, as
to John Fenell, 11. H. 6. 3. Or else upon condition, whereof I have seen
diverse presidents, for who has power to give has power to dispose, ibid.

Modus dat domationi, Fleta, Ployd. f. 25. a. The manor of the gift which the
donor limiteth, makes a law to the donee, for though in the preamble of the
Act of W. 2. there be but three estates limited, to wit, especial tail,
franke-marriage, and general tail, yet may the donor make other tails by his
limitation, for his will is a law, as to the tail, and so heirs males of the
body of the donee, and tail to the heirs females of the body of the Donee,
and all other tails are within the purview of the Act, for the will of the
donor is the effect of the stature, and from it, it follows, that the
alienation of the donee shall not bind the issues nor the donor. And the second
wife shall not be endowed, neither can the donee charge the land with a
rentcharge or other encumbrance; neither shall the land be forfeited for
felony: and all these are included in the first purview to wit, that the will
of the donor shall be observed and are but consequences, and explanations of
the first purview, vide ibidem plura.

But if a gift be repugnant or contrary to law, Exception.
as a gift made upon a condition unlawful or impossible, it is void and of no
effect, to gain any thing by the making of it in our law. As if the condition
be to kill a man, Ployd. f. 34. b. Or if an obligation be made to save one
harmeless for killing a man, Ibid. f 64. b. these conditions are void.

So a feoffment made, that the feoffee shall not alien the land, is void,
because it is contrary to law, for by the law tenant in fee-simple has power
to alien to any man, for if such a condition should be good, then the condition
should oust him of all the power that the law has given him, which is contrary
to reason, Littleton.

The like law is upon a devise in fee, upon condition that the devisee shall
not alien, the condition is void: And so it is of a grant, release, or
confirmation, or any other conveyance, whereby a fee-simple does pass, for it
is absurd and repugnant to reason, that he that has no possibility to have the
land revert to him, should restrain his feoffee in fee-simple of all his power
to alien. And so it is if a man be possessed of a lease for years, or of an
horse, or of any other Chattells real or personal, or give, or sell his whole
interest or property therein, upon condition that the Donee or Vendee shall not
alien the same, the same is void, because his whole interest and property is
out of him, so as he has no possibility of a reverter, and it is against
trade and traffic, and bargaining and contracting between man and man, and
against reason that he should oust him of all power given him, for regulariter
non valei pactum de re mea non alienda, a contract or condition that I shall
not alien that which is my own, does not hold, and suiquum est liberis
hominibus non esse liberam rerum suarum alienationem, it is unjust that freemen
should not have liberty to alien their own estates. But these are to be
understood of conditions annexed to the grant or sale it self, in respect of
the repugnancy, and not to any other collateral thing, Coke com. f. 223. a.

But before the statute of quia emptores terrarum, A man might have made a
feoffment in fee, and added further, that if he and his heirs did alien
without license, that he should pay a fine, it had been good then, and then
the Lord also might have restrained the alienation of the tenant by condition,
because the Lord had a possibility of reverter, and so it is in the Kings case
at this day, because he may reserve a tenure to himself.

If A. be seized of black Acre in fee, and B. enfeoffeth him of white Acre,
upon condition that A. shall not alien black Acre, the condition is good, for
the condition is annexed to other land, and ousteth not the feoffee of his
power to alien the land whereof the feoffment is made, and so no repugnancy to
the State passed by the feoffment, and so it is of gifts or sales of Chattels,
realls, or personalls, Coke ibidem.

But if a feoffment be made upon condition, that the feoffee shall not infeoff
I. S. etc. This is good, for he does not restrain the feoffee of all his power,
and in this case if the feoffee infeoff, I. N. of intent and purpose that he
shall infeoff I. S. some hold that this is a breach of the condition, for,
Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri ex directo prohibetur and per obliquum, for
when any thing is forbidden to be done directly, it is also forbidden to be
done collaterally or obliquely, Coke ibidem b.

And a gift in tail that is made upon condition, that the donee nor his heirs
shall not alien in fee in tail, or for term of another life, is good to all
those alienations which amount to any discontinuance of the estate tail, or is
against the statute of W. 2. but as to a recovery the condition is void, for
that is no discontinuance, nor against the said statute. Neither is a
collateral warranty or lineall with assets in respect of the recompense
restrained by the said statute, no more then a common recovery is, in respect
of the intended recompense, Ibidem.

If a man make a feoffment to Baron and feme in fee, upon condition they shall
not alien, this is good to restrain them by feoffment or alienation by deed,
because it is tortious, but to restrain their alienation by fine, is
repugnant, void, because lawful, ibidem.

Voluntas reputabitur pro facto Bract. the will shall be esteemed for the deed.

If no place be limited where money is to be paid in the condition of a Bond,
and the Obligor at or after the day of payment happen in the company of the
obligee, and offers to tender him the money, and the other shifteth away to
prevent him, it seems in this case he shall be excused, because he has done
his endeavor, 8. E. 4. 1. by Catesby.

One was indicted quod burglariter fregit and intravit ecclesiam nocte ad
depraedandum bona parochianorum in eadem existentia, and good, though he took
nothing away, for his will was to have taken, Dier. f. 99 and 58.

A man gives a juror money to embrace him, though the verdict pass against
him, he shall be punished for this, 28. H. 6. 12.

A man carries his sick father into a croft, whereby he dies, it is felony.
An Harlot hid her child with leaves in a thicket, and a Kite strikes it and
kills it, it is felony.

A Bull, Bear, or Dog, accustomed to do hurt, of which the master and owner
well knowing, does not tie him up but suffers him to go at large, and being
so at large he kills a man, this is held by Fitzherbert to be felony in the
owner of the Beast, for thereby the owner seems to have a will to kill vide
Wilson, office of Coroner f. 11.

And by the civil law, if a man be bitten of another man's dog, the owner of
the dog is chargeable unto him that is hurt, because he did not tie up his dog,
and musle him, Fulb. Pand. f. 76. For it is a rule in the civil law,
voluntatem pro facto reputari, A wife after the death of her husband, being a
copyholder came into the Court, and challenged her right of Frank-bank, and
prayed to be admitted, but the steward refused to admit her, yet was it
adjudged an admittance in law. So if a tenant alien and the feoffee tendreth
his services and gives a fine, and the Lord refuses, the Lord shall be
compelled to avow upon him, and so continual claim amounts to an entry,
Huttons rep. f. 18.

And therefore the denial to do any thing is a breach of covenant, as if a
man be bound to do an act when I request him, and I do request him, and he
will not do it, he has forfeited his band, 15. E. 4. 21. 34. H. 8. 23.

Exitus plerumque in maleficiis spectatur, non voluntas, the act, and not the
will, in evil facts is respected and considered, though in ancient times, the
will was so material in felonious attempts, that it was taken for the fact it
self, and so adjudged, as one intending the death of another man, wounds him
so grievously that he leaves him for dead, and afterward flies, and the man
wounded revived, it was then adjudged to be felony, in so much as his will
appeared to have killed him, 1. E. 3. with which Bractons saying accords, in
maleficiis spectatur voluntas and non exitus, but this law is not now in force,
for he must be dead indeed before it be adjudged felony, and though the will be
wanting the evil deed is always censured for felony.

As if I hurt another, only with an intention to beat him and he dies, it is
felony. So upon the malicious words of a woman two men fought, and the one
killed the other, the woman in this case was arraigned for the death of the
slain man.

Three men go together to diffame one, and one of them kills a man, the
other two are principalls, though they had no such will and intention.

Non efficit conatus, nisi sequatur effectus, and non efficit affectus nisi
sequatur effectus, Coke l. 11. f. 98. b. A conation and an affection hurts
not, unless the Act and effect ensue.

As those who have Offices of trust and confidences, shall not forfeit them by
conations and intentions to do Acts, although they declare them by express
words, unless the Act it self ensue.

As if one who has the custody of a Park, shall say that he will kill the
game in his custody, or that he will cut down the trees in the Park, yet does
he neither kill the game, or cut down the trees, that is no forfeiture, and
sic de similibus, for in all such cases there ought to be such a fact or a
negligence which amounts to as much, to wit, as to the destruction of the
game.

If a Bishop, Archdeacon, or Parson, etc, abateth all the trees, it is a good
cause of deprivation, 9. E. 4. 34. If a Prior make dilapidation, it is a good
cause to deprive him, 29. E. 3. 16. 20. H. 6. 36. But if it be but a conation
or enterprise without any Act done, in none of these cases, it is cause of
deprivation, for in these cases voluntas non reputabitur pro facto, the will
shall not be reputed for the deed.

So a conation or an enterprise cannot be the cause of the disfranchisement of
a Citizen or Burgess, for he may repent before the execution of it, and then
no prejudice will ensue, but the matter which shall be the cause of a
disfranchisement must be an Act or a deed against the trust and duty of his
freedom, or to the prejudice of the public good of the City or Borough, vide
ibidem plura, in James Baggs case.

Affectus punitur licet non sequatur effectus, Coke l. 9. f. 56. 57. in the
Poulters case, The affection or will to do a thing is punished, though the
effect follows not.

Though a Writ of conspiracy does not lie, unless that the party be indicted,
and legitimo modo acquietatus, for so are the words of the writ, yet false
confederacy among diverse persons shall be punished, though that nothing was
put in ure, as 27. Ass. Pl. 44. Two were indicted of confederacy, either of them
to maintain the other, though the matter was true or false, and though nothing
was supposed to be put in ure, yet the parties were put to answer to it, for
that such a thing is forbidden by the law.

And in the next Article of the same book, enquiry shall be made of
conspirators and confederators, which confederate among themselves etc. falsely
to endite and acquit, and of the manner of their alliance, and between whom,
which proves that confederation to endite, and acquit, is punishable by the
law though that nothing was executed. And it is holden 19. R. 2. title brief
726. A man shall have a writ of confederacy, though as they do nothing but
confederate together, and shall recover damages and may be indicted for it also.
Also the usual commission of Oyer and Terminer gives power to the
Commissioners, to enquire de omnibus coadunationibu^, confederationibus, and
falsis alligantiis and coadunatio is an uniting them together, confederation is
a combination between them, and falsa alligantia is a false alliance one with
another by obligation or promise, to execute any unlawful Act, which the law
punishes before any fact is executed, to the end, to prevent the unlawful
act, quia quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur and illud per quod pervenitur
ad illud for when any thing is forbidden, that also is forbidden, by which one
may come to that, and therefore, Hill. 37. H. 8. in the Star Chamber a Priest
was branded with an P. and A. in the forehead, and put upon the Pillory, with a
paper written, for false accusation, vide ibidem plu^a.

Volenti neque injuriam neque vim fieri, Reg. I. C.

Volenti non fit injuria. f. 501. No injury can be done to a willing man.

If a Parson Emparsonee present another by it, he has disappropriated the
advowson, and makes it presentable by his own Act, and therefore no injury.

A man shoots, giving warning to all, and one will go to the mark and is
hurt, he is without remedy, 18. E. 4. 8.

If I am bound to make an house, if you prohibit me to come upon the land, I
may plead this bar, 19. E. 4. 2.

If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the King being Lord the mesne holds
of the King in capite, and the tenant holds of him in Socage: if the tenant
get a release of the mean, or forejudge the mean, he shall now hold in
capite, for volenti non fit injuria, and it shall be injurious to the King, if
he should lose his tenure in capite and should have in place of it a tenure in
Socage, Dav. 12. P. f. 67. a.

If I exchange land with one has a bad title, which is known to me, and if I
know of a fraudulent conveyance, and buy the Lands, in both those cases the
party shall have remedy, though they be willing to the wrong.

Omne actum ab agentis intention est judicandum, Reg. I. C. and Coke com. f.
49. Affectio tua nomen imponit operi tuo, every act is to be judged from the
intention of the agent, and every affection or intention gives the name to thy
work.

As if a man lets lands etc. for term of years, the remainder over to
another for life in tail, or in fee, if the termor enter before Livery of
Seisin made to him, then the frank-tenement and the reversion is in the Lessor,
but if the Lessor and the Lessee come upon the ground of purpose, for the
lessor to make, or the lessee to take livery, the entry vesteth no actual
possession in him till livery be made, because the purpose and intention gives
the name to the work, and therefore if it be agreed between the disseisor and
the disseisee, that the disseisee shall release all his right upon the land,
this is a good release, and the entry of the disseisee being for this purpose
did not avoid the disseisin, for his intent in this case did guide his entry to
a special purpose, Val. 19. Eliz. l. B. Coke ibidem.

The intention and agreement of the minds of the parties is the only thing
that the law respects in contracts, and such words as bewray the assent of
the parties, and have substance in them, are sufficient, Ployd. f. 141. As if
one make an obligation, and the obligation is endorsed, that the obligee does
will and grant, that if the obligor shall stand to the arbitrament, ordination,
and judgment of A. and B. that then the obligation, shall be void, there an
exception was taken to the condition, for that the words are the words of the
obligee, and not of the obligor, but it was holden by the better opinion, that
the condition was good, for there is sufficient substance of a condition, and
the intent of the parties appears, and yet the words are not usual for
conditions, for the words of the condition are the words of the obligors, 21.
H. 6. f. 55.

So a grant of an annuity to one, pro consilio impendendo, is a grant
conditional, for if he will not give counsel, the annuity shall cease, and
yet there is not one word of a condition. So T. 9. E. 4. f. 19. and. 22. where
debate was for tithes between a Prior and another, and the composition
between them was, that the Prior should have the tithes without challenge or
contradiction of the other, and the Prior granted to the other forty shillings
yearly, and by the better opinion, the grant shall enure conditionally, so as if
the other disturb the Prior in receiving his tithes, the forty shillings shall
cease.

If one make a Lease for years by deed, and by the same deed covenanteth that
the Lessee shall nor be impeached of wast, that word Covenant made at the same
time, amounts to as much as if he had said Habendum: for years without
impeachment of wast, P. 21. H. 6. f. 7.

I. S. did bind himself in an obligation of twenty pound, and the obligation
was Noverint universi per presents me, I. S. teneri and obligari W. B. in
twenty pound, solvendum eidem I. etc. and yet the obligation good, and the
Court held that the Count shall be made solvendum to the Plaintiff, for the
interest of the parties there appears, and the certainty of the bond before,
shall not be taken away by the Solvendum after, M. 4. E. 4. f. 23.

So if one have a remainder of land in him, and he grants it to another, by
the name of a reversion of land, that shall be a good grant, for there the
certainty of the land appears, and then notwithstanding the mis-terming of
the thing, the law regards the intention of the parties, and does judge
according to it. So if I be bound to pay you at the feast of Saint Michael
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1555. 20 s. And at the same feast of
Saint Michael then next ensuing other 20 s. The law will adjudge the same feast
to have the meaning of such or the like feast, for it cannot be the same feast,
if it come after it, so the law will take one word for another to supply the
intent of the parties, vide ibid. Ployd. 141 b. Brownings case.

Carta non est nisi vestimentum donationis, Bract. and the intent directs
gifts rather then the words, Ployd. 160. b. As if a receivor be bound in an
obligation to his master to pay to him omnia recepta and recipienda, all things
received and to be received in his office, that by it he is not bound to pay
all that he might receive, but only that which he shall receive indeed, and so
his intent shall rather be taken then the word, H. 41. E. 3. f. 6.

So where a man makes a Lease of an house, so as the lessee may make his
profit of the houses within, he cannot pull down the houses or make wast of
them, for the intent was not such, although the words seem otherwise, T. 9. E.
4. f. 22. And it was said, to follow the words was summum jus, and that Judges
ought not to do it, but to follow the intent rather, and Ployd. f. 161. b.
says, that such was the opinion of Bradwell in 14. H. 8. f. 22. That contracts
shall be as it is concluded and agreed between the parties, and as their
intents may be taken, and that cavillation with words contrary to the simple
intent, as Tully says in his Offices is calumnia quaedam and ninis callida and
malitiosa Juris interpretatio, ex quo illud, summum jus summa injuria, a kind
of a calumny and malicious interpretation of the law, from whence that saying
proceeded, the rigor of right is the extremity of injury.

As he puts the example of one had made a truce for 130. days with his
enemy, and in the night he plundered and depopulated his possessions, because
he said the truce was for days, and not for the nights, which Cicero
accounts mere injury and injustice, and admonishes men to avoid the like
interpretation of the law, and to observe the intent of the words, and
certainly words are but testimonialls of the intent, and therefore Ployd. f.
107. b. It is said, it is the offices of Judges to take and expound the words,
as the common people do use them, to express their intent according to their
intent: As a Lease was made for life, and that after his decease the tenements
redibunt to a stranger, it shall be taken as a remanebunt because to that
purpose it was there used, and therefore by 18. E. 3. f. 28. It shall be taken
by way of remainder. So a lease for life, the reversion to a stranger shall be
taken as a remainder, for the reason abovesaid, 30. M. 1. ante 157. vide ibidem
plura, in Hills case.

And so Ployd. f. 291. a. Where a covenant cannot be performed according to the
words, it shall be performed according to the intent as near as may be, as in
the case of Littleton, where a man makes a feoffment upon condition, that the
feoffee shall make an estate in special tail to the Feoffor, and his wife,
and the heirs of their bodies, if the Baron dies before the estate made, the
estate shall be made as near to the condition as may be, to wit, to the feme
for life, without impeachment of wast, the remainder to the issues in tail,
according to the first limitation, and if the feme be dead, then the feoffee
ought to give the lands to the issues and the heirs of the body of his father
and his mother engendered.

If the words be performed, and not the intent, the agreement is not performed,
Ployd. f. 291. b. according to the rule of the civil law, leges non ex verbis
sed ex mente sunt intelligendae, laws are not to be understood and construed
by the words, but by sense and meaning of the parties, as where the Defendant
was obliged upon condition, that if his feoffees of his Manor of W. should
grant to the Plaintiff an annual rent of forty shillings out of the said
Manor, that then etc. and he had three feoffees, and two of them granted to
the Plaintiff the rent: There the words of the condition were performed, for
the feoffees had granted the rent, and yet he had not performed the condition,
for all the Justices there held, that all the feoffees ought to have granted
the rent, and so it should be sure, for there the third might have the land by
survivor, and he might avoid the rent, and also more then two parts of the
Manor were not charged with the rent, and so the intent is not performed
though the words be M. 22. H. 6. f. 10.

So if a man be bound to enfeoff me of the Manor of D. and he makes a
feoffment to another of parcel of it, and then enfeoffeth me of the Manor, he
has performed the words, but yet he has not performed the intent, which was,
that I should have had all the Manor as it then was, H. 3. H. 7. 4.

So a remainder was limited to B. Si ipse vellet in-habitare and residens esse,
if he would dwell and be resident on the land during the term, there it is
taken that if he was resident one week during the term, he had performed the
words of the condition but not the intent, for the intent was, that he should
be resident all the term, 4. E. 6. ante 23.

So an Abbot was Parson Emparsonee of a time etc. and he had annuity for the
time, of which no memory runs in right of the Parsonage, and he as Abbot
without naming himself Parson, brought a Writ of annuity, and counts upon a
prescription in him, and his predecessors Abbots, and the prescription
traversed and found for the Plaintiff, there every word of the Verdict is true,
and yet attaint lay against the Jury, because he brought the Writ in the name
of the Abbey and so claimed the annuity, whereas he was not seized by that
form, but as Parson, and for that he did not claim as Parson, they ought not
to have found the issue with him, and so the words of the Verdict and the
intent of the Verdict did not agree in one, M. 10. E. 4. f. 16. Ibidem, in
Chapmans case.

It is not requisite always that the agreement shall be performed according to
words, because the intent is performed, which is the principal point of the
agreement, Ployd. f. 295. a. b As if a man be bound to pay a lesser sum upon
a day certain, if I pay the sum before the day, the condition is performed,
H. 10. H. 7. 24. So if the condition be in a Mortgage, that I pay the money at
such a place, if I shall pay it at another place, and the Mortgage accept of
it, it is well enough, for the value is the effect.

So if a feoffment be made, upon condition, that if the feoffee do not pay the
Feoffor such a sum at such a day, that then the feoffor shall enter; If the
feoffee before the day make a feoffment over, and at the day does not pay the
sum, there the second feoffee at the day may tender and pay the sum, though
the agreement was no other but that the first feoffee shall pay the sum,
Litt. vide ib. plura.

If a man make a feoffment, on condition to enfeoff two in fee at such a time,
and before the time one dies, the feoffment ought to be made to the survivor
and his heirs only, for the intent which appears in the condition, Ployd.
f. 345. 4. H. 7. f. 127.

Every one who groundeth an Act with discretion, has an intention in the
inception, and neither begins any thing but to some end, and in the
progression has the same intent, and so in the consummation; so as the same
intention is the cause of every part, and therefore the intention is
principally respected in all humane acts, and especially in those which
concern the disposition of our estates, and in feoffments and grants: A
feoffment by deed, of a Manor with an advowson appendant, and no livery made,
the advowson passes not, yet an advowson may pass without livery, but the
intention and the meaning was, that the Manor and it should pass together,
Finch Nomot. 58.

A bargain and sale of Land, and a reversion by deed not enrolled, the
reversion passes not, though a deed without an inrolement may pass the
reversion, but it was meant they should pass together, if one disseise another
of two Acres in Dale, and the disseisee release to the Disseisor all his right
in all his Lands in Dale, and delivers the release as an escrow to be
delivered to the disseisor as his deed before the second of May, and before
that day the disseisor disseiseth him of another Acre in D. and then the
releafe is delivered unto him the second day of May, the right to the third
Acre shall not pass, because it was not his intent to release it, Ployd.

One reciting by his Deed, that whereas by prescription he has used to find a
Chaplain, because some controversy has grown of it, grants by the same
deed to do it, this determines not the prescription, for the intent of the
Deed reciting the prescription, was to confirm it, and not make a new grant.
21. H. 7. 6.

Though it be a general rule, that the words which the common people use to
express their intent, ought to be taken according to the intent, and not
according to the very definition, in Hills, and Granges case, f. 170. And that
generalis regula generaliter est intelligenda, yet this rule is principally to
be observed in cases of uses, which were only trusts, and confidences between
man and man, Coke l. 6. f. 64. vide ibidem plura, in Sir Moile Finches case.

And Coke l. 1. f. 100. Shelleys case, we find in diverse cases of our Books,
that the intention of parties is the direction of uses by a conscionable, and
benign construction; as if a man seized of Lands of the part of his mother,
makes a feoffment in fee, reserving a rent to him, and his heirs by the common
Law, the rent shall go to the heir of the part of the father, Lit. But if a
man be seized of lands of the part of the mother, and makes a Feoffment in fee
to the use of him and his Heirs, such use shall not go to the heir at the
common Law, but in regard the Land moved from the part of the mother, therefore
in equity, the use, which is nothing else but a trust, and confidence shall
also go to the heirs of the part of the mother, 5. E. 4. f. 4. And though
Littleton says, that a man in a Feoffment and grant shall not have a
Fee-simple without these words Heirs, yet if a man before the Statute of 27. H.
8. had bargained and sold his Land for money without these words heirs, the
bargainee had a Fee-simple, because at the common Law nothing passed from the
bargainer, but an use which is guided by the intention of the parties, which
was to convey Land wholly to the bargainee, for that the Law intends that the
bargainee paid the true value of the Land for it is in equity, and according to
the intent of the parties, the bargainee had a Fee-simple without these words
heirs, 27. H. 8. f. 5. Coke ibidem.

And as Ployd. f. 345. a. A fortiori, the intent, says he, shall be observed
in wills, where the words cannot be performed, for Testamentum est testatio
mentis, but that which is other then the intention, is not the testation of the
mind, and therefore as he says also, f. 54. b. It is the office of Judges to
marshall the words of wills, according to the intentions of the parties, for
the most part of them are made in extremity, and when there is no counsel of
Law ready, or present, and the testators themselves are not for the most part
learned in the Law, and are accounted inopes consilij, neither have they
knowledge to put words in good order, and therefore the ignorance, and
simplicity of those which make their wills, require a favorable interpretation
of the words of the will according to the intent.

As Lands were devised to one for life, the remainder for life, the remainder
Ecclesiae sancti Audreae in Holborne, and since the death of tenants for life,
the Parson of the said Church sued an ex gravi querela, and it was pleaded in
Judgment, that the remainder took no effect, because the Church was not a
Parson capable, and upon that was a demurrer; and adjudged, that the devise was
good, and that the Parson shall have execution, and yet the Parson was not
named in the devise, but was comprehended in it, Pas. 21. R. 2.

If a man devise the Manor of D. and had nothing in it at the time of making
the will, and that since he purchased it, it shall pass by the devise, for it
shall be taken, his intention was to purchase it, and if it should not pass,
the will should be void to all intents, Ployd. f. 344. a.

So if one devise Land to the wife of I. S. and I. S. dies, and she takes to
husband, another and after the devisor dies, she shall have the Land, and yet
she was not the wife of I. S., when the devisor dyed, nor shall not take it as
his wife, but the intent was that she that was the wife of I. S. at the time
of the making of the Will shall have it.

And if a man devise Lands to Alexander Nowell Deane of Paul's, and to the
Chapter there and their Successors, and Alexander Nowell dies, and a new Deane
is made, and then the devisor dies, the land shall vest in the new Deane and
Chapter, and yet it vesteth not according to the words, but according to the
intent, for the chief intent was to convey it unto the Deane, and the Chapter,
and their Successors for ever, and the singular person of Alexander Nowell was
not the principal cause, but by chance was one of the causes, Ployd. 344. b.

If one devise by will in writing, Land to one and his Heirs, and then in
another clause after, he devises out of that Land a rentcharge, to him and
his heirs, it shall be good to the one for the rent, and to the other for the
Land, and the rent in construction of Law shall be taken to be first devised,
although it be last in words, and so one part shall stand with the other, and
good sense shall be made, and the intent of the testator shall be observed in
both, Ployd. f. 541. contrary to the rule of the civil Law, ubi pugnantia
inter se in testamento jubentur, neutrum ratum est.

If in the Premises of a will one devises Lands to one in fee, and in the end
of the will he devises it to another in fee, the latter part shall confound
the former, because he had last such an intent, and as the last will shall
repeal the former will, by the same reason the last part of the will shall
repeal the former part of the will, which is contrary to it, ibidem vide
plura, in Paramors case.

Bendloes Rep. f. 209. B. Being sick sent for a Councellor, and desired him to
write his last will and testament of his Lands, and declared unto the
Counselor what he should write, who took paper and ink, and writ notes briefly
of his said will, and every legacy that he had then declared, and also the
names of the Executors, and went home to his house, and immediately with his own
hands did write the last will and testament of B. and when he had written it,
he came again to the house of the said B. with the said will to read it unto
the said B. but then the said B. was dead, and therefore the Counselor
delivered the said will to the Executor of B. who proved the same, and after
the wife of B. did enter into the tenements devised to her by the said will,
and the heir entered upon her, and upon the general issue, it was the clear
opinion of all the Justices, that it was a good will in writing, according to
the Statute of 32. H. 8. And as in Feoffments, Grants, Uses, and Wills, the
intent shall be observed, so every Statute ought to be taken according to the
intent of those that made them, where the words are doubtful, and not
uncertain, according to the rehearsal of the Statute, Ployd. f. 10. a. b.

As in 4. E. 4. there was an information in the Exchequer, that one shipped
certain sacks of Wool, and had not found sureties according to the Statute of
14, E. 3. C. ultimo, to wit, to bring plate of Silver of two marks for every
sack of Wool, and to take two marks of coin again for the bullion, and there
were two Statutes alleged to bar the said finding of sureties, to wit, 36. E.
3. C. 11. Where it is recited, that the Commons of the Realm had granted to
the King a great subsidy of every sack of Wool for three years, in
consideration of which the King by the same Statute granted, that after three
years nothing shall be taken of the Commons, but only the ancient custom of
half a mark of every sack, etc. and that also by the Statute of 45. E. 3. c.
4. It was established, that no imposition, or charge shall be put on Woolls,
other then the custom and subsidy granted to the King without assent of
Parliament, and if any were, it should be repealed, and holden for nothing, but
it was adjudged that the two last Statutes were not to discharge the bullion,
but only the great subsidies, and great charges upon Wools after the three
years, and the intents of the makers of the two last Statutes were not to
discharge the bullion, for all things within the general words shall not be
taken as the purview of the Statute, but such thing as the makers of the
Statutes meant, so as the intent of the makers is judged by the words, and
shall abridge the generalty of them.

So the Statute of Wast is, if any one make wast in Land, which he holds ex
dimissione, etc by lease, yet if his estate be ex legatione, by legacy, he
shall be punished by equity, and the intent of the makers of the act. So the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, restrains men to make tenures of
themselves, yet there where the words are, that every one shall hold of the
Lord Paramount, secundum quantitatem terrarum, according to the quantity of
their Lands, it is taken and ought to be understood, secundum valorem ter^a,
according to the value of the Lands, vide ibidem plura.

And Ployd. f. 57. b. It is an erudition in our Law that where the terms, and
letter of any Statute be obscure, and difficult to be conceived, there we ought
to resort to the intent of the makers of the Statute, vide ibidem plura.

Where the intent appears the Law will include words, which are not apt, from
their proper and common signification, to the intent, Ployd. 154. a. As if the
Disseisee agree with the heir of the Disseisor, who is by descent to confirm
his estate, and if he make them a Deed by these words, Dedi and concessi, the
Land to him and his heirs, that cannot enure in his natural sense, for the
nature of a dedi is to give one a thing which he had not before, but because it
cannot enure, so it shall enure as a confirmation, and so inclines the word
out of his proper signification to the intent and so 17. E. 3. f. 8. It is
holden that a Manor may pass by name of a fee de chivaler, for if the intent
was that the Manor shall pass, the Law shall adjudge the better, to incline
the word (de chivaler) to it, and in 10. E. 4. f. 4. Pasche, it was held by the
better opinion, that a man may plead a demise to him of Land for a year, by
the words, to license him to occupy the Land for a year, and so may one apply
a word out of his apt signification to another signification, in performance of
the intent of the matter.

And Ployd. f. 142. Words shall be construed according to the minds of the
parties, where they are directed to a special intent, and those which do
imply and contain the intent of the parties to be conditional, shall be
sufficient to make a condition as well as the usual words. And therefore if a
man make a Feoffment, ad solvendum, to pay 20 ^. at such a time, it is a
condition, for the matter shows that the intent of the Feoffor was to have
twenty shillings for the Land. So if a man makes a Feoffment in fee to one, to
instruct his Son in such an Art, it is a condition, because the words purport
such an intent, and yet they are not usual words, vide ibidem plura, in
Brownings case.

But Ployd. f. 162. b. Exception.
Though it be the rule of Bract. that words ought to be inclined to the intent,
yet non estregula quin fallat, for one ought to have words apt for the meaning,
or else the meaning will be void, for if a man will bend the Law to the intent
of the party, rather then the intent of the party to the Law, it would
maintain barbarousnesse and ignorance, to the decay of all erudition, and
diligence, for if a man knew that what words soever they are, his meaning
should only be thought on, he would be more negligent for words, and then such
an incertainty would rise to discuss what was the meaning, that he would bring
in great confusion, and therefore the phrases of speech commonly declare the
intents of persons, as if I give you a cup of Wine you shall not have the cup,
but if I give you an Hogshead of Wine, you shall have the Hogshead, because the
phrase shows the intent, Ployd. f. 86. a. 27. H. 8 27.

And therefore we shall see in many cases, that the intent shall be destroyed,
where it accords not with the Law, as 9. H. 6. f. 45. An Abbot and Covent by
deed indented, gave a croft to W. in fee, and for that gift and grant, the
said William, renunciavit toti communia, quam habere consuevit averiorum suerum
cum averijs Abbot and Conventus renounceth all the Common which he has used to
have of his Cattle, with the Cattle of the Abbot and Covent, and that release
of Common was there taken void, because he did not show to whom he renounced
the common, yet there was a full intent, for he had common in the Land of the
Abbots, and he had intent to release it to him, but for the incertainty it was
void. And a Lease was made to Baron and Feme, and the reversion of the Land
that the Baron held was granted, and it was held void, notwithstanding the
intent, because it missed of the certainty of the particular estate, H. 13. E.
3. Fitz. grants 63. And so where there were Lord and tenant of three acres, and
the Lord granted the signiory which he had out of one Acre, it was held void in
17. E. 3. notwithstanding the intent, because his intent did not agree with
Law, and so where a man holds of one by Castle garder, Homage, and Fealty,
and he grants to another all his services, it was held in 31. E. 1. that the
Castle-garder cannot pass, because he did not grant such a Castle, but
reserved it, and therefore he who has not the Castle cannot have the Castle
guarder, and so his intent in granting all the services, could not make all to
pass, because it was not according to Law, and so the Law rules the intent,
and the intent not the Law, Ployd. ibidem, in Throckmortons case.

Coke l. 1. f. 84. b. A man gives Land to M. and 1. his Sisters, and to the
heirs of the bodies of them lawfully begotten (by which they had a joint estate
for life, and several inheritances) and the Donor intending that neither of
them should break the Jointure, but the Survivor should have all per jus
accrescendi, added this clause, sub hac forma, that she that should longest
live should have all the Land, but because his intent is contrary to Law, for
this cause, if the Jointure be severed by fine, the Survivor shall not have the
part so severed by the said clause, which he has inserted of his conceit, and
his own imagination, contrary to Law and reason, ibidem.

But in Wills the intent shall be observed, and only thought of, because the
Testator had no time to order all things according to Law by presumption, but
is suddenly made oftentimes, and so the diversity, Ployd. f. 162. b. And
therefore Ploy. f. 414. a. The intent in devises makes estates to pass
contrary to the rules of the common Law in deeds and other gifts. As if I
devise Land to one A. for life, whereas there is not any such, the remainder in
fee, he in the remainder shall take the Land, though there be no estate
precedent.

And 34. E. 3. one had issue a Son, and Daughter, and devises Land devisable
to one for life, upon condition that if the Son disturb tenant for life, or
his Executors of their Administration, that then the Land shall remain to the
Daughter, and dies; the Daughter after the death of the tenant for life,
brings a Formedon in remainder against the son, and alleges that the tenant
had disturbed the Tenant for life, and the Executors, and the Tenant traversed
it, and upon it issue joined, and the condition took the fee out of the Son,
and put in the Daughter by allowance in Law, in performance of the intent of
the Devisee, though the remainder did not vest when the first estate took
effect Ployd. ibidem.

Coke com. f. 322. a. b. If a man lease Lands devisable for life, etc. the
reversion by his testament in fee, etc. and dies, and then the Tenant makes
wast, the Devisee shall have a writ of Wast, although the Tenant never
attorned, because the will of the Devisor, made by his will, shall be performed
according to the intent of the Devisor, and if the Tenant will never attorne,
then it shall never be performed, and therefore he shall have an action of
wast, or distraine without Attornement, Littleton, for it is a maxim of the
common Law, ultima voluntas testatoris est perimplenda secundum veram
intentionem sufam, Coke ibidem, for if a man devise his Tenements to another by
testament, Habendum sibi in perpetuum, and dies, and the Devisee enters, he
has a Fee-simple, causa qua supra, and yet if a feoffment had been made to him
by the Devisor in his life, of the same Tenements, Habendum sibi in perpetuum,
and livery and seisin upon it made, he shall have an estate only for term of
his life, Littleton, Ibidem.

Coke com. f. 9. b. Though by the common Law an estate of inheritance may not
pass without these words, Heirs, yet in devise it may, as if a man devise
twenty acres to another, and that he shall pay to the Executors for the same
ten pound, he has a Fee-simple by the intent of the Devisor, albeit it be not
the value of the Land, 21. E. 3 16. So if a man devise Lands to give or to
sell, or in feodo simplici, or to him or his Assigns for ever, in all these
cases a Fee simple does pass by the intent of the Devisor, but if the devise
be to a man, and his Assigns, without saying for ever, the devisee has but an
estate for life, if I devise Land to one, and sanguini suo, it is a Fee simple,
but if it be semini suo, it is an estate tail, ibidem.

Exception.
Coke. l. 1. f. 85. 86. in C^rbets case. It was ruled by all the Justices, that
such an estate which cannot by the rules of the common Law be conveyed, by act
executed in his life by advice of counsel learned in the Law, such an estate
cannot be devised by the will of man, who is intended in Law to be in ops
consilij, as if I devise Lands to one by will in perpetuum, he has a fee, for
such an estate may be conveyed by estate executed, but if I devise further,
that if the Devisee does such an act, that then another shall have his Lands to
him and his Heirs, that is void, because such limitation, if it was by act
executed, is void, for as Dyer f. 33. pl. 12. A man cannot devise an estate in
fee to one, and if he do not such an act, his estate shall cease, and another
have it, for when he has disposed the estate in fee, he has not power in the
same will to devise it to another, and f. 4. pl. 7. when the intent of man, who
makes a testament does not agree with the Law, the intent shall be taken void,
as if a man devise his Land to H. in fee, and that if he dye without heir, that
M. shall have the Land, this devise is void, because one Fee-simple cannot
depend upon another in law, the same law is if the devise be to the Abbot of
Saint Peter de W. where the foundation is to the Abbot of St. Paul.

Coke com. f. 25. a. A devise cannot direct an inheritance to descend contrary
to the rules of the Common Law, as if a man devise Lands to one and the heirs
males of his body, and has issue a Daughter, who has issue a Son, the Son
shall not inherit as heir male, because he must convey the descent from the
heirs males, for though a devise may create an inheritance by other words then
a gift can, yet can it not direct an inheritance to descend contrary to the
rule of Law, and no intent of the devisor appears, that the Son of the
Daughter should against the rule of the Law inherit, vide Ployd. f. 414. b. So
if a gift be made to a man, and the heirs females of his hody, and has issue a
Son who has issue a Daughter, this Daughter shall never inherit, vide ibidem
plura.

Pr^ximus sum egomet mihi, Ployd. f. 545 a. It is the natural order to karve
himself, before he karve another, and charity, begins at home.

And therefore in legacies it is reason that the Executors shall have
preferment of satisfaction before others, and the Law makes allowance to them
before any others, because as Lit. faith, they represent the person of the
Testator, and Coke com. f. 209. b. The Executors do more represent the person
of the Testator then the heir does to the Ancestor, for though the Executor be
not named in Mortgage, yet the Law appoints him to receive the money, but so
does not the Law appoint the heir to receive the money unless he be named, and
therefore if the Obligee makes the Obligor his Executor, it is a release in
Law, and if the Obligor make the Obligee his Executor the Action is gone, for
they are as it were the same person in law, whence the law makes allowance to
them before any other. For if a man devise to A. 20 l. and to B. 20 l. and to
C. 20 l. and makes his executor, and dies, having goods only to the value of
20 l. now it is in the election of the executor, to which of those, three he
will pay the 20 l. and if he pay it to one, the other cannot contradict it,
neither has he any remedy for his legacy, so by the same reason, if one of the
three be made executor to the testator, the law says, he may and will retain
the 20 l. in satisfaction of his legacy, and the law allows of it, for it is
reason that he be next to himself, and have regard to himself before another.

And this is the reason of the case in 12. H. 4. f. 21. where in debt upon an
obligation against the heir, he pleaded that the Plaintiff was executor to
Lancestor (which deed he put before them) and administered certain goods and
Chattels to the value of the debt and more, and retained the same sum with
him in the name of payment, and demanded judgment, if Action: And Hull said,
that if he did not retain the same to himself, and might have retained it,
and did not, he shall be barred, for a man is bound to be next to himself, and
this was the opinion of some of them, for which he pleaded there that he
adminstred no goods after the death of the Testator, vide ibidem plura, in
Paramers case.

And for the same reason does the law in all reciprocal acts respect mutual
recompense and consideration, for if there be no consideration, why should they
be made? Doct. and St.
and it is supposed there was error in such Acts; because there is no
consideration of profit, for every one is next unto himself, and ad suum
lucrum satis sapit, is sufficiently wise to project his own emolument. And
therefore have considerations a great effect in laws and customs, for
consideration is the beginning of all customs, the grounds of all uses, the
reason of all rights, and the causes of all duties.

For without consideration nothing is wrought by any conveyance, no interest
transferred, no right removed, nor duty accrued, and no custom has
continuance: As if the Lord of the Manner prescribe, that every one who passes
the highway, which lies in his Manor shall pay 12. d. to him for his passage,
this is void, and not upon good consideration, but if he prescribe to have a
penny of every one that passes such a Bridge which the Lord of the Manor does
use to repair, this is a good prescription, Calthrope, Copy-holds, f. 35. and
36.

And therefore is consideration described by Dier. f 336. to be the cause or
occasion of a meritorious recompense, either in deed or law, for all contracts
and bargains have quid pro quo, and contractus est quasi actus contra actum,
and must have quid pro quo, Coke com. f. 47. b. And so it is in exchanges,
annuities, pro consilio impendendo, or service, rents, services, and tenures
for d^meanes of Lands, as Frank-almoigne, Homage-auncestrell for warranty and
acquittall, commons for cause of vicinage or service. Devise of a woman causa
matrimonij praelocuti, so the manner of a gift to do such a thing, or to make
such a thing. Considerations are either executory or executed, and in
considerations executory, the recompense failing, the Feoffment or grant
cease, as a feoffment to instruct the feoffor in one mystery or Art, if the
Feoffor dies before instruction the heir shall re-enter, 21. E. 3.

Grant of an Office, and for the executing it a fee, if the office be
determined, the fee is determined, M. 5. E. 4. 7. and 20. E. 4. If a woman give
land causa matrimonii prelocuti, and he will not marry her, she shall have a
writ to recover the land, Ployd. f. 58. a. If a man make a lease for years
rendering rent, the lessee needs not pay any rent, if the Lessor had nothing
in the land at the time of the lease, because he had not quid pro quo, Coke
com. f. 47. b.

If I grant an annuity pro consilio impendendo, if he will not give me council
I must stay my annuity, Ployd. 144. b.

An usual and accustomed attendance of a corodian upon the Sovereign of a
monastery upon festival days, determines the corodie, it being a reward for
attendance. Exchanges not executed by each party, at the first is defeasible 9.
H. 4. A portion of rithes granted by indenture for ever, without cavillation or
contradiction, and an annuity granted for the aforesaid portion.

So to have a way for my life, and I grant an annuity of 20 s. without
limitation, the annuity shall endure but during my life, Dier. 336. 337.

Where no consideration is expressed, there the consideration may be averred,
Dier. 146. Vellies case.

A rehersall of a consideration past, whether it be true or false, shall not
dissolve the gift, as because he served me in the Wars beyond the Seas,
although it be false it is not material, Bracton in modis donationum, and so
in the case of the King, Dier. f. 337. If A. enfeoff B. upon a false
consideration, the heir shall not be received to aver a false consideration
against his ancestor, Dier.

Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio, Ployd. 305. a. and 308. b. from a bare
contract or promise no action rises, for it is not much argued by the laws of
England, what diversity is between a contract and a promise and a gift; for
the intent of the law is to have the matter argued, not the terms.

A Nude contract is where a man makes a bargain and sale of his goods or
lands without any recompense appointed for it: As if I say to you. I sell you
all my lands or all my goods, and nothing is assigned, that the other shall
give or pay for it, this is a nude contract, and is void in law, and the vendee
cannot bring an action for them, Dr. and Student c. 24.

And a nude promise is, when a man promises to give a man certain money at
such a day, or to do him certain service, and nothing is assigned for them.

As if I promise to give you twenty pound to make your house anew, there you
shall have no action against me for the 20 l. because it is a nude promise, as
it is affirmed by Townsend, T. 17. E. 4. Ployd. f. 308. b. So if a Carpenter by
word covenanteth and undertaketh to make a new house, and he does not, and for
not making it, the Plaintiff brings an action of covenant against the
Carpenter, and it does not appear that he had any thing for making of the
house, it was adjudged in 11 H. 4. f. 33. that the Plaintiff should not take
any thing by his writ, Ployd. 309. a.

And if I promise to another to keep his goods safely till such a time, and
after I refuse to take them, no action lies against me, but if I take them,
and after they be lost or impaired through my negligent keeping, an Action
lies, Doctor and Stud. c. 24.

But otherwise it is, if he to whom the promise is made, have a charge by
reason of the promise, which he has also performed, then in that case he
shall have an Action for that thing is promised.

As if a man give land in Frankal-moine, they are bound to make prayers to God
for him, and in consideration of such prayers, he is bound to pay to the chief
Lord, all the rents and services issuing out of that land, Lit. a. Frankal.

And in 17. E. 4. 5. It is taken by diverse, that if I promise a Surgeon a
certain sum to cure such a poor man, or if I promise to a labourer certain
money, to repair such a way which is in the high way, that he shall have an
action of debt for it, for it is a thing of charity, and I merit thanks of
them for it, and therefore shall not be called, Nudum pactum, Ployd. f. 306. a.

If I contract with another, that if he will marry my daughter, that I will
give him 20 l. in this case if he take her to wife he shall have an action of
debt for the 20 l. 22. E. l. Assi. Pl. 70. by Thorp. and yet I have nothing for
it, and if a man has no regard to nature, it shall be nudum pactum, but
because my daughter is advanced by it, that is a good consideration to me,
Ployd. f. 305. a. So Dr. and Stud. c. 24. f. 104. It is a good promise, because
he has quid pro quo, the preferement of his Daughter for his money.

But if a man promise to another 20 l. with his daughter in marriage, if he
marry the daughter, and the money be not paid, he shall not have an action of
debt or an action of the case at the common law, but he must sue for his money
in the spiritual Court, for here is no good form of contract, F. n. b. f. 44.
a. And as Bracton says, matrimonium est principale and ejusdem juris id est
jurisdictionis e^^e debet accessorium, matrimony is the principal, and the
accessory ought to be of the same jurisdiction.

Gardener brought an assumpsit, and declared that the Defendant in
consideration that he was indebted to the Plaintiff in 10 l. for pasturing, and
feeding of certain beasts in the Plaintiffs grounds, and for wheat and other
Marchandises had and received by the said defendant, did assume to pay to the
said Plaintiff the debt that he had paid. Upon issue, non-assumpsit was found
for the Plaintiff, and upon a Writ of error in the Exchequor-chamber, that
there must be some certain cause of the debt assigned, for it is not
sufficient to say generally, he was indebted, for it might be for rents upon
leases, or for debts upon specialties, but it was adjudged certain enough, and
required not so much certainty as an action of debt upon a contract, Hob. rep.
f. 7.

Wolastone brought an assumpsit against W. and declared, that whereas W.
promised him 30 l. in consideration that the Plaintiff on the twentieth of
August 1610. had given day to the said defendant for the payment of the same
money until the ninth of October following, the Defendant did assume to pay
him the same ninth day, and upon issue non-assumpsit it was found for the
Plaintiff, and damages given, Hob. f. 26. Wolastons case vide ibidem.

L. brought an assumpsit against B. and declared that whereas the defendant had
felloniously slain one P. M. the defendant afterward required the Plaintiff
to labor and do his endeavor to obtain his pardon from the King, whereupon
the Plaintiff upon the same request did labor etc. to obtain pardon for the
said defendant, and afterward fi. etc. in consideration of the Premises, the
defendant did promise to the Plaintiff to give him a hundred pounds, and that
he had not etc. upon non-assumpsit, it is found for the Plaintiff 100 l. ibidem
f. 147. vide ibid. plura.

B. brings an action of the case against C. executor of Read, and counts
that whereas he had in M. term 14. Jac. presented an attachment of privilege
against Read, rerurn. in H. term, the testator knowing of it, in
consideration that at his request the Plaintiff would forbear to prosecute the
said writ, did promise to pay him 50 l. and then averred etc. and after verdict
for the Plaintiff, and exceptions in arrest of judgment, the Court gave
sentence. Bedwels case, vide ibidem plura.

A promise made for a thing past is void, as if I promise one ten pounds
because he has builded me an house, an action lies not there, and if I
promise to give another 10 l. in recompense of such a trespass that he has
done him, an action lies not against him, and the reason is because a contract
properly is, where a man for his goods shall have by the assent of the other
party certain goods or some other profit at the time of the contract, or
after, but if the thing be promised fot a cause that is past by way of a
recompense, this is an accord rather then a contract, and upon such accord, the
thing in recompense must be paid or delivered in hand, for upon accord there
lies no Action, Dr. and St. c. 24. f. 104. which accords with the resolve in
Cok l. 6. f. 43. Blakes case, accord with satisfaction is a good bar for the
personalty, but not for the realty, vide ibid. plura.

An implicit consideration is, when the law does intend a consideration; so
the Host of any common Inn may detain a man's horse if he will not pay him,
Dier 30. And a Tailor may deteine the apparel until he is paid for his
labor, 5. E. 4. 2. Fulb. l. 1. f. 6.

Hereunto belongs contracts in law, though not arising from the consent of
the parties, as he that finds another man's goods, is chargeable by reason of
the possession to him that right has, so he that receives moneys to ones use,
or to deliver over to him, is chargeable as a receivor, so is he that enters
into land and receives the profits, Finch Nomot f. 181.

Exception.
In an action of debt upon an obligation, the consideration upon which it was
made is not to be enquired, for it is sufficient to say, that it pleased him to
make the obligation, Ployd. 309. b. vide ibid. plura.

Though it be probable that upon every bond there is a contract, because he
confesses the debt, but if there were none, the creditor needs not to prove
no more then the delivery of it.

And for the same reason the law respects matters of profit and interest,
more then matters of pleasure, trust, and authority, or limitation: for matters
of profit shall be taken more largely, and may be assigned and not be
countermanded, but matters of pleasure, trust, and authority shall be taken
more strictly, and may be countermanded, Finch Nomot. f, 31.

As a license to hunt in my Park, or to walk in my Garden; extends only to
himself and not to his servants or other in his company, for it is but a thing
of pleasure, otherwise it is of a license to hunt, kill and carry away the
Deer, for that is a matter of profit, 13. H. 7. 18.

A way granted to a Church over my land, extends not to any other but to
himself, for it is but an easement 12. H. 7 25. b.

A reversion granted to two jointly, and the meant attorneth to one, it is a
void attornement, 11. H. 7. 12. b.

If the Sheriff be-head one should be hanged, it is felony, 35. H. 5 58. b.

The King licenceth one to alien the third part of his land, and he alieneth
all, it is a void alienation for all, 4. E. 6. 68. b.

A lease is made to A. and B. for their lives, A: dies, B. shall have all
during his life, for it is an interest; but if a lease be made to I. S. during
the life of A. and B. there if one of them die, the estate is utterly
determined, for that is a limitation.

A license to come to my house to speak with me, 9. E. 4. 4. b. or goods bailed
over to deliver to I. S. 1. E. 5. 2. or to bestow in alms, Dyer 22. or a
letter of Attorney to deliver seisin, Perkins, all these may be countermanded
before they be done, because they be matters of trust.

Bur if I present I. S. to a Church, I cannot afterward vary and present a
new, for a kind of interest passes out of me, 14. E. 4. 1.

So if I deliver an obligation as an escrowe into a strangers hand, to be
delivered to the obligee upon condition performed, I cannot recall it, for the
obligee is as it were a party, and privy to the delivery, Perk. 19. b.

Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, Ployd. f. 32. b. The Law will not enforce any
one to show that which is against himself. As if a man grant to one an Annuity
pro consilio impendendo, the Grantee shall have a Writ of Annuity, without
showing that he has given him Counsel, for the showing of it is not for his
benefit, and the denial Counsel goes in defeasance of the Annuity, which
ought to be shown by the Plaintiff, because he shall have the benefit of the
defeasance, M. 39. H. 6. f. 22.

So in 15. H. 7. f. 1. It is holden, if an Annuity be granted to one until he
be promoted to a benefice, he shall have a writ of Annuity, and shall not show
that he is not advanced to a benefice, for that goes in defeasance of the
Annuity, which must be shown by him who shall take advantage of the
defeasance, but there it is holden, that if he had granted, that if the party
had first done such a thing, that then he shall have an Annuity, that there he
ought to show the performance of the thing in his count, to enable him to the
Annuity, in that the condition precedeth the estate, and enableth him to to the
estate, and so the diversity, vide ibidem plura, in Colthirsts case.

Nemo tenetur turpitudinem suam detegere, Reg. I C. No man is bound to bewray
his own shame and crime, and therefore the Law is, that if a man for fear or
simplicity will confess himself guilty of a Felony, yet the Judges must not
record that confession, but suffer him to plead not guilty, Finch. Nomos. f.
29.

Accusare nemo se debet nisi coram Deo: Vasques, no man ought to accuse
himself but before God, and therefore no man ought to be enforced to swear
against himself before man, and the reason thereof is given by Coke l. 4. f.
9. 5. Slades case. Jurare in propria persona est saepenumero in hoc seculo
praecipitium diaboli ad detrudendas miserorum anim is ad infernum, to swear in
his own person is oftentimes in this world the precipice of the Devil to cast
down the souls of miserable men into hell, and therefore in debt, or other
action where wager of Law is admitted by the Law, the Judges without good
admonition, or due examination of the party, do not admit him to it, and for
this reason Coke is of opinion, that where one may have several action, to
wit, an action upon the case, upon an assumpsit, or an action of debt, wherein
the Defendant may wage his Law, it is better, and less mischeivous to bring an
action upon the case; then an action of debt, for now experience proves, that
the consciences of men grow so large, that the respect of their private
commodity does rather induce men, and principally those who have declining
estates, to perjury, according to the censure of the Satyrist -- Jures licet
Samothracum,
Et nostrarum aras, Juvenall.
contemnere fulmina pauper
Creditur, atque deos.
Swear by our Altars, and the Gods of Wonder
For gain the poor will scorn them, and Joves thunder.


And therefore by the Civil Law Rejicitur pauper pro test, a poor man is
excepted against for being a witness, though in our Law he is a sufficient
witness, if he be an honest man, Swimb. f. 210.

It is an observation of a Divine, that oaths ex officio had their birth from
Caiphas, Math. 26. who who first imposed it on our Savior in the name of the
living God, saying, I adjure or charge thee in the name of the living God, that
thou tellest us whither thou be'st Christ the Son of the living God. And Mr.
Pryn says, that Cardinal Woolsy the highest Priest in England was the first
that invented oaths ex officio in England, and that they were much inveighed
against by Latimer in his Sermons, and condemned by the express words of the
petition of right, providing against such oaths, Prin. Vind. f. 42.

Impotentia excusat legem, impotency excuses the Law, Coke com. f. 29. a. The
Law tendreth the weaknesses, and debilities of others, execuseth their
un-abilities, ultra posse non est esse, because no man is able to do more then
he can do.

As if a man dies seized of Lands in fee-simple, etc. and these Lands descend
to his Daughter, and she takes an husband, and has issue, and dyerh before
any entry, the husband shall not be tenant by courtesy, because it was in the
power of the husband to have entered, but if a man be seized of an advowson, or
a rent in f^e, and has issue a daughter who is married and has issue, and
dies seized, the wife before the rent became due, or the Church became void,
dies, he shall be Tenant by courtesy because he could by no industry enter, or
attain to any other seisin, then a seisin in Law, or bring it to an actual
seisin. And f. 258. b Though an Hermit or an Anachorite, be shut up himself,
so as by his order he is not to come out in person, yet to avoid a descent he
may command one to make claim, and such a recluse may always appear by an
Attorney in such cases, where others must appear in proper person, and f. 263.
b. An Abbot of a Monastery dies, and during the vacation, one wrongfully
enters into a certain parcel of the Land of the Monastery, claiming the Land
to him and his heirs, and dies seized, and the Land descends to the heir,
and then one is elected Abbot, the Abbot may enter upon the heir, for by the
death of the Abbot no person is able to make continual claim, and therefore a
descent in that kind shall not prejudice the succession.

Coke l. 1. f. 98. a. If the Lessee Covenant to leave wood in the same plight,
the wood was at the time of the lease, and afterward the trees be sub-verted
by tempest, hs is discharged of his covenant, by reason of his impotency, and
l. 4. f. 11. a. If the Lord release to the Tenant so long as I. S. has heir
of his body, and sixty years pass, and then I. S. dies without heir of his
body, in this case though the sixty years be passed, yet the Lord may
distraine, for it was impossible that she should attain to any seisin within
that time, and therefore the act of limitation made in 32. H. 8. does not
extend to such rent or service, that by common possibility could not happen or
become due within sixty years, and so if Land holden by Homage, and Fealty, be
conveyed to a Mayor and Commonalty, etc. in this case they cannot do their
Homage and Fealty, yet though they have enjoyed the Land above sixty years, if
they alien the Land, the Lord may distraine for Homage and Fealty, 33 H 8. Br.
Tit. Fealty, 15. vide ibidem pluta, in Bevills case, and lib. 6. f. 21. b. in
Butlers case, It was resolved that legal imprisonment without Covin is a good
excuse of non-residency in any Parson by reason of his impotency.

Quod remedio destituitur, ipsa revalet, si culpa ab sit, the thing which is
destitute of remedy, avails in the matter it self, if there be no fault or
laches in the party, Coke. l. 6. f. 68. a. As if a man be seized of a manner,
part of which is in lease for life, and part in lease for years, and levieth a
f^ne to A. to the use of B. in tail, with diverse remainders over, in this case
B. shall avow for rent, or have an Action of Wast without any Attornement, for
when the reversion is settled in any one in judgment of Law, and he has no
means to compel the tenant to attorne, and no laches or fault is in him,
there he shall avow, or have an Action of Wast without Attornment: As if the
Lord in Mortmaine, or if a villain claims a reversion, by this claim the
Law vesteth thiS reversion in him, and he has no means to compel the tenant
to attorne, and therefore he shall avow, or have an Action of Wast without
Attornement, the same Law is of Letters Patents, and of the devise of a
reversion, for in all those cases culpa abest, there is no fault, 9. H. 6. vide
ibidem plura, in Sir Moile Finches case.

And Coke l. 8. f. 172. b. in Hales case. If the heir at full age tender his
livery, and dies within three months before he has accomplished it, so as the
making of his homage, or suing out of his livery, without default in him, is
become impossible by the act of God, he shall have as much advantage by his
tender, as if he had made homage, or sued out his livery, for impotency in this
case excuses the Law, and in the judgment of the Law, the interest of the
King by the said limitation is determined, as if the Lord had taken homage of
the heir, when he made his tender, vide ibidem plura.

Coke l. 10. f. 139. b. If tenant for life, or for years, does not repair a
wall of dirt, so as by his default, the Land is surrounded, and becomes
unprofitable, that is Wast, but if the Land be surrounded by the extraordinary
rage and violence of the Sea, without any default in him, that is not Wast, no
more then if an house was burnt by lightning, or subverted by the rage of the
wind or tempest, without default of the Lessee, for impotency excuses the
party, vide ibidem plura in Kighleys case.

So as it is regularly true that the Law tendreth the infirmities of unable
persons, and excuses their impossibilities, as of men illiterate, out of the
Realm, in Prison, Infants, Idiots, out of their sound mind, as also of blind
and deaf, dumb, and blind.

If a man illiterate, be bound to make a deed, he is not bound to seal, or
deliver any writing that shall be tendered unto him, and if it be Latin, or
other Language, which he understands not, he may demand that one read it, and
expound it unto him, and if none be there present to read, and expound it, the
party may refuse to deliver it, for his ignorance excuses him, Coke l. 2. f.
3. Mansers case.

And for that reason if the Deed be read unto him, in other words then are
contained within the Deed or writing, it shall not bind the party that
delivered it, for it is at the peril of the party to whom the writing is made,
that the true purport and effect of the writing be declared, if the party that
shall deliver the writing does require it, but if the party who shall deliver
the writing does not require it, he shall be bound by the Deed, though it shall
be contrary to his meaning, and it mattereth not though a mere stranger
reads the writing, which is well proved by the usual form of pleading in
such case, to wit, that he was a Layman, and not lettered, and that the Deed
was read to him in other words, etc. generally, without showing by whom it was
read, Coke l. 2. Thorowgoods case, f. 11. b.

If a disseisor dye seized, the Disseissee being within age, Covert Baron, in
Prison, or out of the Realm, it shall be no descent to take away the entry,
Finch. Nomot. f. 26.

In omnibus fere minori atati succurritur, Coke l. 9. 84. In all cases for the
most part, there is favor showed to them within age. As,

In a writ of customs and services, (which is in the nature of a writ of right
in which final judgment shall be given) against an infant who is in by
descent, in 6. H. 3. Tit. page 144. It is adjudged he shall have his age, so in
a Cessavit against an infant who has the tenancy by descent, he shall have his
age, though it be upon his own cesser, because he cannot know what arrearages
he shall tender before judgment, and that also is in the nature of a writ of
right, for if he make not true tender he shall lose his Land, 28. E. 3. 99.

But in a per quae servitia against an infant, who has the tenancy by descent,
he shall not have his age, because he has benefit, and avail over and above
the Premises, and therefore is he called tenant paravaile, and it is against
reason, that when the heir has profit by the tenancy, that he shall not pay
annual rent, and it is no mischeife unto him, for notwithstanding his
Attornement within age, he may at his full age disclaim to hold of him, or to
acknowledge that he holds of him by lesser or other services, Coke ibidem.
And regularly it is true, that an infant may do any thing for his own
advantage, and not to his prejudice, as to be an Executor, or to purchase
without the consent of any other, for it is intended his benefit, and at his
full age he may either agree thereunto, or perfect it, or without any cause
alleged, waive or disagree to the purchase, and so may his heir if he does
not agree at his full age, Coke com. f. 2. b.

In a writ of mesne the proceedings shall not be stayed for the nonage of the
infant, because it is not reason that the infant shall be distrained for the
services of the mesne during his nonage, and shall not have remedy until he is
at full age, Coke l. 9. f. 85. a.

If an infant make a Feoffment in person, if he dye without heir, the Land
shall not escheate, but otherwise it is if it be by letter of Attorney, Dyer f.
10. Coke l. 4. f. 125. a.

An infant shall sue by procheine amy, but defend by guardian, Coke com. f.
135. a.

If an infant buyeth Lands in fee, with the money for which he did sell his own
Land, yet may he avoid his own alienation, Doct. Stud 21.

An Execution, Elegit, and Statute Merchant, etc. shall not be sued against the
heir during his infancy, Coke com. 290. a.

An infant shall avoid matters in faite, either within age, or of full age, but
matters of Record, as Statutes, etc. acknowledged by him, a fine levied by him,
or recovery against him by default in a real action, must be avoided by him
during his minority, to wit, Statute by Audita querela, and the fine and
recovery by a writ of error, because they are judicial acts, and taken by a
Court, or a Judge, and therefore the nonage of the party to avoid the same
shall be tried by inspection of Judges, and not by the Country, and because his
nonage must be tried by inspection, this cannot be done at his full age, but if
that age be inspected by the Judges, and recorded that he is within age, albeit
he come of full age before the reversall, yet may it be reversed after his full
age, Coke com. f. 380. b.

The Law does provide for the safety of a man's or woman's estate, that before
the age of twenty one years they cannot alien any Lands, Goods, or Chattells,
or bind themselves by deed, Coke com. f. 171. b. Unless it be for necessary
meat, drink, and apparel, necessary physic, and such other necessaries, and
likewise for his good teaching and instruction, whereby he may profit himself
afterward, but it must be pro nec^ssario vestitu, for convenient apparel,
and not for Gold lace, 11. H 7. and ought to be suitable to his calling, Popham
Rep. f. 152. But if he bind himself in an obligation, or other writing, with a
penalty for the payment of any of these, the obligation shall not bind him,
also all other things of necessity shall bind him, as presentation to a
benefice, for otherwise the lapse should incurr against him. Also if an infant
be Executor upon payment of any debt due to the Testator, he may make an
acquittance, and in that case a release without payment is void ibidem, f. 172.
a.

If a man inheritor takes wife, who have issue a Son between them, and the
Father dies, and the son enters into the land, and endoweth the mother, and
then the mother alieneth that which she has in dower to another in fee with
warranty, and then dies, and the warranty descends to the Son, this warranty
collateral shall bar the Son, Little. but if the Heir be within age at the time
of the descent of the warranty, he may enter, and avoid the estate, either
within age, or at any time after his full age, but if he within age at the time
of the alienation with warranty, and become of full age before the descent of
the warranty, the warranty shall bar him for ever, Coke com. f. 380. b.

Though no laches shall be adjudged in an infant in case of descent, as
Littleton says, yet in some other cases laches shall prejudice an infant, as
laches shall be adjudged in an infant, if he present not to a Church within six
months, for the Law respects more the privilege of the Church, that the cure
be served, then the privilege of he infant, so the Public repose of the
Realm shall be preferred before the privilege of infancy in the case of a
fine, where the fine begins in the time of the Ancestor; As if a fine be
levied before the act of non-claime, and one of full age had right at the time
of the time levied, and dies within the year, and the right descends to the
heir within age, he shall be bound to that year commenced in his Father, and
his nonage shall not avail him there, because his Father was of full age,
Ployd. 372. a. So non-claime of a villain of an infant by a year and a day,
who has fled into ancient demesne, shall take away the seizure of the infant.
And if an infant brings not an appeal within a year and a day, he is barred
of his appeal for ever, for the Law respects more liberty and life then the
privilege of infancy.

If the King be seized of Lands, and the Land descend to the successor, this
shall bind an infant for that the privilege of the infant, in this case
holds not against the King, Coke com. f. 246. a.

Though it be regularly true, that no laches shall be adjudged in infants, for
not entry or claim to avoid descent, yet laches shall be accounted in him for
not performing a condition annexed to the State of Land, for the laches of an
infant for not performing a condition annexed to an estate, either made to his
Ancestor or himself, shall bar him of the right of the Land for ever, as if
either of them be enfeoffed reserving a rent, and for default of payment a
re-entry, the laches of either of them in not paying the rent shall disinherit
either of them for ever. But if a man makes a feoffment in fee to another,
reserving a rent, and that if he pay not the rent within a month, ne shall
double the rent, and the feoffee dies his heir within age, and the infant
pays not the rent, he shall not for this laches forse it any thing, for that
the infant is provided for by the Statute, non current usurae contra aliquem
infra aetatem existentem, Merton, C 31.

An infant is impleadable in Law, and for his contempt shall be punished as a
man of full age, as an outlawry returned against an infant is good, and not
erroneous so as he has passed the age of fourteen years, 2. H. 5. Dyer 104. b.
and 3 H. 6. An infant was forced to answer upon breach of a prohibition in an
estreapment.

An infant is bound by any Statute Law, if he be not expressly excepted in it,
as in fore-judger, recovery in Cessavit, and fines with proclamations, Doctor
Student, c. 45. 147. And that if he had not been excepted in those Statutes,
they should have bound him, an infant prays to be received, and it is
traversed, he shall find sureties of the mean profits as an heir of full age,
Dyer 104. b. An infant under the age of fifteen cannot wage Law either for a
debt, or default of any real action, Office of Exec. f. 346.

If an infant be garden of a prison, and suffers a prisoner to escape, he
shall pay the debt because the Statutes are general, and by that reason he may
by a penal Statute loose his Goods, Doct. and Stud. C. 46. 147.

If one enter into a freehold of an infant with his consent, this is a
disseisin, because an infant cannot consent to an entry. An infant under one
and twenty cannot be a Bailiff, receivor, for want of skill, or ability, nor
yet sworn in any Enquest, or Jury, and is uncapeable of a Stewardship of the
Court of a Manor in possession, or reversion, or any office concerning the
administration of Justice, Coke com. f. 3. b. 157. a. And not capeable to
perform grand Serjeanty at the coronation, ibidem, 107. b.

Actus non facit reum nisi men's fit rea, Coke com. f. 247. b. The act does not
make one guilty unless the mind be guilty, and therefore if an infant under
the age of discretion, commit an act amounting to a Felony, shall stand free
from the attainder, and punishment incident to a Felon, but if he be of the age
of discretion, though he be not of full age he shall suffer as a felon, and
regularly the age of discretion accounted by the Law is fourteen years, and
therefore shall such an one incur the like attainder os felony as one of full
age, Office of Executor, f. 244. and Coke com. f. 247. b. But non est regula
quin fallit, for one of much less years having attained the maturity of
discretion, if he commit any felonious act, shall suffer as a Felon, as it was
resolved in the time of King Henry the seventh, in the third year of his
reign, f. 16. touching an infant but of the age of nine years, who killing
another boy of the like age with a knife, and then hiding the slain boy, and
excusing the blood found upon him, by saying that his nose had bled, it was
held by the Judges, that he was to be hanged as a Felon, his such nonage
notwithstanding, and by King Ina's Law, puer december annos natus surto conscius
arguatur, an infant of the age of ten years shall be attainted of theft, if
guilty thereof, but Doctor and Student applies an infants discretion to the
knowledge of the Law, so that if an infant do a murder at such years as he
has discretion to know the Law, he shall have the punishment of the Law, as if
he were of full age, and this is by a maxim in the Law for eschuing of
murders and felonies, and so it is of trespasses, cap. 46. f. 148.

If a dumb person bring an action, he shall plead by procheine amy, Finch.
Nomot.

It was a time when Idiots and mad men, and such as were deaf, or dumb, were
disabled to sue, because they wanted reason and understanding, but at this day
they all may sue, but the suite must be in their names, and it shall be
followed by others, Coke com. f. 135. b.

A man that is borne dumb may make a grant by delivery of his hands or signs,
and a man borne deaf and dumb, may make a gift if he have understanding, and
though it be an hard matter that a man shall have understanding without
hearing, yet there are diverse such persons as have understanding by their
sight, and a man borne dumb and blind, may have understanding, but a man borne
dumb, deaf, and blind, cannot have understanding, Perk. f. 6.

Furiosus furore suo punitur, Coke com. f. 247. b. The Law favoreth a mad man,
by reason of his disability in criminal causes, and because he is amens, s^ne
mente, without his mind and discretion, he shall not suffer for any felonious
fact, for the intention is the form of Felony; that is, if it be done felleo
animo, with a bitter and mischeivous mind, and therefore is he punished only
with his madness, there are four sorts of mad men, the first is an Idiot,
which from his nativity by a pertuall infirmity is non compos mentis, 2. is he
that by sickness, or other accident wholly loses his understanding, 3. A
Lunatic who has sometimes his understanding, and sometime has not, aliquando
gaudens lucidis intervallis, and is called non compos mentis so long as he has
no understanding, Lastly, he that by his own vicious act, for a time depriveth
himself of his memory and understanding, as he is that is drunk, Coke com.
147. a. Coke l. 4. 124. b. And for the three first sorts of mad men, the Law
is, that they shall not lose their lives for felony or murder, because they
want reason, and understand not what they do, neither can the punishment of a
mad man who is deprived of reason and understanding, be an example to others.

And therefore as Ployd. f. 19. a. If a man of non sanae memoriae, kill
another, although he has, broken the words of the Law, yet he has not broken
the Law, because he had not any memory nor understanding, but mere ignorance,
which comes unto him by the hand of God, and therefore it is called
unvoluntary ignorance, to which the Law imputes the act done, because no
default i^ in him, and therefore he shall be excused, in that he is ignorant by
compulsion, and such an act is called, and termed ex ignorantia, to wit, in
that involuntary ignorance is the cause, and God provided a special remedy,
that he who does such a thing by such ignorance shall not be punished for it,
as Deuteronomy. 19. if a laborer be at labor with an hatchet, and the head of the
hatchet flies off and kills another, that such a laborer shall not be put to
death because he did it by un-voluntary ignorance, but if a man break the Law
by un-voluntary ignorance, there he shall not be excused. As if at man be
drunk, and kill another, this is Felony, and he shall be hanged for it, and yet
he did this by ignorance, for when he was drunk he had neither memory nor
understanding, but because that ignorance came unto him by his own act and
folly, and he might resist this ignorance, he shall not be privileged by it,
because he is voluntarius demon, Coke com. f. 247.
and as Aristotle says, is worthy of double punishment, because he has d^ubly
offended, to wit, in being drunk to the ill example of others, and also in
doing of the act, and this act is called and said to be done ignoranter, to
wit, that he is the cause of his own ignorance, and so there is a diversity of
a thing done, ex ignorantia and ignoranter, Ployd. ibidem, And Coke com. f.
247. a. Omne crimen ebrietatis incendit, and detegit, and what hurt or ill
soever he does in his drunkenness does aggravate it, and that as well in case
touching his life, his Lands, his Goods, or any other thing concerns him,
Coke l. 4. f. 125. Also for the same reason non compos mentis cannot commit
petit treason, as if a wife non compos mentis, slay her husband, as appears,
12. H. 3. Tit. forfeiture, 33.

But in some cases non compos mentis may commit high Treason, as if he slay, or
offer to slay the King, this is high Treason, for the King is caput Reipub. the
head and safety of the Commonwealth, and from the head good health is conveyed
to all, and for this cause their persons are so sacred, that none ought to
offer them violence, but he shall be reus laesae majestatis guilty of high
Treason, Coke l. 4. f. 124. b.

And likewise for the same reason many are the privileges, which the Law
gives to one who is not compos mentis and his heirs, as if an idiot, or non
compos mentis makes a Feoffment in person, and dies, his heir within age, he
shall not be in ward, and if he dies without heir, the Land shall not
eschcate, but if he make a Feoffment by Letter of Attorney, although the Feoffor
can never avoid it, yet as to others, in judgment of Law the State was void,
and therefore in such case if the heir be within age he shall be in ward, and
if he dies without heirs, the Land shall escheate, and that is the true
reason of the books, in 7. H. 4. 5. and 7. H. 4. 12. And so is there a great
diversity between an estate made by the person of a mad man, and by his
Attorney, Coke l. 4. 125.

Also an idiot in an action brought against him, shall appear in proper
person, and he that can plead best for him shall be admitted, 33. H. 6. 18.
otherwise it is of him who becomes non compos mentis, for he shall appear by
his guardian if he be within age, and by an Attorney if be be of full age, Coke
ibidem, f. 124. b.

So if a man of non sanae memoria ^ath cause to enter into tenements; and a
descent is had in his life during the time he was of non sana memoriae, and
then dies, his heir may enter upon him, is in by descent, Littleton, and
though Littleton there says, that the Ancestor who had the same title could
not enter during his life, yet in case of a bar of his right he may. As if a
man of non compos mentis be disseised, and the disseisor levieth a fine, in
this case at the common Law, though the year and the day be passed, yet he
that was non compos mentis shall not be bound by it, but that he might well
enter, Coke l. 4. f. 125. vide ibidem plura.

But if an Idiot or a non compos mentis by accident or qui lucidis gaudet
intervallis, makes a Feoffment in fee, he shall in pleading never avoid it, by
saying that he was an Idiot, etc. at the time of the Feoffment, because it is a
maxim in the common Law, that no man of full age shall be received in any Plea
by the Law to disable himself, contrary to the opinion of some, that he may
avoid his own act by Entry, or Plea, and others, that he may avoid it by Writ,
and not by Plea, and others as Fitzherbert in his Writ of dum fuit non compos
mentis, that he may avoid either by Plea, or by Writ, but Littleton here is of
opinion, that neither by Plea, Writ, or otherwise, he himself shall avoid it,
and herewith the greatest authorities of ou^ Books do agree, and so was it
resolved in Beverlyes case, Coke l. 4. Though this Maxim holds not in
criminal causes, as before has been said, Coke com. f. 247.

Yet does not the Law leave one who is non compos mentis, destitute of remedy
in this case, but that upon an office found for the King, the King shall avoid
the Feoffment of him who is of non compos mentis, for the benefit of him, whose
custody the Law gives to the King, and all that he has, for the King is bound
by the Laws to defend his Subjects, and their Goods, and Chattells, Lands, and
Tenements, as Fitzherbert says, N. B. 232. and therefore the King of right
ought to have, and to order him, his Lands, and Goods, and this was by the
common Law, as appears by Britton f. 16. who writ in the fifth year of Ed.
1. before the Statute de prerogativa regis, which was made in the seventeenth
year of E. 2. a long time after Britton writ, which was but a declaration of
the common Law, Coke l. 4. f. 126. a. Neither does this impugn the Maxim of
the common Law, for in this case he that is non compos mentis, in no Plea that
he pleads shall stultify or disable himself, but all this shall be found by
office by the inquisition and verdict of twelve men, at the suite of the King,
who are not concluded to say the truth, and such and office when it is found
shall have relation, a tempore nativitatis, to avoid all mesne Acts made by one
who is non compos mentis, as Feoffments, Gifts, Leases, Releases, etc. And
after such office found if he be sued in an Action upon an obligation, or
writing which he has made, the King by his writ so long as the office be in
force, reciting the office, shall command a Supersedeas to the Justices where
the suite is commenced, but if one of non compos mentis dye before office
found, after his death no office may be found, and in this sense is the rule of
Bracton true, furiosus stipulari non potest nec aliquid negotium agere, quia
non intelligit quod agit. A mad man cannot promise or contract for any thing,
or do any business, because he understands not what, he does, but all such
Acts may be avoided either by the King or his Heirs, Coke ibidem. f. 126. a.
b. With which the civilian rule accords, furiosus nullum negotium contrahere
potest.

But in case of non compos mentis, the King has not any interest in the
Lunatic, as he has in the Idiot, for that the Lunatic may recover the memory
which he has lost, and therefore in the case of an Idiot, the Law says, Rex
habebit custodiom, the King shall have the custody, but in the case of non
compos mentis, Rex providebit, the King shall provide one to have a care and
charge, that he that is non compos mentis, and his family shall be maintained,
and that nothing shall be spoiled, without taking any thing to his own use,
but all to the use of the non compos mentis, and his family, and that he shall
not cut down trees but for necessary House-boot, Plow-boot, and Cart-boote, and
to repair ancient Pales, as appears in the case of Dyer, 25. b. In Trespass
against Homes, quare clausuum fregit, and did cut down Trees in Padington, etc.
of one John Francis, etc. the Defendant pleaded, that the said John Francis was
a Lunatic, by which the King seized his Lands by commission, etc. and by his
Letters Patents granted custodiam and gubernationem praedict, Fr. sine computo
reddendo, the custody, and government of the said Francis, without rendering an
account, etc. and he prayed aid of the King, and upon demurrer it was denied,
and the diversity taken between the seiser of the Lands of a Lunatic, and an
Idiot, for in the first case the King nor the Grantee shall not have any
profit, but they are bound to find necessaries for him, etc. by the
prerogative of the King, but in the other case, the King and his Grantee shall
have the Lands to his own profit, and Fitzberbert held that the Lunatic should
have an account when he came to his good memory, sed fuit negatum, Ibid. f. 26.
Pl. 164. But it seems by Coke lib. 4. f. 127. that he shall be accountable as
a Bailey to him that is not compos mentis, or to his Executors, or
Administrators. And the King shall have the protection of an infant as well as
of his Land, F. n. b. 232. b.

But the King shall not have the lands that the Idiot holds by copy, for that
is but an estate at will by the common law, and if the King should have the
custody of it, it should be a grand prejudice to the Lord of the Manor, and
yet notwithstanding an alienation made by the Idiot of the copyhold after
Office found, shall be avoided, Dyer 302. Coke ibidem, f. 126. b.

But there are some acts done by a man of non compos mentis, that shall not
only bind himself, but his Heirs and Executors also, and therefore if he
levy a fine, or suffer a common recovery, or acknowledge a Statute or
Recognisance, neither his Heir nor Executor shall avoid it, for those are
matters of record, and cannot be avoided by a nude averrement of non sanae
memoriae, for the inconvenience that thereupon may ensue, also such an
averrement is against the office and dignity of a Judge, for he ought not to
take any cognizance of a fine, or recognisance of him that is non compos
mentis, and therefore all acts that he makes in Court of record shall bind
himself, and all others for ever, and shall not have a releife in equity,
because it is against a ground and principle in Law, that no man shall disable
himself, and if the Judge were not compos mentis, yet all the Fines,
Judgments, and all other Records which are before him shall be good: because
they are matters of Records, Cbichell, Copy-holds.

Vim vi repellere licet, Coke com. f. 162. It is lawful to repel force by
force, and that by the Law of nature, according to the civil rule, adversus
periculum naturalis ratio permittit se defendere, natural r^^son permits to
defend himself against danger, which is manifest in Beasts, which though they
have not the substance and reason of the Law, yet have they a certain shadow
of it, and which is not only observed in Beasts, but also in infants, and
children.

But yet as Coke in the same place says, must it be done with this caution,
moderamine inculpatae tutelae, non ad sumendam vindictam, sed ad propulsandam
in juriam, with the moderation of an unblameable defense, not thereby to take
revenge, but to repulse the injury.

In trespass of an assault and battery for Beasts taken, the Defendant said,
that to all but the assault he was not guilty, and for the assault he said,
that before the trespass the Defendant was possessessed of an horse, as of his
proper Goods, and of it was possessed till the Plaintiff took it out of his
possession, and the Defendant the same day and year requested it of the
Plaintiff, but the Plaintiff said that he would not deliver it, and the
Defendant said, if he would not deliver the horse to him, he would retake it in
spite of him, and presently took a staff which was lying on the ground, and
went toward the Plaintiff with it, which is the same assault, of which the
Plaintiff has conceived his Action: Judgment if Action, and the opinion of the
Judges was, that the assault was justifiable, Kelloway, 22. H. 7. f. 92. If two
fight together on a sudden, and before a mortal wound be on either party,
the one flies to the wall, or to some other unpassable place to save his life,
and upon the pursuit of the other he kills him, this is manslaughter in his
own defense, 3. E. 3.284.

From moral Philosophy.
NExt in order succeeedeth moral Philosophy, the exact knowledge of which, as
Picolonomy, Inductio ad libros Civil. Philos. cap. 6.
cannot be comprehended without the precognition of the natural, and therefore
has the precedence, for the moral faculty does instruct men to avoid vices,
and to cure the maladies of the mind, which cannot be completely accomplished
without the natural contemplation of the affections of the soul, it is called
Ethica by the Philosopher, or institutions of manners, by which the oblique
manners of men are rectified, and their Enormities regulated, and certainly
from such exorbitances of manners originally proceeded the institutions of
Laws, and from whence, as Doderidge, all Laws are in generalty derived, for in
the primary age (which may rather be named the Iron, then the golden age) when
men lived like beasts, Dod. English Lawyer. f. 250.
the one praying on the other, according to the censure of the Philosophical
Poet.

Quod praedae obtulerat fortuna, cuique ferebat.
Sponte sibi quisque valere, and vivere doctus.
What fortune offered for a pray, each one
Laid claim to it, learned to live alone,
And serve himself.
Then were Laws first excogitated to suppress the barbarous Savageness of such
humane beasts, and to reduce them to a more civil association, as the Venusine
Poet rightly, Jura inventa metu injusti, fateare, necesse est,
Tempora si fastosque velis evolvere mundi
If we revolve the Annalls of man's time,
From the worlds birth, we must confess and find
That Laws were founded for fear of the unjust.


Seeing then Laws were introduced, from the depraved judgments and corrupt
manners of men, who will not acknowledge that the science by which they are
formed, and the principles deduced from it, are requisite and material to the
fundamental knowledge of the Law; From which Fountain our Law does draw these
grounds and maxims.

Illud possumus, quod jure possumus, Reg. I.C. We can do that which by right
we can do, for as Boethius, potentia non est nisi ad bonum, ability and power
is not but to good, for the power to have liberty to do wrong, is not by such
liberty augmented, but diminished, and potentia injuriae est impotentia
naturae, the power to do injury is the impotency of nature, as to decay, and
dye, is no power, but in respect of the privation and diminution in the thing,
is rather impotency, as the Angels and Saints confirmed in glory and cannot
sin, are more powerful then man, who through his impotency can sin. So a King
ruling royally, and with whom whatsoever shall please him, has the power of a
Law, and may do what evil he lift is more impotent then he that does all
according to the rule and square of Law; and therefore does the Law give this
rule, Illud Rex solum potest quod de jure potest, Coke l. 3. 99. f. 123. and l.
1. 11. f. 7. Solum Rex hoc non potest quod non potest injuste agere. The King
only can do that which by right he can do, and the King can only not do
this, that he cannot do any thing unjustly, as 4. E. 4. 15. the King can be no
disseisor, he can be no wrong doer, so if the King granterh and releaseth the
services to the tenant and his heirs, that shall not extinct the tenure in
all, for necessity of the tenure, and the King cannot by his charter alter the
Law, and therefore it shall be expounded as near to the intention of the King
as may be, and that is to extinguish all the services, but it only which is
incident inseperably to every tenure, and that is fealty, for it the King
cannot do by Law, Coke l. 9. f. 123. a.

And Coke l. 11. f. 72. a. The King shall not be exempt by construction of Law,
out of the general words of Acts made to suppress wrong, because he is the
Fountain of Justice, and common right, and the King being Gods Lieutenant
cannot do wrong, and with it accords, 13. E. 4. 8. in the case of Alton
woods, l. 1. f. 41.

So Lands were given to Henry the seventh, and the heirs males of his body,
and the question was, whether the King in regard that he was not expressly
restrained by the Act of 13. E. 3. de donis conditionalibus post prolem
masculam sussitatum, might alien, or no, and it was adjudged he could not
alien, but was restrained by the said Act, for it were an hard argument to
grant, that the Statute which restrains men to do wrong and evil shall
permit liberty to the King to do it, Ployd. f. 246. Signior Barklys case, Coke
ibidem vide plura.

Potestas regis juris est non in juriae, and cum sit author juris non debet
inde injuriarum masci occasio, unde jura mascuntur, Bract. l. 2. The Kings
power is of right, and not injury, and as he is the author of right, there
ought not from thence to arise occasion of injury from whence rights proceed.

As if one who intends to sell his Land, and by fraud conveyed it by deed
enrolled to the King, to the intent to deceive the purchaser, and then he
sells the Land to another for a valuable consideration, and makes conveyance
accordingly, in this case the purchaser shall enjoy the land against the Queen
by the Statute of 27. Eliz. c. 4. For though the Queen be not excepted, yet the
act being general, and made in suppressing of fraud, shall bind the Queen.

So if tenant in tail be seized of Land, the remainder over in tail, or in fee,
and he in the remainder knowing that tenant in tail will alien the Land, and by
recovery bar his remainder, to the intent to deprive the tenant in tail of his
birthright, and power that the Law has given him to bar the remainder, and of
intent and purpose to deceive the purchaser, grants his reversion to the
Queen by deed enrolled, and then tenant in tail for a valuable consideration
alieneth the Land by common recovery, and dies without issue, the purchaser
shall enjoy the Land against the Queen, by the Statute of 27. Eliz. the words
of which are, that every conveyance, etc. made, etc. to the intent and of
purpose to deceive a purchaser, andt. shall be deemed only against such
purchaser, etc. to be utterly void, vide ibidem plura, in Magdalen Colleges
case, and l. 2. in Cholmlys case, f. 51.52.

And the King has a prerogative above all his Subjects, that where by fraud,
or salse suggestion he is deceived, that he in that case shall avoid his own
grant, jure regio. 22. E. 3. 47. in the Earl of Kents case, Stanf. pr. regis.
84. a. As the King can neither do himself injury nor others.

And therefore the Law favors right, and construeth all things according to
right, from whence proceeds the ground.

Constructio juris non facit injuriam, Coke, com. f. 183. a b. The construction
of right, or Law does no injury.

As though it be a maxim in the Law, that every man's grant shall by
construction of Law be taken most strongly against himself, yet is it so to be
understood that no wrong be thereby done, for it is another maxim in the Law,
that the construction of the Law does no injury, and therefore if tenant for
life makes a lease generally, this shall be taken by construction of Law, an
estate for his own life that made the Lease, for if it should be taken for the
life of the Lessee, it should be a wrong to him in the reversion, and so it is
if tenant in tail makes a Lease generally, the Law shall contrive this to be
such a Lease as may be lawfully made, and that is for term of his own life,
for if it should be the life of the Lessee, it should be a discontinuance, and
consequently the State which should pass by construction of Law should work a
wrong, Ibidem.

When two are in one house, or tenement, and one lays claim by one title,
and another by another, the Law shall adjudge him in possession, that right
has to have the house, or tenement, Littleton.

Coke com. f. 206. a. b. It is a general rule, that whenever the words of a
deed, or of the parties without deed, shall have a double intendement, and the
one stands with Law and Right, and the other is wrongful, and against Law,
the intendment which stands with Law and Right, shall be taken: As if tenant
in Fee-simple makes a Lease of Lands to B. to have and to hold for term of
life, without mentioning for whose life, it shall be deemed for the life of the
Lessee, for it shall be taken more strongly against the Lessor, for an estate
of a man's own life is higher then for the life of another, but if tenant in
tail makes such a lease, without expressing for whose life, this shall be
taken for the life of the Lessor, for the reason abovesaid, and also because
the Law which abhors injury and wrong, shall never so conster it, as it
shall work a wrong, and in this case if it should be for the life of the
Lessee, the estate should be discontinued, and a new reversion gained by wrong,
ibidem.

Where tenant in tail makes a Lease to another for term of life generally,
and after releaseth to the Lessee and his heirs, albeit between tenant in tail
and him, a Fee-simple passed. It has been adjudged, that after the death of
the Lessee, the entry of the issue in tail was lawful, which could not be, if
it had been a Lease for the life of the Lessee, for then by the release it had
been a discontinuance executed, Coke com. f. 42. b.

The Law more respects a lesser estate by right, then a larger estate by
wrong, as if tenant for life in remainder disse^se tenant for life, now he has
a Fee-simple, but if tenant for life dies, now is his wrongful estate in fee
by judgment in Law changed into a rightful estate for life, Coke com. f. 41.
etc.

If a man retain a servant generally, without expressing any time, the Law
consters it to be for one year, according to the Statute, 23. E. 3. C. 1.

And for the same reason, what is contrary to right and good manners is void in
Law, according to the rule of the Civilians, Contra jus, and bonos mores
conventiones hominum non valent, which accords with the ground of the common
Law, quod contra legem fit proinfecto habetur, whatsoever is done contrary to
to Law or right, is accounted not done, Coke l. 3. f. 74. quod vide.

As if a man makes a Feoffment in fee, upon condition he shall not alien, this
condition is repugnant, and against Law, and the state of the feoffee absolute,
Coke com. f. 206. b.

A Feoffment to A.B. his Heirs and assigns, with proviso, that he shall not
alien to no person, is void, but that he shall not alien to I.S. is good, for
upon the matter he has given the Land to him, and his Assigns except to I. S.
Ployd. f. 77. a.

So if a man makes a Feoffment in fee, upon condition that the feoffee shall
not take the profits, this condition is repugnant, and contrary to Law, and the
State is absolute, Ibid.

If a man be bound with a condition to enfeoff his wife, the condition is void
and against Law, Ibidem.

A man gives Land to two sisters, and the heirs of their bodies, under this
form, that she which lived longest should hold the Land wholly, which is void
because it is contrary to Law, for if the jointure be severed by fine, the
survivor shall not have the other part, 8. Ass. Pl. 33. Coke l. 1. in Corbets
case.

So if a man makes a Lease, upon condition that if the Lessor grants the
reversion he shall have fee, if the Lessor grants the reversion by fine, he
shall not have fee, because it is repugnant to Law, 6. A. 2. Pl. 28.
Pletingtons case.

The Testator makes a Lease of his house, and certain implements in it, for
years, rendering Rent to him, and to his Heirs, and Assigns, The Executors
received the Rent continually after the death of the Testator. The question
was, whether it was Assets or no, and by the Judges adjudged no assets, because
the whole rent appertained to the heir, Dier 360 b.

An obligation taken by the Sheriff color officij of any one in their custody
by course of Law, with a condition then for the appearance at the day mentioned
in the process, is void, because it is against the Statute of 23. H. 6. Coke
l. 10. in Beawsages case, vide ibidem plura.

And it is commonly holden, that if the condition of a bond be against Law, the
bond it self is void, Coke com. 206. b.

But herein the Law distinguishes between a condition against Law, for the
doing of any act is malum in se, and a condition against Law, because it is
either repugnant to the State, or against some maxim, or rule in Law, and that
common opinion is to be understood of conditions against Law, for the doing of
some act is malum in se. As if a man be bound upon condition to kill I. S. the
bond is void, for an unlawful condition is not of effect to gain any thing by
doing of it in our Law, Ployd. f. 34. b.

But otherwise it is in a Feoffment upon condition, for a Feoffment upon
condition that the Feoffee shall kill I. S. the Feoffment is good and absolute,
and the condition void, Ployd. Brownings case, 135.

And though all Feoffments upon conditions repugnant to Law, are void, in bonds
it is otherwise, for a bond upon such conditions is good.

As if a Feoffee be bound in a bond, that the Feoffee and his Heirs shall not
alien, the bond is good, yet he may notwithstanding alien, if he will forfeit
his bond that he himself has made.

So a bond with condition, that the Feoffee shall not take the profits, is
good, so a bond upon condition to enfeoff his wife is good, though it be
against a maxim in Law, Coke com. f. 206. And if the husband be bound to pay
his wife money, the bond is good.

Non valet impedimentum quod de jure non sertitur effectuum, Reg. I. C. Coke l.
4. 31. a. The let or impediment avails not, which takes not his effect from
the Law, as if the Lord be disseised, and the disseisor dies seized, or if the
Land be recovered from him by verdict, or erroneous judgment, in these cases
until the Land is recovered, or the judgment annihilated by the Law, the land
is not demisable, and yet after the land be re-continued, it is grantable
again by copy, but if copyhold lands be forfeited to the Lord, or escheate,
and before any new grant made, those lands be extended upon a Statute or
Recognisance acknowledged by the Lord, or if the wife of the Lord in a writ of
dower has that land assigned to her, though those impediments be acts in law,
yet for that that those interruptions are legal, the lands shall never after
be granted by copy, ibidem.

The words of an Act of Parliament must be taken in a lawful and rightful
sense, as where by the Statute of Gloucester, it is forbidden, that the husband
shall not alien the lands he has in right of his wife, whereof no fine is
levied in the Kings court; those words are to be understood, where no fine is
lawfully levied in the Kings Court, and therefore a fine levied by the husband
alone is not within the meaning of that Statute, for that fine should work a
wrong to the wife, but a fine levied by the husband and wife is intended by the
Statute, and that is lawful, and works no wrong, for generally the rule is
non praestat impedimentum, quod de jure non sortitur effectum, so the Statute
of W. 2. c. 5. Ita quod episcopus ecclesiam conferat, is construed, ita quod
episcopus ecclesiam legitime conferat, Coke com f. 361. b.

Nullam iniquam in jure praesumendum, Coke l. 4. f. 71. No injurious thing is
to be presumed in the law, for the law so abhors injury, that it grants
writs of anticipation to prevent them, quia timet, because a man fears them,
and that before any molestation, distress, or impleading, and there are six
sorts of such writs, first a man may have his writ of Mesne before he be
distrained, 2. a Warrantia Cartae before he be impleaded, 3. a Monstraverunt
before any distress, or vexation, 4. an Audita quereta before any execution
sued, 5. a Curia claudenda before any default of enclosure, and is a ne Injuste
vexes, before any distress, or molestation, Coke com. f. 100. a. And such an
Antipathy there is between the Law and injury, that no injury is to be presumed
in the law, and as Coke l. 10 f. 56. a. Odiosa and in honesta non sunt in lege
praesumenda, and in facto quod se habet ad bonum, and ad malum, magis de bono,
quam de malo praesumendum est, odious, and dishonest things are not presumed to
be in the law, and in a deed or action which has in it both good and evil, it
ought to be more presumed of the good, then of the evil, as there in the case
of the Chancellor of Oxford, it was resolved that covin and fraud shall never
be intended or presumed in the law, unless it be expressly averred, and in the
case of Tier and Meriell, Trin. 10. Jacob. That if no fraud be found by the
Jurors, the Judges shall not adjudge a Feoffment fraudulent, and that though
the Jurors have found circumstances, and presumptions to entitle the Jurors to
find fraud, it is but evidence to the Jury, and not any matter upon which the
Court may adjudge fraud, and the office of the Jurors is to adjudge upon the
evidence concerning matter of fact, and upon it to give their verdict, and not
to leave matter of evidence to the Court to judge, which does not appear to
them, as if A. bring an action of the case against B. upon trover and
conversion, of Plate and Jewels, and the Defendant pleads not guilty, now it
is good evidence to prove the conversion, that the Plaintiff requested the
Defendant to deliver them, and he refused it, and by it it shall be presumed
that he has converted them to his use, yet notwithstanding that is but
evidence, and if it be found by a special verdict that the Plaintiff requested
them of the Defendant, and he refused it, that is not matter upon which the
Court can adjudge any conversion, for the conversion ought to alter the action
of detinue into a trespass upon the case, which a denier cannot in law make,
for in every action of Detinue there is alleged in the count a request, and a
refusal, yet it is good evidence, and has always been allowed to prove a
conversion, that the Plaintiff demanded the goods, and the Defendant refused to
deliver them, Coke l. 10. In the case of the Chancellor of Oxford, vide ibidem
plura.

Nomen non sufficit, si res non sit de jure aut de facto, the name of a thing
is not sufficient, if the matter and substance be not of right or deed, Coke l.
4. f. 107. b. Pope Vrbane at the request of Ralph Baron of Greystack founded a
College, of a Master, and six Priests resident at Greystock, and assigned to
every one of his Priests, five marks by the year, besides his Bed and Chamber,
and the Master forty pounds by the year, and this certified in the Book of
first fruits, and tenths, Rectoriam, and Collegium of Greystock, and the said
College was in being five years before the Act of 1. E. 6. And it was resolved
by all the Judges that such a reputative College was not given to the King by
the Act of 1. E. 6. because it had no lawful beginning, nor the countenance of
a lawful beginning, for the Pope cannot found, or incorporate a College
within this Realm, nor to assign, or license others to assign temporal
livings to it, for it ought to be done by the King, and no other, for the name
does suffice, if the matter be not of right, or deed, Dier 81.

Quando duo jura in una persona concurrunt, aequum est ac si essent in
diversis, Reg. I. C. Ployd. f. 368. a. when two rights concur and meet together
in one person, it is all one, as if they were in several persons.

As if one has an estate for the life of A. the remainder to him for the life
of B. the remainder to him for the life of C. and he is disseised, and the
disseisor levieth a fine with proclamations, now by the present right he has
five years by the first favant, and if after these five years A. does dye, he
shall have other five years for the next remainder by the second savant, which
gives them, as to other persons, which have a future right, and if after those
five years B. does dye, he shall have other five years by the other remainder,
for says he, it is the text of the civil Law, when two rights meet together in
one person, it is all one as if they were in several persons, Ployd ibidem,
vide ibidem plura, in the Lord Zouches case.

Exception.
Coke l. 7. Calvin's case, f. 14. b. This rule holds not in personal things,
that is, when two persons are necessarily and inevitably required by Law, as in
the ease of an alien borne there is; for in the case of an alien borne you must
of necessity have two several legiaries to two several persons; and no man
will say, that now the King of England may make a League with the King of
Scotland, and that because in the Kings person there concur two distinct
Kingdoms, it is all one as if they were in several persons, vide ibidem, f. 2.

Coke l. 4. f. 118. a. Though a Bishop when he is translated to an
Archbishopric, or a Baron be created an Earl, now he has both those
dignities, and as it is commonly said, when two rights concur in one person,
it is all one as if they were in several persons; yet the Act of 21 H. 8. was
always construed strictly against Non-residence, and Pluralities, as a thing
much prejudicial to the service of God, and the instruction of his people; and
therefore within that Act: an Archbishop shall have no more Chaplains then as
an Archbishop; or an Earl, then as an Earl, for though they have diverse
dignities, yet is it but one and the same person to whom the attendance and
service shall be made; and if a Baron be made Knight of the Garter, or Warden
of the Cinque Ports, he shall have but three Chaplains in all: Et sic de
similibus, quia difficile est ut unus homo vicem duorum sustineat, because it
is an hard thing for one man to undergo or sustain the Place and Office of
two persons.

Coke l. 4. In the case of the death of one within the Verge, the Coroner of
the household of the King, and the Coroner of the County, shall join in the
Inquiry, and if one be Coroner of both, he shall well execute this authority.

Quilibet potest renunciare juri pro se introducto, Coke Comment. f. 99. a.
Every man may renounce or refuse a Law made or brought in for himself: as a
man seized of lands may at this day give the same to a Parson, Bishop, etc. and
their successors in frank-almoigne, by the consent of the King and the Lords
mediate and immediate, of whom the Land is holden, for every one may renounce a
Law brought in for himself, and f. 223. b. The Statute of 32. H. 8. gives
power to tenant in tail, to make a lease for three lives, or twenty one years,
yet if a man make a gift, in tail upon condition that he shall not make a lease
for three lives, or twenty one years, the condition is good, for the Statute
does give him power to make such leases which may be restrained by condition,
and by his own agreement, for this power is not incident to the estate, but
given to him collaterally by the act, according to that rule in Law, Quilibet
potest, etc.

Coke l. 10. f. 101. a. In the Act of 23. H. 6. c. 10. the words, upon
reasonable sureties of sufficient persons, are added for the security of the
Sheriff, and therefore if he will take but one surety, be it at his peril, for
he shall be amerced if the Defendant appears not, and for it the Statute does
not make the obligation void in such case, for the said branch which
prescribes the form, requires that the obligation shall be made to the
Sheriff himself, etc. by the name of their office, and that the prisoners
shall appear, in which clause no mention is made of the sureties, so as the
intent of the Act was (that for that it was at the peril of the Sheriff) to
leave it to his discretion to take one or more for his indemnity, and
peradventure it may be better for him sometimes to take one that is sufficient,
then two others, and though the sureties or surety have not sufficient within
the same County as the Statute mentions, yet the obligation is good enough,
for those words of the Act as to that point are more for counsel and direction
of the Sheriff, then for precept and constraint to him, and that for the safety
of the Sheriff, for if the Defendant cannot find two sufficient sureties,
having sufficient within the same County, the Sheriff is not bound to let him
to bail; and this resolution agrees with the ancient rule, to wit, Quilibet
potest, etc. An Orphant in London exhibited a bill in the Court of request
against another, for discovery of part of his estate, Phesant prayed a
prohibition upon the custom of London, but it was resolved, that he might sue
in what Court he would, and wave his privilege there, 19. C. B. R.

But this case extends not to any thing that is against the Commonwealth, or
common right, Coke com. f. 166. a.

Summum jus, summa injuria, Ployd. 160. b. The rigor of the Law is the
extremity of injury, if a man make a lease of a message, so as he may make his
profit of his houses there within, he cannot abate the houses or make wast of
them, by the opinion of the book, H. 17. E. 3. f. 7. for the intent was not
such, though that the words seem otherwise, and said to pursue the words is
Summum jus, which the Judges ought not to do, but ought rather to pursue the
intent.

And for the same reason the Executors of Tenant for life shall have reasonable
time to remove his goods, after his decease: and a man shall have reasonable
time, wherein he shall purchase a Writ of Journys account, Finch Nomot.

Jus descendit, and non terra, 20 H. 6. 5. The right descended, and not the
land; and Coke Inst. f. 345. a. b. There is a right which includes an estate
in esse, in Conveyances, which he in reversion and remainder has, and has jus
in re, and may be granted to a stranger with attornement, or released to him in
possession, as if Tenant in fee-sample makes a Lease for years, and releaseth
all his right in the Land to the Lessee and his heirs, the whole estate in
Fee-simple passes, and also the release to him in possession, with the
reservation of a rent is good, and there is another right, which is called a
bare, mere, and naked right, and jus adrem, when an estate is turned to a
right by discontinuance, disseisin, abatement, etc. and of this right is the
saying to be understood, that the right descends, and not the Land, which may
be released to him in possession, and this right is also called jus
proprietatis; as if a man be disseised of an Acre of Land, the disseisee has
jus proprietatis, and the Disseisor has jus possessionis, and if the Disseisee
release to the Disseisor, he has jus proprietatis and possessionis, Coke com.
266. a. but the reservation of a Rent upon such a release is void; as if the
disseisee release to the disseisor of Land, reserving a rent, the reservation
is void, Coke com. 144. b. Neither can a bare right, a right of entry, or a
thing in action, be granted, or transferred to a stranger by the ancient maxim
of the Common Law, Coke com. f. 166. for that thereby is avoided great
oppression, injury, and injustice; but if a bare right happen to be forfeited
to the King, he may grant the same by his Prerogative.

Frustra est potentia, quae nunquam venit in actum, Vain is the possibility
which never comes into act, Coke l. 2. f. 501.

There is jus proprietatis possessionis, and possibilitatis, and the right of
possibility which depends upon the death of a man, has a necessary and
common intendment, to wit, necessary in regard that all the issues of Adam must
dye, for statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori, and common, because the
death may happen at such a time that the contingency may take effect; and this
necessary and common possibility is called potentia propinqua, which may come
into act, and is not therefore vain, or void in Law; as in 15 H. 7. 10. If
Lands be given to a married man and a married woman, and to the heirs of their
two bodies engendered, this is a good estate in tail, for it is of necessity
that death shall ensue; and in common possibility that one shall dye before the
other, so as the marryage may ensue; but in the same case there shall not be
possibility upon possibility: and therefore if land be given to one man and two
women, there the Law shall not intend, that first he shall marry one, and then
that she that he shall marry shall dye, and that he shall espouse the other,
and therefore in this case they have several inheritances at the beginning, as
if Land be given to two barons and their femes, and the heirs of their bodies
engendered, in this case the Law shall not expect second marriages, and
therefore in this case they shall have joint estates for life, and one baron
and feme one moiety in tail in common, with the other baron and feme of the
other moiety, and so several inheritances; and with it accords, 24. E. 3.
29. for otherwise there should be possibility upon possibility, and if a man
give Land to baron and feme, there is an apparent possibility, that they shall
have issue, but if after they be divorced, causa praecontractus, so as the
possibility is dissolved, the Law shall never expect the second marriage, for
by the divorce they have but an estate of Frank-tenement, 4. H. 7. 16. 17. And
a woman may enfeoff a married man, causa matrimonij prae locuti, for it is of
necessity that death shall ensue, and in common possibility, that the Feme of
the Feoffee shall dye before the Feoffee: So in the common case of a lease for
life, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. the remainder is good for the
necessary and common intendement, vide ibidem plura, in Lampets case, Coke l.
10. f. 50. b.

For the Law respects the right of possibility, and will have nothing to be
void that by possibility may be good: As a mesnalty is given in tail, reserving
a rent, this is good, for the tenancy may escheate to the donee, and then the
doner shall distraine for all the arrearages, 1. H. 4. 2.

A man has issue a daughter, and leaves his wife privement enseint, the wife
may detain the Charters of her husbands Lands from the Daughter, for the
possibility, it may be a Son she goes withal, 41. E. 3. 21. b.

But if A. be indebted to B. in two hundred pounds and delivers goods to him
to sell to pay his debt in the best manner he can, and he is proferred two
hundred pounds for them, and refuses, and after sells them for an hundred
pounds, A. shall answer the residue of the debt notwithstanding this
possibility, 18. E. 4. 5.

But the possibility must be propinque, and a common possibility, as death, or
dying without issue, or coverture, or the like, but if it be a remote
possibility, the Law does judge it vain, because it shall not be intended by
common intendement to happen, as a remainder to a corporation which is not at
the time of the limitation and remainder, is void, though such a corporation
was after erected, during the particular estate, for that was potentia remota,
9. H. 6. 24. For as Ployd. f. 345. a. b. It is a principle in Law, that all
gifts, be it by devise or otherwise, they ought to have a donee in esse and not
in posse, who has capacity to take them given, when it ought to vest; as
devise of Lands in fee, and so of goods, if the devise dye before the devisor,
neither his Heir or Executor shall gain any thing by this Will, vide ibidem
plura, in Brets case.

So if a lease be made for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. if
at the limitation of the remainder there be not any such I. S. but during the
life of tenant for life I. S. is borne and dies, his heir shall never take,
as it is agreed in 2. H. 7. 13. And so in 11. E. 3. 46. the case was, that upon
a fine levied to R. he granted, and rendered the tenements to one I. and F. his
wife for their lives, the remainder to G. the Son of I. in tail, the remainder
to the right heirs of I. and at the time levied I. had not any son named G.
but after he had issue named G. and in praecipe against F. it was adjudged that
G. should not take the remainder in tail because he was not borne at the time
of the fine levied, but long after, by which another who was right heir of I.
S. was received, for when I. had not any son named G. at the time of the fine
levied, the law does not expect that he shall have a Son named G. after, for
that is potentia remota, a remote possibility. But if the remainder had been
limited by a general name, as to the right heirs of I. or primogenito filio,
such a remainder might have been good for the common possibility. But if a
remainder be contrary to Law, the Law shall never adjudge a grant good by
reason of a possibility, or expectation of a thing which is contrary to Law,
for that is potentia remotissime and vana, which by the intendement of the Law
never comes into act, Coke l. 2. f. 5. 2. n. b. in Sir Hugh Chomleys case,
vide ibidem plura.

And hereby the way may pertinently be observed, that a possibility cannot be
released, as if before judgment the Plaintiff in an action of debt, releaseth
to the bail in the Kings Bench all demands, and after judgment is given, this
shall not bar thee to have execution against the bail, because at the time of
the release he had but a mere possibility, and neither jus in re, or jus ad
rem, but the duty is to commence after upon a contingent, and therefore could
not be released presently.

So if the Conusee of a Statute release to the Conusor all his right in the
Land, yet afterward he may sue execution, for he has no right to the Land till
execution, but only a^ possibility, and so have I known it adjudged, Coke com.
f. 265. b.

So if A. grant to B. that if he do such an act, he shall have an annuity of
twenty pounds during his life, before the Act done he cannot release the
annuity, Coke l. 1. in Albanys case.

Lex semper dabit remedium, the law so favoreth right, that it will suffer
things against the principles of Law, rather then a man to be without his
remedy.

As a man who is outlawed may bring an action to reverse it, and an outlawry
there is no Plea, 4. H. 7. 40.

The Tenant shall have a replevin against the Lord that did wrongfully
distraine, though the beasts be come back to himself (because he can have no
action of trespass against him for that prisall) and shall recover damages for
the tortious prisall F. n. b. f. 69. H.

A man (after judgment is passed against him) shall plead against the King a
Charter of pardon, or any such thing done in the mean betwixt the verdict and
the judgment, because against the King he can have no Audita querela, 11. H.
7.10. otherwise it is against a common person.

And therefore is it a principle in Law, cuicumque aliquis quid concedit
concedere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest, Coke l. 11. f. 52.
a. Which Ploydon thus expresses, that it is held as a maxim, in 2. R. 2. in
trespass, that if any man has interest to any thing by the grant, and assent
of another, and the party who has such interest cannot have the principal
thing without doing the other thing, that he may do the said other thing, and
justify it, because it is a means to come to his profit, for there it is
holden, That if one grant to me all his Trees growing in his Woods, I may cut
them down, and carry them through all his Land, and though his Grass be
spoiled with the carriage, he shall not have a Writ of trespass of it, for
Trees are such things that if they be not carried by Carts, he cannot have
them, nor make his profit of them. But if one sell all his Fish in his Pond,
and the Vendee dig a trench so as the water may run out, that by such means he
may take the Fish, an action of trespass will lie against the Vendee, because
he might take the Fish by Nets, or other Engines, but if there had been no
other means to take them, it had been otherwise, and to come to the banks to
fish he may well justify it, for without it he cannot take them by any means,
so as a man shall always justify the necessary circumstance, where he has
title to the principal thing, Ployd, f. 15. and 16. a. vide ibidem plura, in
Renigers case.

So when a Lessor in the Lease except the Trees and after has an intention to
sell them, the Law gives to him, and to those who will buy them power as
incident to the exception to enter, and show the Trees to those who will have
them, for without entry they cannot view, and without view they cannot buy,
Coke l. 11. f 52. in Lisords case.

So 19. H. 6.29. A man seized of a mese in a Borough, etc. devisable, devises
it to his wife in tail, and that if his wife dye without issue, that his
Executor may sell it, and it dispose for his soul, in this case the Executor
may by the Law enter into the house, to see whether it be well repaired, or no,
to the intent to know at what value he may sell the reversion. And the Law
gives power to him who will repair a Bridge, to enter in the Land, and to him
who has a Conduit within the Land of another, to enter into the Land for it,
to mend as cause shall require, as it is resolved in 9. E. 4.35. Coke ibidem,
vide plura.

And Coke l. 5. f. 12. a. If a man has Mines hidden within his Land, and
leaseth his Lands, and all his Mines in it, there the Lessor may dig for them,
for quando aliquis quid concedit, etc. and this accords with 9. E. 4.8. that
if a man lease his Land to another, in which there is a Mine, to wit, an hidden
Mine, he cannot dig for it, and if he do, it is wast, but if he lease his
Lands, and all the Mines in it, it is otherwise, for the reason aforesaid, vide
ibidem plura, in Saunders case.

If tenant at will sows Corn on the ground, and the Lessor out him, he shall
have free entry, egresse, and regresse to carry it away, for when the Law
gives any thing to any one, it gives implicitly whatsoever is necessary for
the taking and enjoying of the same, and the Law drives him not to an action
for the Corn, but gives him a speedy remedy to enter into the Land, and to
take, and carry it away, and compels not him to carry it at one time, or to
carry it, before it be ready to be carried, and if the Lessee be disturbed of
this way the Law does give unto him, he shall have his action upon the case and
recover his damages, for whenever the Law gives any thing, it gives a
remedy for the same, Coke com f. 56. a. If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant,
and the Lord purchases the tenancy in fee, the mesnalty is extinct, but
whereas the tenant held of the mean by five shillings, and the mesne of the
Lord by twelve pence, so as he has more in advantage by four shillings, he
shall have the four shillings as a rent-seck yearly of the Lord, and yet he
shall distraine for it, for seeing the mesnalty is extinct, the Law reserveth
the distress to the rent, for quando lex aliquid concedit, etc. And therefore
if a man makes a Lease for life, reserving a rent, and binds himself in a
Statute, and has the rent extended, and delivered unto him, he shall distraine
for the rent, because it comes to him by course of Law.

Multa constituuntur in lege, ne curia Domini Regis deficeret in Justitia
exhibenda, Coke l. 7. f. 4. Many things are constituted in law, least the Court
of the Lord the King should fail in doing of Justice, by the Statute of W. 2.
c. 8. It is provided, that so often as from henceforth there shall be found in
the Chancery, that in one case there is found a Writ, and in the like case
falling under the same right, and wanting the like remedy, no Writ is found,
let the Clerks of the Chancery agree in making a new Writ, etc. or at the next
Parliament, let there be a Writ by the consent of the learned in the law, and
the estate concludes with the effect of the common law, Quod curia domini
Regis non debet deficere conquerentibus in Justitia perquirenda, That the Kings
Court ought not to be slack or deficient to the Complainant in seeking Justice,
and therefore if there be Lord and Tenant, and the tenancy extend into two
Counties, in this case, if the rents or services be behind, the Lord may have
several Writs of customs and services, for each County a Writ, and shall have
them retornable at one day in the common bench, and there upon count according
to his case by the commmon Law, because otherwise the Court of the King should
be deficient to the Plaintiffs in seeking of Justice, Coke com. f. 154. a. and
Coke l. 7. f. 4. a. b. vide ibidem plura, in Bulvers case.

If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Mesne does truly his services
paramount, and yet the Lord distraineth the Tenant paravaile for them, at that
time the distress is tortious, and the tenant is not distrained in default of
the mesne, yet in this case if the tenant paravaile request the mesne to take
his Cattle out of the ground, and to put in the proper Cattle of the mesne in
place of them, or if the tenant had replevind his own Cattle, and requested the
mesne to join, and to acquit him, and he refuse, by that matter ex post facto.
the Law shall adjudge that the tenant paravaile was distrained in default of
the mesne, and in a Writ of mesne, the mesne shall plead not distrained in his
default, and it shall be found against him, or otherwise the tenant paravaile
who is in no default shall have wrong, and yet shall be without remedy, and it
is all one to the tenant, whether the distress was wrongful or right if he
have not any distress, 39. E. 3.34 etc. By which it appears that the Judges
in those ages did endeavor to put the rule of W. 2. in execution, Curia Domini
Regis non debet deficere conquerentibus in Justitia exhibenda. Coke l. 9. f.
111. a. b.

And Coke l. 9. f. 88. b. The Executors (which in truth has the Goods in
another right, to wit, to pay the debts, etc. of the Testator) shall not
convert them to their private use, without paying the just and true debts of
the Testator, for that shall be against Justice and right, and against the
Office of Executors, which are but the Ministers and dispensers of the Goods of
the dead, and notwithstanding the death of the Testator, yet the debt
remains, for death is not a discharge of debt, and it should be a great
defect in Law that no remedy shall be given for it, and curia domini regis de
ficeret, etc. Coke l. 9. f. 88. b. And therefore an action upon the assumpsit
made by the testator, shall lie against the Executors, because in such case the
Testator could not gage his Law, for by it Justice and right is advanced, in
that the creditor shall be paid his just and due debt, ibidem.

So Coke com. f. 74. a. There are diverse manners of trialls appointed by the
Law besides the common trial by a Jury of twelve men upon oath, least the
Court of the King should be defective in doing of Justice, as in the time of
War out of the Realm, the trial shall be by the certificate of the Marshall
of the host in writing under his seal, which shall be sent to the Justices, so
in the time of peace out of the Realm, as if it be alleged for avoiding an
Outlawry, that the Defendant was in prison at Bordeaux, in the service of the
Mayor of Bordeaux, it shall be tried by certificate of the Mayor of Bordeaux,
and in the like cases such trials shall be by the Marshall of the Army, or by
a messenger of a thing done beyond the Seas, 2. Eliz. 176. In Barrys case. And
for matters within the Realm, the custom of London shall be certified by the
Mayor, and Aldermen, by the mouth of the Recorder, likewise by certificate of
the Sheriff, upon a Writ to him directed, in case of privilege, if one be a
Citizen or a Forrainer. And by trials of Records, by certificate of the
Justices in whose custody they are by Law. So in causes ecclesiastical, as
loyalty of marriage, general Bastardy, Excommengement, Profession, and the
reason, that trials by certificate are peremptory, because if the Court should
re-examine it, they have no other remedy, but to write to the same officer made
the certificate, and it is not to be presumed, that they would differ from
their former certificate, Bac. Max. f. 26.

A Lord of Parliament upon an enditement of treason, or felony, shall be tried
by his peers without oath upon their honors and allegiances, but in an appeal
at the suit of the Subject, they shall be tried per probos, and legales homines
juratores, 10. E. 4.6.8. Customs and Usages of every Court, shall be tried by
the Judges of the same Court, if they be pleaded in the same Court, 11. E.
4.2.9. In dower, an appeal brought of the death of her husband, or in Assise
brought by the feme, which was the wife of B. if the Tenant or Defendant plead,
that the husband is alive, the trial shall not be by Jury, but by Justices
upon Process made before them for the greater expedition, 6. E. 3. 29. etc.

In a Writ of Error to reverse a fine for nonage, or in an Audita qu^rela to
reverse a Statute, or Recognisance for nonage, there the age shall be tried by
inspection of the Judges, and not by the Country, And so it is if tenant vouch
A. as heir within age, and tenant for life vouch him in the reversion within
age, and prays that the Plea may demurr, etc If an infant appear by an
Attorney, it is Error, and shall be tried by the Country, because the making of
the warrant of Attorney is the act of the party, and yet the appearance of the
Attorney is recorded in Court, but if the Plaintiff makes an Attorney in Court,
and the Defendant pleads that the Plaintiff is dead, and one appears and
says, that he is the Plaintiff, which is denied by the other party, the Judges
shall adjudge, whether he that now appears be the same person, who at another
time made the Attorney in Court, 34. H. 6. 43. And a maihme may be tried by the
inspection of the Court, 28. Ass. 38. If question be made whether they be
summoners, and viewers which appear, it shall be tried by the examination of
the Justices. 33. H. 6. 10.

So whether an Earl be an Earl, or a Baron a Baron or no, shall not be tried
by the Country, nor by the Justices, but by the writ of the King, Coke l. 5. in
the Countess of Rutlands case. And in Plea of an alien borne, the league
between the King and the Sovereign of the alien borne shall be tried by the
record of Chancery, for every league is of record, and generally all matters of
record shall be tried by the record it self, and not by the Country, or
otherwise, Coke l. 9. f. 31. vide de hoc plura ibidem.

And when a man is found an idiot from his nativity by office, he who is so
found may come into the Chancery, before the Chancellor, and pray that before
him or such Justices, or sages of the Law, he may be examined whether he be an
idiot or no, or by his friends may sue a Writ out of the Chancery, retornable
in the Chancery, to bring him into the Chancery, there before us or our
counsel to be examined, and if he be found upon that examination not to be an
idiot, the office so found, etc. is utterly void, without any traverse or
monstrans de droit, or otherwise, F. n. b. 233.10. E. 3. Title Livery, 30.

An Apostate shall be certified by the Abbot, or other religious governor, to
whom he owes obedience, F. n. b. 232.

In an appeal, or upon an approvement, the Defendant may plead not guilty,
and try it with the Plaintiff by combat, or battle in person, before the
Justices* 9. Ass. Pl. 1. But the Defendant is restrained from choice of battle,
if there be any notorious presumption of the fact in him, Finch. Nomo^. f. 422.
vide ibidem plura.

And in a Writ of right, the tenant may join issue upon the mere right, and
try it by combat or battle by his champion with a freeman the champion of
the demandant, and not in person before the Justices, 9. E. 4.35. If it be in
question which of the Sheriffs made such a return, it shall be tried by the
Sheriff, 9. H. 4.1. If question be made if such a one be Sheriff, it shall be
tried by the examination of the Sheriff himself, 10. H. 4.7. Yet is he made by
Letters Patents on record, and therefore it also may be tried by record, 32. H.
6.27. A return made by the under Sheriff, if it be denied, shall be tried by
the under Sheriff, and the Sheriff cannot disavow it, if he confess him to be
his under Sheriff, 10. H. 4.7. If an approver say that he commenced his appeal
before the Coroner, by duress, that shall be tried by the Coroner, and if the
Coroner deny it, he shall be hanged, 12. Ass. 29.

Trial, if the Statute showed forth, be a true Statute, or no, shall be tried
by the examination of the Mayor, and Clerk of the Statutes who took the
Statutes, F. N. B. 104. H.

In Assize the Tenant says, that the Lands are taken into the hands of the
King, it shall be tried by the examination of the Escheator, 9. H. 4.1.

To a petit Cape the Tenant says, that he was in Prison three days before,
and three days after, it shall be tried by the examination of the Attorney, 13.
R. 2.22.

Not attached within fifteen days in an assize shall be tried by the
examination of the Bailey. So that the tenant was not summoned according to the
Law of the Land, shall be tried by Law-gager, and the Law-gager does
countervaile a Jury, for the tenant shall make his Law duodecima manu, to wit,
by eleven besides himself, unless it be against a Corporation, for then it
shall for necessity be tried by the Country, because it cannot wage Law.

In a Writ of deceit upon a Recovery by default, the trial shall be (if the
judgment was given upon the petit capit) by the Summoners, if upon a grand
Cape by the Summoners, Pernors, and Viewers, 48. E. 3.11. So if a Recovery by
default in a real action be pleaded, and the other says, not comprised, it
shall be tried by the Summoners, and Viewers, 10. H. 4.7. and yet their is no
remedy if they speak falsely, and therefore ubi majus periculum ibi cautius est
agendum, where there is a greater danger, there we ought to be more wary.

The cause of challenge shall be tried by two tryers to be appointed by the
Justices, 9. E. 4.5. But the trial of any one of the grand Jury shall be taken
by four Knights. Trial may be in debt upon a simple contract, detinue, etc.
either by Law, gager, by the Defendant himself, or by the Country at the
election of the Defendant, 30. Ass. P. 19. Coke. l 9. f. 32.33.

And Coke. com. f. 74. If a Subject of the King be killed by another of his
Subjects in a foreign Country, the wife, or heir of the dead may have an
appeal for that murder or homicide, before the Constable and the Marshall,
whose sentence is upon testimony of witnesses or combat, and their proceedings
according to the civil Law, and not by the oath of twelve men, and so was it
resolved in the twenty fifth of Elizabeth, in the case of Sir Francis Drake who
struck off the head of Dowty in partibut transmariuis, that his Brother and
Heir might have an appeal, but the Queen would not constitute a Constable of
England, and therefore the appeal was dormant. And Coke com. f. 261. b. By the
Statute of 25. E, 3. De proditionibus, it is declared, that it is Treason by
the common Law to adhere to the Enemies of the King within the Realm, and
without, if he thereof be proveablement attaint of overt-fact, and that he
shall forfeit all his Lands, etc. But least the common Law declared by
Parliament should be illusory, and that the Delinquent might not be attainted
thereof, for necessities sake the adherency without the Realm must be alleged
in some place within England,, and if upon evidence they shall find any
adherency out of the Realm, they shall find the Delinquent guilty, but most
commonly they endited him if he had Lands in some County where the Lands did
lie, that were to be forfeited, and so it is declared by the Statute of 35. H.
8. And that it shall be tried by twelve men of the County where the Kings Bench
shall sit, and determined before the Justices of that Bench, or else before
such Commissioners, and in such Shire of the Realm as shall be assigned by his
Majesty's commission, and this Statute for this point remains in force at
this day, and so was it resolved by all the Judges, 33. Eliz. in Orurks case,
and 34 Eliz. in Sir John Perots case, for Treasons done in Ireland, for that it
is out of the Realm of England.

I have been too copious in the exemplification of this ground by so many
notable cases drawn on by the variety and curiosity of them, they being
exorbitant from the beaten tract of the common Law, from which for the better
effecting, and doing of right, the Law deemeth it convenient, and necessary to
swarve and deviate, and that in favorem juris et recti.

To add one example more, if an obligation be made beyond the Seas, and it
bears date at Bordeaux in France, where shall it be sued? answer is made
that it may be alleged to be made in quodam loco vocato Bordeaux in France, in
Islington in the County of Middlesex, and there shall it be tried, for whether
there be such a place in Islington or no, it is not traverseable in that case,
Coke com. 261. b.

Executio juris non habet injuriam, Reg. I.C. and Hoba^t f. 266. The execution
of the Law has no injury. As if a man brings an action upon a false surmise
in a proper Court, he cannot bring an action against him, and charge him with
it as a fault directly, and ex diametro, as if the suite it self was a
wrongful act, for the execution of the Law has no injury.

So Coke com. f. 161. a. It is regularly true, that a man shall not be punished
for suing of Writs in the Kings Court, be it of right, or wrong, ibidem.

And therefore 11. Eliz. a man brought a Writ of forger of false deeds, the
Defendant though he be found guilty, could not have a scandalum magnatum, and
lay the charge contained in the action to be the scandal, for no punishment
was ever appointed for a suite in Law, although it be false and upon vexation,
vide Dyer f. 285. Pl. 37.

And so we rule it every day, that if a man be imprisoned upon a formal suit,
though there were no just cause of suite, yet if he give a bond for his
release, he shall not avoid it by duresse, because it is incarceratio legitima.
Hob. 1. l.

And though every thing by nature is good, and as Saint Paul says, The Law is
good, if a man use it lawfully, yet the abuse of the Law is the fact, and
therefore on the contrary part, if you charge me with a crime in a Court, that
is no way capeable of the cause, I shall have an action for it, and lay that
very complaint to be the slander, as Coke l. 4. f. 14. b. Wood exhibited a bill
in the Star Chamber against Barkeley, and inter alia, charged him that he was a
maintainer of Pirates, and Murderers, etc. B. brought an action of the case
against W. and counted, that the said W. had exhibited a bill in the
Star Chamber containing inter alia, that the said B. was a maintainer of
murderers and pirates, etc. and it was resolved, that for any thing contained
in the bill, which was examinable in the said Court, no action lies, although
the matter was merely false, because it was in course of Justice, but for the
said words, not examinable in the said Court, an action upon the case lies,
for that could not be in course of Justice, vide ibidem plura.

And if a man sue me in a proper Court, yet if his suite be utterly without
ground of truth, and that certainly known to himself, and thus as the
Civilians, it be done animo injuriandi, I may have an action upon the case
against him for the undue vexation, and damage that he puts me unto by his
ill practice, though the suite it self be legal, but I cannot complain of it
as it is a suite, and therefore the sixteenth of E. 3. Fitz. deceit, 35. A
Conusee of a Statute sued execution against his deed of defeasance, whereupon
the Conusor had an action of deceit against him, and his Assignee, in the
nature of an Audita querela, yet though he was imprisoned upon the Statute,
could he not bring an action of false imprisonment, if he had paid the money
before the day limited by the defeasance, because he was imprisoned by course
of Law, 43 E. 3.33.

And if a man sue me, and hanging that suite, commenceth another against me, to
this I have a Plea in abatement, which proves this latter suite unjust and
vexatious, but if he discontinue the former he may bring a new action, 43. E.
3. for as Coke com. f. 130. a. It may be he has mistaken some thing in that
action, or was not provided of his proofs, or mistaking the day, or the like.

Likewise I hold I may have an action of the case against him, who sueth me
against his release, or after money duly paid, yea though it be upon a single
obligation, Hob. ibidem.

But in these cases, these two cautions are to be observed, that the new action
be not brought before the other be determined, because till then it cannot
appear that the other was unjust, 2. R. 1. And for this reason a Writ of
conspiracy lies not until the Plaintiff is acquitted.

The other is, that besides the thing done amiss, there must also be a damage
either already suffered, or else inevitable, and therefore 19. H. 6.44. If a
man forge a bond in my name, I can have no action of the case yet, but if I be
sued I may, for the wrong or damage, though I may avoid it by Plea, but if it
were upon a recognizance or fine, I shall have a deceit presently before
execution, for Quae incontinente aut certo fiunt in esse videntur, and 43. E.
3. 10. deceit against one who procured a Formedon, by collusion, vide ibidem
plura in Waterers case. And this rule fails in a Writ of Replevin against the
Lord, as if the Lord distraine for rent, and the tenant brings a Replevin,
whereby the Lord is disturbed of the means to come to his rent, this is in Law
a disseisin, Coke. com. f. 161. a.

Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria, Coke com. f. 147. b. No
man shall take advantage of his own wrong, as if B makes a lease of one Acre
for life to A. and A. seized of another Acre in fee, grants a rentcharge to
B. out of both Acres, and does wast in the Acre which he holds for life, B.
recovereth in wast, the whole rent is not extinct, but shall be apportioned,
and yet B. claims one Acre under A. and so it is if A. had made a Feoffment
to B. in fee, and B. had entered for the forfeiture, the rent is not wholly
extinct, but must be apportioned, and the reason hereof is, for that is a
maxim of Law, that no man shall take advantage of his own wrong. And therefore
seeing the wast and the forfeiture were committed by the act and wrong of the
Lessee, he shall not take advantage thereof to extinguish the whole rent, and
the whole rent cannot issue only out of the other Acre, because the Lessor
has one Acre under the estate of the Lessee, and therefore it shall be
apportioned, vide ibidem plura.

If a man be bound to appear at a day before Justices, at which day the
obligor casts him into Prison, so as he cannot come, the bond is saved,
otherwise if he were in Prison for Felony, or any other misdemeanor, for that
is his own act and fault, 32. H. 6. Bar 60. Or if he cast himself into Prison,
N^y. Max. f. 13. An infants appeal shall not stay for his full age, for he
shall not take advantage of his own wrong, 27. H. 8. 11.

One in Execution escapes, and the Jailer takes him again, the party if he
will, may have him to remain in Prison in execution for him still, for the
escape is his own wrong, 13. H. 7. 1. So Coke l. 3. in Britons case. If one in
Prison upon execution escape, if he be taken he shall not bring an Audita
querela to discharge himself of his imprisonment, for he shall not take
advantage of his own wrong. He that is party to a wrong, shall not take
advantage by the same wrong, Perk. 41. b. As if Lessor and Lessee for years
join in the cutting down of twenty Oaks, the Lessor shall not punish him in
a Writ of Wast, and take advantage of his own wrong. The heir which is party
to the death of his Father shall not have an appeal of it.

And if issue in tail disseise the Discontinuee of his Father, and then
enfeoff his Father, and his Father then dies seized, and the issue in tail
enter, he shall not be remitted.

If Lessee for life of one Acre of Land, leaseth the same Acre to his Lessor
for years, the remainder to a stranger in fee, and makes livery and seisin to
the Lessor accordingly, it is no forfeiture, Perkins ib.

If tenant for term of life enfeoff the feme of the Lessor of the same Land
leased, and makes a Letter of Attorney to the Lessor to make livery and seisin,
and he does so accordingly, it is no forfeiture, Perk. ibidem. f. 42. a.

If an house fall down by tempest, the Lessee for life or years, has a
special interest to take Timber to reedify the same if he will, for his
habitation, but if the Lessee pull down the house, the lessor may take the
Timber as parcel of his inheritance, and besides have an action of Wast, and
recover treble damages, Coke l. 4 f. 63. a. in Harlackendems case. A devises
lands to B. until eight hundred pounds be levied for the marriage of his
daughters, his Son and Heir enters, and concealeth the will and receives the
profits before the will is discovered, then the devisee enters, and receives
the profits until they amount to six hundred and forty pounds, the heir is to
supply the rent, for the heir shall not take advantage of his own wrong, Coke
l. 4.

Dormit Lex aliquando, jus moritur nunquam, Coke com. 279. b. For as Littleton
there has it, it is commonly said, that a right cannot dye.

For of such an high estimation is right in the eye of the Law, as that the Law
preserves it from death, and destruction, trodden it may be, but not trodden
out, for where it has been said, that a release of right does in some cases
enure by way of extinguishment, it is so to be understood, as here Littleton
says, in respect of him that makes the release, or else in respect by
construction of Law it enureth not alone to him to whom it is made, but to
others also who be strangers to the release, which as has been said, is a
quality of an inheritance extinguished: As if there be Lord and Tenant, and the
Tenant makes a Lease for life, the remainder in fee: If the Lord release to
the Tenant for life, the rent is wholly extinguished, and he in the remainder
shall take benefit thereof, and even so when the heir of a disseisor is
disseised, and the disseisor makes a release for life, the remainder in fee:
if the first disseisee release to the Tenant for life, this shall enure by way
of extinguishment, because it shall enure to him in the remainder who is a
stranger to the release, and yet in truth the right is nor extinguished, but
follows the possession, to wit, the tenant for life has it during his time,
and he in the remainder, to him and his heirs, and the right of the Inheritance
is in him in the remainder, for a right to Land cannot dye, or be extinct in
deed, and therefore if after the death of tenant for life, the heir of the
disseisor bring a Writ of right against him in the remainder, and he join the
Mise upon the mere right, it shall be found for him, because in Judgment of
Law, he has by the said release the right of the Disseisee, for it is commonly
and truly said, that right never dies, but is transferred and conveyed by
Feoffments, Grants, Confirmations, Prescriptions, or Fines, etc. releases from
one man to another, so as the Species of it continually remains.

Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, and factum unius alteri nocere
non debet, Coke com. f. 152. b Things acted among others ought not to hurt
either, and one man's deed ought not to hurt another, and Coke l 9 f. 59. It is
the rule of Law, and reason, prohibetur ne quis faciat in suo, quod nocere
possit in alieno, and sic utre tuo, ut alienum non laedas, it is forbidden,
least any one should do that in his own, that may hurt another, and so use
your own, that you injure not another. If a man has a Watercourse running in a
channel of a River up to his house, for his necessary ules, and a Glover levy
a Lime pit for Calve-skins, and Sheepskins so near his Watercourse, that the
corruption of the Lime pit has corrupted it, by which his tenants go out of
his house, for it an action of the case lies, as is adjudged in 13. H. 6. 26.
b. So he who has several Piscaries in his own Water, shall have an action of
the case against him, who erecteth a Dye-house, by which he makes slime,
filth, and other dirty things to run out of the said house, into the said
Piscaries, by which he has totally lost the profit of the said Piscaries, vide
in the Book of Entries, Nuisance. f 406. b. vide the same in Aldreds case, for
erecting of a Swine-house, and plura alia ibidem. And so also in Penruddocks
case, Coke l. 5. and in Batius case, l. 11. 54. Where you shall find diverse
notable cases to the same purpose.

Lessee for years shall so take his hedge-boote, that he does not destroy
common of Estovers, which another man has there, 46. E. 3. 17. He which has
common in Land not enclosed, shall keep his Cattle out of a stranges Land, 20
E. 4. 11.

If Beasts be driven by the high way, he ought at his peril to keep them out
of the Lands adjacent to the high way, except in case where the Owner is bound
to enclose, 4. E. 4 19. 10. E. 4. 7.

But if a man erect a wall, part on my Land, and part on his own, if I distroy
that on my Land, and the rest by that means falls down, it is excusable.

If a Feoffment be made to two jointly, one of them cannot dereigne the
warranty without the other, 48. E. 3. 17. Yet if a villain and another
purchase jointly, and the Lord of the villain enter into a moiety he may
dereigne the Warranty alone, for therein the severance grows by act in Law.

He that comes into a Tavern, and will not go out in reasonable time, or
distraine for rent, and kills the distress, shall be a wrong doer, ab
initio, 12. E. 4. 8. Because he misdemeaneth that the authority the Law gives
him.

Otherwise it is, if I lend my horse to one to ride to York, and he rides him
further, yet the riding further is not unlawful, neither a general action of
Trespass lies against him upon the accord upon the case, because he
misdemeaneth but the authority that another has given him, Finch. Nomot. f. 47.

If I be distrained and pay my rent, and after am denied to have my goods
delivered, an action of Trespass, or detinue lies, 21. H. 7.

If I deliver a chest to one, who breaks it, Trespass lies, 2. H. 8. If a
Sheriff makes an arrest, and returns not the Capias, an action of Trespass
lies, 8. E. 49.

An executor commands the taking of the goods of the Testator and refuses to
prove the will, a Trespass lies, 8. E. 4. 9.

The Sheriff seiseth the goods of one outlawed, and does not charge himself in
account, the Outlawry being reversed, or the party pardoned, he shall have an
action of Trespass against the Sheriff, 21. H. 7. 23.

Injuria illata incorpus non potest remitti, Reg. I. C. injury which is offered
to the body cannot be remitted, and the reason given by the Civilians is, quia
nemo membrorum suorum Dominus, because no man is Lord, and Master of his
members, but the power of them appertain to God our Creator, and the Prince
our Protector, which accords with the reason of the common Law, which
maintains, as Bracton says, quod cita, and membra sunt in postate Regis, and
as it is in the record of 19. E. 1. Rot. 36. vita and membra sunt in manu
Regis, that the life and member of every Subject are under the safeguard, and
protection of the King, to the intent they may serve the King, and their
Country when occasion shall be offered. Nay the Lord of a villain for the
cause aforesaid cannot maihme his villain, but the King shall punish him for
mayming of his Subjects by Fine, Ransom, and Imprisonment, until the Fine and
Ransom be paid, for that hereby, he has disabled him to do the King service,
Coke com. f. 127. a.

And therefore also does the Law more carefully provide for the preventing, and
punishing of such forcible injury in particular between person and person,
because as Coke com. f. 161. b. Max. paci sunt contraria vis, and injuria,
forcible injuries are most contrary to the quiet, and repose of the
Commonwealth, which is the public felicity both of Prince and people.

As if one do but menace another with a weapon, or staff, or if he stretch out
his arm, or give any other token, whereby his intention of striking does
appear, though never a stroke be given, yet is it actionable, 22. Ass. Pl. 60.

And upon an assault, the Writ was Quare insultum fecit, vulneravit and
maihemavit, and though the injury did not appear to be a maihm, yet was it
allowed, 43 E. 4. For the Law favoreth the Plaintiff in such Actions.

And though force be an enemy to peace, yet is it a maxim in our Law, Quod
quisque in tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure fecisse videatur, Fulb. l. 1. f.
91. whatsoever any one does in defense of his body, it seems to be done by
Law, according to the opinion of the Poet.

Judice me, fraus est concessa repellere fraud^m,
A maque in armatos sumere jura sinunt.
I do conceive it a good fraud to be
To repel fraud, and lawful eke for me
To take up arms against those I armed see.
As 2. H. 4 8. Bract. If any man beat me, I may lawfully beat him if I cannot
escape without st^ips, wounds, or maihmes.

Nay, 9. E 4. 3. I may beat him in defense of my goods, or wife, contrary to
the resolve of 43. Ass. 39. That it is not lawful for me to beat him, if I may
escape with my life.

And 9. E 4. A servant may justify a battery in defense of his Master, and 17.
E. 4. 4. He that comes in company of him who makes the assault, or comes in
to aid him, is a principal Trespassor, and if a Justice of Peace see a man
doing of an assault, he may presently arrest him by commandment or word, to the
intent that he may find surety of peace, 9. E. 4. 3

And by the civil Law, if any one do keep or nourish a Masty Dog, Bear, or
Fox, or some like beast, which does hurt, or damnify another man, he that
receives the hurt shall recover damages against the Owner of the beast, Fulb.
l. 1. f. 81.

And so at the common Law, if a man has a Dog which kills Sheep, and has
notice of the condition of the Dog, the master shall be punished for it, as may
be gathered out of Dyer, 28. H. 8. f. 25. Pl. 162. Otherwise if he be ignorant
thereof, or if it be done without the Masters incitation, ibidem. f. 19.

And whereas in many cases that concern Lands and Goods, the Law does deprive
a man of present remedy, and rather then to suffer an inconvenience, turns
him over to a further remedy, yet if the question be of a personal pain, the
Law does give him present remedy, because he holds no damage a sufficient
remedy for a corporal injury, which ground as Sir Francis Bacon ing^niously
observes, some of the Canonists do aptly infer out of Christ's sacred mouth;
Amen corpus est su^ra vestimentum, verily the body is more worth then raiment,
where they say vestimentum comprehends all outward things appertaining to a
man's condition, as Lands and Goods, which they say are not in the same degree
with that which is corporal, Bacon Max. f. 30.

As if a Sheriff make a false return, whereby I loose my Land, yet because of
the inconvenience of drawing things to delays, if the Sheriffs return should
not be credited: I am excluded of my averrement against it, and am put to my
action of deceit against the Sheriff, and Summoners, 5. E. 4. 80.

But if the Sheriff upon a Capias return a Cepy Corpus, and quod languidus est
in prisona, I may come in, and falsify the return of the Sheriff to save my
imprisonment, 3. H. 6. 3. So if a man menace me in my goods, and that he will
burn certain evidences of my Land, which he has in his hands, if I will not
make him a bond: and if I enter into bond by this terror, I cannot avoid it by
plea, because the Law holds it an inconvenience to avoid a specialty by such
matter of averrement, and therefore I am put to my action against such a
menacer.

But if he restrain my person, or threaten me with a battery, or with burning
of my house, which is a protection to my person, or with burning an Instrument
of Manumission, which is an evidence of my En-franchisement, if upon such
menace or duresse, I make a bond, I shall ovoid it by Plea, 7. E. 4. 21.

So if a Trespassor drive away my Beasts over another ground, and I pursue
them to rescue them, I am a Trespassor to him upon whose ground I came, but if
a man assail my person, and I fly over another ground, I am no Trespassor,
13. H. 8.15. and 21. H. 7. 28. Bacon F. Max. s. 29 and 30. vide ibidem plura.

An injury is twofold, either in factis, or in verbis, in factis, as when a
man is assaulted, or beaten, in verbis, when a man is slandred, and by terms
diffamed; the grounds of the first injury we have already surveyed, which
consisted in assaults, and corporal injuries, now are those of the second sort
to be set forth, which are grounded on slanders, and diffamations, from whence
arise these grounds.

Lubricam linguae non facile in paenam est trabendum R.I.C. The lightness and
rashness of the tongue is not easily to be drawn into punishment. There are
diffamatory words, which proceed from the weakness, or lightness of the
brain, or any rashness in the tongue, which because they are not thought to
be spoken maliciously, pass for the most part unpunished, for in all such
cases words of collor, and in heat, as to call one cousener, and crafty knave,
common extortioner, and drunkard, witch, rogue, Pillory knave, villain, and
unless he say villain to such a man, or regardant to such a manor, will
bear no action, for these are not maliciously spoken, Finch. Nomot. f. 186. b.
And by reciprocal reason, the malice of those which bring actions of slanders
debilitateth their cases, and therefore Coke l. 4. f. 15. b. It was the
resolutions of the Judges, that actions of slanders shall not be maintained by
any strained constructions, or any favor shown for the supportation of them,
because they abound more in these days, then heretofore, and the malice of men
increases, and malitijs hominum est obviandum.

But of such light, hasty, and rash speeches, the civil Law also takes no
cognizance, no though a man in this case speaks ill of the Prince himself,
and the civil Law is so far from taking hold of such words, that the Emperor
himself has said of them thus.

Siquis imperatori malediceret, si id ex levitate processerit contemnendum est,
si ex in sania, miseratione dignissimum, If any should speak evil of the
Emperor, if it proceeded from lightness, it is to be contemned, if from
madness it is most worthy of commiseration.

But in case that such works be of hatred, and malice, as if one reprocheth
another with any thing in his state and condition, wherewith he is not justly to
be charged, then is it altogether punishable, for that thereby charity between
man and man is violated, and the peace of the Commonwealth is many times
broken and disturbed, and as Coke says l. 4. f. 15. b. ad verbis ad verbera
perventum est, and in this sense the rule of the Cannon Law may be taken to be
true.

Omnis qui detrahit fratri suo homicida est, every one who detracteth from his
brother is a manslayer, to wit, in fo ropoli, for whosoever hates his Brother
is a murderer, 1. Joh. 3.15.

And therefore at the common Law, if a man maliciously utter any false slander,
to the indangering of one in Law, as to say that he has reported that money is
fallen, for he shall be punished for such a report if it be false, 9. E 1.
Vttings case. Or if he touch him with some heinous crime, as that he went about
to get poison to kill the child that such a woman goes with, and yet it is no
Felony. Or lie in wait to rob him, or procured another, or agreed with another
to murder him, though he were not murdered in deed, or sought his life for his
Land, 17. Eliz. Hacks case. Or for impairing his trade of life, as to call a
Merchant a banquerupt (for it is his living, but so it is not of a Gentleman)
or an Attorney an Ambodexter, or to say he deals corruptly, Finch. Nomot. f.
186. Or to call the Plaintiff thief, 27. H. 8.22. Or for calling a man a false
or perjured man, 28. H. 8. B. or for calling the Plaintiff a false Justice of
Peace, 4. E. 6. 112. An action of the case will lie, for those are words of
eminent slanders, and of great import, and such as concern the estate,
condition, and life of man, and therefore Coke l. 44.15. In our Books actions
for slanders are most rare, and those that are brought are for words of eminent
and great import.

Albeit, diffamations and scandalls properly consist in words, yet may they
also be done by writings, as by diffamatory Libels, which by Bracton are called
Carmina famosa, and by Senica, Contumeliosi Libelli, infamous Rhimes, and
contumelious Libells, which flow from malice and pride, and tend to contempt
and dissension, and therefore Plato banished such out of his Commonwealth, and
the Romans punished them with death.

L. 1. de Civ. Dei. c. 12.
St. Augustine, Romani probris, and injurijs poetarum subjectam vitam famanque
habere noluerunt, capite etiam puniri sancientes tale carmen condere siquis
auderet, the Romans would not have their lives and fame Subject to the scofs
and injuries of Poets, ordaining that whosoever should dare to compose any such
verse, to be punished with death; which also was one of the Laws of the twelve
Tables, ibidem c. 9.

And they appointed the Aediles, and Triumviri capitales, to foresee that no
prejudice should grow to the Commonwealth by Libells, to sow the seeds of
sedition, and novelty; whose prudent example, the wise King Henry the seventh
was induced to pursue, Bacon. Hen. 7. f. 138.
who as Sir Francis Bacon historizeth it, hanged and executed five mean
persons for spreading of swarms and volleys of Libels against his Highness,
and contriving and dispersing thereof, which as he says are the femalls of
sedition, and which also in conscience is a heinous crime, and little inferior
to high treason, and therefore particularly prohibited by the Law of God,
Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Prince, and according to the original,
Gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people; and Ecclesiastes 10.20. Curse not the
King, no not in thy thought, wherein Magistrates are included, because it
concerns the scandal of government, and by the civil Law in general, this
diffamatory crime is made capital; as if any man do devise any slanderous
Libell against one, and it happens that another find it, and he does not
cancel it, and tear it in pieces, but does publish it to others, he is
punished with capital punishment, and so is the author likewise punished,
Fulb. l. 2. f. 27. Which description of a Libell accords with ours at the
common Law, as in Lambs case it was resolved, Coke l. 4. f. 59. b. That every
man who shall be convicted for the publication of a Libell, either he ought to
be contriver of the Libell, or the procurer of the contriving of it, or a
malicious publisher of it, knowing it to be a Libell, and says, it is a great
evidence that he does publish, when as he knowing it to be a Libell does write
a copy of it, unless that afterward he can prove that he delivered it to a
Magistrate to examine it, for then the act subsequent explaineth the condition
precedent, and though our Law be a charitable dealing mother, and in all cases
favoreth the life of man, (even above the other two, which are most favored in
the Law, There are three things most favored in the Law, life, liberty, and
Dower. Coke Com.
) so as it does not punish this offense with capital punishment, yet does it
detest, condemn, and punish it as a step dam to rancor and violent speeches,
the abortive children of malice, and as a more odious, and perilous crime, then
other open scandalls.

For as Coke l. 5. f. 125. b. The nature of Libelling is secret, and robs a
man of his good name, which ought to be more precious unto him then his life,
and it is a very difficult matter to find out the Author, and therefore when
the offender is known, he ought to be severely punished; as one who poisoneth
another secretly is a greater offender, then he that kills a man openly,
because the offender cannot be so easiy prevented, or inverted: and it
mattereth not whether it be true, or if the party against whom it is made be of
good fame, or evil fame, for in a settled state of government, the party
greived ought to complain for every injury done to him in the ordinary course
of Law, and not by any means to revenge himself, either by the unlawful
course of Libels, or otherwise; and it is not material whether the Libell be
in writing, or without writing, or whether in rhyme, or prose, or whether by
Picture, as to paint the party in any shameful or ignominious manner, or by
signs, as to fix a Gallows, or any other reproachful or d^shonorable signs
at the house of the party or elsewhere, and therefore for the reasons
abovesaid, and that though the Libell be made against one, yet does it incite
those, who are of the same family, or society to revenge, and so tends to the
breach of peace, and may be the cause of effusion of blood: It was resolved
that a Libeller shall be punished by enditement at the common Law, or by bill
if it be denied, or ore tenus, by confession in the Star Chamber, and according
to the quality of his offense, he may either be punished by fine or
imprisonment, and in an exorbitant case, by Pillory and loss of his ears,
vide ibidem plura.

Veritas nihil veretur nisi abscondi, Coke l. 9. f. 20. b. Truth fears
nothing but to be hid and concealed. Truth considered principally, appertains
to the Metaphysics, materially to natural Phylophy, instrumentally to Logic,
but practically to the Ethics or moral Philosophy, and is nothing else, but
an affection of our speech, and actions agreeing with the mind, and is properly
called veracitas, that is a speaking of truth, and of this truth is the ground
to be understood, that it is afraid of nothing then to be obscured, for covin
is so mixed with truth, or truth with covin, that it often deceives a prudent
observer.

But though truth be so mixed with covin that evil herb, as Ploydon phraseth
it, such a conjunction and mixture will prove unsavorie, and the goodness is
turned to mischeivousnesse and the law will never permit covin, and falsity to
suppress verity and fidelity, but in all cases labors to discover and
censure them.

As if there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and rent, and the tenant makes a
Lease for years, and the Lessor has made fealty and paid the rent
continually, and yet the Lord distraineth the Cattle of the Lessee for the
rent, where in truth nothing is behind, and avoweth upon a mere stranger, who
never had any thing, as if he were his very tenant, for the arrearages of rent,
this false avowry of the Lord upon a stranger, that is not his tenant shall not
hurt the Lessee against the truth of the case, but upon special matter
disclosed, he shall have aid of his Lessor, who is the true tenant, and
therefore if the Lessee in such case allege that his Lessor was and still is
seized of the tenancy in his demesne as in fee, and so holds it of the Lord
by the services, etc. of which services the Lord has been, and yet is seized
by the hands of the Lessor, and that the tenant has leased the Land to him,
and that the Lord has charged the Plaintiff unjustly to avow upon one who has
nothing in the tenancy, and therefore he prays in aid of the Lessor, in this
case upon the special matter, he shall have aid, for that without his Lessor
he cannot plead this matter in abatement of the avowry, neither shall the Lord
be compelled to avow upon the Lessor, and the false avowry of the Lord upon a
stranger that is not his tenant shall not hurt the tenant, contrary to the
truth of the case, for truth fears nothing but to be concealed, and the Law
will never permit falsity to suppress a truth, Coke ibidem vide plura.

The Statute of W. 2. c. 3. gives a Cui invita upon recovery by default,
before which such recovery was a wrong to the feme, and an hard thing, as the
Statute says, and therefore a Cui ante devortium is given by the equity of
that Statute, for it goes in oppression of falsity, and advancement of verity,
so the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 6. makes an ordinance against those who
use to enfeoff their first borne and heirs within age, and yet if his first
Son dies, and he enfeoffed his second Son, who is his heir, it is within the
equity of the Statute, or if he levy a fine to him, which is matter of record,
it shall be within the equity of the Statute, and yet the Statute speaks of a
Feoffment, and the cause is, for that covin is always abhorred in our Law,
and states made in suppression of it are for the public good, and therefore
shall be extended by equity: And therefore the Statute of 1. H. 7. c. 1. Which
gives a Writ of Formedon in the remainder against the pernors of the profits,
was made for oppression of covin, for the Feoffment made to persons unknown to
defraud them, who had right to the Land was a great covin, and deceit in Law;
and therefore a Scire facias to execute a remainder, shall be maintainable
against pernors of the profits, Ployd. f. 59 b. in Wimbishes case.

So in Twins case, l. 3. f. 82. It was resolved by the whole Court, that
Statutes made against fraud shall be liberally, and favorally expounded to
suppress fraud, because fraud and deceit abound more in these days, then in
former times, where you may find in Pennyfoots case, and diverse other cases
to that effect and purpose.

Quod alias bonum and justum est si per vim vel fraudem petatur malum, and
injustum est, Coke l. 3. s. 78. a. what otherwise is good and just, if it be
acquired by force or fraud is evil and unjust, and as Ploydon says, Covin may
alter the marter, though the title be good, and covin to have recovery may be
as well where the title is good, as where it is faint and bad: And therefore
the Book is, M. 15. E. 4.4. If a feme have cause of dower, and is of Covin that
the tenant shall be ousted by A. against whom she recovereth, and has
execution, that her estate shall be adjudged against the Disseissee by
disseisin, and shall not hold it, but shall be a Disseiseresse, and yet the
title of recovery is good and true, but the Covin is the cause of it, Ployd. f.
59. and Coke l. 3. f. 78. a.

So if issue in tail who has good cause to have a Formedon in the Descender
upon discontinuance, be of Covin, that A. shall disseise B. against whom he
does recover, he shall not be remitted, although his title is good, but shall
be adjudged a Disseisor by reason of the Covin, M. 10. H. 8.

And in 19. H. 8. Where one disseised tenant in tail by Covin, to the intent
to enfeoff the issue in tail within age, who had no cognizance of the Covin,
and he enfeoff him, he shall not be remitted by the better opinion,
notwithstanding his good title, and the covenous intent is the cause only.
Ployd. f. 51. and 54. And so is it there holden by six Justices, Coke l. 3. f.
78. in Fermors case.

And the reason there given is, because he that is in by him that made the
Covin, shall be in the same plight, as he that made the Covin, and yet infants
are much favored in Law.

It was found by office, that one F. that had good cause of action of ad
terminum qui praeterij^, against an infant in by descent, caused one H. to
disseise the Heir by Covin, against whom he recovered by his Writ of Entry, ad
terminum qui praeterjit, whereupon this Office found, the King of whom the land
was holden, had restitution to the Land during the nonage of the heirs,
notwithstanding the plea, and averment of F. in maintenance of his title; so as
though the title was good, yet if covin was practiced by him who had title to
come to it, he shall not be remitted, Ployd f. 48. b. 41 Ass. 28.

For the common Law so abhors fraud and covin, as all acts as well judicial
as others, and those who of themselves are just and lawful, yet being mixed
with fraud and deceit, are in judgment of Law injurious and unlawful, Coke l.
3. f. 78. a.

And so Coke l. 4. f. 113. a. in Adams case, A man devises Tenements to
superstitious uses, and to good and charitable uses, as to teach a Grammar
School; yet because the good and charitable uses were mixed with superstitious
uses, and nothing in certain was limited to a good use, in such case the
commixture of the evil use with the good use, infecteth the good use, as a
little poison commixed with a great quantity of Wine, or as truth mixed with
covin, turned the goodness of the one into the naughtiness of the other.

And 19 H. 8. 12. If a man make a disseisin, with the intent to make a
Feoffment with warranty, although he make the Feoffment twenty months after,
yet it is a warranty commenceth by disseisin, Ployd. f. 51. So if one make a
gift in tail to another, and the Uncle of the Donor disseise the Donce, and
makes a Feoffment with warranty, and the Uncle dies, and the warranty
descends upon the Donor, and then the Donee dies without issue, the Donor
brings a Writ of Formedon in reverter, and the Tenant pleads the Feoffment
with the warranty, the Demandant shall avoid it, because it commenced by
disseisin, and yet the disseisin was not immediately made to the Donor, but to
the Donee, but by it his reversion was divested, and yet warranties are much
favored in Law.

It is a rule in the Civil law, Neminem ex suo dolo, and calliditate relevari,
that no man is releived by his fraud and deceit: And it is an erudition in the
common Law, Fraus and dolus nemini patrocinari, debent, Fraud and deceit ought
not to be patronized in any, Coke l. 3. f. 78. b.

There is dolus bonus, and dolos malus, say the Civivilians: dolos bonus is
when a man does devise any plot to entrap a thief or offender, and this cannot
properly be called fraud, but solertia and cunning, and such a kind of cunning
is practiced in war-fare by which more victories are atcheived, then by maine
force, as Tacitus, plura consilio, L. 1. An.
quam vi geruntur.

But dolus malus, is a subtle devise used to the deceiving another, or the
Law, and this deceit does not in out Law escape punishment, but affords a
double remedy against such who endamage others by deceit, either a Writ of
deceit, or action upon the case.

As if I. present one to a Church being Patron, and one T. disturbeth me, and
another in my name purchases a Quare impedit, without my knowledge against the
said T. and after causes the Writ to be abated, or I non-suite in the action,
I may have a Writ of deceit against him, 55. E. 3. Quare impedit, 37.20. H.
6.20. And an action of the case is maintainable against him, who sueth an
original in the name of the Plaintiff against his will, 7. H. 6.45.

So if any one forge a Statute Merchant in my name, and sue a Capias thereupon,
whereby I am arrested and had in execution, a writ of deceit lies against him,
19. H. 6.44.

So if the guardian of an infant vouch one by covin, who is not sufficient, or
pleads a bad plea whereas he might have pleaded a better, the infant shall
have a writ of deceit against him, and recover the full value in damages, 9. E.
4.34.

A writ of deceit was brought against an Attorney for acknowledging
satisfaction, whereas his Master was not in truth satisfied, 11. H. 6.34.

In a Praecipe quod reddat, if the Sheriff return the tenant of the Land to be
summoned, whereas he was not summoned, and the tenant loses by default upon
the grand Cape returned, the tenant may have a writ of deceit against the
recoverer, and against the Sheriff for his false return, F. N. B. 97. C. and
may defeat the judgment, and no damages shall be recovered against the
Sheriff in such case, only he shall be fined, 5. E. 4.4^. And if he dye, his
heir may have an action of deceit, and restitution of the Land, 8. H. 6.5.

If a man bargain with another, and assume, upon consideration to enfeoff him
of ceraine Land, and he enfeoffeth another, he to whom the assumpsit was made
may have an action of deceit, or an action upon the case at his pleasure, 3.
H. 7.14.

If one sells to another a horse, which he knows to have a secret disease
in his body, or sells Corn, which is full of gravel, an action of deceit
lies, 20. H. 6.36. without warranty, but F.N.B. 94. C. is of the contrary
opinion. If the Sheriff arrest the body by a Capias ad respondendum, and
returns not the Writ, the party shall have an action of false imprisonment,
Kell. way, f. 3. b.

The Law ordains, that he who will be sure of his goods, shall buy them in
Market overt, and that sale shall bind all strangers as well as vendors, and
yet it is agreed in 33. H. 6. That sale in open Market, shall not bind him who
has right to the goods, if the sale be by fraud, or the Vendee has notice
that the property of the goods appertains to another.

So the Law has ordained the Court of the common Pleas as Market-overt, for
the assurances of Lands by fine, so as he that will be assured of Land, not
only against the Vendor, but against all strangers, it is good for him to
pass it in this Market-overt by fine, yet Covin and deceit shall avoid it,
overt by fine, yet Covin and deceit shall avoid it, (...) a Feoffment by
Covin, which amounts to a wrong and disseisin, Fine levied by him who is
particeps criminis, and who had not, nor pretended to have, any right to the
land, shall not be a bar to the Lessor, Coke l. 3. f. 78. Fermors Case.

A resignation made by an Abbot by covin shall not abate the Writ, 4 E. 2. 22.
A covenous Conveyance that assets shall not descend, is not of force, 34 E. 3.
19. 19 E. 2. 3.

And 17 E. 3.59. That an estate made to the King, and Letters patents granted
over, and all it by covin, between him that granted to the King, and the
Patentee, to make an evasion out of the Statute of Mortmaine, shall not bind
but shall be repealed.

A presentation obtained by fraud and deceit, is void, Dyer 339. b. Letters of
administration obtained by fraud and covin, are void, and shall not repeal the
former administration, Dyer 339. a. and vide Dyer 295. many Cases there put
concerning covin.

If I sell to one cloth, and warrant it to be of such a length, and it is not
of such a length, the buyer may have an action of the case against me by virtue
of the warranty, although the warranty be by word and not written: but if the
warranty be made at some other time after the bargain, he may not have a Writ
of deceit, unless it be made by writing, F. N. B. 98. k.

If a man sell to one Seeds, and warranteth them to be of another Country, if
they be not, a Writ of deceit lies; but if he warrant that the Horse which he
sells should go fifty miles in a day, or that the Seeds shall grow, it is
otherwise. And a Writ of deceit lies for selling of corrupt Victual without
warranty, but not for selling of rotten Sheep though it be with warranty; but
to warrant a thing which is evident to sense, as to be black, which is blew, is
void, unless the buyer be blind, or the thing which is bought be absent, 11 E.
4 7. 3 H. 4. 1.

If I sell one certain Pipes of Wine, and warrant them to be good, and they be
corrupt, the Vendee may have an action of the case against the Vendor, F.N.B.
99. b. Yet according to the opinion of some, an action will lie without
warranty, 7 H. 4. 14. But Master Fitzherbert says, that there ought to be a
warranty, and his taste ought to be his judge in such case; and where it is
with warranty, the Writ must say, that the Defendant at the time of the
warranty made, knew that the Wine which he sold was corrupt.

A Writ of deceit was brought for selling a certain quantity of Wool, and
warranting it to be fifty sacks, whereas it wanted of that measure; the
Defendant pleaded in bar, that it was weighed before the sale, and the servants
of the Plaintiff, being his Factors, did accept of it, and carried it beyond
the Sea, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred, 13 H. 4. 1.

Semper qui dolo fecit, quominus haberet, pro eo habendus est, ac si habet,
Reg. J. C. Always whosoever shall give or grant any thing by fraud, whereby he
may seem not to have it, he is to be esteemed as if he has it: And therefore
if a man by fraud make a Deed of gift of all his goods to one of his Creditors
to deceive the rest, the gift by the Statute of 13 Eliz. is void, Twins case,
l. 3. f. 81 quod vide, where you shall find the signs and marks of fraud
accurately and fully discovered.

And Coke l. 5. f. 60. a. b. debt against the heir upon an obligation, the
Defendant pleaded Riens per descent, the Plaintiff replied, that he had Assets
in D. etc. and the Plaintiff gives in evidence, that the father dyed seized of
lands in fee; the Defendant said, that he aliened before the Writ, the Plaintiff
averred by covin, and proved that it was done by fraud to defraud the
Plaintiff; and therefore it was resolved to be void by the Statute of 13 Eliz.
c. 5. and that the fraud might be well given in evidence, because the Statute
says, that the estate, as to the Creditors shall be void, and therefore shall
be taken by favorable interpretation for to suppress fraud; and that it shall
be mischeivous to the Creditors, and increase maintenance and covin, if the
Plaintiff should be driven to plead, that the Feoffment was by fraud, because it
is comm^nly hatched in arbore cava, and so artificially covered and concealed,
that the party grieved has no means to find and know it; and therefore
j^dgment was given for the Plaintiff, vi^^e ibidem. And Burrels case, l. 6. f.
730. a. and l. 8. f 133. in Turners case.

So Hobart, f. 72. Humbertons Case: Humberton recovered a debt against T H. and
dyed; and upon a Scire facias against the Ter tenants the Sheriff returned J.
H. Tenant of an house that was his at the time of the judgment, and J. H. came
in and pleaded, that T. H. enfeoffed him long before the judgment, in fee,
absque hoc, that he was seized at the time of the judgment, or any time after:
whereupon issue was taken, and the Jury found the Feoffment, and further said,
That it was made by covin to defraud the Plaintiff, and other Creditors, and it
was judged for the Plaintiff, vide ibidem plura, and fol. 166.

Fraus praesumitur si insolitae clausulae apponantur, Reg. J. C. and Coke l. 3.
f. 81. Clausulae insuetae semper inducunt suspicionem. As there in Twins case,
A Deed of gift was in part adjudged fraudulent, because an unusual clause was
inserted in it, and for that the Deed contained, that the gift was made
honestly, truly, and bona fide, vide ibidem plura.

Dona clandestina sunt semper suspiciosa, Coke l. 3. f. 81. Gifts in secret are
always subject to the suspicion of fraud, which there in Twins Case was one of
the reasons alleged to prove a Deed of gift fraudulent, to wit, that it was
made in secret: And so in Burrels case, l. 6. f. 72. the assignment of a Lease
was taken to be fraudulent, because it was delivered in a secret manner to a
person of mean quality: And for the same reason by livery and seisin in one
County, the Lands in another County will not pass, Noys Max f. 3.

Jus, and fraus nunquam cohabitant simul, Coke l. 10 f. 49. a. Right and fraud
never cohabit or dwell together: As a Recovery cannot be said to be by
collusion, where tenant in tail is in the Recovery, whether he be tenant in
Deed or tenant in Law, as a Vouchee: For the Law has made all the reversions
and remainders, as incidents to his estate, subject to his pleasure, and he
has right and power to bar them all, ibidem.

And Coke l. 8 f 132 b. Covin cannot be alleged in doing of a lawful act: As
in a Writ of Dower against a disseisor, if the Tenant plead in abatement of the
Writ, entry by the disseisee, the demandant shall not be received to aver the
entry to be by covin to abate the writ, because the entry is congeable and
lawful, and mixed with no wrong; as it is holden in 15. E. 4. f. 4. and if a
disseisor, or an abator endow a feme who has title of dower, it is good,
because it is a lawful act, Coke l. 5. f. 30. b.

Fraus meretur fraudem, Ployd. f. 100. and the Poet, Fraus est concessa
repellere fraud^m.

Fraud and subtilty deserves fraud and subtilty, and it is a lawful deceit to
repel a deceit.

As in 19 E. 4. f. 27. In appeal of many, who pleaded not guilty, a Venire
facias was awarded against them all; and the Court perceiving that the
prisoners were in opinion to sever in the challenge of the whole pannell, of
subtilty to stay the trial at that time, and that every prisoner would
challenge as many as they might without danger; to wit, twenty, and that every
of them shall have his entire number of twenty, so that one shall not be
excluded of his number by the challenge of the other, and that there was but a
small number of men of sufficiency then in the City to be sworn, so as by that
subtilty the trial should be stayed for the present. The Court agreed that the
first pannell and the Tales should be divided, and made several for every one
of the prisoners: And accordingly said to the prisoners, We perceive your
subtilty well enough, which deserves little favor of the Court, and therefore
tell us whether you will agree in your challenges, for if you will not, the
Clarke shall sever the pannell, and then they all agreed in their challenges,
and after the inquest was full, evidence was given, and there found, and one
subtilty prevented and repelled by another.

And this fraud by the Canonists is called Benus dolus, of which they have this
rule, Frangenti fidem, fides frangetur eidem.
To him who breaks his faith, no faith is to be shown.


And instance in the example of Solomon, who did use such cunning between the
two Harlots, in searching out who was the true and natural Mother of the
child, Fulb. 2. l. f. 23.

Vendens eandem rem duobus falsarius est, Reg. I.C. Coke l. 1. f. 45. a. A man
selling the same thing to two is a falfe dealer, and therefore in the grant of
the King, it is dishonorable for him to grant the same possession to one, that
he or his Progenitors had granted to another, for he that sells the same
thing to two persons is a deceiver.

Fraudis interpretatio non semper ex mente duntaxat, sed ex consilio quoque
desideratur, Reg. I. C.

Dolus circuitu non tollitur, Coke l. 11. f. 74. a. nec purgatur, Bacon Max. f.
3. The interpretation of fraud is not always to be gathered out of the mind,
but also from the council, and consent, and crafty dealing; and deceit is not
taken away nor purged by the circuity of shifting it from one to another, and
though covenous acts be conveyed through many hands, and mediations, yet the
Law takes hold of the corrupt beginning, and proceeding. As if I make a
Feoffment of Lands held in Knights service to I. S. upon condition, that within
a certain time he shall enfeoff I.D. which Feoffment of I. D. shall be to the
use of the wife of the first feoffor for her jointure, etc. this Feoffment is
within the Statute of 32. H. 8. Bacon ibidem.

So if one who has an intention to sell his Land, by fraud conveyeth it by
deed enrolled, to the Queen, with an intent to deceive the purchasor, and after
sells that Land to another for a valuable consideration, and makes a
conveyance accordingly, in this case the purchasor shall enjoy the Land against
the Queen, by the Statute of 27. Eliz. c. 4. For though the Queen be not
excepted, yet the act being general, and made for the suppression of fraud,
shall bind the Queen, and whosoever makes the Queen, who is the Fountain of
Justice to be an Instrument of covin and fraud, and upon it obtains Letters
Patents, such Letters Patents are void, or if the Queen be indeavored to take
away another man's right, and to that end a man obtains Letters Patents, they
shall be repealed, though such covin and fraud be not contained in the grant
made to the Queen, but appears only by averrement dehors, for fraud and
deceit is not taken away or diminished by the subtility of alienations, Coke
ibidem, in Magdalens College case.

Non facies malum, ut inde fiat bonum, it is the Law of God, thou shall not do
evil that good may come thereof, Coke l. 5. f. 30. b. and lib. 11. f 7. 4 a.
What has been said of truth and falsity, may be said of good and evil, and
are so semblable, that an apparent good is often mistaken for that which is
real.

Jun. s. 14.
Fallit enim vitium specie virtatis and umbra.
Vice fairly enbellished with virtues shape
And shadow does often men delude.
H. 7. f. 2.
As Richard the third did many, whose virtues as Sir Francis Bacon histerizeth
it, were feined, and affected things to seek his ambition, and not true
qualities engendered in his judgment and nature; But though as Matchevill
says, such virtuous shows and shadows are sufficient to please and delude the
people, yet the Law Divine, and the Law Humane, which dimaneth from the Divine,
is able, and does distinguish between good and evil; and as the great Legist
of Rome, imperat honesta, and prohibet contraria, commands that which is good
and honest, and inhibiteth that which is evil and impious; and so do the
Justices and Judges of the Law, for as Bodin says, Eodin M. hist. f. 50.
Qui in litibus versantur Judiciorum communione omnia mala norunt, nec mala
duntaxat siditiam bona sinc quibus illa constare, and percipi nullo modo
possunt, bonorum autem, and malornm finibus omnis humana prudentia continetur,
Those who are versed in suits of Law, by the participation of Judgments know
all evil things, and not only evil but also good things, without which they
can no way consist, or be perceived, but in the limits and bounds of good and
evil, all humane prudence does consist; and therefore by the Law, as the same
Legist says, are proposed and appointed, praemia virtutibus, and supplicia
vitiis, rewards to virtues, and punishments to vices, and is so severe in the
censure of vice and evil, that it will not permit any one to do evil, that
good may come thereof.

As the Law will not permit a Creditor who is not Executor, to take and retain
the goods of the Testator, to pay and satisfy himself, though the payment of
his debt be a good and honest thing, for by that means if the goods of the
Testator be not sufficient to satisfy all the Creditors, the rest shall be
barred, and if the Law should give him that power, it should be the cause and
occasion of wrong; and the Law of God says, you shall not do evil that good
may come thereof, Coke l. 5. f. 30, b. And therefore does our Law term such an
one, an Executor of his own wrong, and so in 17. E. 3. 59. The Friars
Carmelites who had then no habitation, obtained of one I. M. who was seized of
ten Acres of Land of the Bishop of Winchester, to have those acres of Land for
their habitation, and because the said I. M. could not grant to them those ten
acres, by reason of the Statute of Mortmaine; the said I. M. and the Carmelites
by covin between them, to make an evasion out of the Statute of Mortmaine,
granted the said ten Acres to the King, his Heirs, and Successoers, by which
the Signiory of the Bishop should be extinct, to the intent that the King shall
grant it over to the Friars Carmlites, which was done accordingly, and for that
it was by covin contrived before to take the Bishop from his Signiory, which
was an evil act, it was adjudged that the Charter shall be repealed, and the
Friars Carmelites should be constrained to render their Charter to be
cancelled, for though the Friars Carmelites were of the profession of religion,
and had no habitation before, so as it seemed a work of piety and charity to
provide an habitation for them, yet you shall not do evil that good may come
thereof, Coke l. 11. f. 74. a.

Contra jus na urale est malum pro bono reddere, Ployd. f. 405. b. It is
against the Law of nature to render evil for good.

As it was a Law in a City, that strangers, who did go or clime up to the
Walls of the City, should be punished with death, but it happened that
strangers innocently passing by the City heard a noise that the Enemy would
suddenly assault and sack the City, whereupon the strangers more reddily then
the Citizens got upon the Walls, and defending the City, now the debate whether
they should dye as the Law commanded, and it was answered not, because it is
against the Law of nature to render evil for good, vide ibidem plura

Beneficium nul^i obtrudi^ur, Pap. f. 212. The Law does not obtrude, or do
good turns to one whether he will or no, and therefore an alien borne shall not
have medietatem linguae unless he request it,

So Damages, ex incremento, are always to be assessed, ex petitio ne
quaerentis, and so are costs ex incremento, and upon a Writ of Error, because
in the beginning of the judgment, it was said, ideo ad petitionem quaerentis
consideratum est, and not ideo consideratum est ad petitionem quaerentis, and
the words were displaced, the Judgment was reversed, for the words misplaced
will not supply this defect, for if the usual form should not be observed,
all would fall into a confusion, and in as much as the words are misplaced, it
is as if they had not been put in at all, and therefore void; like unto the
case put in Walsinghams case, in Ploydon, where an averrment misplaced is as if
it were none, vide ibidem plura, in Goods case.

Malum quo communius eo pejus, an evil thing the more common it is the worser
it is, Coke l. 4. 109. b. For as the more common a good thing is, the better it
is, so the more common an evil thing is, the worser it is, for contrariorum
contra^ia est ratio, for as the true service of God which is in public
Churches, is better then that which is in private Churches, for the general
good that by it may accrue, so all superstitious uses which are in public
Churches, are worse then those which are in secret Chambers, for the general
prejudice which may accrue by them, v^de ibidem plura.

Theft in the beginning in most Nations was not punished with death, but with
satisfaction or some lessor punishment, the Pretors of Rome did punish a thief,
paena quad^upli, with a four fold satisfaction, and the Jews with seven fold,
or if his goods would not amount to so much with all the goods in his house,
Pro 6. 31. The Misians did punish petit Larceners with whips, but if a thing of
good value be taken away they must render the nine fold, or else be put to
death, Fulb. Pard. f. 80. But when the malice of men did increase, an iniquity
did abound, that as the Poet, in facinus jurasse putes, and that many turned
the crime of stealing into a trade of living, and did not gain their
livelihood with their hands by working, but with their fists by fighting and
stealing, as the Comedian facitely, ventri pugnae dant ventri suo, the
detriment to the republic, and community of the offense made it capital, so
as though the offense and the punishment being compared, that Law may seem
unjust, yet as Metsner faith, Cum nullam aliud supersurit remedium, quo malitia
hominum compesci, and tranquilitas conservari potuerit absolute injusta non est
ideoque fures merito illi subjiciuntur, when no other remedy remained, by which
the malice of men might be allayed, and tranquillity conserved, it is not
absolutely unjust, and therefore deservedly are the eves subject unto it, for
which reason most Nations of the universe, justly inflicted capital punishment
on such notorious Delinquents, as by the Law of the twelve Tables, if any man
did cause his beasts to feed upon, or himself did cut, and carry away Corn
growing upon the ground, if he were of full age, he was ordained to be hanged,
and to be sacrificed to Ceres; if not, he was whipped, and yielded either the
damage, and if he were obstinate the double: So by our common Law the stealing
of a Do which is tame and domestical, is Felony, but as Mr. Stanford, it
seems that he that steals it, should have certain knowledge it is tame,
but if the Do be killed, and then stolen, this certainly is Felony, Stanford,
l. 1. c. 25.

And likewise if a man cut Trees, and at the same time carry them away, this is
a Trespass, and is but (...), but if they lie upon the ground a long time, as
the goods of the owner of the soil, this is Felony and is (...), 22. E. 3.
Cor. 156. 10. E. 4. 15. and Stanf. 25. And for the like reason, as this offense
is more nocumentall to the common good of some Countries, or some Cities, it is
more severely and suddenly there punished, as among the Phrygians, he was put
to death that stole any instrument of husbandry, or did kill an Ox was fit for
the Plough, because the living of those Countries did much consist of husbandry,
so in Hallifax, he that steals but a yard of cloth is presently put to
death, because the whole livelihood of most of them consists in cloth.

Malitia mutat legem, Dyer f. 104. b. malice alters the Law, as an infant in
case of murder shall be tried for his life where malice appears, and not
otherwise, because as Dyer there says, malitia supplet aetatem, 3. H. 7.

And malice in homicide alters the Law in those are of full age, as man's
slaughter is a fact less heinous, because it is done on a sudden without
malice precedent, as if two of a sudden fight together without precogitated
malice, and after many blows given, the one flies from the other, and the
other goes in the next house for a weapon, and incontinently pursues and
kills him that flies, this is but man slaughter by the common Law, because
it was done in a continual fury, and shall have his Clergy, but shall forfeite
his goods, Cromp. I. p. 23. So if two without any malice precedent, did fight
together and one comes to part them, and is killed by one of them, it is man
slaughter in him that killed him, ibidem, but if they had fought together, ex
malitia praecogitata, having a purpose to kill, it is Felony in them both, 25
Ass. 180. But where a man kills another upon malice, forethought, whether he
kills him openly or secretly, or whether he that is slain be an English man,
or of another Nation, if he live in this Realm under the Queens protection,
Stanf. f. 18 he cannot have the benefit of Clergy.

So it is if one kill another upon malice employed, which is when one kills
another without any defense on the part of the other, as a Jailer had malice to
a prisoner in his custody, because he suspected he was too familiar with his
wife, and the prisoner purposing to go out of prison, as he was wont, for his
disport, the Jailer suddenly struck the prisoner on the head, so that he fell
to the ground, whereupon he dyed, and it was adjudged murder, Cromp. I. P. f.
20.

So if a thief rob another man and kill him, this is murder, though he never
saw him before, neither had any inveterate malice against him, yet he had
malice before the murder to this intent, that he would rather kill him then be
disappointed of his purpose, Ployd. com. 474.

If the Justice of peace with the Sheriff, come to suppress Riotors, and one
of their attendance is slain by one of the Riotors, this is murder of him and
all the Riotors, being present, Cromp. I. P. 21. And if one without quarrel
kills another standing by, this is implicit murder, ibidem, f. 22.

A writ of conspiracy will not lie unless malice appears in the prosecution,
and therefore the Writ says, quod ipsum in prisona nostra detineri falso, and
malitiose procuraverat, that he procured him to be falsely and maliciously
detained in prison, F. N. B. f. 115. G. and 15. Car. B. R. A man endited others
at the Sessions in the old Bailey, who were acquitted, and the Defendants
removed the enditement into the Kings bench, and prayed a copy thereof, to the
end they might bring a Writ of conspiracy, and it was denied by the Court,
unless the Recorder will say, that there appeared malice in the prosecution,
for a man shall not be punished for lawful prosecution upon a just surmise
without malice.

Semel malus semper praesumitur esse malus, Reg. I. C. who once is evil is
always presumed so to be, which as the Civilians, is to be understood, in
eodem genere mali, in the same kind of evil, as if a Soldier has behaved
himself ^ill in the Militia, he is no more to be trusted; and so perjured
persons who have once forsworn themselves, and for it be convicted, cannot be
admitted after to give Testimony in any cause, and this is so holden both in
the Civil Law and the Common Law, no more also can another like infamous
persons, as if one be attainted of a false verdict, or of a conspiracy at the
suite of the King, or convicted of a Praemunire, or of forgery upon the Statute
of 5. Eliz. c. 14. and not upon the Statute of 1. H. 5. c. 3. Or convict of
Felony, or by Judgment lost his ears, or stood upon the Pillory or tumbrell,
or been stigmaized, or branded, or the like, whereby they become infamous, for
some offenses, for quae minoris sunt culpae majoris sunt infamiae, Coke com. f.
6. b.

Malitiae vitium connexum est personae committentis malitiam, Reg. I. C. the
vice of malice is connexed to the person of him who commits the malice: As
if I have a malicious intent to kill one man, and in the execution of my
malice, I kill another, the malicious intent shall be connexed to my person,
and I shall be adjudged a murderer, as if one of malice prepense, shoots at
another, intending to kill him, and his Arrow kills another to whom he bore
no malice, it shall be murder in him, for he intended in his act to murder, and
that intention shall be connexed to his person, and it shall not be an excuse
for him to say, that he had an intention to kill another person, Ployd. Com. f.
474. b.

So if an impoisoned apple be laid in a place to poison I. S. and I. D. comes
by chance and eats it, this is murder in him that laid it, because in the
ministration of it, he had a malicious intent of death, which is still connexed
to his person, because he was the original founder of his death.

But if a man lay venom in diverse parts of his house to kill Rats, and a
person comes and eats it, and dies of it, it is not felony in him, because
he was void of any malicious intent to hurt any reasonable creature, but
otherwise it is if he had ministered it to kill a reasonable creature, and
another reasonable creature had been slain by it, that he intended not, and he
shall be punished for it, because he had an evil intent, vide ibidem plura, in
Saunders case.

And if a man persuade another to kill himself and he be present when he does
so, he is a murderer for his evil intent, Bac. Max. f. 60.

If I discharge a Caliver with a murtherous intent at I.S. and the piece
breaks, and strikes into my eye, and kills me, I am felo de me, because I
had a murtherous intent, and yet had no intention to hurt my self, ibidem.

Res profecto stulta est nequitiae modus, Coke l. 11. f. 86. b. In the case of
Monopolies, it is a foolish thing verily to imagine any mean in iniquity.

As the sole trade of any mechanical Artifice, or any other monopoly, is not
only a damage, and prejudice to those who exercise the same trade, but also to
all other Subjects, for the end of all those Monopolies is the private gain of
the Patentees, and though provisions, and cautions be added to moderate them,
yet it is mere folly to think that there is any measure in mischeife, or
wickedness, Ibidem.

Excessus in requalibet jure reprobatur communi, Coke l. 11. f. 44. a. Excess
in every thing is disallowed in the common Law, for all virtuous actions
consists in the mean, and vicious, in the excess and extreme, and the Law
advances that is good and virtuous, and suppresseth what is evil and vicious.

Some Courts may fine and not imprison, as the Court of the Leet, and some can
only amerce, as the County Court, Hundred Court, and Court Baron, and some
Courts may fine, imprison, and amerce, as the case shall require, as the Courts
of Record at Westminster, or else where, for no Court can fine and imprison,
but a Court of Record, F. N. B. 37. b.

Yet all Amercements and Fines which be in the excess, are contrary to Law, as
Magna charta, c. 14. Excessive Amercements are against Law, Nullus liber homo
Amercietur nisi secundum quantitatem delicti, no Freeman may be amerced but
according to the quantity of his offense, if Fines of the Copyholder, of a
Manor be uncertain, the Lord cannot exact expressive and unreasonable fines,
and the Copyholder may deny to pay it, and the reasonableness of the fine
shall be determined by the Justices, etc. Quam rationabilis debet esse finis non
definitur, sed omnibus circumstantijs inspectis pendet ex justiciariorum
discretione, how reasonable the fine shall be is not defined, but all the
circumstances being inspected, it depends upon the discretion of the Justices.

If tenant in dower has villains, or tenant at will, which are rich, and they
by excessive tallages, and fines make them poor, or exuls, it is adjudged to
be contrary to Law, and to be wast, 13. H. 3. Title, Wast. 135. F. N. B. 178.
b. because it is ad exhaereditationem to the dis-inheritance of him in the
reversion.

So excessive distresses are prohibited by the common Law, 41. E. 3. f. 26. For
the act, de articulis super Chartas non capietur gravis districtio, extends
to the King only: So excessive and outrageous aid is against Law, as appears
by the Statute of W. 1. cap. 35.

Plus peccat author quam actor, Coke l. 5. f. 99. the Author offends more
then the actor.

The Statute of 5. Eliz. c. 9. has two branches, the first is against
procurors of perjury, and that is in matter depending in suit, by Bill, Writ,
Action, or Information, so as the procurement of perjury upon enditement is out
of that branch, the second branch is a purview against those who commit perjury
by his or their depositions in any Court mentioned or being examined, in
perpetuam rei memoriam, and though that clause be general, and not restrained
by any words to such particular suites by Bill, Writ, Action, or Information,
as the first was, yet in good construction that branch shall have reference to
the first, and shall be expounded by it, otherwise the party who suborneth
perjury, and procures him who commits the perjury, shall pass without
punishment, which shall be contrary to reason, and the intention of the makers
of the Act, and some say, that the author offends more then the actor, and
therefore was Flower who was endited upon the Statute of 5. Eliz. for perjury,
in giving false evidence to the grand inquest upon an enditement of Riot, by
the Judgment of the Court was discharged of that enditement, ibidem.

Peccatum peccato addit, qui culpae, quam fecit, patrocinia defensionis
adjungit, Coke l. 5. f. 49. b. He adds offense to offense, who adjoyneth a
Patronage of defense to a fault he has committed; As he who does wrong, and at
the first confesses the fault, and obeys the commandment of the King by his
Writ, shall not be amerced, and therefore pendenter facit, praecepto legis
obtemperat, he does wisely who obeys the precept of the Law, but every one
who does wrong, and being commanded by the Writ of the King, quod just, and
sine dilatione reddat, etc. that he justly and without delay restore, etc. and
he unjustly maintains the wrong of Record in the Court of the King, and with
great delay constrains the demandant by the course of Law, adds offense to
offense in his unjust Patronage of the defense of it, and therefore shall be
amerced.

Excusat aut extenuat delictum in capitalibus, quod non operatur idem in
civilibus, Bac. Max. f. 314. In capital causes, in favorem vitae the Law does
excuse or extenuate the fact of the offender, except the malice of the will and
intention appears, but in civil Trespasses and injuries the Law does rather
consider the damage of the party wronged, then the malice of him which was the
wrong doer.

As the Law makes a difference between killing a man upon malice forethought,
and upon present heat, but if I give a man slanderous words, whereby I damnify
him in his fame, and good name, it is not material whether I use them upon
sudden choler and provocation, or of set malice, but in an action upon the
case I shall render damages alike.

So if a man be killed by misadventure, as by an Arrow at Butts, this has a
pardon of course: but if a man be hurt, or maimed only, an Action of Trespass
lies, though it be done against the parties will, and he shall be punished in
the Law as grievously as if he had done it of malice, Stanf. 16.6 E. 4.7.

So if a Chyrurgion authorized to practice, do, through negligence of his cure,
cause the party to dye, this Chyrurgion shall not be questioned for his life:
yet if he do only hurt the Wound, whereby the cure is cast back, and death
ensues not, he is subject to an Action of the Case for it, Stanf. 16.

So if Baron and Feme commit Felony together, the Feme in regard of the
subjection of her will to her husband, shall neither be principal not accessory:
but if they join in committing a Trespass upon land or otherwise, the Action
may be brought against them both.

So if an Infant wanting discretion, or a madman kill another, he shall not be
impeached thereof; but if they do him any corp^rall hurt, he shall be punished
in Trespass, 35 H. 6. 11.

So in Felony, if the principal dye, or be pardoned, the proceeding against
the accessory fails. But in a Trespass if one commands his man to beat you,
and after the Battery the Servant dies, yet you may have an Action of Trespass
against the Master, 17 H 4.19.

Aestimatio praeteriti delicti, post facta, nunquam crescit. Bac. Max f. 32. In
penal Laws and Facts, the Law considers the degree of the offense, not as
it stands at this time, when it is committed, but for any circumstance, or
matter subsequent, the Law does not extend or amplify the same.

As if a man be wounded, and the Percussor is voluntarily let to go at liberty
by the Goalor, and after the party wounded dies, yet it is no Felonious escape
in the Jailer, 11 H. 4.12.

So if one conspire the death of one, who after comes to be King, not being
within the Statute of 25 E. 3. this is high, not high Treason; but otherwise it
is in civil and common cases, vide ibidem Plur.

Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur, Co. l. 2. f. 25.

In omnibus quidem, maxim tamen in jure aequitas est, Reg. I. C. In all
things, but especially in the Law, there is equity, and the Laws themselves
desire to be ruled by equity. For inasmuch as no Legislators can foresee all
things which may happen, it was therefore convenient as Ploydon says, that that
fault should be reformed by equity.

And is either an amplification or diminution of the Law, and no part of the
Law but a moral virtue, which reformeth the Law; for dirigens and directum are
diverse things, and equity is not a Law but the emendation of the Law, and
therefore the Laws themselves desire to be ruled by equity.

As whereas, the Debtor after he is become Bankrupt, may prefer one and defraud
others, the Act of 13 Eliz. c. 7. has appointed certain Commissioners of
indifferency and credit to relieve the Creditors of the Bankrupt equally, and
that there shall be an equal and rateable proportion observed in the
distribution of the Goods of the Bankrupt among his Creditors, having regard to
the quantity of their several debts, so that one shall not prevent the other,
but all shall be in aequali jure, and so we see in many cases, as well at the
Common Law, as upon the like statutes such constructions have been made; for as
Cato said, Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur, and therefore is it
holden, 35 H. 8. Title Testaments, V. de plura in Herberts case, lib. 7.
Bro. 19. A man holds three Manors of three several Lords by
Knights-service, every Manor being of equal value, he cannot devise two
Manors and leave the third to descend, according to the generality of the Acts
of 32. and 34. H. 8. of Wills, for then it shall prejudice the other two Lords,
but by equal construction he cannot devise but two parts of every Manor, and
so as equality shall be observed among them, and so at the Common Law an
equality is required, as in 11 H. 7. 12. b. a man is bound in an Obligation,
and his Heirs, and he has Heirs, and has lands of the part of his Father and
part of his Mother, both the Heirs shall be equally charged, vide ibidem plura
Co. Com. f. 10. a. If partition be made between Parceners of lands in Fee
simple, and for novelty of partition, one granted a rent to the other
generally, the Grantee shall have a Fee-simple without this word Heirs, because
the Grantor has a Fee-simple in consideration whereof he granted the rent,
Ipsae etenim leges, etc.

And Co. Com. f. 271. a. b. when a Feoffment is made to a future use, as to the
performance of his last Will, the Feoffee shall be seized to the use of the
Feoffor, and his Heirs in the mean time; for the Laws desire to be ruled by
right and equity; And reason would, that seeing the Feoffment is made without
consideration, and the Feoffor has not disposed of the profits in the mean
time, that by construction and intendment of Law, the Feoffor ought to occupy
the same in the mean time: And so it is when the Feoffor disposes the profits
for a particular time in presenti, the use of the Inheritance shall be to him
and his Heirs, as a thing not disposed of, Co. ibidem.

Co. l. 5. f. 100. a. The Commissioners of Sewers by the Statute of 6 H. 6. c.
5. and 23 H. 8. c. 5. ought to tax all equally, which are in danger to be
endamaged by not repairing the Banks, and not him only who has land adjoining
to the River; for otherwise the rage and force of the water may be so great as
the value of the land adjoining shall not serve to repair the Banks: and
therefore the Statutes will have all who be in the same peril, and are to
receive commodity by it to be contributory; and the statutes require equality,
which well stands with the rule of equity, for equitas, in Bracton, est quasi
aequalitas, and though the Owner of the Land next adjoining to the River, was
bound by prescription to repair the banks of the River, yet the Commissioners
ought not to charge him, only, with all, but to take all those which have lands
in danger, for otherwise it may, that all the country shall be surrounded,
before that one person only can repair the Banks, vide ibidem plura In Fooks
case.

Coke l 7. f. 123. b. When the King grants any Land, without the reservation
of any Tenure, or without any thing from thence to be rendered, or the like,
that land by the operation of Law, shall be holden of the King in Capite, by
the service of Chivalry, according to the rate and proportion of land that
affereth to one fee of Chivalry, and so of more, more, and of less, less, for
the Act in Law respects equity, and will never charge any one with more, or
less, then in reason and equity it ought: For as Bracton says, jus respicit
aequum. If two, four, or more, being severally seized in land, join in a
Recognizance, all their lands must be equally extended.

An house that has Copyhold, and other lands usually occupied with it, is let
for years with the lands appertaining, yet the Copyholds pass not without
special naming, for then it were a forfeiture of them, for the Law construeth
all things according to equity, and constrains a general Act, if there be
any mischief, or inconvenience in it, Finch Nomot. f. 54.

So a Corody granted to one, and his Servants to sit at his Mess, he cannot
bring a Servant that has some stinking and noisome disease.

And if Estovers be granted out of a Manor, the Grantee shall not cut down
Fruit Trees.

So a Common granted to one for all his Beasts, he shall not have Common for
Goats, and Geese, nor other Beasts, not Commonable, Finch ibidem.

It is no Trespass for a man to beat his Apprentice, which is but reasonable
correction; for equity moderateth the strictness of the Law. Finch Nomot. f.
57.

No more is it to carry away a man's Wife against his will to a lawful end; as
to sue a divorce against her husband, or to have the Peace of him before a
Justice of Peace.

So if the Lessor comes upon the ground, it shall be intended that he came to
see if Wast were done; for equity turns all to the best, and makes every Act
to be lawful, when it is indifferent, whether it be lawful or not, Finch
Nomot. f. 57. And if the Disseisee come, it shall be taken that he meant to be
remitted.

And in an Action of Trespass, if two Issues be joined, triable in two
Counties, as one in London, and another in Middlesex (without saying which of
the Issues it should try) this shall be taken to try the Issue in Middlesex
only: for so the Venire facias is lawful, and not in both Counties, which is
against Law, and therefore it is a discontinuance in the City of London, and no
discontinuance, Finch ibidem.

And such a desire has the Law to be ruled by equity, as that it will feign a
thing in show and color, whereby the real right and equity of the thing may
more certainly be found; according to the ground, Lex fingit ubi subsistit
aequitas. The Law faigneth where equity subsisteth.

Coke l. 10. f. 90. a. As the reason why the Law will give a color in a Writ
of Entry Sur-disseisin, Writ of Entry in nature of Assise, Trespass, etc. is
that the Law which prefers and favors certainty as the Mother of quiet,
and repose (to the intent, that either the Court shall adjudge upon it if the
Plaintiff demurr, or that a certain Issue may be taken upon a certain point)
requires, that the Defendant when he pleads such a special Plea, that yet
notwithstanding the Plaintiff may have right, the Defendant shall give color
to the Plaintiff, to the end that the plea shall not amount to the general
issue, and so to leave all the matter at large to the Jurors, which shall be
full of multiplicity and perplexity of matter, and though the color be but a
fiction, yet the Law feigneth where equity subsisteth.

So f. 40. a. Common Recoveries are fictions in Law, and for the equity that in
them is transacted, they are not only allowed by the Common Law, for the
intended recompense, but warranted by statutes for their equitable use. And
therefore the statute of 7 H. 8. c. 1. recites that diverse as well Nobles as
Commons have suffered Recoveries against them of diverse of their Manors for
the performance of their Will, for assurance of Joyntures to their Wives, etc.
The same act in approbation of common recoveries, gives remedy to such
recoveries in diverse cases; And in Dr. and Student, c. 26. it is determined,
that common recoveries do bind as well in conscience as in Law, for semper in
fictione legis subsistit aequitas: And by the statute of 23 Eliz. c. 4. it is
provided, that for the avoiding of danger to common assurances in lands, and
for the advancement of common recoveries, that not any common recovery shall be
avoided by any want of form in words and not in matter of substance, vide
ibidem plura in Mary Portingtons case.

So Co. l. 11. f. 51. a. If one disseise me, and during the Disseisin he
cutteth down Trees, Grass, or the Corn, and then I re-enter, I shall have an
Action of Trespass against him, vi and armis, for the Trees, Grass, and Corn:
for after my regresse, the Law, as to the Disseisor and his Servants, supposes
that the Frank-tenement has always continued in me; but if my Disseisor make
a Feoffment in fee gift in tail, lease for life or years, and after I
re-enter, I shall not have trespass, vi and armis, against them who come in by
Title; for this fiction in Law that the Frank-tenement has continued always
in me, shall not have relation to make him that comes in by Title to be a
wrong doer, vi and armis: for in a fiction of Law always equity existeth, vide
ibidem plura.

And by these cases it appears that equity has a vigorous use in the
exposition of the Common Law. But this bright Star more clearly shines, and
shows forth its luster in the construction of Statutes: for as Co. Comm. f.
24. b. equity is a construction made by the Judges, what cases out of the
letter of the Statute, yet being within the same mischief, or cause of the
making of the same, shall be within the same remedy that the statute provideth;
and the reason hereof is, for that Lawmakers could not possibly set down all
cases in express terms: and Co. Com. f. 271. b. when Lands and Tenements are
conveyed upon confidences, uses, and trusts, if any question grows upon them,
they are to be ruled and decided by the Judges of the Law; for they are within
the intendment and construction of the Laws of the Realm: Rhet. l. 1. c. 3.
And therefore Aristotle well advises Legislators and Makers of Laws, (...),
to design and determine of things, and to leave as little as may be to the
descretion of the Judges.

But as Co. lib. 6 f. 40. b. Rerum progressus ostend^nt multa, quae initio
praecaveri, and provideri non possint, The progress and proceeding of things
do declare and show many things which at the beginning could not be heeded or
provided for: and therefore is equity required to replenish and fill up those
chincks and deserts which seem to be in the letter of the Law, which is
therefore accordingly thus defined.

Aequitas est verborum legis directio sufficiens, cum una res solummodo cavetur
verbis, ut omnis alia in aequali genere iisdem caveatur verbis. Equity is a
sufficient direction of the words of the Law, when one thing is provided for in
the words, that every other thing in the like kind shall be provided for in the
same words. And so when the words of a Statute enact one thing, they enact all
other things which are in the semblable degree. As whereas the Statute of 9 E.
3. c: 31. ordains that in an Action of Debt against Executors, he that
comes in by distress shall answer, the said Act shall be extended by equity
to Administrators; for whosoever of them comes in first by distress shall
answer by the equity of the said Act, because they are in the like degree. So
the Statute of 4 H. 4. c. 8. gives an especial Assise to him who is
disseised, and ousted of his land by force against the Disseisor, and it is
enacted that he shall recover against him double damages: And so it is in an
Assise of Nuisance to turn the course of the water from the Mills of the
Plaintiff with force, it was adjudged that he should recover double damages,
and yet he was not put out of his land, neither was there a disseisin, but the
Nuisance was to the damage of his Frank-tenement, and so by the equity of the
said act the Plaintiff recovered double damages, because the Nuisance was in the
like kind. So the Statute of Gleucester gives an Action of Wast, etc. against
him who holds for life, or for years, and by the equity of it a man shall
have an action of Wast against him who holds for a year, or for twenty weeks
(and yet it is out of the words of the act) because it is in the like degree,
and the cases which are of such degree in our Law, are infinite, Ployd. f. 165.
a.

And there is another sort of equity which abridgeth, and takes from the
letter, and is a correction of the general words, Ethie. 30. l. 10.
and is defined by Aristotle to be (...) a correction of a Law wherein it is
any way wanting, because of the generality of it, which also in our Law is of
much use.

As when an act of Parliament is made, that whosoever shall do such an act
shall be a Felon, and be put to death, and yet a man non sarae memoriae, or an
Infant of tender age who has no discretion does it, they shall not be Felons,
etc. or if a Statute be made, that all persons who shall receive or give meat
or drink, or other aid to one who shall do a felonious act shall be accessory
to the Offense, and be put to death, yet if one does such an act and comes to
his wife, who knowing it receives him and gives meat and drink unto him, she
shall not be accessory nor Felon; for in the generality of the said words of
the Law, he of non sanae memoriae, nor Infant, nor a Wife shall not be
included, and so equity corrects the generality of the Law in those cases,
and the words general are by equity abridged: so the Statute of Champerty, W.
2. l. 49. and Arti. super Chart. contra probatos, men generally do receive
Lands and Tenements while the thing is in plea, yet M. 16. R. 2. accord it was
said by the whole Court in a Writ of Champerty, that if I bargain any lands
before any Writ brought, and after the Writ purchased I deliver Seisin.

That the Writ of Champerty does not lie, because it shall not be intended that
the Bargain was made for such cause, and that by equity, for when he bargained
and promised the land upon just consideration, before any action brought
against him, it was his act to perform it notwithstanding the action

And Costle promoter of the King, brought an action of Extortion. H. 21. H. 7.
16. against an Undersheriff grounded upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 10. which
ordains, that neither the Sheriff, Jailer, or Ministers, nor any of them by
color of their Office shall take any thing, profit, etc. of any person for
fine, fee or ease of prison, but for the Sheriff 20 d. the Bailiff 4 d. and the
Jailer 4 d. supposing that he had taken 20 d. above the same limited upon the
Statute* and upon demurrer it appeared upon evidence to the Court, that all
under Sherifs of the same county, have used, from the time whereof memory does
not run, to have of every prisoner in their ward for suspicion of Felony, when
they are acquitted, twenty pence, called the Bar fee, and the twenty pence
supposed to be taken, were taken from the person named in the count, being
acquitted for a Bar-fee; and the opinion of the whole Court was, that it was
out of the raise of the Statute, though it was within the words of the Statute,
for that the sum of a Bar-fee was assigned to the Sheriff, at the beginning by
the order, and discretion of the Court, in respect of his labor and charge he
had with the prisoners, and for his attendance, and for his ministry when the
prisoners are brought to their delivery, and so that payment was with reason,
and good conscience, which the intent of the makers of the act was not to take
away, and so equity did put an exception to the generality of that text of the
Statute Law.

So the Statute of W. 2. c. 4. ordains that where a man, rat, or dog,
escapes alive out of a Ship, neither the Ship nor any thing that is within it
shall be adjudged wrack, but all the things shall be saved, and kept by the
view of the Sheriff, etc. in the hands of those of the Town where the things
were found: so that if any one can prove that they are his within a year and a
day, they shall be restored to him; and whosoever does otherwise shall be
awarded to prison, and remain at the will of the King, and render damages: yet
if the goods within the Ship be such things as will not endure for a year and
a day, the Sheriff may sell them and deliver the money taken, for them to the
Town to answer for it, and that by equity, though it be against the words of
the said Act.

So the Act of 2. E. 6. c. 14. Which gives to the King all Lands, and
Tenements by any assurance, conveyance, given, assigned, or limited to find any
preacher to have continuance for ever, etc. if the words of that act should be
taken generally, they give to the King all the houses, and glebe Lands of all
Parsons and Vicars: but equity puts in that text, the exception of
Parsonages and Vicarages; because it was not the intention of the makers of
that Act, Ployd. f. 466. vide ibidem plura.

There is another excellent use of equity which consists in guiding the
grounds and maxims of of things which seem to cross, and thwart one another;
for, as Sir John Doderidge, English Lawyer, f. 209.
it is scarcely possible to make any second rule of Law, but that it shall
fail in some particular case, whence springs this often used assertion. Non
est regula quin fallit, for as Cato says, vix ulla lex fieri potest, quae
omnibus commoda sit; sed si majori parti prospiciat utilis est; there can
scarce any Law be made, which shall fit all men, but if it provideth for the
greater part it is profitable; and therefore the ordainers, and interpretors of
Laws, respect rather those things which may often happen, and not every
particular circumstance: for the which though they would, they shall not be
able, by any positive Law, to make provision; and for the like reason, Mr.
Ploydon says, that Law is reasonable, that provideth for the multitude, though
that some persons loose by it, f. 369. b.

By reason whereof they do permit the rules, actions, and propositions of the
Common Law, upon discourse and disputation of reason, to be restrained by
exceptions, which are grounded upon two causes; the one is equity, the other is
some ground or rule proposed, wherein, for conformities sake, and that no
absurdity, or contradiction be permitted, certain exceptions are framed, which
do not only knit and conjoyne one rule of reason to another: but by means of
their equity, temper the rigor of the Law, which, upon some certain
circumstances, in every of the said rules might happen and fall out, and omnia
been aequiparat, as Bracton says, Nomot. f. 14.


But as Sir Hen. Fi. says, this crossing and encountering of one ground, and
maxim with another, if the greatest difficulty we find in the arguing of our
cases; but to help this, we are to prefer those, and those are to prevail that
carry the more excellent perfect reason, and equity with them; and Sir Francis
Bacon says, it is a point worthy to be observed generally in the rules of the
Law, that where they encounter or cross one another in any case, it be
understood that the Law holds worthier, and which rules are of more equity,
or humanity; but now to give you some examples of them, which always do
illustrate, Coke com. 183.

It is a maxim in the Law, Quaelibet concessio fortissime contra donatorem
interpretanda est, every grant shall be taken most strongly against himself,
as if Lands be letten, or a rent granted, an estate for life passes, for that
is most strongly against himself, which is to be understood that no wrong be
thereby done, for there is another rule in the Civil Law, ea est accipienda
interpretatio, quae vitio caret, and a maxim in our Law, that legis
constructio non facie injuriam; the interpretative construction of Law shall
wrong no man; and therefore if tenant for life makes a lease generally, it
shall be taken for his own life, or else it should work a wrong to him in
reversion, and so it is if tenant in tail should make a lease generally, for
otherwise it should work a discontinuance, and a wrong, vide ibidem.

So if tenant in fee makes a lease for life, without mentioning for whose
life, it shall be deemed for the life of the Lessee, and shall be taken more
strongly against the Lessor, but if tenant entaile makes such a lease for life
without expressing for whose life, this shall be taken for the life of the
Lessor, because otherwise it would work a wrong, Coke Com. f. 42. a.

So if an Executor grant all his Goods and Chattells, the goods which he has
as Executor will not pass, because it may be a devestation and a wrong, yet
against the trespassor he shall declare, quod bona sua cepit, 10. E. 4.1.

So it is a rule, verba ita sunt intelligenda, ut res magis valeat, quam
pereat, words are so to be understood, that the matter may prevail rather then
perish, as if I give Lands to I. S. and his Heirs rendering five pounds yearly
to I. S. and his Heirs, this implies a condition to me, that am the Grantor;
yet were it a stronger exposition against me, to say the limitation should be
void, and the Feoffment absolute, Bacon. Max. f. 15.

If the Chancellor dies before his servants privilege discussed in bank; 35.
H. 6. 3. 172. b.
yet it shall be allowed contrary to the rule, sublata causa tollitur effectus,
but there is another rule, actus legis nulli facit injuriam, the act of the Law
prejudiceth no man, and for that reason, the Court shall not prejudice him,
where no folly was in himself.

It is a ground, qui male agit odit lucem, and therefore the Law countenanceth
more things done in the day, then in the night, as the party has all the day
till night to pay his rent, and if it be a great sum he must be ready as long
before the Sun set as the money may be told; for the other, is not bound to tell
it in the night, and a man must not distraine in the night time for rent
behind, yet is there another ground in the Law, quod necessarium, est licitum,
and therefore when there is a necessity of doing things, they may be done in
the night time, as an arbitrament made, and delivered in writing the last day
after the Sun set is good enough, for judgments, and arbitrements require long
advice, so may goods be distrained for in the night for damage feasant, and a
man may be arrested in the night, for otherwise peradventure he shall not do
it at all.

It is a ground in the Law, nihil agit in seipsum, no man can do an act to
himself, yet if one of the Chapter enfeoff the Deane and Chapter, by that he he
himself shall take by his own livery, because the Law in that case cannot do
otherwise; so a feme tenant in Socage may endow her self, and an Executor pay
himself.

It is a ground in the Law, certa debet esse natratio counts and declarations
must be certain, yet things which contain a necessary implication are good
enough, for it is another ground, non refert quid ex aequipollentibus fiat, it
mattereth not what is done by equippollent, or words which amount to such a
sense, as in an Ejectione firmae, etc. In a count of a lease made by tenant for
life, it suffices to say that the Lessor is yet seized without the alleging
of his life expressly, because it amounts to the same sense by necessary
implication.

So in an information upon the Statute of usury, and he counts that the
Defendant took, per viam, and medium corruptae mutnationis, by the way and
means of corrupt borrowing, whereas it should be accomodationis plaudingo, and
yet good enough.

It is a ground qui facit per alium facit per se, things done by another are as
it were done by himself, yet is there another rule, that corporal and
personal things cannot be done by another, as suite of Court cannot be done by
another, 7. H. 4.9.

Otium est matter omnium vitiorum, Coke l 11. f. 53. b. As all virtue consists
in action, so vice consists in idleness, for idleness is the mother of all
vices, and as Coke there says, principally in young men, who ought in their
youth to learn profitable sciences, and trades which are profitable to the
weal public, of which they may reap the fruits in their old age, for
jeunesse oisense vilesse disettense, if in our youth we be idle, in our old age
we shall be indigent, and for that reason the common Law detesteth all
Monopolies, which prohibit any one to work in any Lawful trade, and that
appears in 2. H. 5. b. A Dyer was bound, that he shall not use his Diers
craft for two years, and there Hull said that the obligation was against the
common Law, and that, by God, if the Plaintiff were here he should go to
prison until he had made fine to the King, and so for the same cause if an
husbandman be bound, that he shall not till and sow the ground, the obligation
is against the common Law: And therefore the act of 5. Eliz. c. 4. that
prohibited any person to use, or exercise any craft, mystery, or occupation,
unless he had been an Apprentice for seven years, does not make provision
only to the intent that the artificers may be skillful, but that young men
shall not be idle in their youth, but trained and brought up in lawful
sciences and trades, and so by the same reason the common Law does not prohibit
any person to use many Arts, and Mysteries at his pleasure; for, nemo
prohibitur plures negotiationes, sive Arts exercere, until it was prohibited
by the Act of Parliament, 37. E. 3. 6. That all Artificers, etc. are bound
every one to one mystery, and that none use other mystery but that he has
chosen; but because that restraint of free trade was prejudicial to the weal
public, at the next Parliament it was enacted that all people should be so
free as they were before that Ordinance, by which it appears that without Act
of Parliament, no man can be in any manner restrained to work in any lawful
trade.

Non negligentibus sed impotentibus succurrendum, Reg. I. C.

Vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subveniant, Ployd. f. 357. b. The Law
helps, and releiveth those are impotent, not those are negligent.

As if you disseise me of my Land, and then A. brings a Writ of right against
you, and you join the mise upon the mere right, and you make default after the
mise joined, he shall recover to him, and his Heirs for ever, quit of you, and
your Heirs for ever; and if I do not lay my claim within a year and a day,
I am barred for ever, for the Law succoureth those that are watchful, and not
sleepy: so as non-claime by a year and a day, upon a recovery by default,
where final judgment is given was a good Bar by the common Law, 5. E. 3.222.
by Hor.

A descent cast during the Coverture (where the wife is disseised) barreth her
not of her entry after her husbands death, but if a feme-sole be disseised, and
then takes an husband, there a descent during the coverture, takes away her
entry; for it was her folly to take such an husband, that entered not in time,
Littleton. 95.

Negligentia semper habet comitem infortunium, Coke l. 8. f. 133. a. Sa.
Turnors case.

An Executor of an Administrator ought to execute his office, and administereth
the goods of the dead, lawfully, truly, and diligently, Lawfully in the payment
of all duties, debts, and legacies in such precedence, and order as they ought
to be paid by the Law; truly to convert nothing to his own use, and ought not
by any practice, or devise to bar, or hinder any creditor of his debt, but
ought truly to execute his office according to the trust reposed in him; And
diligently as in the case at bar, for when the Administrators which had
judgment for one hundred pounds, for sixty pounds, and the Plaintiff offered a
release, or to acknowledge satisfaction, and he deferreth it to the intent that
the Judgment shall stand in force, by which the Plaintiff shall be defrauded
of his due debt, and the Administrators to convert the goods of the debt to
their private use: let the agreement be precedent before the recovery, or
subsequent since the recovery, it is all one, as to the creditor who is a third
person, for he is defrauded as well by the one as the other, and the creditor
who is a stranger shall loose his debt, which is by the Law due to him; and if
any prejudice accreweth to the Administrators, in this case it is in his own
default, for the Plaintiff would have released to them, or acknowledged
satisfaction, but they defer it to the intent to bar the Plaintiff of his just
and true debt, and negligence has always misfortune, or ill luck for her
companion, Ibidem.

Coke l. 2. f. 26. b. If a creditor upon a commission upon a Statute of
Bankrupt, either by obstinacy do refuse, or by carelessnesse neglect to come
before the Commissioners within the time limited, and to crave the benefit of
the Act, he loses the benefit thereof; for the Law releiveth those which are
vigilant, and not dormant, for otherwise a debt may be concealed; or a creditor
may absent himself, and void the proceedings of the Commissioners, and every
creditor ought to take notice of the commission, it being a matter of record.

Coke l. 4. f. 10. b. in Bevills case, it was said that the Act of 32. H. 8. c.
2. by express words extends only to actual possession, and seisin, and not
to relieve those which for so long time had neglected to have actual seisin of
their services, and namely of suite, which ought to be made twice every year,
and it was said that it was crassa, and supina negligentia, which that Law did
not intend to relieve, for as it is commonly said, vigilantibus, etc. Ibidem.

Coke l. 4. f. 82. b. in Sir Andrew Corbets case, who devises Lands to R. C.
and others to have and to hold to them, and the survivor of them, until such
time that the sum of eight hundred pounds, etc. was received out of the
issues, rents, etc. for the preferment of his Daughters, it was resolved,
though the Devisee had notice of the devise, yet if a stranger had occupied the
Land, the Devisee ought to take notice at his peril, for vigilantibus, etc.
and none by the Law in such case is bound to give him notice, as in the case of
arbitrament, 1. H. 7.5.8. E. 4.1. ibidem.

And this is the reason of a lapse incurring for want of presentment, or of a
warranty barring for lack of entry, or of descents barring for want of claim,
and a title to tenant in courtesy is lost for lack of entry, and that Statutes
of limitation do bar actions.

One seized of Lands devisable devises that his Executors shall sell his Land,
and distribute the profits for the use of the poor, and dies; If a stranger
tendreth them money for the Land, and they intending to sell it more dear,
defer the sale for two years, and take the profits themselves, the heir for
the laches, and long delay may enter and put them out of the Land, 38. Ass. Pl.
3. 39. Ass. Pl. 3.

A man indebted by specialty, or upon an account determined, tendreth the money
to the Debtee after the day in which it was due and payable, and it is refused,
and after money is embased: it seems to many that the debtor shall bear the
loss, although he had made tender at the very day of payment, because he must
say, vncor prist, Dyer f. 83. Pl. 76.

Caveat Emptor, Coke Com. f. 102. a. Let the the buyer be vigilant, and wary
what he buyeth, for though by the Civil Law, every man is bound to warrant the
thing that he sells, and conveyeth, yet the Common Law binds him nor,
unless there be a warranty either in Deed, or in Law, Ibi.

Coke l. 4. f. 26. a. A Copyholder who is out of possession ought not to sell
his Land until he has gained the possession, and if any one will purchase any
title he is not to be favored, but in such case Caveat Emptor, let the buyer
take heed for if any one has a pretended right and title to Copyhold Land,
bargain and sell it to another, it is within the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 5.
vide ibidem plura.

If I take an horse of another man's, and sell him, and the owner takes him
again, I may have an action of debt for the money, for the bargain was perfect
by the delivery of the horse, and Caveat Emptor, Nay. Max f. 94.

If I sell my Horse to another man, for ten hundred pounds, who takes his
horse again, I shall have all the money, Ibidem f. 95.

Qui timent, caveant, and vitent, Offi. of Exe. 251. They who fear are wary to
shun dangers, as an Executors office is dangerous, and therefore ought to fear
what encombrances fall on him, and to keep goods to pay, all debts, if any
should be concealed.

Non temere credere nervus est sapientiae, Coke. l. 5. f. 114. b. Not hastily
to believe is the sinew of wisdom, and therefore the Law has appointed the
last time in the day to pay money, upon a condition that both parties may
certainly meet together, which is founded on the experience of the sages, least
any of the parties should be constrained to make a Letter of Attorney; or repose
confidence, or trust in any other to pay it for him when he will do it for
himself: And it is wisdom not rashly to trust any.

Caveat actor. Reg. I. C. Let the actor beware what he does.

One enters into Bond to A. that he and A. shall stand to the Arbitrament of
I. S. If A. refuse, he himhimselfe shall take the forfeiture of the Bond.

If a man have a Chapel, which is his donation by Letters Patents, and he
presents me his clerk to the Ordinary, he shall not make collation afterward.

If a Parson impropriate, presents one to a Church, it makes it
disappropriate.

If he who holds his Land by homage, and fealty, takes his Land of the King
by office found that he holds it by forty shillings per annum, he shall pay
the rent hereafter.

Abundans cautela non nocet, Coke l. 11 f. 6. b. An abundance of circumspection
does not hurt, vide ibi.

Qui sentit onus, sentire debet and commodum, Coke l. 1. f. 99. a. He who
bears the burden and takes the pains ought to receive the profit, as if a
Feoffment be upon condition, that if the Feoffor or his Heirs pay the sum of 20
l. or to do any act before a certain day, that they shall re-enter in this
case, if the father dye before the day of paymenr, and the daughter for the
safe-gard of the inheritance pay the money, or satisfies the condition, in this
case the Son after borne shall not divest it, for if the daughter had not
performed the condition, the Land had been utterly lost, and therefore in this
case a good argument may be made that the daughter shall detain the Land, for
Qui sentit onus sentire debet and Commodum, ibidem, vide Hobart Rrep. fo. 4. in
Youngs, and Radfords case.

Ployd. f. 514. Trevilian was Tenant in tail of Tenements, and he being only
seized of such an estate, a common recovery was had against him, and Avice his
wife, who vouched over according to the course of common recoveries, and it was
found that the wife had nothing in the Tenements: the husband dies, the wife
shall have nothing of the intended recompense in the case; because she had
nothing in the Tenements, and so could lose nothing.

If Tenant for life or in Dower do devise the Corn growing on the ground upon
the land at the time of their death, this is a good Devise, and he in the
reversion shall not have it, 4 H. 3. Devise 26. And the Statute of Merton which
says, Omnes viduae possunt legare sua blada, is but an affirmation of the
common Law, which was used in the time of H. 3. 19 H. 6. 6.

A man seized of land in see, in right of his wife, leaseth the land to a
stranger, and the Lessee sows the land, and after the wife dies, the Corn
being not ripe, the Lessee may devise the corn, and yet his estate is
determined, 7 E. 3. 67.

A man seized of land in the right of his wife, and sows it, and devises the
Corn growing on the ground, and dies before it is severed, the Devisee shall
have it, and not the wife, 7. Ass. pl. 19.

One seized of lands in fee, has Issue a Daughter, and dies, his wife
Privement Ensaint with a Son, the Daughter enters and sows the land, and
before the severance a Son is born, and his next friend enters: yet the
Daughter may devise the Corn growing on the land. If a Manor be put in
execution upon a Statute-merchant, and the Conusee sow the land, he may well
devise the Corn growing on the ground, Perkins f. 100. vide ibidem plura.

Qui sentit commodum sentire debet and onus, Cok. l. 5. f. 24. He that feels
or reapeth the profit must bear the burden, and the charges.

A man leaseth an house by Indenture for years, and the Lessee covenanteth for
him, and his Executors to repair the house at all times necessary; The Lessee
assigns it over to H. who suffers it to decay; the Lessee brings an
action of Covenant against the Assignee, and it was adjudged the action did
lie, in that the Lessee had taken upon him to bear the charges of reparation,
the annual rent was the less, which trenched to the benefit of the Assignee,
and he that enjoys the profit must bear the burden and charges, vide ibidem
plura.

Co. l. 5. f. 100. a. The Statutes will have all those which are in peril, and
which are to take comodity by the making of the banks of a River to be
contributory to it: for Qui sentit commodum etc.

Coke l. 7. f. 39. b. If a man grant a Rentcharge for life out of his land,
and the rent is behind, and the Grantor enfeoff A. and the rent is behind in
his time, and after A. enfeoffeth B. and the rent is behind in his time, and
then the Grantee dies, the Executor shall have an action of debt against every
of them for the rent behind in his time, for qui s^ntit commodum, etc. and so
was it holden in Ognels case, l. 4. f. 49. a. 50.

Barons uses, f. 27. If a man bind himself and his Heirs in an Obligation, or
do covenant in writing for him and his Heirs, or do grant an annuity for him
and his Heirs, or do make a Warranty of land binding him and his Heirs to
warranty, in all these cases the Heir after the death of the Ancestor is by Law
charged with this Obligation, Covenant, Annuity, and Warranty, yet with these
three cautions; 1. That the party must by special name bind himself and his
Heirs. 2. That some action must be brought against the Heir, whilst the land
or other inheritance rested in him unaliened, except the land was conveyed away
by fraud, and one purpose to prevent the Suit intended against him: And 3. That
no Heir is further to be charged then the value of the land descended unto him
from the same Ancestor, etc. nor to be sold outright for the debt to be kept
in extent at a yearly value, until the debt or damage be run out.
Nevertheless for his false plea shall he be charged of his own lands, for this
Deed of his Ancestor, and the reason of this charge is, Qui sentit commodum
sentire debet incommodum and onus, vide ibidem plura.

Dilationes sunt in lege odiosae. Ployd. f. 75. b. Delays are tedious in the
Law, and therefore does the Law favor Assise, because they are the more speedy
Suits the Law has given, as the Statute of W. 2. c. 25. in its recital says:
Et quia non est aliquod breve in Cancelaria, per quod quaerentes habent tam
festinum remedium sicut per breve. Nove disseisinae. And therefore because it
is the more speedy Suit, the Law the more greatly favors it, ibidem

For, for speed to the Plaintiff, the Jurors shall have the view before
appearance by the words of the Writ. And though Warranties are favored in Law,
yet none shall vouch in Assise any one, if he be not present, and that is for
the speed of the Plaintiff, No. Not. br. f. 178. And a protection will not
defend the party against an assise, but assizes are accepted by the words of
protection, p. 2. H. 6. 42. B^. protection 53. And all things and pleas which
go in retardation, or abatement of Assizes, are esteemed odious, and therefore
exceptions which will abate, other Writs shall not abate Assizes, if it be so,
that there is a Disseisor and a Tenant, for it is the substance of the Suit,
and therefore the misnaming of one of the Defendants shall not abate the
assise, if there be another Disseisin and Tenant, and yet the Writ was always
false, Plo^d. f. 98. a. b.

And if the Tenant plead Joynt-tenancy with a stranger not named, although the
Plaintiff confess it, yet it shall not abate his assise, but for it only, and
for the remnant, the Writ and Plaint shall stand in his force, and yet the
Plaint was altogether false, and if there be a Disseisor and Tenant for any
part, then it suffices, for other verity in the Writ or Plaint the Law
requires none, and to say that one named in the Writ is dead, before the Writ
purchased, or that there was never any such in rerum natura is alone, and shall
be adjudged no plea in abatement of the Writ, but if there be another Disseisor
and a Tenant, the Writ shall be good against them, Ployd. f 90. a. vide ibidem
plura.

And though in actions real, as the weight of the cause requires, there are
longer times given in their proceedings, then in personal actions, yet it
appears by Fortescue, de lib. l. A. c. 5. 3. that they are not too long, nor
admitted without just cause. Crebro enim says he, deliberationibus iu^icia
matur scunt, sed in accelerato processu numquam. And as Hobert says, f. 133.
Festinatio j^stitiae est n^verca infortunii, Festination of Justice is the
stepmother of mischief; but many times by deliberations Judgments grow to
ripeness, but in over hasty process never; yet the Demandant shall come to a
final end by these actions, which he shall never do by prosecution of
personal actions for the trial of a Freehold or Inheritance, Co. ep. ad
lectorem, lib. 8.

And in all cases the Law favors speeding of men's Causes, and hates
delays, as 3 H. 6. 15. b. He that pleads a Record in delay, as to prove the
Plaintiff excommunicate, must have it ready to show, but otherwise it is if he
plead in bar.

In dilatory pleas both Defendants must join, 12 H. 7. 1.

A Plea in bar that is dilatory must be good to every common intent, 8 H. 7. 9.

One who is in Court ready to join with the Defendant may do it without
process: As the Vouchee the Plaintiffs Lessor being prayed in aid of, when the
Defendant in a Replevin avoweth upon him or the Mesne, when the Lord Paramount
voweth upon him. But Joynder in aid cannot be by an Attorney without process 2
H. 6. 1. b.

One who is a Debtor to the King of Record in the Exchequer, if he be seen in
the Court may be brought in to answer, 2 H. 6 4. b.

An assise of Darrein presentment was brought, and it was pleaded in abatement
of the Writ, that the same Plaintiff had brought a Quare impedit against the
Defendant for the same Church, and the Court was of opinion that it was a good
plea, for the Quare impedit is of an higher nature for the right and
possession: and the Statute of W. 2. l. 5. says, that it may be in the
election of one to have an assise of Darrein-presentment, or a Quare impedit,
ergo not both: And it was adjudged p. 15 Jaco. that one cannot have two Quare
Impedits of one Church, for one avoidance, Hutton f. 403.

When the Law gives a man several remedies for a thing, he cannot have both
of them together, as Littleton says, for then he should recover one thing
twice, which should be a double charge and a double vexation to the Defendant,
Co. Com. 145. a. as if I grant by Deed a Rentcharge to another, the Grantee
has election to bring a Writ of Annuity, and charge, the person only to make
it personal, or to distrain upon the land and make it real, but he cannot
have both after the Grantee has determined his election, but this
determination of election must be by action in Court of Record: for albeit the
Grantee brings a Writ of Annuity, he may distrain and discharge the person,
but if he bring a Writ of Annuity, and thereupon appear and Court, this is a
determination of his election in Court of Records, albeit he never proceed any
further: as if the Wife be endowed ex assensu patris, if she, after her
Husbands death, brings a Writ of Dower at the Common Law, and Count, albeit
she recover not, she shall never claim her Dower ex assensu patris, because she
has determined her election. So if the Grantee bring an assise for rent, and
make his Plaint, he shall never after bring a Writ of Annuity, and if he
distrain and avow the prisall of the Distress in a Court of Record, it is a
determination of his election before any judgment g^ven, according to the rule,
Electio semel facta and placitum testatum, non patiter regressum, Co. Com. 220.
a. But otherwise it is where a man has election to have several remedies; for
a thing is merely personal, or merely real from the beginning: as if a man
may have an action of debt or an action of account at his pleasure, and appear
to it, and after is nonsuit, yet may he have an action of debt afterward,
because both actions charge the person, the like Law is an assise, and a Writ
of Entry in the nature of assise, ibidem.

W. brought an action of the case against F. and declared that the Defendant
had sued out a Fieri facias upon a judgment given against him for the
Defendant, and by virtue thereof took Goods of the Plaintiff to the value of
the Damage, and so made his return pro def^ctu emptoris, and that the
Defendant, well knowing this, to the intent to trouble, vex, and charge him,
did afterward sue out another Fieri facias to the same Sheriff, and delivered
it to be exexecuted, who did thereupon levy the money of other Goods of the
Plaintiff, and paid it over to the Defendant, whereby the now Plaintiff was
double charged; whereupon the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and it was found
against him, and it was adjudged for the Plaintiff, because he was twice vexed
and disturbed, and that wilfully by the Defendant, who had first one execution
inchoate, which he ought to have followed, we all knowing it, and not to have
taken another:) but if he had been ignorant and had not known of the Goods
first taken, he had not been liable to the other action, Hob. 37.3. Waterers
case.

Euilibet in sua art perito est credendum: and omnes prudentes eos admittere
solent, qui probantur ab iis qui in sua art been versati sunt, Arist. 1.
Topic. c. 6. Co. l. 7. f. 19. a. The reason of the wisest man which professes
not the Laws of England, in cases which concern the Laws of England, is not
to be believed, but the legal and profound reason of such, who by diligence,
study, and long experience and observation, are so learned in the Laws of this
Realm, as out of the reason of the same they can rule the case in question, in
this sense this rule is to be taken, that we are to believe every one in his
art, and all wise men are wont to admit those things which are approved by them
are well versed in their own Art.

Coke l. 4. f. 29. a. Agnes was contracted to Bunting, and after married, Twede
Bunting libelleth against Agnes in the Court of Audience upon the said
Contract, and upon the proceedings of which Libell, it was decreed that the
said Agnes should undergo marriage with the said Bunting, and thereupon it was
pronounced, decreed, and declared the said marriage with Twede to be null: And
though that Twede being de facto husband of the said Agnes, was neither party
to the said Suit, nor to the sentence in the Spiritual Court which dissolved
the marriage between him and the said Agnes, but the said Agnes only, yet the
sentence against the Feme only being only declaratory, was good and shall
bind the Baron de facto; and in regard that the Cognizance of marriages
appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court, and the same Court had given sentence
in this case, the Judges of our Law ought to give faith and credit to their
proceedings, and sentence, (although it be contrary to the reason of our Law)
and to think that their proceedings are consonant to the Law of the holy
Church, for we are to believe every one is skillful in his art, vide ibidem
plura, Coke l. 5. f. 7. in Caudries case.

Quod quisque norit, in hoc se exerceat, Co. l. 9. f. 13. a. Let every one
exercise himself in that which he has knowledge and skill. It is the wisdom
of the Law to refer things to persons in which they have knowledge and shall be
expert; and therefore the Law will not constrain the Jurors which have no
knowledge in the Law, to take upon them Cognizance of the points in Law, or in
cases which concern Life, Member, or Inheritance, Frank tenements, Goods, and
Chattels, but to leave them to the consideration of the Judges, nor the Judges
to give their opinion of questions and doubts in Law upon a sudden, but in all
cases to have the truth of the case, and upon conference and consideration to
adjudge according to the Law.

Coke l. 8. f. 130. a. The intent of the act of 5 Eliz. c. 4. was, that no man
should take upon him any Art, Mystery, or any Occupation, but such in whom is
science and knowledge, and therefore the statute intended, that he that used
any Art, Mystery, or any occupation at the time of the act, might use the same
art, or mystery; for every one is to exercise himself in that art which he
knows: And it was said, that the Brewers should have science and skill in
brewing good and wholesome Beer, for it greatly conduces to the health of men.

Ployd. f. 128. b. Always our Predeceossors, for the sense of latin words
have consulted with the Grammarians and others who have knowledge therein, and
that sense which the Grammar warranted they have allowed, as 9 H. 7. 14. One
was bound in an Obligation upon the condition that he should pay five pounds in
fine Gold, and the Obligation was puri auri, and there it appears that the
Masters of Grammar were sent, for to give their counsel what was latin for
fine Gold, vide ibidem plura.

Coke l. 11. f. 10. b. Matters in Law shall be put in issue to be tried by the
Country, for sicut ad quaestionem facti non respondent judices, ita ad
quaestion^m Juris non respondent juratores: As the Judges do not answer to the
question of fact, no more do the Jurors answer to the question in Law: and if
the Jurors take upon them the Cognizance of the Law, and find the special
matter mistake the Law, the Judges of the Law shall give judgment upon the
special matter according to the Law, without having regard to the conclusion
of the Jurors, who ought not to take upon them the judgment of the Law, for
quod quisque novit, etc. Plo^d. C^m. Amie Townsdens case, 5 H. 17. Carus case,
etc.

Coke Com. f. 3. b. If an office either of the Grant of the King, or subject
which concerns the Administration, proceedings, or execution of Justice, or
the Kings revenue, or the Commonwealth, or the interest, benefit, or safety of
the Subject, or the like: If these or any of them be granted to a man that is
unexpert, and has no skill and science to exercise or execute the same, the
Grant is merely void, and the party disabled by Law, and incapable to take the
same pro commodo regis, and populi, for only men of skill, knowledge, and
ability to exercise the same, are capable of the same, to serve the King and
his people, ibidem.

An Infant is not capable of the Office of a Stewardship of a Manor, either in
possession or reversion, ibid. and the Civil Law, Impubes ab omnibus officiis
civilibus debet abstinere.

Coke l. 11. f. 87. a. The case of Monopolies, a Patent made to Sir Edward Bury
for the making of Cards, was void, because he had no skill in making them,
though the Patent was to him and his Deputy, yet if the Grantee himself be
inexpert, he cannot make a Deputy who is skillful to supply his place: Quia
quod per me non possum, nec per alium, for what I cannot do by my self, I
cannot do by another.

Imperitia culpae adnumeratur, Reg. s. e.

Imperitia maxima est mechanicorum poena. Co. l. 11. f. 57. a.

Ignorance and unskilfulness is accounted a fault, and is the greatest
punishment of Artists and Mechanics.

As 7 E. 3. 65. b. If he that takes upon him to work be unskilful and
ignorant, it is sufficient punishment to him, for if any man take upon him to
work, and does it amiss, an action of the case lies against him.

Ignorantia Juris non excusat. The ignorance of the Law does not excuse, Dr.
and Stud. l. 2. c 46. Ignorance of the Law though it be unvincible, that is to
say, that they have done, that in them, is to know the truth, does not excuse,
as to the Law, for every man is bound at his peril to take notice what the Law
of the Realm is, as well the Statutes as the Common Law, for all Statutes are
made in Parliament, and Burgesses are the representatives of the Commons, and
therefore is, alone, as if all the Commons had been there present.

An Infant of the years of discretion may be a Felon and a Trespasser,
according to the civil Rule;

Pupillus qui proximus est pubertati capax est furendi, and injuriae faciendae,
An Infant who is next to the age of puberty, that is of fourteen years, is
capable of stealing and doing injury, though he be ignorant of the Law, but
that is by the old Maxim of the Law, for the eschewing of Murders, Felony,
and Trespasses, Dr. and Stud. l. 2. c. 46. vide ibid. plura.

Coke l. 1. f. 177. a. b. Anthony Mildmay brought an action of the case against
Roger Standish, because the said Robert had said and openly published, that
certain lands which lawfully appertained to the said Mildmay, were lawfully
assured for the term of a thousand years, to Ja. Talbot, and Olyff his wife,
and that they of the interest of that term were lawfully possessed, and so, for
slandring his estate and title showing all in certain, and how he was
prejudiced by the said speaking, brought his Action: And Standish in his plea
justified the words, upon which the Plaintiff demurred, and it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, although de facto, the said Talbot and Olife had a limitation of
those lands, by the Will of Sir Henry Sharington in writing for a thousand
years, which was the occasion that the said Standish being a man not learned in
the Law affirmed and published the same: yet for that he had taken upon him the
knowledge of the Law, and interposed himself in a matter not concerned him,
judgment was given against him; for Ignorantia juris not excusat.

If the Clark mistake Debt for a Detinet in a Writ, his ignorance of the Law
does not excuse, 20 E. 4. 21.

But the Civilians have a Rule, In paenalibus judiciis aetati, and imprudentiae
succurritur, the Law does help the party according to his age, or ignorance in
criminal and penal causes, which accords with the grounds of our Law, as if
an infant of tender years kill a man, it shall not be Felony, because he had no
scretion, or understanding, and so it is if a man dedi non sanae memoriae, kill
another, it is not homicide because he has no memory nor understanding, and
this as Ploydon says is properly said to be done, ex ignorantia, where
unvoluntary ignorance is adjudged the cause of the act, Ployd. f. 19. a.

Coke l. 6. f. 54. a. A Capias was awarded against a Countess by the Court of
Common Bench, that the Sheriff, or his Officer by his warrant, without any
offense may execute it, for they ought not to dispute the authority of Court,
but they ought to execute the Writs to them directed, and to it they are sworn,
and though it was objected that it appeared by the Capias, that she was a
Countess against whom by Law no Capias in such case lies, and ignorantia
juris non excusat, and principally the Sheriffs, and other Ministers of Law,
and Justice, except in some cases, as in cases of contempt: yet it was resolved
that the Sheriff, and his Ministers, ought not to examine the judicial act of
the Court, but they ought to execute the Writ, ibidem, in the Countess of
Rutlands case, so Dyer fo. 60. quod vide.

Ignorantia facti excusat, Coke 2. f. 3. b. in Mansers case, the ignorance of
the deed excuses, as if an illeterate man be bound to seal a deed, he is not
tied to do it, if not any be present to read it, if required, and also to
expound it, if it be written in Latin, etc for ignorantia facti non excusat,
quae est, vel lectionis vel linguae, the ignorance of the deed excuses whether
it be of reading, or of the tongues.

Doct. and Stud. l. 2. c. 47. If a man buy an horse in open Market of him that
has no property in him, not knowing but that he had right, he has good right
to the horse, and his ignorance shall excuse him; but if he had known the
seller had no right, the buying in open Market had not excused him.

So if a man retain another man's servant, not knowing that he is retained by
him, the ignorance excuses him both from the common Law and the Statute of 31.
Ed. 33. and the penalty thereupon, to wit, pain of imprisonment, if any one
retains one servant without license, or reasonable cause, and so has the
Statute always been expounded, that they who were ignorant of the first
retainer should not run into any penalty of the Statute. So whosoever retains
one is a ward to another, not knowing that he is ward, also if homage be due,
and the tenant after makes a Feoffment, and the Lord not knowing of the
Feoffment distraineth for the homage, his ignorance shall excuse him of his
damages in a replevin, though he cannot avow for the homage but if he had known
the Feoffment, he should have yielded damages, ibidem.

If a resignation be made by an imcumbent to a Bishop, the Bishop is bound to
give the Patron notice, or otherwise he shall not have the advantage of the
lapse, and if the same Bishop dye, his Successor shall be bound in the same
manner, although the resignation was not made to him, for he shall have
advantage by reason of the avoidance of the said resignation, then he is bound
to do that thing his successor should do, upon the pain of a Quare Impedit, for
it is intended, that the books of resignation to the successor remain with him,
Calloway 18 H. 7. f. 49. f. by Frowick.

If a Patron who is a Layman present his Clark to the Ordinary, and he is not
well lettered, it is lawful for the Ordinary to refuse him, and of it to give
notice to the Patron for to present another before there shall be a collation
by Lapse, because the Patron could not have Cognizance whether he be a Clark or
no, but if a Patron be a spiritual man and present one not well lettered, and
the Ordinary refuse him, he shall not give notice of it to the Patron because
it is intended that a Clark may have Conusance of the sufficiency of another
before he presentted him to the Bishop, ibidem by Frowick.

So when a man does an act, as to enter into Land, seize goods, take a
distress, or such other he must, by the Law, see at his peril that it be
lawfully done Doctor and Student, ibidem.

As if a Servant comes with his masters horse to Town, where by custom goods
may be attached for debt, and upon a Plaint against the servant, an officer of
the Town attached the masters horse, thinking it to be the Servants, that
ignorance excuses not, ibidem.

So if the Sheriff by a replevin deliver other beasts then were distrained,
though the party that distrained show him they were the same beasts: yet an
action of Trespass lies against him, for he shall be compelled by Law, as all
Officers commonly be, to execute the Kings Writ at his peril, according to the
tenor of it, and to see that the act that he does be lawfully done, ibidem.

But some say if upon a Summons, in a praecipe quod reddat, the Sheriff by
information of the Detendant, summoneth the tenant in another man's Land,
thinking it to be the tenants Land, there he shall be excused, for he does not
seize Land, but only summoneth the tenant on the Land, and that upon the
information of the Demandant, and though he be ignorant that that is the Land,
yet that suffices to the Sheriff as to his entry for the summoning as they
say, though it be not the tenants Land, Ibidem.

SECT. VII.
From the Politics.
THe last Fountain from whence the law deriveth grounds is the political
Science, which of all thereof, as Plato is (...) and as Ar. (...) the Queen and
Regent, for she prescribes certain Laws, by which they may be soundly taught,
and gloriously published, and graciously ministers to them her protection, and
she is the Lady and Mistress of all humane actions, for though other
Sciences, and especially the Ethicall instructs men how to live well, and
happily, yet many Egregious Philosophers, which profess the protection of that
Art and Science, are observed to live loosely, and vitiously, and as Cicero
alios esse pecunia Cupidos, gloriae non nullos, multos libidinum servos, some
to be coveteous of Gold, others ambitious of glory, and many to serve their
lusts, so as if they were not restrained by the Scepter of this Science, by
which Magistrates and Laws are ordained to curb those who will not be adduced
for the love of virtue, to do that which is right and just, and formidine
paenae, for fear of punishment, to fright, and force them into (...) more
virtuous, and civil manner of living, and (...) magisterio (as Camerarius
fully) vita communis (...) ur and constituitur jure, and legibus, ut societates
ho^ number, quae res publicae vocantur in terris conserventu^, ^n^ by whose
magisteriall rule, the lives of all men are so ordered, and disposed by right,
and Laws that the societies of men, which are called republics may be
preserved on the earth. Without doubt therefore many principal and royal
grounds of the Law must spring, and grow from this sovereign Science, from
which the Law receives its constitution, and confirmation, as the grounds
ensuing will manifest.

Salus populi, prima lex esta, L^x. 12. tabularum, and Coke l. 11. f. 113. b.
Salus populi suprema est lex, the health and welfare of the people, is the
prime and chiefest Law, that is, the prime and principal scope to which all
our actions ought to tend, is the public good of the people, and Commonweal,
and therefore does our Law favor things for the Commonweal, and as Dyer f.
36. Pl 40. In cases, which sound for the good of the Commonweal, a man may
justify the doing of a wrong.

As in time of War, a man may justify the raising of Bulwarks in another man's
soil, and so may he justify the raising of an house that burns, ^^r the
safeguard of the houses of the Neighbors. So if the Sheriff pursue a Felon to
an house, and for to have the Felon he breaks the door of the house, he may
justify it, because it is for the Commonweal, that such Felons should be
taken; but it is otherwise in particular cases, as if the Sheriff break the
house to arrest one in the house by virtue of a Capias, in debt or trespass, he
shall be punished, for that was a particular case, and not for the good of the
Common-

If the Lessor have Villains, and one, or diverse of them commit felony, and
that the Lessee pursues them as Felons, by which he exileth them of the
Manor, he is not punishable in wast: but if the Villains slander him, for
which he does them exile, it is punishable, by Knigh^ly.

Fishermen may justify their coming upon land adjoining to the Sea, to dry
their Nets, though it be another ground, for fishing is for the Commonweal,
and sustenance of all the Realm, 8 E. 4. 18. b. and upon this reason the
Civilians say, Si piscator ligat navem ad arborem, dominus eam incidere non
potest: If a Fisherman tyeth his Ship to a tree, the Master of that soil
cannot cut the tree.

And for this reason the King before the Statute of Magna Charta c. 11. might
enter into another Woods and cut the Trees for reparations of Castles, but by
that Statute he did restrain himself so to do, Ployd. 3. 22. b. vide ibidem
plura.

A Mil-stone that is lifted up to be picked and beaten, cannot be distrained,
for it remains parcel of the Mill, which is a thing for the Commonweal.
weal, 14 H. 1 25.

Things brought into an Inn, Fair, or Market, shall not be distrained, 22 E.
4. 49. No more shall Cloth lying in a Tailors Shop, or an Horse that is a
shooing shall not be distrained for the rent issuing out of the Shop.

Coke Com. f. 47. a. When a man and a woman are riding on a horse, or Axe in a
man's hand cutting of wood, and the like, they are for that time privileged and
cannot be distrained.

Valuable things shall not be distrained for rent, for benefit and maintenance
of Trade, which by consequence are for the Commonweal, and are there by
authority of Law, as an horse in the Hostrey, nor the materials in a Weavers
Shop for making of cloth, nor sacks of Corn, or meal in a Mill, nor in a
Market, nor any thing distrained for damage feasant, for it is in custody of
the Law, and the like.

So Beasts belonging to a Plow averia carucae shall not be distrained, and no
man shall be distrained for the Instruments of his Trade, or profession, as the
Axe of a Carpenter, or the Books of a Scholar, whilst Goods, or other Beasts
may be distrained, ibidem.

Coke l. 10. f. 139. b. An action of the case was brought against D. and counts
that D. was seized of certain lands in Kent, by reason of which his ancestors,
and all the Ter tenants from the time whence, etc. have made and repaired when
it shall be material, so many perches of the walls of the Sea in K. etc. and
for default of repairing, etc. the water entered, and over-flowed the lands of
the Plaintiff, the Defendant traversed the Prescription; and it was found for
the Plaintiff, and that there was a default in the Wall for not repairing; by
which the Plaintiff recovered Damage, and a Writ awarded to the Sheriff to
distrain B. to repair the wall there where it was material. Note this judgment
in an action of the case, and the reason is, pro bono publico, for Salus populi
est suprema lex and therefore is that part of the judgment in this action of
the case, that the Defendant shall be distrained to repair the wall, ibidem.

Publica utilitas privatorum commodis est praeferenda, Reg. I. C

Publicum bonum privato est praeferendum, the public utility and good is to be
p^eferred before private gain and profit and therefore shall be more
favorably expounded by the Law, then when it is only for private, Coke comm.
f. 181. b.

As the Tenant holds of the Lord by fealty and one grain of wheat, etc. and
the Lord purchases part, the whole shall be extinct, because it is entire, but
if an entire service be pro bono publico, as Knights-service, Castle-guard,
Cornage, etc. for defense of the Realm, or to repair a Bridge, or a way, or to
keep a Beacon, or to keep the Kings Records, or for advancement of Justice and
Fence, as to aid the Sheriff, or to be Constable of England, though the Lord
purchases part, the service remains, and so it is pro opere devotionis, and
pietatis, for works of devotion and piety, Coke comm. f. 149. a.

Coke l. f. 63. a. In the Chamberlain of Londons case, the Inhabitants of a
Village may make Ordinances, or by-Lawes, for the reparation of a Church, or of
an highway, or any such thing as is for the public good generally, and in
such case the greater part shall bind all without any custom.

So Corporations cannot make Ordinanccs, or constitution, or By-lawes without
custom or charter, unless it be for things which concern the public good, as
reparations of Churches, common-waies, or the like.

So in Corporations such Ordinances or Bylawes are allowed by Law, which are
made for the due execution of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and for the
good or due government of the body Corporate. And the Ordinance of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Comminalty of London, that all Citizens, Freemen, and strangers,
shall not put any broad cloth to sale within the City, before it be carried to
Blackwell Hall to be viewed and searched, so that it may appear to be vendible,
and that hallage be paid for it, to wit, 1 d. was good and allowable by Law,
because it was for the better execution of the Statutes made in that behalf,
without deceit; and also that the assesment of the said penny for hallage was
good and reasonable, because it was pro bono publico, vide ibidem plura.

Coke comm. f. 181, b. If a Charter of Feoffment be made, and a Letter of
Attorney to four, or three, jointly and severally to deliver Seisin, two of
them cannot make Livery, because it is neither by the four or three jointly,
nor any of them severally: but if the Sheriff upon a Capias directed to him,
make a Warrant to four, or three, jointly and severally to arrest the
Defendants, two of them may arrest him, because it is for the execution of
Justice, which is pro bono publico, and jura publica privato promiscue decidi
non debunt, and public Laws ought not promiscuously to be decided by the
private, ibidem.

Coke com. f. 165. a. If a Castle that is used for the necessary defense of the
Realm descend to two, ot more Coparceners; this Castle might be divided by
Chambers and Rooms, as other houses be: but yet that it is pro bono publico,
and defensione regni, for the public good, and defense of the Realm: it shall
not be divided for the right of the Sword, as Britton says, which suffers
not division, that the force of the Realm do not fail so much: but Castles of
habitation for private use, and that are not for the necessary defense of the
Realm, ought to be parted between Coparceners as other houses, ib. And for the
same reason a woman shall not be endowed of a Castle that is maintained for the
necessary defense of the Realm, because it ought not to be divided, and the
public shall be preferred before the private, but of a Castle that is for
private use and habitation she shall be endowed, Co. com f 31 b. vide ibidem
plura.

So a protection, cum clausula volumus, is of two sorts, the one concerns
services of War, as a Kings Soldier, etc. the other wisdom and counsel, as
the Kings Ambassador and Messenger, pro negotiis regni, both these being for
the public good of the Realm, private men's actions and suits must be suspended
for a convenient time, for the public is to be put before the private: but the
cause of granting the protection, must be expressed in the protection, to the
end that it may appear to the Court that it is granted pro negotiis regni, and
pro bono publico, for the common profit of the Realm: and as Britton says, for
our service, as to be in our force and defense of us, and our people, Coke
comm. f. 130.

And it is a rule in the Civil Law, which for the reasonableness of it all
Nations follow, Eorum qui in potestate pai^^s ^unt, sine voluntate ejus,
matrimonia jure, non contrahu ^ur, sed contracta non solvuntur. They who under
the power of their Father cannot lawfully contract Matrimony without their will
and consent; but being contracted are not to be dissolved: Contemplatio enim
utilitatis publitae privatorum commodis p^aefertur, For the consideration of
the public good is to be preferred before private profit, Ful^. Pand. f. 28.

Finis legis pax est, Ployd. f. 388. The Justice said, that peace and concord
were the end of all Laws, and for peace the Law was made: And Dyer said, that
for peace Christ descended from Heaven on Earth, and the Divine Laws of the
old and new Testament were given for peace: Bacon H. 7. f. 233.
And Bacon says, When Christ came into the world, peace was sung, and when he
went ^ut of the world peace was bequeathed: And Weston cited S. Aug. Concordia
stat, and augetur respublica, discordia ruil, and diminuitur, By concord the
Common weal stands and flourishes, and by discord it is diminished, and
runs to ruin: And Cataline said, that the Chariot wherein Peace was
carried, was unanimity, the Rector of the Chariot, Love, the Horses which drew
it, Concord and Utility, and her company and consorts were Justice and Truth,
and Diligence, and her incidents were the attainment and advancement of all
Arts and Sciences; and therefore peace which brings so many commodities,
ought to be preserved above all other things. And Dyer said, that it was one of
the Atticles to which the King is sworn at his Coronation to his subjects to
do, that he preserve the peace, for nothing of greater benefit he cannot grant
to them. And therefore those Laws which bring the more peace, are the more to
be esteemed, as the Law is touching fines, which brings to the Possessors of
Inheritances security, and makes the certainty, and therefore Carus said, they
were the more worthy because certainty engendereth repose, and incertainty
contention; and to avoid incertainty in Inheritances, Fines were devised by the
Founders of our Laws at the beginning of Law, for no point of our Law is of
greater antiquity, and for it Glanvill was cited by Cataline, who lived in the
time of Richard the first, that Contingit aliquando loquelas motas in Curia
domini regis per amicabi^em compositionem, and finalem concordiam te minari,
sed ex licentia regis vel ejus justiciariorum, It happened sometimes that
Libells and Suites moved in the Court of the Lord the King, were ended by a
loving composition, and final concord, but by the license of the King, or of
his Justices. And Bracton, therefore is it called a final concord, because
finis finem litibus imponit, because a fine puts an end to all Suits, vide
ibidem plura.

And for the same reason are Recoveries advanced by the Law above all other
assurances, even fines themselves: and as Bacon, are the greatest security
Purchasers have for their moneys, for a fine will bar the Heir entail, but not
the Remainder, but a common Recovery barreth as well Estates tail, as also all
Reversions and Remainders expectant, an dependant, except in the Kings case,
where the Remainder or Reversion is in the King, and then by the Statute of 34
H. 8. it barreth neither the Estate tail nor the Remainder, saving where the
King is the Giver of the Estate tail, and leaves the Reversion to himself,
Bac. Uses, f. 52. and 53. and Dr. and Student, l. 1. c. 26.

And therefore by the Statute of 23 Eliz. c. 4. Its provided, that for the
avoiding the danger of assurances, and for the advancement of common
recoveries, that every common recovery shall not be avoided, for any want of
form in words and not in matter of substance.

So the common Law is the preserver of peace, and abhors all force as a
capital enemy to it, and therefore is more severe against those which commit
any force, and subjecteth their bodies to imprisonment, whereas at the common
Law, upon a recognizance, or judgment for debts and damages, a common person
only shall have execution of his Goods and Chattells, and of the Corn, or
other present profit grows upon the Land, but it is a rule at the common Law,
that in all Actions, Quare vi, and armis, a Capias lies, and where a Capias
lies in Process, there after Judgment a Capias ad satisfaciendum lies,
which is the highest execution by which he shall loose his liberty, until he
has made satisfaction to the party, and fine to the King, and the King shall
have a Capias p^o fine, Coke l. 3. f. 12. a. in Herberts case, vide ibidem
plura.

And therefore all actions upon the case for corporal injuries, as forcible
Entries, Assaults, and Batteries, which tend to the breach of the peace, may
not only be pursued by action, but Enditement, and are more severely and
largely taken and punished by the common Law: As if four men enter into Land,
and one of them enters by force, this is force in them all, and may be
impleaded by action, or impeached by enditement, 2. E. 3. 12.

Communis error facit jus, a common error makes right, Dr. Stud. c 26 f. 46.
The Law so favors the public quiet, that it will permit a common error to
pass for right, and therefore though it be objected that common recoveries
were f^rst had upon feyned, and unlawful ground, and against the good order of
conscience, nevertheless for as much as they have been used a long time so as
they have been taken of diverse men that have been right well learned, in
manner, as for Law, that the buyers partly are excused so that they be not
bound to restitution, and therefore Ployd. in Manxells case, f. 2. whither a
common recovery barreth an estate tail, is not to be disputed, because a great
part of the inheritance of the Realm depend upon it. So an acquittance made by
a Mayor in his own name, (where the Town is incorporate by the name of a
Mayor, Sheriff, and Burgesses) shall be allowed for good, if there be an
hundred precedents, and more of like acquittances, and that is for common
quietness, and accordingly the Civilian, Bodin says, l. 2. de repub.
Diuturnitas temporis efficere potest ut quod pernitioso more, and exemplo
inveteravit, potentius ipsa lege dominetur, the long continuance of time may
effect, that what by pernicious example, and Custom has grown old, may rule
more powerfully then the Law it self, and therefore as learned Patricius
says, Concedendum est aliquid consuetudini, quae quidem diaturnitate temporis
efficit, L. 1 de repub. f. 2.
ut nonnulla toleranda esse videantur, que contra jus boni, and aequi esse
videantur, we are to yield something to custom, which certainly by long
continuance of time does effect, that some things may seem to be tolerated,
which seem to be against the rule of right, and equity, so Moses tolerated and
suffered the Jews, libello repudii, by a bill of refusal to forsake their
wives, though the indissoluble bond of matrimony was ordained of God, and this
dispensation as our Savior says, was permitted for the hardness of their
hearts, because their hearts through inveterate custom were hardened against
that divine ordinance.

Consuetudo, more utentiam approbata, vim legis obtinet, Bract. l. 3. c. 1. and
Coke l. 4. f. 21. Consuetudo est altera lex, a custom approved by the manner
of the users obtains the force of a Law, and is another Law, Arist. 1. R.
for those things are done by custom as the Philosopher says, which therefore
we do, because we have often done them, and when a reasonable act once done,
was found to be beneficial, and agreeable to the people, then did they use,
and practice it often, and so by the reiteration and multiplication of the same
became a custom, and so being without interruption, time out of mind practiced
for the quiet, and by the approbation of the people obtained the vigor of a
law, for as Bo. princep legum, Sod. de repub. l. 1. c. 1.
pulus morum magister, the Prince is the master, and founder of laws, and
ordinances, and the people of manners and customs, Just. l. 1. tit. 2.
which accords with the description of Justian, quod quisque populus sibi jus
constituit, id ipsius proprium civitatis est, what every people ordain to be a
Law to themselves, that is a proper and municipall Law of the City, Cicer. in
La.
Maxima est vis consuetudinis, says the eminent Legist of Rome, the force of
custom is very great, in so much that as by the Law of nature, consuetudo est
altera natura, so by the Law of Nations, consuetudo est altera lex, for as Coke
l. 5. Epist. ad lectorem, of his own knowledge professes, that at this time
all Kingdoms, and common Wealths are governed by Laws, and that every Nation
has his peculiar and approved Customs, which are the most usual binding, and
firmest Laws, so as it is said, per varios casus artem experientia fecit, it
may be said, per varios usus legem experientia fecit, Co. com. f. 97. b. There
are particular Customs, and general Customs, particular Customs are such as
are used in some certain County, City, Town, or Lord-ship, and general
Customs are such as are used throughout all England, which are the common Law
of England, In his preface.
for as Davis, the common Law of England, is nothing but the common Custom of
the Realm, and Coke, the common Law is nothing else but a common opinion
generally received, and Finch. the common Law is a Law used by prescription
throughout the Realm of England, Finch. Nomot. f. 75. and Ployd. f. 95. a. The
common Law is nothing else but common use, and the mirror of Justice, c. 1. l.
9 The Law is ancient uses warranted by Scriptures, and is called the common
Law, Dav. pref.
because given to all in general, and to conclude this point with this
definition, which seems to me to include all. Custom is a reasonable act
iterated, multiplied, and continued by the people, L. 1. R. c. 3.
de temps don't memoire ne court, time out of mind, Aristotle says, injustum
est apud omnes praeter consuetudines patrias quicquam agere, all Nations hold
it unjust to do any thing against the Customs of the Country, which is a
principle in our Law, that Custom is another Law, Ennig. Frag.
and that we may say with the ancient Roman Poet, as he sung of the Romans.

Moribus antiquis stat resque, Britanna virisque,
The state of England stands on the ancient Law.
And though it be jus non scriptum, and only written in the memory of man, yet
as Sir John Davis, it does far excel our written Laws; namely, our Statutes,
or Acts of Parliament, which is manifest in this, that when our Parliament have
altered, In his preface.
and changed any fundamental point of the common Law, those alterations have
been found to be so inconvenient for the Commonwealth, as that the common Law
has been in effect restored again in some points, by other Acts of Parliament
in succeeding ages, as it is a fundamental principle of the common Law. Quod
haereditarium jus omne per feodum simplex transit, that all estates of
inheritance are fee-simple, which the Statute of 13. Ed. 1. de donis
conditionalibus, intended to limit, and to give every man power to create a new
estate in tail, and establish a perpetuity of his Lands, so as the same should
not be aliened or letten, but during the life of tenant in tail, whereupon
these inconveniences ensued, purchases defeated, leases evicted, and other
estates and grants, made upon good consideration, avoided, creditors defrauded
of their just debts, and offenders enboldened to commit capital offenses, etc.
who therefore were first barred by common recoveries, and then docked by fines,
15. E. 3. 14. by Herb. and Coke l. 4. Ep. ad lectorem.

So the Statute of non-claime of 34. E. 3. is against a main point of the
common Law, whereby ensued the universal trouble of the Kings Subjects, and
therefore was it altered by the Statute of H. 7. c. 24. Coke ibidem. 32.

So by the grounds of the Law, Lands were not devisable before the Statute of
32: and 34. H. 8. concerning which daily experience teaches us that many
subtle and intricate questions arise concerning the construction of Wills, to
the ruin of many, and hindrance of multitudes, Coke ibi.

And it is a politic axiom, that the alteration of any fundamental point of
the common Law which is ratified, by use and experience is most dangerous, and
therefore we ought to vote and resolve with all the Earls and Barons in
Parliament, holden in the twentieth year of H. 3. against the Bishops who
would have introduced the civil Law.

Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, we will not change the Laws of England: To
which purpose I add the asseveration of Cicero, ante nostram memoriam terterum
morem, Frey. Cil. de repub.
ac majorum instituta retinebant excellentes viri, before our memory excellent
men did retain the custom of the ancient, and the institutes of their elders.

Optimus legum interpres Consuetudo, Co. l. 2. f. 81. a. The best expounder of
the Law is custom.

If land holden by grand Serjanty be aliened without license, it is forfeited
by the Common Law, because the service of the body cannot be transferred to
another, 14 E. 3. Quare Impedit 54. but at this day it is remedied by the act 1
E. 3 c. 12. by which it is declared, that because that many people may be
grieved for it, that Lands and Tenements held in chief of the King (as all
those which hold by grand Serjanty are) and alien without leave, have been held
as forfeited, hereafter in such case let a reasonable fine be taken. So since
that Statute at all times, when Lands holden by grand Serjanty have been
aliened without license, a fine has been taken and no seizure ever made for
the forfeiture, and therefore no forfeiture to be taken, for Custom is the
best Interpreter of the Law, vide etiam, L. 10. f. 70. b.

Consuctudo manerii est observanda, Co. com. f. 63. a. and consuetudo loci est
observanda. Brac. l. 2. f. 76. l. 4. f. 28. The custom of the Manor and the
custom of the place is to be observed: for there are different customs in
many Manors, and places, and the customs of one Manor, in some particulars,
commonly varieth from another: And these diversities of customs have grown by
reason of the several Nations who have had government over this Kingdom,
Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, which have left part of their
Language, and part of their usage; which difference of usage and custom is to
be observed in every place and Manor: for what a Copyholder may; or ought to
do, or not to do, the custom of the Manor must direct it, and if there be no
custom to the contrary, wast, either premissive or voluntary of a Copyholder,
is a forfeiture of his Copyhold, Co, com f. 63. a.

If a Copyholder for life surrender to another in fee, it is no forfeiture, for
that passes by surrender to the Lord, and not by Livery: And Copyhold Estates
shall not have the collateral qualities that the estates of the common Law
have without especial custom: for the custom of the Manor is to be
observed, Coke l. 1. f. 22. a. and 23. a. vide ibidem plura, and f. 28. b.

Coke l. 6. f. 67. a. In a common recovery which is had by agreement and
consent of parties of acres of land, the acres shall be accounted according to
the customable and usual measure of the Country, and not according to the
Statute De terris mensurandis made in the 33 of Ed. 1. Sir John Buntings case,
1 Eliz. So if a man bargain and sell so many acres of wood, they shall be
measured according to the usage of the Country, and that is according to twenty
foot to the Rod, and not according to the said act, for the custom of tho
place is to be observed, 47 E. 3. 18.

Coke l, 10. 140. a in Kighleys case, It was resolved clearly, that the
several Commissioners of Sewers throughout England, are not bound to pursue
the Laws and Customs of Romney Marsh, but in case where any particular place
within their Commission have such Laws and Customs as Romney Marsh has,
there they may pursue them, for the custom of the place is to be observed.

Consuetudo vincit communem legem, coke l. 4. f. 21. Custom overcomes and
mastereth the common Law, and will not always be ruled by its grounds, for a
custom and usage of time, whereof the memory of man runs not to the
contrary, may create and consolidate Inheritances.

Coke comm. f. 185. b. If a man be seized of an house and possessed of diverse
Heir Looms, that by custom have gone with the house from Heir to Heir, and by
his Will devises away the Heir-looms, this devise is void, for the Will takes
effect after his death, and by his death the Heir looms by ancient custom are
vested in the Heir, and the Law prefers the custom before the devise, 1 H 5
Executors 108.

And so it is if the Lord ought to have an Heriot when his Tenant dies, and
the Tenant devises all his goods, yet the Lord ^^all have his Heriot for the
reason aforesaid: And it has been anciently said, that an Heriot shall be paid
before a Mortuary, wherein the Lord is preferred, because the Tenure is in him,
Co. ibidem.

Ployd. f. 36. b. Whereas the Statute of 1 R. 2. c. 12. does ordain that the
Warden of the Fleet shall not suffer any one who is in execution to go out of
Prison by main-prize, bail, or baston, yet it is taken by equity of the said
Statute, that if any other Jailer who lets such a one in execution to go out of
prison with mainprize, bail, or baston, that it shall be said to be an escape:
But notwithstanding that it extends to all other Goalers so fully, as though
it had been expressed by plain words, yet those of London use to let such go at
large with baston in any place, within their jurisdiction, and shall not be
judged an escape in them, and the reason of that is not because the statute in
equity does not extend to them, but the reason of it is, their prescription in
that point, and all their customs and prescriptions are confirmed by the
Statutes, by which they may prescribe against the equity and words of the
statute, which are contrary to their customs and prescriptions, as against the
statute of Silva caedua, and to hold Leet at other times then the statute
appoints, and such others, ibidem.

Obtemporandum est rationabili consuetudini tanquam legi, coke l. 4. 38. b. and
Littleton, Sect. 170. consuetudo ex certa causa ratienabili usitata private
communem legem, We ought to obey a reasonable custom as a Law, and a custom
used upon a certain reasonable cause depriveth or over comes the common Law:
but a custom introduced against reason, is rather an usurpation then a
custom, coke comm. f. 113. a. and it is a Maxim in our Law, that all customs
and prescriptions which be against reason are void, coke comm. f. 140. a. As if
the Lord of a Manor prescribe a custom in general, that every Tenant in his
Manor that marries his Daughter to any man, without the license of the Lord,
shall pay a fine, and have paid a fine to the Lord for the time being; this
prescription is void, for none in such case ought to pay fines but Villains,
vide ibidem plura. So if the Lord of a Manor do prescribe, that, for the time
being, he has used to distraine Cattle were upon the demeans of his Manor
for Damage-feasant, and the distress to retain till fine were to him for
damages at his will, this prescription is void, for it is a Maxim in Law,
Aliquis non potest esse judex in propria causa, no man can be a Judge in his
own case, ibidem 141. a.

And therefore a Fine levied before the Bailiffs of Salop was reversed, because
one of the Bailiffs was a party to the fine, because he cannot be a Judge and a
party, coke ibidem.

So a custom that the Lord shall take for Heriot the beast of a stranger
levant and couchant upon the land of the Tenant, is void, Dyer. 199. b.

Custom, that the Tenant shall be amerced, if he do not put his Cattle in the
Pound of the Lord, 21 H. 7. 20.

Malus usus est abolendus, Lit. Sect. 212. 9. Co. com. f. 141. a. An evil use
is to be abolished, for every use that is evil is against reason: for virtue
is an habit consentaneous to reason, Arist. 6. Eth. c. 13. and in
consuetudinibus non diuturnitas temporis, sed soliditas rationis est
consideranda: In customs the long continuance of time is not to be considered,
but the soundness and solidity of reason; and for that reason the Brechon Law
in Ireland was by Lionell Duke of Clarence wholly abolished, because it was not
a Law, but a lewd custom and absonant to reason, for by that Law Bastards did
equally inherit with legitimate Sons, which is contrary to the divine Law, and
the Laws of Nations which is grounded on natural reason.

So coke l. 4 f. 38. b. Two Lords of two several Manors, had two Wastes
adjoining, parcels of their Manors, without enclosure or separation, yet the
bounds of both Manors were well enough known by certain marks: In which Wastes
the Tenants of both Manors had reciprocally Common, because of vicenage of
time, whereof the memory of man did not run to the contrary. But yet in this
case one may enclose against the other, and by it take away the Common for
cause of vicenage, because the Tenants of one Manor could not put their beasts
in the Wastes of another Manor, and that the Cattle of the Tenant of one
Manor did stray into the wastes of the other Manor, and therefore the
enclosure is lawful only to prevent the escape of the Cattle, and malus usus
abolendus.

Consuetudo tollit legem, coke com. f. 31. b. Custom takes away the common
Law, as by the custom of Gavelkind, the wife shall be endowed of the Moiety,
so long as she keep her self sole, and without child, which she cannot wave,
and take the Thirds for her self.

The customs of Gavelkind, and Borough-english are against the maxim of
descent of Inheritance, 35 H. 6. 26. a. And the Customs of Kent, The Father to
the Bough, and the Son to the Plow, is against the Maxim of Escheats; And that
the Lessee in tail shall enter notwithstanding the Feoffment of his Father with
Warranty, is against the Maxim of Discontinuance, and there are many other
customs which are contrary to the particular grounds of the Law, and yet are
reasonable, for they may have a reasonable beginning, and are neither
prejudicial to the Commonweal, nor to the present interest of any particular
person, Davis Rep. f. 32. a. b.

Custom and Prescription cannot take away an act of Parliament, Coke com. f.
113. a. Dr. and Student l. 1. c. 26. f. 47. A custom or prescription of this
Realm, against the Statutes of the Realm prevail not in Law.

But as Coke com. f. 115. a. There is a diversity between an Act of Parliament
in the Negative, and in the Affirmative, for an Affirmative Act does not take
away a Custom, as the Statutes of Wills, of 32 H. 8. do not take away custom to
devise lands, as it has been often adjudged. Moreover there is a diversity
between Statutes that be in the Negative, for if a Statute in the Negative be
Declarative of the ancient Law, that is an affirmance of the Common Law, there,
as well as a man may prescribe or allege a custom against the common Law; so
a man may do against a Statue, for as our Author says, Consuetudo private
communem legem: As the Statute of Magna charta provideth that no Leet shall be
holden but twice in the year, yet a man may prescribe to hold it oftener, and at
other times, for the Statute was but in affirmance of the common Law: So the
Statute of 34 E. 1. provideth that none shall cut down any Trees of his own
within a Forest, without the view of the Forrester, but insomuch as this act
is in affirmance of the common Law, a man may prescribe to cut down Trees in a
Forest without the view of the Forrester, vide ibidem plura.

Consuetudo licet sit magnae authoritatis nunq^am tamen praejudicat manifestae
veriti, coke l. 4. f. 18. a. Custom though it be of great authority, yet does
it never by prejudice hinder the manifest truth.

As that the Plaintiffs bring an action in London, for that the Defendant
called the wife of the Plaintiff Whore, and the Defendant by an Habeas corpus
removed it into the Kings Bench; and it was moved to have a Procedendo to
remand it, because that the Action was maintainable in London for the same
words, but not at the common Law; and the Procedendo was denied by the whole
Court, for such a custom to maintain actions for such brabling words, is
against the Law and custom, though it be of great force, yet does it never
prejudice the manifest truth.

Coke l 6. f. 6. b. In Sir John Moulins case, the question was, Whether a
Manor was holden of the King, and though that diverse Offices, Licenses of
Alienations, and other Records were shown, by which it appeared that the Law
had always so taken it, that the said Manor was held of the King in Capite,
acd that custom is the best Interpreter of the Laws, yet in so much as by
construction of Law upon the Letters Patents it appeared, that there was no
immediate Tenure of the King, the Offices, etc. should not alter the true
Tenure that originally did appear to them as Judges of Record, and though
custom be of great authority, yet does it never prejudice the truth, ibidem.

Consuetudo debet esse certa; nam incerta pro nullis habentur, Davis f. 33
Custom ought to be certain for incertainties are esteemed for nothing in the
Law, and it must be as Littleton, ex certa causa rationabili usitata, for there
are three essential qualities of a custom, reason, ableness, usage, and
certainty: A Writ Dum fuit infra aetatem, was brought against an Infant, the
Tenant pleaded custom, that when the Infant was of such an age that he could
count twelve pence, and measure a yard of cloth, that his Feoffment shall be
good. It was adjudged void for the incertainty, 13 E. 3. Fitz. dum fuit infra
aetatem. 3. In trespass for Trees carried away, the Defendant pleaded custom,
that the Tenant of the Manor which first came to the place where, etc. shall
have the Windfalls there, that custom was void also for the incertainty, vide
ibidem plura.

Consuetudo semel reprobata non potest amplius induci, Davis f. 33. b. A
Custom must have continuance without interruption of time whereof, etc. for if
it be discontinued within the time of memory it is gone. As if a Copyholder be
leased of the Lord of the Manor for life, or for years, according to the
course of the common Law, it shall never after be demised by Custom, as a
Copyhold, for as continuance makes custom, discontinuance destroys it: for
unum quodque dissolvitur eodem modo, quo ligatum est, ibidem.

But a Title being once gained by prescription, or custom, cannot be lost by
interruption of possession, for ten, or twenty years, but by interruption in
the right. As a Modus decimandi was alleged by prescription time out of mind,
for tyth Lambs, and thereupon issue joined: and the Jury found before twenty
years last past, there was such a prescription, and that for these ten years,
he paid tithe Lambs in specie, and it was objected, that the party by payment
of tithes in specie, had waved the custom: but it was adjudged for the
Plaintiff in the Prohibition, for albeit the modus decimandi had not been paid
by the space of ten years, yet the prescription being found, the substance of
the Issue is found for the Plaintiff, Mich. 43. and 4. Eliz. betwixt Nowell and
Hicks, Coke comm. f. 114. b. vide ibidem plura.

Vbi non est gubernator dessipabitur populus, Ployd* 177. b. Where there is no
governor, the people will be dispersed, and where there is no King or governor
every one will do what is right in his own eyes, that is, where there is no
Magistrate fearing God, there is no true religion, or civil order, for when
the reigns of government are let loose to the many headed multitude, an ataxy
of all things will ensue, and every one by rapins, and robberies, and as
Cicero, per caedem, Cicero. orat pro pub. Sestio. de jure magistratus, f. 15.
and vulnera, by wounds, and slaughters will snatch, and catch what they can to
themselves, so as one truly, totum genus humanum periret, si magistratus non
constituerentur, qui bo^os tuerentur, improbos vero coercerent, all man kind
would perish, if Magistrates were not constituted, which may protect the good,
and restrain the evil, for government and obedience are the two Pillars of a
Society, without which it cannot subsist; government is the office of a Prince,
and obedience in the duty of a Subject, which are not only necessary but
profitable, as the Philosopher, to rule and obey is not only (...), Arist. l.
1. Pol. c. 3.
necessary that impious, and rebellous persons may be coerced by the sword, and
profitable that the upright, and peaceable be encouraged by rewards, and
therefore as Tacitus, L. 1. Histo.
praestat esse sub malo principe, quam sub nullo, it is better to be under an
evil Prince then none, and as Kekerman, Polit. f. 21.
a Tyrany is better then an Anarchy, for where there is no governor the people
will be out of all good order, for though in the multitude of people, is the
honor and strength of a King, yet are they murmuring, gaine-saying, stifnecked
and rebellious, if they be not by a Moses powerfully ruled, and as Florus in
the like case of the Romans says, F. l. 3. f. 68.
Regum, and gentium arbiter populus, ipse se regere non potest, though the
people be the Umpires of all Kings, and Nations, yet cannot they rule
themselves.

And therefore have the Laws of this Realm utterly exploded the election of
the supreme governor, because after the fate of one, before another can be
elected, usually, the seeds of dissension are sown, whereby the peoples minds
are dissipated, and divided, (the Hydra of which evils yet remains in the
memories of men) wherewith the Nobles and people of Poland were greiviously
distracted concernining the election of their governor, some demanding the
Archduke of Austria, and others Sigismund for their King, which at this day
are revived by the valorous and just sword of the King of the Swedes. But our
Law to prevent such factions, mischeifes and many other dis-commodities have
excluded interreguum, Coke l. 4. Ep. ad lectorum. Com. 177.
and introduced hereditary succession, and such a King as Mr. Ploydon says,
whose name is a name of continuance, which shall last always as the head and
governor of the people, so long as the people shall remain, and the King in
that name shall never dye, for as Sir Edward Coke it is a maxim in our Law,
Coke f. 4. Ep. ad lectorem. Ployd. 177. b.
Regem Angliae nunquam mori, that the King of England never dies, and
therefore the death of such a person as is the King is called in Law the demise
of the King, because that by it he demiseth his Kingdom to another, and
leaves another to have the function, and so the dignity continues always
whichs certainly is true, in respect of his political capacity which always
endures, and never dies.

And as Sir Edwa^d Coke, Coke l. 4. Ep. ad lectorem.
the State of our Kingdom is monarchical, and from the beginning by the right
of inheritance has been successive, which is the most absolute and perfect
form of government, and therefore as Mr. Ploydon, the Heir, and Successor may
have the term of Soverain Lord and may be called our Soverain Lord, ibidem,
and for this same reason, the gift of a King without saying more, trencheth to
his Successors, Finch. Nomot. f. 83.

Yet sometimes have our Kings (when as it might be upon reasonable ground
presaged, that in case of succession and descent of the royal issue, or for
some other States suspicions civil dissentions might arise, to avoid future
combustions) have conferred their principalities to whom they pleased counting
it as lawful to appoint their Successors after them, as substitutes under
them. Ba. Cron. 4. 27.
So Edward the confessor appointed the Crown after his decease, sometimes to
William the conqueror, sometimes to Edgar Atheline, and sometimes to Harold,
and Harold after his decease upon the title, and appointment of King Edward was
Crowned by the Archbishop of York, and so shortly after William Duke of
Normandy, when he had defeated, Ibidem. f. 31.
and slain Harold at the battle of Hastings claimed the Kingdom by the
nomination of Edward the confessor, as well as by his conquest, and in these
latter times, the Duke of Northumberland prevailed with King Edward the sixth to
appoint the Lady Jane Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk by his Letters Patents
to succeed him, Ibid. 451.
which were suddenly vacuated by Queen Mary, but the most authentical, and
legal way and course in such cases was the nomination, and appointment of
Henry the eighth, to whom the Parliament granted power by his last Will and
Testament in writing, and signed with his hand to make conditions and
limitations, what he would concerning the inheritance of the Crown, who by his
last Will and Testament took order that his Son Edward should succeed him in the
Crown, and he dying without ^ssue his Daughter Mary, and she dying without
issue his Daughter Elizabeth, who all succeeded one another in the same order.

Rex est vicarius, and minister Dei in terra, omnis quidem sub eo, and ipse sub
nullo nisi tantum sub Deo, Bract. l. 1. c. 8. The King is the Vicar and
Minister of God upon earth, every one is under him, and he under none, but
only under God, and therefore the Lands which are in the Kings possession are
free from tenure, for a tenant is he, which holds of some superior Lord by
some service, so as the King cannot be a tenant, because he has no superior
but God, for as Coke l. 8 f. 118. It would be against common right, and reason
that the King should hold of any or do service to any of his Subjects, and
therefore all Lands holden of him mediately or immediately* Co. com. f. 1. and
for which reason Cowell thought it not so proper in the Kings case to say, that
he is seized in dominico suo ut de feodo, as if feodum in our Law was taken as
it is in the fendall Law only for the Lands held in Services: whereas feodum,
as Bracton, Britton, Fleta, and Littleton tells us idem est quod haereditas:
Davis case of Tenures, f. 30.

Neither can the King be a Joynt-tenant with any though it be of land, or other
things that he had in his body natural, for none can be equal with him. And
therefore if two purchase lands to them and their heirs, and one be made King,
they are no more Joynt-tenants, but Tenants in Common, 3 Eliz 339.

Nay Acts of Parliament do not bind him, unless they concern the Commonwealth,
or he be specially named, 4. E. 4 21. 1 Eliz. 223.

And no man can declare against the King, but he must sue by way of Petition,
Ployd f. 241. b. and 18 Eliz. 498. He has the property of all Goods that are
nullius in bonis, and shall have all Tithes out of Forests, and places out of
any Parish, for rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote.

In a Writ of Error upon false Judgment given for the King, no Scire facias
shall go forth, ad audiendum errores, for the King is always in Court, and
that is the cause that the form of Entry is in all Suits for the King, in the
name of his Attorney general, F.N.B. 21. b.

Rex semper praesumitur attendere ardua negotia regni pro publico bono omnium,
Coke l. 5. f. 56. a. It is always presumed that the King does attend the
weighty and hard things of the Kingdom for the public good of all: And
therefore have the Grants of the King a more beneficial interpretation, then
the Grants of the Subject that may attend their private Affairs, which are
always taken more strongly against them. As if the King do grant lands to I.S.
and his Heirs, and in truth I. S. is the Kings Villain, that shall not
enfranchise the Villain by Implication: The same Law is of an Alien born, 17.
E. 3. 39. The Advowson of Pravondry holden of the King was aliened to an Abbot,
and his Successors, and that the Successors shall hold the Provandry to their
own use. The King shall seize the Advowson for Alienation in Mortmain, and
destroy the Appropriation, for he shall not be ousted of his right of Advowson
by Implication. So 2 R. 2. 4. If two be indebted to the King, and the King
release to one, it shall not discharge the other, for no prejudice shall accrue
to the King by construction or implication upon his Grant, more then he truly
intended by it, ibidem.

So if a release be made by him of all demands, the right of Inheritance shall
not be released, 6 H. 7. 15.

If the King grants lands in fee upon condition that they do not alien it is
good, but in all these cases it is otherwise in the case of a common person.

And in many cases the King who claims by a Subject, shall be in a better
case in respect of the Prerogative incident to his Royal person, then the
Subject himself, by whom he claims: As if the King have a Rent-seck by
Attainder of Treason, or by Grant, he shall distrain for it, not only in the
land charged, but also in all his other lands, and yet the Subject by whom he
claims shall not distrain. If a Subject have Recognizance, or an Obligation,
and after is outlawed, or attainted, the King shall seize all the land of the
Conusor or Obligor, where he himself can have but the Moiety, the King shall
take advantage of a Condition broken without demand, whereas a common person
who claims under the King, cannot re-enter for non payment of Rent without
demand made: And if the King purchases a Lordship, of which land is holden by
posteriority, the King shall have the priority, vide ibidem plura, in Knights
case.

Davis f. 45. If a common person grant rent, or any other thing which lies in
grant only, without limitation of any estate, by the delivery of the deed
only, a Frank-tenement shall pass, 17 E. 3. 43. a. If the King grant rent, or
land, without the limitation of any estate, the Grant is merely void for the
incertainty, 7 Ass. pl. 1. and the Grantee shall not be Tenant at Will, as it
is ruled in the case of Alton Wood.

Ployd. f. 243. The Grant of the King is taken more strongly against a
stranger, and more favorable to the King, although the thing granted come to
the King by purchase or descent: Whereas it is otherwise of a common person. As
a grant of a Manor by the King, the Advowson shall not pass without special
words: So the King may grant a thing in action, which another cannot: So if the
part of an entire thing comes to the King, the Common Law has given him all:
As if an Obligation be made to two, and one is outlawed, the King shall have
all the duty: So he shall have an entire Horse or Ox, which one who is
outlawed holds in Common, ibidem,

So Coke l. 9. f. 129. b. Quando jus domini regis, and subditi in simul
concurrunt, jus regis preferri debet, when the right of the King and the
Subject concur and meet together, the right of the King ought to be preferred;
as in Dame Hales case, Baron and Feme, Joint tenants of a term for years, the
Baron is felo de se, the Baron shall forfeit all. Ployd. Com. 262. vide ibidem
plura, in Quicks case. The King may mend his Declaration that term that it is
put in, p. 13 E. 48. So the King may wave his Demurrer and traverse the plea of
another, M. 28 H. 6. f. 2. So if the King grant lands in fee, with Warranty
against all, the Patentee shall not have value in recovery without express
words to have value: So the King may make a Lease to a stranger, this
reservation is good, and the stranger shall distrain for it, or have an action
of debt after the Lease determined, M. 35. H. 6. f. 36. Ployd. f. 243. a.

So for arrearages of Rentcharge granted to the King, he may distrain in all
other lands of the Grantor, H. 13 E. 4. f. 6. So if the Title appears to the
King upon Plea of other parties, the Court of Office shall adjudge it for the
King, though he be not party to the Issue, Ployd. f. 243. b. vide ibidem plura.

And as the Common Law cannot bind the King, no more can private Customs, and
therefore the custom of that, if one pawn Goods that he that has the pawn
shall hold them whose soever they be, until the money for which they were
pawned be paid unto him, shall not bind the King, where his goods were pawned
by a stranger. So sale of goods made by a stranger ^n Market-overt, shall not
alter the property, nor bind him, M. 3. H. 6. 28. And if a man have wrack of
the Sea, if the Goods of the King be wracked, he shall gain no property by it
against the King: And so it is of Prescription to have goods waved or estrayed,
M. 35 H. 6. 27. Ployd. ibidem vide plura.

Nullum tempus occurrit regi, Ployd. f. 243. No Prescription of time runs
against the King: As if right of entry descend to the King* and the Disseisor
dies seized, it shall not take away the entry of the King, M. 35. H. 6. 27. So
if a Villain alien his land the Lord may enter when he pleases.

Coke com. f. 41. b. If Tenant for life, or Tenant in Dower grant over his or
her estate, and the Grantee dies, there shall be an Occupant, but against the
King there shall be no Occupant, because nullum tempus occurrit regi.

Coke l. 6 f. 29. b. At the Common Law if any one had usurped upon the King,
and his Presentee had been admitted, instituted and inducted (for without
Induction the Church is not full against the King) yet the King may have a
Quare Impedit, and by it he shall remove the Incumbent, for no act of the
Bishop, or any other can bar the King of his right, and nullum tempus, etc.
vide ibidem plura, and Ployd. 243. a.

Coke l. 7. f. 28. If Title to present by Lapse be devolved to the Queen, and
the Patron presents a Clark who is admitted, instituted, and inducted, and
dies, the King has lost his Title to present by Lapse, for the King had but
unam and unicam presentationem hac vice, which cannot be extended to the second
avoidance, and the statute de prerogativa regis, quod nullum tempus occurrie
regi is to be understood when the King has a certain permanent interest, and
not when he has an interest specially limited, vide ibidem plura in
Baskerviles case.

All which proceed from the Prerogative the Common Law gives the Prince, which
is so large, Nom. f. 85. Davis in his Preface
as Sir Henry Finch says, that you shall find that to be Law almost in every
case of the King, that is Law in no case of the Subject: And therefore Sir John
Davis confidently averreth, that the Common Law does excel all other Laws in
upholding a free Monarchy, which is the most excellent form of Government,
exalting the Prerogative Royal, and being tender and watchful to preserve it.
And yet maintaining all the ingenuous liberty of the Subject. Davis ibidem.
But though the Common Law allow so many Prerogatives to the King, yet shall he
not hurt others by them. As if a Bridge be repairable by the Subject, and is in
decay, the pardon of the King shall not excuse him who ought to do it, because
others, to wit the Subjects of the Realm, have an interest in it. So if one
have Jewels in pawn for ten pounds, and he that puts them to pawn is
attainted, the King shall not have the Jewels unless he pay ten pounds, for his
Prerogative will not prejudice another, Ployd. f. 487. a. b. So the Earl of
Kent had the return of certain Cattle in Replevin in 13 R. 2. and the
Proprietor of the Cattle was attainted. There it is holden that the Earl of
Kent shall retain the Cattle against the King, until he is satisfied for the
thing, and the Prerogative of the King will not discharge them of the return,
because the Prerogative will not give prejudice to another, vide ibidem plura,
in Nichols case.

Rex est caput and salus reipublicae, and a capite bona valetudo transit in
omnes, Coke l. 4. f. 124. b. The King is the head and safety of the
Commonweal, and as from the head health is conveyed to the body, so from the
King safety is conveyed to the Commonweal, which is the body of the Kingdom,
for from him Justice is distilled to all, by which all men are preserved in
peace and safety, as Ployd. f. 242. b. All justice, tranquillity, and repose is
derived from him as the Fountain of it, and therefore by Bracton he is called
Author juris, L. 3. c. 9.
the Author of right, by whom right is separated from injury, equity from
iniquity, that all subject to him may live honestly, that not one should hurt
another, and that to every one, what is his, be by a right contribution
restored. And by Homer, (...), Gods Scholars, and by a more divine Poet, Gods
themselves, especially because they sit on Gods own Seat when they minister
justice to the people, Dixi quod dii estis.
and that the Rules of Justice be their principal Lesson, Which like the Sun
in the Firmament, to which Justice is rightly resembled, he is to communicate
to all the Creatures of his Commonweal: And as the King is the Sun and
Fountain of Justice, so are the Judges and Professors of the Law but Conduit
Pipes to convey the streams of his Justice throughout all the Kingdom: L. 4
Ep ad l. A. Chron. 19.6, 7.
Whereupon Sir Edward Coke has this observation from the divine Text, videte
Judices, Take heed you Judges what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for
the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment, wherefore let the fear of the Lord
be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor respect of persons, nor taking gifts: And so, says he, must every
Judge be just, without respect, to give every man his own.

Protectio trahit subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem, Coke l. 7. f. 5.
Calv. case, Protection draws subjection, and subjection protection.

Legiance is the mutual Bond and Obligation between the King and his Subjects,
whereby Subjects are called his liege Subjects, because they are bound to obey
and serve him, and he is called their liege Lord, because he shall maintain and
defend them. And as there ought to be a mutual connection of dominion and
fidelity between the Lord and Tenant, ita quod, quantum debet domino ex
homagio, tantum illi debet dominus ex dominio, as Glanvil says, so that how
much the Tenant owes the Lord by homage and service, so much does the Lord owe
the Tenant by his power and protection, for the Law says, he is to defend his
Tenant; so is there an higher and greater connection between the Sovereign and
the Subject, for the Subject owes to the King his true and faithful
obedience, and the Sovereign is to protect and govern his Subjects. For as
Fortescue, Rex ad tutelam legis, corporum, and bonorum erectus est. Del. l. A.
C 13. the King is raised to defend the Laws, the Bodies, and Goods of his
Subjects: and frustra feruntur leges nisi obedientibus, in vain were it to
prescribe Laws to any but to such as are obedient, Coke ibidem f. 7. And as
Coke l. 11. f. 100. obedientia est legis essentia: obedience is the essence of
the Law, and therefore ought all Citizens and Burgesses to give obedience and
reverence to the chief Magistrates in their Cities and Burghes because they
derive their authority from the King, whom by leigiance we are bound to obey.

Iudex bonus nihil ex arbitrio suo faciat, nec proposito domesticae
voluntatiis, sed juxta leges, and jura pronunciet. A good Judge may do nothing
of his own phantacy, nor according to the power of his own domestical will and
affection, but is to pronounce sentence according to the Laws and right, Co.
l. 7. f. 27. Calv. case. For Judges have not power to Judge according that
which they think to be fit, but that which out of the Laws they know to be
right, and consonant to the Laws, for Judex est lex loquens, a Judge ought to
be a speaking Law, f. 4. and as Coke says, l. 4. f. 33. b. Judicandum est
legibus non exemplis, we ought to Judge by Laws, and not by examples, and
therefore by Glanvill, is a Judge called Justitia in abstracto, because he
should be as it were Justice it self, to put him in mind of their duty, and
office, and now in the legal Latin are the Judges called Judiciarij in
Concreto, and not Judices, because they should be just, Coke com. f. 71. b.

Judicis est judicare secundum allegata, and probat^. A Judge ought to Judge
according to what is alleged and proved, Dyer f. 12. P. 50. As in a Formedon,
if the Demandant count of a Feoffment in fee, and not in tail, if the tenant
demur upon it, clearly, the Court cannot maintain the Declaration to be good,
because the Judge is to Judge according to what is alleged, and approved.

Ployd. f. 83. b. The Judges have a private knowledge, and a judicial
knowledge, and Judges cannot judge of their private knowledge, but may use
their discretion, as appears in 7. H. 4. f. 31. Where the Ring demanded of
Justice Gascoine this question, that if he did see one kill I. S. and another
that was guilty was endited for it before him, and found guilty of the same
death, what then would he do in this case, who answered that he ought to
respit judgment before him, because he knew the contrary, and to make relation
thereof to the King to show him grace, and mercy, and the King was well pleased
that the Law was such, and further added that he could not acquit him, and give
judgment of his own private knowledge* for as the Civilians, Judex non debet
exequi sententiam nisi de veritate constat. a Judge ought not to execute
judgment, unless it appear before him to be true, but where we have
judicial knowledge, there we may and ought to judge according to it, as if one
be arraigned upon an enditement for any offense, which is pardoned by
Parliament, there we ought not to proceed in it, nor give judgment if he be
found guilty, because it appears to us by judicial Science, that we ought
not to arraigne him, for the Judges ought to take cognizance of the Statutes,
which shall appear to them judicialiter, although they be not pleaded, Ibidem.

Officia magistratus non debent esse vaenalia, Coke com. f. 234. a. Offices of
magistracy, and judicature ought not to be sold, and therefore by the Statute
of 12. R. 2. c. 21. It is provided that no Officer, or Minister of the King
shall be ordained, or made for any gift, favor, brocage, or affection, nor
that any which pursues by him, or any other privately, or openly to be in any
manner of office shall be put into the same office, or in any other, but that
all such Officers shall be made of the best, and most lawful men, and
sufficient, a Law worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, says Sir Edward Co.
but more worthy to be put in execution, for certainly Justice shall never be
duly administered, but when the Officers and Ministers of justice be of such
quality, and come to their places in such manner as by this Law is required.

Mich. 13. Jacobi. Sir Robert Vernon coferor of the Kings house, who had a
great pension out of the Kings revenew, for moneys did bargain and sell the
same to Sir Aug and agreed to surrender the said Office to the King, to the
intent that a grant might be made to the said Aug. and thereupon the said
office by the Kings appointment was admitted, and sworn Coferer, and it was
resolved by Sir Thomas Edgerton Lord Chancellor, the chief Justice and others
to whom the King referred the same by the Statute of 5. E. 6. c. 16. whereby it
is provided that if any officers touching the Administration of Justice, or
Clerkeship in any Court of Record, or concerning the Kings Treasure, Revenue,
Custom, Alnage, Auditorship, Kings Surveyor or keeping of any of his Majesty's
Castles, Forts, etc. shall bargain, or sell any of the said Offices, or any
deputation of the same, or take any money or profit, or any promise, covenant,
bond, or assurance shall not only forfeit his estate, but also every person so
buying, giving, or assuring, be adjudged a disabled person, to have or to hold
the same Office, or Offices, deputation, etc. and that all such bargains,
sales, promises, covenants, and assurances, as be before specified shall be
void, except as in the said act, is excepted, quod vide, and that A. was
disabled to have, or to take the said office, and that no non obstante could
dispense with this Act, to enable the said A. for the reason before mentioned,
and hereupon the said Sir A. was removed, and Sir Marmeduke Darnell sworn by
the Kings appointment in his place, and note that all promises, bonds, and
assurances, as well on the part of the Bargainor, as the Bargainee are void by
the said Act, Ibidem.

And so by the Statute of 13. Eliz., all presentations, admissions, and
inductions, upon any gift of the person presented, or any gift, or
consideration without the consent or motion of the party shall be void, whereas
before they were void only by deprivation, and the said Statute does not only
extend to benefices with cure, but to dignities, prebendes, and all
ecclesiastical livings.

Securius expediantur negotia, commissia pluribus, Co. l. 11. f. 4. a. in
Auditor Carles case, offices committed to many are more safely discharged.

And therefore by the Statute of 32. H. 8. it is provided that there shall be
two persons named to the Kings highness, which shall be called the Auditors of
the Lands, of his graces Wards, and the King cannot constitute one only, for
the subject by the Act has an interest in it, and more safely are the
businesses dispatched which are committed to many and therefore though the
words of the grant be conjuctim and divisim, and alterius eorum diutius
viventi, yet are they not material, for if an office be granted to two, pro
termino vitarum suarum, without more by the death of one of them, the grant
shall be void, for being an office of trust, there shall be no Survivor: And in
this case no Survivor shall be, because the Act says there shall be two
persons, and though the King may constitute one at one time, and another at
another time, yet he that is first chosen shall have no judicial voice, until
the other is constituted, and to this purpose there may be a Survivor of one of
the persons to whom another shall be added.

Plus vident oculi, quam oculus, and nemo potest supplere vicem duarum
personarum, Coke l. 4. f. 46. a. Two eyes see more then one, and no person can
supply the place of two, and f. 118. a.

As if a baron be made Knight of the Garter, or Warden of the Cinque Ports, he
shall have but three Chaplains in all, notwithstanding the Statute of 21. H.
8., for though he has diverse dignities, yet is he the same person to whom the
attendance is to be made, for it is a difficult matter for one man to supply
the place of two, and though it be a ground, quando duo jura in una persona
convenient, aequum est ac in diversis, when two rights concur and meet
together, it is all one as if it were in several; yet this Act was always
construed strictly against non-residencies, and pluralities, as a thing very
prejudicial to the service of God, and instruction of the people, and
therefore if a Bishop be translated to an Arch Bishopwrick, or a Baron be
created an Earl, and now has both those dignities, yet by this act he shall
have but so many Chaplains as an Archbishop, or an Earl may have for the
reason abovesaid, Ibi.

Minister legis non tenetur in executione officij sui sugere aut recedere, Coke
l. 9. f. 68. a. in Makalies case, An Officer, or Minister of Justice is not
bound in the execution of his office to fly, or to go back, and therefore an
Officer and Minister of the Law in the execution of his office, if there be any
resistance, and assault, is not bound to fly to the wall, etc. as other
Subjects are, for the life of the Law is more favored then the life of man, and
the execution of the Process of Law, and the offices of the conservators of
the peace, are the soul, and life of the Law, and the means by which Justice
is administered, and the peace of the Realm guarded.

Officia judicialia non concedantur, ante quam vacant, Coke l. 11. f. 4. in
Auditor Curles case, judicial offices ought not to be granted before they are
void, and therefore was it resolved in that case, that the grant made by the
King to John Churchill, and John Took in reversion after the death of T. and
C. was void, partly, because it was a judicial office, for these Auditors are
one of the Judges of the Court, and as none can give any judgment of things
which happen in future, so none can be a Judge in future, and great
inconvenience would thereupon ensue, for he who at the time of the grant of the
reversion may be able, and sufficient to supply the place of judicature, and
administer Justice to the Subjects of the King before the office fall, may
become unable, and insufficient to perform it, and it was resolved that
neither the office of master of the Wards, nor of the Survivor, nor of the
Attorney of the same Court may be granted in reversion, because they are
judiall offices.

But ministerial and secular offices may be granted in fee, in tail, for life,
or at will, as the offices of the Constable of England, Marshall, Vis-count, or
the Warden of the Fleet, and the reason is because those temporal officers
have their offices in their natural capacity, and the King in policy may
suppress, and revive those offices, pro loco and tempore, and by consequence
may limit temporal estates in them, Davis f. 45. b.

So the office of keeping of our Lady of Lincoln was entailed, and a Formedon
brought upon that gift of the Office by the Issue in tail, 18 E. 3. 27.

The Office of one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer was entailed, 1 H. 7.
8. The Office of a Fostership was entailed, 4 H. 7. 10. 9. Coke comm. f. 20. a.
vide ibidem plura.

Aliquis non debet esse judex, in propria causa, immo iniquum est aliquem suae
rei esse judicem, Coke l. 8. f. 118. a. No man ought to be Judge in his own
case, yea, it is a partial and unequal thing that any one should be a Judge
in his own matter: In Dr. Borhams case, in which case one of the reasons there
alleged was, that the censors had not power to commit Dr. Bonham, because they
could not be Judges, Ministers, and Parties; Judges to give sentence, Ministers
to make summons, and Parties to have the Moiety of the forfeiture, for no man
can be a Judge in his own case; one cannot be a Judge and an Attorney, 3 E. 6.
f. 65. Dyer.

If any act of Parliament give to any one power to hold, or have Cognizance of
all manner of pleas before him, arising within his Manor of D. yet he cannot
hold plea to which he himself is a party: for it is unequal for any one to be
a judge in his own matter, vide ibidem plura.

Yet in some cases one shall be his own Judge, Play Master, and Carver. As if
the Lessor covenant to repair the house, if he do not, and the Lessee do it, he
may pay himself out of the rent, 12 H. 8. 1. Guardians of a Church at their own
costs repair the Church, and for amends detain ten load of stones of the
Parishioners, for which the Successors Guardians bring an action of account,
and adjudged that they may lawfully detain them, 37 Eliz. Metholl and Winge.

So Tailors and Hostlers may detain the Robe, or Horse, etc. until reasonable
satisfaction is given.

If one to whom the Testator is indebted, will not receive Goods in recompense,
then it is lawful for the Executor to pay him with his own money, and retain
so much Goods of the Testator, for it may be there is a penalty which will be
forfeited before that he can sell the Goods of the Testator, Dyer f. 2. pl. 7.

Quicquid non excutitur, justitia non putatur, Reg. I.C. and Coke l. 6. f. 52.
a. Quicunque aliquid statueret part inaudita altera aequum licet statuerit
haud aequum fecerit, whatsoever is not discussed and tried, is not to be
reputed Justice: and if any one shall decree any thing, one of the parties
being not heard, though he does decree that is right, yet has he not done that
is just and equal, in Bosewels case, where it was resolved, that no Incumbent
shall be removed by a Quare Impedit, or an Assise of Darrein presentment
purchased within the six months, unless the Incumbent be named in the Writ,
although the Incumbent be in a defeasible Title, for then he shall be removed
and adjudged not being heard, and Quicunque aliquid, etc.

So Coke l. 11. f. 99. a. in James Baggs case, though the Mayor and
Counsel-chamber of Plymmouth have lawful authority either by their Charter or
Prescriprion to remove any one from his freedom, and that they have just cause
to remove him, yet if it appear by the return that they have proceeded against
him without hearing him to answer to what is objected, or that he was not
reasonably warned, such a removement is void, and shall not bind the party.

In ancient times, where any were found guilty by the good people, by Inquest
for any mortal Offense, the King gave order to execute them without any
answer. Mirror of Justice, which custom may seem to be derived from the
Dictators power among the Romans who had authority to cast any into prison, and
to punish him with death indicta causa: And which also was a custom among the
Gauls, De Laud. l. Aug. 4. 82.
whom now we call French, which as Fortescue says, in his time remained among
them, to wit, That the King usually calling his Nobles into his
Counsel-chamber, without any form of judgment, were adjudged criminous by the
Conscience of the Prince, and thereupon were they presently by the Marshals
servants put into Sacks, and in the night by them precipitated into deep rivers
and so drowned. And which custom also was used in Almaine.

But King Alfred in compassion of the frailty of man, who cannot keep himself
from sinning without the assistance of the grace of God, abrogated that
custom, and decreed that no Appelle, or Inditee should be condemned, or
executed without answer, Mirror of Justice, l. 2 f. 3. which still continues:
and therefore says Coke l. 2. Epist. ad lectorem, are our Laws commended
above other, which punishes not the greatest Offenders, though it be for
Treason, but by just and equal proceedings in Law, according to the ancient
Laws of England declared by the general Charter, Nulli vendemus, nulli
negabimus justitiam and rectum. And therefore says Fortescue, De Laud. l. A.
f. 122.
It is part of the charge of the Judges Oath, not for any command of the
Prince, either by Letters, or by word of mouth, to deviate from Justice, or to
deny right to any, but to minister justice and right indifferently, to all as
well enemies as friends: and accordingly says he, Queen Elizabeth's charge to
the Justices was, That for no commandment of hers common right should be
disturbed, or delayed: Whereas in other Countries the Judges had rather
misconster the Law, and do injustice, then to displease the Kings humor,
according to the old Sarchasme, Ad libitum regis sonuit sententia legis.

For which unlawful and wilful perverseness, some of our later Kings have been
blamed, and for which as Frossard says, l. 2. c. 3. Edward the second was
condemned, quod in audita causa aliquos proceres de medio tollebat, that he did
punish with death some of his Nobles without hearing their case, neither was
the stupendous proceeding of Henry the eigth against his new created darling
the Lord Cromwell commendable, Hen 8. f. 71
or allowable, though acted by Parliament, who being accused of high Treason
and Heresy, as Godwin says, inauditus damnatur, is condemned without hearing
his answer. Neither is David's unjust judgment, in condemning Mephibosheth
being absent, 2 Kings 16.
and unheard upon the false accusation of Siba approved, for whosoever shall
decree any thing, the other being not heard, though the decree be right, yet it
is not just and equal.

Quicunque jussu judicis aliquid fecerit, non videtur dolo malo fecisse, quia
parere necesse est, Coke l. 10. f. 70. b. He that does any thing by commandment
of the judge, seems not to have done any thing with a fraudulent intent,
because he needs must obey.

And therefore the Officers and Ministers of a Court are not to be punished for
executing the precept and warrant of the Court, whereas if they had refused to
do it, the Court would have punished them for their disobedience.

As in 16 E 3. 70. it is taken for a Maxim, that the thing which the Officer
does by Precept or warrant of the Court, cannot be said to be against the
peace, and Dr. and Stud. f. 150. The Officers of the King are bound to execute
the Writs of the King at their peril.

But this diversity is to be taken, that when a Court has jurisdiction of a
Cause, and proceeds erroniously, there the party who sueth, or the Officers
and Ministers of the Court that execute the precept and process of the Court,
are not liable to an action: but when the Court has no jurisdiction of the
Cause, and all the proceeding is coram non Judice, actions do lie against them
without any regard to the precept or process; for when he has no jurisdiction
he is no judge, and it is not of necessito obey him who is no judge, no more
then a mere stranger; for it is a rule, Extra terratorium jus dicente, non
paretur impune, He that obeys in prescribing Laws beyond his jurisdiction
shall not go without punishment Co. ibid. f. 57. A, and B. And therefore 22 E.
4.33. Pigot said, that if the Court has not power and authority, their
proceeding is coram non Judice, As if the Court of the Common Bench hold plea
in an appeal of death, robbery, etc. and the Defendant is attaint, it is coram
non Judice: but if the same Court in an a plea of debt award a Capias against a
Duke, etc. which by the Law lies not against him, and it appears in the Writ
it self, yet if the Sheriff arrest him by force of that Capias, because the
Court has jurisdiction of the Cause, the Sheriff is excused, though the writ
is against the Law. And so if a Capias comes unto him without an Original,
and he serves it, it is excusable in false imprisonment.

Dyer f 60. pl. 26. So if a Justice of Peace make a Warrant to arrest one for
felony which is not indicted, though the Justice of Peace err in the Warrant
of it, yet he that makes the Arrest by force of that Warrant, shall not be
punished by a Writ of false imprisonment, because that he is Judge of the
Cause, 14 H. 8. 16.

Factum a Judice, quod ad ejus officium non pertinet, ratum non est, Reg. I. C.
and Coke l. 10. f. 76. b. Judicium a non suo Judice datum nullius est momenti.
An act done by a Judge, which does not appertain to his Office, is not allowed,
and a Judgment given by him, is not his proper Judge, is of no weight nor
moment,: As if the Sheriff who is prescribed by the Law to hold his Turn within
a month after Michaelmas, holds his Turn after the month, and takes an
Indictment of robbery at the same Turn, and the Indictment is by a Certiorari
removed into the Kings Bench, by advice of all the Justices, the party so
indicted was discharged, because the Indictment was utterly void, and coram non
judice: because at that time the Sheriff had no authority to hold it. And if a
man have a Leet which is holden at a day certain, if he hold it another day,
such Court so holden is void, and without Warrant; but it is otherwise of a
Court Baron, Coke ibidem, but if the Court of Common Bench holds plea without
an Original, it is not void, for they are Judges of those pleas, and it cannot
be said that the proceeding is coram non judice, 19 E. 4. 8.

Judgment in the Marshalsey when none of the parties be of the household of the
King, may be avoided by plea without any Writ of Error, which proves that it
is void, 6 N. 2. So in Trespass before the Marshall, if none of the parties be
of the household of the King, it is coram non judice, because they pass their
power, 29 E. 4. 16.

If one of the Queens household sue another of the same household, and the
Plaintiff is put out of service, the plea depending, the other may show this
and abate the Writ, but otherwise it is, if the Defendant be put out of
service, Lib. de diverse. des Courts f. 102. b. And if a man be impleaded in the
common place, for lands within the Cinque Ports, the Tenant may show to the
Court that the land is within the Cinque Ports, and by this plea the Court
shall be outed of jurisdiction: but if the Tenant does plead in bar, which is
found against him, and the Demandant have judgment, to recover the land, t^ is
judgment shall bind the Tenant for ever, Ib. 107. b And so it is of land in
ancient Demesne, if a Writ be brought for them in the common place, if the
Tenant appear and plead the bar and takes no exception to the jurisdiction,
and the plea is found against him, so that the Demandant recovereth, he shall
not reverse this by a Writ of Error, because he might have taken exception to
the jurisdiction of the Court, and that should have been allowed, ibidem: But
the Lord may reverse this judgment by a Writ of Deceit, and make the land
ancient Demesne, as it was before. If a man devise to one, lands devisable, the
Devisee cannot sue for these lands in the Ecclesiastical Court: but if he make
a devise of goods and chattles real, as a term of years or of a ward, he may
for such sue in that Court, F. N. B. f. 43. b.

Jurisdictio est potestas de publico introducta cum necessitate juris dicendi,
Coke l. 10 f. 73. Jurisdiction is a power introduced by the public, for the
necessity of decreeing and doing right.

The Jurisdiction of the Court of the Marshally was first instituted for the
necessity of the rule and governance of the Servants of the Kings household,
and therefore was it anciently styled, placita corona aulae hospiti^ domini
regis, the Pleas of the Court of the household of the Lord the King, by which
words it is proved that the one, or the other party ought at the least to be of
the household of the King, for how can these words stand when neither of the
parties be of the household of the King, and that is the reason that it is not
necessary in suites before the Steward and Marshall, to allege that the
Plaintiff or Defendant were of the household of of the King, for the style of
the Court does the same imply, ibidem.

So the jurisdiction of the Court of Py-powders was introduced for the
necessity of doing right in suits, and matters concerning Markets, and as that
Court has not jurisdiction, but for things concerning the Market, so has it
not Jurisdiction for matters concerning the Market, unless they be done in the
same Market, M. 42. and 42. Eliz in B. R.

Hall brought a Writ of Error against Jones, of a judgment given in the Court
of Py-powders, of the Market, etc. for Jones one of the Registers of the Bishop
of Gloucester, because Hall had published slanderous words of him, etc. and the
judgment was reversed for two errors, because those words did not concern any
matter concerning the Market, and therefore the Court had no jurisdiction of
it, but if one slander any that shall come into the Market in any thing which
concerns his trade, an Action well lies against hims and 2. it appears in
the count, that the words were spoken before the Market, and not in it, for the
Court has only jurisdiction of those things which are done, and said in the
Market, ibidem, a. and b.

Where there is no color to hold Plea, as in a Court Baron of Land, not holden
of a manor, all is void, but where there is color to hold Plea, though it be
by plaint, where it should be by original, yet the Judgment rendered is only
voidable by a Writ of Error, ibidem.

Non pertinet ad judicem secularem cognoscere de ijs, quae sunt spiritualibus
annexa, Bract. l. 5. c. 2. It does not appertain to the secular Judge to take
cognizance of those things, which are annexed to spiritual things: And
therefore the branches of Trees which are privileged from Tithes shall be also
privileged, but the suite for the Tithe branches of Trees which are not
privileged, shall be in the spiritual Court, as well as the suite for the
Tithe of Trees themselves.

Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, Coke com. 103. a. The thing adjudged is
taken for truth.

As in an Action of debt upon an Obligation against an Abbot, the Abbot
acknowledges the Action, and dies, the successor shall not avoid execution,
though the Obligation was made without the assent of the Covent, for he cannot
falsify the recovery in an higher Action, and the thing judged is taken for
truth, and this is but a Chattle, and so is it of a Statute, or Recognizance
acknowledged by an Abbot, and Prior, ibidem.

And therefore does the Law so much respect the certainty of Judgment, and the
credit, and authority of Judges, as it will not permit any error to be
assigned, that impeacheth them in their trust, and office, and in wilful abuse
of the same, but only in ignorance or mistaking either of the Law, or of the
Case, and matter of fact, according to the rule, de fide and officio judicis
non recipitur quaestio, Bac. Max. f. 62.
sed de scientia, sive error sit juris sive facti, there is no question to be
made of the office, and faith of a Judge, but of his knowledge whether it be
error in Law, or fact, as if I will assign for error, that whereas the verdict
passed for me, the Court received it contrary, and so gave Judgment against
me, this shall not be received, F. N. B. f. 21.

So if I will allege, that whereas I. S. offered to plead a sufficient bar,
the Court refused it, and drove me from it, this error shall not be allowed, 3.
H. 6. 3.

If an appeal of maihme be brought, and the Court by the assistance of the
Chyrurgions adjudge it to be a maihme, the party cannot bring a Writ of Error,
1. Mar. 5.

If a woman bring a Writ of Dower, and the tenant pleads her husband was
alive, this shall be tried by proofs, and not by Jury, and upon Judgment
given on either side, no Error lies, 8. H. 6. 23.

If null til Record be pleaded, which is to be tried by inspection of the
Record, upon Judgment no Error lies, 5 E. 4. 3.

So if upon Judgment given upon confession for default, and the Court do
assesse damages, the Defendant shall never bring a Writ though the damages be
outrageous, F. N. B. 23.

And the reasons of these cales are, that the Law will not have the Judges
called in quostion in the point of their office when they undertake to discuss
the issue, and to examine again what the Court had tried, were to attaint the
Court; yet there may be question of the Error in Law, or the Error in Fact, and
Errors in Law, and Errors in Fact, or ever of such matters as were not crossed
by the Record, as to allege the death of the tenant, at the time of the
Judgment given, and nothing appears on Record to the contrary; so when an
infant levieth a fine, and it appears not upon Record that he is an infant,
then it is error in fact, and shall be tried by inspection during nonage, F. N.
B. 21.

And you shall never allege an error in fact, contrary to the Record, as if a
man will assign for error, that whereas the Judges gave judgment for him, the
Clerks entered it in the Roll against him, this error shall not be allowed, and
yet it does not touch the Judges but the Clerks, but the reason is, if it be an
error, it is an error in fact, vide Ba. Max. f. 65.

Novum judicium non dat jus novum, sed declarat antiqum quia judicium est quasi
jurisdictum, and per judicium jus est noviter revelatum, quod diu fuit velatum,
Coke l. 10. f. 42. a. A new judgment does not give or make a new Law, for
judgment is the voice of the Law, and by judgment the Law is newly revealed,
that has long been covered, as that though it seemed to be a new opinion, that
tenant in tail cannot be restrained from suffering a common recovery, yet it
appears by the ancient Books, and Litt. also, that it is not of late
invention, and it is true the Law sometime sleeps, but judgment, it awaketh,
and certainly these perpetuities were born under an unfortunate constellation,
for in so great a number of suits concerning them in all the Courts of
Westminster, they never had any one Judgment given for them, but many
judgments given against them, and by which those fettered inheritances of the
Frank-tenements of the Subjects be set at liberty according to their original
freedom, vide ibidem plura.

Mandatum ita regulatur in superioribus sicut in privatis a voluntate
mandantis, Reg. I. C. a commandment is regulated from the will of the
Commander, as well in higher, as in private things, so as in every command the
will of the Commander is to be considered and observed, and therefore Coke com.
258. a. Regularly it is true, that where a man does less then the
commandment, and authority committed to him, there the commandment and
authority being not pursued, the act is void.

The King licenseth an Abbot, and Covent to alien, and the Abbot sole alieneth,
it is void, 11. H. 7. 8. And the rule is given by Frowick, when the King makes
any grant, or license, it ought to be executed accordingly, and strictly, as if
the King grants to me a license to make a Feoffment by Deed, I cannot make a
Feoffment without Deed, nor e contra, so that the license must ever be pursued
or otherwise the act done is not warranted by the license, 18. Ass. Pl. ult.

The license was to levy a fine of the Manor of Dale, to find two Chaplains,
and he would have levied the fine leaving out the Chaplains, and could not be
suffered, 3. E. 3. 5. Davis in his case of tenures, f. 19.

The Statute of Merton, c. 3. ordains, that in a re-disseisin, the Sheriff,
assumptis secum custodibus placitorum coronae, do go to that tenement of which
the complaint is made, if the Sheriff take but one Coroner it is not good, for
the Act appoints a number two at the least, which number ought to be
satisfied, or else the authority given by them is not pursued, 23 Ass. 7 Ployd.
f. 393. So as it is manifest a nude authority must be pursued strictly, both
for matter or manner, or the act down by color of the authority i^ void, Dyer
ibidem, f. 20.

Coke com. f 52. a. b. If a man be disseised of black acres, and white acres,
and a VVarrant of Attorney is made to enter into both and to make livery here,
if the Attorney enter into black acre only, and makes a livery and seisin,
secundum formam chartae, there the livery of seisin is void, for the estate of
the disseisor cannot be divested in white acre without an entry.

In a praecipe quod reddat, there must be two Summoners there, for Summons by
one summoner is not good because he does not pursue the authority of the Writ,
and if there be but one, and the tenant make default, and loose by default, he
shall have a Writ of deceit, Ployd. 393. 50. E. 3. 16.

When a man assigns Auditors to Accomptants, and they be found in arrearages,
by the Statute of W. 2. c. 12. they may be arrested, and by the warrant of the
Auditors sent to Goal, there if there be but one Auditor assigned, he cannot
commit the Accomptant to the Goal, for the Statute limiteth such power to two
at the least, vide ibidem plura, in the Earl of Leicesters case, quod vide.

A Letter of Attorney to four, or three jointly to make seisin, two of them
cannot make livery, ibidem, f. 181. b.

But there is a diversity between an authority coupled with an interest, and a
bare authority, as for example a custom within a Manor, time out of mind of
man used, was to grant parcel of the said Mannar in Fee-simple, and never any
grant was made to the heir of his body, for life, or for years, and the Lord
of the said Manor did grant to one by copy for life, the remainder over to
another, and the heirs of his body, and was adjudged that the grant and
remainder over was good, because the Lord having a custom and interest withal
might grant a lesser estate, for in this custom which enableth him to do the
greater, enableth him to do the less, Coke com. f. 52. b. for omne majus
continet in se minns, and regularly it is true, that where a man does that
which he ought to do, and more, there it is good, for that which is warranted,
and void for the rest, Coke com. 258. a.

As if a Letter of Attorney be made to I. S. to make livery of seisin in white
acre, and he makes livery in white acre and black acre there he does, idem,
and aliud, and therefore it is good for white acre, that is according to his
authority, and void for black acre which is aliud from his authority, Perk. 38.

But otherwise it had been, if the Letter of Attorney were to make livery of one
acre, and he makes livery of two acres, there it is void for both, because it
is not named in certain in the Feoffment of which acre livery shall be made
according to 4. H. 7.

And so regularly it is true, that where a man does the same thing he is
authorized to do, alio modo, in another manner then the authority does
warrant, there it is void for the whole, Davis in case of tenures, f. 21.

As if I command a man to make a Feoffment in my name according to a copy
showed in Latin, and he makes a Feoffment to the same effect in English, it
is without warrant, because he does not pursue the authority in the same
Manor, 10. H. 7. 9.

So a Letter of Attorney is made to deliver seisin after the death of I. S. and
the Attorney makes seisin during the life of I. S. all is void, 40. Ass. 38.

Authorities by Deed are to be pursued strictly and precisely both for matter
and manner, Davis ibidem: f. 17.

The Plaintiff did make a charter of Feoffment to the tenant, and a Letter of
Attorney to deliver livery of seisin, the Attorney delivers seisin upon
condition, this livery is void, for the authority is not pursued in the same
manner, 12. Ass. 24. 26.

So on the contrary, if the Letter of Attorney had been to deliver seisin upon
condition, and the Attorney makes livery without condition, this is void, Co.
Just. 258. 11. H. 4. 3.

So where an authority is given to enfeoff, and he levieth a fine, 10. H 7. 15.
It is void.

Omne mandatum est temporaneum, Reg. I. C. all commands are temporary, and are
extinguished by death, which is the difference, that the Civilians put between
an authority, and a command, and that the command is determined by the death
of him that commands, but not the authority, as by these verses is signified.

Praeceptum non pracipitat mors praecipientis,
Mandatum mandatore cadente cadit.
But some hold opinion that they both expire by the death of him that
commands, or gives authority, which Fulbech says, is more agreeable to our
Law, especially in matters of Bailship, of which, notwithstanding these
diversities may be observed.

A man devises all his lands to his Sister, except one Manor which he
appoints to pay his debts, and he made two Executors, and dies, the one
Executor dies, yet the other may sell the Manor and pay his debts, Dyer 371.

But if a Letter of Attorney be made to deliver Livery of Seisin after the
death of the Feoffor, the Letter of Attorney is void, Coke com. f. 52. b.

And if a Mayor and Comminalty makes a Charter of Feoffment, and a Letter of
Attorney to deliver Seisin, the Livery and Seisin is good, after the death of
the Mayor, because the Corporation dies not. But if the Lessor by his Deed
license the Lessee for life or for years, to alien, and the Lessor dies before
the Lessee does alien, yet is death no countermand of the license, but that he
may alien, for this license was executed on the part of the lessor as much as
may be, M. 3. Jac. c. 23. And so if the King does license to alien in Mortmain,
and dies, the License may be executed afterward, Coke ibidem.

There is a diversity between authorities created by the party for private
uses, and an authority created by Law for execution of Justice: As for example,
if a man devises that his two Executors shall sell his land, if one of them
dies the Survivor shall not sell it; but if he had devised his lands to his
Executors to be sold, there the Survivor shall sell it, coke com. f. 181. b.

And if a man make a Letter of Attorney to two, to do any Act, if one of them
dye, the Survivor shall not do it: But if a Venire facias be made to four
Coroners to impanell, and return a Jury, and one of them dye, yet the other
shall execute and return the same, vide ibidem plura.

And if there be two joint Attorneys to return Livery for another, and livery
of Seisin is made to one of them, in the name of both, this is void, unless the
Warrant be jointly, and severally, Coke com. f. 49. l. vide ibidem plura.

Mandata licita strictam recipient interpretationem, sed illicita latam and
extensam. Bacon. Max. 60. lawful Commands receive a strict interpretation, but
unlawful, large, and extensive. In committing of lawful authority to another,
a man may limit it as strictly as he pleases, and if the party authorized do
transgress his authority, though it be in circumstance expressed, it shall be
in most cases void in the whole act, as has before been demonstrated and
distinguished. But when a man is the Author, and advisor to another, to commit
any unlawful act, then he shall not excuse himself by circumstances pursued.

Therefore if I make a Letter of Attorney to I. S. to deliver Livery and Seisin
in the capital Message, and he does it in another place of the land, or
between the hours of two and three, and he does it after or before, in these
cases the act of the Attorney as to execute the estate is void. Or if I express
the Seisin to be delivered to I.D. and my Attorney deliver it to I.B. it is
void, but if my Attorney makes it to his Attorney, it shall be intended, for
it is a Livery to him in Law. But on the other side, if I command I. S. to rob
I. D. on Shooters-hill, and he does it on Gads-hill; or to rob him such a day,
and he does it not himself, but procures another to do it, or to kill by
poison, and he does it by violence: in all these cases he is an Accessory.
Ployd. 175.

But if it be to kill I. S. and he kills I. D. mistaking him for I.S. then he
is no accessory, because it is different in substance.

And if I bid I. S. to steal such things out of an house, without breaking of
the house, and yet he breaks the house, I am accessory to the Burglary.

But if a man bid one rob I. S. as he goes to Sturbridge Fair, and he rob him
in his house, he is not accessory, for the variance is of substance, Ployd. ib.
175.

Quando aliquid mandatur, mandatur and omne per quod pervenitur ad illud, Coke.
l. 5. f. 115. b. when any thing is commanded, every thing is commanded, whereby
we may come to it.

Whereas a Writ of Estrepment will lie in an action of Wast, because he cannot
receive more damages then are contained in the Count, and can assign no Wast
after the Writ purchased; if a Writ of Estrepment comes to the Sheriff, by
virtue of it, he may resist those which will make waste, and if otherwise he
cannot, yet it is lawful for him to imprison them, and to make Warrants to
others to do the same, and if it be necessary he may take a Posse commitatus
for his aid; though the words of the Writ only be, that he shall personally go
to the Message, and altogether take order, that no wast, or estrepment of the
said Message be, according to the fo^m of the statute, whilst the said plea
hangs indiscussed, because when any thing is commanded, every thing also is
commanded, by which we may come to it.

Quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur and id per quod pervenitur ad illud,
Col. 9. f. 57. a. then any thing is forbidden that also is forbidden, by which
we come to it.

As confederation, and combination among men, uniting themselves together
either by obligation, or by promise, to execute any unlawful act is punishable
by Law, before the unlawful act be executed: and the Law punishes the
combination, and the confederacy, to the end to prevent the unlawful act; and
therefore the usual commission of Oyer and Terminer gives power to the
Commissioners to enquire of all combinations, confederacies, and false
allegiancies, and false allegiance is a false binding of any^ one to another by
Obligation, or promise to execute an illoyall act

Boni judicis est lites dirime^e, and expedit reipub. ut sit finis litium
propter communem omnium utilitatem, Coke l. 5. f. 73. b. It is the part of a
good Judge to cut off strifes; and it is profitable to a Commonweal that there
be an end of Suits for the common good of all, in Williams case.

When a Chapel is not private to the Lord and his Family, but is public and
common to all the Tenants of the same Manor, who may be many and of great
number, there no action upon the case lies against the Vicar who ought and is
bound by prescription, by himself or some other, to celebrate Divine Service in
his Chapel, etc. for then every one of his Tenants may also have an action
upon the case, as well as the Lord himself, and so infinite actions for one
default; but it is the part of a good Judge to break and put of suits and
strifes, etc. and it is profitable to the Commonwealth, that there be an end
of suits, for otherwise great oppression may be under the color and pretext of
Law. For as Coke l. 6 f. 9. a. If there should be no end of suits, then a rich
and malicious man will by actions and suits, infinitely vex him who has right,
and in the end because he cannot attain to any end, compel him to redeem his
charge and vexation, and to leave and relinquish his right, vide ibidem plura.
And therefore Coke l. 9. f. 73. b. Accords with satisfaction are much favored
in Law, for the interest of the Common wealth, that there may be an end of
suits, and Coke com f. 306 b. every plea ought to be tryable, for without
trial the case will never come to an end, which would be discommodious to the
republic.

And therefore does the Law shun circuity of actions, and such actions as are
needless and may be saved: and as Coke l. 5 f. 31. Circuitus est evitandus; As
if he that has ten pounds issuing out of certain land, disseiseth the Tenant
of the land: In an assise brought by the Disseisee, the Disseisor shall cut off
the rent in the damages, insomuch as if the mean profits of the land were at
the value of thirteen pounds, the Disseisee shall recover but three l. 3 H. 6.
18. and the Disseisor shall cut of all the damages he has expended in
repairing the houses, 14 E. 3. 92. and if Rent-service happen during the
Disseisin, it shall be cut off, 9 E. 3. 8. and the reason of the cutting off in
such case is, because that otherwise the arrearages of the rent-service,
charge, or seck shall be revived, and therefore to avoid cercuity of action,
the arrearages during the Disseisin shall be cut off in damages.

Coke com. f. 265. a. If there be Father and Son, and the Father be disseised,
and the Son living, the Father releaseth to the Disseisor all his right which
he has, or may have in the same Tenements, without clause of Warranty, and
then the Father dies, the Son may lawfully enter upon the possession of the
Disseisor, because he had no right in the land in his Fathers life, but the
right descended to him after the release made, yet if there had been a Warranty
annexed to the release, then the Son should be barred, for the Warranty may
rebutt and bar him and his Heirs of a future right, which was not in him at
that time, and the reason wherefore a Warranty shall bar a future right, is for
avoiding of circuit of action, as he that made the Warranty should recover the
land against the Ter-tenant, and he by force of the Warranty to have as much in
value against the same person, ibidem.

Upon the grant of a Ward with Warranty, the Defendant in a Writ of right of
Ward, may rebutt the Plaintiff by that Warranty, and shall not be driven to
bring an action of Covenant for avoiding circuit of action, Finch. f. 55.

In an action of Waste upon a lease of years by Deed, and in the same Deed the
Lessor grants to the Lessee that he shall not be impeached of waste, the
Lessee may plead this in an action of waste, and shall not be driven to bring
an action of Covenant for avoiding circuit of action.

When a Father enfeoffeth his Son and Heir with Warranty, and dies; now the
Son in a Praecipe brought against him may vouch the Feoffor of his Father, for
the Law will not suffer him to vouch himself, and when he comes in as Voucher,
then to deigne the Warranty for the circuity of Voucher.

Malificia non debent manner impunita, and impunitas continuum affectum tribuit
delinquendi; and minatur innocents, qui parcit nocentibus, Coke l. 4. f. 45.
a. Evil doings ought not to go unpunished, because impunity ministers a
continual affection of offending, and he threatens the innocent who spares
the Delinquent: And Aristotle Pol. 7. Actiones justitiae sunt necessariae in
civitate, licet non eligibiles. Though the actions of Justice, that is the
sentences, and punishments of evil, and condemned persons, are not secundum
se, of their own nature eligible; yet are they necessary in a City, that the
City may be the better ruled and saved: for as Solon, there are two things, and
ties by which a Commonwealth is contained, and preserved, praemium, and poena,
reward and punishment, and it is truly said, Etsi meliores sunt quos ducit
amor, tamen plures sunt quos corrigit timor, Though^ they be the better persons
whom the Love of goodness and virtue draws, yet there are more whom the fear
of punishment does deter, and correct, and therefore the wisdom of our Law
does abhor that greater offenses should pass unpunished: So as that if a man be
convict either of verdict, or by confession upon an insufficient Indictment,
and no Judgment upon it given, he may again be indicted and arraigned, because
his life was never in jeopardy, and the Law wants his end, which provideth
that no evil Deeds should pass unpunished, Coke l. 4. f. 45. a. for as Coke
says, l. 5. f. 53 b.

Oderunt peccare mali formidine penae.
The wicked to offend themselves refrain.
And from the same are scared for fear of pain.
And therefore by the Common Law is the offense of felony so severely punished,
and though the Judgment against such a Malefactor, in that he shall be hanged by
the neck until he be dead; yet implicitively he is punished,

First in his wife, that she shall lose her Dower.

Secondly, in his Children, that they shall become base, and ignoble.

Thirdly, that he shall lose his Posterity, for his blood is stained and
corrupted that they cannot inherit to him, or to any other Ancestor.

Fourthly, that he shall forfeit all his Lands and Tenements, which he has in
fee, or in tail, or for term of his life.

And fifthly, all his Goods and Chattels. And the reason was, that men should
fear to commit Felo^y, ut poena ad paucos metus ad omnes perveniat, that the
punishment might be inflicted on few, and the fear may come to all. But some
Acts of Parliament have altered the common Law in some of these points; as by
the Statute De donis conditionalibus, lands in tail were not forfeited neither
for Felony nor for Treason, but for the life of Tenant in tail: And this Law
continued in force from the thirteenth year of Edward the first, until the
twenty sixth year of Henry the eighth, when by Act of Parliament Estates in
tail are forfeited by attainder of high Treason, but as for Felons, the Statute
De donis Conditionalibus, does still remain in force, so as for attainder of
Felony, Lands and Tenements in tail are not forfeited, but only during the
life of Tenant in tail, but the Inheritance is preserved for the Issues: but
being attainted of high Treason, or Petit treason, the wife shall not be
received to demand her Dower, but in certain cases specially provided for,
Ployd f. 195. Coke com f. 392. a. b.

And now the wife of a person attainted of misprision of Treason, Murth^r, or
Felony, is dowable by the Statute of 5 E. 6. c. (...) etc. in that case made
and provided, which is more favorable to the women, then the Common Law was,
Coke ibidem.

Receditur a placitis Juris, potius quam inju^iae and delicta maneant impunita.
Bac. Max. f. 51. The Law will dispense with some grounds of the Law, rather
then crimes and wrongs should be unpunished, quia salus populi suprema lex, the
safety of the people is the supreme Law, and the safety of the people is
contained in the repressing of offenses by punishment.

It is a positive ground, that the accessory in Felony cannot be proceeded
against until the principal be tried; yet if a man by subtility and malice
set a mad man by some device to kill one, and he does so; now forasmuch as the
mad man is excused, because he cannot have any will or malice, the Law
accounts the Incitor as principal, though he be absent, rather then the
Crime shall go unpunished, 13 Eliz 1.

So it is a ground in the Law, that the appeal of Murder goes not to the
Heir where the party murdered has a wife, nor the younger brother where
there is an elder: yet if the wife murder the husband, because she is the
party Offender, the appeal leapeth over to the heir, and so if the Son and
Heir murder his Father, it goes to the second brother, Ed. 4 M 28. 6. Stanf.
l. 2 f. 60.

But if the Rule be one of the higher sort of Maxims that are regulae
rationales, and not positivae, then the Law will endure rather a particular
Offense to escape without punishment, then violate such a Rule.

As it is a Rule that penal Statutes shall not be taken by equity: And the
Statute of 1 E. 6. enacteth, that those that are attainted for stealing of
Horses, shall not have their Clergy: The Judge conceived that this should not
extend to him that should steal but one horse, and therefore procured a new act
for it in 2 E. 6. c. 33. for it is not like the case upon the Statute of
Gloucester, that g^^^^h an action of waste against him for term of life, or
years, and yet if a man hold for a year, he is within the Statute: for penal
Laws are taken strictly and literally only in the point of defining, and
setting down the fact and punishment, and in those clauses that concern them,
and not in general words which are but circumstances and conveyances in the
putting of the case, and so note the diversity; for if the Law be that for such
an offense a man shall lose his right hand, and the Offender has his right
hand cut off in the Wars, he shall not lose his left hand, but the crime shall
rather pass unpunished, vide ibidem plura.

Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto, Coke com. f. 145. b. No man is punished for
another man's fault. And therefore the Defendant in a Replevin, cannot claim
property by his Bailiff or Servant, and the reason is, for that if the claim
fall out to be false, he shall be fined for his contempt, which the Lord cannot
be, unless he makes claim himself, for no man shall be punished for another
fault.

Dyer f. 66. pl. 14. It is the Law of God, that every one shall bear his own
burden, and receive judgment according to his proper fact, and merit whether
it be good or evil.

As whereas the Plaintiff charge the Defendants with an escape made and
suffered by them, they ought not to accuse their Predecessors, but excuse
themselves, and answer for their proper fact, and demeanor: for it is a common
erudition that the Defendant in his answer, and bar ought either to traverse,
or confess, and avoid the Plaintiff, vide ibidem plura.

Yet in Treasons and Felonies one shall be punished for another offense, and
by our Law, and not without good reason, the Sons of them which are disloyal
Subjects and Traitors to their Prince, are barred from the Inheritance of their
Ancestors, that their Fathers infamy may always accompany them, and that their
life should be a punishment to them, and their Fathers fault a continual
corasive, and that is done because their Fathers Ulcers are feared in them, and
that being bred and brought up of naughty Parents, they will be prone to do the
like, and this penalty is used in the nature of a medicine, that by suffering
shame he may be deterred from crime; and therefore as Coke com. 5. f. 391. l.
by his attainder of Treason or Felony is the blood so stained and corrupted,
that his Children cannot be Heirs to him, nor to any other Ancestor.

And therefore where the Tenant is outlawed of Felony; it is in the Lords
election to have a Writ of Escheat, supposing that his Tenant was outlawed of
Felony, or that he died without Heir, for by the attainder the blood is
corrupted, 48 E. 3. 2.

But it seems by Nichols case, that the party attainted ought to be dead
before the land can escheat, for according to Dyer and Brian in the Kings case
after the attainder, and till Office be found the Fee-simple shall in facto be
in the person of the attainted so long as he shall live, for as he has a
capacity to take lands of a new purchase, so he has power to hold his ancient
possessions, and he shall be Tenant to a Praecipe, and if he died before Office
found, and the land be held of the King, the land shall go to the King in
nature of a common Escheat, Ployd. 477. Nichols case, but in case of Treason,
the King shall be presently after the attainder in actual possession, without
Office found by the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 20.

If the Father purchases land, and his eldest Son is attainted of Felony and
dies, the next in degree of descent, and worthiness of blood unto the Son
attainted, shall not have the land, but it shall escheat to the immediate Lord
of whom the land is held, for the blood is corrupted, otherwise it had been if
he had died in the life of the Father, having no Issue, Dyer 48.

An account is brought against two, the one enters into an account, and it is
sound against him, it shall bind both, 44 E. 3. 18.

One is imprisoned in the Marshalsey, and a stranger breaks the Prison, and
the prisoner escapes, the Marshall shall be charged for the whole debt.

If I have a way over the lands of twenty men, and one of them stops the way
in his land, I shall have an action against all those over whose lands the way
was, 33 H. 6. 26. by profit.

A rate is put upon a Town for the fees of a Knight of the Parliament, The
Beasts of him has paid his part are taken for the residue, he shall not have a
Replevin, but the beasts shall be sold to pay his duty, 11 H. 4. 2.

In quo quis delinquit in eo de jure est puniendus, Co. com. f. 233. b. In what
one offends, in the same by right he is to be punished: As if any Keeper kill
any Deer without warrant, or fell, or cut any Trees or under-woods, and
commits them to his own use* it is a forfeiture of his Office; for the
destruction of the Deer is by a mean the destruction of the Venison. And so it
is if he pull down the Lodge, or any house within the Park, for putting of Hay
into for feeding of the Deer, or such like, it is a forfeiture, and the reason
why the Office shall in such and the like case be forfeited, because in what
one offends, in that he shall be punished.

Dispensatio mali prohibeti est, de jure, Domino regi concessa, propter
impossibilitatem providendi de omnibus particularibus; and dispensatio est mali
prohibiti provida relaxatio, utilitate, seu necessitate pensata, Coke. l. 11.
88. a. The dispensation of a prohibited evil, is by right granted or allowed
to the King, because of an impossibility for providing for all particular
things; and a dispensation is a provident relaxation of an evil prohibited,
recompensed with profit and utility. As where an Act of Parliament which
generally prohibiteth a thing upon penalty which is popular, or where it is
only given to the Queen) may be inconvenient to diverse particular persons* in
respect of the person, place, or time, etc. therefore in such causes the Law
has given power to the Queen to dispense with particular persons. But when the
wisdom of Parliament has made an Act to restrain pro bono publico, the
Importation of any foreign Manufactures, to the intent that the Subjects may
apply themselves to the making of the said Manufactures, etc. and by it
maintain themselves and families: Now for private gain to grant the
importation of them to one, or diverse against the said Act is a Monopoly, and
against the Common Law, and against the end and scope of the Act it self, vide
ibidem plura in the case of Monopolies.

Coke l. 5. f. 28. Cawdrys case; By the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, a
Priest cannot have two Benefices, nor a Bastard be a Priest, but the King by
his Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction, may dispense with both these,
because they are mala prohibita, and not mala in se.

The King by a clause of non obstante may dispense with the Statute Law, and
that if the Statute says, that dispensation shall be merely void, 2 H. 7.
Grants 73. Finch. f. 82.

Coke comm. f. 120. a. A party or Minister disabled by reason of any corrupt
Contract, etc. by the Act of 13 Eliz. which is an absolute and direct Law
cannot be dispensed withal by any Grant, etc. with a non obstante, as it may
be when any thing is prohibited sub modo^, as upon a penalty given to the King.

Coke l. 4. f. 35. b. in Bozums case, when the King by the common Law cannot in
any manner make a grant, there a non obstante of the common Law, will not make
the grant good against the reason of the common Law, as if the King grants a
protection in an assize, or Quod impedit with a non obstante, of any Law to the
contrary that grant is void, for by the common Law, a protection does not lie
in any of these cases, 39. H. 39.

But when the King may lawfully make a grant, but the common Law requires that
he may be so instructed, that he be not deceived, there a non obstante may
supply it, as when the King grants a lease for life, or years, he has the
reversion in him, which he may lawfully grant, but the Law requires in this
case, that he be not deceived in his estate and to grant the possession of the
Land, whereas he has but a reversion, and therefore when he grants the Land,
notwithstanding that it be in lease for life, or for years of Record, or
otherwise the grant is good.

When the words of a grant are not sufficient, ex vi termini, to pass the
thing granted, but the grant is utterly void, there any non obstante cannot
make the grant good, vide ibidem plura.

Davis f. 75. In the case of Commendams, By our Law, what is wrong, and malum
insert, and against the Law of God cannot be dispensed with, and therefore 11
H. 7. 12. a. It is said that the King cannot dispense with any that does
nuisance in the Highway, and if he does it, that such a dispensation is void,
and 8 H. 6. 19. The King cannot grant that if a man does a trespass to me,
that I shall not have an action against him, or that a man shall be his own
Judge, and therefore it is often said in our Books, that the prerogative of the
King shall do no wrong to the Subject, 13 E. 3. 8 So though the King may
dispense with a Statute, which prohibiteth an indifferent thing to be done; yet
he cannot change the common Law by his Patent, 37 H. 8. Patent 110. And as to
the Pope it is often said in the Bishop of St. Davis case, that the Bulls of
the Pope cannot change the Laws of England. Notwithstanding the word non
obstante was first invented, and first used in the Court of Rome, which as Sir
John Davis observes, f. 69. b. was a mischeivous precedent to all the commonweals of Christendom, for the temporal Princes perceiving that the Pope
dispensed with his Canons in imitation of him, have used their prerogative to
dispense with their penal Laws, and Statutes, and whereas before their Laws
were religiously observed, as the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

Davis f. 77. The Law which ordains that the first benefice shall be void by
the acceptance of the second, may be dispensed with, and so is it of the Law
that ordains, that when a man is made a Bishop, that his other Benefices
shall be void, as Thrining says, 11. H. 4. 213. b. For those Laws were made by
Ecclesiastical policy, and therefore the same policy may dispense with those
Laws.

permissio non est officium legis, quia lex ad fert necessitatem, Reg. I. C.
permission is not the office of the Law, for the Law brings necessity.

As by the Statute of W. 2. Lands were permitted to be entailed, and usury also
by many Statutes, yet can they not properly be termed Laws, and Statutes.

Confessus in judicio pro judicato habetur, and quodam modo sua sententia
damnatur, Coke l. 11. f. 30. He who confesses in the Court of Justice, is
holden adjudged, and in a certain manner is condemned by his own mouth or
sentence.

And therefore the Attainder in confession is the strongest attainder may be,
for the vehement presumption it has of truth, for it should be absurd to say,
that he has not done such a Felony, since the party himself has confessed it
to the destruction of him, and all his offspring.

And the case of confession is a stronger case then guiltiness by verdict, for
though he be found guilty by verdict, yet may he be innocent, and therefore at
the common Law he may have his Clergy, and make his purgation, but if he had
confessed the offense upon record he shall not have his Clergy at the common
Law, because he could not make his purgation, when the Court finds his
confession on Record, for in the intendement of the Law he cannot contrary his
express, and voluntary confession in Court, vide ibidem plura.

In praesentia majoris cessat potentia minoris, Manhood, in Ployd. f. 498. a.
In the presence of the greater power, the lesser power cease.

All the Justices agreed, that the Ordinary, the Patron, and King, ought to
agree in making an impropriation, and the Ordinary is the principal aagent in
it, in that he has the spiritual jurisdiction, and the act of appropriation
is a thing spiritual, and what the Ordinary of the Diasis, might do, that the
Pope used to do in the Realm as supreme Ordinary, and was a long time
suffered so to do, and did use to make appropriations without the Bishop which
were taken to be good, and the Bishop never contradicted but accepted them as
good, for in the power of the greater, the power of the lesser cease, and in
all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, his authority was taken as absolute, and did
bind the Bishop as his inferior in all acts, now such authority and
jurisdiction as the Pope used within this Realm was acknowledged by the
Parliament, 25. H. 8 and other Statutes to be in the King, and that he might
lawfully do all that the Pope was accustomed, and used to do within this
Realm, and from him it descended to his Son Edward, who as superame Ordinary
did make the appropriation of his own authority and jurisdiction without the
Bishop, and did put these words in his Charter, authoritate nostra regia, and
ecclesiastica, qua fungimur, vide ibidem plura.

Vectigal ab origin ipsa jus caesarum est, and patrimoniale, lex imperatoria,
Custom from the beginning is the right and patrimony of Caesar, and Emperors
and are called vectigalia a mercibus evectis, and invectis, from Merchandises
exported, and imported, for custom is a prerogative, and benefit, to which
Kings and Princes are by the Law of Nations, entitled: And as the Law, Nations
were before Kings, so Kings were made by the Laws of Nations, ex jure gentium
originem suam traxerunt, Baldus, and as soon as they were made Kings,
presently the Law of Nations did annex the prerogative of custom to their
several Crowns, so says Baldus, cum creatus fuerit Rex, omnia regalia ei
conceduntur, and competit omnibus regibus jus imponendi vectigalia, when a King
was created, all royal incidents were granted to him, and the right of
imposing customs appertained to all Kings.

Wherein the rules of our Law as Davis observes, f. 12. are agreeable with
those of the imperial Law, for we also say that custom is the ancient
inheritance of the Crown of England, and that inheret sceptro, and is as
ancient as the Crown it self, and is due by common right, and by
prescription, and not by the grant, and benevolence of Merchants, or by Act of
Parliament, Dier, 165. b.

And whereas by the imperial Law, Primaria vectigalium causa, ac ratio fuit,
ut plana tutaque mercatori praetereunti itinera praestarentur, Plin. l. 19. c.
4. The first cause, and reason of customs was that plain and safe voyages
should be exhibited, and assured to the Merchants, and in our Law Wafrages and
protection to the passing Merchants of the Sea was one of the principal causes
of the payments of those duties, Davis ibidem f. 12.

And Dyer f. 43. Puts a difference between a custom and a subsidy, and
says that the custom for Merchandises to be transported out of the Realm, is
an inheritance of the King, and by the common Law, and not given by any
Statute, and that appears by the Statute of 14. E. 3. which was the first
Statute which makes mention of any custom, and that Statute does not give, or
limit any Custom to the King but abridgeth and abateth the custom which was
paid for Wool, or Leather; but a subsidy, says he, is a Tax assessed by
Parliament, and granted to the King by the Commoners during the life of every
King only, which is made clear by the case reported by Dyer, 1 Mar. f. 92.
where King Edward the sixth had granted a License to a Merchant stranger to
transport all Merchandises paying pro custumis and subsidiis tot, and tantas
denariorum summas, quot and quantas, any english Merchant and Denizen should
pay, and no more: And it was resolved by all the Judges after the death of
Edward the sixth the grant was good for the Customs, but void tor the
Subsidies, because the King had an Inheritance in the Custom, as a Prorogative
annexed to the Crown, but in the Subsidies he had an estate only for life by
act of Parliament.

But there is a third kind of duty payable for Merchandises which are called
Imposts, or Impositions, and these were sometimes rated and assessed by
Parliament, and then were they of the nature of Subsidies; and sometimes were
imposed by the Prerogative Royal, to support the necessary charges of the
Crown, and then as the ancient Senator of Rome said, Nihil magis justum est
quam quod necessarium est, There is nothing more just then that which is
necessary, Davis f. 12. vide ibidem plura.

The Impost upon Wines was first assessed by Parliament, and limited to be paid
for certain years, which being expired is now continued by Parliament, ibidem.

Opo^tet patrem familias vendacem esses and non emacem, Cato major Davis f. 10.
The Master and Father of a Family ought to be a buyer and not a seller: By the
Grecians, Kings were called (...), Pastors of the people; and Emperors by the
Romans Patres Patriae, Fathers of their Country, for their vigilant and
Paternal care they were to take for the preservation and provision for the
people, for he is the public Pater familias, and is to bend his thoughts to
the utility and commodity of the public, and as he is reputed a provident
Father of a Family, who has more commodites to sell, then occasions to buy, so
ought he to be a seller rather then a buyer; and to provide that more native
commodities be exported for sale, and the less foreign Merchandises imported to
the buyer.

And therefore the little custom of foreign Commodties was then accepted of
the King, when but a little quantity of such foreign Wares were imported into
England: For in the time of Edward the first, and after that in the times of
Edward the third, the native Commodities of England exported, were of greater
quantity and value by two parts of three at the least, then the foreign
Merchandises imported, by which King Edward the third raised so great a revenue
out of the Native Commodities of his Dominions, that it was noted for good
Husbandry in that King; for a Father of a Family ought rather to be a buyer
then a seller, but now it is altogether contrary, for at this time the Out-gate
is lesser then the In-gate, and the foreign Commodities imported are of greater
quantity and value by two parts then our native Commodities exported, which is
a great shame to our Nation to be so enamoured with Mercery and Grocery Wares
imported by strangers, and to expend upon those more then the value of all the
Staple Commodities of our Country, which will be in the end, the decay and
ruin of the Commonweal, Davis, ibid.

Thesaurus regis est pacis vinculum, and bellorum nervi, Coke l. 3. f. 12. b.
The treasure of the King is the bond of peace, and the sinews of war. And
therefore the Common Law prefers and advances the right of the King,
insomuch as Sir Henry Finch observes, you shall find it to be Law almost in
every case of the King, that is not Law in case of the Subjects, and that with
an intention to inhaunce the Kings Treasure, and to replenish his Coffers,
whereby he may in time of peace advance the glory and honor of the Nation, and
in time of War be enabled to protect the Commonwealth against foreign
incursions and invasions; for the Kings Treasure is the bond of peace, and
sinews of war.

And therefore in the case of the King, which is not so in the case of a common
person, the body, the lands, and the goods of the Accomptant, or Debtor of the
King at the Common Law, were liable to the execution of the King, Dyer 234.
before the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 38.

Coke ibidem, and upon the same reason is this principal grounded, Quando jus
domini regis, and Subditi in simul concurrunt, jus regis preferri debet, Coke
l. 9. 3. 129. b. when the right of the King and the Subject concur together,
the right of the King ought to be preferred. As in Dame Hales case, Ployd. 262.
Baron and Feme were Joynt-tenants of a term for years, the Baron is selo de se,
he shall forfeit all, and yet till the Office it surviveth, but after the
Office it has relation before, or at the least at the time of the death, vide
ibidem plura, in Quicks case.

So Plo^d. f. 263. b. If a Feme take husband, and has Issue, and the land
descend to the Feme, and the Baron enter, so that he is entitled to be Tenant
by the Courtesy, and then the Feme is found an Idiot, and her Estate in the
land is also found; the King shall have the land, and if the Feme dye, the
Baron shall never have the land by Courtesy: for by the first possession of the
Feme, the Baron was entitled to be Tenant by Courtesy, and when the Office is
found, the Title of the King shall have relation also to the first possession,
and so both the Titles commence at the same time, but the King shall have the
pre-eminence, and because the Title of the King is in this case to the
Frank-tenement of the land, in that, that he shall have the custody of it
during the life of the Feme, it shall utterly take away the Title of the Baron,
which before the Office found was vested in the Baron, and therefore after the
death of the Feme he shall not be Tenant by courtesy, but the Issue shall have
the lands out of the hands of the King, if it be not holden of the King, and if
it be, the King shall have it for the Wardship of him, during the nonage; and
upon the same reason was this principal also founded.

Thesaurus competit domino regi, and non domino libertatis nisi sit per verba
specialia Fitz. Coro. 281. 436. It is a firm conclusion in the Common Law, that
Treasure belongs to the Lord the King, and not to the Lord of the Liberty,
unless it be by special words. Adrianus Caesar made a Law, that if any man
found treasure in his own ground, himself should have it, if in another man's
ground, he shall give the half to the owner of the Soil, if in a public place,
he shall devide it equally with the Treasury: but now, and long time ago the
Civil Law has transferred it to the Prince, which is thus defined by
Justinian, Vetus depositio pecuniae, vel alterius metalli, cujus non extat modo
memoria ut dominum non habeat: An ancient deposition or hiding of money, or
some other metal, of which for the present no memory is extant, that it may
have a Lord or owner.

Wherein the Common Law of this Realm accords with the Civil Law, which
holds that Treasure hid in the earth, not upon the earth, nor in the Sea, and
Coin though not hidden being found, is the Kings, which we call Treasure
trove, Stanf. f. 10. 27 Ass. pl. 19. 10. Eliz. Ployd. 322.

And Mr. Stanfords reason why such Treasure should belong to the King is
un-answerable, and it is this, Quia dominus rei non apparet, ideo cujus sit
incertum est, because the Lord and Owner of the thing does not appear, therefore
whose it is, it is uncertain, 22 Ass. pl. 19. And it is a current rule in all
Nations, In ambiguis casibus semper praesumitur pro rege, and in doubtful
cases it is always presumed and taken for the King.

Many other benefits and prerogatives there be which the Common Law of England
gives to the King, in regard of the exceeding charge and cost he is at in the
defending and governing the Commonwealth, of which I may plainly say as Cicero
said of the Romans, That all the Revenue and Treasure is scarce able to, Lips.
de Mag. Romans l. 1. c. 4, 5.
maintain the Army both by Sea and Land, and therefore has need of many
Prerogatives and benefits. It were tedious to touch them all, and will only
name some, which I deem pertinent to the precedent principle.

As the Mines of Gold and Silver, which by the Law of Nations, as well as the
Common Law, belong to the King and Prince, for to whom should Gold and Silver
appertain but to him that has authority to coin it as his own, according to
the answer of our Savior, Matthew. 22. v. 20.
Date quod est Caesaris Caesari, and therefore moneta dicitur a monendo, quia
impressione nos monit cujus est Moneta, Davis f. 19. And therefore the Judgment
given in the case between the Queens Majesty and the Earl of Northumberland,
seems to be sound and grounded upon invincible reason, although the Grant
was, Omnium and singularum Minerarum, of all and singular Mines: for the
diversity is there well taken by Wray, that there be two sorts of Mines, Mines
royal, and base Mines; and Mines royal may be sub-divided into two other
kinds, those which contain in them Silver; or Gold entirely, or which have
Brass or Copper in them, and have some veins of Gold intermixed, both these
belong to the Prince, for the Gold as the more worthy, draws to its self the
less worthy: But such as have in them merely Brass, Copper, or Lead, may belong
unto a Subject by a special Title.

And that in such case the Proprietor of the land and Soil shall have the Ore
and Mine, and not the King by his Prerogative; which was the opinion of all the
Judges, and they all also agreed, that a Mine royal, be it of base Metal, or
pure Gold, or Silver, may by grant of the King be severed from the Crown, and
granted to any other, for it is not an incident inseparable to the Crown, but
the King may sever it by apt and precise words, but not by the words, of all
and singular Mines, Ployd. f. 333. and 335. vide ibidem plura, in the case of
Mines.

There is another special Prerogative which the King has in the Sea, for the
Sea is not only under the Dominion of the King, as it is said, 6 R. 2. Fitz.
protection 46. The Sea is of the legiance of the King as of the Crown of
England; but is also his proper Inheritance; and therefore the King shall have
the land gained out of the Sea, Dyer 226. Also the King shall have the great
possessions of the Sea, as Whales, Sturgeons, etc. which are royal Fishes, and
no Subject can have them without special grant of the King, Prerog. regis c.
10. Stanf. 37, 38. And the King shall have wild Swans, as volatilia regalia
upon the Sea, and the Braches of the Sea, Coke l. 7. f. 17. in the case of
Swans. So the wreck of the Sea is a perquisit royal, Coke l. 5. 107. Sir Hen^y
Constables case. And upon this reason, before the Statute of 18 E. 3. no
Subject might pass beyond the Seas without special license of the King: but
there it is enacted that the Sea shall be open to all Merchants: And all Havens
and Ports quae sunt ostia, and Janua regni appertain to the King, because he
is custos totius regni, F.N.B. 113. a. And the King ought by right to save and
defend his Subjects against the Seas, as against his Enemy: And therefore the
Commission of Sewers was awarded by the King by virtue of his Prerogative
royal, before any Statute made in such case, extends not only to the walls
and banks of the Sea, but also to all navigable Rivers, and Fresh-waters; F. N.
B. 113. a. And in the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 10: The King by reason of his
Prerogative royal, ought to p^ovide that navigable streams be made passable.

And the City of London by the Charter of the King, have the River of Thames
granted to them, and purchased another Charter by which the King granted to
them, solum and fundum, of the said River, by force of which Grant the City
receives the rents of them which fix posts, or make Wharfs, or other Edifices
upon the Soil of the said River, so as the King has the same Prerogative in
the Braches of the Seas, and navigable Rivers, and fresh-waters, so high as the
Sea flows and refloweth in them, as he has in Alto mari.

And though the Civillians say, that Flumina and portas publica sunt, ideoque
jus piscandi omnibus commune est in portu fluminibusque, that Rivers and Havens
are public things, and therefore the right of fishing is common to all in
Rivers and Havens, which rule is found in Bracton l 2. c. 12.

Yet by the Common Law of England, every navigable River, so high as the Sea
flows and refloweth in it, is flumen regale, and the Piscary of it is also
royal Piscary, and belongs to the King as his Prerogative, but in any other
river not navigable: In the Piscary of such River, the Ter-tenants of either
side of the water have an interest of common right, and the reason why the King
has interest in such navigable Rivers, so high as the Sea flows and
refloweth in it, is because such River participateth of the nature of the Sea,
and is said to be a brach of the Sea, so far as it flows or refloweth. 12
Ass. pl. 93. And though the King permits his people for their ease and
Commodities, to have common passage, yet he has the sole interest in the soil
of such Rivers, as also in the Piscary, although the profit of it is not
commonly taken by the King, and appropriated by the King, unless it be of
extraordinary and certain annual value. So the King granted to Strangewaies,
totam illam liberam piscarim, all that free Priscary called the Fleet in
Abboesbury, which is a bay and creek of the Sea: And though the Abbot had the
Piscary before the dissolution, it is to be understood that the Abbot at the
beginning had it by grant of the King, it being a several piscary upon the
brach of the Seas, and therefore by consequent royal piscary, vide Ployd. 315.
b. And therefore in the case of the royal piscary of Bann, Davis, 57. It was
resolved that the River of Bann so far as the Sea did flow, and reflow in it,
is a royal River, and the fishing of Salmon there a royal piscary, which
belongs to the King as a several piscary, and not to those which have the
soil, ex utraque part aquae, on either side of the water, vide ibidem plura.

Tributum est victoriae praemium, Cicero in vere.
and poenabelli
Tribute is the reward of victory, and penalty of War.
A Conqueror may command tribute, and all that comes in under the Conqueror by
the Law of Nations, and therefore the Roman General said unto the French men,
Tac. l. 4. histro. Deuteronomy. 20.11.
jure victoriae tributum vobis addidimus, by the right of victory we have
imposed tribute upon you, and tribute for the same reason is due by the Law of
God, which clearly appears by the answer of our Savior to the Jews, who
because they would have Christ to have challenged their earthly Kingdom by
that means to draw him into hatred with Caesar, demanded of him whether it
were lawful to give tribute to Caesar, but he that always professed that his
Kingdom was not of this World, Matt. 22.
gave them a bone to gnaw, saying give unto Caesar, all the things which are
Caesar's, and to God, the things that are Gods, for indeed tribute are allowed
by the Law of God.

So William the Conqueror, after his universal conquest was the first that
commanded, and imposed tribute in England, and not unjustly, which as yet is
continued as a remembrance of a conquest, yet do the English seem rather to
offer a tribute to their Monarch, then the Monarch to command it, for the
courtesy of England is great, and the clemency of their Princes greater, and as
Fulbeck protests, sithence the conquest of England, tribute, and subsidy have
been as justly by the Law of God, and the Law of Nations paid England as in
Jury, Fulb. Pand. c. 10. f. 99.

In republica maxim conservanda sunt jura belli, Coke com. f. 10. b. In a
Commonwealth the Laws of War are principally to be preserved, for to invert
the position of Justinian, and yet to retain the sense, imperatoriam Majestatem
non solum legibus oportet esse armatam, Just. Institutes.
sed etiam armis decoratam, ut utrumque tempus bollorum, and pacis recte possit
gubernari, the imperial Majesty ought not only to be armed with Laws, but
also adorned with arms, that the time of War and peace may be rightly
governed, for experience the mistress of all Arts and Sciences teaches us
that there is nothing more necessary for the observation of peace, and
Administration of Justice, then the conservation of the Laws of arms, and
that in consideration of the ambition of the world, and factions of people, it
is impossible for any Realm to continue in peace and tranquillity, where the
protection of the Sword is not eminent, and iminent, and therefore Cicero,
summus illo administrandae reipub. Magister, Buchan. de Cicerone.
propounds the chiefest Master of the administration of a common wealth,
propounds this sentence to be practiced as a State Aphorism, Ideo
suscipienda sunt bella ut in pace sine injuria vivamus, therefore are Wars to
be undertaken that we may live in peace without injury, Tullys Offi.
for without the assistance of the Militia, and Sword, a State cannot be
constantly cleared, and freed from public or private injuries, and it was
Catos sage advice, by which the continual rebellions of the Spaniard might
surely be suppressed, id uno modo caveri potest, si effectum erit ne possint
rebellare, that by one only means may be prevented, if such course be taken
that they cannot rebel, and the very like course did Lentulus prescribe
against the Perfidious Carthaginians, quoniam illoram Persidiam non possumus
tollere ideo debilitemus potentiam, because we cannot eradicate their
persidiousnesse, therefore let us debilitate their power; both which by
continuance, and force of arms was effected.

Mavult princeps domesticos milites, quam stipendiarios bellicis apponere
casibus, Coke com. f. 69. a. A Prince will rather employ Domestic and Native
Soldiers, then Stipendiaries, and Forreners. It was the wisdom of the ancient
Kings of England, to be served in the Wars by their own Subjects, and therefore
did give Lands to their Subjects, to hold of them by Knights services, that
when the King did make a royal voyage to Scotland, Wales, etc. according to
their several tenures they ought to be with the King for a certain time
limited, conveniently arrayed for the War, and though they only who held
immediately of the King were to do this service, yet every man by his tenure,
is bound to defend his Lord, and he and his Lord the King, to which the
military rule of Galba is consonant, optimum est militem deligere, non autem
emere, it is the best course to choose a Soldier, but not to buy him, and then
are Princes said to choose their Soldiers, when they conscribe their own
Subjects, and to buy them when they purchase strangers with their pay: And as
another, satius est erudire suos, quam conducere alienos, it is better to
instruct your own people in arms, then to procure expert strangers, for which
Machavell that subtle Secretary of State, extolleth the King of England, that
when he invaded France for many years ago, would not accept any other
Soldiers but English, L. 1. de repub. c. 21.
though he had enjoyed and lived in peace for the space of thirty years,
whereas the French were continually conversant, and exercised in the Italian
Wars, yet that prudent King, who knew well that he had so ordered the Realm,
that in the time of peace, the feats of arms were practiced, and military
discipline exercised, both attempted the conquest of France, and fortunately
effected it: The same Encomium does he give of Epominondas, who redeeming the
Thebans from the servitude of the Spartans, so instructed them in the form of
military discipline, that through their aid though effeminated by service, he
gave the Spartans a mighty defeat, and overthrow; for the care and faith of
Domestic, and Native Soldiers, is greater and firmer, and for the honor of
their Prince, and glory of their Country, will fight more fiercely, ita ut,
consensu quodum, says Seneca, protegendi, amandique regem, conspirasse
intelliguntur; so as they are conceived to have conspired with an unanimous
consent of protecting and loving their King.

Whereas mercenaries, and strangers are commonly tumultuous, and refractory,
and love not to be commanded, Tac. 4. hist. Tac. theagiae.
or governed, but as Tacitus omniae ex libidine agunt, love to do what they
lift, and which is most perilous are perfidious, non fide non affectu tenentur,
are not held, nor kept by faith, and affection, but there faith depends on
fortune, which inclining to the Enemy thither do they for the most part bend
their minds and forces, by which means as one truly, externo pessundata
milite regna, and as Curtius insidiosae fiunt illorum domini, Kingdoms are
sometimes ruined, and by treachery they themselves become Lords and Masters of
their leaders.

L. 1. f. 13.
Polibius relates that Carthaginians waging War with the Romans, had their
army mixed with Spaniards, French, and fugetive Grecians, and that having made
peace with the Romans, intended to dismiss them who amounted to the number of
twenty thousand, which they perceiving, suddenly drew themselves into a
military body, and made head against the Carthaginians, and forced some of
their Cities, to subject their Forts to their Forces in so much as the
Carthaginians were compelled to crave aid of the Romans to resist, and repel
them, through whose assistance Hamilcar circumvented and enclosed them in
narrow streites and places, so as more of them perished by famine, then the
sword, and Hamilcar by the consent of all was called salvator patriae, the
Savior of his Country, to this purpose I could plaustra exemplorum accumulare,
accumulate Cart-loades of examples, how dangerous a thing it is to call in
strangers to their aid, and especially in any great number, which plainly
appears by the perfidiousnesse of the Saxons, who though they came at the
first as Mercenaries, yet once admitted, and sensible of their own power, they
soon grew Masters and Lords of the Brittons, and therefore Livy gives this
sound counsel to them, who are necessitated to introduce the aid of strangers,
that their Captains be so circumspect, quod non ita externis credant auxillijs
ut non plus sui roboris suarumque p^oprie virium in castris habeant, Livy l. 25.
that they do not confide so much in external aid, that they have no more of
them in their army then their own strength, and power will keep in awe.

Multum potest in rebus humanis occasio, plurimum in bellicis, Poly. b. Coke
com. 71. a. Occasion, and opertunity prevail much in humane things, but most
of all in Marshall affairs.

In ancient time Kings had the supremacy over others of commanding, 2. Reg. c.
8.
or commencing War as appears by the sacred History, yet sometimes upon
necessary, cause if there be danger in delay, or the sovereign Commander be
absent, War may be undertaken without the commandment of the Prince, if it be
upon necessary occasion of just defense, which by the Law of nature is granted
to every one: So though the Consul Marcellus had the supreme command in
Sicily, yet, L. Pinarius who was Captain of the Garrison of Enna in Sicily,
when he did foresee the revolt, and defection of the Citizens of Enna, to the
Carthaginians, Livy l. 24.
and he could not send Ambassadors to the Consul Marcellus though he was not
far from thence, suddenly he did kill all the Carthaginians, by which Act Enna
was still retained for the Romans, and Marcellus did not disallow the fact.

And therefore Cicero commends the enterprise of Octavius Caesar, who not
expecting the decree of the Senate, did of his own head make War against
Antonius, for if he had then omitted the time of battle, he did well foresee
that the common Wealth would be suppressed, and that then nothing could be
decreed by the Senate, and the Senate did after allow by public authority the
War undertaken by Octavius of his own private advice, so Scipio Nasica, did
deserve exceeding commendation, who voluntary without any decreed authority did
offer himself a Captain to all good Romans, for the suppressing of Tibe^ius
Gracchus, and his treacherous confederates, for it is necessary in such
perturbations, and tumults, rather to obey times, then customs, for in peace
we must obey custom, in War the times, and occasions.

Inter arma silent leges,
Coke l. 9. Ep. ad Lectorem.
When Arms and Weapons sway,
The Laws are at a stay.
War was first brought in by necessity, for in that decisions in Courts of Law,
and the determining of controversies by their rules could not be between two
strange Princes of equal power, unless they should willingly agree to such an
order, because they have no superior nor ordinary Judge, but are supreme and
public persons, and therefore the judgment of Arms is necessary, because
such War against them cannot be bridled by Law, and by this and many other
cases War is lawful, though many mischeefes do stain it, for good does ensue
of it, and Princes by it obtain their rights, and rebels are reduced to
obedience, and peace accorded, and that whose end is good, is also good it
self, to which and to common equity without bloodshed, and these injuries of
war men do seldom attain. But when the Laws of War and Arms do rule, the
civil Laws of peace are silent, and of little or no force: As in the
Conquerors time, the Laws did seem to be silent, for in all the time of his
Reign, either his Sword was always drawn, or his hand was continually on the
Hilt, ready again to be drawn; and as Bacon, the Conqueror got by right of
conquest all the lands of the Realm into his own hands in demesne, taking from
every man all Estate, Term, property, and liberty of the same, except
Religious, and Church Lands, and the lands of Kent, and still as he gave any of
it out of his own hand, he reserved some retribution of rents or services, or
both to him, and to his Heirs, which reservation is that which is called Tenure
of land, in which reservation he had four serviceable Institutions suitable to
the state of a Conqueror.

1. Marriage of the Wards Male and Female. 2. Horse for service. 3. Homage and
Fealty,
And fourthly, Primer Seisin, Bacons uses f. 30. vide ibidem plura.

But Sir John Davis is of opinion, Davis 21. f. 41.
that though William the Conqueror made a more absolute and entire Conquest of
England, then Henry the second did of Ireland, yet he did not seize all, and
had not the actual possession of all the lands within the Realm of England
vested in him by the Conquest, yet he acknowledged that the book of Domesday
which is an exact description of all the Realm, was made in the time of the
Conqueror, and that by it appears, that the Conqueror had certain lands in
Demesne, which lands were in the hands of Edward the Confessor, and are
entitled Terrae Edwardi regis, and other lands which himself had seized upon
the Conquest, and are entitled terrae regis, and called them the ancient
Demesnes of the King, and of the Crown of England, but he makes no mention of
the lands which he conferred on the Normans, which without doubt were very
great, and whom by Manors as well as by Honors he made predominant in
England, as to Hugh Lupus the son of his Mother Lotte, and one Hoclewin a Noble
man of Normandy whom she had married, he gave the Earldome of Chester to hold
of him as freely by his sword, as he held the Crown of England; by virtue of
which Grant, the said Hugh ordained under him four Barons, B. Cr. f. 34.
such an honor as no Subject in England ever enjoyed the like: which also is
manifest by the Grant he made to Warren (a Norman of principal quality) of
the Castle of Shirburn in Norfolk, B. cr. f. 33.
which afterward he restored to the Heir, because he had never born Arms
against him, by which this consequence may probably be inferred, that
notwithstancting his universal Conquest, he had such a moderate respect to
those who were neither Actors, nor Opposites to his achievement of the Crown,
that though upon suspicious informations he had by Grants deprived them of
their estates, yet in consideration of their submissive homage and fealty he
graciously restored them.

But to the point in hand, upon this Conquest the ancient Laws did seem to be
silent, Co. l. 3 71. ad lectorem.
for he abrogated many of them, and in their stead brought in other Laws,
which Sir Edward Coke confesses, efficacissima ad regni pacem tuendam, were
effectual and forcible to maintain the peace of the Kingdom, commanding them
to be written in French, and also that all causes should be pleaded, and all
matters of form dispatched in French, thereby intending to make the Normans
Language as predominant as their persons, and therein intimating the Romans who
upon their Conquest of any Country as well as England introduced, and used
their Language in all matters of state, and Courts of Judicature, both which
are altered and changed by our Parliaments, as an ancient badge of conquests
and servitude.

So Edward the first made a Conquest of the Dominion of Wales, and changed
their Laws and Customs, as he has expressed in his Charter, as the Statute of
Rutland, whereas to their Laws and Customs he says, Quasdam illarum de
consilio procerum regni nostri de levimas, quasdam correximus, ac etiam quasdum
alias adjiciendas, and faciendas decrevimus, etc. Some of them by the advice of
the Nobles of our Kingdom we have abolished, some we have corrected also, some
we have decreed to add and make.

Optimi ducis est Scire, and vincer^, and cerdere prudenter tempori, Coke com.
f. 71. a. It is the part of an excellent Captain to know and to overcome, and
wisely to yield unto the time. Men must not fight only with Warlike Weapons
and Engines, but with the force of his wit and ingeny, for dolus, cunning and
policy is much used in military affairs, and stands in equal balance with
strength and might according to the poetical sentence.

Nil refert armis contingat palma, dolove,
Nam dolus, an virtus surit, quis in host requiret?
By might and slight to conquer yea, or no,
It is no matter for either in a foe,
Who does require,
Nay, often times prudent subtlety prevails more in such Warlike enterprises
then might and strength of hand, and therefore are Stratagems more commonly
more commodious then plain and equal encounters, which a complete General
will always practice upon a convenient occasion: as Vegetius prescribes, Boni
duces non aperto morte praelium, in quo est commune periculum, sed ex occulto
semper attentant, ut integris suis viribus quantum possint hosts interrimant,
certe vel terreant. Good Captains will not fight in open field, in which the
danger is common and equal, but will invade them unawares, that with all their
forces in what they can, they may either destroy the enemy, or otherwise put
them into a fear and fright. And therefore the Lacedominans when they over-came
the enemy by Stratagem, did sacrifice to Mars an Ox, but when by open strength
a Cock, of which Plutarch, gives the reason, that so they might accustom
their Leaders that they should not only, be valiant, but also by subtle
wiliness which is requisite in an Emperor, they should excel in Stratagems.
And which by the Law of God is more to be desired, for God commanded Joshua
Josh. 8.
to lie in ambush for the City of Aye behind it, and so did David when he was
to fight with the Philistims, Thou shall not go up, but fetch a compass behind
them, and come upon them over against the Mulberry Trees,

So it is a cunning policy in the besieged, that they pretend to abound in
those things which they most want. So the Romans when the Capital was besieged
by the French, and were pressed with the extreme necessity of famine, did cast
down loafes of bred among their enemies, Val. Max. l. 7. c. 4.
that they might seem to abound in provision, by which device the enemy was
induced by compact to leave the siege.

And so in such a siege, it is a commodious thing to a Captain to move in
treaty of agreement, and to make truce with the enemy for certain days, which
usually makes the enemy more negligent, so as he may the more easily get out
of their hands: By this way Sylla delivered himself twice from the enemy, and
by the same deceit Asdruball in Spain got out from the force of Claudius Nero,
who had besieged him, Match. l. 6. f. 89. vide ibidem plura.

Lib. II. MISCELLANEA, or an Hotch-pot. Or diverse scattered grounds concerning
the reasonable construction of the LAW.
SECT. I
RAtio est anima legis, Coke com. f. 394. b. Reason is the life of the Law; for
then we are said to know the Law, when we apprehend the reason of the Law, that
is, when we bring the reason of the Law to our own reason, that we may
perfectly understand in as our own, ibidem, and therefore we use to say in
argument, that reason will that such a thing be done, or that reason will not
that such a thing be done Noy max. f. 1. for as Ployd. f 34. our Law has
reasonable constructions in all things; As if I be bound to perform the
Covenants in such an Indenture, it shall be intended all the Covenants, or that
my Feoffees shall make an Estate, it shall be intended all my Feoffees.

Lex est summa ratio, Coke com. 97. b. the Law is the chiefest reason, that is
an artificial and legal reason, warranted by authority in Law, ibid. 62. a.
and therefore Littleton says, Semper quaere de dubiis quia per rations
pervenitur ad legitimam rationem. Always enquire of doubts, for by reason you
shall come to a lawful reason, for reason is radius divini luminis, and by the
reasoning and debating of grave learned men, the darkness of ignorance is
expelled, and by the light of legal reason the right is discerned, and
thereupon judgment given according to Law, which is the perfection of reason,
Coke com. f. 232. b. Nay, the Common Law it self is nothing but reason, which
is to be understood of an artificial perfection of reason gotten by long
study, observation, and experience, and not of every man's natural reasons: for
Nemo nascitur artifex, No man is born an Artist. This legal reason is summa
ratio: And therefore if all the reason that is dispersed into so many several
heads, were united into one, yet could he not make such a Law as the Law of
England is, because by many successions of ages, it has been fined and refined
by an infinite number of grave and learned men, and by long experince grown to
such a perfection, as the old rule may be verified, Neminen oportet esse
sapientiorem legibus: No man ought out of his own private person to be wiser
then the Law, which is the perfection of reason, Co. com. f. 97. b. And though
the Jurisdiction of the Court of Parliament, is so transcendent, that it
makes, enlarges, diminishes, repealeth, and reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts,
and Ordinances, concerning matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal,
Common, Civil, Martial, Maritine and the rest, Coke comm. f. 110. a. yet
cannot a Parliament confirm any thing which is against Law and reason: And
therefore if a Town has customs which are against Law and reason, and their
customs be confirmed by Parliament. Danby chief Justice in such case says, M
5. E. 4. f. 40. and 41. That such confirmation shall not extend to such
customs: For a thing used merely against Law and reason, is not custom,
notwithstanding the usage as the Law says, and therefore the Act of Parliament
which confirms their customs, is referred to that which is not, for they are
not customs, and therefore shall be void, Ployd. f. 399. b. vide ibidem plura.

Quod est contra rationem est illicium, Coke com. f. 97. b. what is contrary to
reason is unlawful. And therefore Tenant in Franck-marriage shall do fealty to
the Lord, before the 4th degree passed, for it should be inconvenient and
against reason, that a man shall be Tenant of an an Estate of an Inheritance to
another, and yet the Lord shall receive no manner of service of him, and
therefore he shall do fealty for all service, ibid.

And all positive Laws which are contrary to the Laws of nature, and the Law
of reason lose their force, and are no Laws at all. Such was that of the
Egyptians, to turn weomen to Merchandises and Commonwealth affairs, and to
keep men within doors.

And such was the Law of the Thracians, who accounted stealing very
commendable, and idleness an honest thing, Finch. Nom. l. 75.

Quod est inconveniens, and contra rationem non est permissum in lege,
Whatsoever is convenient and contrary to reason is not permitted in the Law,
Coke com. 178. a.

If a man be seized of lands in Fee-simple, and has issue two daughters, and
the eldest is married, and the Father gives parcel of the lands to the Baron
with his Daughter in Franck-marriage, and dies seized of the remnant, which
are of the greater value by the year, then those lands given in Frank-marriage:
In this case the Baron and the Feme shall have nothing for their pur-party of
the said remnant, unless they will put their lands given in Frank-marriage in
hotch pot, with their remnant of the land with the Sister: And if they will not
do so, then the younger may hold and occupy the same remainder, and take to her
the profits only, for if the other partner should have nothing of it is given
in Frank marriage, of this a thing would ensue an inconvenience, and a thing
against reason, which the Law will not suffer; and therefore if the Baron and
Feme will not put their lands in Frank-marriage, in hotch pot, they shall have
nothing of the remnant, because it shall be intended by the Law that she is
sufficiently advanced, to which advancement she agrees, and holds her self
content, Littleton ibidem.

Mutata legis ratione mutatar and lex, Coke l. 7. f. 7. The reason of the Law
being changed, the Law it self is changed.

As though by the Common Law a man cannot distrain for rent or service in the
night, 12 E. 3.17.11 H. 7.5. accord: yet for damage-feasant a man may distrain
in the night, for the necessity of the case, for otherwise peradventure he
shall not distrain at all for before the day they may be taken or strayed out
of the ground, 10 E. 3. f 37.

In the Statute of Winchester it is provided, that in Cities or great Villages
which are enclosed, the gates ought to be shut from the setting of the Sun, to
the Sun rising; and since that Statute, if in such Village, or City enclosed,
any murder or manslaughter be done in the day, or in the night, and the
Offender escape, such City, or Village shall be amerced, which Act changed the
reason of the Law, for at the common Law, if a man was slain in the night, and
the Offender escape, there it was not any default in the City and Village, but
now if they do not guard their Gates strongly, according to the Statute by
which the Offender escapes, then it is a default and negligence in them, 3 E.
3. tit. Coronae 290.

So if diverse commit a robbery by the Statute of 13 E. 3. those of the hundred
ought to apprehend all the Felons, and though they apprehend any of them that
is not sufficient to excuse them, for the words of the Act are, that they shall
answer for the bodies of the Offenders: but now by the Statute of 27 Eliz. c.
13. it is provided, that none shall have an action upon the said statute, if
not, that the party robbed so soon as he can, shall give notice of the said
felony to some of the Inhabitants of any Village, or Hamler next the place
where the robbery was done, and that if in their pursuit they take any of the
Offenders, that shall excuse them though they do not take all. See there in
that Statute the reason of the alteration.

Co. l. 6. f. 50. a. b. At the common Law a man that had once the benefit of
the Clergy, shall have it another time, and so in infinitum, which was remedied
by the Act of 4 H. 7. So as the burning in the hand was not to other purpose,
but to notify to the Judge whether he had had his Clergy before, or no, ibid.

So if one be attainted at the Common Law for forging false Deeds, the King
cannot pardon it, yet the King may pardon the corporal punishment in case of
forgery in the Star Chamber, because all Suites in the Star Chamber are but
informations, for the King, though the Suit be exhibited by the party, ibidem.

So before the Statute of 18 Eliz. c. 7. the King might in case of Indictment
of Man slaughter pardon the Imprisonment, 15 H. 7.9. but not in an appeal, but
after the Statute of 18 Eliz. by which it is provided, that after Clergy
allowed and burning in the hand, the Prisoner shall presently be enlarged and
delivered out of prison: It was resolved that that Act did extend as well to
the case of appeal, as to the case of Inditements, otherwise the party shall
lawfully be discharged of his punishment, and yet remain in perpetual prison,
ib. vide examen legum Angliae, f. 29.

Cessante ratione legis c^ssat lex, Coke com. f. 70. b. The reason of the Law
ceasing, the Law it self cease; As he that holds his land by Escuage, when
the King makes a Voyage royal into Scotland, to subdue the Scots, then he
that holds by the service of one Knights fee, ought to be with the King
conveniently arrayed for the War, for forty days, etc. yet needs he not go
with the King himself, if he will find another man, and this seems to be good
reason, for it may be he is languishing, so that he cannot go, nor ride.

Also an Abbot, or another man of religion, or a Feme-sole which hold by such
services, ought not go in proper person, Littleton ibidem. Quia multa, In jure
communi, propter rationabilem causam, omittenda sunt, for many things for a
reasonable cause are to be omitted.

If the King give lands to an Abbot, and his Successors to hold by Knights
service, this had been good, and shall do homage and fine a man, but there was
no wardship or releif, or other incident belonging thereunto: but if the Abbot
and his Heirs had conveyed the land to a natural man and his heirs, now the
wardship, releif, or other incident belonged of common right to the King. So if
the King give lands to a Mayor and Comminalty, and their successors to be
holden in Knights-service, the Patentee shall do no homage, neither shall there
be any wardship, or releif, only they shall find a man, but if they convey the
land to any natural man and his heirs, now marriage, homage, ward, releif, or
other incidents belong hereunto; for the reason of the Law being changed, the
Law its self is changed, and the immunity which was in respect of the body
politic, by conveyance over, cease, Coke ibid.

Qui rationem in omnibus quaerunt rationem subvertant: Theophrastus, Coke l. 2
f. 7.30. who do seek reason in all things, overthrow reason. As if a man make a
Lease of Indenture for life of lands in several Counties, and makes livery of
seisin in one County, and diverse days after he makes livery in the other
County, yet an entire rent shall issue out of the land in both Counties, and
yet the livery by which the Estate passed was made at several times, and
therefore it may be argued, that presently by the first livery the rent issued
out of it: But the Law shall not adjudge by parcels, in subversion of the
intent and agreement of the parties, but after all Acts are made in performance
of the original contract and agreement of the parties, the Law shall adjudge
upon all as done at one and the same time. So if a man make a Charter of
Feoffment with warranty, and deliver the Deed to the Feoffee, and after at
another time make livery secundum formam chartae: yet the Warranty is good, and
yet it may be objected, that when the Deed was delivered no estate passed to
which the warranty may be annexed, nor no estate was in the Feoffee by which
the Deed might enure; and so by nice construction upon the distinction of time
the warranty shall be subverted, but the Deed which comprehended the warranty
took effect presently by the delivery of the Deed before livery and seisin, and
therefore the sentence is true, that who do seek reason in all things subvert
reason, ibidem.

SECT II.
A Verbis legis non est recedendum, Coke l. 5. f. 118. b. we ought not to go
from the words of the Law, Edriches casc.

A. devises rent with distress to B. for the life of C. the heir leaseth the
land for life to D. the remainder to E. in see, the rent is behind in the life
of D. D. dies, C. dies, B. distraineth for the arrearages of E. in remainder,
and resolved that he shall be charged by the second branch of 32 H. 8. c. 37.
which gives a distress for the arrearages upon such lands out of which the
said rents were issuing in such manner and form, as if Cestuy que vie had been
living. And the Judges said, that they ought not to make any interpretation
against the express letter of the statute, for nothing can so express the
intent of the makers of the act, as their direct words, themselves, for Index
animi se^mo, and it shall be perilous to give scope to make construction in any
case against the express words, when the intent of the makers appears not to
the contrary, and when no inconvenience upon it shall arise, for we ought not
to go from the words of the Law, vide ibidem plura.

Coke l. 10 f. 105. a. b. If in an Assise so many of the Recognitors make
default, that there be not twelve, the Justices of Assise cannot award Tales de
circumstantibus; for though the Justices of Assise are named in the said Act of
35 H. 8. as well as the Justices of Nisi prius, yet insomuch as the said Act
does not give power to Justices of Assise, or Nisi prius, but where the trial
shall be by twelve men in any Writ of Habeas Corpora, or Distringas, with Nisi
prius, and it cannot be in an Assise, for Assisae capiamur in proprio Comitatu,
and can never be taken by Nisi prius in proprio commitatu, and no exposition
can be made against the express words, for that shall be viperina expositio,
quae corrodit vistera textus, a viperous exposition which should tear the
bowels of the Text, ibidem.

Coke l. 8. f. 1. 7. a. b. The better Expositors of all Letters Patents, and
Acts of Parliaments, are the Letters Patents and Acts of Parliament themselves
by construction and conference of all the parts of them together: for optima
Statuti interpretatrix est, omnibus particulis ejusdem inspectis, ipsum
Statutum, and Injustum est, nisi tota lege inspecta, una aliqua particula
proposita, judicare vel respondere. The best expounder of a statute is the
statute it self, all the parts of the same being looked into, and it is an
unjust thing, One particular being propounded, to judge and answer, unless the
whole Law be looked into, ibidem in Dr. Bonhams case.

Coke l. 10. f. 24. b The better exposition of the Charter of the King is upon
consideration of all the Charter to expound the Charter by the Charter it self,
and the Letters Patents in this case are the bowels of the Text, and therefore
all the parts of the Letters Patents should be considered, and every part of it
explained according to the true and genuine sense, for verba chartae regi aeque
portant suam expositionem, For the words of the Kings Charter do equally carry
their own exposition, ibid.

Divinatio non interpretatio est, quae omnino recedit a littera. Bac Max. f.
16. It is a divination, and not an interpretation which leaves the Letter.

As if I have a fee-farm Rent of ten shillings issuing out of White-acre, and I
reciting the same reservation, do grant to I. S. the rent of five shillings to
be received out of the aforesaid rent, and out of all my Lands and Tenements in
Dale, with clause of distress. Though there be an Attornment, nothing passes
out of my former rent, because for that it is against the words, and the
copulation of the words show the taking of them in another sense: but if I,
reciting that I seized of such a rent of ten shillings, do grant five shillings
to be received of the same rent, it is good enough without attornment, because
percipiendum de, to be received of, may well be taken for parcella de, parcel
of, without violence of the words, but if it had been of the aforesaid rent, it
had been void, vide ibidem.

But as Ployden says, f. 162. Exception.
Non est regula quin fallit, There is no Rule but fails, and as has been
said, the more reasonable and equitable rule is always to be preferred when
they encounter and meet in opposition: as contrary to this is the rule of the
Civilians, Leges non verbis, sed rebus esse impositas. And Coke l. 11. 34. b.
Qui haeret in littera haeret in cortice. Laws are not imposed upon words, but
upon things, and he that sticks in the letter, sticks in the bark or
outside of the matter, and not attaineth to the inside of the sense.

As by the statute of 27 E. 3. c. 1. It was provided, that he that draws one
to the Court of Rome in a plea which was determined in the court of the King,
or of other things whereof judgment is given in the Court of the King, etc. to
defeat the judgments given in the Court of the King shall have day containing
the space of two months, etc. and if they come not within the mean time in
proper person, they shall be put out of protection, etc. and the question was
moved in 30. E. 3. 11. If the Defendant appears, pleads and be condemned
whether he shall have the Judgment of a Praemunire given by the said Act, but
since, in 39. E. 3. f. 7. Judgment was given against the Bishop of Chicester,
who appeared, although the letter of the Statute is, that if they come not at
the same day, etc. they shall be put out of protection, and therefore a multo
fortiori, when the defendant in such case appears, pleads, and shall be
found guilty, he shall have Judgment upon the said Statute, 44. E. 3. 36. and
yet it is out of the words of the Act, which speak only of a default, for Qui
haeret in littera, etc.

So by the Statute of 25. E 3. the killing of his Master is adjudged Treason,
yet by construction is it extended to his Mistress as it is holden in 19. H.
6. 47.

And whereas by the Statute of 25. H. 8. house burners were deprived of Clergy,
and in the Statute of 5. and 6. E. 6 there was no mention of that offense in
particular, but only that the said Statute should stand in force concerning
the trial of offenders in another County, yet by another sentence in the said
Act, that every clause, and sentence in the said Act touching Clergy, etc.
shall from henceforth concerning such offenses, remain and be in full strength
and virtue, it was adjudged that the said clause should extend to all the Act
of 25. H. 8. because by that construction such an heinous offense should not
pass in effect without capital impunity, and that such Malefactors shall not
be encouraged to burn not only Houses but Villages, and Cities.

And it is frequent in our Books, that penal Statutes have been taken by
intendement, beside the letter, to the end that they shall take effect,
according to the express intention of the makers of the Act, to remedy the
mischeife in advancement of Justice, and suppression of heinous crimes, Coke
ibidem, vide ibidem plura. And though it is a Maxim that penal Laws are to
be taken, it may be conceived of such as concern inferior, and not heinous
offenses.

Coke Com. 365. b. A man seized of Lands in fee, levied a fine to the use of
himself for life, and after to the use of his wife, and of the heir males of
her body, by him begotten for her Jointure, und after he and his wife levied a
fine, and suffered a common recovery, the husband and wife dyed, and the issue
male entered by force of the Statute, of 11. H. 7. And it was holden that the
entry of the issue male was lawful, and yet this case was out of the letter of
the Statute, for she never levied a fine being sole, or with any other after
taken husband, but is by her self with the husband that made the loynture, but
this case being in the same mischeife, is therefore within the remedy of the
Statute, by the intendement of the makers of the same, to avoid the
dis-inherison of heirs who were provided for by the said Ioynture, and
especially by the husband himself that made the Ioynture, which as it was said
was a stronger case, then any set down in the Statute, for Qui haeret in
littera, vide ibidem plura.

Coke com. 241. a. If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Mesne does
grant to the Tenant to acquit him against the Lord, and his heirs, the Lord
dies, his wife has the signiory assigned to her for the Dower, and
distraineth the tenant, albeit the grant of Mesne was to acquit him against the
Lord and his heirs only, yet because she continued the State of her husband,
and the reversion remained in the heir, this grant of the acquittall did
extend to his wife, for Qui haeret.

Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba ipsa
fienda est, Coke l. 7. f. 24. a. So often as there is no ambiguity, nor doubt
in the words, there no exposition against the express words is to be made: If
A. by Deed grants rent out of the Manor of D. to have and receive it, to him
and his heirs, and further grants by the same Deed, that if the rent be
behind that the grant shall distraine in the Manor of S. both the Manors are
charged, the one with the rent, the other with the distress for the rent, the
one issues out of the Land, and the other is to be taken upon the Land, for
here a rent is granted expressly to be issuing out of the Manor of D. and the
parties have expressly limited out of which Land the rent shall issue, and in
which the distress shall be taken, and the Law shall not make any exposition
against the express words, and intention of the parties, when it can stand
with the rule of Law, for where there is no ambiguity in the words, there is no
exposition to be made contrary to the express words, ibidem, in Calvin's case.

Exception.
Yet as Mr. Ploydon says, f. 18. b. The words of the Law of nature, of the Law
of the Realm, and the Law of God will yield, and give place to some acts and
things done against the words of the same Laws, and that is when they are
infringed to avoid greater inconveniences, or for necessity, or by conpulsion.

For inconvenience: It is a rule in the Law, that factum unius alteri nocere
non debet, no man's deed ought to hurt another, but there is another maxim that
it is better to suffer a mischeife, then an inconvenience which is to be
preferred before it, Coke com. 152. b. As if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant,
and the Tenant holds of the Mesne by five shillings, and the Mesne holds
over by the service of twelve pence, if the Lord purchases the Tenancy, the
Mesnalty is extinct, because when the Lord has the Tenancy, he holds of the
Lord next parament to him, and if he should hold of him that was Mesne, then he
should hold the same Tenancy immediately of two Lords, which should be
inconvenient, and the Law will that we rather suffer a mischeife then an
inconvenience, Littleton, so as the rule is regularly true, res inter alios
acta, alteri nocere non debet, what thing is acted among some must not hurt an
other, but with this exception, unless an inconvenience should follow, Coke
ibidem.

So it is a Maxim in the Law, that a warranty of a collateral Ancestor if it
descend upon him shall bar the heir, as if A. disseise B. of Land, and sells
the Land, and the Alienee obtains a warranty of the Ancestor collateral to
the Disseissee after whose death the warranty discendeth upon the Disseissee,
the Disseissee by descent of the warranty upon him is barred for ever in Law,
Doctor and Student, l. 2. c. 501.

but though they all offended in obtaining of the said collateral warranty,
yet such an offense is not to be considered in the Law, for the inconvenience,
that thereupon might ensue, for it is holden for an inconvenience, as Coke
says, Com. 152 b. That any of the Maxims of the Law should be broken, though
a private man suffer loss, for that by infringing of a Maxim, not only a
general prejudice to many, but in the end a public incertainty and confusion
would follow, and lex citius tolerar^ vult privatum damnum, quam publicum
malum, and Law will sooner suffer a private injury, then a public evil,
neither in such cases is there any remedy to be had in the Chancery, or in
conscience, for it was resolved in Beverlys case, Coke l. 4. f. 124. a. That
against an express maxim of the common Law, no man shall have releife in
Chancery, for it should be in subversion of a principle, or ground of Law,
Doctor and Student, ibidem, vide ibidem plura.

So Ployd. 18. b. It is against the Law of nature, and the Law of reason to
beat the person of any man in any cases, yet when a man is mad, and of non
sanae memoriae, and does much evil, a man and his Parents also may take him,
bind him, and beat him with rods, and may justify it, 22. Ass. Pl. 56. And by
the Statute of Mar. it is generally prohibited, that none shall drive any
distress out of one County into another, and yet it is adjudged that if one
hold Land of a Manor in another County, that the Lord may distraine and drive
the distress of the Land holden of the Manor in the County where the Manor
is, and that is in avoidance of the inconvenience, for it should be a great
damage to the Lord, if he should not drive the distress to his own manor,
for the avoidance of which the Law is not offended, although the words of the
Law be broken, M. 1. H. 6. Pl. f. 3.

A man privileged in some Court is sued in London, and the Action is
actionable no where else, yet upon a supersedeas, the Court shall surcease,
Finch. Nomot.

And we see also that necessity in all Laws shall be a good excuse, and that
all Laws give place to necessity, according to the common proverb, necessitas
non habet legem, necessity has no Law,

And therefore in a precipe quod reddat, the tenant shall excuse his default by
a flood of water, and yet every default is abhorred in our Law, because it is a
contempt of the Court, but because by peril of death he could not come, the
necessity of the chance in such case, in regard there was no default in him,
shall excuse him, M. 38. H. 6. 11.

So the words of the Law of God may be infringed by necessity without offense
to God, and therefore in the old Law, by the Law of God it was prohibited that
none should eat of the show bread, and yet it appears that David for
necessity of famine did eat the said bread, and yet he did not break the Law,
as our Savior Christ declares in the Gospel, so the Apostles of our Savior
did pull the ears of Corn of other persons, and did eat them, and that for
necessity of famine, Ploydon f. 19 a.

So if a man steal victuals to satisfy his present hunger, this is no
Felony, nor Larceny, Stanford, because it is for the conservation of life.

And if diverse be in danger of drowning by the casting away of some Boats, or
Barge, and one of them get to some Planke, or on the Beats side to keep him
above water, and another to save his life, thrust him from it whereby he is
drowned, this is neither se defendendo, nor by misadventure, but is
justifiable, Bac. Max. f. 25.

So if diverse Felons be in a Goal, and the Goal by casualty is set on fire,
whereby the prisoners get forth, this is no escape nor breach of prison, 15. H.
7. 2. by Keble.

So if a man have right to Land, and does not make his claim for fear of
force, the Law allows him continual claim, which shall be as beneficial to
him as any entry, 12. H. 4. 20. Lit.

So where Baron and Feme commit a Felony, the Feme can neither be principal
nor accessory, because the Law intends her to have no will, in regard of the
obedience, and subjection she owes to her husband, Stanf. 26 2. E. 3. 1^0.
Cor. Fitz.

So one reason why Ambassadors are used to be excused of practices against the
State where they reside, (unless it be in point of conspiracy which is against
the Law of Nations, and Society) is because it does not appear whether they
have it in Mandatis, and then they are excused by necessity of obedience,
Bacon. Max f. 26.

So if I be tenant for years of an house, and it by the Act of God, or a
stranger be over-throwne by great tempest, or by sudden floods, or invasion of
Enemies* in all these cases I am excused in wast, 42. E. 3. 6. 19. E. 3. by
Fitz. wast.

Ployd. f. 9. b. Any man in his defense, or a Champion upon trial may kill
others, and that is for the necessity of the salvation of his life in his
defense, and by the common Custom of the Realm the Hostelers shall be charged
with the Goods of the Guests lossed, and taken out of their houses; yet if
their houses be broken by the Kings enemies, and the goods of the guests
lessened, or embezelled, they shall not be charged with them, because they
could not resist them, ibidem,

So for necessity the funeral expenses shall be first paid by the Executors,
Broh. executor 162.

So a man may milk a Cow that he has by return irrepleaible, and that is for
necessity, Finch. Nom. I. S. 35.

Davis 122. 1. Nihil magis est justum quam quod necessarium est: Nothing is
more just then what is necessary; So the King by his Prerogative for the
necessary charges of the Crown may decree Imposts and Impositions payable upon
Merchandises, contrary to the petition of right and property.

Though a man may not be punished for an act he does by necessity of obedience;
yet if the act be unlawful, he is not the less to be blamed, or if it be not
necessitas culpabilis: As those which releived Sir John Oldcastle with
provision, were not punished because they did it pro timore mortis, for fear
of death. Steel in the C. of M. H.

Coke com. l. 5. f. 40. b. Necessitas saepenumero vincit communem legem.
Necessity for the most part overcommeth the common Law.

As if two Joynt-tenants be of land to them, and the heirs of one of them,
they shall not join in a Writ of Right: But two Joint tenants and the heirs of
one of them in a Writ of Advowson, shall join in a Writ of right of Advowson:
And the reason of the diversity is, because that in the first case they have
several means and remedies, as it is agreed in 46 E. 3. 21. But in the other
case if Tenant for life shall not join with him that has the fee, neither the
one nor the other shall have any remedy, and therefore in this case necessity
overcomes the Law, ibidem.

Coke l. 10 f. 61. a. Illud quod alias licitum non est, necessitas facit
licitum, and necessitas inducit privilegium quod jure privatur, Bract. f. 247.
that which is not otherwise lawful necessity makes lawful, and necessity
introduces a privilege which is deprived by Law.

As if a Bishop grants an Annuity-out of his Bishopric that is restrained by
the Statute of 1 Eliz, because it is a diminution of its revenues, and
depauperation of its successors: But if a Bishop grant an Office to one only,
that is not restrained by the statute of 1 Eliz. because such Grants are for
necessity; for if the Bishop should not have power to grant such Offices of
service, and necessity for the life of the Grantees, no sufficient persous
would serve them in such Offices, or at the least would not discharge it with
such alacrity if they had no estate for their lives, but that their estates did
depend upon uncertains, as the death or translation of the Bishop.

Bacon Max. f 17. Privilegium non valet contra rempublicam. The necessity of
privilege prevails not against the Common wealth, for public necessity is
greater then private: and therefore in all cases, if the act be against the
Commonwealth, necessity excuses it. And accordingly the Law imposes on every
Subject that he prefer the urgent service of his Prince and Country, before the
safety of his life. As in a tempest, if those in a Ship throw over their Goods
they are not answerable: But if upon command they have Ordinance and ammunition
to relieve any of the Kings Towns, they cannot justify the throwing of them
over, ibidem.

So in the case of Husband and Wife, if they join in committing Treason, the
necessity of obedience does not excuse the wife as in felony, because it is
against the Commonwealth, 13 H 8.16. by Shelly.

So if a fire be taken in a street, I may justify the pulling down of the Wall
or House of another man's to save the row from the spreading of the fire, 12 H.
10 by Brook, 22 Assise pl. 66 But if I be assailed in my House, City, or Town,
and distressed, and to save my life, set fire on my house, which takes hold
upon other houses adjoining, I am subject to their action of the case, because
I cannot rescue my own life by any thing which is against the Common wealth,
but if it had been but a private trespass, as the going over another ground,
or the breaking of his enclosure when I am pursued for the safety of my life,
it is justifiable, 6 E. 4. 7.

But necessitas culpabilis excuses not, as to kill one se defendendo is not
matter of justification, because quarrels are presumed not to grow without some
wrong, and the Law supposes the party not to be without some malice, and
therefore it puts him to sue out his pardon of course, and punishes him
with the loss of his Goods, Bacon Max. f 28.

Compulsion also is a good excuse in our Law, against the words of the Law; And
therefore whatsoever I do by duresse is not my act but may be avoided according
to the rule.

Actus, me invito factus, non est meus actus. An act done against my will is
not my act, as when I am compelled for fear of imprisonment, to make a Bond or
a Deed, such a fear suffices to avoid a Bond or a Deed, Coke com 253 b for the
Law has a special regard to the safety and liberty of man.

If one make me swear to surrender my estate unto him, and I do so afterward,
this is a Disseisin to me, 14 Ass. pl. 20.

One imprisoned until he makes an obligation at another place, and after he
does so when he is at large, it is by duresse of imprisonment, 21 E. 4. 28.

If I threaten you in one County to make an Obligation of twenty pounds, and
after I find you in another County, and demand the Obligation, the Obligation
is avoidable, because it has respect to the first threatening, Kelleway, f. 52.
b. vide ibidem, 2 marriage procured by duresse to be avoidable.

If a stranger threaten A. to make a Deed to B. A. shall avoid the Deed by such
threatening, Coke l. 2. f 9. B. as well as if B. himself had made the
threatening, but it is no plea without making the Obligee party to the plea.

If the hand of any man be drawn by compulsion, and the weapon in his hand
kills another, it shall not be felony, Ployd. f. 18. a.

Modus, and conventio vincunt legem, Coke com. f. H. 41 b. Manner and Covenant
overcome the Law.

As to every Tenant for life, or for years by Law, are incident three kinds of
Estovers: House-boot which is twofold, aedificandi and ardendi. Plow-boot,
estoverium arandi, and lastly Hay-boot, that is, estoverium claudendi, and
these Estovers must be reasonable, and therefore are they ca^^ed rationabilia
estoveria: and those the Lessee may take upon the land without any assignment,
unless held or restrained by a special Covenant, for Modus and conventio
vincunt legem, ibidem.

Coke l. 2. f. 73. b. Though Recoveries and Fines do extinguish all other
Rights and Titles, yet the Covenants and Conditions shall be saved, for modus,
etc. vide ibidem plura, in Cromwels case.

Coke l. 7. f. 28. a. In Maunds case, a rent granted to one, and his Assigns,
pro consilio impendendo, it may be assigned over by the express words of the
Grant, which grants it to him and his Assigns, though otherwise it could
not, for modus, etc.

The Law does not determine to whom the tender shall be made, when the parties
themselves expressly agree to whom it shall be made, Die. As it is resolved in
Goodales case, l. 5. f. 97. a. That the payment to the Assignee had not been
good, because the Heirs, Executors, and Administrators are expressly named, and
not Assigns: as Littleton upon a Mortgage upon condition that he pay to the
Feoffee, or his Heirs, the tender ought to be made to the Heir, and not to the
Executors, because the Heir was expressly named.

Glanvil says, Generaliter est verum, quod conventio vincit legem: and Magna
Charta, conventio legi dorogat. An agreement overcomes and barreth the Law,
and Ployd. f. 29. a. the manner and form of the Gift alters the Law.

As if houses let for years be overthrown by tempests and wind, the Law will
excuse the Lessor in wast, but if he had covenanted to repair them, and leave
them well repaired at the end of the term, an action of Covenant will lie
against them.

A Termor did covenant and agree pro se and executoribus, to repair and
maintain the houses, and to find principal Timber, which is decayed by the
default of him, or his Executors, and dies, and the house is burnt in default
of the Executors; and it was adjudged that a Writ of Covenant in this case will
lie against the Executors, and that damages should be recovered of the Goods of
the Testator, and yet this happened by casualty, Dyer 324. but the reason is
Modus, etc, Fulb. l. 2 f. 52.

And Dyer 33. The Lessee of a Meadow did covenant and agree to keep and
maintain the banks in good repair, and the said banks were drowned, or
overflowen by high water or sudden flood, yet the Lessee is bound to repair
and maintain them because of his Covenant, but according to the opinion of
Fitz. and Shelley, because the decay of the banks were the act of God, he ought
to have convenient time to repair them.

If I be bond to I. S. to entermarry with such a Daughter before such a day,
and before the day often tender my self to the Daughter of the Obligee to marry
her, and she refuses, yet I have forfeited my Obligation, Perk. f. 146. b.
vide ibidem plura.

Sheep are letten, and the Lessee covenanteth to render the poles at the end of
the term; if they dye of Murren, he shall answer for them, 40 E. 3. 2.

Et sic interpretari, and concordare leges legibus est optimus interpretandi
modus. And so to expound and to make Laws to agree together, is the best
manner of expounding, is the general rule given by Sir Edward Coke, when the
grounds and authorities of the Law seem to be at difference and variance
between themselves, Coke l. 8. f. 169. a. and which Mr. Ployden also declares,
that Maxims by reason ought to be conferred and compared the one against the
other, although they do not vary: or by reason ought to be discussed, what
thing is more near to the Maxim, or the mean between the Maxims and what not,
Ployd. f 29 a.

Verba fortius acciptuntur contra proferentem; Bac. Max. f. 9. words are to be
taken strongest against the Speaker, which rule as he says, is drawn out of
the depth of reason, for first it makes a man watchful in his own business,
and grants. And secondly, it is the Author of much quiet and certainty, because
it favors conveyances executed, taking them beneficially for the Grantees
and Possessors, as also because it makes an end of many doubts concerning the
construction of words, for if the intention of the parties should only be
picked out, every Judge would have a several sense: whereas by this rule they
may know the Law more certainly.

And this rule has a special force in Grants, according to the ground,
Quaelibet concessio for^issime contra danatorem interpretanda est, Coke com.
183. a. As if lands be letten, and a rent granted, the general intendment is,
that an estate for life passes, but if the Habendum limit the same for years,
or for life, or at will, the habendum does qualify the general intendment of
the Premises, and the reason is, because every man's grant shall be taken by
construction of Law most forcible against himself, and the reason thereof given
by the Civilians is, because the Grantor might have expressed his meaning in
more full, large, and manifest words; and therefore when the Grant is
uncertain, and the words of the Grant ambiguous, the Grant must be taken most
strongly against the Grantor.

As if a man grant an Annuity out of certain land, and he has no land at the
time of the Grant, yet the Grant shall charge his person, T. 9. H. 6. 12. by
Babington.

And if a Deed of a Grant be good in parcels, and for parcels not, that which
is for the advantage of the Grantee shall be taken to be good. As if a man
grants unto me an annuity, provided that it shall not charge his person, the
Proviso is void and the Grant good, 20 E. 4 8. by Townsend, 14 H. 4. 30. by
Hank.

And if an annuity be granted pro consilio impendendo, though the Grantee be
well skilled in diverse professions of art, yet counsel shall be given in that
faculty only, which was intended at the time of the Grant, 4. 1. E. 3. 6.

If the King grant to a man that he and his Heirs shall be quit of Tax for the
lands which they have, this is a good Grant, though there be no Tax at the time
of the Grant, 38 H. 6. 10. And so is the Law of Tenths and fifteens, ibidem.

Ployd. f. 29. a. If a man makes a Lease for life, and after the decease of
Tenant for life, that the lands redibus to A. B. in fee, it is held a good
remainder, because it is held for a principle that the Livery of every one
shall be taken more strong against him, 18 E. 3. f. 28.

If a man give land to one, and haeredibus, it shall be a Fee-simple without
the word suis; and though he does not give him a Fee-simple expressly, yet every
man's livery shall be taken strongest against him, Ployd f. 18 b.a.

If I make a lease for years upon condition, that one month after he shall
have fee, he shall have it after the month accordingly, for the thing shall
pass according to the convention more strong against the Donor, Ployd ibidem.
So if I make a lease to two upon condition that if one does dye within seven
years, that then after the death of the other it shall remain to a stranger in
fee, that remainder is good, for the reason of the condition to give the estate
to privies, or strangers, is all one, in regard that he had first given an
estate, to which the condition may be annexed, for the livery and limitation
shall be taken strongest against him that made it, ibidem.

If I give land to one, and filio suo primogenito, and he has no Son at the
time of the gift, and after he has a Son, that son shall have the land by way
of remainder, and yet the remainder was not out of the Lessor, neither did it
vest at the time of livery, but the Law construeth the livery and limitation
more strong against the Lessor, P. 17 E. 3. f. 29. Ployd. vide ibidem plura.

If two Tenants in Common grant a rent of ten shillings, this is several, and
the Grantees shall have twenty shillings: But if they make a Lease and reserve
ten shillings, they shall have only ten shillings between them.

So an Obligation to pay ten shillings at the feast of our Lord God, it is no
plea to say that he did pay it, but he must show at what time, or else it will
be taken that he paid it after the feast, for every act shall be taken more
strictly against him that made it, Noy. Max. f. 15. 2 E. 3. p. M f. 140 b. and
161. b.

A general pardon ought to be taken more beneficially for the Subject against
the King, 37 H. 8. f. 21. Coke l. 4. Vaughans case.

If I. S. submit himself to arbitrament of all Actions, and Suites between
him, and I D. and I. N. it shall be intended collective of joint Actions, and
distributive of several Actions also, because the words shall be taken
stronger against him that speaks, 2. R. 3. 18. 21. H. 7. 29.

If I grant 10 l. rent to Baron and Feme, and if the Baron dye, the Feme shall
have three pound rent, it shall be strongest taken against me the grantor, for
three pounds addition to the ten, 8. Ass. Pl. 10.

So if I sow all my Land with Corn, and let it for years, the Corn passes
to the Lessee, if I except it not: So if I have a free Warren in my own Land,
and let my Land for life, not mentioning the Warren, yet the Lessee by
implication shall have the Warren discharged, and extracted during the Lease,
8. A. 7 32. H. 6.

If I. give Lands to I. S. and his heirs males, this is a good Fee-simple and
the words, males, is void, Bac. Max. f. 12. vide ibidem plura.

Yet this rule also fails, when another which the Law holds worthier comes
in place, and which is of more equity, and humanity.

It is a rule in the Civil Law, valiant eo modo quo valere possunt, and at the
Common Law, Benignae faciendae sunt interpretationes chartarum propter
simplicitatem laicorum ut res magis valeat, quam pereat, Coke com. f. 30 b. The
interpretations of Deeds, and charters because of the simplicity of the people
are favorably to be made, that the thing may rather stand and subsist, then
fall and perish, and let all things stand by the same means they may stand.

And therefore if I give Lands to I. S. and his heirs, rendering five pounds
yearly to I. D. and his heirs, this implies a condition to me that am the
grantor, Littleton, yet were it a stronger exposition against me, to say that
the limitation shall be void, and the Feoffment absolute.

So if a man make a lease to A. for years, and after by his Deed, the Lessor,
voluit quod haberet, and teneret terram pro termino vitae, wills that he
should have, and hold the Land for term of his life, this is adjudged by the
word volo to be a good confirmation for life, Coke com f. 301. b. Though it
were stronger to say those words are void, because they are not proper words of
confirmation.

So if the Disseisor grants a rent to the Disseisee, and he by his Deed
grants it over, and after does re-enter, in this case one, and the same words
do amount to a grant, and a confirmation.

So if the Disseisor makes a Lease for life, or in tail, the remainder to the
Disseisse in fee, and the Disseissor by his Deed grants over the remainder
and the particular tenant atturneth, the Disseissee shall not enter upon the
tenant for life, or in tail, for then he should avoid his own grant, which
amounts to a grant of the estates, and a confirmation also, ne pereat Coke
ibidem 302.

So if A, enfeoffeth another upon condition, that he and his heirs shall
render to a stranger and his heirs, a yearly rent of twenty shillings
although this reservation be merely void, for that no estate moves from the
stranger, and that he is not party to the Deed, and therefore can be no rent,
yet shall it be taken for a penalty, or for an annual sum in gross, so as if
they will not pay it according to the form of the Indenture, they shall loose
the Land by the entry of the Feoffor and his heirs, which is to be observed
that words in a condition shall be taken out of their proper sense, ut res magis
valeat, quam pereat, Coke com. 213. a.

If one gives Lands to two, and the heirs of their two bodies engendered, the
Donees have joint estates for life, and several inheritances, for if one of
the Donees has issue and dies, the other shall have all by survivor during
his life, but if the Survivor has issue and dies, then the issue of the one
shall have the one moiety, and the issue of the other, the other moiety of the
Land, and shall hold the Land together in common, and the cause why they shall
have several inheritances is, for that they cannot by any possibility have an
heir between them engendered, and when the grant is impossible to take effect
by the letter, there the Law shall-make such const^uction as the gift by
possibility may take effect, Co. 83. b.

If Lessor of an house for twenty years makes a Lease for two years rendering
rent, and after grants all his term, and interest to another, if the Lessee
atturne, the Reversion shall pass, and if no Atturnement be had, yet the
ieterest in the Reversion shall pass, so as the Grantee shall have the Land
after the two years determined, for the grant of one shall not be adjudged
void, if to any intent it may take effect, Coke l. 4. f. 53. b.

If a Termor grant his Term, Habendum immediate post mortem suam, the Grantee
shall have it presently, ut res magis valeat, quam periat, Noy. Max. f. 16. So
if a man make a Lease for ten years, and after for twenty years, the latter
shall be a good Lease for ten years after the first is expired, Ibidem.

A release of all Actions against a Prior, and Covent shall be construed, all
Actions against the Prior, for an Action cannot be brought against the Covent.

Coke l. 1. f. 76. Gardener and Bredons case. Tenant for life of Land, the
Remainder in tail, Tenant for life, and he in the first Remainder in tail,
join in a fine, sur conusans de droite come ceo, etc. to another in fee, who
granted a Rent charge of forty pounds to tenant, for life, it was agreed by all
the Justices that the fine levied by tenant for life, and him in the first
Remainder was no discontinuance of the first Remainder in tail, nor of the
second, because every of them did only give that they may lawfully give, and no
forfeiture in the case be cause the law which abhors all wrong, shall conster
it first to be the grant of him in the Remainder in tail, and then the grant
of Tenant for life, ut res magis valeat, quam pereat, but if a Feoffment had
been made by word, then it is the surrender of Tenant for life, and the
Feoffment of him in the Remainder, Ibidem.

Coke l. 1. f. 45 a. In 2. R. 3. 4. it is holden by Starky, and others, that if
the Patent of the King may be taken to two intents good, then it shall be taken
more beneficially for the King, but if it may be taken to one intent good, and
to another intent void, then it shall be taken to that intent to make the grant
good, and not to that intent to make it void, ut res magis valeat, etc. vide
ibidem plura, in Alton Woods case.

Coke l. 5. f. 8. a. In Cessavit where the Tenure is alleged by Homage,
Fealty, and Rent, and the Demandant counts, that in doing the said services
he did cease, it shall be taken by construction, to such services only, of
which a man may cease 6. H. 7. 7. as of Rent, and not of Homage, and Fealty,
and the reason of this is, ne res destruatur, least the thing should perish,
vide ibidem plura.

Ployd. f. 197. b. Anthony Brown Justice said, that it is an office of a Judge
to expound the thing, ut res magis valeat, quam pereat, and to make all parts
of the Deed, and intention of the parties also to agree together.

Coke l. 4. f. 4. If I grant to you, that you and your heirs shall distraine
for a rent of forty shillings, to wit, within my Manor of S. that by
construction of Law, shall amount to a grant of a Rent, out of my Manor of S.
for if it shall not amount to a grant of a rent, the grant would be of little
force or effect, if the Grantee shall not have but a nude distress, and no
rent in him, for then he shall never have an Assize of it, and for that reason
it has been often times ruled, that it shall amount to the grant of a Rent by
construction of Law, ut res magis valeat, 3. E. 3. 12. etc.

Benedicta est expositio, quando res redimitur a destructione, Coke l. 4. f.
25. b. Blessed is the exposition, when the thing is redeemed from destruction,
every Manor which consists of Frank-tenements, and Copyholders has two
several Courts, the Court of Frank-tenements, wherein the Suitors are Judges,
and is called the Court Baron, and the Court of Copyholders, wherein the Lord,
or Steward of the Manor are Judges, and if all the Tenements escheate, or the
Lord release the tenure, and service of his Frank-tenements, yet the Lord may
hold his Court of Copy-holds and make admittance, and grant of them, ne res
destruatur, it is a ground in Law, verba debent intelligi ut aliquid operetur,
Coke l. 8. f. 24, words must so be understood, that they must work some thing,
and not be idle and frivolous, in Edward Foxes case, wherein it was resolved,
that a demise and grant upon consideration of fifty pound for ninty nine years
amounted to a bargain, and sale for the said years, for when a Frank tenement
or tenement passes by Deed indented, and enrolled, it is not necessary to have
those precise words of bargain, and sale, but words which amount to so much
are sufficient, as if a man covenant in consideration of money to stand seized
to the use of his Son in fee, if the Deed be enrolled it is a good bargain and
sale, and yet there are no words of a bargain and sale, but amount to as much
Coke l. 7. f. 40. So if a man, for money alien, and grant Land to one and his
heirs, or in tail, or for life by Deed indented, and enrolled, it shall amount
to a bargain and sale, and the Land shall pass without any livery and seisin.

It is a ground in Law, verba sunt accipienda cum effectu, Coke l. 4. f. 51. a.
b. Words are to be taken with effect, as if a man has in the right of his wife
any estate in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, or for term of life, etc. the Baron shall
have all the arrerages as well before marriage, as after the death of his wife
by the Statute of 10. H. 6. 11. for though by the Common Law, the Executors,
etc. of the wife might have an Action of debt for the arrea^ages before the
coverture, yet when as the Statute gives to the Baron an Action of debt for
the arrearages, the words shall be taken with effect, and shall be construed
for the arreages due before.

It is a rule in the Law, that verba restringuntur ad habilitatem personae vel
ad aptitudinem rei, Bac. Max. f. 14. General words are to be restrained to the
condition of the person, or fitness of the thing, as if a man grant to another
common, inter metas and bundas villa de Dale, and part of the vill is his
several, and part of his wast, common, the Grantee shall not have common in
the several, yet this is the strongest exposition against the Grantor, so by
all the precedent rules, and grounds, it appears that the rule that words
shall be taken more strongly against the Grantor, does yield to them as the
more worthy and equitable, vide ibidem plura, where this rule with its
differences and exceptions is amply and accurately discussed.

The grant of a common person shall be taken more strong against him, but the
grant of the King shall be taken more strong against a stranger, and more
favorable for him, Ployd. f. 243. a.

As a Manor granted by the King, the advowson shall not pass without special
words, 2. H. 7. 8. So the King may grant a thing in action, Ibidem. And if the
King grant a Manor or Land without limitation of any estate, the grant is void
for the incetrainty, and the Grantee shall not be tenant, at the will of the
Lord Davis, Rep f 45. vide ibidem plura.

This rule has no place in Acts of Parliament, Verdicts, Judgments, or
Devise, Bacon. f. Max. 21.

Expressio eorum q^ae tacit insunt nihil operatur, Coke l. 4. f. 73. b. The
expression of those things, which are covertly employed works nothing, for the
expression of a clause which the Law implies operateth nothing, as in 30. Ass.
Pl. 8. A Lease is made to two for term of their lives, and diutius eorum
viventi, and after they made partition, and the one dies, and he in reversion
enters, and his entry adjudged lawful, notwithstanding the said words, and
diutius eorum viventi, for without those so much was covertly employed by the
Law, 17 E. 3. 7. Hulls case, whereupon Coke gives this observation, that in
case of lease for life, it is more beneficial for the Lessor to have the
jointure severed, then to have it continue, but otherwise it is in a Lease for
years, for if a man makes a Lease for years to two, with a proviso that if
the Lessees dye within the term, that the term shall cease, the Lessees make
partition, or one alieneth his part, and dies, the Lessee shall not enter into
his part that is dead, but the Grantee, or the Executors of the Lessee shall

So if the King makes a Lease for years rendering rent, without limiting of
any place, or to whose hands it shall be paid, the Lessor may by the Law pay it
either to the receipt of the Exchequer of the King, or to the hands of the
Bailiffs, or receivors of the King, whom the King has authorized to such
purpose, and therefore the usual and special limitation of the payment of
rent, at the receipt of the Exchequer, etc. does import no more then the Law
will imply, and therefore nihil operatur, Ibidem.

Coke l. 8. f. 26. b. If the King reciting that another holds the Manor of
D. for life, grants the said Manor to B. for his life, in this case the Law
implies that the second grant shall begin, and take effect after the
determination of the first grant and therefore there is no incertainty in the
grant, though it be not expressed, so for the expression of a clause which the
Law implies, operateth nothing, ibidem, in the Earl of Rutlands case.

Coke l. 10. f. 39. a. By the Statute of 32. H 8. Tenant in tail may make a
Lease for three lives, or ten years, and by the Statute of 4. H. 2. c. 24. he
may levy a fine, and by the Statute of 32. H. 8. c. 36. by it bar the issues,
and therefore if a man make a gift in tail, and further grant that he may
lease for life, or for years, or levy a fine with proclamations to bar the
Issues, nihil operatur, for when one makes a tacit gift in tail, he gives
those incidents to it, Ibidem.

And therefore are such conditions, and expressions called by Sir Francis
Bacon, clausula vel dipositio inutilis, an unprofitable clause, and
disposition, and to no use, because the act or the words do express no more,
then the Law by intendment would have supplied, and that therefore the
doubling, and iterating of that and no more, then which the conceit of the Law
does in a sort prevent, and preoccupate is reputed nugation.

And therefore if a man devise Land at this day to that they must work some
thing, and not be idle and frivolous, in Edward Foxes case, wherein it was his
Son and heir it is void, because the disposition of the Law did cast the same
upon the heir by descent, 32. H. 8. Gourd. 39. Ber.

And yet if it be by Knights service Land, and the heir within age, if he take
by the devise, he shall have two parts of the profits to his own use, and the
guardian shall have the benefit but of the third, Brook devise. 41.

But if a man devise Lands to his two Daughters, havnig no Sons, then the
devise is good, because he does alter the disposition of the Law, for by the
Law they shall take in coparcenary, but by the devise they all take jointly,
Dyer 12. Bacon. f. 74.75. vide ibidem plura.

Yet Littleton says it is well done to put in such clauses to declare, and
express to the lay people which are not learned in the Law, what the Law is in
such cases, Co. lib. 4. f. 73. b.

Expresum facit cessare tacitum, Coke com. f. 183. b. A matter, or thing
expressed causes that to cease or to be of no effect, which by intendement of
Law was employed, and not expressed.

As if one grant Lands to two without expressing what estate they shall have,
they have a joint estate for term of their lives, but if a Lease be made to
two, Habendum to the one for life, the remainder to the other for life, this
does alter the general intendement of the promises, so if a Lease be made to
two Habendum the one moiety to one, and the other moiety to the other, the
Habendum does make them tenants in common, for that which is expressed, does
make that which is secretly intended to cease, Ibidem, for as he in another
case says, if the general words should stand without any qualification, then
the special words should be altogether vain, Coke l. 8. f. 154. in Edward
Althans case, quod vide.

Coke Com. f. 210. a. b. If the Feoffee in mortgage before the day of payment
make his Executors and (...) dye, and the heir enter into the Land as he
ought, etc. the Feoffor ought to pay the moneys to the Executor, because the
Executors as he says, l. 5. f. 99. a. represent the person of the Testator for
all Goods, and Chattels, but if the condition upon the Mortgage be to pay the
Mortgagee, or his heirs the money, etc., and before the day of payment, the
Mortgagee dies, the Feoffor cannot pay the money to the Mortgagee, but the
payment ought to be made to the heir, for expressum, etc. and the Law shall
never seek out a person when the parties themselves have appointed one, for
designatio unius est exclusio alterius, the appointment of one is the exclusion
of the other. But if the condition be to pay the money to the Feoffee, his
Heirs, or Executors, then the Feoffor has election to pay it either to the
Heir or Executor, Coke com. ibidem.

It is a sure ground in the Law, expressum facit cessare tacitum, Davis, 45. in
the case of Tenures, and therefore the express reservation in Letters Patents
excluded the reservations, and implication in Law, as if the King in his
Letters Patents reserveth no tenure, it shall be a capite tenure, but if
another tenure be expressed that shall prevail, as Coke l. 6. f. 6. where in a
Patent the words of the Tenendum were, Tenendum de nobis per servittum unius
rosae pro omnibus servitij: and whereas it was objected that no tenure can be
without fealty, yet in this case fealty, that is an incident to all services,
shall be admitted to stand with the words, and that then the tenure so expressly
reserved was so complete, that it might well exclude the Knights service
tenure, which otherwise the Law would have employed, Davis Ibidem, where it was
also resolved that although the express tenure be void, yet no tenure by
implication of Law, shall arise against the express tenure of reservation.

And so in the case of a void Habendum, which stands upon the same reason, it
was adjudged in B.R. between Higs and Cross, 33, and 34 Eliz. which in
Bucklers case is cited by Coke l. 2. f. 55. Tenant for life makes a Lease for
years, and after grants the reversion to A. Habendum from a day to come for
life, after the day the Lessor for years atturneth* in that case the Habendum
is void, and that void Habendum makes void the whole Grant, and excluded the
implication of Law in the Premises, and no Estate shall pass by implication of
Law in the Premises, against the express limitation of the party in the
Habendum, Davis ibidem.

A man makes a Lease rendering rent, and does not say to whom the rent shall be
paid, this by implication shall be to the Lessor and his Heirs: But if the
words be to the Lessor, the Heir shall not have it, Dyer 45. 12 Eliz. 3. etc.
So as an Estate by implication shall be controlled by an express limitation.

But if I grant to another a rent which I have in fee, the grant shall be for
life, but if I say further Habendum after the death of I. S. there all shall be
void, Ployd. 52.156.

So if the King grants lands by Letters Patens, Habendum from a day to come,
there the whole grant is made void by the Habendum, coke l. 5. f. 93. Barwicks
case.

He in the reversion for life gtanteth his Estate, Habendum after Michaelmas,
and after Michaelmas the Tenant attornes, yet resolved the grant is void,
though if there had been no Habendum, it had been good by the Premises of the
Deed, coke f. 2. c. 55. Davis f. 26.27.

Coke l. 7 f. 41. b If the Father by Deed indented, in consideration of a
hundred pounds paid by his son, covenanteth to be seized to the use of his son,
there no use shall be raised to the son if the Deed be enrolled by the statute
of 26 H 8. c. 10. for that it is in the nature of a bargain and sale, and that
which is expressed shall cause that which is implied to cease. ibid.

Coke l. 4. f. 8. a. in Nokes case, It was resolved by the whole Court, that an
express Covenant does qualify the generality of the Covenant in Law, and
restrains it by the mutual assent of both parties, which shall extend to no
further then the express Covenant. Quia clausula generalis non refertur ad
expressa, because a general clause employed in Law, has no reference to an
express and particular Covenant in deed.

Yet Quadam tacita habentur pro expressis: As if the Father, Tenant by
Knights-service, enfeoff his son and heir within age, it is not necessary to
aver by collusion, for it is apparent, Ployd. Winbichs case, and 27 H. 8.
Dacres case, 33 H. 6. 14 etc. So if I covenant to stand seized to the use of my
Wife, Son, or Cousin, that shall well raise a use without any express words of
consideration, for sufficient consideration appears, because paternall love
and affection appear.

If in a Lease the express Covenant is, that the Lessee and his Executors shall
repair the house demised: This shall not excuse the Assignee, who by an
employed Covenant in Law adherent to the Estate, is tied to repair it, Coke l.

A Warranty in Law is not distroyed by an express Warranty; as if a man lease
for life rendering rent, and further binds himself and heirs to Warranty,
there the express Warranty shall not take the Warranty in Law, but he may
choose which he pleases, Coke l. 4. f. 81. a. vide ibidem plura.

Lex neminem cogit ad impossibilia, Coke com. f. 231. b. and l. 5. f. 75. a.
The Law compels no man to impossibility.

If a Deed remain in one Court, it may be pleaded in another Court, without
showing forth, for the Law does not compel any one to impossibilities, ibidem.

If a Lease be made, upon condition, that the Lessee dwell upon the lands
demised, the lease being for forty years, and he dies at the end of ten years,
yet the Executor shall enjoy the land, because the condition is become
impossible. Et nemo tenetur ad impossibilia. Dod. No man is bound to
impossibilities, 37, and 38 Eliz.

If a man make a Lease for years of woods, and it is covenanted that the Lessee
shall leave the woods in as good plight as it was at the time of the Lease
made; and during the term the woods fell down by sudden tempest, the Lessor
shall not have an action of Covenant, because it is impossible the Lessee shall
perform it, Perk. f. 142. b. Coke l. 1. f. 98. a.

Coke com. f. 206. a. If the condition of a Bond be impossible at the time of
making the Condition, the Condition is void because impossible, and the Bond
good: As if a man be bound in an Obligation, etc. with Condition, that if the
Obligor does go from the Church of S. Peter at Westminster, to the Church of S.
Peter at Rome within three hours, that then the Obligation shall be void; the
Condition is void, and impossible, and the obligation stands good.

And so it is of a Feoffment upon condition that the Feoffee shall go as is
aforesaid, the Feoffment is absolute, and the Condition void, because it is a
Condition subsequent, for there is a precedent Condition, and a subsequent
Condition. If a Condition subsequent to a Feoffment in fee be impossible, the
state of the Feoffee is absolute: but if the Condition precedent be impossible,
no state or interest grows thereupon. As if a man make a Lease for life, upon
Condition that if the Lessee go to Rome as aforesaid, that then he shall have
fee, the Condition precedent is, and therefore no Fee-simple follows, Coke
ibid.

The statute appoints that in re-disseisin the Sheriff shall go to the place,
and there shall take the Inquest. If then the re-disseisin is of several lands
in diverse Counties, so as he cannot be at all at once, it is sufficient to take
the Inquest at one of them, because of the impossibility, 40 Ass. 23.

If a man be bound by recognizance, or Bond, with Condition that he shall
appear the next term in such a Court, and before the day, the Conuzee, or the
Conuzor dies, the Obligation is saved. And in all cases where a condition of a
Bond or Recognizance, etc. is possible at the time of making of the Condition,
and before the same can be performed, the Condition becomes impossible by the
act of God, or of the Law, or of the Obligee, there the Obligation is saved

But otherwise in case of a Feoffment, as if a man makes a Feoffment, on
condition that if the Feoffor shall appear in such a Court the next term, that
then it may be lawful for the Feoffor to re-enter, and presently after the
Feoffor dies, the estate of the Feoffee is become absolute: And the reason of
this diversity is, because the estate of the land is executed and settled in the
Feoffees, and cannot be returned back but by matter subsequent, viz. The
performance of the Condition: But a Bond or Recognizance is a thing in action,
and executory, and whereof no advantage can be taken until there is a default
in the Obligor, Coke com. f. 260. a. vide ibid. plura.

Vltima prioribus derogant, Reg. I. C.

Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, Coke l. 11 f. 62. 63. The last
Laws derogate and abrogate the first, which are contrary.

Though the wisdom of the Judges and sages of the Law, have all wages
suppressed subtle, and new inventions in derogation of the Common Law, and will
not change the Law that has been used, 38 E. 3. 1 so as if it be not altered
by Parliament it remains still; yet as Cato said, Vix ulla lex fieri potest
que omnibus commoda sit: And as Sir Edward Coke, rerum progressui ostendunt
multa quae initio praecaveri and provideri non possint, It is impossible for
any Law to be, which may be commodious to all, and the progress and proceeding
of things show, and present many things which at the first could neither be
presaged nor prevented: From whence it proceeds, that no Law can be so
absolute, but that may in some particulars prove defective, and amendable, and
yet as Ployd. f. 369. that Law is reasonable which provideth for the multitude,
though some especial persons lose by it, which has been the occasional cause
of the alteration of the Common Law in many points.

Yet the Common Law has no controller but the high Court of Parliament, and
the wisdom and custom of this State has always had such regard and respect
to the Common law, that they would by no means change it, but by the great
Council of Parliament, wherein all things are transacted not only by the
prudency of the Prince, but by the chiefest and sagest Senators of the whole
Nation, and that not upon the consultation and declaration of one or two
hundred, but as Fortescue by more, and three hundred elect men, by which number
the Senate of Rome was ruled, who always have been cautious, and vigilant not
to introduce any foreign Law, as Sir John Davis in his Preface observes: That
in the Parliament of Merton when motion was made by the Clergy, that Children
borne before marriage might be adjudged legitimate. The great and wise men of
England made answer with one voice, Nolumus leges Angliae mutari. And again in
11 R. 2. when a new course of proceeding in criminal Causes, according to the
form of the Civil Law was propounded in that unruly Parliament. Answer was
made by all the States, That the Realm of England had not been in former times,
nor hereafter should be ruled by the Civil Law: And therefore for the most
part Magna Charta, which is the foundation of other Acts of Parliament, and
other ancient Statutes, are but the affirmations and declarations of the Common
Law; And that whereas the words of the Statute are general, the construction
thereof shall be according to the reason of the Common Law, Coke com. 81 b. and
282. b.

So cautious have our grave and prudent Senators been, not to subject the
common law to any mutations, unless for necessary and impulsive causes
reasonably arising from the public mischeifs and inconveniences which happen
in the Commonweal, through the injurious abuses of the ancient and former
Laws, upon which grounds other Laws were constituted for the remedy of such
mischeifs and inconveniences, which did abrogate the former, from whence grew
this ground, Leges postertores priores abrogant.

To illustrate this by examples.

It is regularly true, that Statutes in the affirmative shall not take away
precedent acts affirmative, unless it be in special cases.

As the Statute of Wills, 32. and 34 H. 8. does not take away a custom to
devise lands as often has been adjudged. So it is enacted, that the King shall
have Wreckum Maris per totum regnum; yet this shall not take the wreck from one
who has wreck by prescription, unless the prescription had been per totam
Angliam, Coke l 5. in Sir Henry Constables case.

So the Statute of 21 H. 8. c. 13. enacteth, that if one ^ath a Benefice of the
value of eight pounds, and takes another, and is inducted, the first is void;
does not take away the Law which was before; that if one who had a Benefice,
with cure, did accept another, the first is void, only that in that case no
lapse shall incur without notice, Coke l. 4. in Hollands case, and in this
point is the Statute nothing else but a confirmation and affirmance of the Law
before, ibid.

So the Statute of 23 Eliz. that inflicteth the penalty of twenty pounds by the
month, has not taken away the Statute of 1 Eliz. which has given the
forfeiture of twelve pence for every Sunday and Holy Day, but both shall be
paid, the twelve pence only to the poor, and the twenty pounds to the Queen,
and therefore does the Statute of 3 Jac. c. 4. give a more speedy remedy for
the said twelve pence, yet shall they not be punished but upon one of them.

Yet when the latter affirmative Statute is contrary to the precedent Statute
in matter, the former abrogateth the latter, as by the Statute of 33 H 8. c. 23
it is enacted, that if any person being examined before the Council of the
King, or three of them, shall confess any Treason, misprision of Treason, or
Murder, or be to them vehemently suspected, he shall be tried in any County
where the King pleases by his Commission, and after by the Statute of 1 and 2
P. M. c. 10. it was enacted, That all trialls hereafter to be had for any
Treason, shall be had according to the course of the Common Law, and not
otherwise: That latter act, and though the latter words had not been, had
abrogated the first, because they were contrary in matter; But that does not
abrogate the Statute of 34 H. 8. c 2. of the trial of Treasons beyond the
Seas, notwithstanding the words are in the negative, because it was not
contrary in matter, for it was not triable by the Common Law, Dyer 132. Stanf.
89. 90. So the Statute of 1 E. 6. of Chanteries being in the affirmative, does
alter the Statute of H. 2. c. 41. which gives a Cessavit cantaria also in the
affirmative, for the one is contrary to the other in matter, vide plura, Coke
l. 9. f. 63. a.

But whenever Laws are contrary in quality, that is, where the first is a
material or express affirmative, and the latter an express or material
negative, and when the first is a material or express negative, and latter
affirmative, there the latter Law does abrogate the former. As the Statute of 5
E. c, 4. which prohibiteth every person to use or exercise any craft, mystery,
or occupation, unless he has been an Apprentice for seven years, does alter
the Common Law, by which any one may in any manner work in any lawful Trade,
without any service precedent: for without an Act of Parliament no man can be
restrained to work in any Trade, Coke l 11. f. 54. a. in the Tailors of
Ipsiches case.

And to conclude to this Argument with the general ground given by Sir Edward
Coke l. 1. 11. f. 67. a. That for that Acts of Parliament are established with
such gravity, and wisdom, and the universal consent of all the Realm, they
ought not through any strained construction out of the general, and ambiguous
words of a subsequent Act be abrogated, as where the Statute of 16. R 23 c. 5.
enacteth, that all the Lands and Tenements, of any one attainted in a
Praemunire shall be forfeited to the King, in the case of one Prudgion, Pasch.
21. Eliz. being tenant in tail of certain Lands and Tenements, who was
attainted of a Praemunire, the question before all the Judges of England was,
whether the estate tail was a bar, or no, and it was resolved by all the
Justices, that those general words had not repealed the Statute de donis
conditionalibus, but that only he shall forfeite them for his life, and that
the issue in tail should inherit, vide ibidem plura.

Lex non patetur fractiones, and divisiones Statuum, Coke l. 1. f 87. a. The
Law will not suffer fractions, and divisions of estates.

As if a man make a lease for life, upon condition that if he does not pay
twenty pounds, that another shall have the Land, that future limitation is
void, Ployd. f. 25. c. M. 18. H. 8. 3. And if after the Statute of 1. R. 3. and
before the Statute of 27. H. 8. A man had made a Feoffment to the use of one
for life, or in tail, and after to the use of another for life, or en-taile,
and after to the use of another in fee, they in the Remainder might not make a
Feoffment, nor grant their estates by the general words of that act, for then
there should be a fraction, and division of estates, which the Law will not
suffer, vide ibidem plura, in Corbets case.

Coke l. 3. f. 32. b. If a man be seized of a Manor to which a Leet waife, or
stray, or any other hereditament which is not of any annual value is
appendant, or appurtenant, there by a devise of the Manor with the
appurtenances, those shall pass as incidents to the Manor, for in that the
Statute enableth him by express words to devise the Manor, by consequence it
enableth him to devise the Manor with all incidents, and appendants to it, and
it was never the meaning, or the intention of the makers of the Statute, that
when the Devisor has power to devise the principal, that he shall not have
power to devise it that was incident, and appendant to it, but that the Manor,
etc. shall be dismembered and fractions made of things, which by legal
prescription have been united, and annexed together, Ibidem, for the Law will
not permit such factions in Estates.

Coke com. f. 147. b. If a man has a rentcharge issuing out of certain Land,
and he purchases any part of the Land to him and his heirs, the whole
rentcharge is extinct, because the rent is entire, and against common right,
and issuing out of every part of the Land, and therefore by purchase of part is
extinct in the whole, and cannot be apportioned.

Coke com. 309. b. If the reversion be granted of three acres, and the Lessee
agree to the said grant for one acre this is good for all three, and so it is
of an Attornement in Law, if the reversion of three acres be granted, and the
Lessee surrender one of the Acres to the Grantee, this Attornement shall be
good for the whole Reversion of the three Acres according to the grant.

Apices juris non sunt jura, Coke com. f. 2 83. b. and nimia subtilitas
reprobatur in Lege, Coke l. 4. 4^. b. The Law of England respects the effect
and substance of the matter, and not every nicity of form or circumstance, and
too much subtility is reproved in the Law.

As it was alleged for an exception in the Enditement, that the Enditement was
taken before I. S. Coronatore in comitatu praedicto, and not de comitatu
praedicto, or comitatus praedicti and every Coroner of one County, is a Coroner
in every County of England, but not of every County, but it was not allowed,
for the Coroner in the County, etc. shall in all reasonable intendement be
taken for the Coroner of the County, and so it is used in the Writ de
coronatore elegendo, ibidem vide plura.

Coke l. 5. f. 120. 122. It is a rule in Law, that Enditements ought to be
certain, but there are three manner of certainties, the first is to a common
intent, and that suffices in Bars, which are to defend the party and excuse
him, the second is to a general intent which is required in Inditements,
Counts, and Replications, etc. for that they are to excuse or charge the party;
the third is a certain intent to every particular, and this certainty is
rejected in Law, for nimia subtilitas in jure reprobatur, and such certainty
confounds certainty, vide ibidem plura, in Longs case.

Coke l. 8. f 56. b. Whereas the Queen granted a Manor to B. and his heirs,
to have and to hold the said Manor to B. and his assigns, omitting the words
heirs, in the Habe^dum, it was resolved in Auditor Kings case, by the whole
Court, that the fee of the Manor passed by the Premises of the Letters
Patents, and that the Habendum was void, for the Premises were certain enough
to pass the Fee-simple, and the omission of his heirs in the Habendum, shall
not subvert it was certain in the Premises, for the intention of the Queen
appears to pass the Fee-simple by the Premises, and her grant ought to be
interpreted, in intentionem, and non in deceptionem Regis, and when as a
litterall and strict construction, is made to make his grant void, contrary to
the intention of the King, it sounds in deceit of the King, and it is a
great indignity to him, for nicities in Law to make his Charter under the great
Seal of England of things, which may be lawfully granted, void, and of none
effect, for Apices juris non sunt jura, and it was said by Coke Lord chief
Justice, and affirmed by the other Justices, that of latter times such nice and
strict constructions have been strayned by some, of Letters Patents to subvert
the force and effect of them, that many good Letters Patents are drawn into
question, to the dishonor of the King, and disinherison of the Subject,
contrary to the true reason and ancient rule of Law, for as it is said, Co. l.
4. f. 5. b. Simplicitas legibus amica.

Coke l. 10. f. 125. b. In the Mayor, etc. of Lynns case, it is said, that
until these latter times it was never read in any of our Books, that any body
politic or corporate, did endeavor, or attempt by any suite to avoid any of
their Leases, Grants, and Conveyances made to them, by the misnaming of the
very name of the Corporation, but God forbid that their Leases and Grants
should be defeated for every curious and nice misnomer, vide ibidem plura, in
the Mayor, etc. of Linns case, where it was adjudged that a bond made to the
Mayor and Burgesses of Linn was good, though therein was omitted the Borough
of Kings Linn which was their name given them by their Patent, because it was
idem re, and sensu, though not idem litteris and Syllabis.

Fortior, and potentior est dispositio Legis, quam hominis, Coke com f. 224. a.
The disposition of the Law is of more force, and stronger then the disposition
of man.

If a man grant to another by his deed, the office of a Parkship of a Park, to
have and occupy the said office for term of life, he has an estate in that
office upon condition in Law, to wit, that the Parker shall well and lawfully
keep the said Park, and shall do that which to such office appertains to
do, or otherwise it shall be well lawful to the Grantor and his heirs to
oust him, and grant it to another, and such a condition in Law annexed to a
thing is as strong as if the condition had been put in wrting, Littleton,
ibidem.

If a man has title to enter upon tenant in tail, if he makes a claim to
the land, then is the estate tail defeated, for this claim is an entry made
by him, and is of the same effect in Law, and if the tenant in tail after such
claim continues his occupation, that is a disseisin to him that made such
claim, and as often as his adversary does wrong and injury to him, so often
may he bring a Writ of Trespass, or a Quare clausum fregit, for the wrong and
disseisin, Littleton, whereby it appears that continual claim, which is an
entry in Law, is as strong as an entry in deed, Coke com. f. 236. b. Coke com.
f. 338. a. A surrender in Law in some cases is of greater force, then a
surrender in deed, as if a man makes a lease for years to begin at Michaelmas
next, this future interest cannot be surrendered, because there is no reversion
wherein it may be drowned, that by a surrender in Law, it may be drowned, as if
the Lessee before Michaelmas take a new Lease for years, either to begin
presently or at Michaelmas, this is a surrender in Law of the former lease, and
in this case Fortior, and aequior est dispositio legis, quam hominis, Coke l.
10. f. 67. b. 37. H. 6. 16. And if the Lessees be a corporation aggregated of
many, so as they cannot make an express surrender without deed in writing
under their seal, yet they can by act in Law surrender their term without any
writing: So if the Prior by consent of the Covent makes a Lease for years
rendering rent, if the prior by Deed expressly releaseth the rent, and dies, the
Successor shall recover the arrerages, but if the Prior oust the Lessee, and
dies, that discharge in Law shall discharge the rent, which incurreth during
the ouster against the Successor, 34. H. 6. 21. Coke l. 10. f. 67. If an heir
within age assign more dower then he ought to have done, yet the guardian in
right may have a Writ of Admeasurement of dower, but if he grant over his
estate, his Assignee which is guardian in fair shall not have the Writ, because
it was a thing in action given to the Lessor, F. N. B. 149. 9.

Coke l. 6. 38. b. When a Deed is requisite, ex institutione legis, it ought to
be shown, though it be collateral, and convey nothing, as a Mayor and
Comminalty, Tenant, Pur autre vie, if he attorne to the Grantee in reversion,
the Law requires that it be done by deed, and that in pleading, the deed of
Attornement be shown, but when it is requisite ex provisione hominis, not as
when a man makes a Lease for years of Land to A. upon condition, that he
shall not assign it over, but by deed only, and not by word, in this case, ex
provisione hominis, the Assignement ought to be by deed, but because ex
institutione legis, the Deed is not necessary to the Assignee, he may plead the
Assignement without showing of the Deed, and in quo minus by the fermor of the
King, he ought to allege that he is a fermor of the King to enable him to sue
there, but he need not show it to the Court, because a collateral action,
ibidem. So the Collector shall not show it, 22. H. 6. 42. neither shall the
Sub-Collector show it, 21. E. 4. 50. And the Devisor shall not show the
Testament, for it appertains to the Executor, 4. Ass. 20.

One Parcener may have a Quare impedit against another, if she be disturbed of
her presentment by turn, so cannont Joyn-tenants, or tenants in common, F. N.
B. 34 I.

For equality of partition among Coparceners, a rent granted shall be a
Fee-simple without the word heirs, Coke. com. f. 10. a.

Coke com. 102. a. Homage ancestrell is a special Warranty in Law, and the
Lands generally, which the Lord has at the time of the Voucher, shall be
liable to execution in value, whether he has them by descent, or purchase, but
in the case of an express warranty, the heir shall be charged only with such
Lands, as he has by descent from the same Ancestor, so in this case, Firmior
and potentior est operatio legis quam dispositio hominis.

Lease upon condition, that if it happen that the Lessee make any wast in, or
upon the Premises, it shall be lawful for the Lessor to re-enter, and the
Lessee suffers the house to fall in default of covering and reparations. Dyer
and Wash said, that the Lessor might re-enter for such wast is punishable by
the statute of Gloucester, for destructionem facere in domibus, Dyer 281. b.
and so it is if he suffer wast to be done by a stranger, Doct. Stud. l. 2. c.
4. yet if the Tenant had been bound in an Obligation that he shall do no wast,
he shall not forfeit his Bond by the wast of a stranger, for greater is the
operation of the Law, etc.

A man is seized of three Manors of equal value, and takes a wife, and she
takes one entire Manor for her Dower, which is charged with a rent, she shall
hold it charged; otherwise it is if she had recovered her Dower by a Writ of
Dower, and had had a third part of each assigned to her.

Inutilis labor, and sine fructu non est effectus legis. Non licet, quod
dispendio licet. Sapiens incipit a fine. Et lex non praecipit in utilia, Coke
com. f. 127. b. The Law commands no vain, chargeable, and unprofitable
things. As a Villain by the Law shall not have an appeal of Mayhem against his
Lord, for in an appeal the Mayhem man shall only recover damages; and if the
Villain in this case recovereth damages against his Lord, and thereupon has
execution, the Lord may take it that the Villain has in execution from the
Villain, and so the recovery void, and inutilis labor stultus, and unprofitable
labor, is foolish and idle, which the Law prescribes not.

Coke com. f. 197. a. Tenants in Common of an Hawk and an Horse, shall join in
Assise, for otherwise they would be without remedy, for one of them cannot make
his plaint in an Assise of the Moiety of an Hawk, or Horse, because the Law
will never enforce a man to demand that which he cannot recover, as the Moiety
of an Hawk, or an Horse, or any other entire thing; for Lex neminem cogit ad
vana, and in utilia.

Coke com. f. 319. b. If a Lease be made for term of life, the remainder to
another in tail, the remainder over to the right Heirs of the Tenant for life,
and Tenant for life grants his remainder in fee to another by his Deed, the
remainder shall presently pass without any Attornment, for none can atturn but
himself, and it were in vain that he should atturn upon his own Grant, for quod
vanum est lex non requirit.

Coke l. 5. 84. a. Where a man is in custody of the Sheriff by process of Law,
and after another Writ is delivered to him to take the body of him who is in
custody, presently he is in his custody by force of the second Writ by judgment
of Law, although he make not an actual arrest of him, for to what purpose
shall he be arrested of him who is and was before in his custody, for the Law
prescribes no fruitless things.

Actus legis nemini facit injuriam, Coke com. 178. a The Act of Law does injury
to none. As if the land out of which a rentcharge is granted, be recovered by
an elder Title, and thereby the rentcharge is voided, yet the Grantee shall
have a Writ of Annuity, because the rentcharge is avoided by course of Law. So
if Tenant for another man's life, grant a rentcharge by Deed to one for one and
twenty years, Cestuy que use dies, the rentcharge is determined, yet may the
Grantee have during the years a Writ of Annuity for the arrearages incurred,
after the death of Cestuy que use, because the rentcharge did determine by the
act of God and course in Law, which wrong no man. ibid. Coke l. 5. f. 87. a. If
the Defendant in debt dies in execution, the Plaintiff shall have a new
execution by Elegit, or Fieir facias, because otherwise the Plaintiff should
lose his debt without any default in him, and the act of God, and the act in
Law will not prejudice any one.

Trewgrijard being a Burgess of the Parliament, who was taken upon an Exigent
post capias, and yet upon his Writ of privilege of Parliament the Sheriff let
him go at large, for the King, and the Realm has an interest in the body of
every Subject, and the Commonwealth shall be preferred, yet the party of the
Parliament may be taken in execution again, after the Plaintiff shall not be
prejudiced in his execution by the act of Law which does no man wrong, neither
is the Sheriff chargeable because his Office consists chiefly in the execution
and service of writs, and is sworn to do it, Dyer 60.

Lex plus respicit acta sine verbis, quam verba sine actis, Coke l. 3. f. 26.
The Law respects more acts without words, then words without acts.

As at the Common Law, if lands be given to Baron and Feme in tail, or in fee,
and the Baron dies, there the Feme cannot divest the Frank-Tenement out of her
by any verbal waiver, or disagreement in pais; as if before any entry made by
her, she says, that she waiveth, and altogether disagreeth to the said state,
and that she never will take, or accept of it, yet the Frank-tenement remains
in her, and she may enter when she pleases, and waive it in Court of Record,
for the Law more respects Acts without words, then words without Acts; and
therefore if she enters and takes the profits, although she say nothing, it
is a good agreement in Law. And so it is adjudged in Mich. 34 E. 1. Avowry 232.
That if a man take a distress for one thing, yet when he comes in Court of
Record, he may make an Avowry for what thing he pleases: a multo fortiori,
when a Frank-tenement is vested in him, it cannot be divested by nude words in
pais, and with it accords 17 E, 3. 6. 17. Where the Baron alieneth his lands
and retaketh the estate to him and his wife in tail, the Baron dies, the Lord
of whom the land was holden by Knights-service, supposing that the Baron died
sole seized, by word assigned Dower to the Feme which she accepts: yet was it
adjudged that that refusal of the estate of inheritance, and acceptance of her
Dower in pais shall not divest the Frank-tenement out of her.

So 13 Ric. 2. Joynt-tenancy, a Charter of Feoffment was made to four, and
seisin delivered to three in the name of all, and after the Seisin delivered,
the fourth comes and vieweth the Deed, and says by word that he will have
nothing in the Land, and it was adjudged that that agreement by word in pais,
shall not divest the Frank-tenement out of him, and Thorp, 35 Ed. 3. Disclaimor
said, that in such a case the Tenement remained in all until a disagreement in
Court of Record.

So if there be Lord and Tenant by Deed, enfeoffeth the Lord and a stranger,
and makes Livery to the stranger in the name of both, if the Lord by word
disagreeth to the estate, it is nothing worth, but if he enter into the Land
generally, and take the profits, that amounts to an agreement to the
Feoffment: but if he enter into the Land, and distrain for his Seignory, that
act amounts to a disagreement of the Feoffment, and shall divest the Frank
tenement out of him, 10 E. 4. 12. by all the Justices.

But if Lands be given to Baron and Feme, and after by the Statute of 32 H 8.
the Baron alieneth the Land to the use of him and his heirs, and after
devises it to his wife for life, the wife enters claiming by word the estate
for life, this is a good agreement to the estate for life, and a good
disagreement to the estate of inheritance, Dyer 351. b.

And if A. makes an Obligation to B. and deliver it to C. to the use of B.
this is presently the Deed of A. But if he offers it to B and he refuses it
in pais, by it the Obligation shall lose his force, Dyer 167.

The same Law is of the gift of goods and chattels, and if the goods be
delivered to the use of the Donee, the goods were in him presently, but he may
refuse them in pais, and by it the property shall be determined, ibidem.

SECT. III
INclusio unius est exclusio alterius. Coke l. 11. f. 50. a. b The inclusion of
one thing is the exclusion of another; As when an act of Parliament gives a
power and interest to one certain person, by that express designation of one,
all others are excluded, although such a statute be in the affirmative: As
where the statute of 31 E. 3. c. 12. it was provided, that error in the
Exchequer shall be corrected and amended before the Chancellor and Treasurer,
and therefore it could not be corrected before any other; and the general Rule
is put, that when any thing is to be done before any person certain, by any
statute, it cannot be done before any other, and yet the statute of 31 E. 3. is
in the affirmative, Ployd. 106. b. in Stradlings case.

So whereas by the statute of 8 H. 6. c. 9. forcible Entry is designed to the
Justice of Peace to make restitution, by it others be excluded, though the
statute be in the affirmative, and therefore neither Justices of Oyer or
Terminor, or of Jail-delivery, etc. shall do it, Dallisan 3 Eliz vide ibid.
plura.

And this is true in all acts, which are the introduction of a novel Law, as
the above said acts are; but where acts of Parliaments are no introductions of
a new Law, it is otherwise. So the act of 35 Eliz. does not exclude those to
whom the Forfeitures are limited by the act of 23 Eliz, because by it they are
not given to a new person, but to the same person, to wit the Queen, and is but
an act of addition to give more speedy remedy. As the statute of W. 2. c. 9. in
a Writ of Mesne, gives more speedy process, and in the end fore-judger:
whereas the process at the Common Law was but Distress infinite, yet the
Plaintiff may take which process he will, either at the Common Law, or upon the
statute, because they are both in the affirmative, Coke l. 11. f. 64. a.

And also in many cases the designation of a novell person in a latter act of
Parliament, shall not exclude another person that was authorized to do the same
thing by an act precedent; As by the statute of 8 H. 6. c. 16. after Office
found, he who found himself grieved might within a month after traverse, and
take the Tenements to farm, and that then the Chancellor, Treasurer, or other
Officer shall demise to him to farm, until, etc. 13 E. 4. f. 8. and yet by the
statute of 1 H. 8. c. 16. he has liberty by the space of three months, and
after by the statute of 32 H. 8. c. 40. the Master of the Court of Wards by
advice of own of his Council, is authorized to make a Lease of Land in Ward,
or an Idiot, And though the latter act design another person, yet it is not the
first altogether taken away, for before any Lease made by the Master of the
Wards, the Chancellor and Treasurer may do it: and so e contrario, as Stanf.
holds, Prerog. f. 69. a. b. Where he makes mention of this Rule, ^eges
posteriores, priores, contrarias abrogant, vide ibidem plura.

Coke com. f. 210. a. If the Condition upon a Mortgage be to pay to the
Mortgagee, or his heirs, the money, and before the day of payment the
Mortgagee dies, the Lessor is not to pay the money to the Executors, but to
the Heir, for in this case designatio unius personae est exclusio alterius.

Consensus tolli^ errorem, Coke com. f. 37. a. Consent takes away error. As
Dowment ad ostium Eclesiae, and ex assensu patris, seem to be good, albeit the
wife be within the age of nine years: But without question for the same reason,
a Jointure made to her under, or above the age of nine years is good, ibidem.

Coke com. f. 125. b. a. If a Venire facias be awarded to the Coroners, where
it ought to be to the Sheriff, or the Visne comes out of the wrong place, yet
by assent of the parties, and so entered of Record, it shall stand, for all
consent takes away error, ibidem, Coke l. 5. f. 36. b. Dyer. 367. in Bainhams
case.

Coke l. 5. f. 40. a. b. in Dormers case. A common Recovery is not to be
resembled to a judgment, or proceeding at the common Law, for by usage and
custom it is become a common assurance, and conveyance of Lands, and because
it is done by mutual consent, errors are not to be allowed, for consensus
tollit errorem.

If the Demandant and Tenant consent, that two of the four in a Writ of Right
shall be Esquires, where by the Law they ought to be Knights, and well, because
by consent.

Trial of Villenage was altered from the natural trial by consent.

Pleader of a Feoffment upon condition without deed, and re-entry is good, if
the other party confess the condition.

If twelve be sworn, and one depart, another of the pannell by consent may be
sworn, and with the eleven give verdict.

The Court in a Quare impedit, by consent may give longer day then is limited
by the Statute of Marlebridge.

The Statute of 2. E. 3. and 20. E. 3. provide, that neither for the great
Seal, or the petty Seal, Justice shall be delayed, yet when the matter
concerns the King only, if he command it, it may be stayed, F. N. B. 21. b.

Tenure at this day may be created by consent of all, notwithstanding the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, 27. H. 8.

By special consent of parties, re-entry may be made for default of payment of
the rent, without demand of it, Dyer 78. vide, by all which cases it
appears, that consent of parties alters the form, and course of Law,
ibidem, Coke l. 5. f. 40.

Electio semel facta, and placitum testatum non patitur regressum, 20. H. 6.
24. Coke com. f. 146. a. An election once made, and testified by pleading,
suffers no return.

As if a Rentcharge be granted to A. and B. and their heirs, and A
distraineth the Beasts of the Grantor, and he sueth a Replevin, A. avoweth for
himself, and makes conusance for B, A. dies. B. surviveth, B. shall not have
a Writ of Annuity, for in that case the election, and the avowry, for the rent
of A. barreth B. of any election to make it an Annuity, ibidem

Coke l. 4 f. 5. b. in Vernoms case, If the Baron discontinue the Land of his
wife, and dies, and the wife brings a Writ of dower against the
discontinuee, and recover the third part, she is by it estopped to bring a cui
invita, for by the Writ of Dower she claims Title of Dow^r only, and
therefore shall be estopped to claim any other right by a cui invita, 10. E.
3. double Plea, 8. 10. E. 3. Scire facias, 13. F. N. B. 194 17 Ass. Pl. 3.

For when she brings her Writ of Dower, and has judgment to have the third
part of all, by it she affirms that she has but title of Dower, and by
consequence no estate, and therefore she shall be estopped to claim any part
of it, of which she has demanded by her Writ to be endowed, and an acceptance
of rent by her Deed indented, concludes the feme of her right, 11. H 7. 10
vide ibidem plura, in Christians case.

But here a diversity is to be observed, that a man may have several remedies
for a thing that is merely personal or merely real; As if a man may have an
action of account, or an action of debt at his pleasure, and he brings an
action of account and appears to it and after is non-suite* yet he may have
an action of debt afterward, because both actions charge the person, the like
case is of an assize, and of a writ of entry in the nature of assize, and the
like, Coke com. f. 146 a.

Multa conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conc^duntur de directo, Coke l. 6. f.
47. a. Many things are granted by the by, which are not directly granted.

As when a Bar is pleaded in a real, or personal Action, as a release, etc.
in a foreign County, there the Jurors which try it, shall assesse damages
according to the profits of the Land in another County, and so by that means
enquire of things local in another County, for many things are granted by the
by, etc.

And when they try the matter of the Bar upon good, and pregnant evidence, they
ought to find all dependants upon it, as damages, etc. vide ibidem plura.

Dispositio ^e interesse facturo lest inutilis, Bacon, f. 56. The grant of a
future interest is vain, and void, for the Law does not allow of grants,
unless there be a foundation of an interest, for the Law will not accept of
Grants, of Titles, or of things in Action which are imperfect interests, much
less will it allow a man to grant or incumber that which is no interest at
all, but merely future.

As a Writ of Annuity was granted by a prebend, after collations, admissions,
and institutions, but before installation, or induction, which though it was
confirmed by the ordinary, who was the Patron, also was adjudged void, because
he had but jus ad rem,, and a future interest, but not in re, for he shall not
be said a prebendary to all intents, nor at the Common Law, without the real
possession which is by induction, Dyer 221. Pl. 18.

A. makes a Lease of Land for years to B without reservation of the Woods and
Trees, the Lessor cannot sell all the Woods and Trees, for the Woods and Trees
are parcel of the Lease, and pass to the Lessee, as well as the Land, if they
be not excepted upon the Lease* for all the fruits, and profits coming from
the fruitful Trees belong to the Lessee, and the shadow and also the branches,
and loppings for fire, or enclosure of fences, Dyer 90. Pl. 8.

If I grant unto you, that if you enter into an obligation to me of one hundred
pounds, and after procure me such a Lease, that then the same obligation shall
be void, and you enter into such an obligation unto me, and afterward do
procure such a lease, yet the obligation is simple, because the defeasance was
made of that which was not, 20 Eliz. 19. H. 6.62.

So if I grant unto you a rentcharge out of white-acre, and that it shall be
lawful for you to distraine in all my other Lands, whereof I am now seized,
and which I shall hereafter purchase, although this be but a liberty of
distress, and no rent save only out of white-acre, yet as to the Lands after
to be purchased, the clause is void, 27 E. 3. If I covenant with my Son in
consideration of natural Love, to stand seized to his use of the Lands, I
shall hereafter purchase, the use is void, 25. and 27. Eliz.

So if I devise the Manor of D. by special name, of which at that time I am
not seized, and after I purchase it, except I make some new publication of my
will, my devise is void, Ployd. Rigdens case, vide, Bacon. ibidem plura, f.
57.58.

Non refert an quis assensum praebat verbis, an rebus, and factis, Coke l. 10,
f. 52. b. It mattereth not whether a man gives his assent by words, or by
things themselves, and Deeds.

Whereas the assent of an Executor is necessary before any legancy can be had,
for that debts are first to be paid, and that the Executor must look to it
at-his peril, Offi. of Exec. 234. the assent, consent, and agreement of John
Morris, the Executor to the Legacy of William Tailor, and Elizabeth his wife,
did appear, in that at the special instance and request of the said Morris,
the said William Tailor, and Elizabeth his wife did release the said Legacy to
the said Morris, first because he requested it, which implies an assent, and
secondly because he accepted it which also implies an assent, for it mattereth
nor whether one gives his assent by words or by things themselves, and deeds,
vide ibidem, in Lampeis case.

As if the Baron accept the Grant of a reversion, that amounts to an
Attornement, 44. E. 3. Fines, 37. Littleton, so 37. H. 6. 17. he which has
interesse termini, to wit, a future interest cannot by express words surrender
it, but the acceptance of a new Lease shall drown it, and in 7. E. 3. 50. The
Lord demanded an heriot, and the heir delivers a Beast in which himself
has property in his own right to the Lord, that amounts to a gift, Ibidem.

N.S. seized of Manors, for the preferment of Winif^id his wife, and Anne his
Daughter, covenanteth to stand seized to the use of himself, etc. for life,
the remainder in tail to A. his Daughter, with a proviso, that if he shall be
disposed to determine, etc. the said uses, it shall be lawful for him so to
do by writing indented under his hand and seal, subscribed by three
witnesses, and to limit the said uses to any other, and N. S. after by
indenture subscribed by three witnesses, in consideration of a jointure to his
second wife, covenanted to stand seized to the use of himself, and his second
wife, and it was resolved, though there was no express signification of his
purpose to determine, etc. the former uses, yet his last Indenture to stand
seized to himself and his second wife, should enure to the determination of the
former uses, etc. and that by it, ipso facto, the former uses did cease, and
also inure to the raising of other uses, etc. quia non refert an quis,
intentionem suam declaret verbis, an rebus ipsis vel factis, because it is no
matterwhether one declares his intention in words, or in the things
themselves, or deeds, for by the limiting of other uses he did declare his
intention and purpose, to determine, and alter the uses before Coke l. 10. f.
144. a, Scroops case.

Conditio beneficialis quae statum construit benign, secundum verborum
intentionem est interpretanda, odiosa tamen, quae statum destruit, stricte
secundum verborum proprietatem est accipienda, Coke l. 8. f. 90. b. Provisoes,
and conditions which go in destruction and defeasances of estates are odious
in Law, and are to be taken strictly, and shall not be construed to make void
any other use or state, which is not within the words of the proviso, but
beneficial conditions, which make an estate, are favorably to be taken
according to the intention of the words.

As if a Feoffment be made upon such condition, that the Feoffee shall give the
Land to the Feoffor, and the wife of the Feoffor, and to the heirs of their
two bodies engendered, the Remainder to the right heirs of the Feoffor, if the
Baron dye, living the Feme, the Feoffee by the Law must make the estate to the
Feme so near the condition, that he can make it, as Littleton says, to wit, to
lease it to the Feme for term of her life, without impeachment of wast, and
after her decease to the right heirs of the Baron, and of her engendered, the
remainder to to the right heirs of the Baron, and so if the Baron and Feme dye
before the deed made; And with it accords the, 2. H. 4. 5. But when
conditions enure to the destruction of estates, then they shall be taken
strictly, as if a man make a Feoffment in fee of certain Lands upon condition,
that the Feoffee shall not give the Land to Baron and Feme, and to the heirs
of their bodies engendered, if the Baron dies without issue, and the Feoffee
makes a lease for the life of the Feme without impeachment of waste, that is
no breach of the condition, for it is taken strictly, because it runs to the
destruction of the Feoffment, vide ibidem plura, in Frances case.

A lease made to one upon condition that the Lessee shall not alien to A. B.
and he alieneth to R. B. and it seemed that the Condition was not broken, for
every Condition must be taken strictly; for if a man makes a Feoffment on
condition, that he shall not enfeoff I. S. and dies, and his Heir enfeoffeth
I. S. that is no breach of the Condition, Dyer f. 45. Pl. 1.

A man is bound to another in an hundred pounds, that he shall discharge the
Obligee, and ^ave him harmless of all Suits and Encumbrances against I.S. and
after the said I. S. sued the Obligee, and proceeded unto Judgment, and the
Defendant pleaded non damnificatus; and Beaumon Sergeant said, That in the eye
of the Law, until his Goods or Lands were actually charged, he was not
damnified; But Walmesley Justice held, that there were two sorts of damages,
executory, and executed, executory which a man may in future time sustain,
executed, as if the Land or the person should be in present execution. As if
the Disseisee makes a release to the Disseisor, and a stranger cancelleth the
the Deed of the Release, the Disseisor may have an action of trespass against
him, and yet the Disseisor does continue in possession, and is not actually
damnified. And the Justices said, the Land in some sort was actually charged,
for who would buy the Land of the party, but only under value, because of the
Judgment executory, 33 Eliz. Ridgleys case.

If a man be bound to make a sufficient estate in Land to one, according to the
advice of I. S. if he make an estate according to his advice, whether it be
sufficient or no, he is excused, 7 E. 4.13.

A TABLE of the grounds and RULES contained in this Treatise.
A.
ABundans cautela non nocet, An abundance of circumspection does not hurt, fol.
323 Actus Dei nemini facit injuriam, The act of God does injury to no man, 6
Actio personalis moritur cum persona, A personal action dies with the person,
48 Actori incumbit onus probandi and stabilitur praesumptio donec probetur in
contrarium, The burden of proving lies on the Plaintiff, and the presumption
is confirmed until it be proved to the contrary, 46 Accessorium sequitur suum
principale, An accessory follows the principal, 56 Accusare nemo se debet
nisi coram Deo, No man ought to accuse himself, unless it be before God, 222
Actus non facit reum nisi men's fit rea, The act makes not a man guilty,
unless the mind is guilty, 231 Actus repugnans non potest, in esse, produci, A
repugnant act cannot be brought into being, 124 Actus, me invito, factus, non
est meus actus, An act done against my will, is not my act, 434 Actus legis
nemini facit injuriam, The act of Law does no man injury, 463. and 317 Ad
libitum Regis sonuit sententia legis, The sentence of the Law sounds
according to the Kings will, 393 Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio, let the
relation be to the next antecedent 9 Ad questionem facti non respondent
judices, nec ad questionem juris respondent juratores, The Judges are not to
answer to the question of Fact, nor the Jurors to the question of Law, 331 Ad
proximum antecedens fiat relatio, nisi impediatur sententia, Let the relation
be to the next antecedent, unless it be hindered by the sense, 10 Aestimatio
praeteriti delicti, ex post facto, nunquam crescit, The estimation of a past
fault is not amplified by any matter subsequent, 305 Aequitas est verborum
legis directio sufficiens, qua una res solummodo cavetur verbis, ut omnis alia
in aequali genere iis de^ caveatur verbis, Equity is a sufficient direction of
the words of the Law, when one thing only is provided for by words, that every
other thing in the same kind may be provided for by the same words, 312
Aequitas est correctio legis generaliter latae, qua part deficit, Equity is
the correction of the Law, wherein it is any way wanting by reason of the
generality of it, 312 Affectus punitur licet non sequatur effectus, The
affection to do a thing is punished, though the effect does not follow, 195
Affectio tua nomen imponit operi tuo, Every affection or intention gives a
name to the work, 197 ffirmativum negativum implicat, An Affirmative implies a
Negative, 132 Agentes and consentientes pari poena plectuntur, The Agent and
the Consentor are to suffer the like punishment 60 Aliquis non debet esse judex
in propria causa, immo iniquum est aliquem esse suae rei judicem, No man ought
to be a judge in his own cause; and it is an unjust thing that a man should be
judge of his own matter, 371. and 351 Amor descendit, Love descends 163
Ambiguum pactum contra venditorem interpretandum est, ambigua verba contra
proferentem accipienda sunt, An ambiguous contract is to be expounded against
the Seller, and ambiguous words are to be taken against the Speaker, 27
Ambiguum placitum interpretari debet contra proferentem, ambigua responsio
contra proferentem est accipienda, An ambiguous plea shall be taken strongest
against the Pleader, 27. and an ambiguous answer is to be taken against the
Utterer, 28 A majori and digniori fieri debet denominatio, A denomination ought
to be from the greater and worthier thing, Apices juris non sunt jura, The
tittles or nicities of the Law, are no Law, 457 Argumentum a divisione est
fortissimum, An argument from division is strongest, 133 Argumentum ab
authoritate fortissimum est in lege, An argument from authority is strongest in
Law, 126 A verbis legis non est recendum, We ought not to go from the words of
the Law, 423
B.
BEnedicta est expositio quando res redimitur a destructione, Blessed is the
exposition, when a thing is redeemed from destruction, 443 Benignae faciendae
sunt interpretationes chartarum, propter simplicitatem laicorum, ut res magis
valeat quam pereat. Interpretations of Deeds and Charters, for the simplicity
of the Laity, are favorably to be made, that the thing may rather stand and
subsist, then fall and perish, 144 Benignior sententia in rebus generalibus and
dubiis est praeferenda, In general and doubtful things, the most favorable
exposition is to be preferred, 26 Boni judicis est lites dirimire and expedit
reipublicae, ut sit finis litium propter communem omnium utilitatem, It is the
part of a good Judge to cut off Suits, and it is good for the Commonwealth
there may be an end of Suits, for the common profit of all, 387 Bonum est
benefacere die sabathi, It is good to do good on the Sabbath day, 5
C.
CHarta non est nisi vestimentum donationis, A Charter is nothing else but the
apparel of the Deed, 199 Caveat actor, Let the actor take heed what he does,
323 Caveat Emptor, Let the Buyer take heed, 322 Causa and origo est materia
negotii, the cause and the beginning is the matter of the business, 65
Cessante ratione legis, cessat Lex, The reason of the Law ceasing, the Law
cease 421. and 46. Certum est, quod certum reddi potest, That is certain
which may be made certain, 33 Certa debet esse intentio and narratio, Counts
and Declarations ought to be certain, 38. and 318 Cessante causa, cessat
effectus, the cause ceasing, the effect cease, 75 Cessante causa, cessat
causatum, The cause ceasing, the thing caused cease, 76 Clausulae inconsuetae
semper inducunt suspitionem, Unaccustomed clauses always induce suspicion, 291
Constructio juris non facit injuriam, The construction of Law does make no
injury, 244 Communis error facit jus, Common error makes right, 344 Consuetudo
est optimus legum interpres, Custom is the best Interpreter of the Laws, 348
Consuetudo manerii and loci est observanda, The custom of the manor and place
is to be observed, 348 Consuetuto vincit communem legem, Custom overcomes the
Common Law, 350 Consuetudo t^llit legem, Custom takes away the Law, 352
Consuetudo private commun^m legem, Custom does deprive the Common Law, 353
Consuetudo, licet sit magnae authoritatis, nunquam tamen prajudicat manifestae
veritati, Custom, although it be of great authority, yet it, shall never
prejudicate a manifest truth, 354 Consuetudo debet esse certa, nam incerta pro
nullis habentur, A custom ought to be certain, for uncertain things are taken
for nothing, 354 Consuetudo semel reprobata non potest amplius induci, A
custom once cast off cannot again be brought in 355 Conjunctio maris and
feminis est de jure naturae, The coupling of man and wife is of the Law of
nature, 146 Confessus in judicio projudicato habetur, and quodam modo sua
sententia damnatur, He that confesses in the Court of Justice shall be taken
judged, and as it were, is by his own sentence condemned, 397 Conditio
beneficialis quae statum construit benign, secundum verborum intentionem est
interpretanda, ^diosa tamen, quae statum destruit, stricte secundum verborum
proprietatem est accipienda, Provisoes and Conditions which go in destruction
and Defeasances of estates are odious in Law, and are to be taken strictly, and
shall not be construed to make void any other use or estate, which is not
within the words of the Proviso: but beneficial Conditions, which make an
estate, are favorably so to be taken according to the intention of the words.
473 Cuicumque aliquis quid concedit concedere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa
esse non potest, To whomsoever any one shall grant any thing, he seems to
grant that without which the thing it self cannot be, 258 Cuilibet in sua art
perito credendum est, We ought to believe him that is skillful in his own Art,
329, and 330 Cui licet quod majus, non debet quod minus est non licere, To whom
it is lawful to do the greater, its lawful for him to do the less, 120 Cujus
que rei potissima pars principium est, The beginning is the principal part
upon which all other things are founded, 6 Cuique natural est illud quod
procreavit tueri, it is natural to every one to defend that he has gotten,
163
D.
DE ullo quod est sua natura indivisibile nullam partem habebit uxor pro dote
sua sed satisfacietur ad valentiam, Of that which of its nature is indivisible,
the wife shall have no part for her Dower, but shall be satisfied according to
the value, 159 Da tua dum tua sunt, post mortem tunc tua non sunt, Give yours
whilst they are yours, for after death they are not yours, 25 Derivativa
potestas non potest esse major primativa, The derivative power cannot be
greater then the primative, 73 Debile fundamentum fallit opus, A weak
foundation fails the work, 84 Destinata tantum pro factis non habentur, Thing
destinated only are not taken for things done, 89 De fide and officio judicis
non recipitur question sed de scientia, sive error sit ju is aut facti, There is
no question to be made of the Office and faith of a Judge, but or his
knowledge, whether it be error in Law, or in fact, 378 Divisio est oration qua
totum in parts distribuitur, Division is an Oration, by which the whole is
divided into parts, 133 Dispensatio mali prohibiti est de ju^e domino regi
concessa propter impossibilitatem p^^videndi de omnibus particul^ribus, The
dispensation of a prohibited evil i^ of right granted to the King for the
impossibility of providing for all particulars, Dispensatio est mali prohibiti
provida relaxatio, utilitate seu necessitate pensata. Dispensation is a
provident relexation of a prohibited evil recompensed by profit or necessity,
385 Dies dominicus non est dies juridicus, The Sabbath day is no Law day, 5
Distingue tempora, and concordabis-leges, Distinguish the times, and you will
agree the Laws, Divinatio non interpretatio est, quae omnino receditae litera,
It is a divination and not an interpretation which altogether leaves the
letter 425 Dilationes in lege sunt odiosae, Delays in Laws are odious, 326
Dispositio de interesse futuro est inutilis, The Grant of a future interest is
vain and void, 470 Dona cloudestina semper sunt suspiciosa, Close gifts are
always suspicious, 291 Dormit aliquand^ jus morietur nunquam, A Right sleeps
sometimes, but dies never, 425 Dolosus versatur in universalibus and
generalibus, A Deceiver is conversant about universalls, and generals, 21
Dominium a possessione caepisse dicitur, Dominion is said to have its beginning
from possession, 178
E.
EAdem and simili ratione suadente, idem jus statuendum est, The same and the
like reason persuading, the same Law is to be determined 117 Ecclesia fungitur
vice Minoris, meliorem potest facere conditionem, deteriorem nequaquam, The
Church exercises the Office of a Minor, and can make its condition better, but
not worse, 4 Electio semel facta, and placitum testatum non patitur regressum,
An election once made, and the plea testified, does not suffer regresse, or
going back, 305 Eventus est qui ex causa sequitur, and dicitur eventus, quia ex
causa evenit, The event is that which follows the cause, and therefore is
called an event because it comes from the cause, 41 Exitus acta probat finis,
non pugna coronat, The end proves and crowns the work, 87 Execu^io juris non
habet injuriam, The execution of the Law has no injury, 267 Exitus nonnuquam
in maleficiis spectatur, non voluntas, The end sometimes in evil acts is
respected, and not the will, 194 Expressum facit cessare tacitum, That which is
expressed, causes that which is employed to cease, 447 Expressio eorum quae
tacit insunt nihil operatur, The expression of those things which are implied
work nothing, 445 Extra terretorium dicenti non paretur impune, He that obeys
one prescribing Laws beyond his jurisdiction, shall not go unpunished, 374
Excusat aut extenuat delictum in capitalibus, quod non idem operatur in
civilibus, That does excuse and extenuate an offense in capital causes, which
does not work the same in civil causes, 304 Exteriora acta indicant interiora
animi secreta, The outward acts show the inward secrets of the mind, 88 Ex
verbo generali aliquid accipitur, Out of a general word, something may be
excepted, 22
F.
FActum unius alteri nocere non debet, the deed of one ought not to hurt the
other, f. 428. Factum a Judice quod ad ejus officium non pertinet, ratum non
potest esse, an act done by a Judge which does not appertain to his office, is
not allowed, f. 375 Facinus quos inquinat aequat, an offense equalleth those
are infected with it, f. 57. Festinatio Justitiae est noverca infortunij, the
festination of Justice is the step mother of misfortune, f. 327. Finis rei
attendendus est, and fines mandatorum domini regis per rescripta sua diligenter
sunt observanda, the end of the thing is to be heeded, and the end of the
mandate of the King by his Writs, are diligently to be observed, f 87. Fortior
and potentior est dispositio legis, quam hominis, the disposition of the Law is
more strong and powerful then the disposition of man, f. 459. Finis finem
litibus imponit, a Fine puts an end to suites, f. 90. Frustra expectatur
eventus, cujus effectus nullus sequitur, in vain is the event expected where
no effect follows, f. 92. Frustra feruntur leges nisi obedientibus, in vain
are Laws to be made unless to those who are obedient, f. 365. Frustra fit per
plura quod fieri potest per pauicora, in vain is that done by more which may
be done by fewer, f. 134. Fraus, and dolus nemini patrocinari debent, Fraud
and Deceit ought not to Patronise any one, 229. Frustra est potentia, quae
nunquam venit in actum, vain is the power which never comes into Act, 254.
Frangenti fidem fides frangatur eidem, to him that breaks his faith, let faith
be broken, f. 293. Fraudis interpretatio non semper ex mente duntaxat sed ex
consilio quoque desideratur, the interpretation of fraud is not always
collected out of the mind, but also from the council and consent, f. 293.
Fucatus error nuda veritate in multis est probabilior, sed saepenumero multis
rationibus vincit veritatem, painted error in many things is more probable then
naked truth, and oftentimes with many reasons overcomes truth, f. 136.
Furiosus suo furore punitur, a mad man is punished by his madness, f. 233.
G.
GEnerale nihil ponit, generale nihil certi implicat, a general thing
determines or implies nothing certainly, f. 17. Generalibus specialia
derogant, special things derogate, and diminish gene^all things, 18
Generalibus semper specialia insunt, special things are always contained in
generals, f. 19. Generalis clausula non porrigitur ad ea, quae sunt specialiter
comprehensa, a general clause is not extended to those things which are
specially comprehended, f. 20. Clausula generalis non refertur ad expressa, a
general clause is not referred to those things which are expressed f. 21.
Generalis clausula non porrigitur ad ea, quae antea sunt specialiter
comprehensa, a general clause is not extended to those things, which before
were specially comprehended, f. 21 Generalia sunt praeponenda singularibus,
general. words are to be put before particular, f. 22. Grammatica falsa non
vitiat chartam, false Grammar does not destroy a deed, f. 13.
H.
HAeres est alter ipse, and filius est pars patris, the heir is another self,
and the Son is part of the Father f. 165. Haeres non tenetur in Anglia ad
debita antecessoris reddenda, nisi per antecessorem ad hoc fuerit obligatus,
praeterquam debita regis tantum, an heir is not bound in England to pay the
debt of his Ancestor, if he be bound thereunto, unless the debts of the King
only, f. 173. Hae^es legitimus est, quem nuptiae demonstrant, he is a lawful
heir, whom marriage demonstrateth so to be, f. 169.
I.
INclusio unius est exclusio alterius, the inclusion of one thing is the
exclusion of another, f. 466. Illud quod alias licitum non est, necessitas
facit licitum, that which otherwise is not lawful, necessity makes lawful,
f. 132. Illud possumus quod jure possumus, we can do that which by Law we can
do. f. 241: Idem non potest esse agens, and patiens, the same thing cannot be
an agent, and a patient, f. 45. Ignorantia juris non excusat, ignorance of the
Law does not excuse, f. 332. 334. Ignorantia facti excusat, ignorance of the
fact excuses, f. 334. Ignoratis terminis ignoratur ars, the terms being not
understood, the art is not understood, f. 8. Impossible est unum corpus duobus
locis esse simul, it is impossible for one body to be in two places, at one and
the same time, 160 Impersonalitas non concludit, nec ligat, impersonality does
not conclude or bind, 11. Impotentia excusat legem, impotency excuses the
Law, 223 Infans ab omnibus civilibus officijs debet abstinere, an infant ought
to abstain from all civil offices, 332 Imperitia culpae annumeratur.
Imperitia maxima est mechanicorum paena, ignorance and unskilfullnesse is
accounted a fault, and is the greatest punishment of Artists, and Mechanics,
332 Inter arma silent Leges, Laws are silenced by arms, 412 In praesentia
majoris cessat potentia minoris, in the presence of the Major, the power of the
minor cease, 394 Injuria illata in corpus non potest remitti, injuries made
upon the body cannot be remitted, 274 In pari causa possessor potior habetur.
In aequali jure melior est possessio possidentis, in an even and equal cause,
and right, the possession of the possessor is the better, 182 Infinitum in jure
reprobatur, infinity is rejected in the Law, 187 In omnibus quid^m, maxim
tamen in jure aquitas est, In all things, but especially in the Law there is
equity, 306 In eo quod plus est semper inest minus, the less is always in
that which is more, 418 In omnibus fere minori aetati succurritur, in all
things almost the Law favoreth infants, 241 In criminalibus praestant
accidentia, in criminal acts accidents prevail, 531 In republica maxim
conservanda sunt jura belli, in a common wealth, the Laws of War are
principally to be preserved, 408 In ambiguis casibus semper prasumitur pro
rege, in doubtful cases it is always presumed for the King, 403 In
favorabilibus magis attenditur quod prodest, quam quod nocet, in favorable and
indifferent things, that which profits is more respected then that which
hurts, 49 In obscuris secundum magis similius est judicandum, vel quod
plerumque inspici solet, in obscure sayings, we ought to judge according to
that which is most likely, and which is wont to be, 28 In distjunctivis
sufficit alterum esse verum, in disjuntives it is sufficient, if one of them be
true, 12. In quo quis delinquit in eo de jure est puniendus, in what one
offends in the same by right he is to be p^nished, 394 In jure non remota,
sed proxima, causa spectatur, in the Law the next, and not the remote cause is
respected, 79 In omnibus stipulationibus id tempus spectatur in quo
contrahimus, in all contracts, the time is respected in which we do contract,
101 In omnibus obligationibus in quibus dies non ponitur praesenti die debetur,
and nulla temporis designatio praesens denotat, in all obligations in which the
day is not set, the debt is due presently, and no designation of time denotes
the time present, 101 Inutilis labor and fine fructu non est effectus Legis, an
unprofitable labor and without fruit is not the effect of the Law, 462
Interpretari and concordare Leges Legibus est optimus interpretandi modus, to
interpret, and agree the Laws with the Laws, is the best manner of
interpreting, 436 Ipsa etenim Leges cupiunt ut jure regantur, the Laws
themselves desire to be ruled by equity, 306 307 Jura naturalia sunt
immutabilia, the Laws of nature are immutable, 160 Jus descendit, and non
terra, the right does descend, and not the Land, 253 Judex bonus nihil ex
arbitrio faciat nec proposito domesticae voluntatis, sed juxta Leges, and jura
pronuntiet a good Judge ought to do nothing of his own fancy, nor according
to the purpose of his domestic will, but according to Law and right, 365
Judicandum est legibus non exemplis, we ought to judge by Laws and not
examples 366 Judicis est judicare secundum allegata, and probata, it is the
part of a Judge to judge according to that is alleged and proved, 366 Judicium
non a suo Judice datum nullius est momenti, a judgment not given by his Judge
is of no force, 373 Jurisdictio est potestas de publico introducta cum
necessitate j^ris dicend^, jurisdiction is a power introduced by the public,
for the necessity of doing right 337 Jus sanguinis, quod in legitimis
successionibus spectatur, ipso nativitatis tempore quaesitum est, the right of
blood, which is respected in lawful successions is found in the very time of
the nativity, 169 Justum non est aliquem ante natum mortuum facere bastardum,
qui to^o tempore suo pro legitimo habebatur, It is not just to make any one a
Bastard, who all his time has been taken for legitimate, 13
L.
LEX est summa ratio, The Law is the chiefest reason, 4^7 Lex neminem cogit ad
impossibilia, The Law compels none to impossibilities, 450 Leges non ve^bis,
sed rebus sunt imposi^ae, Laws are not imposed on words, but on things, 425
Lex citius tolerare vult privatum damnum, quam publicum malum, The Law will
sooner suffer a private loss, then a public evil, 429 Lex non praecipit
inutila, The Law prescribes no unprofitable things, 462 Leges posteriores
priores contrarias abrogant, The latter Laws abrogate the former which are
contrary to them, 452 Lex non paetitur fractiones, and divisiones statuum, The
Law does not suffer fractions, and divisions of Estates, 456 Lex plus respicit
acta sine verbis, quam verba sine actis, The Law respects more acts without
words, then words without acts, 464 Lex semper dabit remedium, The Law will
always give a remedy, 257 Lex fingit ubi subsistit aequitas, The Law feigneth
where equity subsisteth, 309 Legis constructio^ non facit injuriam, The
construction of the Law does no injury, 316 Lex non requirit verificari quod
apparet Curiae, The Law does not require that to be verified which appears to
the Court, 137 Lex respicit naturae ordinem, The Law respects the order of
nature, 144 Licet tenenti vetus o^us reficere non novum facere, it is lawful
for the Tenant to repair an old work, but not to make a new one, 85 Locus ab
authoritate est infi missimus, An argument from authority is most weak, Locus
pro solutione reditus, aut pecuniae, secundum conditionem demissionis aut
obligationis est stricte observandus, That place for the payment of money, or
rent according to the condition of a Lease, or Obligation, is strictly to be
observed, 108 Longum tempus and longus usus qui excedit memoriam hominum
sufficit pro jure, Long professions, and long occupation which does exceed the
memory of man, suffices for a right, 178 Lubricium linguae non facile in penam
est trahendum, The nimblenesse and lubricity of the Tongue is not easily to be
brought into punishment, 278
M.
MVlta conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conceduntur de directo, many things
are granted by the bye, which are not directly granted, 471 Manifesta
probatione indigent, manifest things need no proof, 138 Mala Grammatica non
vitiat chartam, and sensus abbreviationis accipiendus est ut coniessio non sit
inanis false Latin does not distroy a Charter, or Deed, and the sense of
abbreviations is so to be taken, that the grant be not void, 13.14 Mandata
licita strictam recipient interpretationem, sed illicita latam and extensam,
lawful commandes receive a strict limitation, but unlawful, large, and
extended, 385 Malesicia non debent manner impunita, offenses ought not remain
unpunished, 387 Malitia mutat legem, malice changes the Law, 299 Malum quo
communius, eo peius, an evil the more common it is the worse it is, 207
Malitiae vitium connexum est personae committentis malitiam, the vice of malice
is connexed to the person who commits the malice, 301 Malus usus est
abolendus, an evil use is to be abolished, 352 Magis, and minus non
diversificant speciem, more and less do not diversify the species, 123
Mandatumita regulatur in superioribus sicut in privatis a voluntate mandantis,
a commandment is regulated according to the will of the Commander as well in
higher as inferior, and private things, 380, Misera est servitus, ubi jus est
vagum, it is a miserable servitude where the Law is wavering, 28 Majorum
praecepta, justa, an injusta, non sunt contemnenda, the precepts of the
ancients whether just or unjust are not to be contemned 129 Monumenta quae nos
recorda vocamus sunt veritatis, and vetustatis vestigia, 129 Mos sidelissimae
vetustatis retinendus est, and quae praeter consuetudinem majorum fiunt, neque
placent, neque recta videntur, and frequentia actus multa operatur, the manner
of most faithful antiquity is to be retained, and what are made contrary to
the custom of our Ancestors, do neither please, neither do they seem right,
and the frequency of an act works much, 123 Modus dat legem donationi, the
manner gives a Law to the gift, 190 Modus and conventio vincunt legem, the
manner and agreement overcome the Law, 35 Mutata forma prope interimitur
substantia rei, the form being changed, the substance of the thing is
destroyed 85 Multa transeunt cum universitate, quae per se non transeunt, many
things pass with the universality, which of them selevs do not pass, 23
Multa ignoramus, quae nobis non laterent, si veterum lectio nobis fuerit
familiaris, we are ignorant of many things which would not be hid from us, if
the reading of the ancients were to us familiar, 129 Multa constituuntur in
lege, ne curia domini regis deficeret in justitia many things are ordained in
the Law, least the Court of the Lord the King should fail in Justice, 260
Mutata legis ratione mutatur and lex, the reason of the Law being changed, the
Law also is changed, 400 Mavult princeps domesticos milites quam stipendiarios
bellicis exponere casibus, a prince desires rather to employ in military
affairs, domestic Soldiers, then Aliens, and Stipendaries, 409 Multum potest
in rebus humanis occasio, plurimum in bellciis, occasion, and opportunity
prevail much in humane things, but most of all in Marshall affairs, 411
Multitudo errantium non parit errori patrocinium, the multitude of those which
err do not patronise an error, 151
N.
NAturalis possessio ad prescriptionem sufficet, Natural possession is
sufficient to prescription, 179 Naturae vis maxima, the force of nature is very
great, Negativum nihil implicat, A Negative employed nothing, 132 Nemo tenetur
prodere seipsum, No man is bound to betray himself, 331 Nemo tenetur
turpitudinem suam detegere, No man is bound to bewray his own filth, and shame,
222 Negatio destruit negationem, and ambo faciunt affirmationem, A double
negative makes an affirmative, 12 Nescit generosa men's ignorantiam pati, A
generous mind cannot suffer ignorance, 13 Nemini vim facere videtur, qui suo,
and non alieno utitur, He seems to do injury to no man who uses his own, and
not another, 25 Nemo redditum invito domino recipere potest, No man can
receive the rent, without the Lords consent, 25 Nemo potest plus juris in alium
transfer, quam ispe habet, No man can grant more right then he has, 24 Nemo
videtur rem omittere cujus propria non fuit, No man does seem to lose that, in
which he has no property, 24 Nrcessitas saepenumero vincit communem legem,
Necessity oftentimes overcomes the common Law, 432 Nemo nascitur artifex, No
man is born an Artist. 418 Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus, No man
ought to be wiser then the Laws, 418 Nil agit exemplum, litem quod lite
resolvat, An example is of no validity to decide a controversy, 133 Nihil dat
quod non habet, He gives nothing that has nothing, 24 Nimia subtilitas in
jure reprobatur, Too much subtlety is rejected in the Law, 458 Nihil est magis
justum quam quod necessarium, There is nothing more just, then that is
necessary, 432 Nihil agit in seipsum, nothing acts upon its self, 43 Nihil in
lege intolerabilius est quam eandem rem diverso Jure teneri, There is nothing
more intolerable in Law, then the latter Judgment to contradict the former,
127 Nihil magis consentaneum est ut iisdem modis res dissolvatur, quibus
constituitur, and nihil tam conveniens est naturali aequitati, unum quodque
dissolvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est, There is nothing more meet and convenient
to natural equity, then that every thing shall be dissolved by the same means,
or bonds it was first bound, or constituted, 80 Nihil est tam conveniens
naturali aequitati, quam voluntatem domini volentis, suam rem in alium
confer, ratum habere, Nothing is more convenient to natural equity, then to
confirm the will of the Lord willing to transfer his estate to another, Non
debet cui plus licet, quod minus est non licere, It ought not that to whom it
is lawful to do more, that it shall not be lawful to do the less. 120 Non
debet mulieribus assignari castra in dotem, quae fueraut virorum suorum, and
quae de bello existunt, Castles ought not to be assigned to women for their
Dower, which did appertain to their Husbands, and were fortresses of war, 150
Noxa caput sequitur, The offense follows the head, Non est regula quin
fallit, There is no rule but fails, 315 Non licet, quod dispendio licet, That
is not lawful, which is lawful to my loss, 466 Non valet impedimentum, quod
de jure non sertitur effectum, The impediment avails not, which takes not
effect from the Law, 247 Nomen non sufficit, si res non sit de jure, aut de
facto, The name of the thing is not sufficient, unless the matter be of right,
or fact, 259 Non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda, A Contract that I shall
not alien what is my own, is of no force, 29 Non refert quid ex
aequipollentibus fiat, It mattereth not what is done by equipollency, 138
Notationes sunt quasi rerum verae notae, Notations are, are as it were true
signs of things, Nobiliores, and benigniores praesumptiones in dubiis sunt
praeferendae, The most noble and favorable presumptions in doubts are to be
preferred 26 Non impedit clausula derogatoria, sive clausula de non obstante,
quo minus ab eadem potestate res dissolvantur a quibus constituuntur, Acts
which are in their nature revocable, cannot with a non obstante be fixed and
perpetuated, 63 Non pertinet ad Judicem secularem cognoscere de iis quae sunt
spiritualibus annexa, It does nor appertain to a secular Judge to take
cognizance of those things which are annexed to spiritual things, 378 Novum
judicium non dat jus novum sed declarat antiquum, A new Judgment does not make
a new Law but declares the old Law, 380 Non refert an quis assensum praebeat
verbis, an rebus, and factis, It mattereth not whether a man gives his assent
by words, or by things themselves, and Deeds, 471 Nullum simile currit quatuor
pedibus, Nothing that is like runs upon four feet, and is altogether the
same, 116 Nullum exemplum est idem omnibus, There is no example the same to
all, 126 Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria propria, No man can take
advantage of his own wrong, 270 Nullus liber homo amercietur nisi secundum
quantitatem delicti, No man ought to be amerced but according to the quantity
of his offense, 301 Nunquam prospere succedunt res humanae ubi negliguntur
divinae, Humane affairs never succeed prosperously, where Divine Rights are
neglected, 7 Nullum tempus occurrit regi, No prescription of time prevails
against the King, 350 Nullum iniquum in jure est praesumendum, No unjust thing
is to be presumed by Law, 248
O.
OFficia magistratus non debent esse vaenalia. Magistraticall Offices ought not
to be exposed to sale, 367 Officia Judicialia non conceduntur antequam vacent,
Judicial Offices ought not to be granted before they are void, 370 Omne
mandatum est temporaneum, All commands are temporary, 385 Omnia quae movent ad
mortem sunt deodanda, All things which move to death, or whereby death ensues
are Deodands, Omnia tempus habent, and habent sua tempora tempus, All things
are subject to time, and time its self has also its time, 105 Omne majus
continet in se minus, Every greater contains in it the less, 118 Omne majus
dignum trahit ad se minus dignum, Every greater worthy draws unto it the
less worthy, 121 Omnis privatio praesupponit habitum, Every privation
presupposes an habit, 125 Omnis propositio est aut vera, aut falsa, Every
proposition is either true or false, 136 Omne actum ab agentis intention est
judicandum, Every act is to be adjudged by the intention of the agent, 197
Omnis ratificatio retro trahitur, and mandato aequiparatur, Every ratification,
or approving of any thing looks back, and is all one, as if a man had given
commandment at the first, 42 Oportet quod certae personae, certae terrae, and
certi status compredentur in declaratione usuum, It behooveth that certain
persons, certain lands, and certain estates be comprehended in the Declaration
of uses. 37 Oportet ut res certa ducatur in judicium, It behooves that a thing
certain shall be brought into judgment, 38 Optimi ducis est scire, and vincere,
and cedere prudentur tempore, It is the part of an excellent Captain to know
and to overcome, and wisely to yield unto the time, 415 Optima statuti
interpretatio, omnibus particulis ejusdem inspectis, est ipsum statutum, and
injust m est nisi tota lege inspecta una aliqua part proposita, Judicare, vel
respondere. The best Expositers of Acts of Parliament, are Acts of Parliament
themselves by construction and conference of all the parts together, 424
Oportet patrem familias vendacem esse non emacem, A Father or a Family ought to
be a Buyer, nor a seller, 400 Optimum est militem deligare non eme^e. It is
best to choose a Soldier and not to buy him, 409 Origo rei inspici d^bet, The
beginning of a thing is to be looked into, 89
P.
Part quacunque sublata tollitur totum, The substantial part of any thing
being taken away, the whole is destroyed, 95 Paci sunt contraria vis, and
injuria, Force and injury are contrary to Peace, 275 Parium eadem est ratio,
There is the same reason of equals, 115 Periculosum existimo quod bonorum
virorum non comprobatur exemplo, I esteem that dangerous which is not approved
by the example of good men, 127 Per divisionem melius materia imtelligitur, By
division the matter is better understood, 133 Permissio non est officium legis,
quia lex ad fert necssitatem, Permission is not the Office of the Law, because
the Law imposes a necessity, 397 Pendente lite nihil innovetur, Nothing is to
be innovated, hanging the suit, 47 Plus peccat author, quam actor, The Author
offends more then the Actor 203 Plus vident oculi quam oculus, Two eyes see
more then one, 364
Possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem, A possession
of the Brother of a Fee-simple makes the Sister to be heir, 185 Potestas
regis Ju^is sit non injuriae, and cum sit author Juris non debet inde
injuriarum nasci occasio unde jura nascantur, The power of the King is of
right, and not injury, and seeing he is the Author of right, there ought not
from thence to arise the occasion of injury, from whence right does proceed,
243 Praelatus ecclesiae suae conditionem meliorem facere potest sine consensu,
deteriorem nequaquam sine consensu, A Prelate may make the condition of the
Church better without consent, but not worse without consent, 4 Principio dato
sequntur concomitantia, Things accessory are of the nature of the principal,
58 Prop^ia res est, quae solius est, sive uni soli convenit, It is a proper
thing which is one man's, and belongs to one man only, 23 Proprietas temporis
fi^genda est secundum subjectam materiam, The property of time is to be
feigned, according to the subject of the matter, 103 Protectio trahit
subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem, Protection draws subjection, and
subjection protection, 365 Privilegium non valet contrarem publicam, A
privilege is of no force against the ommonwealth, 432 Prohibetur ne quis
faciat in suo, quod lae dat in alieno, and sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas,
It is forbidden, that no man does that in his own, which may do hurt in
another, and so use your own, that you do not hurt another, 273 Pr^ximus sum
egomet mihi, Every one is next to himself, 213
Q.
QUalis causa talis effectus, such as the cause is, such is the effect, 74 Quae
incontinenti fiunt in^sse videntur, What things are done in an instant seem to
be in being, 90 Quaelibet concessio fortissine contra donatorem interpretanda
est, Every Grant is to be taken strongest against the Grantor, 316. and 437
Quae rerum natura prohibentur nulla lege confirmata sunt, What things are
prohibited by nature, are confirmed by no Law, 142 Quae libet haereditas
naturaliter quidem ad haeredes descendit nunquam autem naturaliter ascendit.
Every inheritance does naturally descend to the Heirs, but never does naturally
ascend, 164 Quando charta continet generalem clausulam, posteaque descendit ad
verba speciala quae clausulae generali sunt consentanea, interpretanda est
charta secundum specialia, when a Charter contains a general clause, and
then afterward descends to special words, the Charter is to be expounded
according to the words special, 18 Quando verba statuti sunt specialia, ratio
autem generalis, generaliter statutum est intelligendum, When the words of the
Statute are special, and the reason general, the statute is generally to be
understood, 22 Quando diversi considerantur actus ad aliquem statum
perficiendum Lex plus respicit actum originalem, When to the perfection of an
Estate, diverse acts are required, the Law more respects the original act, 61
Quando jus domini regis, and subditi concurrunt jus regis praeferri debet, When
the right of the King, and the Subject meet together, the right of the King
ought to be preferred, 361 Quando duo Jura in una concurrunt persona aequum est
ac in diversis, When two rights meet together in one person, it is all one as
if they were in several, 369. and 250 Quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur
and id per quod pervenitur ad illud, When any is forbidden, that also is
forbidden by which one may come to it, 386 Quam longum debet esse rationabile
tempus non definitur in lege, sed pendet ex discretione Iusticiariorum, How
long a reasonable time ought to be, is not defined in the Law, but depends
upon the discretion of the Judges, 103 Quando aliquid mandatur, mandatur and
omne per quod pervenitur ad illud, When any thing is commanded, that is
commanded by which one may come to it, 386 Quilibet potest juri renunciari pro
se introducto, Every one may renounce the Law, which was brought in for
himself, 251 Qui rationem in omnibus quaerunt rationem subvertunt, Who seek
reason in all things, overthrow reason, 422 Qui hae et in littera haeret in
cortice, He that sticks in the letter, sticks in the bark, or the outside, 425
Qui facit per alium facit perse, What one does by another, he does by himself,
318. and 52 Qui sentit onus, sentire debet, and commodum, He that bears the
burden ought to receive the profit, 90 324 Qui non habet in aere luat in
corpore ne quid peccetur impune, He that has no money, let him be punished in
body, least any offense be committed without punishment, 87 Qui adimit medium
adimit finem, He that takes away the medium, or mean, destroys the end, Qui
male agit, odit lucem, He that does evil hates the light, 104 Quicquid non
discutitur, justitia non putatur, Quicunque aliquid sta^uerit part inaudita
ultera, aequum licet statuerit, haud aequum erit, What is not discussed nor
tried, is not reputed Justice; and whosoever shall decree any thing, the other
party being not heard, though he decrees that is right, yet has he not done
that is equal, 372 Quicunque jussu Judicis aliquid fecerit, non videtur dolo
malo fecisse quia parere necesse est, He that does anything by commandment ot
the Judge, seems that he has not done any thing deceitfully, or amiss,
because he must needs obey, 374 Qui ex damnato coitu oriuntur, inter filios non
computantur, who are born of unlawful, and damned copulation, are not
accounted among Sons, 176 Qui semel actionem renunciaverit amplius repetere non
potest, He who once renounceth his action, can no more receive it, 447 Qui
timent cavent and vitant, Who fear, are wary, and shun dangers and damages,
322 Quod per me non possum, nec per alium, What I cannot do my self, I cannot
do by another, 55 Quod initio non valet tractu temporis non convalescet, That
which in the beginning is vicious, or invalid, cannot by tract of time be made
good, or valid, 66 Quod non valebit in principali, in accessorio, and
consequenti non valebit, What does not avail in the principal shall not avail
in the accessory and consequent, 59 Quod dignius est prius est minus digno,
What is more worthy is before that which is less worthy, 72 Quoties duplici
jure defertur alicui possessio, repudiat^ novo jure, quod ante defertur,
superest vetus, When a possession is cast upon one by a double right, the new
right being rejected, which was given before, the old remains, 74 Quoties in
verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra ipsa verba fienda est,
Where there is no ambiguity in words, therein no exposition is to be made
contrary to the words themselves, 427 Quod est contra rationem est illicitum,
What is contrary to reason is unlawful, 419 Quod est inconveniens, and contra
rationem non est permissum in lege, What is inconvenient and against reason, is
not permitted in the Law, 419 Quod in minori valet, valebit in majori, What
avails in the less, shall avail in the greater, 123 Quod constat clare non
debet verificari, What appears clearly ought not to be verified, 138 Quod
remedio destituitur ipsa re valet, si culpa absit, What is destitute of remedy
in the matter it self, it does avail if the fault be absent, 225 Quod quis que
in tutelam corporis sui fecerit, jure fecisse videatur, Whatsoever any man
shall do in defense of his body, it seems lawfully to have done it, 275 Quod
alias bonum, and justum est, si per vim, vel fraudem petatur, malum and
injustum est, What otherwise is good and just, if it be attempted by force, or
fraud is evil and unjust, 284 Quod necessarium est licitum, What is necessary
is lawful, 317
R.
RAtio est anima legis, Reason is the life of the Law, 417 Receditur a placitis
juris, potius quam injuriae, and delicta maneant impunita, We ought to recede
from the grounds of Law, rather then offenses and injuries may remain
unpunished, 391 Res per divisionem melius aperiruntur, Things are better opened
by division, 133 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, A thing acted
amongst some ought not to hurt another, 272 Rerum progressus ostendant multa,
quae nec praecaveri aut provideri non possunt, The progress and proceedings of
things, demonstrate many things which in the beginning could not be foreseen,
or provided for, 311. and 452 Res judicata pro veritate accipitur, The thing
adjudged is taken for truth, 417 Rex est caput, and salus Reipublicae, and a
capite bona valetudo transit in omnes, The King is the head and safety of the
Commonweal, and from the head good health is conveyed to all, 364 Rex est
vicarius, and minister Dei in terra. Omnis quidem sub eo, ipse sub nullo nisi
tantum sub Deo, The King is the Vicar, and Ministor of God, every one is under
him, and he under none, unless it be under God, 358
S.
SAlus populi suprema lex, The safety of the people is the chiefest Law,
Sapiens incipit a fine, A wise man begins with the end, 461. and 86 Sape
locus in delicto auget vel minuit culpam, In an Offense the place does often
augment, or diminish the punishment, 113 Securius expediuntur negotia commissa
pluribus, Offices and businesses committed to many are more safely discharged,
368 Semper praesumitur pro legitimatione puerorum, and filiatio non potest
probari, at is always presumed for legitimation of Children, and filiation, or
begetting of Children cannot be proved, 168 Semper qui dolo fecit quo minus
haberet, pro eo habendus est ac si habet, Always whosoever shall give or grant
any thing by fraud, whereby he may seem not to have it, is to be esteemed he
has it, 290 Semel malus semper praesumitur esse malus in eodem genere mali,
Who has once been evil, is always presumed to be evil, in the same kind of
evil, 300 Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est, and sermones
semper accipiendi sunt secundum subjectam materiam, The sense of the words is
to be taken out of the cause of the speech and speeches are always to be taken
according to the subject of the matter, 28 Semper ita fiat relatie, ut valeat
dispositio, Let the relation be so, that the disposition may avail, 49 Si defit
obedientia non adjuvat lotus, If obedience be wanting, the place releiveth not,
114 Sicut beatius ita majus est dare, quam accipere, As it is a more blessed
thing, so it is a greater thing to give then to take, 120 Sicut natura in
operationibus nihil facit persaltum. Ita nec lex, As nature in his operations
does nothing by skips, so neither the Law, 145 Si mulier nobilis nupserit
ignobili de sinet esse nobilis, If a Noble woman marry an ignoble man, she
leaves to be noble, 151 Si plures conditiones ascriptae sunt donationi
conjactim omnibus est parendum, and ad veritatem copulativum requiritur, quod
utraque pars sit vera, If many conditions be jointly annexed to a gift, all of
them must be obeyed, and to a copulative truth it is required that every part
be true, 11 Singular distributive sumptum aequat plurale, A singular
distributively taken equalleth the plural, 23 Solum Rex hoc potest de jure
potest, The King can do only that that he can do by right, 242 Substantia
prior, and dignior est accidente, The substance is more worthy, and before the
accident, 43 Suprema potestas seipsum dissolvere potest, The supreme power may
dissolve it self, 84 Subsequens matrimonium tollit peccatum praecedens, The
subsequent marriage takes away the precedent Offense, 177 Sublata causa
tollitur effectus, The cause being taken away, the effect always is taken
away, 317 Summum jus summa injuria, The severity of Justice is the extremity of
injury, 253
T.
TEmpus est mensura motus secundum prius, and posterius, Time is the measure of
motion according to priority, and posteriority, 99 Tempora mutantur, and nos
mutamur in illis, Times are changed, and so in them are we, 105 Tempus edax
rerum, Time is the consumer of things, 105 Thesaurus domino competit regi, and
non domino libertatis, nisi sit per verba specialia, Treasure belongs to the
Lord the King, and not to the Lord of the liberty, unless it be by special
words, 403 Tributum est victoriae proenuum, and poena belli, Tribute is the
reward of Victory, and penalty of War, 407 Totum praefertur unicuique parti,
The whole is preferred before every part, 93 Turpis est pars, quae cum suo toto
convenit, Foul, and deformed is the part, which agrees not with the whole, 95
Vbi major pars est ibi est totum, Where the greater part is, there is the
whole, 34 Vbi non est gubernator dissipabitur populus, Where there is no
Governor the people shall be dispersed, 355 Verba ita intelligenda sunt ut res
magis valeat, quam pereat, Words are so to be understood, that the thing may
avail, and not perish, 317 Verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu, Words are
to be taken in a favorable sense, 29 Veritas nihil ver^tur nisi absc^ndi,
Truth fears nothing but to be hidden, 282 Vigi an^ibus non dormientibus leges
subveniunt, The Laws do help them that are watchful, and waking, and not
those who are sleepy and negligent, 319 Unumquodque principiorum est
sibimetipsi fides, Every Principle is of credit to it self, 71
FINIS.

