THE BACKSLIDER BEWAILED, THE Careless Warned: AND THE FAITHFUL ENCOURAGED.
WITH True desires, and living breathings for the Preservation of the whole
Israel of God.

Written by P. Hendrick, who is a stranger in England, but a fellow Citizen of
the new Jerusalem, and a member of the true Church of which Christ is the Head.

Translated into English by W. C.

Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

1 Cor. 10.12. Of a truth I perceive God is no respecter of persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted with
him.

Act. 10.34, 35. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

Gal. 3.38. Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ all, and in all.

Col. 3.11. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free and have all been made to drink
into one spirit.

1 Cor. 12.13. Printed in the Year 1665.

MY near, and cordially beloved friends, Although for the present I have no new
thing, nor any thing else to declare unto you, then what you have heard from
the beginning, from our dear brethren, the faithful servants of the Lord,
nevertheless I cannot omit to write these few lines unto you, which may serve
for a token of our peculiar fellowship, and feeling one of another, in that
whereby we are so often made sensible one of another. Oh! blessed be the Lord,
who through his unspeakable love and infinite mercy, has made us so often
sensible of that from which the world is alienated, and of which it is
ignorant, (to wit) the revelation of his holy eternal spirit, and divine power
in us, through which we could have no peace day nor night, while we walked in
the days of our ignorance, alienated from him, in the time of our nakedness
and misery, but he often revived his own spirit, as a living witness in our
conscience, to the reproving, convincing, and judging of us, for our known, and
some then unknown corruption of our hearts; besides, often did he with friendly
exhortation, beget such good, strong, and precious desires after himself, and
after the redemption from the garment of sin, the old garment of the flesh; and
not alone so, but often has he powerfully drawn us, yea, and in a manner
constrained to subjection, obedience, and fulfilling of his will and commands;
and this has he done of himself, not only when we have found no power in our
selves, nor of our selves, but also when our hearts have in a manner consented
to the evil, and our minds in some measure captivated by the enemy, yea, he
himself in such a time, I say, has kept us from the evil, when we our selves,
nor no man else could not preserve us. And in this manner has he thus very
meekly handled with us, when we daily resisted his spirit through disobedience,
and when, and that almost perpetually, works were brought forth which grieved
his spirit, nevertheless through his unspeakable mercy has he as it were
looked over them things, and has reached over them to his own seed, and has
sought to raise and revive that, and has tenderly nurtured and cherished it,
as a mother nurtures her child, or as a hen her chickens.

And now oh his mercy! that the should even choose us as the first fruits, from
among so many thousands, yea ten thousands, which are yet walking in the
enmity, and alienated from him that gives them breath and life, and who has
born with them until this very day, against which they have heaped up a
treasure of wrath through their disobedience and obstinacy, in which condition
they are often cut off, and so rewarded according to their work. And if the
Lord had dealt so with us, how could we have accused him? nay in the depth of
our misery must we have justified his Judgments. But oh! how contrarily yea how
fatherly, how gently, and how graciously has he dealt with us? what tongue
with words can declare the same? oh the depth of his mercy, and unspeakable
goodness! yea, the consideration of the same does so overcome the hearts of
his children, that often times they cannot express that which they see and
feel that the Lord has done for them, and now through the same love and free
grace has he called us out of the world, and separated us from the same
through his power, which in a great measure has redeemed us from the same in
many respects, both inwardly and outwardly, and having showed and opened unto
us a place of holiness, in which, as we abide, we shall be kept unsportted
from the world. And all, yea all this, has the Lord done for our good, that he
might have cause to manifest his love the more unto us, and to make us
partakers of his heavenly virtues, yea, of his fullness, of his love, peace,
joy, consolation, and gladness in his holy spirit, of his long suffering
loving kindness, forbearance and mercy, yea in short to make us partakers of
his own nature.

And many who have taken to heart this acceptable day of friendly visitation,
and time of great mercy, and have esteemed the day of grace more precious than
all that is in the world, yea, than their own life, and who also have continued
steadfast in the time of trial, for so certainly as the Lord has ordained a
gracious and merciful day of visitation, so assuredly has he prepared a time
of trial; and I say, these that have continued steadfast in the same, and
through the same have been confirmed in the Lord, oh! how well is it with them,
yea, how well is it with such? but on the contrary, those who have not regarded
the day of visitation, which was for their good, but have despised the same,
and carelessly have let it pass by, not sufficiently laying to heart their
eternal peace, nor considering how tenderly the Lord has dealt with them and
born with them, and how fatherly he has cared for them; yea, if it had been
possible, and that they had been worthy, he would have constrained them to have
entered into his rest: but alas! they looking at the visibles, and not giving up
their old and evil accustomed life to the Judgment which was so near unto them,
and ruling in them, shunning the Cross, and following the vain imaginations of
their hearts, and the lusts of the world, and so have let the day of their
visitation, which was out of love unto them, pass over their heads. Oh! in
what a miserable condition have they remained, and what a precious thing have
they neglected? but yet a greater misery is to be observed, which is come over
some such which have not absolutely refused the day and time of their gracious
visitation, but embraced the same with joy, being powerfully convinced of the
truth of God in their own consciences, that all that the Lord wrought in them
and for them, was for their good; for whose preservation the Lord even sought
to do what he knew needful to be done, yea, even as for us; whereby they have
also been constrained to forsake much for the truths sake, and have been
sometimes a good favor to the same, and their service was once before the Lord
not very unacceptable, so long as they remained little before him, and and
little in their own eyes, when their hearts were broken and tender, and when
they were single before the Lord, and given up to his will, and so long as they
did not turn their eye backward, but remained diligently waiting in the daily
Cross, and in the love of the same, and when they had put on the same as a
garment, and as breast plate before their breast, and as a girdle upon their
loins, had girded it, in which time of their tenderness and fruitfulness, the
Lord found cause to manifest his large love unto them, and very much open some
of them, and enlighten the eyes of their understandings, and gave them
knowledge and wisdom, and in a great measure gifted them with authority and
courage, even to the admiration of their enemies, who had sought to provoke
them to resist that truth which they bore testimony of, but often had the power
over them, yea, to tread upon the imagined wisdom of the wise as upon dung,
and to sing the song of triumph over them; these and many more remarkable
things has the Lord brought to pass concerning them, and often in such a
condition has he made them sensible of his grace and mercy, of his kindness
and love, of consolation and refreshment, yea, in short, of the powers and
virtues of the world to come, without end, and of the everlasting Judgment, so
that one might ask, what has not the Lord done for them? or what has the Lord
omitted to do, that he should have done for them? so that it has not in any
wise been wanting on the Lords part: but alas! now when they had gotten some
wisdom, yet nevertheless through the grace of God, in such a time when they
were as fools in their own eyes, yea, as ignorant fools, not knowing any thing;
and when they were become sensible, and partakers of several good gifts in the
time of their tenderness, and when they were little in their own eyes, and
when they kept close to the light, and loved the daily Cross; But oh! not
steadfastly abdiding upon the watch in the light and fear of the Lord, until
than the Lord should be pleased to become all in all in them, and until that he
had totally consumed him that had the power of death (to wit) Satan, and that
they might have learned to have known him and all his devices, subtle
deceivings, and deceivable appearances; therefore have they been through his
cunning snares and subtilties detained, and as an untimely birth, have not been
brought forth unto life; for as Satan is exceeding cunning, and goes
continually about seeking whom he may devour, even so is he an utter enemy to
man's peace with the Lord, and seeks upon diverse manners how he may obstruct the
same; yea, even as the Lord is laboring night and day for man's preservation to
judge the evil, and afterward to show mercy, even so is Satan busy night and
day to accomplish that which he has determined. And although there was a time
wherein he could not easily seduce them, yet did he not despair corcerning
them, but took his opportunity, and appeared to them when they had taken up
some rest in a more glorious form, and changed his countenance, as if he had
been an angel of light, seeking to imitate in motion and appearance, that which
before had proceeded through the power from the life, yea, even as the
Magicians of Egypt who through their witchcraft could imitate much of that
which was done by the power of the Lord, even so this deceivable seducer. And
on the other hand, even as Israel through the mighty hand of the Lord was
redeemed out of Egypt, for whom the Lord had done such wonderful things,
nevertheless this being but a little over, and they not imprinting all those
things which the Lord had done for them in their hearts, then were images soon
made, and Idols set up, and then they said, Behold Israel, these are thy gods
which have brought thee up out of the ladn of Egypt; and even so was it with
them before mentioned, when Satan had drawn their minds from the watch in the
light, and they being become wise in their own eyes, hearkened to the
imaginations and inventions of their own hearts, and then did they make unto
themselves Images of the every finest gold, saying in their hearts to them,
these are your Gods; but he who is a very jealous God, will not have any god
served, honored, nor worshipped, besides himself; who in a short time has
manifested such unspeakable grace, mercy, and goodness to them, he beheld this
their present condition with much sympathizing and heaviness over them, and
sought with great kindness, in much long suffering and tenderness, to warn them
from them, sometimes powerfully convincing them of his truth in their own
consciences, and oftentimes making them sensible of the danger which they are
in, in laying their heart and condition clearly open before them, seeking then
friendly to reprove or to judge that which will not be subject to his spirit;
but alas! the Judgment was become heavy to them, yea too heavy, especially to
the perverse part, and the Cross was become bitter, and there being yet
something remaining ever in them not yet mortified, nor wholly forsaken; and
though the same could not wholly reign nor have the dominion, while they were
tender before the Lord, loved the Cross, and abode in the light, yet
nevertheless has it afterward increased, and is become strong, until that it
finally did sufficiently get the dominion again.

But oh, what has the Lord born with them? and how graciously and mercifully
has he handled with them, and labored with them for to bring them off from
it; yea, how has he labored with them, and not alone the Lord, but also his
Children and faithful servants, who also being constrained through love, were
very diligent in watching over them, for the best, as in the truth it became
them, in much watchfulness, tenderness, and wisdom, but their minds being
drawn out through the subtilty of the enemy, from the light, life, and feeling
of the Unity, and an evil sharp eye that looked out, being opened in them, then
did they seek to pervert every thing to the worst sense that was done by those
who simply and uprightly, from their very heart feared the Lord, whether in
their dealing with them, or toward them, or otherwise. And when the evil and
perverse eye was opened in them, then did prejudice and hard thoughts creep in
against their Neighbors, which when it was let in, increased as a Canker, and
has done much harm in them, by bereaving them of the feeling they once had of
the truth of God, and of them that walked in it; and they thus hardening their
necks against the Lord and his precious servants, nor not willing to remain
subject to the Spirit of the Lord in themselves, which had exceedingly striven
with them to bow them to subjection, nor not being willing to forsake that
which was so dear to them, which yet remained in them unmortified, which having
again gotten power and strength, the Lord has finally ceased striving with
them, and has given them up to themselves, and to their own wills, and has
left them to themselves; and thus were they at last made vessels of wrath,
nowithstanding the great and unspeakable long-suffering of the Lord, that the
Lord might manifest his power and righteousness upon them; and some of them
are made already so sad, dreadful, and lamentable examples, whose misery is
unspeakable, and whose recovery is not to be expected. Oh miserable above all
misery! much better it had been for them that they had never known the truth of
God.

And my dear unfeignedly beloved friends, seeing it has pleased the Lord,
after his so great and long suffering, forbearance and patience, so to reveal
his righteousness upon some, as before mentioned, who have not remained in
subjection to his Spirit unto the end.

Oh let this than serve as a living example unto us, lest that any of us at any
time should be found in the like unbelief and unfaithfulness, and that the Lord
therefore should use the like righteous severity against us, which he has done
unto them; for what are we more then they, if our minds should come to be drawn
out, and alienated from the grace of God in our selves, whereby we have had
such a feeling of the Lord, of his truth, and of those that walk in the same? I
say, if that Satan through his subtilty should come to scatter our minds from
the feeling thereof in our selves, what should we then be better then they? but
it would be more like that such misery and wrath should be suffered to come
upon us, as is come upon them.

And now, seeing that it is so, that the mind can be so easily moved and drawn
out from that in which the Immutability consists, through the manifold
temptations, snares, deceivable subtilties, and subtle seducing of Satan, even
as its possible the most have found by experience in themselves. Let us
therefore keep perpetually in the light in our own particulars, heartily
loving, embracing, cleaving unto, and uniting our minds to it; for that same
that convinced us in the beginning of our sins and unrighteousness, is the same
that must preserve us to the end, for in the same is lite, mercy, and peace;
and through being preserved holily in the same, we become partakers of the
virtues of eternal life, as they are in Christ Jesus; for through the light
has the Lord opened our understandings, and in the light have we seen and felt
the fullness of grace, and through the same the unspeakable mercy of the Lord is
perpetuated, which every morning is renewed to his Children who continually in
his fear, and in his light do wait upon him, calling upon him in his light,
praying, praising, and thanking of him for his unspeakable love, grace and
mercy which he so often and abundantly has manifested to them, whereby they
are often overcome in themselves, and constrained to humble themselves before
the Lord, in true tenderness, brokenness, simplicity, and uprightness of their
hearts, from the bottom of the same, to glorify his holy Name.

Oh, my friends, how does my soul long for all your establishment in the truth,
according to your faithfulness and uprightness of heart, and after your
simplicity, singleness and tenderness before the Lord? that you might be
exalted and established above all that which would arise to hinder you in your
precious running and holy intent, that you therefore might be found steadfast
and diligent, keeping your watch in the light, that he who goes about
continually as a roaring Lion seeking whom he might devour, might never have
cause through any of his subtilties through deceit, to trap or ensnare any of
you, and that before you your selves be aware of it, or by bringing one thing
or other into your hearts, therewith to trouble and disturb you, and to spend
your time, and through such occasions may seek to draw your minds from the
light, and from watching in the same, even as he has done with some who had
neglected the watch in the light, over whom he has gotten power, they having
made shipwreck of faith and of a good conscience, having scattered that which
once with diligence they had gathered, and having lost that which once they
were sensible of, so with the D^g turned to his vomit again, and with the Sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire again, and that after they were
in measure washed.

And though in the beginning of their Apostasy and degentration they gave
credit unto Satan, who sought to make them believe, or rather to imagine, that
they should be no less then they were before, not then the people of the Lord,
but that they should be more perfect, and become better, holier, perfecter,
simpler, uprighter and faithfuller then these who simply wa'ked in the truth,
and more established in it; but finally, it became manifest what Satan was
determined to do with them, and the same it manifest it, when they could hide
that no longer which was grown up in their bosoms, when that came to break out
which they had for a long time secretly hidden.

Oh that Satan should ever so far prevail over any: and now that the like might
not come to pass concerning any of us, who are yet sensible of the grace of
God in our selves, and of his everlasting and unchangeable truth in our own
particulars, therefore is my heart so often turned to the Lord, and pured forth
before him, praying for the salvation of Israel, and for all in Israel that are
of a tender and broken heart, that Satan might not in any wise bereave them of
their simplicity in the light, or of their tenderness to the truth; yea,
because of this, for the truths sake, is my life often poured forth before the
Almighty Father, praying and interceding in much travel, sweating and waking
night and day, that the Lord might be pleased through his unexpressible grace
and fatherly mercy, to obstruct that which Satan has purposed and determined;
for this I may say plainly, he has not yet ceased, neither has he yet
despaired, neither is he who is the accuser of the brethren, cast out of all,
but goes yet about, as a devouring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Oh
therefore my dearly beloved and precious Friends, is it not exceeding needful
to keep our hearts perpetually in the light, upon the watch, to the Lord in
openness and simplicity, that nothing but the Lord alone, and his work and
truth might have the possession in our hearts?

And whatsoever Satan should propound, or seek to make you believe, thereby to
take an occasion to draw out your minds from the light, and from the grace of
God in your selves, regard him not, nor look not at his temptations nor
enticements, neither unite your minds unto the same, for otherwise you might be
ensnared before you were aware; but look upon the Lord and his light, which
manifests his temptations, and join you unto the same, for therein is the
preservation and salvation, and in the same is there power enough to preserve
you from the temptations, that you be not overcome with the same, nor with the
subtle subtilties of the enemy, much less that you should perish in them.

And so my Friends, keep close to the Lord in your own conditions, and do not
easily let in any thoughts against any, or concerning any matter, for thereby
might you come easily to neglect the watch in the light, whereby the enemy
might seek an occasion to draw out your minds from the light, and to alienate
you from it, and then should he have an opportunity to perfect his work, which
he would willingly perfect; and if thoughts arise, what sort soever they are,
or whatsoever happen, or what things soever are brought into your Minds, well,
be circumspect in all things, and be not too forward in any thing, neither give
too much place too suddenly to any thing in the mind, for thereby some have
suffered loss, but whatsoever appears or comes up, receive it not too
suddenly, but bring it to the light of the Lord, that it may be thereby weighed
and tried. And if any thing at any time be found in any of you, by the light of
the Lord not to be pure, nor to proceed from the life, watch against it, and
give it no place but judge it out with the ground from whence it proceeds, and
tread it under your feet; for if you should be slack in wholly forsaking of it,
in judging of it in the ground, and not presently to reject it, after that it
is through the grace of God opened and showed to you not to be of him, nor of
his Spirit, but to be a deceivable temptation of the enemy, and yet never the
less, I say, through negligence and carelessness to suffer it to harbor in you,
oh this is very dangerous, which some with sorrow to their great prejudice have
found by experience, when it had gotten the dominion over them, and had
occasioned a desolation before they were aware.

And seeing the power of my love is so strong, through which I am often made
with tears to intercede unto the Lord for all your preservation, therefore is
my heart the more open to you; neither can I conceal from you the manifold
cunning devices, and subtle deceits of Satan, through which he has so sadly
overcome some, and also what he is determined yet to do, if that he can find
any from the watch in the light, and from the grace of God in themselves; for
indeed this I must once more say, neither can I well omit it, to wit, that
Satan goes yet about seeking wherein, whereby and who he may deceive. And the
Lord knows how it should tend to my comfort, ease and refreshment in him, if
that it were possible that ye all might be spared for to inherit life
everlasting; yea truly I do not know any one thing that would be more
acceptable to me, or that could refresh me more in the Lord, then your
stedfastness, faithfulness and establish in the truth; and therefore I say is
my heart so open to you, and tender over you; neither can I conceal from you
what Satan has determined, hoping that peradventure it may tend to your peace.

And now having declared that which for a long time has been before me, and
hope to return to my resting place, not knowing but that I have done that which
was required of me. So the Almighty Father and preserver of life keep you all,
that you may be steadfastly established for to stand unmoveably in his truth to
the end, to the praise of him that has called you.

Translated in love to the Brethren whom in true love I salute, and in the same
do rest, their entire Brother, W. C.
Your dear Friend, and tender Brother in the fellowship of the Gospel of life,
P. Hendricke.
Amsterdam, the 6th of the 11th Month. 1664.
THE END.

