THE HEADS Of the great CHARGE PRESENTED To the Honorable House of Commons,
against the eleven impeached Members,

BY Colonel Scroope. Colonel Okey. Colonel Hewson. Colonel Pride. Lievt. Col.
Bowen. Lievt. Col. Goffe Major Raynbow. Capt. Berry. Capt. Glarke. Capt.
Carter. Capt. Roase. Master Sexby Master Gettings.


AS ALSO, Certain Papers from the Army, setting forth the gallant proceedings
of the Commissioners, in their present Treaty at Wickham.

London, Printed for R. Walton, July 8. 1647.

The proceedings of the late Treaty, betwixt the Parliaments Commissioners, and
the Army.
THere came Letters also to the House, from the Commissioners with the Army,
and tharein enclosed two letters from the General dated July first at Wickam,
whereof one of them gave to understand that the General had that day appointed
Lieutenant General Crumwell, Commissary Genesis Ireton, Col. Fleetwood, Col.
Rainsborow, Col. Harrison, Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Col. Rich, Col.
Lambert, Col. Hammond, and Major Rainsborow; these or any five of them, of
which the Major part to be of the five last to treat and debate with the
Commissioners of Parliament upon the papers, and desires sent from the army to
the Parliament, and the Votes sent to the army according to the Order of both
Houses of the 26 of June, 1647. And the other letter was in answer to the Vote
of the House on Tuesday last, that a particular charge should be delivered into
the House against the 11 Members by this day, the General returning this
answer thereunto, That as he finds a great willingness in his council of war,
to answer the expectation of the house in all things so in this particular but
the things being of that importance to the Kingdom and the persons charged so
many in number (...) taken up more time then was expected, and therefore desire
that it may be respited until Tuesday next, at which time they will not fail
to bring it in, and that the Kingdom shall then see they have not impeached
the Gentlmen out of any private respects but in affection, and duty to the
public.

There was further also a Proclamation from the General, forbiding any abuse
or obstruction to be offered to any Officers of Parliament in levying the
Excise or other assessements.

From the army came further this evening, that His Majesty one Thursday from
Hatfield toward winsor where he expected to see his children, of which he was
very desierous, but intended not to stay there above a day or tsio, but remove
some further distance from London. The treaty with the Parliaments
Commissioners, and Commissioners from the Army began this morning, as was
appointed, the head quarters of the army it is supposed will be removed
Saturday to Reading.

The house had some debate of the Prince Electors desires, and ordered to leave
it to his own pleasure.

A letter was read in the house from the Commissioners with the army, giving to
understand their entering upon treaty with the army, and the manner of their
proceedings. The house upon debate approve of the Commissioners proceedings
therein.

The head quarters of the army it is certified were removed this day to Reading
and his Majesty was gone back from Winsor to the Lord Cravens house near Causum.

(...) Friday July 2. His Excellency appointed, these Officers of the Army to
treat with the Commissioners from the Parliament in these words:
I Do hereby appoint Lieutenant General Cromwell. Commissary General Ireton,
Colonel Fleetwood, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Harrison, Colonel Sir
Hardres Waller, Colonel Rich, Colonel Lambert Colonel Hammond and Major
Disborough; These ten or any five of them (of which the major part to be of the
five last) to Treat and Debate with the Right Honorable, The Commissioners of
Parliament residing with the Army, upon the Papers and Desires sent from the
Army to both Houses, and the Votes sent to the Army, according to the effect of
the Order of both Houses, dated the 26 of June, 1647. And for that purpose to
attend the Comissioner; at their lodging at the Katherine wheel tomorrow
morning by eight, of the clock and so from time to time, and place to place as
shall be mutually agreed on.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Wickham, the first day of July, 1647.
His Excellency having also received certain votes of the house touching the
eleven members impeached, sent this ensuing letter in answer thereto.

To the Right Honorable the Commissioners of Parliament now residing with the
Army.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving with my Council of War considered of the Votes of the House of
Commons, June 29. which you sent me, for the bringing in the particlar charg
and proofs against the Members charged by the Army, by Friday next at
farthest: As I find a great willingness in them to answer the expectations of
the House in all things, so in particular, but the things being of that
importance to the Kingdom, and the persons charged so many in number, has
taken up more time then was expected; We desire therefore, That it may be
respited until Tuesday next at which time we shall not fail to bring it in;
although we could wish that no time might be lost therein which might be
improved for the present settlement of the affairs of this Kingdom, and that
the Kingdom shall then see, we have not impeached the Gentlemen out of any
private respects, but in affection and duty to the Public. I remain

Wickham, July 1. 1647. Your very affectionate. Friend and Servant, Tho:
Fairfax.


At a council of of war at the Generals quarters at Reading yesterday being
the 5 day of July, 1647. It was ordered as follows. Ordered by his Excellency
and the Council of war, that the Officers and Soldiers under mentioned, do
re-repaire to London, for presenting of the Charge against the 11 members to
the house of his Excellency and the whole Army.

At the making of this order, was a very great Council of war, consisting of
eleven Col. seven Lievtenants Col. and Majors, with a great number of Captains.

The names of the officers aforesaid mentioned, appointed to present the charge
against the eleven members are as follows.

Col. Scroope, Col. Okey, Col. Hewsou, Col. Pride, Lieut. Col. Bowyer, Lieut.
Col. Goffe. Maj. Raignbow, Cap. Berry, Cap. Clarke, Cap. Roafe, Mr. Sexby, and
Mr. Getting.

According to the Order of the Council of War before recited, the Commanders
thereby nominated, for presenting the Charge against the eleven Members, came
to London to deliver the particular Charge to the House. The Charge it self
contains, more then one sheet; therefore of necessity must here be omitted.

Thursday July 1. SIR,
The General advanced this day to Wickham, and the Kings Majesty came from
Hatfield, dined at Moore-Park near Watford, and thence rode to Windsor; but
his Majesty finding his desires not answered, so as to have the opportunity of
rejoicing in the society of his Children there, he left the place the next day,
and went to Winchomb house, near Reading. In this his Majesty's progress, the
Country flockt together to see him; before him rode a Trumpeter, then some
Persons of Honor bare headed; after this came his Majesty attended by the
Commissioners, and about a mile behind them marched a Regiment of Horse.

The last Lords day, Master Crofts preached before the King in the presence
chamber, at the Lord Cravens house near Causum bridge, in the fornoone, and
Master Peter's below in the Hall, and in the afternoon the King heard divine
service only.

The Headquarters continue at Reading; some complaints have been made to the
General, of abuses committed by diverse Soldiers; and for prevention thereof
for the future, his Excellency set forth a Proclamation, charging and requiring
all Soldiers whatsoever, to forbear taking of horses from any person
whatsoever, without sufficient Warrant or to compel any Person where they
quarter to give them any money, and in further pursuance thereof, his
Excellency granted Commission to the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major of
every Regiment, for punishing of offenses by a Council of War in each
Regiment, a copy whereof follows: (...)


The heads of the Charge preserted to the House of Commons, July 6.
FIrst, that they have endeavored to overthrow the Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, and to stand in opposition against the true course of Justice, etc.

2. That by false informations, and evil suggestions, they have used their
utmost endeavors to raise a misunderstanding betwixt the Parliament, and Army.

3. That they have been obstructive instruments in the service of Ireland, and
has showed themselves very forward for the obstructing of that Design.

4. That they have endeavored to set an Army on foot within this Kingdom, and
have also endeavored to carry on many desperate designs within this Realm.

It is said, that the Army does intend to proceed against some of the impeached
Members first, and so to the next by degrees. The Charge was read in the
Honorable House of Commons upon Tuesday last, and after some debate thereupon,
the further result thereof was put off till Friday following.

FINIS.

