A THREEFOLD CORD To unite Souls for ever unto GOD.

1. The Mystery of Godliness opened. 2. The Imitation of Christ proposed. 3.
The Crown of afflicted Saints promised.
As it was compacted by M. Richard Head, M. A. and sometimes Minister of the
Gospel, in his Labors at Great Torrington in Devon.

Published now, after his Death, for public profit.

ECCLES. 4.12. A threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Fr. Coals, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Old-Bayly, at the Sign of the Halfe-Bowle, 1647.

To the Readers.
HOnest Readers (for I dare bespeak no other) This Posthumous Work of the
Reverend Author, given to my perusal by his surviving Consort, with desire to
make it of public benefit, is fit for none so much as for you, who are
delighted in Honest Things. Other Histrionicks, Athenian and wanton Readers,
are taken up with Play-Bookes, Newes-Bookes, and Scandalous Pamphlets; yet
would they turn their eyes upon Spiritual and serious Discourses, it might
prove better worth their labor, even to make them better. To all therefore
that desire to be good, or to do good, I shall commend this little Work, as
not unbeseeming their view. The several Tractates are not large, as perhaps
the subjects of them might desire, they being of great extent; yet a short and
swee^ representation of them will make none losers, who may read some of them
in larger Volumes, set out to the full. 1 Timothy 3.16. Matthew, 19.28^ Jam. 1.12.
If the Mystery of Godliness, the Imitation of Christ, the Crown of
afflicted Saints, be matters delightful to you, you may pass through this
little Garden, and crop sweet Flowers, growing upon every Root. The Subjects
do garnish enough the Labor of the Author, and his Labor enlighten's them.
My prayer is, that by this Light your Souls may be guided to obtain this
Mystery, this Christ, this Crown here blazoned: Your labor then will not be
lost in Reading, nor mine in persuading you thereunto. The God of Spirits write
in your hearts what you read here; in him I am,

Yours, bound to serve you for Jesus sake, GEO: HUGHES.

August the 7. 1647.
I Have read these three pious and profitable Sermons; the first, entitled,
The Saints Inheritance; the second, The Mystery of Godliness; the third, The
reward of Imitation, and do license them to be printed and published.

JOHN DOWNAME.

THE SAINTS INHERITANCE.
A Sermon Preached in Torrington the second of February, 1642.
JAMES 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation; for when he is tried,
he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to those that
love him.


WE have here an Argument unto patience, and cheerful suffering, verse 10.
Let the rich man rejoice, when brought low, to an ebb, like a River emptied.

Durus hic Sermo; this is a hard saying, who can bear it? it is hard for any,
especially for a great man to endure vexations, per se: harder yet? to endure
them with joy.

True 3 and therefore, that the man brought low may not only endure his
pressures, but endure them with joy, the Apostle encourages him thereunto,
propter aliud; from, or for something else; and this no less then a Crown of
immortal Glory: and so would have him to go chearefully on; assured, that his
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

In the words we have, first, a proposition; and then, secondly, the proof
thereof.

In the proposition, first, the subject, or person spoken of; and secondly, the
(...), or thing a firmed of him.

First, the subject, (...)

The (...) dinari^ pitch, (...); look a little back, and you shall see him,
verse. 9. Let the brother of low degree rejoice when exalted; and let the ^ch
man rejoice when brought low. It Is then some great man the Text here speaks
of, some great man in adversity; and yet not simply so, but one, who being in
adversity, is there by tempted; and yet (which is worse) (...), endu^eth the
remptation, neither shrinking from it, nor sinking under (...) and there lies
the point of Christian braverie and gallantrie.

By tentation, in this place then, we are to understand afflictions; whether
from within, by a prick in the flesh, and the bufferings of Satan; or whether
from without, by the molestations of malicious and malignant enemies, by the
revisings and reproaches of the ungodly, by unkindnesse of friends, and the
^tinesse of such as have been near and dear unto (...) king from us the
choice of our affection, (...) 24.16. calls the pleasure of the heart, and
(...) fo the eyes; or whether the Lord lay his hand upon our bodies, in some
painful and pining Sickness: in a word, whatsoever affliction the Lord be
pleased to lay upon us, suppose it be that we cannot make less, by imparting
it to others; all is to ^rie us.

Afflictions are but Trials.

1 Obser^.
Dear. De^r. 8.2. And thou shaft remember all the way which the Lord thy God led
thee these forty years in the Wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee,
to know what was in thine heart, whether thon wors^ (...) of any thing within
us, for he understands all our thought long before; Hell and destruction are
before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the son^es of men? But that what
is in us, may he made (...) both to our selves (...) whether it be Pride,
Impatience, or any other whatsoever Rebellions (...) Faith, Hope, Love,
Patience and other the lovelyest Graces of Gods holy and sanctifying Spirit,
which like the ^tar^es in the darkest night, are most illustrious in blackest
times of trouble and adversity.

Thus also would the Lord try our uprightness and sincerity: ^imes of Peace,
Pl^n^ie, and Prosperity there is roo^e for Satan's objection against us, as
against holy job^ Do those, and there, serve the^ for nothing? (...) not thou
thus and thus blessed them? And it may be that many in those better days
served God son the blessings of his left hand, etc. Like little Children, who
say their Prayers, to have their Breakfast. But when in times of great
afflictions, when God is turning his Children our of doors, a begging exposing
them to eminen^ dang^ now to serve the Lord, now to adhere unto him, choosing
rather to have our bodies torn from our souls, then our ^es from our
Redeemer: This demonstrates, that we are not base and ^cenarie; that though we
cannot serve God without wages, yo^ did not serve him for wages; but at least,
primarily for himself, and the lovelynesse of his Nature.

Afflictions then are no arguments of Gods displeasure ^ay, 1 Use. Instruction
in Truth,
when blessed and sar^ctified, they are arguments of his love and favor; and
(...) ^ey are, when by them God separates what he hates, from he person whom he
loves. I know (says David) that out of very faithfulness thou have caused me
to be afflicted. And again, Blssed is the man whom thou chastisest, and ^chest
in thy Law. Not therefore blessed, because afflicted; but therefore blessed,
because by afflictions made wiser, made more holy, more humble, etc.
Afflictions, like Jonathans Arrows, are sent, not to hurt (...) but to w^rne
us like the Sheph^ Dog, sent out, not to bite, but to bring us in from
straying, and so from danger.

And if Afflictions be Trials; 2 Use. Instruction to D^ie.
then must we, when under them, (as now at this time all of us, in respect of
the publi^e) especially look to our selves: for now as the losing, or the
^ving of some special Grace, or Blessing. Now God is trying me, whether I will
repent of my sins, go home to my Fathers house, whether I will hold out in
my journey to Canaan, or back again to Egypt, etc. Truly, what you are in
affliction, that you are, and no more.

Is there any among you, 3 Use. Comfort.
who being under afflictions, lives by faith, manifests his graces, is
thereby drawn nearer to God, in a spiritual^ disdain of all things here
below? Is there any here that truly and experimentally can say of his trouble,
It^ good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes?
Psalm. 119.71. Read here an argument of Gods fatherly love; he scourges every
son whom he receives: and then say of thine affliction, thus turning thee
from sin and death, as David to Abigail, when she turned him from his fury;
Blessed he the Lord God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me: Oh, the
memory of this may do you good another day; It follows:

As afflictions are trials, so it is said of the great man under them, (...), a
word made up of two, and so would speak unto us two points:

1. 2 Obser.
When God is pleased to lay afflictions on us for our trial, we must (...),
stay in those afflictions, till he that laid them on, shall please to take
them off.

It Is said of Joseph, that till the time was ^ome, the Word of the Lord tried
him; God knows as how, so when, to deliver his servants: in the Mount he will
be seen; and therefore in whatsoever afflictions we are, we must wait his
will and pleasure, and stay his leisure too, Dan. 11.35. And some of them of
understanding shall fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white,
even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed: And Isay
28.16. He that believes shall not make haste: The Plaster must lie on, till
the Sore be healed; wherefore, Jam. 1.4. Let patience have her perfect work.

This makes against those who can endure afflictions for a while, but if a
little lengthned, 1 Use. Reproof.
they grow weary and impatient; saying as he in 2 Kings 6.33. Why should we
walt on God any longer? Away they go to some indirect and unlawful ways; or
else they murmr, repine, blaspheme, etc.

And truth is, there is too much impatiencie in the best, Mica 7.4. The best of
them is as a Bryar, the most upright is sharper then a Thorne-hedge: They kick,
but it is against the pricks; and so by their impatiencie they only hurt
themselves, they make their burden more heavy, and God more angry: Read and
tremble, Numb. 11.1. And when the people complained, it displeased the Lord,
and the Lord heard it; and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord
burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the
Camp.

Heb. 10.36. Verily you have need of patience, that when you have done the will
of God, 2 Use. Exhortation.
you might inherit the promise: wherefore, as our Lord and Savior advises,
Luke 21.19. In patience possess we our own souls; this shall save us from
the evil of affliction: Quamvis non ab exteriere and alieno tamen ab intimo
and nostro, August. Though not from the evil that is without us, yet from the
evil that is within us.

Abide patiently: Might you for the least of the sins Rome calls venial,
have not only deliverance from troubles, but great preferment, yield not on
any terms; Heb. 11.35. And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection.

Let not God go in these your wrestlings, till with Jacob you have got a
blessing. Have you not heard of the patience of Job? Jam. 5.11. And have you
not seen the end of the Lord? So soon as the Just Man, seeing the folly of his
impatiencie and distemper, yielded and submitted; the Lord made an end of his
afflictions. See Job 40.4.) what he says, Behold I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Now hear the Lord, verse. 6.
Then the Lord answered unto Job out of the Whirlewinde, and said, Gird up thy
loins now like a man, etc. And surely (as David sings) The patient abiding of
the just shall never be forgotten. Nay, if thus you suffer, you shall be more
then conquerers, through him that loved us. Revel, 12.11. And they overcame him
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved
not their lives unto the death.

But they are malicious men, by whom you suffer, Object.
(say you) and this is that that moves you.

Be it so, and so it ever was, Sol.
is, and will be. Gal. 4.29. But as then, he that was borne after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even so it is now. But then say
I:

First, If because they revile, rail, reproach you, you again revile,
reproach, and rail on them as fast; what difference is there, inter
provocantem and provocatum, Tert^ll. between you and them? only this; they
sinned first, and you sinned next.

Secondly, Who, or whatsoever be the instruments of your afflictions, 'cis God
permits them, he has an hand in all your troubles; Art. 3.6. Job 2.10.
Is there any evil in the City (says the Lord) and I have not done it? Say
then as Job to his Wife, Shall (...) receive good at the hands of God, and
shall we not receive evil? Say we (as our Lord and Savior) Shall I not
drinks of the Cup my Father gives me?

As for the molestations of the wicked; as Pilate unto Christ, threatening him
with crucifying, because he spoke not when he was spoken unto, John 19.11. They
could have no power ^ver you, were it not given them from above. Here then you
must also see the hand of God, and lay your own hand upon your mouth. See what
David does, 2 Samuel 16.10, 12. And the King said, What have I to do with you,
ye sonnis of Zerviah? So let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him,
Curse David; who shall then say, wherefore have thou done so? It may be the
Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his
cursing this day. Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14. They also that seek after my life, lay
snares for me; and they that seek my hurt, speak mischievous things, and
imagine deceits all the day long: but I, as a deaf man, heard not, and I was
as a d^mbe man, that opens not his mouth, etc.

Nay farther,

We must not only (...), but (...); not only not shrink from, but not sink
under the pressures God is pleased to lay upon us. So then the next point is,

2. 4 Obser.
When God is pleased to try us by afflictions, we must not only suffer them
to the end, but all the while with strength and courage; not only with
constancy, but magnanimity. If (says Solomon) thy heart fail thee in the
day of trouble, thy strength is small. We must stand up under our burdens, as
the Palm Tree under weights; not only, not stooping or declining, but
springing up the more toward Heaven.

As in the Deluge; the higher the Waters rose, the higher still mounted the
Arc: so the greater our trouble; are, the higher must we go in our thoughts
toward, God. 2 Cor. 4.8, 10. We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; always bearing about in
the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our body.

Say we then of our several pressures (as it is, Ier. 10.19.) Truly this is
my griese, and I will bear it. Use. Counsel.
They who being under affliction, do either shrink from it, or sink under
it, are Cowards both alike. If at any time, either through the greatness, or
the length of any misery, our hearts begin to faint, check we our selves, and
say as David, Psalm. 42. Why art thou ^ast down, O my soul, and why art thou
so disquieted within me? Trust in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.

To this end, labor we for spiritual strength: My Grave (says God, as to
the Apostle, so to all in like case, 2 Cor. 12.9.) shall be sufficient for
thee. And Philip. 4.13. I (says the Apostle) am able to do all things through
him that strengthens me: Understand him, transcendently; strengthened by
Christ, we shall be able, not only to do, but to suffer any thing for his
sake.

Labout we for courage, fortitude, heavenly-mindednesse; so shall nothing be
hard unto us: Aliquando vincitur quis, non quia fortior, sed quia cum timidiore
congressus, Tertull. We are sometimes beaten, not because weak, but because
more cowardly and fearful.

Well (say you) here is the Man that suffers, and thus suffers; a Man that
both stays in his affliction, and stands up under it: What then?

Secondly, The thing affirmed of him.

He is blessed: And hence shall I commend unto your tenderest Meditations, two
Instructions.

First, As we would be blessed, we must first be tried by some affliction or
other.

Acts 14.22. Where you see the way to Heaven lies; first, through tribulations;
secondly, through many tribulations; and this, thirdly, necessarily it must be
so.

God has appointed it, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. That no man should be moved by these
afflictions; for your selves know, that we are appointed therecunto. And if
we go forth by the footsteps of the flock (as it is in one of the Songs of
Love) we shall find, all that are now in Heaven, to have gone this way. Heb.
2.10. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings. And, Heb. 13.1^ Wherefore, seeing we also are
compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every
weight, etc. Iam^es 5.10. Take my brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken to us
in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience. 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. And this
way must all follow after. Whosoever (says the Apostle) will live godly in
Christ; note that, in Christ, that is, in opposition to the world, must suffer
persecution.

Blessedness at the first required nothing but obedience active, Do this and
live; but since the Fall, it requires obedience passive also: the way to
Heaven is by weeping-crosse, Heb. 12.6,8. For whom the Lord loves he
chasten^th, and scourges every son whom he recerveth: if ye endure
chastening. God deals with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the
father chasteneth not?

Those eight Beatitudes, or rather eight parts of Beatitudes, (which is one and
entire) in Christ's first Sermon upon the Mount, if you mark them, run most of
them in obedience passive: we must go to Canaan through the Wilderness,
amidst Scorpions, and by the waters of Marah.

They then are much deceived, Use. Conviction.
who think to pass hence, a delicits ad delicias, from fleshly and worldly
pleasures and delights to the joys of Gods presence: deceived they are, as
they shall one day find, when it shall be said unto them, amid their torments,
and too late repenting, as unto Dives; Remember thou had thy pleasure upon
earth.

Art thou yet at ease in Sion. etc? Counsel.
Well, thou m^yst yet suffer, nay thou must, there is no scaping in a mist;
though going forth wind and tide serve thee, yet suddenly both may turn
against thee. It Is reported of Nero, that having a fair Empress, he used
sometimes to take her by the chin; saying, Here is a saire face, but when I
list I can cut it off: So say thou of all thy sairest external blessings; here
is a strong body, but God can when he pleases turn it into dust; here are
sweet children, but God can when he will take them from me, etc. Provide for a
storm, and the rather, because now the heavens lowre, our banks are broken
down, and the tide is breaking in: O let us no longer, like little children,
play with cockle shells upon the shore.

Art thou under any affliction, any distress, any extremity, etc? be not
dismayed, the worst of the ways of God are better then the best of the ways
of sin; for these lead to the chambers of death, 1 Pet. 1.12 think it not
strange, nay think of it both as right and comsortable; for this is your
land-marke, now may you assure your selves, that you are in the way, only
look not back to Egypt again, nor sit still as weary, yet a little farther,
and you are happy, Heb. 12.11. Now no chastening for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit
of Righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. It follows,

Secondly, As they who would be blessed, must endure tentation; so they that
endure tentation, shall be blessed.

Romans 8.17. And if childrens then heirs, heirs of God, and joyntheires with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together. Revel. 2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; be
thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Nay, they are already blessed in the comfortable assurance of Gods love and
favor.

Away then with all Bildads and Zophars, Use. Reproof.
who would draw hard conclusions on Gods people in their affliction, as if God
loved them not: Oh let their mouths be tied up in silence for ever. Blessed
(says my Text) is the man that indureth tentation; and who can curse where ^od
has blessed?

See here with admiration, Advice.
the goodness and graciousnesse of our God, who though he might command our
obedience, both active and passive, upon the allegiance we owe unto him is yet
pleased to sugar his precepts with sanctions; with propositions and promises of
reward. He blesses us as the good old father, Ephraim and Manasseth with his
hands a-crosse. How happy are we to serve so good a Master; but how happy
shall we be, if we do him good service?

Is there any among you, who being in troubles, is thereby offended, whose feet
begin to slip, whose treadings are almost gone? O look out with Moses to the
recompense of reward, so shall you hasten home, and sweeten your thoughts by
the way as you go; the days are sharp, but then they are short; the ways are
soul, but not long; Heaven is hard at hand, and a day is coming will make
amends for all your sorrows and sufferings; hold on, and the Crown is yours.

Afflictions are trials; and these, as we would be blessed we must endure;
yea, if we endure them, neither sinking under them, nor shrinking from them,
we shall be blessed.

Blessed is the man that indureth tentation; and why blessed? the proose of the
proposition follows, for when he is tried, he shall receive a crown of life,
etc.

And here you see the blessedness of the patient man:

First, defined.

Secondly, assured.

1. It Is defined.

It Is a Crown of life: A Crown speaks State and Dignity; whatsoever we are
now, we shall ere long be Kings, and walk in long white Robes: You (says
Christ) that have followed me in the Regeneration; that is, in the day of new
birth to all the world, in the day of Restoration of all things; shall sit on
twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28.

But what is a Crown without life; Better (says Solomon) be a living Dag then
a dead Lion.

True, but the patient man shall have at last, not only a crown, but a Crown
of Life, 2 Timothy 4.8. Honcesorth is la^d up for me a Crown^ of Righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Indge shall give me at that day; and not to me
only, bus unto them also that love his appearing: So then,

Howsoever we have here beatudinem viato^nm, such and so much happ^nesse as
belongs to Travelers, Observe.
yet is the fullness, the heaghe of blessedness behind, beatitudo patriae,
we are now the sons of God, 1 John 3.2. Nevertheless, it does not appear
what we shall be; but when Christ shall appear, we should appear in glory with
him. Above (says the Apostle) are such things as neither eye has seen, ner
ear heard, nor ever came into the heart of (...) to conceive: The sum of all,
is Gods beatificall vision.

In Heaven is the perfection of all good things; fullness is the perfection of
measure, everlastingnesse is the perfection of time, infiniteness the
perfection of number, immutability the perfection of state, immensity the
perfection of place, immortality the perfection of life, and God the perfection
of all; Psalm. 16.11 In thy presence as fullness of joy, at thy right hand there
we pleasures for evermore.

See here the extreme folly of worldly men, Use. Reproof.
who for perishing, and vexations vanities, are content to part with a Crown
of immortal Glory.

Worse yet are they, who for the pleasures of s^e, which are but for a season,
momentanie, ye^ abortive, perishing are they bud, forseit eternal
blessedness: We laugh at little children, when they let go things of worth
for trisles, rattles, a nut, an apple: but certainly many among us are much
more child^sh; They let go Heaven and all the riches, joys, and happiness
thereof, for things that can do them no good, may do them much hurt; and when
all is done, cannot abide with them.

See here again a ground of patience and cheeresull suffering; your losses are
many and great, Counsel.
but if you have not lost Heaven, you have lost nothing: Mary's better part is
that which cannot be taken away: Your crosses are many and great, remember
there is a Crown of life behind, etc.

Wherefore (as the Apostle, Colos. 3.) take your affections off from things
here below, and set them on things above; look to the Crown of life reserved
for you: Amid all crosses, and in the hour of death, live in the comforts of
this hope, and raise your minds accordingly; live like those that do believe,
and expect an Heaven: Heb. 10.34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and
took joyfully the sp^yling of your goods, knowing in your solves that you have
in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. See here a cross with a Crown.

But what assurance? we see blessedness defined, but how is it assured?

The assurance is twofold.

1. In regard of promise, God has said.

2. In regard of those to whom the promise is made, They that love him.

First, Obser.
God has said, Blessed is the man that indureth tentation, for he shall
receive a crown of life. Has God said it, and shall not he do it? He (says
the Apostle) is faithful who has promised; Again, all his promises in Christ
are yea and amen. If we confess, 1 Ioh. 1.9. God is faithful to forgive; a
strange argument, one would think, we should rather fear revenge, then expect
forgiveness of sin from the Justice of God.

But God is as just in performing the mercy he has promised, as in executing
the vengeance he has threatened.

See here a sure ground of hope, Use. Counsel.
the word and promise of our never-failing God; a sure ground (I say) wherein
hope, which is our Anchor, may strongly fasten, to secure our souls in any
tempest; as to hope without a promise, or upon a promile, otherwise then it
stands, is to let our Anchor hang in the water, or catch in a wave, and so to
expect safety: So to depend upon the promise of God, and so as the promise is
made, is to settle, to stay, to save our selves against all storms.

Wherefore, take the Lord at his word, Cast not away your hope, (says the
Apostle, Heb. 10.35, 36.) And why? because there is a promise, whereby with
patience and doing the will of God, we shall be sa^e amid all surges here, and
at last happily arrive on the shores of peace.

What (say some) will you have us to stand where no bottom is? Dub.
will you have us to hang in the air?

Oh slow of heart to believe; Sol.
does not the world, earth, and sea, depend on the Word of God; as you may see,
Heb. 11.2. Through faith we understand, that the worlds are framed by the Word
of God, so that things which are seen, were not made of things which (...)
appear.

Howsoever among men, an argument from authority is not always sound, because
all men are liars, farther then truth speaks for them; yet some you know have
borne such sway with their followers and disciples, that their bare word have
carried assent, (...), such a one said it, has stopped all further oppositions;
And when God says this or that, shall not we believe him? Psalm. 9.10. They
that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou never failest them that seek
thee.

Secondly, as God has promised a crown of life to the patient man; so his
farther assurance is, it is the Crown God has promised to those that love him:
And hence a twofold observation.

First, Obser.
Eternal blessedness belongs by promise, only to the holy; to these only is
the promise made, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God; Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the Tree of life, and may enter in through the Gates into the
City.

See here the gates of Heaven made fast against all the ungodly; Use.
with Balanm, they would dye the death of the Righteons, but they will not live
the life of the Righteous: They would be happy, but they will not be holy; how
unequal are these thoughs? how unpossible are these hopes? In good duties (as
one observes) they separate the means from the end; they think to come to
Heaven, though they move not a foot, turn not their faces that way, though they
live in the general neglect of all good duties: As if a man bound from hence
to London, should sit down here, and yet think to attain his journeyes end.
Again, in evil things, they separate the end from the means; they promise
themselves an escape from hell, though every step they take tend thither. Mal^
esse volunt, misers esse nolunt ^mo ^dco sunt mali ^t non sint miseri, Aug. Let
these read Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. And it come to pass when he bear^th the words of
this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst,
the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smock against that man, and all the curses that are written in this Book^
shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under Heaven.

Farther, See here a necessity of an holy life; as we would be everlastingly
blessed, we must live holily; for without holiness, none shall see the Lord:
He that would finish his colors in brightness, must be sure to lay suitable
grounds; and he that would finish his life in glory, must necessarily begin
and end in grace: Away with the black colors of sin, they are an ill
foundation; 1 John 3.2, 3. Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he sha11 appear, me
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is; and every man that has this
hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

It Is the Crown God has promised to those that love him; hence by the by, are
two Questions.

First, Quest. 1.
Why is it not rather said, it is the Crown God has promised to those that do
believe, or obey, etc?

First, Note this love arising from faith in Christ, in whom alone ^s the
accep^ance of persons and du^es.
because faith works by love, and good duties done out of love are acceptable,
because they are the gifts of friends: Wicked men may abound in outward works,
they may pray, hear, etc. all which howsoever materially good, and in common
acceptance be commanded, may yet be made sin (and indeed too often are)
because the doing of them does not necessarily, and from within, respect either
the command, or the commanders glory, but are only reducible unto him, and may
in the mean time look another way; so that the goodness of those duties is
not in the duties themselves, but in the right manner of doing them; wherein if
we fail, the things are no longer good, at least to us.

Secondly, wicked men, as they cannot believe, so neither can they love,
because these things are essentially good in themselves: And although we
neither do them, nor can do them with that strength and perfection the Law
requires; yet cannot the doing of them in faith be totally and altogether
sinful, because they take Christ into their performance, and do
intrinsecally, and in the very substance of the work respect God in him.

Thirdly, they who do what God commands, obedientially in says, respect both
the commandment, and his glory that gives it: he that works, not only out of
common conviction, but in and with this filial affection, out of love; this is
he that through Christ pleases God, both in his person and all his
performances.

Secondly, Quest. 2.
Why is it not rat her said, it is the Crown God has promised to those whom he
does love?

Because our love is better known unto us, Answ.
being within us; then Gods love, being without us; especially in such days as
these of great calamity, wherein we are prone to doubt of, and to question the
love of God; if God be with us, why is all this evil fallen on us?

Now that we love God, we may be sure; not conjecturally, but certitudinali
scientia, certainly and infallibly. O how I love the Lord, (says David) Psalm.
116. And we (faith the Apostle) have received the Spirit of God, whereby we
know the things that are given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

And being assured that we love God, we may be sure that God loves us; Ille
prior in amore, 1 John 4.20.

Howsoever our love to him, in respect of his to us, be as the running of a
little stream, to the flowing of the great Ocean; or as the thirst of one, to
the Fountain where he drinks: yet for as much as his love to us, begets our
love to him; therefore if we love him, we may be sure he loves us.

Now as touching the second observation.

He that indureth tentation is blessed; and why? because he shall receive a
Crown of life; And why shall he receive this? because it is the Crown God has
promised to those that love him: But why to the patient man? because by his
patient suffering he shows his love to God more then any. Now (says God to
Abraham, on the point of offering up his only son) I know thou love me.

As the patient show their love to God by suffering, Observe.
so will the Lord show his love to him by rewarding.

The Covenant between God and us, stands in mutual stipulations of love.
Wherefore, we having showed our love to God, by patient suffering for his sake;
it remains, that he experiment his love to us in rewardfull retributions.
It Is just with God (says the Apostle) to render to you that are troubled, rest
and peace, etc.

It suffices not then, Use.
that we suffer, unless we suffer in love; and if we love, we shall serve,
and suffer long, as Jacob for Rachel, and think all nothing, only because we
love.

Love is that lively motive, which makes our obedience full; it is that virtue
which comprehends all other virtues. Gradn eminentia; for if we do and suffer
out of love, we are at the highest pitch possible attainable. Love (says the
Apostle) fulfils the Law, nor can any virtue so long hold out; It Is as strong
as death, Cant. 8.6, 7.

Acquaint your selves with Gods transcendent excellencies, but above all, set
your thoughts a working in deepest and humblest meditation of his love to you
in Christ. God loved us, loved us first; loved us being enemies; yea, so loved
us, as to give his Son to us; yea, as to give him to death for us, to an
accursed and shameful death; and he asks nothing of us but this, that we
believe in him, and so he good to our souls: If Faith be in the work, Love
will break out, yea break out into tears of joy, to an exrasie, Psalm. 31.21.
Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and may
supplications; because he has inclined his ear unto me; therefore I will
call upon him so long as I live, Gal. 2.20.

The result of all is this:

We must suffer and endure afflictions, Obser.
as out of love, so with joy.

The Argument.

That which makes for our eternal blessedness, is to be endured with joy: But
Afflictions makes for out eternal blessedness; erge, not that we are to
rejoice in our afflictions, but in the act, exercise of our patience, or rather
Christ's working them in us; and so in the assurarce of Gods love and favor: as
the penitent not in his sins, but in his tears for sin; Acts 5.41. And
they departed from the presence of the counsel, rejaycing that they wene
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name; And 2 Cor. 12.10. Therefore I take
pleasure in infirm^ies, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake.

But be you therefore cheerful in afflictions, they are but for a few days,
and then comes glory: Every Bird can sing in a clear Heaven, only the
Nightingale sings in a storm; Romans 5.2, 3. By whom we have access by faith,
into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the glory of God: and not
only so, but we glory in tribulation, knowing that tribulation works
patience, etc. If your hearts grow heavy, recover your selves with David,
Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou so sad, O my soul, and why so disquieted within me?
Trust in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance,
and my God.

Soli Deo gloria.
THE MYSTERY OF GODLINESS.
I TIMOTHY 3.16. And without controversy, great is the Mystery of
Godliness; God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into
Glory.


WHat the Evangelists speak of Christ by way of History, the Apostle here
discovers as a great Mystery: Without all controversy great is the Mystery
of Godliness, etc.

Where, behold (as in a Scale of Gradation) first, a Mystery; secondly, a
great Mystery; thirdly, a great Mystery of Godliness; fourthly, a great
Mystery of Godliness without all controversy.

Next, the Veyle being as it were rent, we see what that great Mystery is,
God made manifest in the flesh.

So then, the Apostle here shows you, first, that there is a Mystery;
secondly declares what that Mystery is.

First, a Mystery: This word in its own language speaks some sacred and
secret thing, full furnished with matter of knowledge, but not clearly
understood; either because there is something between us and it, or because it
self is too hard for us: and Mysteries there are many. 1 Cor. 13. If (faith
the Apostle) I knew all Mysteries: thereby giving us to understand, that there
are Mysteries of several sorts, some greater, some lesser: whatsoever others
are, this is great.

Secondly, a great Mystery: (...). This, says the Apostle, speaking of
Marriage, Ephesians. 5.32. is a great Mystery, because it shadoweth forth unto us
the Union that is betwixt Christ and his Church: But,

Thirdly, it is not only great, but godly; a Mystery of Godliness: Godliness
is the scope of it; it teaches not only to believe what God promiserh, but to
obey what God commands: and godliness (faith the Apostle) is great gain; it
has the promise of this life, and the life to come: its therefore a Trade
(says one) of a good return, which way soever you look. Nay more;

Fourthly, the Mystery here is not only great, a Mystery of Godliness, but
all this without controversy. There are many great Mysteries in the world, but
not great without controversy; nay, not without great Controversies. The world
you see is full of desperate Disputes about Truth, whilst Truth her self lies
neglected in the middle; like Moses his body, when the Devil and the Archangel
strove about it; dead, and buried, no man can tell where: Religion (as one
complains of old) is even lost in Questions about Religion: we pull so
violently in our unprofitable Disputes, that at length breaking the Rope, we
sall more asunder, yea, the one side, if not both, must at last fall to the
ground. But what is the Mystery here? so great, so godly, and both without
controversy.

God made manifest in the flesh.

So that here is, first Height, God; secondly, Depth, in the flesh; thirdly,
Breath, manifest; that is, God not only made man, but showing himself a man.

First, Height, God, Job 6.26.

Secondly, Depth, God in the flesh, that is, the Godhead not absolutely
considered, but as personally restrained to the Son; and to him not simply
neither, as he is God, but as a Person subsisting in the Godhead. The Word was
made flesh, says S. John, that is, the second Person; (...), The Word of God:
who, as we begat words out of our thoughts, beget his Son out of himself,
as it were by thinking within himself an eternal Generation.

Not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost is made man, for then there should have
been two Sons, but the middle person between both: as to preserve the
integrity of the blessed Trinity, so the better to undertake the office of
Mediation between God and man.

But yet, though Father and Holy Ghost had no communion with the incarnation of
the Son, (...), Damascen, otherwise then by assent, and approbation: yet for
as much as the Son is of the same substance with the Father, coeternall,
coessentiall with him, God blessed for ever, Amen: for as much as the Word and
Deity are both one subject, should we exclude the nature of God from
incarnation, we should make the Son of God not to be very God. Undoubtedly
therefore, the Nature of God, in the Person of the Son, is incarnate: and
therefore, though incarnation may not be granted to any Person, but one; yet
may it not be denied to the Nature, which is common to all.

Now this second Person assumed not the person of one man; for then had that
only been saved, which was assumed: but Wisdom, to the end she might save
many, built her House of that nature which is common to all: nor did he assume
a person already made, for then should he have two persons, the one assuming,
the other assumed: he took man's nature to his Person, that is, not only the
body; but the soul of man, that so the whole man, body and soul, might be
saved. Yea, he took not only the substance, but the properties and qualities
of our nature. We may say of him, as S. James of Elias, he was (...), a man of
like passions with us; in all things like us, saving in sin.

But how without sin?

He came not from Adam, as we do, and therefore had not the corruption of
Adam, as we have: he took the substance of our nature, but not by the way of
ordinary generation. He came of man, but not by man: he was the immediate
fruit of the womb, but not of the loins, and so is sree from the touch and
taint of our corruption; he is the holy thing. Moreover, he was conceived by
the Holy Ghost: As Mary was the passive and material principle of this
precious flesh, so was the Holy Ghost the active and efficient; both stopping
the course of original sin in the Virgin, and sanctifying the materials,
from the first moment of her Conception.

But is not Christ then the Son of his own Spirit?

No: Fathers indeed beget their Children out of their own substance, but the
Holy Ghost only framed flesh for him, from whom he himself proceeded: They
both made the handmaid of the Lord, whom from thence, all generations shall
call blessed.

It follows, thirdly, Breadth.

Thirdly, not only is God made flesh, but made manifest in the flesh; he
pitched his Tabernacle among us: The Word (says S. John) was made flesh, and
dwelt amongst us. He came (faith the Apostle) on the form of a servant, he
went about doing good. We have seen him with our eyes, we have heard him
with our ears, felt him with our hands, say his Witnesses.

And why all this? Why made flesh? And why made maifest in the flesh? first,
That God might be satisfied in the same nature wherein he was offended:
secondly, That Satan might be destroyed in the same nature wherein he destroyed
man, Heb. 2.14.

See here what God can do in a piece of Clay. To work curiously in Gold, or
Silver, much commends the Workman: but to do the same in mouldring Earth,
commend: him more; so is it here: It Is a Si^le borrowed from the Council of
Ephesus.

Thus also would God restore us to our lost glory: Romans 3.^
All have sinned (faith the Apostle) and come short of the glory of God. For
the restoring of this ^age, we must back to God again: But alas, there is no
coming near him, for he is a cousuming fire; and who can dwell with
everlasting burnings? Besides, He (faith the Apostle) ^wells in laght
inaccassible. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Could we come near him, we cannot see him, for he is invisible. Behold, the
S^nne of God is made the Son of Man, that we by this might be made the
Sons of God, 2 Cor. 3.18. Gal^. 4.4, 5.

Thus also would God advance the nature of man, disgraced by sin, and made
odicus unto him: because we could not come to him, he comes to us, in our
flesh is made man; just as if a King should lovingly and gracionsly return to
that City, from whence not long fince he) turned away in great and just
displeasure. He (faith the Apostle) took not the seed of Angelr; Heb. 2.16.
may mo^, he in no wise took the s^ of Angels, but the seed of (...): Quantite
fecit, ex his me pro te fact us est, agnosce, Bern.

Thus also would God make our nature terrible to the Devil; who overcome by
Christ, in our fles^, d^es not be so bold with man: as a fish that sees or
feels the hook, takes heed of it, so etc.

And in all this, would God have us give him the glory of his infinite Wisdom,
who found out that way of Life the Angels could never think of, for ever must
admire: as also of his Justice, and Mercy, who rather then he would have finne
to go unpunished, or minunpardoned, would have his own Son to come in the
flesh, and so to die for (...).

And because the God head in Christ is made flesh, therefore is Christ both God
and (...) in one Persoh.

There are in him two distinct nat^s; and these so distinct, that they remain
both uncompounded and unconfounded, and make both but one Person.

Now whereas we say, the S^e of God made the world, the Soune of man by his
death saved the world, and (...) comra^ the reason of these ^offe and cironlar
speeches, is the hypostaicall union of both natures in one Person howbeit, we
must not ascribe that to the (...) ^ine challenges; or that to the Divine,
which the humane has right unto. Understand therefore, not the one or the
other nature, but the Person in whom both natures are: In him, that is, in the
Person, Coloss. 2.9. ^hvelleth the fullness of the Godhead, (...).

The reason of this Union:

He that must redeem us, must die for us; for without blood, no redemption:
and therefore he must be man.

He must not only die, but overcome death, and apply the merits of his death
unto us; and therefore he must be God.

And God is Christ, Emannel, God with us; God and Man in one Person: Man, to
die for us; God, to va^quish death: Man, to be bound; God, to loose the
sourowes of death: Man, to speak from his Father to us; God, to speak to his
Father for us: if altogether like Man, long esset a Deo; if altogether like
God, long esset ab hominibus: therefore both. August.

He came to redeame us from Sin, Death, and the Devil: as God he would not,
as Man he could not; therefore, as God and Man he does it.

Thus Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteonsnesse and Peace has kissed
each other. You have here Jacobs Ladder, the top whereof reaches up to
Abraham's Bosoms, whilst the foot thereof is here below, at Jacobs Loins, that
we may ascend up into the New Jerusalem.

It being with the Sabines and the Romans (as we read in the Roman History)
as with the Tribe of Benjamsn, where every one caught a Wife of the daughters
of Shiloh: and as they were joining battle, the Women being daughters to the
one side, and Wives to the other, interposed themselves, and by their peculiar
interest on either side, took up the Quarrel. (Whatsoever the Cause of the
unhappie Quarrels among us may be, sure I am, we have greater and dearer
Arguments 10 make us Friends, if we could think of them.) But to my purpose.

God and Man are enemies; the reconciler of both, must have an interest in
both: behold Jesus Christ, God and Man. John 20.19. G^ to my Brethren, and
say^nte them; I ascend to my Father, and year Father; to my God, and (...) God.
When Christ shall enter our appearance in his Name, and shall say to his
Father, Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the Children which thou have given me; This
shall make God and Man friends again. And me thinks, the consideration of
this, should make us all friends.

How this that you have heard, first, is a Mystery; considering the premises,
you will easily grant it. The whole Gospel is a Mystery, Coloss. 2.2. it is
the Mystery of God, and of Christ. Magnum Sacramentum, say the Rhemists,
following the vulgar, as by the Conventicle of Trent they must: but the word in
it own Language speaks a Sacred Secret, The (...), 1 Gor. 1.7. Though the
Gospel be every where preached, yet is it not by every one understood, it is
still a Mystery. The natural man (faith the Apostle) perceives not the
things of God, none but they to whom its given, understand this, none but the
Sparituall^ To you (faith Christ) is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdoms; note, Mysteria (...) regis: and then, they that know, know but in
part, but darkly; the rest know nothing. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. The Gospel is hid to
those that are lost. Now, whatsoever in the Gospel is most mysterions, the
inoarnation of the Some of God is more yet.

Secondly, It Is a great Mysterle, both in the making, and in the ma^festing of
it.

First, in the making; That God should be made Man: Had he come in the shape of
an Angel, or in the beauty and glory of any other Creature, above or under the
Sun; or had he come in the beauty and power of our nature; or as on Mount
Tabor, between Moses and Elias, when his face was as the Sun, and his
garments as the Lightning; this had been abasement enough: but to come in the
flesh of man which is but dust and ashes, oh this is that de basement beyond
expression!

Every precious thing is abased, by mingling with a worse; and still the worse
the thing is, wherewith mingled, the more the debasement. If then Gold be
abased, by being mingled with Silver; much more, when mingled with rust or
Iron, or with the dross of Lead: This debasement of Christ, oh it is
infinitely more, then if the Son of the grea^st (...) in the World should (if
it were possible he might) be turned into the basest Creature on the face of
the earth.

See Proverbs 30.4. Who bath ascended up into Heaven; or desconded? Who bath
gathered the Winds in his fists? Who bath bound the Waters in a Garment? Who
bath established all the ends of the Earth? What is his (...), and what is his
So^es Name, of thou can tell? You may read the first Letter of his Name, in
Isay 9.6. Wonderful.

And wonderful he was, and did ^derously, when he appeared unto Manaa^,
Judgers 13.18, 19. B^ all the Wonders that ever were; Creation and all from
thence; and that which shall be last of all, but not least of all, the
Resur^ection from the dead, must give place to (...).

You have here the highest pitch of Gods Wisdo^e, Goodness, Power, Glory, and
Mercy; if any thing may be said to be highest, in that which is infi^te, and
exempt from all measure and dimension. Dan. 2.11. It Is a (...) thing a say^
Chaldeans to the Question propounded them by the King of Babel, and none can
show the like, except the gods, whose dwelling is not in flesh. But here the
raritie lies in the contrary; He who is over all, God blessed for ever, is come
in our flesh, etc.

2 Chronicles. 6.18. But will Gad in very deed dwell with (...) earth? Behold,
Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; how much less this house
that I b^ built? Words of wonder. But see here a greater matter: the Son of
God is made the son of man; clo^thed with our flesh, and (...).

Deus ^asci^ur, the great, Jeh^ is become a (...) sagens where, Eternity has
put on our mo^; He that is incorporeall, is clothed with our flesh; the
Ancient of days is become an infant.

Made of a Woman, borne of a (...), that it was given for a sign unto bel^,
long before the accomplishment; a figue of Gods, own ch^ing, one Ray of the
Wonders, in the depth, breath, on the beight above. Isa. 7.14. Bohold, a Virgin
shall (...) a Son, and shall (...) his name Emanuel.

That the Son of God, should be made the some of (...), made of a woman, yea,
that woman which he himself made: That her Womb then, and the Heavens now,
should contain him, whom the Heaven of Heavent cannot contain^: That he should
be both God and Man in one Person, and both distinctly; and so have a Father in
Heaven, without a Mother; and on Earth a Mother, without a Father: That his
Father should be greater then he, and yet he equal to his Father: That ^ee
should be before Abraham, and yet be borne well-nigh two thousand years after
him: That he should be David's son, and yet David's Lord: That he should have
neither beginning nor end of days, etc.

Let Egypt cease to talk of her Mole-hils of Brick, Ephesus of her Temple,
Babylon of her Walls, Rhodes of her Colos^e; here is a Wonder, infinitely
beyond all; God is made flesh: Nay more;

Secondly, made manifest in the flesh, (...) What may be know^e of God, (says
the Apostle, Romans 1.20.) is manifest in the Creatures: but here you have, God
made manifest in the flesh of Man.

God himself is hid from our eyes, Isa. 45.15. Truly, O Lord, thou art hid
from our eyes. So that God himself is a Mystery; and that which makes the
Myster^ the greater, God is h^d with Light: He dwells (says the Apostle) In
Light maccessible, 1 Timothy 6.16. But what have we to do with an hidden God; a
God that cannot, will not be see^? Make us gods (say the people unto Aaron) may
go before us, Ex^. 32.

Behold here, God not only made, but made manifest in the flesh. And behold
here a lower degree of abasement: Men, especially if great, howsoever abased,
cannot endure to have their baseness known; Oh, tell it not in G^h. Even
Nao^, in her distress, is ashamed of her Name: Call m^ no more beautiful, but
bitter, far the Alo^ghtie has dealt bitterly with me, Ruth 1.20. But Christ is
not only made flesh; but made manifest in the flesh: yea, so sarre from being
ashamed of it; that a little before his death, he gives a Charge, to have it
preached all over the world.

And if the incarnation of Christ be a Mystery, so great a Mystery; them must
we learn, silently to (...): its no shame, to be ignorant of the things we
cannot know; nay, '^is Docta ignorantia, C^lv. We are sick of our Mothers
Disease: we would ^aine know; the Tree of Knowledge is goodly to behold, and
because we think it to be matter of great wit, to find out secrets; we
venture too sarre, and to our o^ne^urt; Ex^d. 20. God is feign to set- ^imits
unto his people, that they press not too near the Mount. Secret things belong
to God; we must here fall down in the worship of admiration, ever praising
him in a mysterious ignorance.

More especially in this great mystery of Christ's Incarnation Who (says Esaias
that Evangelicall Prophet) can declare his generation? Credere (...) jussu^,
discutere non per^aissum, Ambrof. The Virgin Mary was over-shadowed by the Holy
Ghost; so that God himself has as it were veiled the truth; and therefore we
may not, must not too earnestly pry into it.

And yet we must look into it, it is the mystery of Christ, and therefore must
be learned of every Christian, so far as it is revealed, Ioh. 17.3. In the
Arc of the Covenant, the Cherubins had their faces toward the Mercy-seat,
(the type of our Savior) to point out unto us, that this is the mystery the
very Angols desire to stoop and look into, 1 Pet 1.12. Unto whom it was
revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the shings
which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the G^spel unto you,
with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, which things the Angels desire to
looks into: We must therefore make our initiation into the School of Christ,
by praying to him, hearing from him receiving his Sacraments. Oh ^hon (says
David) that hear prayers, to thea shall all flesh come: as properly may we
say, O thou that art manifested in the flesh, to thee shall all flesh come;
Heb. 10.19, 20. Having there fore brethren holdnesse to enter into the holiest,
by the blood of Jesus by a now and living way, which ^e bath consecrated for
us, through the voile that is to say, his Flesh; and having an High Priest over
the House of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water, etc.

Lastly, if the incarnation of Christ be so great a myster^, then it calls for
revererce, in all the parts and pleces of our service; how precise were the
Heathen, and to this day are, in their preparations unto devotions? The Orator
could say, Cast jubet lex adire sacra; how much more ought we? etc. Whosoever
calls on the Name of the Lord, let him d^part from iniqulty, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Thirdly, this myster^ here, is not only great, but godly; a mystery of
Godliness.

The Devil had his mysteries, for to whom but him did the Heathen of old their
sacrifices, their greater and lesser Elnsinea, to Bacchus, to Ceres, and the
rest? 1 Cor. 10.20. But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God.

Antichrist has his my^teries also, the very word mysterium is written in his
forehead, there is not the least Ceremony among their many, but is very
mystical; their Durand has given the world a book of them, and he calls it
his Rationale.

We also among our selves have our mysteries too and never so much as now, etc.
too much of the Serpent, too little or nothing of the Dove^ Religion is made a
stalking horse unto policy, etc.

But the mystery here, is a mystery of godliness; the Gospel speaks and
preaches piety, reveals Gods wonderful love unto us. Velatio deitat is
revelatio charitutis, Job. 3.16. God so loved the world, that ^e gave his only
begotten son; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

This calls us to an holy and godly life: as Christ manifested himself in our
flesh, so must we manifest Christ in our loves and conversations: O^ use not
this dear name Jesus, (not make wanton of his precious blood) but in your
prayer^ and intercessions.

A mystery not only signifies as a Ceremony, but operates and works as a
Ceremony does not. The myster^ of iniquity began to work in the Apostles
days; no^ a mystery works, as other Agents do; it makes them in whom it
works, like it self; wherefore as ours is the mystery of godliness, so must
^ee but selves be godly; Christ must appear in us; our light must shine; etc.
Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the grace of God that bring^th salvation, has appeared
to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ; Nay more yet, as our myster^e of godliness is great, so must we
increase in godliness every day more and more; we are mystical enough,
abundant, yea, and manifest too in the ways of flesh and blood; O let us be
as skillful, as full, and as open in the ways of life and peace; Gal. 6.16.
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

Fourthly, and lastly, the mystery of godliness here is not only great, but
great without controver^ie; all that believe it, do in admiration acknowledge
it.

But did not Simon Magus oppose it? Were there not some, who both thought and
taught, that Christ was not God; some, that he was not man? Were not the
Pharisees, Sadduces, Herod, people, Elders, all against Christ? Were not his
Apostles, when he was gone, evil intereated for his sake? Was not Peter
drunk, and Panl a mad man with them? Was the Gospel of Christ any more with
Leo, then with them, a fable? Are there not some among us, as with whom the
profession of Christ is reproachful? Un Christana, say the Italians, when they
mean a fool, or a blockhend; Even so it is with as, if not worse, says
Salvian: of what esteem is Christ among Christians, when the very name is
a^counted base among many?

But, says the Apostle, We know in whom we have believed; and what is
foolishness to the world, is the wisdom of God to the perfect: the
proposition therefore is most true, Great is the my^teni^ of godliness,
without all controversy: Let us therefore make no controversy about it we
have already too many in the world, at the best unprofitable; I would they were
gone out of the world, and their authors more wise, or gone with them. Let us
humbly and heartily submit to the Gospel of Jesus Christ; and then when he
which came once in great humility to redeem us, shall come again, he will
take as with him, and we shall see him as he is, 1 Ioh. 2.28. And now little
children abide in him, that when be shall appear, we may have considence, and
not be ashdmed before (...) at his coming.

Soli Deo gloria.
THE REWARD OF IMITATION.
MATTHEW 19.28. And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye
which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in
the Throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel.


THe words are a promise made by our Lord and Savior to the Apostles, but
extended to the Gentiles, and so to the whole family of God; for as they
exclude Judas (though present when Christ spoke) by reason of his apostasy; so
they include us, though many Generations after, through many Generations, being
believers.

The scope is to infringe those argnments of discouragement in the ways of
God, which Satan and our own corruption may and do too often press us with;
What profit is there in serving God?

To strengthen us against this objection; Ye (says Christ) who have followed
me, etc. answerable whereunto is that of his; if any man serve me, him will my
Father honor.

Observe in the words.

First, a president of Christian Imitation, Ye that have followed me.

Secondly, a reward of that Imitation, Ye shall sit on twelve Thrones, and
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Thirdly, the determinate term, or time of this glory, (...), (...), in the
renovation, and instauration of the whole world, when Christ in his Throne of
glory shall declare himself to be the Son of God.

First, the president of Imitation.

Ye that have followed me; Obser.
Christ is the example, we are all to follow; he cries unto us as unto
Matthew, Come and follow me.

But who is able to find the way of a Serpent on a stone, Object.
the way of a Ship on the Sea, or of an Eagle in the air? these (says
Solomon) are indiscernable; and are not the ways of Christ much more
unsearchable? His name is wonderful, he rides upon a Cherub, and makes
darkness his pavilion; If discernable, yet (says the Apostle) he inhabits
Eternity, and dwells in Light inaccessible.

The works of Christ are of two sorts; Answ.
first, incommunicable; secondly, communicable.

Incommunicable, As the work of his merit and mediation, these cannot be
imitated; for, says the Apostle, There is but one Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, no other name given, whereby we may be saved: They
have not to do with the Censer to offer incense, who have not to do with the
Altar to offer Sacrifice. Incommunicable also is the work of Government and
influence into his Church, his dispensing the Spirit to the quickening of the
Word, his subduing his enemies, his gathering together his people; these are
all personal Honors appertaining unto Christ, as our Head and Savior.

Communicable: The actions of Christ; whereof by his Grace others have been,
and may be made partakers; and these are either extraordinary, or ordinary:

Extraordinary, for ministry and service, not for sanctity, or salvation; such
were the miraculous works of the Apostles, by way of privilege, and temporary
Dispensation to them granted.

Ordinary, and universal, belonging to all his Members, as praying, fasting,
doing good, etc.

We are then to follow Christ, not in all things he did, but in those things
only which he himself did, and has commanded; he in the ordinary way of his
obedience, must be the type and pattern of ours.

Pirst, Active.

Did Christ readily do what his Father commanded him? so must we; when they
sought unto him to make him King, he resused that honor, and went unto a
Mountain: So ought we even to dye unto the honors and pleasures of this
world: How can you believe (says Christ) if ye seek honor one of another?
Was Christ meek, and gentle, and courteous? so ought we to be, and that because
Christ was so. Learn of me (says he, Math. 11.29.) for I am humble and meek:
And Jo^. 13.15. having washed his Disciples feet; I (says he) have given you an
example: not that we are to wash one the others feet, (for this was a custom
only of that age and place) but that we are to be of like affections one to
the other; all humble: Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ, Philip.
2.5.

Secondly, Passive.

Christ suffered, so must we; He suffered (says the Apostle Peter) leaving us
an example. If any man (says Christ) will be my Disciple, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me: So that in suffering, we
are of Christ's own Order, Children of the Cross; and if we suffer with him,
we shall be glorified with him, Romans 8.17. Heb. 12.1, 2.

Christ not only suffered, but in suffering, submitted unto his Fathers will;
Not my will, but thine be done; So was ^ee as a Lamb before the shearer,
d^mbe.

Thus ought we to do in all our sufferings: Si filius quante magis servuns,
Bern. So shall we possess our selves in an holy silence.

Lastly, Christ being to bid the world sarewell, prays for his enemies, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do: Thus ought we, not only to forgive,
but also to entreat God, that he also would forgive them that hate, or hurt us.

We must follow Christ through the whole walk of his moral obedience; his
whole life was a living, and shining, and exemplary Precept; a visible
Commentary on the Law of God, Et (...) Nyssen. Christianity is nothing else
then an imitation of our Maker. We must be holy a^ he is holy, not in
respect of equality, but quality; Tam non tantum, we must be as truly and
sincerely holy, following him as Peter, Elonginque, a far off, or as a little
Child his Father; Non passibus equis, so fast as we can; saying, as the
Church in one of her Songs of Love, Draw us, and we will run after thee.

The Reasons.

First, this is one of the ends why Christ came into the World; for first, he
came to Redeem us, and then to sanctify us. This is he (says Saint John)
that came by water and blood; by blood, to take away the guilt; by water, to
take away the filth of sin.

Secondly, without this Imitation of Christ, no sanctification; for we are
sanctified when we are renewed unto God, re-indued with the Image of God,
whereunto we were at first created. Now in an Image there are these two things:

First, the similitude of one thing to another.

Secondly, a deduction, derivation, or impression thereof on some other; from
which again we take a third, a fourth, etc. in want of which we always run
to the Original, the prototype. Now as for the Image of God; its holineffe,
Colos. 3.10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after
the Image of him that created him.

This in our first Creation did gloriously shine in our faces; in Adam we lost
it; and therefore we must all to God again for it.

But this cannot be, we cannot come so near him, as to look into him, for he
is a consuming fire, he dwells in light inaccessible, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only
has immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom
no man has seen, nor can see. You see, if we could come near him, yet we
cannot see him, for he is invisible: No man (...) see him and live; All have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, Rom 3.23.

So that we may as easily see that which is invisible, and attain that which
is unapproachable, as of our selves to become holy again, unless the Lord
shall please, through some veil, to exhibit his Image unto us; or through some
Glass, shall make the same to shine upon us: we shall live and dye without
it, strangers from the life of God.

Behold, the Son of God is made the Son of man, God made manifest in the
flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. So that through his humane Nature, as through a veil, we
have access to the holiest of all: He is the Image of the invisible God,
Colos. 1.15. and by him are we made the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. Partakers of
the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 4. and 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face, beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: So that as Christ is the
Image of his Father, Heb. 1.3. so are we the Image of God; but with this
difference, Christ us imago equalitatis, Christianus imitationis; As the Image
of an Emperor (says Augustine) is, aliter in nummo, aliter in filio; so the
Image of God is, aliter in Christo, aliter in Christiano. The renewed are the
Image of God, Non quantum ad naturalia (as the Schools teach) though therein
us yet be some remains of our lost glory; but as renewed by Christ.

Thirdly, the quality of the mystical body, where of Christ is the head and
Savior, requires this imitation; he is our head, Heb. 2.10, 11. For it became
him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many
sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through
sufferings; For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all
one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, and Heb. 4.15,
etc.

Fourthly, Christ is the sum of all Scriptures, and therefore necessarily the
rule of all holiness: as the Apostles did, so must we, preach nothing but
Jesus Christ.

How too blame are those, 1 Use.
who are so far from following Christ, that they follow man, any man, the
worst, the most, and think it their safest way. But if great men, if men in
Authority do so, and so, then all is out of doubt. Their Religion is to them
as their Coin; all goes for Current, that is stamped with Authority, and
allowance of the State. Nay, what fantastical Spirit so idle and ridioulous,
that has not many Disciples? What juggling Impostor so despicable, and
infamous, that has not many followers? What rebellious Son of Belial, or
Atheistical Ruffler so execrable and odious, that has not many observers?
What Ignatian Viper, or devilish Jesuit, Monochus Damonnicus, so prodigiously
wicked, so traitorously audacious, that has not many favorers and attendants?
Habet and Diogenes suos parasitas, the Cynick is not without his approvers, and
admirers; whilst Christ, the Son of the living God, sits alone, like a
Pelican in the Wilderness, or a Sparrow on the house top.

But the men are good, etc.

Yet are they but men: and all men are Liars; may both deceive, and be
deceived. Peter was a good man, yet once dissembled: so was Barnabas, yet
snatched away by example, into the like dissimulation.

You see in the Scripture, the failings of the Saints to hang on record; not
that God either delights to see them, or others to gaze on them, for he has
cast them all behind his back, and blotted them out of the Book of his
Remembrance; but that the Apostles admonition might ever be thought on, Let him
that stands take heed lest he fall: Cavenda tempestates flenda naufragia,
Aug. And that we might not think it safe to follow good men, no, not the best
men in all things, nor would good men have us so to do; Follow me (says Paul)
as I follow Christ, 1 Cor. 12.1.

Some there are so far from following Christ, that they go before him: These
are they that despise Government, and speak evil of things they understand
not.

Others worse yet, are so far from following Christ, that they run from
him; called after, they will not return: having nothing to plead for
themselves, they make their Will their Master, and so have as many Lords over
them, as Affections in them: all under the Curse of Cha^, a slave to their
slaves; one to his Pleasure, another to his Profit, a third to his Vanity, etc.

If God move by his Spirit, that is resisted; if he allure by his Mercies,
they are abused; if threatened by Judgments, they are neglected; if called by
Ministers, they are reviled, etc. Oh, when men thus pull away their shoulders
from Christ's Yoke, when they turn their back on God, set up mounds against
the Gospel, Nonplus Gods mercies; this is an heavy sign, that God has left
them unto themselves, a very plague of plagues: See Psalm. 81.11, 12, etc. What
remains, but that we send them to the Judge with this Scrowle on their
foreheads, Domine noluerunt incantari?

Some there are who follow Christ, but not constantly: Sequnntur sed non
assequuntu^, Bern. With Orpha, they go a little way, and then return into
their own Country.

Set we the example of Christ before us, 2 Use.
in all the things we do: If the thing be unlawful, and yet we find our
Lusts swaying us that way, ask we this question; Would Christ have done this,
or does he allow it? etc. If the thing being both lawful and expedient, yet
if not suitable to our person, we must here respect Christ's allowance; in all
other things, we must reflect on his example.

1 John 2.6. He that says he is in Christ, ought to walk as he has walked.

First, Religiously: Beginning all things with God, sanctifying every Creature
and every Ordinance with prayer; and this longer or shorter, as the occasions
are more or less serious, doing all things by the warrant of the Word;
contemning our own will, that we may do our Fathers: choosing rather to lose
life then our obedience, as if there were but one will between God and us;
doing all things for God, and reserring all unto his glory.

Secondly, Christ walked holily, so must we, for without holiness no^e shall
see the Lord: if we live like monsters, Christ will never own us for his
members.

Thirdly, Christ walked fruitfully in his Calling, Acts 10. He went about
doing good: he watched and apprehended all occasions of being helpful unto
others, to their souls, to their bodies. Thus should we spend our days, and
not as the most do, who bring the day to an end without the performance of any
thing, the remembrance whereof may comfort them at night; nay, doing things
hurtful both to themselves and others, and thus continually. Thus account: So
much time spent in idle Games, so much in unprofitable Company, which might
have been spent in hearing, reading, praying, meduation, exercise of
humiliation for my souls health, or in works of mercy, for the benefit of my
afflicted Brother; did ever my Lord and Savior thus walk, thus converse?

Fourthly, Christ walked justly toward man; never deceived any by thought,
word, or deed: There was no guile found in his mouth. Never covetousness
entered his heart; he gave every man his due: An admirable pattern of Civil
Righteousness. This must we follow, we must walk as he walked, etc.

Fifthly, Christ walked in the Light; and this, a threefold Light: first, in
the purity of his Nature; there was no darkness in him at all; (...), none
at all: in his mind, no darkness of ignorance; in his will and affections,
no darkness of disorder: secondly, in the light and purity of holy
conversation; he never committed any works of darkness: thirdly, in
communion and fellowship with his Father, who dwells in Light inaccessible.

Thus must we walk.

First, full of the Rays of spiritual understanding; the Word of God not
only dwelling in our heads, but in our hearts; and in both, (...), richly.

Secondly, acting that Spiritual life, in our lives and conversation walking
as Children of the Light, and of the Day: Qui male agit odit lucem.

Thirdly, Embracing communion with our God, and rejoicing therein, as also in
the place and means of his presence. Though worldly men are then only merry,
when the thoughts of God are banished their hearts, yet are the Saints of God
no longer well, then in his presence. 1 John 1.7. If we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blond of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Ye that have followed Christ: you that have framed your lives according to his
example; you, who together with him, are of the same mind; those are they that
follow the Lambt, whither soever he goes.

Thus you have the Saints; and in them their motion: but what of these?

You (says Christ) shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Here is their Quies.

The degrees here are many; we shall arise with them, in our discourse,
according to their order.

First, They shall sit. We are here full of labor, subject to many changes,
alterations, and discontentments. Man (says Job) shoots forth like a Flower,
and is cut down, he vanishes away as a Shadow, and never continues in one
stay: But a day is coming, wherein we shall rest from all our labors. Revel.
14. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors:
wherein we shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the
Sun light on us, or any heat, Revel. 7.16. Wherein God shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes, Revel. 21.4.

You see in nature, all things labor to attain their last perfection: so our
bodies here, subject to mutabilitie, to Diseases, the Stone, the Gout, Fevers,
by which Death entering within our Walls, surprizeth the Castle of our hearts;
and thus are we still in motion, to our last Exit, always tending to
perfection: whither when we come, and arrive up above Sun, Moon, and
Stars, we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

The Needle touched by the Lodestone, never gives over his trembling motion,
till it stand against the North Pole, till it come to its Point: so we, having
once touched Christ, the true Lodestone of our Souls, by faith, neither are,
nor can be at rest, till we rest not only in him, but with him; Then shall
our bodies be immutable; then shall we sit down and rest for ever. Be of good
comfort, your labors in Egypt, your travailes in the Wilderness shall not
last for ever; a day of rest is coming. In the mean time, let us take the
advice and counsel the Apostle Peter gives, Acts 1.19. Repent, and turn unto
the Lord, that your sins may be done away, when the time of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord.

Thus the followers of Christ shall one day sit, and rest them. It follows;

Secondly, They shall sit on Thrones. What these Thrones are, is no less
unprofitable, then curious to enquire: its like they shall be of the Air,
because (says the Apostle) we shall meet the Lord in the Air; and if
conform to that of our Savior, it must be so: for he shall ride in the Air,
and make the Clouds his Chariot, Revel. 14.14. I looked, and behold a white
Cloud, and upon the Cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, etc.

But whatsoever these Thrones are, they promise two things, sweetest Rest, and
greatest State.

Sweetest Rest, and tranquillity, full acquiescence, not only to their bodies
(as you have heard) but to their souls. Their bodies shall be free from the
pain of travail, and the mutabilitie of corruption: their souls shall be
free from the waves of trouble, and the conflicts of passion: no fear, no
grief, no wrath, no desire, nor carnal affection, shall any way disturb the
quietness of their sweet Repose; they shall be, as satisfied with the fullness
of the Lord, so also secured by the omnipotency of his greatness.

And as they shall enjoy sweetest Ease, so shall they have greatest State: for
as to sit, speaks Rest; so to sit in the presence of God, speaks Greatness
and Dignity; and this infinite, and most incomparable.

But why twelve Thrones?

Chrysostom and his followers, confining the words to the Apostle, makes the
soul of every Christian to be a Throne, or place of residence, thus; They that
receive the words of John, are the throne of John; they that receive the words
of Peter, are the throne of Peter, etc.

But surely the words extend farther, and have respect to CHRIST'S Tribunal,
where all the Elect have their several places, and sit at Table with him in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Augustine thinks the number twelve therefore to be here used, because of the
perfection of it, and so falls on a Platonicall mystery.

But not to trouble you with curiosities, the certain number of twelve, is
here put for an incertaine, a finite, for an infinite; so that by twelve
Thrones, we are to understand an universality of Thrones, provided for the
Saints in the highest places; For, says Christ, in my Fathers House are many
Mansions.

Thirdly, On those Thrones they shall sit and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

They shall judge.

There is a judgment of power and authority, and that belongs to God the
Father, for he is Judge of the whole earthy: There is a judgment of honor,
and delegates, that belongs to Christ, as he is man; for the Father has given
all judgment to the Son: There is a judgment of assession, and witness of
consent and allowance, and this belongs to the whole company of Gods Elect.

They shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

All Israel, not exempting Levi; yea, not only all Israel, but all the world,
and all the creatures therein, though never so eminent and sublime in glory, 1
Cor. 6.23. Know you not, that the Saints shall judge the World? Yea, Angels,
Devils. And how? as members of the mystical body, whereof Christ is the head
and Savior. Christ and his Church are one, and therefore whatsoever is given
to him, is also given to her. Christ the primary Judge shall pass the
Sentence, and the Saints shall approve it, and rejoice therein; they shall
triumph in the truth of divine Justice, with the sweetest notes of praise and
jubilation.

See here the glory and honor of Gods people, their advancement and
super-exaltation above the Stars of the morning, they are Citizens of Heaven.
When God shall come to judge the world, thousand thousands of Angels shall come
with him; but yet as his ministers and servants: the Saints shall fit with him,
as his familiars and associates, upon Thrones, and that ever Thrones, and all
the glorious host of his noblest creatures; their judgment (as the Schools
distinguish) is not condemnationis sed manifestationis, they condemn none,
only they show forth the praise and glory of God, in the justice of the
Sentence on them whom Christ condemns.

Here then is ground of support to all the people of God; you are now troubled
and molested by the Devil and his agents, malicious adversaries, you groan
under unjust Censures and accusations; be content, a day is coming wherein
the Saints shall judge both the evil angels, the Devils, and all their
malicious instruments.

Let our care be in the mean time, so to live and converse here, as to be
worthy of that honor then; far be it from them that are to judge the world,
so to live, as to justify the world by their profane and impure conversation.

Thus they that follow Christ, shall sit on twelve Thrones, and judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel.

But when?

In the regeneration, when the son of man shall sit in the Throne of his
Glory: Wherein you have the determinate time of Glory.

Where observe,

First, A Position, in the regeneration: Secondly, an Exposition, that
regeneration wherein Christ shall sit in the Throne of his Glory.

The Position,

The regeneration, that is, the Resurrection, or otherwise the redemption of
our bodies. A time is coming wherein all creatures shall be as it were newborn. Mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and this corruptible shall put
on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. Our bodies now subject to many infirmities, to
hunger, nakedness, thirst, cold, many diseases, dull and heavy in the service
of God, shall then be immortal, and therefore needing no bodily refreshments:
immortality shall choose death out of nature, and command sleep from the eyes;
then shall our bodies have strength to perform their own actions: Were such
an Elixar to be bought, your Chymicks talk of, as would free us from all
diseases, and repair the ruins of old age, who would not give all he has to
have it? and such an one there is in the hands of God, an Elixar of
immortality.

It Is better (says Christ, Matthew. 18.8.) for a man to enter into life, hurt
and maimed, then having two hands, two feet, and so all parts entire, to be
cast into hell fire: True it is, were it possible; but of this we may be sure,
we cannot go to heaven, either imperfect, or without glory. Particularly.

First, we shall have all the parts of our bodies perfect, and entire, though
now maimed or deformed, yet than we shall be perfect.

1. Because then all things shall be reduced to their former estate of beauty
and perfection, that namely the body had in its first creation. The Heavens
(says the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.21.) must contain Christ, till all things be
restored.

2. It Is said, Revel. 21.4. There shall be no more death; If no more death to
the whole man, (says Tertullian) then no more death to any part of man.

It Is better (says Christ, Mat. 18.) for a man to go halt, Object.
or maimed into Heaven then, etc.

Understand Christ, Ex hypothesi, not that any shall go to heaven maimed, but
that if possible, i^ were better so to do, then to go to hell with all the
glory of the world.

Neither does Christ there speak of the body, but of the soul, and the
conclusion would be this; that it is far better for a man to lose any, or all
his limbs, for the saving of his soul, then to lose his soul, and so to go
into hell with all his members. Fear not then to lose a leg, or an arm, or
an eye for Christ, every member then shall be restored again. Have thou lost
any member for Christ, or otherwise? trouble not thy self; remember, he that
gave Malcus his ear again, who was his enemy, will much more restore to thee
thy parts who act his friend.

Secondly, our bodies shall not only be entire, but beautiful and lovely,
though now deformed; much more, when stained with the pale and ghastly colors
of death; yet then we shall be exceeding fair, far beyond the most exquisite
beauty of any that lived ever since Adam, for we shall then be as Adam in his
innocence, on whose beauty and splendor the beasts of the field stood gazing.

Salomons Temple was full of beauty and glory; the second Temple, the former
being destroyed by the Chaldeans, was howsoever fair, yet far short of the
former, in respect of beauty; but our bodies in that Day, shall be restored to
greater beauty and loveliness then ever they had.

O what pains do the crooked take, to make their bodies straight, or at least
to app^are so, or not so crooked as they are? How far send they for
complexion, and how dear do they buy it? and this at last makes them more
deformed; perfect beauty is not to be had, till the Glorious morning of the
Resurrection; and the way to have it then, is to be Religious now.

Thirdly, our bodies shall be full of splendor; howsoever now dark and
obscure, yet then they shall be as so many shining Stars, Dan. 12.3. They
shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. Moses
returning from God, after his forty days conference with him, was so full of
shining Glory in his face, by the Reflection of the Glory of GOD, that the
people could not behold him: How full of Glory shall our bodies be, when we
shall abide with God, not forty days only, but for ever and ever?

Fourthly, our bodies shall be immutable, and immortal, subject to no change,
not needing the Elements, or Elementary food. God does with us, as the
Goldsmith with his Gold or Silver, first melts our bodies by death, and then
makes us up again to a more glorious form, as Vessels of Honor to stand
before him in his Temple for ever. A sweet meditation, especially in the time
of sickness, and in the hour of death, against the crawling worms, and the
place of silence. I know (says Job) that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though after my skin, Worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my
self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be
consumed within me, Job 19.25, 26, 27.

O what means do many use, to keep themselves ali^e, yea, to preserve the
bodies of their friends, being dead, from putrefaction, they imbalme them in
Spices, and lay them up in Marble, yet all will not do, the bodies of Kings and
Queens must yield to rottenness, only a good life makes our bodies immortal.

Fifthly, Our bodies shall be spiritual: It Is sown (says the Apostle) a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body; For then they shall be sustained
by the Spirit without meat and drink; not as Moses on the Mount for forty
days only, but for ever and ever; and whereas now the flesh lusts against
the Spirit; there being a Law in the members, rebelling against the law of the
mind; Then the body shall be subject to the Spirit, and in all things attend
on him.

Sixthly and lastly, This body (says the Apostle) is sown in weakness, it
rises in power; whereas now we are weary of kneeling in prayer, weary of
Prayer it self; Insomuch that Aaron and Hur must attend Moses, to hold up his
inseebled hands; but then shall our bodies be able to perform their own
actions, without desatigation; they shall then be able to move themselves any
way with ease, upwards, downwards, backwards, forwards, more easily then now to
lift up an hand; and he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like unto
his glorious body, according to his mighty working, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself.

Yea, not only man, but the Heavens and the Earth, shall in that day be as it
were newborn. Behold (says God) I create a new Heaven and a new Earth; So it
is likewise in 2 Pet. 3. Whereas the Heavens now give rain and snow, etc. then
they shall exhibit Christ, Matthew. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the son of
man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of Heaven:
Whereas the Heavens are now ever whirling, and wheeling about, always winding
up the thread of man's life, then they shall stand fast for ever; the Heavens
shall rest from their motion, and receive a greater perfection of brightness
and claritie: The air shall be purged from obscurity; the fire from consuming
quality, the water from putrefaction, the earth from weeds and all hurtful
creatures, yea from barrenness, she shall bring forth as before the Fall,
without labor and Husbandry.

And all this for the comfort of the Saints, who are to pass this way into
Heaven, in their long white Robes, as Princes through some Gallerie, into their
Chambers of Presence. Then this Earth, howsoever now a Valley of Tears, shall
be unto us a Door of Hope in the Valley of Achor. The wicked shall see this,
and by it, as through a Crevise, the glory of Heaven, but themselves shut out
of both.

But when shall this regeneration of the Creatures be? When the Son of man
shall sit in the Throne of his glory.

First, Christ shall come to judge the quick and dead: so it is said, Acts
10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it
is he which was ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead. So again
in the 17. Chapter, verse 31. Because he has appointed a day in the which he
will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. And so we believe.

He knows all, even our most secret thoughts: Hell and destruction (says
Solomon) are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the sons of men?
All things are naked and broken up before him; and as he knows all, so he is
able to punish, and that not the body only; he can cast both body and soul
into Hell. Revel. 20. Whosoever was not found written in the Book of the
Lamb, was cast into the Lake of fire.

First, this should teach us fear and trembling; Knowing the terrors of the
Lord (says the Apostle Paul) we persuade men. And (says the Apostle Peter)
if ye call him Father, who without respect of persons judges every man
according to his works, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1
Peter 1.17.

Secondly, learn from hence to look to your Packes: see what Wares you carry
with you; for in that Day, all must be opened.

Thirdly, learn hence to agree with your adversary while you are in the way.
If you were to dye to morrow, what would you do to day, how spend your time?
And yet you may dye sooner: Take heed, At the Tree falls, there it lies.

Fourthly, Art thou injured, slandered, mifused any way? Remember, a Day is
coming, wherein all must stand at Christ's Tribunal. You (says Corah, with
his Accomplices, unto Moses and Aaron) you take too much upon you, Numb. 16. And
what does Moses answer? To morrow (says he) the Lord shall show who are his.
And 1 Cor. 4.3, 4. But with me it is a very small thing, that I shon'd be
judged of you, or of man's judgment; yea, I judge not mine own self, for I
know nothing by my self: yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judges
me, is the Lord. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make
manifest the counsels of the heart; and then shall every man have praise of God.

Fifthly, Art thou afraid to appear before the Judge? Remember, it is thy
Savior the dyed for thee. If Pharaohs Butler feared not to got before him,
because Joseph had assured him of Liberty; how comfortably then are we to
appear before the Judge, being already assured, all shall go well with us?
He is our Judge, who is our Savior, and Mediator: a most comfortable
Meditation. I am your Brother (says Joseph unto his Brethren) I am your
Brother Joseph: This could not but comfort them, howsoever conscious of their
injuries done him. So it is here.

Sixthly, It Christ must be our Judge; how warily then, and holily, are we to
live now, that we may not be ashamed at his Coming? Peter being on the Seas,
and seeing his Master on the yonder shore, girds his Coat about him: One would
think, he should rather have cast his Coat from him: No, no, he was to
appear before his Master, and he would appear comely. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we
must all appear before the Iudgement-Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that hea has done, whether
it be good or bad.

Seventhly, Happy are all they, that are gone out of themselves into Christ:
for, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christlesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Observe further:

As Christ shall come to judge the world; so being come, he shall sit in the
Throne of his glory. Dun. 7.9, 14. I behold, and lee are like the Some of Man
(...) w^h the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him; and there was given him Dominion and Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve hi^; his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his
Kingdom that, which shall not be destroyed. Match 34.30. And then shall
appear the figne of the Son of Man in Heaven. What this figne is, me thinks
may be gathered from verse the 27. As the Lightning comes from the East and
passes to the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be M^, says
Christ (...) here is Christ and there is Christ (...) shall be the sign of my
coming, even the bright^ and splendor of my Body; obscuring all other Lights,
and awakening all the World. That it shall be this, is manifest, Revel. 21.23.
And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it;
for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

If we tell you of Christ's Glory at his Transsiguration in the Mount, you will
tell us of that of Moses coming from his forty days conference with the Lord.

But the difference is grear.

First, the glory of Moses was only in his face; that of Christ all over his
Body: secondly, when Moses veyled his face, none could see his beautle; but
that of Christ appeared through his garments. Thirdly, the glory of Moses made
the people afraid; but that of Christ was amiable, and lovely: Bonum est, esse
hit, said they that were with him. Fourthly, Moses could not communicate his
glory unto any, but Christ (says the Apostle) shall make our bodies like unto
his glorious Body.

Since the Glory of Christ was such at his Transfiguration, what will his Glory
be in that Day, when he shall sit in his Throne?

He came in the form of a servant, was a man of serrowes, knowning
infirmities; Our sins, like continual droppings of water, putting out the
Lump of his life. But when he comes again, O what beauty, what resplendant
Majesty!

But what of all this?

In that day, they that have followed Christ, shall sit on twelve Thrones, and
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Observe, First, the Saints shall partake of CHRIST'S GLORY.

Secondly, They and none but they.

Thirdly, Nor they, till then.

First, the Saints shall partake of Christ's Glory. God has said it, and you
know he is faithful who has promised; All his promiser are Ye^, and Amer.

See here what a good Master we serve. The World pays, his followers with
trouble and carfulness, the Flesh pays her followers with corruption and
filthiness, the Devil his with despair and wre^ednesse; but Christ his with
Glory, and Blessedness. To hasten your desires homeward, and to sweeten your
affections by the way; with Moses, look up to the recompense of Reward; God
gives you leave so to do.

Secondly, as the Saints shall partake of Christ's Glory, so none but they shall
partake thereof, Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me^ those that have
made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. So Mal. 3.17, 18. And they shall be
mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my Jawels, and I will
spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him; then shall ye
returns and discern between the righteous and the wicked; between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not.

Again, Mal. 4.2, 3. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Son of
Righteousness arise, with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and
grow as Calves of the stall, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be as ashes under the soles of your feet; in that day I shall do this,
says the Lord of Hosts.

This point, like the Red Sea, opens it self for the passage of Gods people
into Heaven, and then closes again on the ungodly, to their destruction. You
that live profanely, etc. you are lost men, you are of the forlorn hope; for
1. Joh. 3.2, 3. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet
appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is, and every man that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

Gather hence a necessity of a godly life; if we will be happy, we must be
holy; Revel. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have a right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the
City. This also the Glory promised and expected calls for. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filt hinesse of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Alexander, invited to a Race with Plebeians, could answer. That Kings ought not
to run but with Kings: So neither Christians, but with Christians.

Thirdly, as the followers of Christ shall be partakers of Christ's Glory, and
they only, so they only in the Regeneration, when Christ shall come in his
glory, not till then, that is the day of our Redemption.

First, therefore, we are to long and look out for this Day. Job 14.14. If a
man dye, shall he live again? All the days of my appointed time will I wait,
till my change come. Romans 8.22, 23. For we know, that the whole Creation
groaneth and travelleth in pain together, until now; and not-onely they, but
our selves also, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves
groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of
our body. Then is our Iubile; the Trumpet having sounded, and liberty
proclaimed, we may enter into our possessions.

Secondly, we are to comfort our selves against all troubles in assurance and
expectation of that Day, Colos. 3.2, 3, 4. Set your affections on things above,
not on things on the Earth, for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God; when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with
him in glory. Recordatione temporum, meliorum spero, said a Roman, beholding
the rubbish of old Marble, the ruins of ancient building. But look forward to
the day coming, and the glory thereof: me thinks this should much comfort us;
surely (...) would, if we did believe.

How joyful will it be to meet with our Savior in that day, when the thought
of it is so refreshing? Rabboni, says Mary unto Christ, when her eyes were
opened to see her Savicur, whom before she supposed to be the Gardner: as if
she should have said; What, have I found thee, whom I have so desired, so
longed for? If thus it were with Mary then; How exuberant beyond expression,
yea imagination great, shall our joy in that Day be, when we shall sit on
Thrones with CHRIST, and all partake of his Glory?

Thirdly, we are in the mean time to wait on, in the use of all holy means,
Heb. 10.36. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the promise; for yet a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. 1 Ioh. 2.28. And now little children,
abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

