A Looking-glass FOR WOMEN, OR, A Spy for Pride: SHOWING The unlawfulness of
any outward adorning of any attire of Hair, either in laying forth the Hair,
or in crisping of the Hair, or in broidered Hair in all Women, but especially
in godly Women, declared fully by the Scripture.

Also those Scriptures and carnal Objections answered, which are seemingly
made for it.

Prove. 22. 23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not.

Col. 2. 6. As you have therefore received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk you
in him.

London Printed for R. W. 1644.

To the Christian READER.
I Have a long time sat down in my thoughts, to admire awhile, to see the
strain of the world, how that there is nothing wanting in them to make up their
destruction, they will take pains to be drunk, to whore, to cozen, to lie, to
steal, to murder, to be proud, and a thousand sins more, which they are
faithful unto him to do who reigns in them as a Prince, in all the Children
of disobedience, yea, they would rather sink down presently into hell, then to
leave one sin; and the reason is, because they walk according to the principles
which rule in them.

And truly, upon the sad consideration of this particular, to see and observe
that wicked men should be so at every command to him in whom they serve, and do
walk according to their own destruction.

It caused me to consider, how that godly men and women had need to walk
according to the pattern which Jesus Christ has left us, who rules in all his
Elect; as their only King, Priest and Prophet, and because my love is so dear
unto the Saints, that I would have them walk according to the rule which Jesus
Christ has left unto his Saints in his Word: It pleased the Lord to stir up my
heart to consider upon the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of wearing any outward
attire of hair in women, whether laying forth, or any other attire else, and
found it by the Word to be utterly unlawful, against the the mind and rule of
the Apostle Peter, and of the Apostle Paul; and one great reason which made me
wave into this work, was, because that I saw many godly women do now adays
wear it, yea, those whom we call Ministers wives, who should have given better
example unto other women, besides many other godly women of particular
Congregations, who have given up their names unto Christ both in heart and
mouth, Covenanting to walk with Jesus Christ among his members, in all the
known truths of God, as it shall be from day to day revealed unto them by his
spirit from the Word of God.

Therefore I finding this outward attire of any outward adorning of hair to be
unlawful in any woman whatsoever, but more especially among godly women.
Considering likewise that many learned godly men have taken but little notice
of it, who might have written for more better then my weak capacity am able to
understand.

Considering likewise that any godly man or woman would not live in any known
sin, if that they knew it: Upon these three considerations it moved me to
declare my mind touching the unlawfulness of laying forth the hair in women,
and truly I should not have so fully declared my mind unto the world, if I had
not found the spirits of godly women affected to it so much as they are:
Therefore desiring such whom it may concern, to accept of these few lines, or
short epitomy, as the tenderings and earnings of my love unto all those that
desire to live godly in this present evil world, and in their willing
acceptance of it, will my love be requited, not looking at any gain hereby,
except it be the calumnies and reproaches, which may be of my friends, as well
as of my enemies, but I shall wave whatsoever comes by, as looking more at the
good which I intended thereby, then at the evil which may come upon it,
desiring the Lord that he would direct all our hearts, both of men and women,
so to walk, that we may see Jesus Christ in all our vvalkings:

Your servant in Jesus Christ, T. H.

A Looking-glass FOR WOMEN, OR, A SPY for PRIDE.
SIn commonly carries a fair gloss with it, and I have observed that the
devil, when he would present a sin unto any godly man or woman, he never
presents it in the same shape as it is in its own nature, but maskes it over
with some seeming pretense or color for it, I could instance it diverse ways
wherein he does it; but because we are upon this subject only; namely to prove
its utterly unlawful for any woman to go in any outward adorning of attire of
hair, in laying it forth in any fashion whatsoever, under that seeming
pretense of a covering, and that it was given to them for an ornament to deck
themselves withal, which to say plainly, is but pride, and comes from him who
is the author of all sin.

Therefore I shall begin this work from that portion of Scripture, which the
Apostle Peter has laid down as a pattern for every godly woman to walk by,
which is out of the first of Peter 2. 3. in these words, Whose adorning let it
be, not that outward adorning, as of plaiting the hair.

These words are a direction by the Apostle, setting forth the carriage of a
Christian woman in her outward adorning toward the gaining in of an unbelieving
husband, as if the Apostle should have said, you that have husbands in the
state of nature, and you being in the state of grace, your conversation of life
should be such, while they beholding of it being coupled with fear, might be
wun without the word, by the conversation of the wife; which cannot be says
the Apostle in vain, and outward aadornings, and in the hidden man of the
heart, but there will be such a conversation that every thing will be
answerable unto it, both in your words, gesture, and attire, or outward
adorning: as if he should have said, be your speech never so gracious, and your
gesture never so meek, yet if your outward adorning be light or gaudy, what a
contradiction will here be, between light and darkness, and we know that light
and darkness can never dwell together until they be agreed, Amos 3. 3.

Now says the Apostle, in the consideration of this, what a hinderance will it
be in the drawing in of a yoke fellow here unto Christ, when as he shall see
that you are half for God, and half for the world, when as he shall see your
speech and gesture is after the mind of God, and your attire and outward
adorning to be after the fashions of the world, which is contrary to the
glorious light of God, which once if the Lord be pleased to let it shine in men
or women, it will shine in every part of their conversation, now you cannot see
the glorious light of Gods truth to shine in your outward adorning of attire of
hair, as in your speech and gesture, not that my meaning is that you should
place any godliness in it but that it may show forth to the world that
godliness is in you, and truly the Apostle Paul would not have bid us, fashion
not our selves according to the world, if that the Spirit of God by him had not
put a difference both between our speeches and gesture, and outward adornings,
to testify unto the world that you are such whom he has chosen out of the
world.

And truly those godly women that do use this outward adorning of laying forth
the hair, a man can hardly know them from the women of the world, nay and
moreover, to other godly Christian men, and women, that hear that such as are
Christians that do were it, they not knowing of them, they will be but unto
them as seeming Christians; and they will ground it from this, that if the
heart were stable and sound, their attire of laying forth their hair would not
be light and gaudy, because that Christ says, Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12. 34. that is whatsoever comes forth out of the
heart from man or woman, either in word or action, it does declare the heart to
be more holy, or less holy, that is, seeming holy, or real holy, and this was
that which the Apostle James drove at, Jam. 2.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. that godly
men should declare their faith by their works, as if he should have said,
though it be not works that you can be saved by, yet is it such that must give
that testimony to the world, that you are such whom the Lord has bin pleased
for to call from among them (that is) you cannot be a believer and a drunkerd
too, a believer and a proud person too, a believer and a wanton person too, in
your words, gesture and attire, for this end he has made a difference between
you, and the world, that you should walk more holier before him, which must be
seen in your outward adorning, as well as in your speech and gesture.

Now that we may see the odiousness of this unlawful attire, the better it
will appear in these four particulars.

First your outward adorning, or laying forth the hair, is a light attire, for
the Prophet Esaias brings it in among the rabble of those particulars which made
up a light gesture, as you may read Esaias 3. 24.

Secondly, laying forth of the hair, or any such like outward adorning, it is
a vain attire, it is of no substantial use, but to please the fancy, it is so
far from drawing men to see God in you by it, as it provokes them more to lust,
by seeing such wear it.

Thirdly, it is a proud attire, it was brought in among those particulars of
pride, in the place we mentioned before, Esaias 3. 24. as a judgment on those
particularly that had misused their hair, in these words, Instead of well set
hair baldness, as if the Lord should have spoke by the Prophet, you that have
abused your hair, by taking more delight in it, then in me, I will take this
Idol out of your way, and instead of well set hair, place baldness.

Fourthly, it is an unseemly attire, not befitting grave and holy women, and
this will appear also to be a truth, if we shall consider, if it be unseemly
for a woman for to go in man's apparel, how much more is it unseemly for grave
and holy Christian women to go in Strumpets attire, and take ye no exception at
this kind of term, for the Apostle Saint Paul speaks of the unseemlinesse of
it, especially in godly women, as you may read 1 Timothy 2. 9. where it is said,
that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacednesse, and
sobriety, and he begins first with broidered hair, as if it were both an
immodest, and a bold, and audacious attire, and do you not think because the
Apostle speaks of broidered hair, and I being against laying forth the hair,
that this is not to the purpose: I suppose it is, for it was that fashion of
hair that those women did use in them days, as you know in every age fashions
do alter, and this your laying forth the hair, though it be the fashion now,
comes under that, and the Apostle would have reproved it as the other, if it
had been worn in them days, as an immodest attire, very unseemly becoming
holy gracious women.

Secondly, if we do but consider those dangerous inconveniences which does
attend this outward adorning of attire of hair, it will appear unto you to be
utterly unlawful.

First, in regard of themselves this outward adorning of attire of hair will
prove very inconvenient, because it is one of the greatest instruments that
Satan has to set pride on work; we commonly say a Peacocke is a proud
creature, and our reason is not taken from the turning of his head, for so
other creatures do, but from the variety of colors of his feathers, which we
suppose is the cause of the turning of his head, and hence comes that old
phrase, to be as proud as a Peacocke, and truly such godly women that go in
such a gaudy attire, it must needs be a great instrument of stirring up of
pride in them, because is is so near unto the eye, and it will be most an end
upon it.

Secondly, this attire of laying forth the hair, it will be a dangerous
inconvenience in regard of others, two ways, either unto godly persons, or
else unto wicked men.

First, this kind of outward adorning will be a very inconvenient attire in
regard of godly men and women, and because it will be one great cause of their
judging of them to be seeming holy, when as it may be they may be really holy,
and so by this means it may cause the love that should be among the Saints, to
be abated, and instead of love to grow strange unto each other.

Secondly, this kind of outward adorning of laying forth the hair is a very
inconvenient attire, in regard of wicked men to, because it will rather provoke
them to lust by beholding of such, then by seeing any thing in that attire to
draw them unto any good.

Now having discovered the unlawfulness of any outward adorning of attire of
hair in all women, but especially among godly women, I now am come to answer
these objections, which are seemingly made for it.

The first objection is this, oh but your ground work, which you have builded
all this while upon, is a rotten foundation, and not taken in that sense which
you understand it for to be, for read you but the mind of the Apostle in the
place of Peter, 1.3.3. and you shall find that his meaning is clean contrary,
in that he says let not your conversation lie in your outward adorning of
plaiting the hair, or of wearing apparel, but let it be in the hidden man of
the heart, even the ornament of a quiet, and meek spirit, implying thus much,
not that we should not lay our hair out, but that we should not place any
Religion in the plaiting of the hair, or any other adorning, but only in the
hidden man of the heart.

Answer, indeed in one sense it is to be understood so, because it was all the
drift of the Apostle Peter to beat men from placing Religion in any thing here
below, not only in any outward thing, but in any thing that was corruptible,
as in gifts or graces, or the like, but now if this were all the meaning of the
Apostle here, then this place of Scripture would seem to prove that a woman
might wear her hair plaited, or gold, or any kind of apparel, so that they
did not place any Religion in it, which if this exposition should stand, then
it would break that rule which godly men holds, that one place of Scripture,
if it be understood a right, it never thwarts another, but this exposition does
two places of Scripture; first 1. Cor. 11.16. that of the Apostle Paul, Her
hair is given her for a covering, now a woman cannot be said to be covered,
when as it is broidered and plaited, or laid forth, again it contradicts that
place which the Apostle speaks of in 1 Timothy in 2. 9. where he says, let
women adorn themselves in modest apparel with shame-fastnesse, and sobriety,
not with broidered hair or gold, or pearls, or costly array, but 10. ver.
which becomes women professing godliness, and good works, implying, that the
outward adorning of laying forth the hair, is a very unbeseeming thing,
becoming women professing godliness.

Secondly, you may object and say my hair is not plaited nor crisped, but
only laid forth, and therefore all the conclusions which you draw from the
Apostle Peter's words is of no purpose, for he speaks not so much to me, as to
those who wear their hair crisped or plaited, etc.

I answer, the word plaited here used by the Apostle is taken for a general
expression, concluding all sorts in one term, as if he should have said, let
not your conversation be in your outward adorning, as plaiting of the hair, or
any such like fashion, so that whatsoever fashion it be, either crisped or
broidered, or plaited, or laid forth, if it come under this term of an outward
adorning, it is utterly unlawful from the rule of the Apostle Peter, as you
cannot deny but your attire of laying forth your hair, comes under the term
of outward adorning.

Thirdly, you may object from the Apostles words 1. Cor. 11.16. that hair was
given of God unto you for a covering, and you use it for no other end.

Answer; first, that way you use it, it is but a seeming covering, and no real
covering, and it will appear that it is rather an uncovering as you use it,
then a covering, in that you take it out of its proper place, to hang it down
in another place. Secondly, its against the rule of the Apostle so to do, for
he says you must be covered, or else you must be shorn; the Apostle does not
mean here, that your hair should only cover your head and ears, but that your
clothes should cover your hair, and therefore this was the reason that men must
have their hair cut, because men was to wear no clothes to cover their head,
therefore says the Apostle, if you will not cover your heads, that part which
is uncovered must be shorn or shaven, implying, that his meaning is, that
their clothes should cover their hair. Thirdly, if you would have the meaning
of the Apostle, that your hair should be given you for an outward covering,
then by this rule it were unlawful for any woman to wear any covering upon her
hair, which to understand it so will be rediculous. Fourthly, if you should
take the Apostles meaning, that her hair was given her for an outward covering,
then by this rule she might wear it of any fashion, so that it covers her head,
though that it hang down all her neck, ears, and forehead, being tied up
neatly, to which you will say this is like more unto a mad, frantic woman,
then to a sober, grave, and holy woman. Fifthly, your laying forth of your hair,
comes under that admonition, which the Apostle Peter gives of an outward
adorning, for why may not that part of the hair be tied up as well as all the
rest, or why do you not let all the rest of your hair hang down about your
head, as well as that?

Fourthly, you may object end say, oh but my hair is given me for an ornament,
and I take no pride in my laying it forth.

Ans. I do not deny but that your hair is an ornament to your head, because the
Lord created it for that proper place, but that your hair is given you as an
ornament to deck your self withal, that is against the rule of both the
Apostles, for that the Apostle Paul says your hair is given you for a
covering, and not to deck your self withal, and the Apostle Peter condemns it
for an outward decking, for if it had bin given an ornament to deck your self,
the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 29. would not have condemned it, an unseemly attire,
not befitting grave and holy women.

Fifthly, you may object and say, though I have no absolute rule for it from the
word of God, yet I have the examples of many godly grave and holy women for it.

Ans. First you must never follow the example of any godly man or woman then
their example is regulated by the word.

Secondly, if you shall ask any of them upon what ground they do were it, they
can give you no Scripture for it, but one of these two reasons, or some other
such like carnal reasons, either they will say it was a fashion that I was
brought up in from my parents, who went in the same fashion before me, or else
they will say, why may not I wear it as well as such and such women, poor
answers to satisfy conscience in such a case.

Sixthly, you may object and say, why do you think they are all godly women,
that goes close covered in their hair, or do you think that they be all but
seeming Christians, as you term them, that lays their hair forth?

Answ. I neither say they are the one or the other, but suppose a godly woman
were walking with a wicked woman abroad, the godly woman she having her hair
forth, the carnal woman she is close covered, you following of them, you
meeting with a friend and say, I pray Sir do you know those two women that
passed by us? Yes, says he very well, I pray says he, what is that woman that
went in that modest attire? oh says he she is a very carnal woman, and what
is the other woman that had her hair forth? she is a very precious godly woman;
good lack says he, it did not appear so to me by her gaudy attire, well says
he, let the other carnal woman be what she will she goes more modester,
then the other godly woman, so that even nature may teach women to be more
modester in their attire of hair, but more especially godly women.

Seventhly, you may object and say, oh but all this while you have but drawn it
out by consequences, that vvomens laying forth their hair is a sin, you have
brought never a place of Scipture flat against it, and therefore it may be your
own brain meaning more then the meaning of the Scipture.

Ans. Although there is no such place of Scripture as this, thou shall not lay
thy hair forth, yet doubtless, though it was not spoken against by God himself,
yet in so much as it was spoken against by the Apostle Paul, who had the
Spirit of God; whatsoever he spoke then, was the mind of God, for
whatsoever that was spoken against the mind of God had been a sin, but such
a one as Paul, who had such a measure of the spirit, could not sin in such a
case, as to speak his own judgment when as it was not the mind of God,
therefore it must needs be the mind of God, that laying forth of hair is
unlawful, in that he used the apostle Paul and Peter to mind us of it.

Eighthly, you may object and say, oh but my birth requires is, and the company
I keep withal daily requires it or else, I shall not be fitting for such
company.

Ans. first will you prefer your natural birth, before your spiritual birth?
Secondly, if you can discern what a natural birth requires in your attire of
hair, why cannot you as well then discern by the rule of the Apostle what a
spiritual birth requires, which is plainly discovered to be against your
laying forth the hair. Thirdly, as for the company you are with according to
your rank, you must not be guided more by their rule then by the pattern of
the word, as the Lord has put a difference between them, and you in their
souls condition, so the Lord has put a difference between you and them, in
your attire.

Ninthly, you may object and say, why may not I as well go in this attire of
hair, as to go in gold and silver, seeing that is lawful for me to do, if it
be according to my rank and place.

Answ. For your gold and silver it is lawful for to wear, by such persons in
whom the Lord is so pleased to bestow this worldly wealth upon, as you may read
in the book of Exodus, and in Job 32. 11. but they that wear their hair out,
have no rule for it, but a flat rule against it.

Tenthly, you may object and say, oh but God requires that our adorning should
be decent and comely, and I never wore my hair but decent, civil and comely.

Answ. There can be nothing said to be decent and comely, which is displeasing
unto God, and it is as undecent in Gods sight for a woman to wear their hair
out, as it is undecent in man's sight for a woman for to go in man's apparel,
and surely the Apostle Paul and Peter would never have troubled themselves so
much in speaking of it, if it had not been both displeasing unto God and man,
nay the Lord would not threaten such a judgment on them for it, that did abuse
their hair, as you may read Esaias 3. 24. instead of well set hair, baldness;
read but out all the words in that verse, and you shall find that in every
particular wherein they offended, and displeased God, the Lord sent them a
particular judgment for it, as you may read instead of sweet smell, a stink,
implying it was displeasing, and instead of beauty, burning or tanned, so that
for every particular sin the Lord had a judgment for it: for no doubt that the
Lord was not displeased with their natural beauty, for then he should despise
his own creature that he made, but that artificial beauty which they put upon
themselves, and so we must understand the Lord sent a judgment of baldness
upon those women that had well set hair, not because it was his own
workmanship, but because they abused their hair, etc.

Eleaventhly, oh but this dressing in my hair becomes me more better then my
dressing in clothes does, and therefore I wear, and for no other end.

Answ. First, take heed that this fashion blind not your eyes, that you cannot
see the ugliness in it, for pride and self love blindes one that they cannot
see, that which another sees in them to be unseemly.

Secondly, do not persuade your self it is a seemly fashion best becoming of
you, for if you do but look upon it, you are in your apparel more like an
Hermophrodite, that is to say half man and half woman, that is, when as you
shall be like to a woman downward in your apparel, and you should be like to a
man upward in your Hat, and hair.

Thirdly, your wearing of hair forth is no such comely dressing, because it
takes away that modesty, and shamefastness, which would if you were godly
women appear in you, and to say the truth, those seem to be more viragines or
men like women that do werae it, then modest grave and holy women.

Twelfthly, oh but you may say, though you may prove it is unlawful for a
woman to lay forth her hair, yet I hope it is not unlawful for one to go
close covered wearing some locks of hair forth, doing it only for the setting
forth of my person, as I do wear my dressing for that end.

Answ. First, if it be unlawful to do the greater, it must needs follow to be
unlawful to do the less, if it be unlawful for a man to swear a great oath,
it is as unlawful for a man to swear a little oath, and my reason is this,
because the least sin in Gods sight is as heinous unto him as the greatest sin,
because in the least sin we do blemish the Image of God, though in the greater
sins it be in a greater degree, and truly a small sin given by a Saint unto
God, is more hainouser then a greater sin given by a wicked man, because he
that does not the will of God ignorantly shall not be excused, but he that
knows how to do the will of God, and does it not, he shall be left to be
punished, without excuse: Luke 12. 47, 48.

Secondly, to wear your locks forth, it comes under the same admonition as the
Apostle Peter speaks of, and outward adorning, and under the Apostle Paul's
rule of, an immodest Attire, not beseeming gracious holy women, professing
godliness, and therefore utterly unlawful.

Thirdly, it is an object of pride, to set it a working in those that do wear
it, though perhaps all present may not do it for that end, I instance thus: you
will say it were a very unbeseeming thing for a man to pray unto God to give
him power over his lust of uncleanness, and yet you to see him daily to use
lascivious pictures, and wanton gestures, truly it is one and the same case in
godly women, who prays daily unto God for power over their sins, and among
all the rest, prays against the sin of pride, and against all those
Instruments which may be a means of stirring up of it in them, and yet shall
daily Lock forth their hair, which is not only as great an instrument to
stir up pride in them, if there should be none, as it gives cause unto other
godly persons, to be but pride it self, and truly in conclusion, if there
were no sin to be found in it, yet in so much as it has been this many years,
such a great affence given unto so many godly men and women, which by their
wearing of it, has been a great cause to Censure them, though it may be they
never deserved it, if it were but only upon this ground and none other, it
were enough to beat you from your pleading for it, and to lay it down, as a
thing both offensive unto God and man, and though your knowledge may be very
much, I know Paul had as much as you, and yet his spirit came so low, as you
may read, 1 Cor. 8. 13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat
no flesh while the world stands, which was a greater matter to abstain from
that food which was so nourishing to his body, then for you to lay in your head
of hair, or lock of hair, and to be close Covered, seeing you have a Rule,
In case you give by any means any offense, to a weak Brother or Sister, and so
by this means make them to offend that Great God, to whom be praise through
Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer, for ever, world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

