A FEVV COLLECTIONS FOR IRELANDS Soldiers.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Phillip Lord Lysle, Lord Leivetenant General of
IRELAND.
(My Lord)
THe favors I received from you Honorable Father in my first journey to
Ireland, and now suitable to your Lordshipps Fathers Will seconded; has
emboldened me to offer this poor tribute: not to teach your uncontradictable
knowledge, but humbly desire it may kiss your hands as a sacrifice offered
from your servant, or as a weakness that stands in need of your protection,
therefore I humbly crave it may not be offensive if for one hour or less I
beg you from your more serious thoughts, to vouchsafe the reading of these
few lines; The profession of a Soldier is necessary, his ends glorious, and
his quality honorable; But when I come to think of a mind befitting a
Soldier, I can only say this; that how curious, costly, plain, or deformed
the Cabinet be, yet must it necessarily be filled with all manner of virtues:
vice must be as that deadly foe with whom he will never make truce, or ever
Capitulate, and the bulwark to withstand his assaults must be Faith and a good
Conscience, under the guard of these he must find his security: A Soldier
must be valiant, (for his proper virtue) valiant to conquer his Countries
foes: and valiant to overthrow is own passions: to which purpose I presume
this manner of writing: Since then (my Lord) you are by the Honorable Houses of
Parliament made Lord Leivetenant General of the Kingdom of Ireland for the
reducing of those Apostated miscreants, and that on you depends all the
Millitary actions of that Kingdom; I cannot be persuaded but any thing which
comes clothed with this title being nothing but truth, shall find from you a
noble respect: Be it then your Lordshipps noble favor to save this poor
Epistle from the wrack of envy, and when it shall arrive at your presence, be
pleased to hear what it delivers: And I doubt not, but though it can bring
little to Augment your knowledge, yet it may leave something worthy to be
retained in your best memory: and howsoever the weakness of words may deface
it, yet your Lordship shall find it has an honest aim, and points at the way
to prosper; it being the constant prayer of my soul that you may reap the
fruits of so honorable and gallant an undertaking, so that God being thereby
glorified, your soul may be everlastingly comforted: For my share of which
service I am

Your Honors devoted Soldier by word and deed, to the hazard of his life
LAZARUS HAVVARD

A Few collections for IRELAND.
A GOod heart has learned to frame it self to all conditions, and can change
estates without change of disposition, rising and falling according to occasions

DIstrust not God who is judge of all causes and men, for he brings nothing
to pass but that which is most righteous and most for his glory.

Vain men go forth in a morning weak and unarmed to encounter with
principalities and powers: but he that truly knows Christ comes not into the
field without this captain.

AFfliction upon a nation is either to reform them or destroy them: when
Israel worshipped strange gods war was in their gates.

NO people is saved for their righteousness sake, nor chose a people because
they were righteous: but to make them righteous, yea the righteous shall be
more righteous though the wicked grow worse and worse.

Carnal hearts are carried away with presumption of their own abilities, and
not finding matches to themselves in outward appearance insult over the
impotency of inferiors.

Even for our sins of Hypocrisy and Idolatry we have been punished by the
sword of Atheist and Idolater, yea one proud man corrects another.

YE we could say with Abraham and Lot, let there be no strife between me and
thee, and so both join together against the common enemy, we might expect a
good success.

OPpression and wrong upon even terms are not so heinous unto God as those
that are upon manifest disadvantage, in one there is an hazard of return in
the other there is a tyrannous Insultation.

VNprovoked and envious onsets upon the backs of the Israellites by Amaleck God
took to heart, every cowardly and cruel attempt upon an impotent enemy
sticks in the stomach of the Almighty.

REmember says Moses how Amelecke met thee by the way and smote the hindermost
of you, all that were feeble behind thee, when thou were faint and weary.

PUnishment upon a nation was never removed till the sin was either punished
or taken away: there can be no end of war where sin is cherished in the
seat of justice.

ITs not the name of peace or war, but the circumstances and condition of
either that should make a man embrace the one or eschew the other.

KIngs that uphold Gods Kingdom, God upholds theirs: if they will have God to
be mindful of them in his mercy, they must be mindful of him in their
business.

EVery important action requires a sacrifice of prayer to bless it: but much
more that action which imports a whole Church or Common wealth.

OUr days are grown desperate and full of homicides, as if violence would
leave nothing to do, the merciles soldier has put on his armor, left off
his charity and fights for money.

REligious and worthy Arts always advance a work intended: it prospers a
war, brings soldiers into a better command, and a whole Army under good
government.

Do enemies what they can, so Christ be our Captain, our leader, and our
friend, we need not to fear.

Every man forsake sin and rest upon Gods providence: for man's extremity is
Gods opportunity.

REward Babylon as she has deserved, yea serve her as she has served us:
suppress an Antichristian Prelacie, cut off those which make war against the
people of God.

IF there be a dog in the manger, he shall not always lie there, though there
be divisions in Church and State, yet we shall at last be taught of God to be
of one mind.

O How happy were we, if we could say, as Abraham to Lot, let there be no
strife between me and thee, but both join together against the Common enemy.

VEngeance in a great and an extraordinary measure, is sure to fall on al those
that are Rebels and persecuters of Gods Elect.

REvenge for Religion-sake upon such Idolaters as have by craft and wiles
sought to destroy and corrupt the people of God, is warranted by his word.

PRinces in honor cannot make peace with any People, Nation, or Country, that
have shed the blood of his innocent Subjects: but especially not with his own
in like Case.

It Is a good prediction, and a presage of future happiness to a distracted
Kingdom, when righteous men are brought into place of Judicature.

Kingdoms never flourish better then when Christ's Gospel has a free passage
in it.

EVery violence that opposes it self against Gods truth, must be utterly
suppressed? for the glory and welfare of a Kingdom consists in the maintenance of
truth.

SUch as have no confidence in God, their hearts must needs fail them in
undertakings of danger: but faith fears not though in the valley of the shadow
of death.

HAving Christ to be ours, and our souls his, though the world were on a
light fire, yet we shall not perish.

OUr knowledge of Christ is the cause of our love, and if we love him, we will
fight against his enemies.

VIctory, joy, pleasure and peace are coming to the people of God, but only
with the coming of Christ.

LOve can extend the passions of the heart to the thing loved, and yet cannot
apprehend Christ: he must be apprehended before he be loved, and that love
will make us defend his cause.

Dreadful curses fall commonly upon all those that take part with the enemies
of Christ fighting to maintain the cause of Antichrist, David says none of
their weapons shall prosper, Psalm. 54.17.

EVen the consideration that our war is surrounded with the prayers of all
Gods people is encouragement enough for a man to go on.

RIghteous men shall rejoice when they shall see the vengeance that comes upon
the wicked, and shall wash their feet in their blood.

IF God give quietness, who can make war? when he hides his face, who can
behold him whether it be done against a nation or a man only.

OUr sorrows and sickness, our pains and perturbations, pestilence, famine
and war, are the fruits of sin, and the manifestation of Gods displeasure
against sinners.

Ungodly men may take council together, but it shall be brought to naught,
yea though they make a confederacy, it shall be broken to pieces, for God will
be a Sanctuary and a rock of defense to all his.

REprobates and ungodly men are Satan's Soldiers, and yet Gods pentioners and
revolted to the enemy: Demas had been with Paul, professed with Paul, labored
with Paul: and yet for this present world forsook Paul.

Policy, succors, or abundance do but rather entangle and disable our
resistance, but the wisdom, comfort, and powerfulness of the holy Spirit are
the arms with which we shall beat down our enemies.

IShmael, Moab, and the Haggarens, Gabell and Ammon, Amalecke and the
Philistines, the men of Tire and Ashur, all had several gods: yet all these
conspire against the true God.

Keep not back thy sword from destroying of Gods enemies, for God pronounces
a Curse upon those that do his work negligently.

EHud, Joshuah, David, and his Worthies, were all men of great knowledge, given
to temperance, sobriety, and chastity: these ought to be the virtues of
Soldiers.

COwards are always enemies to God and his Cause; to sit still in these times,
is to be lukewarm professors of base and sordid spirits.

He that joins himself to a Rebel, no man can know him from a Rebel: such
surely were never of us, that have been and are bloody against us.

A Reformation is the most of our enemies fear, and the true cause that the
Devil and his Instruments do so bestir themselves at this time.

REvenge the blood of Gods Saints, and the many outrages committed against his
Servants; for the whole Church of God calls to come into the help of the Lord
and his people against the mighty.

GOd teaches us not to look upon our Enemies as Countrymen, and Kinsmen, but
as his enemies, and siders with Antichrist: therefore our eye must not pity
them, nor our sword spare them, Jer. 48.10.

EVery man stands upon his guard, especially when our Enemies have drawn their
swords upon us, to invade our person, and whatsoever else is dear unto us.

YOu may seek peace and follow after it, yet when the beast makes war
against the Saints of God, you must then take up Arms, Rev. 19.19.

OUr Lives and Religion fought for with courage brings Christ to take our
parts, who will not fail to give us victory in the end.

VIolence requires resistance, yea it is lawful always to take up Arms when
there is no safety without them, Paul makes it a fruit of faith to be valiant,
Heb. 11.34.

REad the History of the Bible, for you shall find that the Art Military is
no where so well to be learned as from that great and high Commander the Lords
of Hosts, Isa. 10.24.26.

PRinces are happy when their Armies are like King David's soldiers, surely
Kings of David's heart will have no soldiers but such as King David's were, 1
Chro. 12.38.

IN Zebulon were fifty thousand men expert in war that could keep their
order in Ranks, besides they were not double-hearted.

KIng David had a great company of soldiers at his back, yet he slew Goliath
alone, and had none to help him: so faith alone conquers.

EVery just and warranted war God is with, and in the end gives victory: he
helped the Rubenites, and other Tribes, and cast down their enemies, 1 Chronicles.
5.20

Soldiers to be religious, courageous, valiant and skillful in military
profession is required of God himself, Deuteronomy. 23.9.

HE that for ever suffered, that we might not suffer for ever, will not plead
for those above, that will not fight for him below.

OUr God will teach our hands to war, and our singers to fight, yea also cover
our heads in the day of Barrel.

UNgodly men have their day wherein they may execute theirown pleasure (as it
were without control) but Christ the Judge of all shall have his day.

DElinquents, Jesuits, and Firebrands of mischief are not able to abide the
trial of Justice, and therefore past hope of recovery by any lawful treaty.

EVery thing is that which it loves, so the wicked are the worlds, because they
affect the world.

REspect nor protect a Newter, for they that are not with God, are against him:
but he will deal with them accordingly. Curse ye Merosh, Judge. 5.23.

IF Samuel mourn, because God has cast away Saul, Samuel must cease mourning,
because God has cast away Saul by his just Judgment.

OUr best evidence of the maintenance of Christ's Cause, is when his Enemies are
destroyed, and his own people refreshed and comforted.

Virtuous men such as Abraham, Josuah and David, are always victorious, and
prevailent against Gods Enemies.

Royal hearts ever disdain to follow pleasure (though sometimes lawful) when
they should be in the field: this contempt was in Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.11.

PRayer is always a special means to procure victory, Israel fought, but
Moses prayers made them prevail.

IGnorant men are not fit for service, for not a multitude, but art and
exercise gets victory: Isreal's soldiers were all expert men, Judge. 20.16.

Kingdom is risen against Kingdom, and Nation against Nation, Gods Church is
trodden underfoot, it must be so for a time, yet there is hope if we war aright.

EXalt thy self O God, and deliver us from our Enemies: defend us from those
that rise up against us, let thy glory be above all the earth.

PIety makes men valiant, for God being reconciled to such, death if it come,
will be their advantage: Araham, David, Josuah, and Josiah were all valiant men.

Only such men as have bought experience at a high rate are fit to command,
for advancement is the true reward of desert.

REst not too much upon means, though the best be to be used, for a horse
prepared for the Battle is a vain thing: for safety (says Solomon) is of the
Lord, Prove. 21.31.

TRust in God, with prayers and supplications, asking council of him,
prospers an Army, and procures victory, Judge. 20.18, 23, 26.

YOu may put confidence in God, for faith in Christ withstands all encounters:
yea it is he that mannages all just causes.

O Foolish Soldier, thousands of thine Enemies stand about thee, rather be
sick then slothful.

Unless we defend Gods glory, when it is in question, our tongues and hands are
tied by the Devil, and not loosed by God.

RUn with patience unto the race that is set before thee, by death Christ came
unto us, by death let us not grudge to go to him.

Policy, wisdom, and experience, is required in Commanders, and no less
dexterity and skill in common Soldiers: but above all have a strong faith.

IT was faith which steeled Moses, and made him esteem the reproaches of Christ
greater then the Treasures of Egypt. Heb. 11.14, 25, 26.

KNowledge of the experiences that Gods people have had in former Ages, and his
love expressed to his servants in these times is sufficient to take away all
faint-heartednesse.

EVery good man sleeps more secure in his Tent, then the sinner in his
Baricadoed Fortifications.

TRue faith brings the peace of God to our conscienes, good report, victory
over our Enemies, and brings us to all other blessings.

REcommend thy self to God by prayer, before thou go to God: for no man's
work can please God, unless the person of the worker be first acceptable to
him.

A Soldier to be indifferent in Gods Cause, is both dangerous and damnable,
not to oppose them that oppose God, is to be Gods Enemy.

IF a man consider seriously the evil of cowardice, and the excellency of
valor, it will make him abhor the one, and be ambitions of the other.

LOve can extend the passions of the heart to the thing loved and yet cannot
apprehend Christ, he must be apprehended before he be loved, and that love will
make us defend his Cause.

IF we did but love Christ as well as we ought to do, or but so well as we say
we do, we would take his part more boldly.

OUr knowledge of a propriety in God challenges and earnest affection.

Unless our knowledge of Christ breed humiliation, we are vainglorious, never
seeking Christ's honor, but our own.

Rejoice in this honor, that ye know Christ: for it is a knowledge whosoever
seeks is wise, whosoever gets is rich, whosoever keeps is strong, and
whosoever injoyeth is blessed for ever.

PRovident policy, though never so circumspect, may be subject to error,
therefore not to be trusted in, much less to be gloried in.

IN much rest upon Confederates there is great danger, but especially let not a
Jehosaphat help and Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 19.2 Chron. 25.6.

KIng Ezekiahs comfort was that God was with him to fight his battles, and
Moses says, fear not but stand still, etc. 2 Chronicles. 31.8. Exodus 14.14.

EVery wicked man has the feet of a wolf, whatsoever he treads on shall never
prosper: but a whole Army fares the better for a good Ezekiah.

COwardly dismayings which put men upon sinful shifts in troublesome times, is
odious both to God and man.

HE that dares not fight, nor perform his charge for fear, is to be punished:
God commands cowards to be turned out of the Army.

EXpect not to prosper in any war, unless you hearken to Gods voice: Oh that
my people would have heard my voice, then would I soon have destroyed their
Enemies, Psalm.

EVery man that carries any command, let him be sure to order himself well,
or else his command will soon grow into contempt.

CAll to mind what God has done for Israel, he is a Man of War, his right
hand is become glorious, he has dashed his Enemies in pieces, Exodus 15.

KNowledge in Commanders procures fear from Enemies, love from friends, and
honor to themselves, for Solomon says, knowledge is better then weapons of War.

IF you suffer Idolatry in an Army, you procure the greatest of Gods Judgments
upon you, and so become naked of his protection: this overthrew Joash, 2 Chronicles.
25.7.

OVer-many words, pride, envy, and the fruits thereof tend to provoke the
breach of peace, therefore, not to be suffered in an Army: hence arose the
bloody wars between Ephraim and Jephta, Judge. 12.9.

Useful peace may sometimes be made with such as may injure us when we go to
war with others; lest while we set upon one, we be invaded by another, 1 Samuel
7.14. Esa. 37.19.

REad how Abraham the first General accepted of aid in war, therefore let no
man presume upon his own strength, Genesis 14.14. 2 Samuel 10.6.

PUrsue thine Enemy with a full Army, Israel got nothing by sending a small
number against Ai, therefore use thy best strength to obtain victory, Ios. 8.1.

JN the Tribe of Gad, there were men for strength called Men of Might for
courage, they had faces like Lions, and for-footmanship as swift as Roes, 1 Chronicles. 12.8.

KEep all promises made by thy self or by others by virtue of thy Warrant, for
it is a true mark of piety; Josuah was careful of this to the deceitful
Gibeonites, Ios. 6.22.9.19.

EVery determination in an Enemy to fight must cause thee to foresee and
attend such traps and ambushments, which may in execution suddenly come upon
thee.

CAll to mind what God himself wrought for the Israelites, when they were
refreshed, and the Enemy strongly deceived by the sunshine upon the water, 2
King. 3.22, 23.

HE that overthrowes an enemy by craft, as plain meaning Abijah was by
Jeroboam, shall be served as Jeroboam: God loves no machivilian policy, 2 Chronicles. 13.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

ALl advantages may be used, or any stratagem for the overthrow of an Enemy, so
it be not against breach of oath, godliness, or the Law of nature and Nations.

REmember after the example of Christ's parable to go forth to war With a full
Army, for an enemy is rather heartned then hurt by small numbers, Luke 14.31.

GIdeon sent out spies into the Enemies camp, to hearken after the fear and
terror that is in an Enemy, is a great heartening to go forward, Judge. 7.10,
11, 13.

Evil reports dis-heartens an Army, and therefore not to be suffered; this God
punished in his own people, Number. 14.27.

YOu may sometimes receive entertainment from the friends and subjects of an
Enemy, dis-joyning the hearts of such as be at one with him, may weaken this
power and be a more easy way to get victory.

ONe victory gotten with a full Army fairly, is almost the winning of a whole
Country, Caesar's victory at Alexandria drew almost all France to him.

Use all expedition in war as Saul did upon Nabash, and Iosuah upon the five
Kings, 1 Samuel 11. Ios. 10.9.

REfuse to fight after weary travel, or with over much hunger and thirst; for
it may be thou meetest with a lively and a fresh Enemy.

PEace must be offered before you strike, for God hates unnecessary
bloodshed, and abhors men of violence, Deuteronomy. 20.10.2 Sam. 10.18, 19.

JOsuah, Ehud, David and his Worthies went not forth to war, but in causes
apparently just, be careful then, and embrew not your hands in innocent blood.

KNowledge and the want of fear of God in our Armies, will keep us from
prospering in our designs.

EVery boasting of our own strength, wisdom of Generals, courage of Captains,
and dis-esteem of Enemies, as Benhadad did of Ahabs Army, may endanger the
overthrow of an Army.

SUch as hope to prevail, put their whole strength to the war, yet presume
not, for victory stands not in multitudes made of an host, but strength
comes from heaven, 1 King. 10.

HAve no confidence in such as may justly be suspected, the Lords of the
Philistims would not admit of David, and his Company to go into battle with
them against Israel.

OFtentimes good success follows good advise, without counsel, says
Solomon, purposes are disappointed, Prove. 15.

VEnture not to put all to hazard before thou have considered of thine own
numbers and strength, the quality and condition of thy Soldiers, whether young
or old, raw or experienced, and then of thine enemies.

LIttle errors may bring great damages, so that the due actions, commendations
of all former preparations, deliberations, and watie proceedings, is here
retained or lost.

DIligent foresight, and excellent judgment before joining of battle is
required of all good Commanders; for there lies at stake the precious lives of
men.

Endeavor for all advantages of ground, wind, and sun, the Syrians imputed
much to the place, making great difference between the hills and the valleys,
1 King. 20.

REly not too much upon means, for faith has confidence in God, yea all
safety is from him: one Sampson beats a thousand, Judge. 25.14, 15.

IF thou be forced to fight despair not, though thy numbers be small, and
thine enemy proud; for in such cases God strangely gives victory, 2 Chronicles. 14.

OUr experience has taught us, that small numbers of skillful men, well
exercised in Arms, will rout whole multitudes of others.

Virtuous and godly Orations with speeches of encouragement have been formerly
made to soldiers by great Commanders to take away fear.

REsist the Devil, and he will fly from you; he cannot enter, unless you open
him the gate, and who would open to let in such an enemy?

PReserve and maintain the true Protestant Religon, whereof under God,
consists the glory of a Kingdom.

IF a man be valiant for the Lord, he shall have great reward here, and
everlasting glory hereafter.

KNowledge mixed with presumption, may be overcome with distraction and subtly
end in an apoplexy, yea and beats out her own brains.

EVery hypocrite being once unmaskt proves the most dangerousest enemy,
therefore let thy sword make no difference between him and another.

COwardice and timerousnesse are qualities too base for eminency, it is want of
courage betrays the truth, men being more careful of their own quiet, then of
Gods glory.

HE that has his thoughts taken up with the consideration of the dreadfulnesse
which is in God, has a takin fear, such fearful ones God encourages and
comfort.

A Well ordered Army is a School, wherein is taught preparation to death,
continency, vigilance, obedience, hardness, temperance, humility, and devotion.

REgenerate men are but sinners, voluntaries at most, but pressed soldiers
against their wills; the God of wisdom will forgive them, when the wicked
shall receive the reward of Rebels.

GOd will not be worse to them that fight for him, then he is to them that
forsake him: yet alas, how are men's consciences ingrost by the world?

EVery man encourages one another to the end, by the recompense we shall find
in the end; for though God be good to us always, yet he will be best at last.

THe good soldier ever praises God for a revenge of those that plot or
contrive any hurt against the people of God.

OUr best evidence of the maintenance of Christ's Cause, is when his enemies are
destroyed, and his own people refreshed, and comforted.

THe way for soldiers to cure themselves of all sinful fears is to get the
fear of God settled in their hearts.

HE that goes by the means shall attain to the end, and so shall obtain a
crown of glory: yea he that walks so shall not miss it.

ENcouragement against adversaries of the truth is very necessary, for
Christians are very ready and subject to faint and fall.

FAith to rest upon Gods Word and Promise, is sufficient to sink, and drown
all sinful and slavish fear.

RIghteous men, such as Abraham, Josua, and David, being all men of good
consciences, prevailed always against Gods Enemies.

OUr desire of gain makes walk and venture through many frequent and mortal
dangers, yea it is an old saying, Soldiers and Seamen scarce fear God
himself.

NO man deserves reward for his goodness, but fears punishment for his
sinfulness: therefore look to thy obedience, and let God alone with thy
recompense.

That Is but a desperate policy that studies to vex those whom God has
blessed, yet the Lord so takes such into his tuition, that he will devour
their enemies.

OUr God will execute vengeance on whom he will, and it is no wrong to us, that
he saves any, the cause is in himself: that he condemns many, the cause is in
themselves.

REmember thou shall die, not because thou art wounded, or sick, but because
thou art alive.

RAther turn the world out of thy self, then turn they self out of the
world, for a wise man will be a hermit at home.

ENter into the Land of Canaan, for God has cast out the Devils out of the
Kingdom of heaven that Christ's soldiers may dwell there.

AS God has made even the flesh of vipers to assist in cordialls, so he can
raise strength out of weakness, and make war it self procure our everlasting
peace.

ROme has made us eat the bread of Superstition, and drink the wine of
Fornication of many years, yet God has now delivered us from it: if we revolt
from the integrity of his service, our latter end will be worse then our
beginning.

EVill-affected men toward the Doctrine of truth, are always so blinded in
mind, that they cannot abide the light of the truth.

Offenses, hatred, and extreme cruelty commonly follow the Professors of the
truth, yet beware, beware of being led by thine own blind ignorance.

RIsing early and much watching are profitable to keep a man in health, and to
increase his wisdom.

TIme is glorious to him that gloriously spends it, but that time is accursed,
that is wickedly spent, or passed over in sluggish ignorance without any profit.

OBedience is a virtue of an high nature, and in great estimation, but above
all things rather obey God then man.

THat man is blessed that lives a holy life, nothing can make him poor, he
graceth all conditions, honors and places.

HE that loves the world, and yet hopes for heaven, let him cease that love,
and know that if Christ makes us deny this world, he will give us a better.

EVery man is afflicted in this world, that he may be humbled; yea many sores
on thy flesh, that fewer sins may be on thy soul

REfraining of sin brings Christ into Armies, but fruitfulness in goodness
brings him into our hearts.

JN an Army none are so happily fed as those who wait upon God for their daily
bread, and are therewith satisfied; competency is a good soldiers content.

GOod things are not wearisome in their continual use, our daily bread though
daily received, is to be daily craved.

HE that with patience kisseth Gods striking hand is happy, for there is no
greater argument of patience then the acknowledgement of a divine hand in our
suffering.

THe patience of God is greater then the wickedness of man, yet let not
sinners presume, the silent Judge will at last speak home.

ORder and due execution of strict Discipline, is the strongest guard to keep
an Army from destruction: if Moses offend he must taste of the great General,
Gods displeasure.

REconcile your consciences and carefully keep at a distance from all sin, and
put thy whole confidence in God, rest upon his promise, and fear not to
prevail.

Learn of zealous Paul not to count your lives dear unto you, that thereby
you may finish your lives with joy.

EVery distrustful suspicion of our own present condition makes us fear,
least God is now filling up his cup of wrath for us to drink off, but remember
David's saying, in 42. Psalm. 11.

FEed not your fears nor fancies with such thoughts as are apt to terrify and
affright you, Esa. 33.18.

THe true cause why God may be slack in delivering of an Army from an
approaching danger, may proceed from a neglect of praising him for deliverances
past.

HHappy is the man that gets a resolution to live, because his time is not yet
come to die, pitching his desires upon the pleasures which have neither bounds
nor end.

AS thou know not when or where death will meet thee, so thou must remember
that always and in every place he seeks for thee.

NEver had any man perfect rest in this world, for it deceives all that put
their trust therein.

Diverse are the miseries and sorrows of this life, and few the pleasures, to
make us more desirous of heaven, where there is nothing but pleasure.

OLd age may be good three ways, naturally, morally and spiritually, the last
is best, when a man can look both ways, backward with comfort to his life
past, forward with joy to his reward to come.

REsolve that nothing shall hurt thee, for sin is the sting of all troubles;
pluck out the sting and devide all the malice of the Serpent.

DIrect an awful eye toward thy last account, and it will by many degrees be
more careful of the manner then the matter of actions both how and what thou
do.

EVerlastingly to be exiled from Gods, in whom is life, must needs be an
everlasting death; if Gods presence be fullness of joy, the fullness of sorrow
must needs be in his absence.

REmember our head is in heaven, what makes our hearts upon earth? it is fit
the head and heart should go together.

IF this temporal life which we know be so precious, and that time must
determine it, how precious is that which is equal with eternity?

OLd in knowledge and obedience is blessed, the hoarie head is a crown of
glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.

Virtue adds to a regenerate man a new splendour, which together with the honor
of his house challenges respect from all.

Ruin and destruction are in the paths of the wicked, and the way of peace
they shall never know, that contemn and oppose the Gospel of Christ.

PRay still and God will answer, and what is wanting in our endeavors God will
make up of his sufficient mercies.

JN death and dust, who can say this is the Skull of a King? that of a
Captain? this of a Politician? that of a Fool? this of an Officer? that of a
Soldier?

KNowledge never rests till his faith be built on assurance that God has
pardoned his sin, and given him a place in heaven.

EVery man whose eternal election and present justification is such, that he
can call God father, his Savior brother, and the Holy Ghost his Comforter, the
terrors of death amaze him not; for he knows whom he has trusted, and whether
death shall lead him.

FINIS.

