A SERMON PREPARED To be preached at the FUNERAL of WALTER NORBANE, Esquire
BY W. HAYWOOD Dr. in DIVINITY: One of the Chaplains in ordinary to his late
MAJESTY of Glorious Memory.

LONDON,

Printed for Richard Thrale at the Cross-Keyes at S. Pauls-Gate, entering into
Cheapside. 1660.

To the truly Virtuous and Worthy Mistress Mary Norbane, Relict of Walter
Norbane, Esquire deceased.
THat I had no desire or meaning thus to appear in print, when I first
undertook this Funeral Sermon, I suppose on my single asseveration will easily
be believed: But that the Sermon should be at the very instant of the delivery,
in so honorable, so full an Audience defeated and silenced, is a thing not so
easy to be believed, without the attestation of many Witnesses; That one
single person usurping the Office of a Minister, but neither a Graduate, nor in
Orders, nor scant of Age to be, nor ever intending (as I am informed) any way,
old or new, to be, should by his clamorous impudence and shameless railing
confound such a Solemnity, silence the Preacher appearing in the Pulpit, and
drive all, that met to do honor to the memory of so worthy a Gentleman, out of
the Church without any Sermon, is an example of pity and boy-like petulance,
such as I think can hardly be paralelled. Especially, since neither the deceased
Gentleman (for ought I know) nor the Preacher had ever affronted or provoked
the said insolent Party in word or deed. My own wrong (I thank God) I least
value, having learned by experience to bear many causeless injuries with
patience. But the wrong done to the deceased (a singular Ornament to this
Country and to his Profession) together with the injury and contempt of so
noble an Auditory, consisting of Lords, Knights, Parliament Men, Esquires,
Gentlemen, Officers of the County and Reverend Divines, so many, as in diverse
years has not been seen in Caln-Church the like Congregation; such an
insolence may not so well be passed over in silence, nor so Worthy a Company
utterly defrauded of what they came to hear. I have therefore yielded to the
request of diverse friends that the Sermon may be published, and not buried with
him, whose Memory and Virtues deserves never to be buried. And I have thought
fit to dedicate it to you, by whose request it was undertaken, and who can best
witness how little I sued or sought for the employment. Beseeching God it may
help to mitigate your sorrow for so invaluable a loss, and add somewhat to
your comfort, and remain as a Monument of his good will to you and yours: who
is many ways obliged to be, and to continue

Your truly loving Friend and Neighbor WILLIAM HAYVVOOD.

A SERMON At the Funeral of Walter Norbane Esquire April. 13 1659. at Calne Church
in Wiltshire, prepared to be preached.
ROMANS 6.5. For if we have been planted together into the likeness of his Death,
we shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection.

OF Christ's Death and Resurrection it is, that the Apostle here speaks,
exhorting us to be planted into the one, that we may attain to the likeness of
the other.

The time of the year borders upon the annual Memory of our Saviors Death and
Resurrection; and it is a season also of planting and growing up: but God has
made it, to our great sorrow, a time of felling and hewing down. We have beheld
the fall of this worthy Gentleman, whose remainders lie here before us, as the
fall of some great Tree, under whose shadow many lesser plants were sheltered.
A Tree of no little ornament, benefit, relief and comfort to the poor
Inhabitants of this place wherein he lived. And much to our sorrow it adds,
that there appears not so near again any of like dignity, age, and fair
abilities to compare with him.

Howbeit, if we could be persuaded, this cutting down were but a new
Plantation, and a plantation of great advantage to him, how much loss soever to
us, that might avail somewhat to mitigate our sorrow; And that (I suppose) this
Text may help to persuade us, for there we hear of a plantation into Christ's
Death, so that Death it self to them that are in Christ, is but a kind of
plantation, and their burial, a kind of sowing: So our Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.42.
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power. So our blessed Savior, Except a Corn of wheat fall into the ground, and
die, it abides alone, but if it die, it brings forth much fruit, John 12.24.
Christ himself therefore chose to die, and his Burial to him proved but a
planting; His Body in three days rose again, with an increase of Immortality;
and Christ neither died nor rose for himself, but is become the first fruits of
them that sleep, and the pattern of them that shall rise again: For, as is the
Heavenly Adam, so they also that are heavenly, And as we have born the Image of
the earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly; But there must be a
change first, for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither
may corruption inherit incorruption There must be a plantation therefore, first
into the death of Christ, a fellowship with his sufferings, (as St. Paul calls
it) a conformity to his Passion, which if we patiently undergo, the Text then
has a comfortable promise, that will not fail us: For if we have been planted
into the likeness of his Death, we shall be also into the likeness of his
Resurrection.

But it will be said, Saint Paul speaks not here of our planting into Christ,
by a natural death, but rather by a moral, or a mystical: for immediately
before, he instanceth in Baptism: Buried (says he) by Baptism into death; That
like as Christ was raised by the glory of the Father, so we should walk in
newness of life. And at the eleventh ver. Likewise reckon ye your selves also,
to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. So that
the planting into our Saviors Death, which Saint Paul here intends, is by a
death unto sin, not by a death in the grave.

And this we deny not; And even in this respect, we have not only a comfortable
Scripture over the dead, but full of good instruction also, and edification to
the living; So would Funeral Sermons be. They are for the behoof of the living,
rather than the dead; That as the Apostle says of Prophecy, He that
prophesies speaks unto men, to edification, and exhortation, and comfort; so
by such preaching, Christians might not only be comforted, but edified
likewise, and exhorted. Now for edification, a Scripture more effectual can
hardly be found, than this; For it comprehends the sum of all virtuous and
godly living; To be planted into Christ's Death, that thereby we may grow to his
Resurrection; that is, To die to sin, and live to Righteousness; Cease to do
evil, and learn to do well: Put off the old Man, that we may be planted into
the New: And, what is there more in Christianity to be done?

Yet though this be the nearest, and most genuine Exposition of the Apostle, so
to understand him, as speaking of mortification, and rising to a new life; the
other way of applying this Text to men naturally dying, or pressed with great
tribulations, may not be excluded as altogether improper. For even to that
purpose also Saint Paul in other places applies this very Metaphor, of dying
and rising with Christ: as 2 Cor. 1.8. We are troubled on every side, but not
distressed: Persecuted, but not forsaken: always bearing about in our body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be manifest, etc.
And though resembling Christ's Death, and Rising by true Repentance, and a holy
Life, be the most excellent, and most profitable way of imitating him; as
without which outward suffering, avail little, and therefore that sense needs
most exhortation: Yet we cannot deny such a conformity to Christ's Death by our
sufferings, to be a nearer way and more fully resembling the likeness of his
plantation. As our rising from corruption to glory draws nearer the likeness
of Christ's Resurrection, than our rising to newness of life only: So our
planting into Christ's Death, by a fellowship of his sufferings, and by being
brought down to the grave with him, is a nearer and fuller resemblance of his
passion, than the Death of true repentance and mortification to sin only, if no
other affliction be added.

But how much more full, if both be joined together? As in this our deceased
brother to my knowledge they were, an afflicted Body, and a penitent soul, a
self-deniyn life, and a patient and lamb like death, a flesh crucified with the
affections and lust, and a spirit raised and revived with hope of immortality,
a soul aspiring to heaven, while his body sunk to the earth. What nearer, what
fuller, what truer or more immediate planting into the death and Resurrection
of Christ? And he that is so far incorporated, what Text can fit him better.
For if we have thus been planted into the likeness of our Saviors Death, We
shall be also, into the likeness of his Resurrection.

We proced to a division of our Text. Two plantations in this Scripture appear
joined in connection, and inferred one upon the other: The one a sad and heavy
plantation, the other a joyful and comforting, the one in weeping and
mourning, the other in triumph and rerejoycing, the one may be called our
Winner plantation, the other our Summer; If not rather, the one our seed time,
the other our harvest, out Winter planation or seed-time. For if ye have been
planted together, into the likeness of Chirsts Death. And our Summer
plantation, or harvest, Ye shall be also into the likeness of his
Resurrection. The former of these contains our conflict, the later our Crown:
Not more bitterness and pains in the one, than comfort and sweetness in the
other.

We begin with the former, which is our Winter plantation, or sowing in tears.
For if we have been planted into the likeness of Christ's Death. Where the
first word that meets us is the Conjunction Si, implying a Condition, Si
complantati fuerimus, If we have been planted. Giving us to know, that these
two plantations are so connected one to the other, as our labor and our
reward, our warfare and our victory; that without having our part in the
former, there is no hope of attaining the latter; unless we first communicate
in the Winter plantation of our Lords Death; at the summer plantation of his
Resurrection there will be no arriving. Except we first suffer with him, no
hope of reigning. It is the Apostles way of arguing, for some length together,
whereby he persuades Timothy to endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3. If a man strive for Masteries, yet he is not crowned,
except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that labors, must be first
partaker of the fruits. Remember that Christ first died, before he rose again,
and it is a faithful saying, If we be dead with him, we believe, we shall also
live with him.

So the two plantations are inseparable; and rightly we may conclude; if any
man miss his part in the later, it is for lack of the former; if any attain
not to the Resurrection of Christ, it is because he failed in the suffering,
which may be the reason perhaps, why the Apostle thus puts it upon an If, as a
thing to be doubted of: If we have been planted into his Death. For so hard
appears the condition, and so rate the number of them that are truly so
planted, that it may well be doubted, and doubted of the best of us all.

Insomuch that the Apostle speaks here in the first person, as if he doubted of
himself for company. If we have been planted, fully and thoroughly, into the
likeness of Christ's Death. And it is but what ye find in the third to the
Phillipians, All things. I account but dung, that I may be found in him, with
the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death: If by
any means, I might attain to the Resurrection of the dead; Not as if I had
already attained, or were already perfect: But I follow after, if I may
apprehend, Phillip. 3, 12. If I may apprehend; So that he doubts of his own
sufferings likewise, and whether this first plantation be complete with himself.

Ye see therefore that he uses the preterperfectense also. (...). If we have
been planted. Have been, that we desire to be, that we intend to be: every one
will be ready to say, and no If, no doubt upon that. All the fear is, whether
or no we have already enough of this plantation. Which makes him say in
another place, I fill up, that which is behind, of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh, Coloss. 1.24. As if somewhat in this kind, were still wanting on his
part; and therefore well may he utter it with Si, and si Dubitantis; If we have
been already planted sufficiently, into the likeness, of his Death.

Doubted it may be the rather, because of the preposition (...) here added; Si
complantati faith the latin, if we have been planted together, which is
diversely expounded, together with Christ, or together with one another.
Together with Christ, If we have been obedient as he was, to the Death, not
shrinking from our pattern, so much as in a wish but resolved with him, who
when he saw the cup coming, prayed, not my will O Father, but thine be done.
And then, together with out brethren, If we have not deserted out companions in
suffering, As St. Paul complains of Demas, that he had forsaken him, and
embraced this present world, 3 Tim. 4.10. And, at my first answer (to wit
before Nero) No man stood with me, but all forsook me, Si complantati may teach
us, that suffering together in a good cause, is as acceptable as praying
together. They do not well therefore, who withdraw from times of Common
humiliation, such as the Memorial of our Lords Passion, and his fasting in the
Wilderness; times ordained to make this Complantati as universal and as full
as may be, that Christians may be planted together into the similitude of their
Saviors Death.

Two observations more by the way here offer themselves: One upon Plantati,
another upon Mortem. Upon Plantati, that it is not any slight Conformity, or
Community with the Death of Christ will serve turn. Though it be but in
similitudinem, yet it is more than assimilati. It is not if we resemble it, if
we imitate or draw near it; But Si complantati, if we have been planted into
it, which argues a nearer Conjunction, more firm and inseparable: For that
which is planted, or grafted (so the word signifies) grows into one nature
with that, whereto it is joined. It partakes of one life, one spirit with the
Root, and never decays so long as it has Communion therewith. We are not
waxed or soder'd, or pinned to the Body of Christ, to be shaken off with foul
weather, melted with the flames of persecution, or untied by Satan's cunning:
but we are planted, there to abide, there to grow, and thrive, and increase.

To thrive and increase: for planting inferrs fruitfulness: Christ's death is
no barren soil, his Body no unfruitful Tree: It yielded an increase with him
to life everlasting, and must yield an increase with us. An increase, and no
small one. For Christ's Body is a Vine, of all plants the most fruitful; I am
the Vine, ye are the branches, and my Father the Husbandman, Every branch that
bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: If it bear
none, be takes it away, etc. John 15.6.

Nor will it suffice, that for a while we bring forth fruit, unless we
continue so. Branches that are grafted, Slips that are planted, if they live,
are never at a stay, but always increasing, to imitate our daily and incessant
growth in Grace; Therefore is the Gospel of the Kingdom likened to a grain of
Mustard seed, to Leaven spreading through a whole Lump; the Corn rising and
growing: first the blade, then the ear, and then the full Corn in the ear, and
never at a stand till it be quite ripe. If young Imps newly grafted, do not
thrive and increase, it is a sign they are not well joined: they have not
communion with the Root.

Communion with the Root may be another reason, why the Apostle chooses this
Metaphor of Planting. The fruit, be it more or less, receives all its vigor
from the Root; while it derives from thence, it flourishes and multiplyeth;
when it cease to draw from thence, it withers; to intimate therefore the
power of all well-doing, of all the fruit we bear, is derived from the Merits
of Christ and his Passion, not from any natural vigor of ours; therefore we
hear of planting into his Death.

Into his Death, leads us to another observation concerning Mortem. That into
any other resemblance of Christ, it will not suffice us to have been planted:
if we shrink from this, it will not serve turn that we have been planted into
his life, or his lesser sufferings: As his causeless envy, his undeserved
infamy, persecution, stripes and wounds, if we reach not to a Communion with
his Death. First, by Mortification, that the flesh be curcified, with the
affections and lusts, and we can say, no longer I, but Christ lives in me; and
the life that I now live, is no more to my self, but to him that dyed for me,
and rose again. And then by constancy in Obedience, that we be faithful to the
death; that neither famine, nor nakedness, peril or sword, be able to separate
us from his love. This is in samilitudinem mort is, into the likeness of his
Death: without which, all communion with his life will do no good.

Farther yet: It may be doubted, why Saint Paul adds In Similitudinem, not into
Christ's Death, but into the likeness of his Death. It is (as some think) to
comfort those, who by a mortified life, striving after their Pattern, reach it
but imperfectly. That though they attain not a full Communion or Identity with
their Copy; they may not be disheartened, while they reach a similitude. For a
similitude may be enough for us. Christ dyed bodily: It may suffice, that we
die spiritually. Christ died to make satisfaction: We to make good our belief
of his satisfaction: Christ died for sin: we not for, but to sin. Christ for
the sins of the whole world: we for no sins, but our own. Nor for our own
neither, by way of expiation; for we cannot satisfy Justice, but by way of
cessation, that we commit them no more: Christ was crucified on the Cross
literally, God send our affections and lusts to be crucified mystically. So
perfectly mortified was he, as to know no sin; we, if we can get so far as not
to serve sin, it will be well. In Christ both nature and mortality was
destroyed, but not sin; for he knew no sin: In us, not Nature, nor Mortality,
till the time of our dissolution, but sin only: Christ's death and rising again
was by his own power; I have power to lay down my life, and power to take it up
again, John 10.18. so cannot ours be. Our spiritual dying and rising, is all by
his aid and assstance, and virtue of our planting into him, and without him we
can do nothing; so ye see a wide disparity 'twixt his manner of dying and ours.
And therefore well may it be in similitudinem: not planted into his death, but
into the likeness of his death.

But in what points then holds the similitudes of being planted into that
likeness (ye will ask) since in these it holds not? Nay, first enquire what be
the right ways of thus planting, for there appear more than one. As there are
two sorts of Crosses belonging to a Christian, one of Mortification, another of
Martyrdom or Tribulation: so two kinds of planting into Christ's death; The one
voluntary, by beating down our bodies, by crucifying the flesh with the
affections and lusts: and the other involuntary, by persecutions, molestations,
and troubles for a good conscience: which all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must expect their share of.

St. Cyprian calls these two several kinds of Martyrdom: the one belonging to
times of War, the other to times of Peace. In times of War (says he)
Ponenda est anima, we must jeopard our lives for a good conscience, and imitate
Christ's Death that way. In times of Peace, Frangenda carnis desideria, the
wanton desires of the flesh to be broken and crucified. The one of these ye
have in St. Paul's Castigo corpus: I beat down my body, and bring it into
subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. There Is the Cross of mortification: and the other in
facti sumus spectaculum, we are made a Spectacle to the World, to Angels, and
to Men: We hunger and thirty, and are buffered. Being reviled we bless, being
persecuted we bear it: being defamed we entreat; we are made as the filth of
the world, and are as the off-scowing of all things to this day, 1 Cor. 4.13.
There Is the Cross of Tribulation.

Of these two Martyrdomes: the first is more excellent, because it belongs to
all Christians, and is at all times to be practiced. Nor is the Cross of
Tribulation acceptable at all, unless the Cross of mortification be joined
with it: but add both together, and then ye have the nearest conformity to the
Cross of Christ that can be. When a heart cleansed from sinful corruptions,
and perfumed with sanctifying Graces, is beaten in the Mortar of Tribulation,
is threshed with the staile of persecution and sends forth the sweet odor of
Praise and Thanksgiving; rejoicing under the Cross, it is one of the most
pleasing sacrifices to God, and the nearest resembling Christs', that may be
imagined.

To touch upon both these in a few words: That the Cross of Mortification, may
most nearly be brought to the similitude of Christ's Death; observe from the
words of our Text, similitudinem mortis, That it be not a defective or half
mortifying in some parts, not in all, having our tongues bridled it may be, and
our hearts loose: out looks and gestures sanctified, but our actions in secret,
lawless: our voluptuous desires curbed, but covetous ones untied. Our
intemperance pruned and pared, but our revenge and malice overgrown. This is
not in similitudinem mortis: for Death setters all limbs, deprives all senses,
extinguishes all faculties: And Christ when he was crucified, had every member
stretched on the Cross, not any escaped the pains of it: if (...) mortify
some vices and spare others, as Saul destroyed Amalek in part, and spared Agag;
if we leave a beloved sin uncrucified, this is not the likeness of Death, but
of mutilation only; it is not in mortem, while we suffer the smallest known sin
to escape vengeance.

Not maimed then let our mortifying be; Nor secondly inconstant, that we return
again to the works of sin; for dead men return no more to life. And thirdly,
let there be no more motion, nor remembrance of former follies: Let not our
hearts fall a longing as the children of Israel, when they remembered the Onions
and Fleshpots, and Fish and Melons of Egypt: for they that are dead, are dead
to all love and liking, and have no more remembrance of the things of this
life. Fourthly, Let not the pains of mortifying deter us neither; for if it be
in the likeness of Christ's Death, he dyed (we know) a painful Death. Think not
the crucifying of our naughty lusts, will prove an easy dying, but then
believe it true and unfeigned, when it puts us to trouble and grief.

These four then, may help to try our mortifying, whether our plantation come
home to the pattern of Christ's Death, or no: that is to say, if it be an entire
mortifying, and in all parts diffused: for it is Death, not a maiming. If it
put us to sore pangs and struglings, for it is a painful Death, and a
Crucifying. If it utterly abolish all delightful remembrances, all longings
and desires toward sin; for it is Death, not a sickning or swowning. And
fourthly, If it be a constant mortifying, that we return no more to the works
of sin: for it is Death, and not a sleeping. The first of these discovers
Hypocrites, which mortify by halves. The second tender and delicate ones, that
will not abide the pains of a through mortifying. The third, waverers and
languishers, whose hearts hang after the pleasures of sin. The fourth,
babksliders and revolters, that return with the dog to the vomit, and the sow
to the mire again. If our mortifying fail in none of these four particulars, it
is a good sign it comes home; and the first way of planting into Christ's Death
is sound and uncounterfeit.

But then neither may the second way be omitted, after the Cross of
mortification, must be expected the Cross of tribulation, to try whether our
plantation be firm and right; when the Potters vessel is well fashioned, it
must be brought to the fire, that it may be hardened. And the fire shall try
evry man's work of what sort it is, 1 Cor. 3.13. No sooner was Job perceived to
be perfect and upright, but Satan desired to try him, and the like with the
Apostle, whom he would fain have sifted as wheat: the highest of all the eight
Beatitudes, is, Blessed they that suffer persecution, for righteousness sake;
If persecution shake us, it is a sign we are firmly planted then indeed. And
it is Gods mercy to his own, to send them a right experience of themselves in
persecution, that they may be assured their mortification is unfeigned;
tribulation works experience, and experience hope, that makes not ashamed,
And if any be made ashamed, that is, fall away through storms of persecution,
he may impute it to the lack of sound mortification, his first planting was not
firm.

Well, but how may our planting either way be examined, whether it be sound and
firm, according to Christ's likeness or no? How, but by the virtues which were
most eminent and conspicuous in the Cross of Christ, and made his sufferings
so acceptable. Now they are chiefly four, which Bernard likens to the four
quarters of the Cross, each of them serving to make up the complete body of a
Christian suffering; that is to say, Humility, and Charity, and Patience and
Constancy.

Humility first: for Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to Death, even
the Death of the Cross: And if he so humbled that had no sin, how much rather
we, that are so full of sin? humillity teaching us to think the worst of our
selves, will persuade us all the sufferings that fall upon us, are less than
we have deserved. He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded
us after our iniquities. And consequently, teach us with meekness to submit to
the scourge: Righteous art thou (O lord) in all thou have brought upon us: The
end of the Cross is indeed to humble us: If any repine at it, and grow not
more lowly by it, he makes not the right use of it.

Secondly Charity or Obedience, which proves our lowlinesle, for in the Death
of Christ was manifested the height hof Charity. Greater love has no man than
this, that he lay down his life for his friend. How great was his then, that
laid down his life for his enemies? And Love is the fulfilling of the law:
Charity is the sum of obedience. It suffers long, and is kind, and thinks
no evil, hark how it speaks from the cross: Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do! And, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, says the
first Martyr, with his last breath. If we be so charitable in our sufferings,
as to return blessing for cursing, prayers for persecutions, it is a sign our
plantation into the death of Christ is strong and mighty indeed: as the
contrary discovers a weak Christian.

For Thirdly, if our conformity be right, it must add Patience, a virtue in
Christ's suffering most eminent. Who As a sheep led to the slaughter, and as a
lamb before the shearers is dumb; so he opened not his mouth: He shall not
cry, nor strive, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. I
became dumb, and opened not my mouth (faith David) for it was thy doing; this
silent submitting, this patient bearing, this still lying, and making no noise,
is that which proves us true Gold indeed, for that melts in silence and makes
no noise: as wheat also abides quiet under the flayle, while Chafe flies in
the face of them that smite it.

Fourthly Constancy, the Crown of all the rest, for only He that indureth to
the end shall be saved. Most eminent, this was in our Saviors Cross; when all
the bitter scoffs of his enemies, could not move him to come down. Let Christ
the King of Israel come down from the Cross, and we will believe him? No, they
are not to be believed that say it, Christ having loved his own, continued to
love them to the end, and would not leave the work of our Redemption unperfect,
and lose the fruit of all for lack of constancy: let patience (says St.
James) have her perfect work, And the perfection of Patince is Constancy, that
we be not weary of well doing; nor tired out with innocent suffering: But wait
on the Lord, till he deliver us, committing the keeping of our souls to him in
well doing, as to a faithful Creator. I know whom I have believed, and he is
able to keep, what is committed to him. 2 Timothy 1.12

Add these four virtues together, and then your sufferings may appear
somewhat like your Saviors: Let them be humble, without confidence in your
selves: Charitable, having compassion and praying for others: patient and
silent, without complaint or murmurring: Constant, and continued to the end,
without wavering or revolting; And then your plantation is proved to be sound
and firm, ye are thus without doubt, Planted into the similitude of Christ's
Death.

Especially, if you be faithful to the Death, for that makes all sure. Be
faithful to the Death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Death ends the
conflict, puts all out of hazard, gets the Conquest, and crowns the conqueror,
for it foils the last, and worst of all our enemies, even Satan and all his
forces. As by the Cross of mortification we die to the flesh; and by the
Cross of Tribulation, we die to the world: so by the Cross of a natural
Death, we die to all the temptations of Satan; And are then past our winter
plantation without doubt, and stand ready for our summer, that follows in the
Text, as the second General of our division, and the Reward annexed to the
painful coudition. For if we have been planted into the likeness of his
Death, we shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection.

A promise (I told you) this part is: and such a one, as cannot fail us, if we
fail not with the condition: The condition, that indeed is proposed
hypothetically, and doubtfully. If ye have been planted into his Death. But so
is not the promise: that is direct and Categoricall, without any If in t. Ye
shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection. Shall be without doubt,
if you continue unmovable in your Winter plantation, and pluck not your selves
from the Tree of Christ Cross; That Cro-sse is a Tree of life, that will not
suffer you to die or wither; but shoot you forth again, into a better
plantation.

Howbeit, Take heed of presuming, for though we cannot perish, while we
continue fast joined to the root, we may break our selves from the root, and so
perish. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a witherd branch, John
15.6. Behold the goodness and severity of God, On them that fell, severity,
But toward thee, goodness: if thou continue in hi goodness, otherwise thou
also shall be cut off, Rom 11.22.

So that in our unstedfastnesse there may be danger, but in his promise is no
unstedfastnesse. If we continue not, yet he abides faithful; he cannot deny
himself: more than one or two places of Scripture like this, assure us, that we
cannot miss of a glorious and high plantation; if we abide firm in a lowly one
and be constant in true Repentence, then it is a faithful saying. For if we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2. Knowing that as we have been partakers of the sufferings, we
shall be also of the consolation, 2 Cor. 1.7. For ye are dead, and your life is
bid with Christ, in God. When Christ who is our life shall appeart, then shall
ye also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. He that raised up the Lord Jesus,
shall also quicken our mortal bodies. To. 8.11. Numbers of the like
Testimonies assure us, that our diying in Christ, is but the Gate of rising to
life, we cannot be lost in the first plantation, if we wait with patience for
the second. And as true, that the two plantations are inseparable (as was said)
no arriving to a glorious summer, but through a hard winter, no happy rising
with Christ, unless we die with him. And if any rise not by a new and holy
life, after their repentance and conformity to his sufferings, it is a sign,
they were never well planted into the similitude of Christ's Death.

So then the connection of the two plantings is undeniable: they may not be
severed. But as touching this latter plantation into Christ's rising, wherein
(ye will ask) consists that? Or what is it, to be so planted. Interpreters are
here divided: some; because the chapter throughout, is an exhortation to good
life, and the words before are; Baried with him in Baptism into death: That
like as Christ was raised by the glory of the Father, so we to walk in newness
of life: conceive by this planting into the resurrection of Christ, is meant
only our sanctification, as by the other planting into his Death is meant our
true Repentance and Mortification. Others again, because the two parts appear
in the nature of a Promise and Reward, conceive this latter plantation to point
at our eternal reward, and the likeness of Christ's Resurrection, to be that
state of immortality, wherein Christ now abides, and which at the end of the
world, all his true members shall partake of: both expositions are profitable,
both useful, and both have great abettors: for the former of sanctification,
are Ambrose, Jerome Bid and Cajetane, for the latter of glorification, are
Chrys^stome, Theophylact, Euthymius and Athanasius; we shall (God willing)
touch upon both, as the time will permit, and so conclude, with a word of
Application.

And first, we shall be planted into the likeness of his Resurrection, that is
by our sanctification; In nature this ought to go first, for it went first in
Christ; even before his Body was glorified, while he was in his mortality, his
soul was perfectly holy, and enjoyed the vision of God. These two estates of
Christ: viz. Before his resurrection, and after, represent our two
Resurrections. One of the soul to Righteousness and Holiness, begun in this
state of mortality, another of the Body, glorified with immortality, at Christ's
second coming to judgment. The souls resurrection leads the way, called
therefore in Scripture; the first Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he, that
has his part in that: For over such the second Death shall have no power,
Revel. 20.6. Two deaths we read of, before the end of the world. The souls
death in sin, and the bodies death in the Grave, Both would have their
resurrection. But first the soul from the Death of sin, to the life of
righteousness; which is by Grace: And then the Body, from corruption to
Immortality, which is by Glory.

To begin with the souls Resurrection to the life of Grace; observable it is,
that this also is a plantation supernatural as well as the life of Glory. No
praise to us then in any good fruit we bear, but to the Root Christ Jesus, the
Root of Jesse, whereinto we are planted, Without me, says he, ye can do
nothing; for it is God that works in us, both to will, and to do according to
his good pleasure. What have thou, which thou have not received? Even the power
and will of bestowing and doing good to others, is none of ours to boast of, it
is bestowed from on high. Ye see here, the Apostle promises such a
Resurrection by way of Reward. Ye shall be planted, so as to bring forth good
works: Not as if you were able to bring them forth of your selves, but God will
plant you, so that ye shall be able to bring them.

The reason why the Apostle uses this Metaphor of planting, may be to show how
entirely we are beholding to Christ, and to his Resurrection for the whole
power of welldoing; As also to let us know, that our fruit bearing in Christ,
is the very end of our planting. Therefore we are planted indeed for the fruits
sake: for when that comes then it appears we are living plants, then is our
Resurrection justified; as good we were dead still, as barren and yield no
increase to our Master. If no fruit, then no part sure in this plantation, nor
in the first Resurrection.

Well, but by what means is this planting brought to pass? (ye will ask) or,
how are we grafted into Christ's Rising? By Faith (say some): for Faith is that
by which we live the life of Grace, called therefore sometimes the life of
Faith. Faith unites us, that is certain, for by it we dwell in Christ, and
Christ in us, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
Others say, by Hope. Blessed be God who haeth begotten us again to a lively
hope, through the Resurrection of Jsus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. Others
again by Love; for Love is the most uniting Grace of all, which makes us one
with Christ, and Christ with us: one undivided, and not to be separated: for,
What shall separate us from the love of Christ, Romans 8.35. Indeed by all three
we are incorporated into Christ's mystical Body, and therefore enlivened and
planted in our first Resurrection.

But especially, and above all, is this Resurrection to appear by a holy
Conversation, in newness of life: This is the lively Image and similitude of
Christ's Resurrection; that, as he was changed from mortality to Glory, so we
from our former corrupt conversation, to holiness and righteousness. We are
grafted into a better stock, that we should henceforth bring forth better
fruit; in vain are we new grafted, if our fruit be still the same. As the grave
made a great change in Christ, his glorious Body far differing from his frail
and passible one: so, our lives renewed by Repentance, must be far estranged
from former sinful courses, All is to be new framed after the Image of the new
Man; old things are passed away, behold I make all things new: for if any be in
Christ, he is a new Creature. A new heart, that which before delighted in
vanity, now in perfection of Virtue and Purity. New hands, those that were wont
to hurt and defraud our brethren, now exercised in helping and relieving them.
New tongues, those that were given to lying and dissembling, to railing and
cursed speaking, now filled with blessing and truth, instruments of Gods
Praises. New eyes, they that so much joyed to behold beauty and vanity; now
flowing with water for their youthful follies. New feet, those that were swift
to shed blood, now shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and
prepated to run the way of Gods Commandments. The whole man new, not after the
Image of the old Adam, in the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, but after
the Image of the second Adam, in sincerity and Truth. This is rightly planted
into the Similitude of Christ's Resurrection, by being new framed according to
his glorious Image.

And still we may go nearer. For the likeness of Christ raised again, is the
very Image and likeness of God, says Leo. Now Gods likeness is in all Heavenly
Virtue; far above all passions and frail perturbations is his eternal
Constancy. He is all Mercy, all Truth, all Goodness: imitate him what we may;
be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful, kind as he to the
unthankful and evil: who sends his Rain upon the just and unjust:
long-suffering, full of patience, and slow to take vengeance. Moreover, see
that all be in a right state of Government, for Christ's glorious Body is wholly
subject to the will of the Spirit; let our bodies also be in a right subjection
to our souls, and our souls in subjection to the Law of God. Let our sense be
ordered by our reason, our reason by the Precepts of holy Scripture, and
especially in the manner of your virtuous working, endeavor to resemble your
Pattern, for there is the right trial indeed. Herein lies the main difference
betwixt men regenerate and unregenerate: betwixt those conformed to Christ's
likeness, and those unconformed. That from a true Christian his works come
easily, voluntarily, delightfully, like the motions of Christ's glorified Body;
but from the unregenerate they proceed heavily, cheerlesly, wearisomly,
Ianguidly, and interruptedly. Will ye then discern the truth of your Plantation
into the Rising of Christ? Observe the manner of your fruit-bearing, whether
what ye do virtuously, ye do delightfully, heartily, cheerfully, constantly,
abundantly, without any tediousness or weariness of well-doing? If so, then ye
may gather some comfortable assurance, that ye have your part in the first
Resurrection; in which if you hold out with patience, will without fail bring
you to the second, for that follows as a Reward upon this, and it is a Reward
worthy waiting for indeed: If ye have thus been planted into Christ's
Resurrection mystically, ye shall be really; If ye had thus resembled him in
soul, ye shall in body also; and that brings us upon the last point of our
division, and most proper to our comfort over the dead, to wit, the
Resurrection of immortality and glory, and our planting into that: Ye shall be
planted into the likeness of Christ's glorious Resurrection.

And this may well be called a summer Plantation; for in the bodies rising,
man's nature somewhat resembles that of plants. Plants after they are withered
in the depth of Winter, begin to spring again at the opening of the year, and
returning of the Sun. The Sun of Righteousness Christ Jesus, when he returns,
shall make a spring season, wherein all the bo dies of dead men shall rise,
here they have their fall of the leaf, in affliction and sickness, the dead
winter in the Grave; but they shall insallibly have their spring again: Thy
dead men shall live (says Isaiah) Their dead bodies shall arise, thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth her dead. Isa. 26.19. Of
plants none doubt it, they die and spring again, there is hope of a tree, if
it be cut down, that from the root somewhat may spring; But man lies down and
rises not, Job. 14.12. Nay man shall rise also, the nature of man shall now
resemble the nature of plants, by this new and divine plantation, they shall
have a new spring, and a better summer, at the return of a better sun, and be
more vigorous than ever.

For it is planted into his resurrection, and his resurrection is glorious, and
glorious for ever. Christ being raised from the dead, now dies not: Death has
no more Dominion over him, which makes the difference betwixt Christ's members,
and others that shall rise; That Death may have dominion over them, but not
over Christ's members, that rise after his likeness; for they shall rise in
glory. When Christ, who is our life shall appear, then we also with him in
glory. And we shall be like him, for we shall see him, as he is Like him? and
somewhat more. More than resemblence is promised, even a kind of union; I in
them, and thou in me, that we may be made perfect in one, John 17.23.

This therefore is the plantation, most properly intended by St. Paul, for he
speaks in the future, ye shall be planted, and shall be, intimates hope, and
hope would be of some glorious reward; somewhat worth our waiting for. But the
Resurrection of Grace to holiness and Righteousness, seems rather a labor
than a reward, because of the imperfection, and troubles that attend it in this
life, the fears, the cares and temptations. Shall be planted then, points to
some better estate, than this life can hope for, even to that of 1 Cor. 15.58.
Wherefore my brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the lord: for a much as ye know (upon his hope to wit of the bodies rising
again) that now your abor is not in vain in the Lord.

But take this hope away, and our labor is vain indeed, then they that are
fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. There must be a Resurrection therefore
(says Crysostome on this place) or God shall not be a full rewarder of them
that seek him; They that seek him most, shall labor in vain, for how poorly is
virtue recompensed here? yea, the best virtues, Constancy, and Striving for
the truth unto death are least of all rewarded. If no other life to be hoped
for, Christians were doubtless, of all men most miserable.

But now is Christ risen (says the Apostle) and risen, as the first fruits of
them that sleep, and therefore they that belong to him, must rise like him.
This flesh now subject to worms and dust, shall be clad with a new garment of
immortality: he that made it of dust, is not so weak, that he cannot raise it
out of dust again, else if no Resurrection (says Damascene) let us even turn
Epicures, eat and drink, and live a beastly life, and so an end: If no
resurrection, what difference, not only betwixt holy and profane, but betwixt
men and beasts, nay, if no Resurection, happier were the beasts that know no
care, feel no cumberance, are not disquieted with sorrow for what is past, or
fear of what is to come! If no Resurrection, then neither God nor Providence.
All things are hurried by chance and confusion, how many good men in this life
have we seen heavily opressed? And on the side of their oppressors, there was
power: but they had no comforter; how many wicked ones, may we see unjustly
prospering? no bands in their death; but they are lusty and strong: they come
in no misfortune like other folk, nor are they plagued like other men, their
eyes swell with fatness, they cotrupt others, and speak wicked blasphemies.
How can this be endured, if God be righteous, and wise and all power in his
hands? Erit ergo, Erit Resurrectio, (says that Father) There must, there shall
be a Resurrection, for God is not untighteous, to forget their work and labor
of love which have suffered for his sake. If the soul only have suffered in
virtuous works. It perils and conflicts have fallen upon the soul only, let
the soul alone be rewarded; But if the body, the frail body has undergone
toils and pains: if she sweat and faint, hunger and pine, and be even
martyred and mangled for Gods service, let either the body share in some
proportionable rewards, or confess God a weak, if not an unrighteous Master.

Of the bodies Resurrection therefore no doubt to be made, such a plantation it
shall have: but wherein consists the similitude (ye will ask) to the
Resurrection of Christ? School-writers answer in two things especially: that is
to say, Clory, and Impassibility; the one defending the body from all harm, the
other crowning it with all good. Two ways (we know), a Glass that is broken
may be conceived reparable, one to be made whole as it was before, but still
brittle, subject to casualties and apt to crack again: another so repaired, as
to be changed into a solid hardness, or metall-like firmness, not to be broken
any more. The former of these is like the Resurrection of Lazarus, or of Jairus
his daughter: the later like unto Christ's, where this frail Glass of mortality
shall be changed into firmness and immutability, no more liable to breaking:
this mortal to put on immortality, and this corruptible to be clothed with
incorruption. And again, over and above such impassibility ye may suppose added
to the Glass Charity, and resplendency to give light of it self, like a
Carbuncle or Glow-w^^n, or the Moon in a clear night. This likewise shall be
added to the bodies impassibility: namely, Light and Glory, The Righteous shall
shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. Such is the
likeness of Christ's Resurrection.

In fine, the Schoolmen here tell us, of the souls and the bodies Dowries, when
the Heavenly marriage betwixt Christ and his Church shall be consummate, and
they are seven, three in the soul, and four in the body: three in the soul, to
answer to the three divine Virtues which sanctify the soul in this life:
namely, Faith, and Hope, and Charity. Unto Faith shall answer clear and
beatifical Vision, whereby we shall see God face to face. Unto Hope fruition,
whereby we shall enjoy that we see, and apprehend that whereof we are
apprehended. Unto Charity union, implying fullness of joy and delight, in the
presence and possession of him whom our soul loves: Thus shall the spirits of
just men in these three be made perfect.

In the Body shall be four more Perfections or Dowries, curing all defects and
penalties incident to this mortal flesh, which are specially four, viz.
Heaviness, Grossness, Passibility and Ignominy. Heaviness, disabling it to
move upwards, or to make any great speed in passing any way. This shall be done
away by agility, whereby the body shall become light and speedy as the wind,
able to be wherever the soul would wish it in a trice. Secondly, Grosseness,
not suffering it to enter in at a narrow place, or to pass, as water does,
through a chink; but by reason of its stiff and gross consistence, it is
barred out with doors and locks. This shall be remedied by the gift of
subtility, whereby the substance of the body, when ever the soul pleases,
shall become pliable as Oil, or Water to enter in at any cranny or chink, and
yet not loose its Figure, but return as it lists to its shape and consistence
again. Thirdly, Passibility or frailty, exposing our bodies to be harmed and
injured by heat or cold, hunger or thirst, fire or water, sword or spear. This
shall be removed by the gift of impassibility; our flesh shall no more be
liable to hostile injuries: Violence shall not hurt it, Time shall not waste
it, Hunger shall not pine it; all diseases, aches, pains and infirmities shall
be far away: This is more than incorruption, for the bodies of the wicked shall
have a kind of incorruption; they shall not die nor waste away, yet they shall
not be impassible, for they shall be tormented with Hellfire: But the bodies
of the Righteous shall be impassible, never to know pain or sorrow more: all
tears shall be wiped from their-eyes. Fourthly, Ignominy, our bodies are now
subject to shame and noysomnesse, there is a Turpitude in the nakedness of the
body; it is liable to evil smells, and un^omely deformity: this shall be done
away by the gift of Charity or Resplendency: whereby these bodies shall be all
bright, comely and lovely, filled with fragrancy and glory C^lestial, more
beautiful in their very nakedness, than any Apparel can render them. So, then
in these four the body shall have all the perfections our hearts can desire:
even the excellencies of strength, health, activity and beauty. The perfection
of strength it shall have in subtility; it can penetrate or pass through any
thing. The perfection of health in impassibility, it can be harmed by nothing.
The perfection of activeness in agility, it can be where the soul desires in a
moment. The perfection of beauty in Charity, or Resplendency, far exceeding all
mortal comeliness whatsoever.

Now, that we may not seem to go quite without book, as if no ground of all
this to be had in Scripture. Observe, that we are to be planted into his
Resurrection, who shall change our vile bodies according to the likeness of his
own glorious Body; and Christ's glorious Body after his Resurrection had all
these Agilities: for he appeared to Mary Mag dalene suddenly, and as suddenly
vanished. It was with the Disciples at Emmaus, at Jerusalem with the eleven:
with her at the Sepulcher, and all in a short distance of time. Secondly,
Subtility it had, for it passed through doors fast locked, through the
Sepulcher barred and sealed, and was not restrained any where. Thirdly,
Impassibility, for as Christ now raised, dies not, so death has no more
dominion over him: no sickness, infirmity or injury is his glorious body any
more subject to. Fourthly, Charity, or Resplendency: for it was not less
glorious be sure, than it was in Mount Tabor (a shadow of the Resurrection) and
there his face shone, and his Raiment became white as the Light; only it was in
his power, now so to shine when he would, and when he would to cease, and in
that respect the more glorious such a body. If then we are to be planted into
the likeness of his Resurrection: if, as we have born the Image of the earthy
Adam, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly. This is his Image, this his
likeness; and into this if we have been rightly planted into the likeness of
his Death, we shall grow up by the power of his Resurrection, which God of his
mercy grant unto us all, even for the same our blessed Saviors sake. Amen.

Turn we now to a word of Application, upon this present subject of mortality
here before us, and so I shall commit you to God.

I am not ignorant, how hard it is to satisfy the expectation of so judicious
and full an Auditory, touching so full a subject, and worthy so great
commendations as the life of this Reverend Gentleman whom we are now to speak
of. Nor am I troubled at the prejudice of some, to whom he was less known, and
whose opinions are not much to be valued: I must not fear to bear witness to
the Truth, having for these eleven years past so well known him, and for some
years lived so near him, and so thoroughly acquainted with him for his
judgment in matters of Religion, as I believe toward his latter time, no man
in England more: nor may I mince the matter, because he was my special friend,
one to whom for many real favors and neighborly courtesies, I was much obliged.
I care not whose thoughts may charge me of flattery, or self-seeking, so long
as my own Conscience charge me not for delivering any untruth, or smothering
ought worthy commendable remembrance, for fear of detracting tougues.

But I yield them too much respect in so long Apologizing. I shall for brevitie
sake pass over many things in his younger time worthy mention, because I was
no eyewitness of them. As that his natural parts were so eminent by Gods great
blessing, as to outstrip many of his rank at School when he was a child; and,
being quickly removed from School to the University, from the University to the
Innes of Court, that he there grew so eminent as to be called to the Bar
betimes with much honor, daily increasing in repute and renown, till be
performed his public reading with great applause; nor could he have missed
the degree of a Sergeant, had times been as favorable as his worth was great.
That though one of the youngest sons of his Father, and by a second Wife, yet
so highly he gained hi, Fathers good opinion by his constant dutifulnesses and
his known ability and worth, that long after the death of his Mother, his
Father at his decease ordained him sole Executor, left him all his personal
Estate besides his proportion of land, suitable to the rest of his children.
Which overplus bequeathed to him alone, he yet with such charity and
tenderness imparted to his brothers again, that of his mere voluntary
goodness, he gave them (as I am informed) to the value of 2000.

These things, received on hearsay, I let go: and observe that in his honest
industry, God so blessed him, that he grew to a fortune, such, as scant any of
his family had the like, yet not to be charged (for ought I could ever hear) of
ruining any person or family, or rising by the fall and impoverishing of
others. But eminent for his faithful diligence, and honest trustiness, and
wise secrecy, and abundant sufficiency in his profession; so that great and
eminent ones in the same profession, and some elder than he have repaired to
him for his opinion, and to be assisted with his advice.

In all the long time of his life and practice, never heard I of any that could
tax him of the least breach of trust, of any extortion, bribery, or injustice,
or of being feed on both sides, or for deserting any cause, which he thought
just, for want of his poor clients purses ability. Well might he say with
Samuel, whose ox or whose ass have I taken, or of whose hand have I received
any bribe to blind mine eyes withal? Notable late instances might be given of
this, if particulars of this nature were fit here to be mentioned.

His integrity so great, and his abilities so eminent, could not fail to have
preferred him to a seat of judicature among the highest had not the tempest of
the wars coverd him with a cloud. Wherein yet he perferred his conscience
before all worldly ends: nor followed any side, because he thought it would
prosper, nor forsook that side, when he saw it prospered not, but persevered as
he had first engaged, and engaged not weakly, but fervently, actively and
courageously. And yet so prudently, that though he suffered imprisonment, and
paid large compositions, yet he escaped easier than some that were less
active. So great was his wisdom, and in such esteem was his worth had, even,
by the adverse party: I will not say, he was courted by some of them, to accept
of preferment among them, but such things have been averred in my hearing, and
to my knowledge his constancy was such, the world could not have wrought him
to accept of promotion against his conscience, for all that was offered to our
Savior upon the Mountain.

During the time of wars and troubles, though he were far in years, yet he
made no have to marry. No, nor in times more quiet, before the war, though he
could not have wanted great offers, as any man of his quality, yet he preferred
the discharge of his calling, and the continual employments he had that way,
in the service of many noble friends, before all conjugall delights, and no
less free was he from intemperance in eating or drinking. Where is the man can
say he ever saw him cup-shotten, the reigning disease of this Town and Country
as abstemious was he known that way, as from pleasures more effeminate.

And when maturity of years and a fair estate of his own, at length invited
him to marry, in times more calm: he looked not far abroad, to raise his
fortunes, but chose him a consort near home, of a neighboring family, both
worthy and eminent, one of his own persuasion, and whose Father had sometimes
been high Sheriff of this County. With whom God blessed him to live most happily
and lovingly, and to have hopeful budds of posterity, even in his old age. The
greater sorrow at present to all his friends, the babes should be left
fatherless so young.

And whereas he might have planted himself in the City near his practice, or in
Towns of more trade, and credit, than this mean place, so abounding with poor;
he chose rather here to fix his mansion, here to build and settle: and here to
keep hospitality amongst his poor neighbors, and to have the blessing and
prayers of many such, as how highly he deserved them how constant a reliever of
the needy, both at his doors, and in their houses: how ready to lend to any in
want, how bountiful at his Table, what a constant inviter of his poor
neighbors at solemn times of the year, I leave it to many of this place to
report, who have felt the benefit of it, and may condole the loss of it, as
well as I.

A great lover of ancient good order he was, and no friend to innovations: a
constant frequenter of the Church in quieter times, till his health began to
fail him, and newer customs to creep in, which he fancied not. A devout
Receiver of the blessed Sacraments, and a frequent Communicant in public, when
he might receive it in the beauty of holiness, as he desired to see it.
Seldom failed he at the three solemn times of the year, especially to make one
at the Communion, if he were in the Country. To the suffering party of the
Clergy, to those of his own persuasion very loving, kind, respectfull and
bountiful. To none of any sort, that I know, uncivil, though in more special
manner, he favored and countenanced Divines of known learning, gravity and
experience, nor much respecting others, whom he thought time-serving,
hypocritical, ignorant, raw or scandalous. A friend to Peace he was, though his
profession rather thrived by strife: a willing Reconciler and taker up of
differences, where both parties would hear reason, rather than a prolonger of
suits. A man, such as Moses would have chosen for a Judge, fearing God and
hating covetousness: hating it not only in himself, but in others: yea, not
caring, to my knowledge, to displease some of his very good friends, where he
thought them too worldly inclined; very bountiful to the poor he was himself,
and would fain have had all of ability like him. Far from flattering, lying,
and soothing up, though such vices are too frequent with many of his
profession, loving Truth, and delighting in them that loved it, as one rightly
sensible of the great calamities this Kingdom has been involved in, through
the licencious and unconscionable liberty of lying tongues.

These virtues made him honored and respected far and near; scant a Nobleman
or Gentleman in these parts that made not much use of him, and frequently, as
their occasions required resorted to him: so, that he was the eminent beauty,
ornament and shelter of this poor place wherein he lived. A Staff to the poor,
a Counselor to the rich, a Sanctuary to the oppressed, a Terror to the
unconscionable, deceitful and worldly minded, a comfort to those in need, and
to such as for need desired his help.

Our hearts sorrow it was, that so soon in his bodily health he began to
decline, having yet scant added three years to threescore: but to his joy in
the end it proved, I doubt not, that he was so long a planting into the Death
of Christ. The Cross of mortification from the time of his full maturity,
might seem to be his daily practice, whereby he learned to die to the flesh.
The Cross of Tribulation he had his share in too, having tasted of
persecution, as far as imprisonment and loss of goods for his Conscience,
whereby he was taught to die to the world. The Cross of natural Death was his
last trial, whereby he learned to dye to mortality it self, and to all the
temptations of Satan; and long he was a planting on this manner into the
similitude of Christ's death. Near upon two years I have perceived him
declining: when as his outward man perished, so his inward seemed to renew day
by day.

During which time, the Virtues beforementioned as peculiar to the Cross of
Christ, might seem more and more to increase in him. To say nothing of his
Piety, addicting himself to read Books of Religion, as his time would permit.
And of his justice so true and upright in his dealing, so exact in paying every
one his own. The four Virtues of the Cross ye heard commended: to wit,
Humility, Charity, Patience and Constancy, appeared more and more to manifest
themselves in him, the nearer he drew to his end.

Humility; for he was courteous to the meanest, ready to put off and yield
reverence to any, as fast as any to him: nay, to prevent in Courtesy, and to
give place to some his inferiors. Charity, for he excelled in bounty to the
poor: witness his last charitable Gift to this Parish, and diverse pious
Legacies in his Will to the value, well nigh of a thousand pound, witness his
loving invitation of his poor Neighbors in his weakness at Christmas last,
even when himself could not eat, yet it joyed him to walk by and see others eat
and drink at his cost. And for an eminent proof of his Charity but a little
before he took his bed in his last sickness, he lent freely to one that had
dealt falsely enough with him, and was like for so doing to be utterly ruined
by the fraud of another: he lent, I say, to him notwithstanding a considerable
sum of money to preserve him from perishing. So notable was his Charity in
returning good for evil, and so well he seemed to remember, If thine enemy
hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink, etc.

It pleased God to enlarge his patience by the manner of his last sickness,
which seizing at length on his lungs, deprived him of the use of his speech,
for any length or continuance of speaking: during which time I never observed
in him the least impatient carriage in word or deed, or any repining at the
heavy hand of God upon him, but silently he submitted himself under the
scourge, like him that said, I became dumb, and opened not my mouth, for it was
thy doing, Psalm 39. 10.

And lastly, For his Constancy, as he approved it in the course of his life, so
to the death constant he was to the Religion he had been born and bred up in:
an obedient Son of the Church of England, as he had ever professed himself to
be, and suffered for. Heartily he answered to all questions that were asked him
about the profession of his faith; willingly and readily submitted himself to
Gods will for leaving the world; gladly forgave all that had offended him, and
wherein he had offended any, professed himself willing to ask forgiveness, and
to make restitution.

Being put in mind of the Sacrament, he would not for reverence sake receive it
in the evening, but deferred it till the next morning, and then most piously
and devoutly, like one that bowed the knees of his heart, when those of his
body failed him, with eyes lifted up, and hands bent to Heaven, he received it:
and when he heard after both kinds taken; Lord grant it may nourish you to
eternal life, cheerfully and audibly, he said Amen.

After which, he dismissed us from longer praying by him, being desirous to be
left for the present to his own private devotions, and requested us to pray by
him again in the afternoon, as if he had foreseen the certain time of his
departure: and in the afternoon, according to his own appointment, at prayer we
continued by him till toward five in the evening: at which time, most meekly
and silently, and like a Lamb he departed, and quietly slept in the Lord. And
now being so rightly planted into the Death of Christ, having thus sowed in
tears, we doubt not he shall be planted into the likeness of his
Resurrection, one day in body, as he is already in soul, and reap in abundance
of joy; which God of his mercy grant unto us all for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.

FINIS.

